The Project Gutenberg eBook, Sermons on Evil-Speaking, by Isaac Barrow,
Edited by Henry Morley


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: Sermons on Evil-Speaking

Author: Isaac Barrow

Release Date: November 25, 2003  [eBook #10274]

Language: English

Chatacter set encoding: US-ASCII


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SERMONS ON EVIL-SPEAKING***


This eBook was prepared by Les Bowler, St. Ives, Dorset.




SERMONS ON EVIL SPEAKING

BY ISAAC BARROW, D.D.




CONTENTS.

Introduction by Professor Henry Morley.

Against Foolish Talking and Jesting.

Against Rash and Vain Swearing.

Of Evil-speaking in General.

The Folly of Slander. Part 1.

The Folly of Slander. Part 2.




INTRODUCTION.



Isaac Barrow was born in London in 1630.  His father was draper to 
the king.  His mother died when he was four years old.  He was named 
Isaac after an uncle, who died in 1680, Bishop of St. Asaph.  Young 
Isaac Barrow was educated at the Charterhouse School, and at 
Felstead, before he went, in 1643, to Cambridge.  He entered first 
at Peterhouse, where his uncle Isaac was a Fellow, but at that time 
his uncle was ejected from his Fellowship for loyalty to the King's 
cause, and removed to Oxford; the nephew, who entered at Cambridge, 
therefore avoided Peterhouse, and went to Trinity College.  Young 
Barrow's father also was at Oxford, where he gave up all his worldly 
means in service of the King.

The young student at Cambridge did not conceal his royalist feeling, 
but obtained, nevertheless, a scholarship at Trinity, with some 
exemptions from the Puritan requirements of subscription.  He took 
his B.A. degree in 1648, and in 1649 was elected to a fellowship of 
Trinity, on the same day with his most intimate college friend John 
Ray, the botanist.  Ray held in the next year several college 
offices; was made in 1651 lecturer in Greek, and in 1653 lecturer in 
Mathematics.  Barrow proceeded to his M.A. in 1652, and was admitted 
to the same degree at Oxford in 1653.  In 1654, Dr. Dupont, who had 
been tutor to Barrow and Ray, and held the University Professorship 
of Greek, resigned, and used his interest, without success, to get 
Barrow appointed in his place.  Isaac Barrow was then a young man of 
four-and-twenty, with the courage of his opinions in politics and in 
church questions, which were not the opinions of those in power.

In 1655 Barrow left Cambridge, having sold his books to raise money 
for travel.  He went to Paris, where his father was with other 
royalists, and gave some help to his father.  Then he went on to 
Italy, made stay at Florence, and on a voyage from Leghorn to Smyrna 
stood to a gun in fight with a pirate ship from Algiers that was 
beaten off.  At college and upon his travels Barrow was helped by 
the liberality of public spirited men who thought him worth their 
aid.  He went on to Constantinople, where he studied the Greek 
Fathers of the Church; and he spent more than a year in Turkey.  He 
returned through Germany and Holland, reached England in the year 
before the Restoration, and then, at the age of twenty-nine, he 
entered holy orders, for which in all his studies he had been 
preparing.

The Cambridge Greek Professorship, which had before been denied him, 
was obtained by Barrow immediately after the Restoration.  Soon 
afterwards he was chosen to be Professor of Geometry at Gresham 
College.  In 1663 he preached the sermon in Westminster Abbey at the 
consecration of his uncle, Isaac, as Bishop of St. Asaph.  In that 
year also he became, at Cambridge, the first Lucasian Professor of 
Mathematics, for which office he resigned his post at Gresham 
College.

As Lucasian Professor of Mathematics, Isaac Barrow had among his 
pupils Isaac Newton.  Newton succeeded to the chair in 1669.  Barrow 
resigned because he feared that the duties of the mathematical chair 
drew his thoughts too much from the duties of the pulpit, towards 
the full performance of which he had desired all studies to be aids.  
He was then intent upon the writing of an "Exposition of the Creed, 
Decalogue, and Sacraments."  He held a prebend in Salisbury 
Cathedral, and a living in Wales, that yielded little for his 
support after the Professorship had been resigned.  But he was one 
of the King's chaplains, was made D.D. by the King in 1670, and in 
1672 he was appointed Master of Trinity by Charles II., who said, 
when he appointed Isaac Barrow, "that he gave the post to the best 
scholar in England."  Barrow was Vice-Chancellor of the University 
when he died in 1677, during a visit to London on the business of 
his college.

The sermons here given were first published in 1678, in a volume 
entitled "Several Sermons against Evil-speaking."  That volume 
contained ten sermons, of which the publisher said that "the two 
last, against pragmaticalness and meddling in the affairs of others, 
do not so properly belong to this subject."  The sermons here given 
follow continuously, beginning with the second in the series.  The 
text of the first sermon was "If any man offend not in word, he is a 
perfect man."  The texts to the last three were:  "Speak not evil 
one of another, brethren;" "Judge not;" and "That ye study to be 
quiet, and to do your own business."

There were also published in 1678, the year after Barrow's death, a 
sermon preached by him on the Good Friday before he died, a volume 
of "Twelve Sermons preached upon several Occasions," and the second 
edition of a sermon on the "Duty and Reward of Bounty to the Poor."  
Barrow's works were collected by Archbishop Tillotson, and 
published, in four folio volumes, in the years 1683-1687.  There 
were other editions in three folios in 1716, in 1722, and in 1741.  
Dr. Dibdin said of Barrow that he "had the clearest head with which 
mathematics ever endowed an individual, and one of the purest and 
most unsophisticated hearts that ever beat in the human breast."  In 
these sermons against Evil Speaking he distinguishes as clearly as 
Shakespeare does between the playfulness of kindly mirth that draws 
men nearer to each other and the words that make division.  No man 
was more free than Isaac Barrow from the spirit of unkindness.  The 
man speaks in these sermons.  Yet he could hold his own in wit with 
the light triflers of the court of Charles the Second.  It is of him 
that the familiar story is told of a playful match at mock courtesy 
with the Earl of Rochester, who meeting Dr. Barrow near the king's 
chamber bowed low, saying, "I am yours, doctor, to the knee 
strings."  Barrow (bowing lower), "I am yours, my lord, to the shoe-
tie."  Rochester:  "Yours, doctor, down to the ground."  Barrow:  
"Yours, my lord, to the centre of the earth."  Rochester (not to be 
out-done):  "Yours, doctor, to the lowest pit of hell."  Barrow:  
"There, my lord, I must leave you."

Barrow's mathematical power gave clearness to his sermons, which 
were full of sense and piety.  They were very carefully written, 
copied and recopied, and now rank with the most valued pieces of the 
literature of the pulpit.  He was deeply religious, although he had, 
besides learning, a lively wit, and never lost the pluck that taught 
him how to man a gun against a pirate.  He was "low of stature, 
lean, and of a pale complexion," so untidy that on one occasion his 
appearance in the pulpit is said to have caused half the 
congregation to go out of church.  He gave his whole mind and his 
whole soul to his work for God.  Mythical tales are told of the 
length of some of his sermons, at a time when an hour's sermon was 
not considered long.  Of one charity-sermon the story is that it 
lasted three hours and a half, and that Barrow was requested to 
print it--"with the other half which he had not had time to 
deliver."  But we may take this tale as one of the quips at which 
Barrow himself would have laughed very good-humouredly.
                                             H. M.




SERMONS ON EVIL-SPEAKING.




AGAINST FOOLISH TALKING AND JESTING.



"Nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient."--
Ephes. v.4.

Moral and political aphorisms are seldom couched in such terms that 
they should be taken as they sound precisely, or according to the 
widest extent of signification; but do commonly need exposition, and 
admit exception:  otherwise frequently they would not only clash 
with reason and experience, but interfere, thwart, and supplant one 
another.  The best masters of such wisdom are wont to interdict 
things, apt by unseasonable or excessive use to be perverted, in 
general forms of speech, leaving the restrictions, which the case 
may require or bear, to be made by the hearer's or interpreter's 
discretion; whence many seemingly formal prohibitions are to be 
received only as sober cautions.  This observation may be 
particularly supposed applicable to this precept of St. Paul, which 
seemeth universally to forbid a practice commended (in some cases 
and degrees) by philosophers as virtuous, not disallowed by reason, 
commonly affected by men, often used by wise and good persons; from 
which consequently, if our religion did wholly debar us, it would 
seem chargeable with somewhat too uncouth austerity and sourness:  
from imputations of which kind as in its temper and frame it is 
really most free (it never quenching natural light or cancelling the 
dictates of sound reason, but confirming and improving them); so it 
carefully declineth them, enjoining us that "if there be any things" 
[Greek] ("lovely," or grateful to men), "any things" [Greek] ("of 
good report" and repute), "if there be any virtue and any praise" 
(anything in the common apprehensions of men held worthy and 
laudable), we should "mind those things," that is, should yield them 
a regard answerable to the esteem they carry among rational and 
sober persons.

Whence it may seem requisite so to interpret and determine St. 
Paul's meaning here concerning eutrapelia (that is, facetious 
speech, or raillery, by our translators rendered "jesting"), that he 
may consist with himself, and be reconciled to Aristotle, who 
placeth this practice in the rank of virtues; or that religion and 
reason may well accord in the case:  supposing that, if there be any 
kind of facetiousness innocent and reasonable, conformable to good 
manners (regulated by common sense, and consistent with the tenor of 
Christian duty, that is, not transgressing the bounds of piety, 
charity, and sobriety), St. Paul did not intend to discountenance or 
prohibit that kind.

For thus expounding and limiting his intent we have some warrant 
from himself, some fair intimations in the words here.  For first, 
what sort of facetious speech he aimeth at, he doth imply by the 
fellow he coupleth therewith; [Greek], saith he, [Greek] (foolish 
talking, or facetiousness):  such facetiousness therefore he 
toucheth as doth include folly, in the matter or manner thereof.  
Then he further determineth it, by adjoining a peculiar quality 
thereof, unprofitableness, or impertinency; [Greek] (which are not 
pertinent), or conducible to any good purpose:  whence may be 
collected that it is a frivolous and idle sort of facetiousness 
which he condemneth.

But, however, manifest it is that some kind thereof he doth 
earnestly forbid:  whence, in order to the guidance of our practice, 
it is needful to distinguish the kinds, severing that which is 
allowable from that which is unlawful; that so we may be satisfied 
in the case, and not on the one hand ignorantly transgress our duty, 
nor on the other trouble ourselves with scruples, others with 
censures, upon the use of warrantable liberty therein.

And such a resolution seemeth indeed especially needful in this our 
age (this pleasant and jocular age) which is so infinitely addicted 
to this sort of speaking, that it scarce doth affect or prize 
anything near so much; all reputation appearing now to veil and 
stoop to that of being a wit:  to be learned, to be wise, to be 
good, are nothing in comparison thereto; even to be noble and rich 
are inferior things, and afford no such glory.  Many at least (to 
purchase this glory, to be deemed considerable in this faculty, and 
enrolled among the wits) do not only make shipwreck of conscience, 
abandon virtue, and forfeit all pretences to wisdom; but neglect 
their estates, and prostitute their honour:  so to the private 
damage of many particular persons, and with no small prejudice to 
the public, are our times possessed and transported with this 
humour.  To repress the excess and extravagance whereof, nothing in 
way of discourse can serve better than a plain declaration when and 
how such a practice is allowable or tolerable; when it is wicked and 
vain, unworthy of a man endued with reason, and pretending to 
honesty or honour.

This I shall in some measure endeavour to perform.

But first it may be demanded what the thing we speak of is, or what 
this facetiousness doth import?  To which question I might reply as 
Democritus did to him that asked the definition of a man, "'Tis that 
which we all see and know":  any one better apprehends what it is by 
acquaintance than I can inform him by description.  It is indeed a 
thing so versatile and multiform, appearing in so many shapes, so 
many postures, so many garbs, so variously apprehended by several 
eyes and judgments, that it seemeth no less hard to settle a clear 
and certain notion thereof, than to make a portrait of Proteus, or 
to define the figure of the fleeting air.  Sometimes it lieth in pat 
allusion to a known story, or in seasonable application of a trivial 
saying, or in forging an apposite tale:  sometimes it playeth in 
words and phrases, taking advantage from the ambiguity of their 
sense, or the affinity of their sound:  sometimes it is wrapped in a 
dress of humorous expression; sometimes it lurketh under an odd 
similitude; sometimes it is lodged in a sly question, in a smart 
answer, in a quirkish reason, in a shrewd intimation, in cunningly 
diverting, or cleverly retorting an objection:  sometimes it is 
couched in a bold scheme of speech, in a tart irony, in a lusty 
hyperbole, in a startling metaphor, in a plausible reconciling of 
contradictions, or in acute nonsense:  sometimes a scenical 
representation of persons or things, a counterfeit speech, a mimical 
look or gesture passeth for it:  sometimes an affected simplicity, 
sometimes a presumptuous bluntness giveth it being; sometimes it 
riseth from a lucky hitting upon what is strange, sometimes from a 
crafty wresting obvious matter to the purpose:  often it consisteth 
in one knows not what, and springeth up one can hardly tell how.  
Its ways are unaccountable and inexplicable, being answerable to the 
numberless rovings of fancy and windings of language.  It is in 
short, a manner of speaking out of the simple and plain way (such as 
reason teacheth and proveth things by), which by a pretty surprising 
uncouthness in conceit or expression doth affect and amuse the 
fancy, stirring in it some wonder, and breeding some delight 
thereto.  It raiseth admiration, as signifying a nimble sagacity of 
apprehension, a special felicity of invention, a vivacity of spirit, 
and reach of wit more than vulgar:  it seeming to argue a rare 
quickness of parts, that one can fetch in remote conceits 
applicable; a notable skill, that he can dexterously accommodate 
them to the purpose before him; together with a lively briskness of 
humour, not apt to damp those sportful flashes of imagination.  
(Whence in Aristotle such persons are termed [Greek], dexterous men; 
and [Greek], men of facile or versatile manners, who can easily turn 
themselves to all things, or turn all things to themselves.) It also 
procureth delight, by gratifying curiosity with its rareness or 
semblance of difficulty (as monsters, not for their beauty, but 
their rarety; as juggling tricks, not for their use, but their 
abstruseness, are beheld with pleasure) by diverting the mind from 
its road of serious thoughts; by instilling gaiety and airiness of 
spirit; by provoking to such dispositions of spirit in way of 
emulation or complaisance; and by seasoning matters, otherwise 
distasteful or insipid, with an unusual, and thence grateful tang.

But saying no more concerning what it is, and leaving it to your 
imagination and experience to supply the defect of such explication, 
I shall address myself to show, first, when and how such a manner of 
speaking may be allowed; then, in what matters and ways it should be 
condemned.


1.  Such facetiousness is not absolutely unreasonable or unlawful, 
which ministereth harmless divertisement, and delight to 
conversation (harmless, I say, that is, not entrenching upon piety, 
not infringing charity or justice, not disturbing peace).  For 
Christianity is not so tetrical, so harsh, so envious, as to bar us 
continually from innocent, much less from wholesome and useful 
pleasure, such as human life doth need or require.  And if jocular 
discourse may serve to good purposes of this kind; if it may be apt 
to raise our drooping spirits, to allay our irksome cares, to whet 
our blunted industry, to recreate our minds being tired and cloyed 
with graver occupations; if it may breed alacrity, or maintain good 
humour among us; if it may conduce to sweeten conversation and 
endear society; then is it not inconvenient, or unprofitable.  If 
for those ends we may use other recreations, employing on them our 
ears and eyes, our hands and feet, our other instruments of sense 
and motion, why may we not as well to them accommodate our organs of 
speech and interior sense?  Why should those games which excite our 
wits and fancies be less reasonable than those whereby our grosser 
parts and faculties are exercised?  Yea, why are not those more 
reasonable, since they are performed in a manly way, and have in 
them a smack of reason; feeling also they may be so managed, as not 
only to divert and please, but to improve and profit the mind, 
rousing and quickening it, yea sometimes enlightening and 
instructing it, by good sense conveyed in jocular expression?

It would surely be hard that we should be tied ever to knit the 
brow, and squeeze the brain (to be always sadly dumpish, or 
seriously pensive), that all divertisement of mirth and pleasantness 
should be shut out of conversation; and how can we better relieve 
our minds, or relax our thoughts, how can we be more ingenuously 
cheerful, in what more kindly way can we exhilarate ourselves and 
others, than by thus sacrificing to the Graces, as the ancients 
called it?  Are not some persons always, and all persons sometimes, 
incapable otherwise to divert themselves, than by such discourse?  
Shall we, I say, have no recreation? or must our recreations be ever 
clownish, or childish, consisting merely in rustical efforts, or in 
petty sleights of bodily strength and activity?  Were we, in fine, 
obliged ever to talk like philosophers, assigning dry reasons for 
everything, and dropping grave sentences upon all occasions, would 
it not much deaden human life, and make ordinary conversation 
exceedingly to languish?  Facetiousness therefore in such cases, and 
to such purposes, may be allowable.

2.  Facetiousness is allowable when it is the most proper instrument 
of exposing things apparently base and vile to due contempt.  It is 
many times expedient, that things really ridiculous should appear 
such, that they may be sufficiently loathed and shunned; and to 
render them such is the part of a facetious wit, and usually can 
only be compassed thereby.  When to impugn them with down-right 
reason, or to check them by serious discourse, would signify 
nothing, then representing them in a shape strangely ugly to the 
fancy, and thereby raising derision at them, may effectually 
discountenance them.  Thus did the prophet Elias expose the wicked 
superstition of those who worshipped Baal:  "Elias (saith the text) 
mocked them, and said, 'Cry aloud; for he is a god, either he is 
talking, or he is pursuing, or he is in a journey, or peradventure 
he sleeps, and must be awaked.'"  By which one pregnant instance it 
appeareth that reasoning pleasantly-abusive in some cases may be 
useful.  The Holy Scripture doth not indeed use it frequently (it 
not suiting the Divine simplicity and stately gravity thereof to do 
so); yet its condescension thereto at any time sufficiently doth 
authorise a cautious use thereof.  When sarcastic twitches are 
needful to pierce the thick skins of men, to correct their lethargic 
stupidity, to rouse them out of their drowsy negligence, then may 
they well be applied when plain declarations will not enlighten 
people to discern the truth and weight of things, and blunt 
arguments will not penetrate to convince or persuade them to their 
duty, then doth reason freely resign its place to wit, allowing it 
to undertake its work of instruction and reproof.

3.  Facetious discourse particularly may be commodious for reproving 
some vices, and reclaiming some persons (as salt for cleansing and 
curing some sores).  It commonly procureth a more easy access to the 
ears of men, and worketh a stronger impression on their hearts, than 
other discourse could do.  Many who will not stand a direct reproof, 
and cannot abide to be plainly admonished of their fault, will yet 
endure to be pleasantly rubbed, and will patiently bear a jocund 
wipe; though they abominate all language purely bitter or sour, yet 
they can relish discourse having in it a pleasant tartness.  You 
must not chide them as their master, but you may gibe with them as 
their companion.  If you do that, they will take you for pragmatical 
and haughty; this they may interpret friendship and freedom.  Most 
men are of that temper; and particularly the genius of divers 
persons, whose opinions and practices we should strive to correct, 
doth require not a grave and severe, but a free and merry way of 
treating them.  For what can be more unsuitable and unpromising, 
than to seem serious with those who are not so themselves, or demure 
with the scornful?  If we design either to please or vex them into 
better manners, we must be as sportful in a manner, or as 
contemptuous as themselves.  If we mean to be heard by them, we must 
talk in their own fashion, with humour and jollity; if we will 
instruct them, we must withal somewhat divert them:  we must seem to 
play with them if we think to convey any sober thoughts into them.  
They scorn to be formally advised or taught; but they may perhaps be 
