The Project Gutenberg eBook, Nonsense Books, by Edward Lear


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: Nonsense Books

Author: Edward Lear

Release Date: October 8, 2004  [eBook #13650]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NONSENSE BOOKS***


E-text prepared by Dave Newman, Ben Courtney, A. Deubelbeiss, Stan
Goodman, and Project Gutenberg Distributed Proofreaders



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this file which
      includes the original illustrations and music clips as well as
      midi, pdf, and lilypond files.
      See 13650-h.htm or 13650-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/3/6/5/13650/13650-h/13650-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/3/6/5/13650/13650-h.zip)





NONSENSE BOOKS

by

EDWARD LEAR

With all the Original Illustrations

1894







PUBLISHERS' NOTICE.
The first _Book of Nonsense_ was published in 1846. Three other volumes,--
_Nonsense Songs, Stories, etc._, published in 1871; _More Nonsense
Pictures, etc._, in 1872; and _Laughable Lyrics: A Fresh Book of Nonsense,
etc._, in 1877,--comprise all the "Nonsense Books" written by Mr. Lear.




  "Surely the most beneficent and innocent of all books
  yet produced is the _Book of Nonsense_, with its corollary
  carols, inimitable and refreshing, and perfect in rhythm.
  I really don't know any author to whom I am half so
  grateful for my idle self as Edward Lear. I shall put
  him first of my hundred authors."

  JOHN RUSKIN,

    In the _List of the Best Hundred Authors_.



[Illustration: EDWARD LEAR. ENGRAVED BY ANDREW FROM A PHOTOGRAPH TAKEN IN
SAN REMO, BY RONCAROLO.]



CONTENTS.

   I.   A BOOK OF NONSENSE.
   II.  NONSENSE SONGS, STORIES, BOTANY, AND ALPHABETS.
   III. MORE NONSENSE PICTURES, RHYMES, BOTANY, ETC.
   IV.  LAUGHABLE LYRICS:
        A FRESH BOOK OF NONSENSE POEMS, SONGS, BOTANY, ETC.


[Illustration: QUI LEGIT REGIT.]




The following lines by Mr. Lear were written for a young lady of his
acquaintance, who had quoted to him the words of a young lady not of his
acquaintance,

  "How pleasant to know Mr. Lear!"

      "How pleasant to know Mr. Lear!"
        Who has written such volumes of stuff!
      Some think him ill-tempered and queer,
        But a few think him pleasant enough.

      His mind is concrete and fastidious,
        His nose is remarkably big;
      His visage is more or less hideous,
        His beard it resembles a wig.

      He has ears, and two eyes, and ten fingers,
        Leastways if you reckon two thumbs;
      Long ago he was one of the singers,
        But now he is one of the dumbs.

      He sits in a beautiful parlor,
        With hundreds of books on the wall;
      He drinks a great deal of Marsala,
        But never gets tipsy at all.

      He has many friends, lay men and clerical,
        Old Foss is the name of his cat;
      His body is perfectly spherical,
        He weareth a runcible hat.

      When he walks in waterproof white,
        The children run after him so!
      Calling out, "He's come out in his night-
        Gown, that crazy old Englishman, oh!"

      He weeps by the side of the ocean,
        He weeps on the top of the hill;
      He purchases pancakes and lotion,
        And chocolate shrimps from the mill.

      He reads, but he cannot speak, Spanish,
        He cannot abide ginger beer:
      Ere the days of his pilgrimage vanish,
        How pleasant to know Mr. Lear!

       *        *        *        *        *




INTRODUCTION.

Edward Lear, the artist, Author of "Journals of a Landscape Painter" in
various out-of-the-way countries, and of the delightful "Books of
Nonsense," which have amused successive generations of children, died on
Sunday, January 29, 1888, at San Remo, Italy, where he had lived for twenty
years. Few names could evoke a wider expression of passing regret at their
appearance in the obituary column; for until his health began to fail he
was known to an immense and almost a cosmopolitan circle of acquaintance,
and popular wherever he was known. Fewer still could call up in the minds
of intimate friends a deeper and more enduring feeling of sorrow for
personal loss, mingled with the pleasantest of memories; for it was
impossible to know him thoroughly and not to love him. London, Rome, the
Mediterranean countries generally, Ceylon and India, are still all dotted
with survivors among his generation who will mourn for him affectionately,
although his latter years were spent in comparatively close retirement. He
was a man of striking nobility of nature, fearless, independent, energetic,
given to forming for himself strong opinions, often hastily, sometimes
bitterly; not always strong or sound in judgment, but always seeking after
truth in every matter, and following it as he understood it in scorn of
consequence; utterly unselfish, devoted to his friends, generous even to
extravagance towards any one who had ever been connected with his fortunes
or his travels; playful, light-hearted, witty, and humorous, but not
without those occasional fits of black depression and nervous irritability
to which such temperaments are liable.

Great and varied as the merits of his pictures are, Lear hardly succeeded
in achieving any great popularity as a landscape-painter. His work was
frequently done on private commission, and he rarely sent in pictures for
the Academy or other exhibitions. His larger and more highly finished
landscapes were unequal in technical perfection,--sometimes harsh or cold
in color, or stiff in composition; sometimes full of imagination, at others
literal and prosaic,--but always impressive reproductions of interesting or
peculiar scenery. In later years he used in conversation to qualify himself
as a "topographical artist;" and the definition was true, though not
exhaustive. He had an intuitive and a perfectly trained eye for the
character and beauty of distant mountain lines, the solemnity of rocky
gorges, the majesty of a single mountain rising from a base of plain or
sea; and he was equally exact in rendering the true forms of the middle
distances and the specialties of foreground detail belonging to the various
lands through which he had wandered as a sketcher. Some of his pictures
show a mastery which has rarely been equalled over the difficulties of
painting an immense plain as seen from a height, reaching straight away
from the eye of the spectator until it is lost in a dim horizon. Sir
Roderick Murchison used to say that he always understood the geological
peculiarities of a country he had only studied in Lear's sketches. The
compliment was thoroughly justified; and it is not every landscape-painter
to whom it could honestly be paid.

The history of Lear's choice of a career was a curious one. He was the
youngest of twenty-one children, and, through a family mischance, was
thrown entirely on the limited resources of an elderly sister at a very
early age. As a boy he had always dabbled in colors for his own amusement,
and had been given to poring over the ordinary boys' books upon natural
history. It occurred to him to try to turn his infant talents to account;
and he painted upon cardboard a couple of birds in the style which the
older among us remember as having been called Oriental tinting, took them
to a small shop, and sold them for fourpence. The kindness of friends, to
whom he was ever grateful, gave him the opportunity of more serious and
more remunerative study, and he became a patient and accurate zooelogical
draughtsman. Many of the birds in the earlier volumes of Gould's
magnificent folios were drawn for him by Lear. A few years back there were
eagles alive in the Zooelogical Gardens in Regent's Park to which Lear could
point as old familiar friends that he had drawn laboriously from claw to
beak fifty years before. He united with this kind of work the more
unpleasant occupation of drawing the curiosities of disease or deformity in
hospitals. One day, as he was busily intent on the portrait of a bird in
the Zooelogical Gardens, an old gentleman came and looked over his shoulder,
entered into conversation, and finally said to him, "You must come and draw
my birds at Knowsley." Lear did not know where Knowsley was, or what it
meant; but the old gentleman was the thirteenth Earl of Derby. The
successive Earls of Derby have been among Lear's kindest and most generous
patrons. He went to Knowsley, and the drawings in the "Knowsley Menagerie"
(now a rare and highly-prized work among book collectors) are by Lear's
hand. At Knowsley he became a permanent favorite; and it was there that he
composed in prolific succession his charming and wonderful series of
utterly nonsensical rhymes and drawings. Lear had already begun seriously
to study landscape. When English winters began to threaten his health, Lord
Derby started a subscription which enabled him to go to Rome as a student
and artist, and no doubt gave him recommendations among Anglo-Roman
society which laid the foundations of a numerous _clientele_. It was in the
Roman summers that Lear first began to exercise the taste for pictorial
wandering which grew into a habit and a passion, to fill vivid and copious
note-books as he went, and to illustrate them by spirited and accurate
drawings; and his first volume of "Illustrated Excursions in Italy,"
published in 1846, is gratefully dedicated to his Knowsley patron.

Only those who have travelled with him could know what a delightful comrade
he was to men whose tastes ran more or less parallel to his own. It was not
everybody who could travel with him; for he was so irrepressibly anxious
not to lose a moment of the time at his disposal for gathering into his
garners the beauty and interest of the lands over which he journeyed, that
he was careless of comfort and health. Calabria, Sicily, the Desert of
Sinai, Egypt and Nubia, Greece and Albania, Palestine, Syria, Athos,
Candia, Montenegro, Zagori (who knows now where Zagori is, or was?), were
as thoroughly explored and sketched by him as the more civilized localities
of Malta, Corsica, and Corfu. He read insatiably before starting all the
recognized guide-books and histories of the country he intended to draw;
and his published itineraries are marked by great strength and literary
interest quite irrespectively of the illustrations. And he had his reward.
It is not any ordinary journalist and sketcher who could have compelled
from Tennyson such a tribute as lines "To E.L. on his Travels in Greece":--

    "Illyrian woodlands, echoing falls
      Of water, sheets of summer glass,
      The long divine Peneian pass,
    The vast Akrokeraunian walls,

    "Tomohrit, Athos, all things fair,
      With such a pencil, such a pen,
      You shadow forth to distant men,
    I read and felt that I was there."

Lear was a man to whom, as to Tennyson's Ulysses,

    "All experience is an arch wherethrough
    Gleams that untravelled world."

After settling at San Remo, and when he was nearly sixty years old, he
determined to visit India and Ceylon. He started once and failed, being
taken so ill at Suez that he was obliged to return. The next year he
succeeded, and brought away some thousands of drawings of the most striking
views from all three Presidencies and from the tropical island. His
appetite for travel continued to grow with what it fed upon; and although
he hated a long sea-voyage, he used seriously to contemplate as possible a
visit to relations in New Zealand. It may safely, however, be averred that
no considerations would have tempted him to visit the Arctic regions.

    A hard-working life, checkered by the odd adventures which happen
    to the odd and the adventurous and pass over the commonplace; a
    career brightened by the high appreciation of unimpeachable
    critics; lightened, till of late, by the pleasant society and good
    wishes of innumerable friends; saddened by the growing pressure of
    ill health and solitude; cheered by his constant trust in the love
    and sympathy of those who knew him best, however far away,--such
    was the life of Edward Lear.

      --_The London Saturday Review,_ Feb. 4, 1888.

Among the writers who have striven with varying success during the last
thirty or forty years to awaken the merriment of the "rising generation" of
the time being, Mr. Edward Lear occupies the first place in seniority, if
not in merit. The parent of modern nonsense-writers, he is distinguished
from all his followers and imitators by the superior consistency with which
he has adhered to his aim,--that of amusing his readers by fantastic
absurdities, as void of vulgarity or cynicism as they are incapable of
being made to harbor any symbolical meaning. He "never deviates into
sense;" but those who appreciate him never feel the need of such deviation.
He has a genius for coining absurd names and words, which, even when they
are suggested by the exigencies of his metre, have a ludicrous
appropriateness to the matter in hand. His verse is, with the exception of
a certain number of cockney rhymes, wonderfully flowing and even
melodious--or, as he would say, _meloobious_--while to all these
qualifications for his task must finally be added the happy gift of
pictorial expression, enabling him to double, nay, often to quadruple, the
laughable effect of his text by an inexhaustible profusion of the quaintest
designs. Generally speaking, these designs are, as it were, an idealization
of the efforts of a clever child; but now and then--as in the case of the
nonsense-botany--Mr. Lear reminds us what a genuine and graceful artist he
really is. The advantage to a humorist of being able to illustrate his own
text has been shown in the case of Thackeray and Mr. W.S. Gilbert, to
mention two familiar examples; but in no other instance of such a
combination have we discovered such geniality as is to be found in the
nonsense-pictures of Mr. Lear. We have spoken above of the melodiousness of
Mr. Lear's verses, a quality which renders them excellently suitable for
musical setting, and which has not escaped the notice of the author
himself. We have also heard effective arrangements, presumably by other
composers, of the adventures of the Table and the Chair, and of the cruise
of the Owl and the Pussy-cat,--the latter introduced into the "drawing-room
entertainment" of one of the followers of John Parry. Indeed, in these days
of adaptations, it is to be wondered at that no enterprising librettist has
attempted to build a children's comic opera out of the materials supplied
in the four books with which we are now concerned. The first of these,
originally published in 1846, and brought out in an enlarged form in 1863,
is exclusively devoted to nonsense-verses of one type. Mr. Lear is careful
to disclaim the credit of having created this type, for he tells us in the
preface to his third book that "the lines beginning, 'There was an old man
of Tobago,' were suggested to me by a valued friend, as a form of verse
leading itself to limitless variety for Rhymes and Pictures." Dismissing
the further question of the authorship of "There was an old man of Tobago,"
we propose to give a few specimens of Mr. Lear's Protean powers as
exhibited in the variation of this simple type. Here, to begin with, is a
favorite verse, which we are very glad to have an opportunity of giving, as
it is often incorrectly quoted, "cocks" being substituted for "owls" in the
third line:

    "There was an Old Man with a beard,
    Who said, 'It is just as I feared!
    Two Owls and a Hen, four Larks and a Wren,
    Have all built their nests in my beard!'"

