The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Story of Patsy, by Kate Douglas Smith
Wiggin


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: The Story of Patsy

Author: Kate Douglas Smith Wiggin

Release Date: September 20, 2004  [eBook #13506]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF PATSY***


E-text prepared by Juliet Sutherland, Project Gutenberg Beginners
Projects, Suzanne Lybarger, and the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed
Proofreading Team



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 13506-h.htm or 13506-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/3/5/0/13506/13506-h/13506-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/3/5/0/13506/13506-h.zip)





THE STORY OF PATSY

by

KATE DOUGLAS WIGGIN

Author of _The Birds' Christmas Carol_







[Illustration: "PATSY MINDING THE KENNETT BABY."]


[Illustration: VIGNETTE.]




To

H.C.A.

IN REMEMBRANCE OF GLADNESS GIVEN TO SORROWFUL LITTLE LIVES




    "The young lambs are bleating in the meadows,
     The young birds are chirping in the nest,
     The young fawns are playing with the shadows,
     The young flowers are blowing toward the west--
     But the young; young children, O my brothers,
         They are weeping bitterly!
     They are weeping in the playtime of the others
         In the country of the free."

MRS. BROWNING.




The original Story of Patsy was written and sold some seven years ago
for the benefit of the Silver Street Free Kindergartens in San
Francisco. Now that it is for the first time placed in the hands of
publishers, I have at their request added new material, so that the
present story is more than double the length of the original brief
sketch.

K.D.W.
New York, March, 1889.




CONTENTS AND LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

       *       *       *       *       *

          _"Patsy minding the Kennett Baby."_      _Frontispiece_
          _Vignette._                                     _Title_


       I. THE SILVER STREET KINDERGARTEN.

      II. PATSY COMES TO CALL.

          _"Here's an orange I brung yer!"_

     III. TWO 'PRENTICE HANDS AT PHILANTHROPY.

          _Miss Helen._

      IV. BEHIND THE SCENES.

          _"The boys at my side prattle together."_
          _"Here is the hat!"_

       V. I SEEK PATSY, AND MEET THE DUCHESS OF ANNA STREET.

          _"The Story of Victor."_

      VI. A LITTLE "HOODLUM'S" VIRTUE KINDLES AT THE TOUCH OF JOY.

          _Carlotty Griggs "being a Butterfly."_
          _Paulina's "good-mornings to Johnny Cass."_

     VII. PATSY FINDS HIS THREE LOST YEARS.

          _"He sat silently by the window."_
          _Tail Piece._




CHAPTER I.

THE SILVER STREET KINDERGARTEN.

     "It makes a heaven-wide difference whether the soul of the child is
     regarded as a piece of blank paper, to be written upon, or as a
     living power, to be quickened by sympathy, to be educated by
     truth."


It had been a long, wearisome day at the Free Kindergarten, and I was
alone in the silent, deserted room. Gone were all the little heads,
yellow and black, curly and smooth; the dancing, restless, curious eyes;
the too mischievous, naughty, eager hands and noisy feet; the merry
voices that had made the great room human, but now left it quiet and
empty. Eighty pairs of tiny boots had clattered down the stairs; eighty
baby woes had been relieved; eighty little torn coats pulled on with
patient hands; eighty shabby little hats, not one with a "strawberry
mark" to distinguish it from any other, had been distributed with
infinite discrimination among their possessors; numberless sloppy kisses
had been pressed upon a willing cheek or hand, and another day was over.
No,--not quite over, after all. A murderous yell from below brought me
to my feet, and I flew like an anxious hen to my brood. One small
quarrel in the hall; very small, but it must be inquired into on the way
to the greater one. Mercedes McGafferty had taunted Jenny Crawhall with
being Irish. The fact that she herself had been born in Cork about three
years previous did not trouble her in the least. Jenny, in a voice
choked with sobs, and with the stamp of a tiny foot, was announcing
hotly that she was "NOT Irish, no sech a thing,--she was Plesberterian!"
I was not quite clear whether this was a theological or racial
controversy, but I settled it speedily, and they ran off together hand
in hand. I hastened to the steps. The yells had come from Joe Guinee and
Mike Higgins, who were fighting for the possession of a banana; a
banana, too, that should have been fought for, if at all, many days
before,--a banana better suited, in its respectable old age, to peaceful
consumption than the fortunes of war. My unexpected apparition had such
an effect that I might have been an avenging angel. The boys dropped the
banana simultaneously, and it fell to the steps quite exhausted, in such
a condition that whoever proved to be in the right would get but little
enjoyment from it.

"O my boys, my boys!" I exclaimed, "did you forget so soon? What shall
we do? Must Miss Kate follow you everywhere? If that is the only way in
which you can be good, we might as well give up trying. Must I watch you
to the corner every day, no matter how tired I am?"

Two grimy little shirt bosoms heaved with shame and anger; two pairs of
