The Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific American Supplement, No. 601,
July 9, 1887, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Scientific American Supplement, No. 601, July 9, 1887

Author: Various

Release Date: March 7, 2004 [EBook #11498]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, SUPP. 601 ***




Produced by by Jon Niehof, Don Kretz, Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks
and the DP Team





[Illustration]




SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT NO. 601




NEW YORK, JULY 9, 1887

Scientific American Supplement. Vol. XXIV, No. 601.

Scientific American established 1845

Scientific American Supplement, $5 a year.

Scientific American and Supplement, $7 a year.


       *       *       *       *       *

TABLE OF CONTENTS.

I.   ASTRONOMY.--A Star Finder.--A simple apparatus that can be
     constructed by any mechanic.--1 illustration.

     Photographic Study of Stellar Spectra, Harvard College Observatory.
     --First annual report of the Henry Draper memorial observations.
     --Review of the work by Prof. EDWARD C. PICKERING.

II.  BIOLOGY.--Sponges.--The growth and life history of sponges.--Report
     of a recent lecture at the London Royal Institution by Dr.
     R. VON LEDENFELD.

III. ELECTRICITY.--Phenomena of Alternating Currents.--By Prof.
     ELIHU THOMSON.--16 illustrations.

IV.  ENGINEERING.--An English Car Coupling.--Description of an
     English automatic coupling.--2 illustrations.

     A New Process of Casting Iron and other Metals upon Lace,
     Embroideries, Fern Leaves, and other Combustible Materials.
     --By A.E. OUTERBRIDGE, JR.--A new and eminently practical
     process of producing ornamental castings.--4 illustrations.

     Bricks and Brick Work.--By Prof. T. ROGER SMITH, F.R.I.B.A.
     --The history and technical review of this subject.--A most
     remarkable contribution to the engineering of architecture.

     Link Belting.--By CHARLES A. SCHIEREN.--An interesting and
     practical paper on leather belting made of links.
     --9 illustrations.

     Recent Progress in Gas Engineering.--A lecture by Mr. A.
     MACPHERSON, of Kirkcaldy, reviewing the last improvements
     in this branch.

V.   MISCELLANEOUS.--Herbet's Tepid Douche.--Apparatus in use
     for bathing soldiers in the French barracks.--1 illustration.

     Kent's Torsion Balance.--A new type of balance, involving
     torsional suspension instead of knife edges.--5 illustrations.

     Preservative Liquid.--Note on preservation of organic
     substances.

     The Falls of Gairsoppa.--The great Indian falls, higher than
     Niagara.--2 illustrations.

     The New British Coinage and Jubilee Medal.--Illustrations and
     descriptions of the new pieces.--8 illustrations.

     The Winner of the Derby.--Portrait and description of Merry
     Hampton.

VI.  NAVAL ENGINEERING.--The Falke Type Torpedo Boat.--The fastest
     type of British torpedo boat, constructed by Messrs. Yarrow
     & Co.--1 illustration.

     The German Navy.--The New Gunboat Eber.--A description of
     a late accession to the German navy.--1 illustration.

VII. ORDNANCE AND GUNNERY.--Magazine Rifles.--Continuation of
     this important article, including the Chaffee-Reece,
     Kropatschek, and other magazine guns.--3 illustrations.

     New British Torpedo Experiments.--Experiments with torpedoes
     against a ship.--The efficiency or torpedo nets.--The effects of
     Whitehead torpedoes.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FALKE TYPE TORPEDO BOAT.


Among the different classes of vessels designed for special services,
constructed by Messrs. Yarrow & Co., at Poplar, for the British
government, is one which is stated to be the fastest torpedo boat in her
majesty's navy. This boat has been put through its official trials; with
a load of 15 tons, running continuously for two hours without stopping,
a speed of 23 knots, which is equal to 261/2 statute miles, an hour was
obtained. The boat is 135 ft. long by 14 ft. beam. Its design is known
as the Falke type, being in many respects similar, but very superior, to
a torpedo boat of that name which was built two years ago by the same
firm for the Austrian government. The form of the hull is of such a
character as to give exceptional steering capabilities; at the time of
trial it was found to be able to steer round in a circle of a diameter
of 100 yards, averaging 62 seconds. The forward part of the boat is
completely covered over by a large turtle back, which is the customary
form of the boats built by Messrs. Yarrow & Co. It was first introduced
in the Batoum, which they constructed eight years ago for the Russian
government. This turtle back increases the seaworthiness of the craft by
throwing the water that comes upon it freely away. It forms, also, good
and roomy accommodation for the crew, and incloses a large portion of
the torpedo apparatus. The forward torpedo gear consists of one torpedo
gun, adapted for ejecting the Whitehead torpedo by means of gunpowder,
now preferred on account of its simplicity. The boiler, one of Messrs.
Yarrow & Co.'s special construction, of a type which has undergone many
years of constant trial, is capable of developing 1,660 horse power. In
the engine room there are six engines--one for driving the boat, two for
compressing the air for the torpedoes, an engine for working the dynamo
for producing the electric light, an engine for forcing air into the
stoke-hole, and an engine working in conjunction with the distilling
apparatus for supplying drinking water for the crew and the waste
incidental to the boiler. Aft of the engine room come the officers'
quarters. The stern of the boat is fitted up as a pantry and for the
stowage of ammunition and stores. On the deck are mounted three machine
guns, and near the stern an additional conning tower for use in case of
need, around which revolve two torpedo guns for firing the torpedoes off
either side. These torpedo guns can be trained to any angle it may be
desired to fire them at. On both conning towers are machine
guns.--_Illustrated London News_.

[Illustration: THE "FALKE" TYPE TORPEDO BOAT, AND SECTION SHOWING
GENERAL ARRANGEMENT.]

       *       *       *       *       *




THE GERMAN NAVY--THE NEW GUNBOAT EBER.


The gunboat Eber is an improved vessel of the Wolf type, but differs
from other vessels of its class in that it has not a complete iron hull,
only the frame and deck beams being of iron, while the planking is of
wood and yellow metal. No copper is used on the bottom. The "composite
system" of building is looked upon with favor for ships of this kind,
because iron vessels which are kept permanently at stations in the
tropics soon become overgrown in spite of good care, and thus suffer a
great loss of speed. In a wooden vessel the crew's quarters are better
and more healthful than in iron vessels, for they are not as much
affected by the temperature outside of the ship.

The greatest length of the Eber is about 245 ft.; its breadth, 26 ft.;
its depth, 14 ft.; and it has a displacement of about 500 tons. The
armament will consist of three long 5 in. guns in center pivot
carriages, and a small number of revolvers. One of the former will be
placed at the stern on the quarter deck, and the two others on the
forecastle. Some of the revolvers will be on the quarter deck and some
on the forecastle, care being taken to arrange the guns so as to obtain
the widest possible range, thus enabling the ship to protect itself
perfectly.

[Illustration: THE NEW GERMAN GUNBOAT EBER.]

The Eber is provided with a two-cylinder, compound engine, which can
generate 650 horse power, giving the vessel a speed of 111/2 knots. The
coal bunkers are so large that the ship can travel 3,000 miles at a
speed slightly less than that just mentioned without requiring a fresh
supply of coal. The rigging is the same as in iron vessels of the Wolf
class, and the sails are sufficiently large to allow the vessel to
proceed without steam. The ship will carry about 90 men, including
officers, crew, engineers, and firemen.

A sum of $145,000 was appropriated for the construction and equipment of
the Eber, which was begun at Kiel in the latter part of 1885, and was
launched February 15, 1887.--_Illustrirte Zeitung_.

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW BRITISH TORPEDO EXPERIMENTS.


The torpedo experiments against the Resistance, which have been
suspended since November last, were resumed on June 9 at Portsmouth by
the officers of the Vernon. The injuries received by the ironclad in the
previous experiments having been repaired, so as to make the vessel
watertight, the old ship was towed up the harbor, and moored in Fareham
Creek. Our readers are aware that the Resistance is an obsolete ironclad
which has finished her career as a battle ship, and that nothing could
have converted her into a modern armorclad.

Although it was intended to render the experiments final and conclusive
as a practical demonstration under service conditions of the destructive
effects of the Whitehead torpedo when directed against a modern vessel
of war, the results still leave behind them much uncertainty. The
Resistance was built of iron, whereas battle ships are now exclusively
constructed of steel, and it would be perhaps hazardous to state that
the behavior of the two metals under a sudden and violent shock would be
exactly the same. The construction of the double bottom of the old ship
is also different. Since the last experiments were carried out against
her, however, measures have been taken to make her as far as possible
the counterpart, so far as under water arrangements and coal protection
are concerned, of a modern ship of war.

At the last attack, the Whitehead was directed against the after part of
the hull on the port side in wake of the boilers. During the present
series of experiments the old ship was assailed on the same side, but
directly amidships, in the neighborhood of the engine room. As no steam
was got up in the boilers, the effect of the jar upon the steam pipes,
glands, and feed connections remains a matter of speculation. So far as
the consequences of the burst upon the structure of the hull itself is
concerned, every care was taken to make the ordeal as complete and
instructive as possible. The wing passage, which has a maximum diameter
of 3 ft. diminishing to a point, was left empty, although at the former
experiments the lower portions were filled with coal. But behind this,
and at a distance of 8 ft. from the bulkhead, a longitudinal or fore and
aft steel bulkhead 3/8 in. thick had been worked to a length of 61 ft.,
and, with the coal with which the intervening compartment was packed,
formed (as in recent armorclads) a solid rampart, 20 ft. high, for the
defense of the engine room.

The height of the double bottom between the outer and inner skin plating
is 21/2 ft. The watertight compartments were divided into stations by
means of vertical lightening plates pierced by three holes, and in order
to make them, as far as was practicable, resemble the bracket frames of
a modern armorclad, the center of the plates was cut away so as to leave
a single oval hole instead of the three circular holes. In view of the
differences of opinion which exist on the part of experts on the subject
of under water protection, the officers of the Vernon had determined to
submit the problem to the test of experiment. For this purpose steel
armor 11/2 in. thick had been worked along the outside of the upper skin
of the double bottom throughout one of the compartments, in addition to
the other protection mentioned. The Resistance had been brought down by
iron ballast to a trim of 25 feet 9 in. aft and 19 ft. 7 in. forward,
giving a mean draught of 22 feet 8 inches. She was consequently rather
further down by the stern than before, but was in other respects the
same.

When in commission, the Resistance had a mean draught of 26 feet 10
inches. The present series of experiments was of even greater importance
than the first series. The attack was gradually developed by means of
fixed and outrigger charges of increasing power, and the _coup de grace_
was not given by means of a service Whitehead in actual contact until
various lessons had been derived.

The opening experiment on June 9 consisted of an attack directed against
a new system of torpedo defenses which are to be carried by ships in
action, or when in expectation of an attack, rather than an assault upon
the ship herself. The previous experiments had clearly demonstrated that
a Whitehead, when projected against a vessel at close range, and
consequently with a maximum of motive force, could not get through the
ordinary wire netting before expending its explosive energy in the air,
and that the spars by which the nets are boomed out from the ship's side
could be reduced to 25 ft. in length without danger to the hull. The
ordinary wooden booms employed on board ship, however, are heavy and
unwieldy, weighing, as they do, more than half a ton each. In ordinary
circumstances, the spars cannot be lowered into place and the nets made
taut in less than a couple of hours, and the work of stowing them is
equally slow and laborious.

Mr. Bullivant, who manufactures the torpedo netting and hawsers for the
navy, has devised a method of getting rid of the difficulties complained
of by substituting steel booms for the wooden booms and an arrangement
of pulleys and runners, whereby the protection can be run out and in,
topped and brailed up out of the way, with great facility. The system
was tried at Portsmouth last year with considerable success upon the
Dido, but as it was thought that some of the fittings were somewhat
frail and might collapse beneath the shock of a live torpedo, it was
resolved to submit them to a practical test under service conditions
upon the Resistance. The ship was consequently fitted with three of the
steel booms on the port side. They were 32 ft. long and spaced 45 ft.
apart, and connected by a jackstay to which the nets were attached. Each
steel boom weighed 5 cwt., or less than half the weight of the ordinary
boom, and whereas the latter is fixed to the ship's side by a hook which
is liable to be disconnected or broken by the jerk of an exploding
torpedo, Mr. Bullivant's boom works in a universal or socket joint,
which cannot get out of gear except by fracture, and which permits the
boom to be moved in any direction, whether vertically or fore and aft,
close in against the sides. Below each boom is a flange, which serves as
a line along which a traveler moves, the latter being actuated by means
of a topping line running over a pulley at the head and another near the
heel.

Upon the booms being topped to a perpendicular position, the nets are
attached to the runners at the bottom of the booms close inboard
(instead of, under the existing system, to the tops of the booms from
boats alongside or otherwise), and when this is done, the mere
depression of the booms into position will cause the nets to run out of
their own accord. In like manner, when the occasion for their use has
passed, the raising of the boom will cause the nets to come alongside,
when they can either be brailed up through the grummets or disconnected
for future use.

The action of the gear is so simple and rapid that the torpedo
protection can be always ready without arresting the way of the ship. As
a length of net 30 ft. by 20 ft. deep weighs about 3 cwt., it will also
be seen that the reduction of strains by working the crinolines from the
heel instead of the head of the booms is considerable. The attack by the
Whitehead upon the booms and nettings was made shortly before 2 p.m., at
the time of high tide.

The whole affair occupied a very few minutes. As soon as the red pennant
was struck on board to show that Mr. Bullivant was satisfied with the
arrangements, and that the target was ready, the torpedo vessel Vesuvius
got under way, and after circling round the doomed hulk discharged a
Whitehead against the netting from her under-water bow torpedo tube at
an approximate range of 50 yards. As on former occasions, the missile
was one of the old 16 inch pattern, but it was understood that the
charge of gun cotton had been reduced to 87 lb., so that the net
protection should not bear a greater strain than would be the case in
actual hostilities. The torpedo, which was set to a depth of about 10
feet, struck the net in the middle and threw up an immense spout of
water, but without getting to the ship, which was apparently uninjured.
Although it hit the net immediately below the center boom, no fracture
occurred, and the points remained intact. Although at the short range
the torpedo would spin through the water at from 30 to 40 horse power,
and would deliver a formidable blow upon the net, the thrust was
effectually resisted, though as a matter of course the net was much torn
by the explosion of the baffled projectile.

Although at the second torpedo attack made on the Resistance, the
following day, the offensive power that was brought to bear was quite
exceptional, the victory remained with the ship. The charge exploded was
an exceptionally heavy one. It consisted of 220 lb. of gun cotton. It
was consequently more destructive than any which is ever likely to be
launched against an armorclad much better prepared to resist it than the
obsolete and time-worn Resistance. An idea, however, had got abroad that
the Russians either have or intend to have a locomotive torpedo capable
of carrying the same weight of explosive in its head, and the object of
the experiment was to ascertain what would be the effect of the
detonation of such an enormous charge upon the submerged portions of a
ship of war.

But, while this was no doubt the primary purpose in view, the experiment
also served the secondary purpose of determining the result of the
explosion upon the net defenses of a ship. Mr. Bullivant's booms and
runners, which were found to be scarcely anything the worse from the
ordeal of the previous day, were again used. The damaged net was taken
away and one of the old service grummet nets slung in its place, the
cylinders containing the gun cotton being attached to the jackstay
immediately in front of the battered sides, and 30 feet from the hulk,
and sunk to a distance of 20 feet below the water line, which would
bring it about opposite the bend of the bilge. By 3 p.m. everything was
ready for the explosion of the charge--everybody had cleared out of the
ship while the surrounding small craft drew off to a distance of 300
feet. The charge was electrically fired from a pinnace. The burst was
terrific and the reverberation was heard and the shock distinctly felt
in the dockyard. But the remarkable thing was that the hulk did not
appear to jump in the least, though there was not more than six feet of
water under her keel. That she would not be seriously crippled by the
discharge seems to have been accepted as a foregone conclusion by
Captain Long and the other torpedoists, as the day for the third
experiment had been fixed in advance; but that the steel booms with
their double flange running ways, stays, travelers, and hinges should
have resisted the tremendous jar and upheaval was a genuine surprise for
all concerned, and goes far to prove that except a vessel be taken
unawares, it will be impossible for a torpedo to come into actual
contact with it. At the experiments last year the wooden booms were
unhinged and splintered under a much less violent shock. But the steel
booms employed, though somewhat bent, remained unbroken and in position,
and the joints were quite uninjured. All that is necessary for perfect
defense is that the booms should be made a little heavier.

The torpedo experiments against the Resistance were resumed on June 13,
when the old ironclad suffered some rough treatment. As the experiment
was understood to be the last of the second series, and was fully
expected to have a sensational termination, a considerable number of
interested spectators were attracted to the scene in Fareham Creek. The
torpedoists resorted to severe measures, but with a distinctly useful
purpose in view, having bound the ship hand and foot, so to speak, in
such a way that her name became a solecism. They exploded 95 lb. of gun
cotton 20 ft. below the water, and in contact with her double bottom.
This amount of explosive represents the full charge of the old pattern
16 in. Whiteheads; but as the hulk was, for prudential reasons, moored
close to a mud bank, and as the water was consequently much too shallow
to allow of a locomotive torpedo being set to run at the required depth,
a fixed charge was lashed fore and aft against the bottom plating of the
ship and electrically exploded from No. 95 torpedo boat.

In previous experiments this year the ironclad was attacked on the port
side, which had been specially strengthened for the occasion, and the
result was a victory for the defense. On June 13 the starboard side was
selected for attack, in order that a comparison might be instituted with
the effects produced under different conditions by a similar experiment.

Last year in the latter case the double bottom was filled with coal; and
after the charge, which was lashed against the ship in the same way, had
been exploded, it was found that the bilge keel had been shivered for a
length of 20 ft., while the lower plating had been much bulged above the
bilge keel. Four strakes of the skin plating extending up to the armor
shelf had also been forced inward and fractured where they crossed the
