The Project Gutenberg EBook of Dr. Scudder's Tales for Little Readers,
About the Heathen., by Dr. John Scudder

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Dr. Scudder's Tales for Little Readers, About the Heathen.

Author: Dr. John Scudder

Release Date: September 27, 2004 [EBook #13539]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DR. SCUDDER'S TALES ***




Produced by Stephen Schulze and the PG Online Distributed Proofreaders
Team









DR. SCUDDER'S

TALES FOR LITTLE READERS,

ABOUT THE HEATHEN.



1849


The following work, so far as the Hindoos are concerned, is principally
a compilation from the writings of Duff, Dubois, and others.

Should the eyes of any Christian father or mother rest upon it, I would
ask them if they have not a son or a daughter to dedicate to the
_missionary_ work. The duty of devoting themselves to this work of
Christ, or at least, of consecrating to it their money, their efforts,
and their prayers, is the great duty to be perseveringly and prayerfully
impressed on the minds of our children. A generation thus trained would,
with aid from on high, soon effect the moral revolution of the world.
Blessed will be that father, blessed will be that mother, who shall take
any part in such a training. And I would add, too, blessed will be that
pastor, and blessed will be that Sabbath-school teacher, who shall come
up to their help.




CONTENTS.


CHAPTER I.

General Remarks

CHAPTER II.

The Color and Ornaments of the Hindoos

CHAPTER III.

Dress, Houses, Eating, and Salutation of the Hindoos

CHAPTER IV.

Marriage among the Hindoos

CHAPTER V.

Death and Funerals among the Hindoos

CHAPTER VI.

The Gods of the Hindoos

CHAPTER VII.

The Three Hundred and Thirty Millions of the Gods of the Hindoos--The
Creation of the Universe--The Transmigration of Souls--The different
Hells

CHAPTER VIII.

Hindoo Castes

CHAPTER IX.

Hindoo Temples--Cars--Procession of Idols

CHAPTER X.

Festivals of the Hindoos

CHAPTER XI.

The worship of the Serpent

CHAPTER XII.

The River Ganges

CHAPTER XIII.

The Goddess Durga

CHAPTER XIV.

The Goddess Karle

CHAPTER XV.

Self-tortures of the Hindoos

Chapter XVI.

The Suttee, or Burning of Widows

CHAPTER XVII.

The revengeful Nature of the Hindoo Religion

CHAPTER XVIII.

The Deception of the Hindoos

CHAPTER XIX.

Superstition of the Hindoos

CHAPTER XX.

Burmah, China, etc., etc.

CHAPTER XXI.

The duty of Praying and Contributing for the Spread of the Gospel

CHAPTER XXII.

Personal Labors among the Heathen

CHAPTER XXIII.

Success of the Gospel in India and Ceylon




DR. SCUDDER'S

TALES FOR LITTLE READERS,

ABOUT THE HEATHEN.




CHAPTER I.

GENERAL REMARKS


My dear children--When I was a little boy, my dear mother taught me,
with the exception of the last line, the following prayer:

    "Now I lay me down to sleep,
    I pray the Lord my soul to keep;
    If I should die before I wake,
    I pray the Lord my soul to take;
    And this I ask for Jesus' sake."

Though I am now more than fifty years old, I often like to say this
prayer before I go to sleep. Have you ever learned it, my dear
children? If you have not, I hope that you will learn it _now_; and I
hope, too, that when you say your other prayers at night, you will also
say this. I think that you would be glad to see how this prayer looks in
the Tamul language--the language in which I am now preaching the Gospel,
and in which I hope that some of you will hereafter tell the heathen of
the Saviour. The following is a translation of it:

[Illustration: The Lord's Prayer in Tamul]

I wish that all the little heathen children knew this prayer; but their
fathers and mothers do not teach it to them. Their fathers and mothers
teach them to pray to gods of gold, or brass, or stone. They take them,
while they are very young, to their temples, and teach them to put up
their hands before an idol, and say, "Swammie." Swammie means Lord. As
idolatry is the root of all sin, these children, as you may suppose, in
early life become very wicked. They disobey their parents, speak bad
words, call ill names, swear, steal, and tell lies. They also throw
themselves on the ground in anger, and in their rage they tear their
hair, or throw dirt over their heads, and do many other wicked things.

Let me give you an instance, to show you how they will speak bad words.
A few months ago, a little girl about twelve years of age was brought to
me, with two tumors in her back. To cut them out, I had to make an
incision about eight inches in length; and as one of these tumors had
extended under the shoulder-blade she suffered much before the operation
was finished. While I was operating she cried out, "I will pull out my
eyes." "I will pull out my tongue." "Kurn kertta tayvun." The
translation of this is, "The blind-eyed god." By this expression, she
meant to say, "What kind of a god are you, not to look upon me, and help
me in my distress?" If this little girl had had a Christian father to
teach her to love the Saviour, she would not have used such bad
language. But this father was even more wicked than his daughter,
inasmuch as those who grow old in sin, are worse than those who have not
sinned so long. I never saw a more hard-hearted parent. That he was so,
will appear from his conduct after the operation was finished. He left
his daughter, and went off to his home, about forty miles distant.
Before going, he said to his wife, or to one who came with her, "If the
child gets well, bring her home; if she dies, take her away and bury
her."

I hope, my dear children, that when you think of the wicked little girl
just mentioned, you will be warned never to speak bad words. God will be
very angry with you, if you do. Did you never read what is said in 2
Kings, 2d chapter and 23d verse, about the little children who mocked
the prophet Elijah, and spoke bad words to him. O, how sorry must they
have felt for their conduct, when they saw the paws of those great bears
lifted up to tear them in pieces, and which did tear them in pieces.
Besides all this, little children who speak bad words can never go to
heaven. God will cast them into the great fire. Have you ever spoken bad
words? If so, God is angry with you, and he will not forgive you unless
you are sorry that you have done so, and seek his forgiveness through
the blood of his dear Son.




CHAPTER II.

THE COLOR AND ORNAMENTS OF THE HINDOOS.


My dear children--If you will take a piece of mahogany in your hands,
and view its different shades, you will have a pretty good
representation of the color of a large class of this heathen people--I
say, of a large class, for there is a great variety of colors. Some
appear to be almost of a bronze color. Some are quite black. It is
difficult to account for the different colors which we often see in the
same family. For instance, one child will be of the reddish hue to which
I just referred; another will be quite dark. When I was in Ceylon, two
sisters of this description joined my church. One was called Sevappe, or
the red one; the other was called Karappe, or the black one.

This people very much resemble the English and Americans in their
features. Many of them are very beautiful. This remark will apply
particularly to children, and more especially to the children of
Brahmins and others, who are delicately brought up. But however
beautiful any of this people may be, they try to make themselves appear
more so, by the ornaments which they wear. These ornaments are of very
different kinds, and are made of gold, silver, brass, precious stones,
or glass. All are fond of ear-rings. Sometimes four or five are worn in
each ear, consisting of solid gold, the lower one being the largest, and
the upper one the smallest. Some men wear a gold ornament attached to
the middle of the ear, in which a precious stone is inserted. Sometimes
they wear very large circular ear-rings, made of the wire of copper,
around which gold is twisted so as to cover every part of it. These are
frequently ornamented with precious stones. The females, in addition to
ear-rings, have an ornament which passes through the rim of the ear,
near the head, half of it being seen above the rim, and half of it below
it. An ornamental chain is sometimes attached to this, which goes some
distance back, when it is lost in the hair. They sometimes also wear a
jewel in the middle of the rim of the ear, and another on that little
forward point which strikes your finger when you attempt to put it into
the ear. Nose jewels also are worn. Sometimes three are worn at the
same time. Holes are made through each side of the lower part of the
nose, and through the cartilage, or that substance which divides the
nostrils, through which they are suspended. The higher and wealthier
females wear a profusion of ornaments of gold and pearls around the
neck.

A very pretty ornament, about three inches in diameter, having the
appearance of gold, is also frequently worn by them on that part of the
head where the females in America put up their hair in a knot. In
addition to this, the little girls sometimes wear one or two similar but
smaller ornaments below this, as well as an ornament at the end of the
long braid of hair which hangs down over the middle of their backs.
Occasionally the whole, or the greater part of this braid is covered
with an ornament of the same materials with those just described. They
also wear an ornament extending from the crown of the head to the
forehead, just in that spot where the little girls to whom I am writing
part their hair. Attached to this, I have seen a circular piece of gold
filled with rubies. Rings are worn on the toes as well as on the
fingers, and bracelets of gold or silver on the wrists. Anklets similar
to bracelets, and tinkling ornaments are worn on the ankles. The poor,
who cannot afford to wear gold or silver bracelets, have them made of
glass stained with different colors. I have seen nearly a dozen on each
wrist.

The little boys wear gold or silver bracelets; also gold or silver
anklets. I just alluded to finger-rings. I have seen a dozen on the same
hand. In this part of the country, the little opening which is made in
the ears of the children is gradually distended until it becomes very
large. At first, the opening is only large enough to admit a wire. After
this has been worn for a short time, a knife is introduced into the ear
in the direction of the opening, and an incision made large enough to
admit a little cotton. This is succeeded by a roll of oiled cloth, and
by a peculiar shrub, the English name of which, if it has any, I do not
know. When the hole becomes sufficiently large, a heavy ring of lead,
about an inch in diameter, is introduced. This soon increases the size
of the opening to such an extent, that a second, and afterwards a third,
a fourth, and a fifth ring are added. By these weights, the lower parts
of the ear are drawn down sometimes very nearly, or quite to the
shoulders. Not unfrequently the little girls, when they run, are obliged
to catch hold of these rings to prevent the injury which they would
receive by their striking against their necks. I need hardly say, that
in due time, these rings are removed, and ornamented rings are
substituted.

A different plan is pursued with the Mohammedan little girls. They have
their ears bored from the top to the bottom of the ear. The openings
which are at first made are small, and are never enlarged. A ring is
inserted in each of these openings. I have seen a little girl to-day in
whose ears I counted twenty-four rings.

Flowers in great profusion are sometimes used to add to the adornment of
the jewels.

I cannot conclude my account of the jewels of the little girls, without
giving you a description of the appearance of a little patient of mine
who came here a few days ago, loaded with trinkets. I will give it in
the words of my daughter, which she wrote in part while the girl was
here. "On the 17th, a little dancing-girl came to see us. She was
adorned with many jewels, some of which were very beautiful. The jewel
in the top of the ear was a circle, nearly the size of a dollar. It was
set with rubies. Nine pearls were suspended from it. In the middle of
the ear was a jewel of a diamond shape, set with rubies and pearls. The
lowest jewel in the ear was shaped like a bell. It was set with rubies,
and from it hung a row of pearls. Close by the ear, suspended from the
hair, was a jewel which reached below her ear. It consisted of six bells
of gold, one above the other. Around each was a small row of pearls,
which reached nearly to the bell below, thus forming a jewel resembling
very many drops of pearls. It is the most beautiful jewel that I ever
saw. In the right side of her nose was a white stone, set with gold, in
the shape of a star. From it hung a large pearl. There was a hole bored
in the partition between the nostrils. This hole had a jewel in it,
about an inch in length, in the middle of which was a white stone with a
ruby on each side. It also had a ruby on the top. From the white stone
hung another, of a similar color, attached to it by a piece of gold. In
the left side of the nose was a jewel about an inch in diameter. It was
somewhat in the shape of a half-moon, and was set with rubies, pearls,
emeralds, etc. etc. This jewel hung below her mouth. On the back of her
head was a large, round gold piece, three inches in diameter. Another
piece about two inches in diameter, hung below this. Her hair was
braided in one braid, and hung down her back. At the bottom of this were
three large tassels of silk, mounted with gold. Her eyebrows and
eyelashes were painted with black. Her neck was covered with jewels of
such beauty, and of such a variety, that it is impossible for me to
describe them. Around her ankles were large rings which looked like
braided silver. To these were attached very many little bells, which
rung as she walked. I believe all dancing-girls wear these rings. We
felt very sad when we thought that she was dedicated to a life of infamy
and shame."

There is an ornament worn by the followers of the god Siva, on their
arms, or necks, or in their hair. It is called the _lingum_. The nature
of this is so utterly abominable, that I cannot tell you a word about
it.

Married women wear an ornament peculiar to themselves. It is called the
tahly. It is a piece of gold, on which is engraven the image of some one
of their gods. This is fastened around the neck by a short yellow
string, containing one hundred and eight threads of great fineness.
Various ceremonies are performed before it is applied, and the gods, of
whom I will tell you something by and by, with their wives, are called
upon to give their blessing. When these ceremonies are finished, the
tahly is brought on a waiter, ornamented with sweet-smelling flowers,
and is tied by the bridegroom to the neck of the bride. This ornament is
never taken off, unless her husband dies. In such a case she is deprived
of it, to wear it no more for ever--deprived of it, after various
ceremonies, by her nearest female relative, who cuts the thread by which
it is suspended, and removes it. After this a barber is called, who
shaves her head, and she becomes, in the eyes of the people, a
_despised_ widow--no more to wear any ornament about her neck but a
plain one--no more to stain her face with yellow water, nor to wear on
her forehead those marks which are considered by the natives as among
their chief ornaments.

I have now told you something about the jewels of this people. I hope
that you will never be disposed to imitate them, and load your bodies
with such useless things. They are not only useless, but tend to
encourage pride and vanity. All that you need is, the "Pearl of great
price," even Jesus. Adorn yourself with this Pearl, and you will be
beautiful indeed--beautiful even in the sight of your heavenly Father.
Have you this Pearl of great price, my dear children? Tell me, have you
this Pearl of great price? If you have not, what have you?

I just now alluded to those marks which the natives consider among their
chief ornaments. These are different among different sects. The
followers of Siva rub ashes on their foreheads. These ashes are
generally prepared by burning what in the Tamul language is called
[Tamul:] _chaarne._ They also apply these ashes in streaks, generally
three together, on their breasts, and on their arms. Some besmear their
whole bodies with them.
