The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Making of a Nation
by Charles Foster Kent and Jeremiah Whipple Jenks

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Making of a Nation
       The Beginnings of Israel's History

Author: Charles Foster Kent and Jeremiah Whipple Jenks

Release Date: May 25, 2004 [EBook #12434]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAKING OF A NATION ***




Produced by Al Haines




THE BIBLE'S MESSAGE TO MODERN LIFE

Twelve Studies on

The Making of a Nation

The Beginnings of Israel's History




BY



CHARLES FOSTER KENT
JEREMIAH WHIPPLE JENKS





1912



The best of allies you can procure for us is the Bible.  That will
bring us the reality--freedom.--_Garibaldi_.

If the common schools have found their way from the Atlantic to the
Pacific; if slavery has been abolished; if the whole land has been
changed from a wilderness into a garden of plenty, from ocean to
ocean; if education has been fostered according to the best lights
of each generation since then; if industry, frugality and sobriety
are the watchwords of the nation, as I believe them to be, I say it
is largely due to those first emigrants, who, landing with the
English Bible in their hands and in their hearts, established
themselves on the shores of America.--_Joseph H. Choate_.

And, as it is owned, the whole scheme of Scripture is not yet
understood, so, if it comes to be understood, it must be in the
same way as natural knowledge is come at; by the continuance and
progress of learning and liberty, and by particular persons
attending to, comparing and pursuing intimations scattered up and
down it, which are overlooked and disregarded by the generality of
the world.  Nor is it at all incredible that a book which has been
so long in the possession of mankind should contain many truths as
yet undiscovered.--_Butler_.

Mr. Lincoln, as I saw him every morning, in the carpet slippers he
wore in the house and the black clothes no tailor could make really
fit his gaunt, bony frame, was a homely enough figure.  The routine
of his life was simple, too; it would have seemed a treadmill to
most of us.  He was an early riser, when I came on duty at eight in
the morning, he was often already dressed and reading in the
library.  There was a big table near the centre of the room: there
I have seen him reading many times.  And the book?  It was the
Bible which I saw him reading while most of the household
slept.--_William H. Crook_, in _Harper's Magazine_.

The Bible has such power for teaching righteousness that even to
those who come to it with all sorts of false notions about the God
of the Bible, it yet teaches righteousness, and fills them with the
love of it; how much more those who come to it with a true notion
about the God of the Bible.--_Matthew Arnold_.

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION

 The Rediscovery of the Bible.
 The Object of These Studies.
 The Plan of Work.
 Books of Reference.


STUDY I.  MAN'S PLACE IN THE WORLD.  The Story of Creation, Gen. 1,
2

 1. The Different Theories of Creation.
 2. The Priestly Story of Creation.
 3. The Early Prophetic Story of Creation.
 4. A Comparison of the Two Accounts of Creation.
 5. Man's Conquest and Rulership of the World.
 6. Man's Responsibility as the Ruler of the World.


STUDY II.  MAN'S RESPONSIBILITY FOR HIS ACTS.  The Story of the
Garden of Eden, Gen. 3

 1. The Nature of Sin.
 2. The Origin of Sin According to the Story in Genesis 3.
 3. The Different Theories Regarding the Origin of Sin.
 4. The Effects of Sin upon the Wrong-doer.
 5. God's Attitude toward the Sinner.
 6. The Effect of Sin upon Society.


STUDY III.  THE CRIMINAL, AND HIS RELATION TO SOCIETY.  The Story
of Cain, Gen. 4:1-16

 1. The Meaning of the Story of Cain.
 2. The Making of a Criminal.
 3. The Criminal's Attitude toward Society.
 4. The Ways in which Society Deals with the Criminal.
 5. How to Deal with Criminals.
 6. The Prevention of Crime.


STUDY IV.  THE SURVIVAL OF THE FITTEST.  The Story of the Great
Flood, Gen. 6-9

 1. The Two Biblical Accounts of the Flood.
 2. The Corresponding Babylonian Flood Stories.
 3. History of the Biblical Flood Stories.
 4. Aim of the Biblical Writers in Recounting the Flood Stories.
 5. The Survival of the "Fittest" in the Natural World.
 6. In Social and Political Life.


STUDY V.  THE PIONEER'S INFLUENCE UPON A NATION'S IDEAL.  Abraham,
the Traditional Father of the Race, Gen. 12:1-8; 13:1-13; 16; 18;
19; 21:1-7; 22:1-19

 1. The Reasons for Migration.
 2. The Prophetic Stories about Abraham.
 3. The Meaning of the Early Prophetic Stories about Abraham.
 4. The Prophetic Portrait of Abraham.
 5. The Tendency to Idealize National Heroes.
 6. The Permanent Value and Influence of the Abraham Narratives.


STUDY VI.  THE POWER OF AMBITION.  Jacob the Persistent, Gen.
25:10-33:20

 1. The Two Brothers, Jacob and Esau.
 2. The Man with a Wrong Ambition.
 3. Jacob's Training in the School of Experience.
 4. The Invincible Power of Ambition and Perseverance.
 5. The Different Types of Ambition.
 6. The Development of Right Ambitions.


STUDY VII.  A SUCCESSFUL MAN OF AFFAIRS.  Joseph's Achievements,
Gen. 37; 39-48; 50

 1. The Qualities Essential to Success.
 2. The Limitations and Temptations of Joseph's Early Life.
 3. The Call of a Great Opportunity.
 4. The Temptations of Success.
 5. The Standards of Real Success.
 6. The Methods of Success.


STUDY VIII.  THE TRAINING OF A STATESMAN.  Moses in Egypt and the
Wilderness, Ex. 1:1-7:5

 1. The Egyptian Background.
 2. The Making of a Loyal Patriot.
 3. The School of the Wilderness.
 4. Moses' Call to Public Service.
 5. The Education of Public Opinion.
 6. The Training of Modern Statesmen.


STUDY IX.  THE ORIGIN AND GROWTH OF LAW.  Moses' Work as Judge and
Prophet, Ex. 18:5-27; 33:5-11

 1. The Needs that Give Rise to Law.
 2. The Growth of Customary Law.
 3. The Authority Underlying all Law.
 4. Moses' Relations to the Old Testament Laws.
 5. The Development of Modern Law.
 6. The Attitude of Citizens toward the Law.


STUDY X.  THE FOUNDATIONS OF GOOD CITIZENSHIP.  The Ten
Commandments, Ex. 20:1-17

 1. The History of the Prophetic Decalogue.
 2. Obligations of the Individual to God.
 3. The Social and Ethical Basis of the Sabbath Law.
 4. The Importance of Children's Loyalty to Parents.
 5. Primary Obligations of Man to Man.
 6. The Present-day Authority of the Ten Commandments.


STUDY XI.  THE EARLY TRAINING OF A RACE.  Israel's Experience in
the Wilderness and East of the Jordan, Num. 11-14; 21:21-31;
32:39-42

 1. The Wilderness Environment.
 2. Influence of the Nomadic Life upon Israel's Character and Ideals.
 3. The Influence of the Wilderness Life Upon Israel's faith.
 4. The Significance of the East-Jordan Conquests.
 5. The Significance of Moses' Work.
 6. The Early Stages in the Training of the Human Race.


STUDY XII.  A NATION'S STRUGGLE FOR A HOME AND FREEDOM, Israel's
Victories over the Canaanites, Josh. 2-9; Judg. 1, 4, 5.

 1. The Crossing of the Jordan.
 2. The Canaanite Civilization.
 3. The Capture of the Outposts of Palestine.
 4. Ways by which the Hebrews Won Their Homes.
 5. Deborah's Rally of the Hebrews.
 6. The Final Stage in the Making of the Hebrew Nation.



INTRODUCTION

THE REDISCOVERY OF THE BIBLE

In the early Christian centuries thousands turned to the Bible, as
drowning men to a life buoy, because it offered them the only way
of escape from the intolerable social and moral ills that attended
the death pangs of the old heathenism.  Then came the Dark Ages,
with their resurgent heathenism and barbarism, when the Bible was
taken from the hands of the people.  In the hour of a nation's
deepest humiliation and moral depravity, John Wycliffe, with the
aid of a devoted army of lay priests, gave back the Bible to the
people, and in so doing laid the foundations for England's
intellectual, political and moral greatness.  The joy and
inspiration of the Protestant Reformers was the rediscovery and
popular interpretation of the Bible.  In all the great forward
movements of the modern centuries the Bible has played a central
role.  The ultimate basis of our magnificent modern scientific and
material progress is the inspiration given to the human race by the
Protestant Reformation.

Unfortunately, the real meaning and message of the Bible has been
in part obscured during past centuries by dogmatic interpretations.
The study of the Bible has also been made a solemn obligation
rather than a joyous privilege.  The remarkable discoveries of the
present generation and its new and larger sense of power and
progress have tended to turn men's attention from the contemplation
of the heritage which comes to them from the past.  The result is
that most men know little about the Bible.  They are acquainted
with its chief characters such as Abraham, David and Jesus.  A few
are even able to give a clear-cut outline of the important events
of Israel's history; but they regard it simply as a history whose
associations and interests belong to a bygone age.  How many
realize that most of the problems which Israel met and solved are
similar to those which to-day are commanding the absorbing
attention of every patriotic citizen, and that of all existing
books, the Old Testament makes the greatest contributions to the
political and social, as well as to the religious thought of the
world?  National expansion, taxation, centralization of authority,
civic responsibility, the relation of religion to politics and to
public morality were as vital and insistent problems in ancient
Israel as they are in any live, progressive nation to-day.  The
gradual discovery of this fact explains why here and there
through-out the world the leaders in modern thought and progress
are studying the Bible with new delight and enthusiasm; not only
because of its intrinsic beauty and interest, but because in it
they find, stated in clearest form, the principles which elucidate
the intricate problems of modern life.



THE OBJECTS OF THESE STUDIES,

There are two distinct yet important ways of interpreting the
Bible: The one is that of the scholar who knows the Bible from the
linguistic, historical and literary point of view; the other, that
of the man who knows life and who realizes the meaning and value of
the Bible to those who are confronted by insistent social, economic
and individual problems.  These studies aim to combine both methods
of interpretation.

Briefly defined the chief objects of these studies are:

(1) To introduce the men and women of to-day to that which is most
vital in the literature and thought of the Old Testament.

(2) To interpret the often neglected Old Testament into the
language of modern life simply and directly and in the light of
that which is highest in the teachings of Christianity.

(3) To present the constructive results of the modern historical
and literary study of the Bible, not dogmatically but tentatively,
so that the reader and student may be in a position to judge for
himself regarding the conclusions that are held by a large number
of Biblical scholars and to estimate their practical religious
value.

(4) To show how closely the Old Testament is related to the life of
to-day and how it helps to answer the pressing questions now
confronting the nations.

(5) To lead strong men to think through our national, social and
individual problems, and to utilize fearlessly and practically the
constructive results of modern method and research in the fields of
both science and religion.



THE PLAN OF WORK.

These studies are planned to meet the needs of college students and
adult Bible classes.  Those who are able to command more time and
wish to do more thorough work will find in the list of _Parallel
Readings_ on the first page of each study carefully selected
references to the best authorities on the subject treated.  For
their guidance are also provided _Subjects for Further Study_.  In
using this text-book the student may proceed as follows:

(1) Read carefully the Biblical passage indicated in connection
with each title; for example, in the first study, Genesis 1 and 2.

(2) Read the Biblical and other quotations on the first page of
each study.  Unless otherwise indicated the Biblical quotations are
from the American Revised Version.  They include the most important
Biblical passages.  The other quotations embody some of the best
contributions of ancient and modern writers to the subject under
consideration.

(3) Read and think through the material presented under each
paragraph.  This material is arranged under six headings for the
convenience of those who wish to follow the plan of daily reading
and study.



BOOKS OF REFERENCE.

The books suggested in connection with this course have been
carefully selected in order that each person may have for his
individual use a practical working library.  The following should
be at hand for constant reference.

Kent, C. F., _The Historical Bible_, Vols. I and II.  Contains the
important Biblical passages arranged in chronological order and
provided with the historical, geographical and archaeological notes
required for their clear understanding.  The translation is based
on the oldest manuscripts and embodies the constructive results of
modern Biblical research.  New York, $1.00 each.

Jenks, J. W., _Principles of Politics_.  New York, $1.25.  Prepared
to explain the principles by which political action is governed and
thus to aid thoughtful citizens both to gain a clear outlook on
life and wisely to direct their own political activity.

Aristotle, _Politics_.  The greatest masterpiece of scientific
political thought.  Its different point of view will suggest many
illuminating comparisons between Greek and modern political ideals
and institutions and give the reader a broad basis for the
appreciation of that which is essential and enduring in the
statecraft of all ages.  $2.50.

For further parallel study the following books are suggested:

Breasted, J. H., _History of the Ancient Egyptians_.  Clear,
concise and authoritative.  New York, $1.25.

Bryce, James, _The American Commonwealth_, Vols. I, II.  New York,
$2.00 each.  Best commentary on American Government.

Cooper, C. S., _The Bible and Modern Life_.  Presents the point of
view from which the Bible may most profitably be studied and
contains valuable suggestions regarding the organization and work
of college and adult classes.  New York, $1.25.

Driver, S. R., _Introduction to the Literature of the Old
Testament_.  New York, $2.50.  A sane, thorough study of the
origin, history, and contents of the Old Testament books.'

Goodspeed, G. S., _History of the Babylonians and Assyrians_.  New
York, $1.25.  A comprehensive and attractive picture of the life of
these ancient people.

Hadley, A. T., _Standards of Public Morality_.  New York, $1.00.  A
suggestive study of the application of moral principles to the life
of society.

Hastings, James, _Dictionary of the Bible_, Vols. 1-5.  New York,
$6.00 each.  A summary of the historical, literary, geographical
and archaeological facts which constitute the background of the
life and thought of the Bible.

Kent, C. F., _The Beginnings of Hebrew History and Israel's
Historical and Biographical Narratives_.  (Vols. I and II of
Student's Old Testament.) $2.75 each.  Presents in a clear, modern
translation the original sources incorporated in the historical
books of the Old Testament, the origin and literary history of
these books, and the important parallel Babylonian and Assyrian
literature.

Kent, C. F., _Biblical Geography and History_.  New York, $1.50.  A
clear portrayal of the physical characteristics of Palestine and of
the potent influences which that land has exerted throughout the
ages upon its inhabitants.

McFadyen, J. E., _Messages of the Prophets and Priestly
Historians_.  New York, $1,25.  A fresh and effective
interpretation of the historical and spiritual messages of the Old
Testament historical books into the language and thought of to-day.

Smith, H. P., _Old Testament History_.  New York, $2.50.  A
thorough, well-proportioned presentation of the unfolding of
Israel's history.

Wilson, Woodrow, _Constitutional Government in the United States_.
$1.50.  A constructive judgment of the American constitution.

Seeley, J. R., _Introduction to Political Science_.  $1.50.  An
effective example of the application of the historical methods to
politics.




STUDY I

MAN'S PLACE IN THE WORLD.

THE STORY OF CREATION -- Gen. 1 and 2.

_Parallel Readings_.

  Kent, _Historical Bible_, Vol. I, pp. 1-7, 231-3.
  Articles, "Evolution" and "Cosmogony," in _Ency. Brit_. or _Inter.
    Ency_., or any standard encyclopedia.

God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he
him, male and female created he them.  And God blessed them, and
God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the
earth, and subdue it; and have dominion over the fish of the sea,
and over the birds of the heavens, and over every living thing that
moveth upon the earth.--_Gen. 1:27, 28_.

 When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers,
 The moon and the stars which thou hast ordained;
 What is man, that thou art mindful of him?
 And the son of man that thou visitest him?
 For thou hast made him but little lower than God,
 And crownest him with glory and honor.
 Thou makest him to have dominion over the works of thine hands,
 Thou hast put all things under his feet.--_Ps. 8: 8-6_.

 God clothed men with strength like his own,
 And made them according to his own image.
 He put the fear of them upon all flesh,
 That they should have dominion over beasts and birds.
 Mouth and tongue, eyes and ears,
 And a mind with which to think he gave them;
 With insight and wisdom he filled their minds,
 Good and evil he taught them.  Ben Sira. 17, 3-7 (_Hist. Bible_).

All things were made through him; and without him was not any thing
made that hath been made.--John 1:3.


I.

DIFFERENT THEORIES OF CREATION.

Every early people naturally asked the questions, How were things
made?  How were men created?  First of all, Who made the world?
They necessarily answered them according to their own dawning
knowledge.

The most primitive races believed that some great animal created
the earth and man.  In the Alaskan collection in the museum of the
University of Pennsylvania there is a huge crow, sitting upon the
mask of a man's face.  This symbolizes the crude belief of the
Alaskan Indians regarding the way man was created.  The early
Egyptians thought that the earth and man were hatched out of an
egg.  In one part of Egypt it was held that the artisan god Ptah
broke the egg with his hammer.  In another part of the land and
probably at a later date the tradition was current that Thoth the
moon god spoke the world into existence.  The earliest Babylonian
record states that:

  The god Marduk laid a reed on the face of the waters,
  He formed dust and poured it out beside the reed;
  That he might cause the gods to dwell in the dwellings
    of their heart's desire,
  He formed mankind.

Later he formed the grass and the rush of the marsh and the forest.
Then he created the animals and their young.

The Parsee teachers held that the rival gods, Ahriman and Ormuzd,
evolved themselves out of primordial matter and then through the
long ages created their attendant hierarchies of angels.  The
philosophers of India anticipated in some respects our modern
evolutionary theory.  Brahma is thought of as self-existent and
eternal.  He gradually condenses himself into material objects,
such as ether, fire, water, earth and the elements.  Last of all he
manifests himself in man.  The Greek philosophers were the first to
attempt to describe creation as a purely physical, generative
process.  They taught the evolution of the more complex from the
simpler forms.  Plato and Aristotle believed in a transcendental
deity and found in the world indications of a vital impulse toward
a higher manifestation of life--man.

Michael Angelo, with wonderful dramatic power, in his painting in
the Sistine Chapel at Rome has portrayed how lifeless clay in form
of man, when touched by the finger of God, by sheer vitalizing
power is transformed into a living soul.

Very different yet equally impressive is the modern scientific
view.  The origin of matter and of life is so absolutely unknown
that scientists have not as yet formulated definite theories
concerning it.  Even the theories regarding the origin of the solar
system are still conflicting and none is generally accepted.  The
old nebular hypothesis is discredited and the theory of the spiral
movement of the solar matter seems to be confirmed by phenomena
observable in the heavens.  The one principle generally held by
scientists is that, given matter and life and some creating force,
our present marvelous complex universe has come into being
according to laws usually called natural.  These laws are so
invariable that they may be considered unchanging.

Even more definitely established is the so-called theory of
evolution which is based on the careful observation and comparison
of countless thousands of natural phenomena.  According to the
Encyclopedia Britannica it is the history of the physical process
by which all living beings have acquired the characteristics,
physical, mental, moral, and spiritual, which now distinguish them.
It recognizes the gradual development from the simplest to the most
complex forms.  It is merely an attempt to describe in the light of
careful observation and investigation the process of growth by
which the world and the beings which inhabit it have grown into
what they are.

A comparison of the Hebrew account of creation with those of other
races and times is extremely suggestive.


II.

THE PRIESTLY STORY OF CREATION.

Note that the first and second chapters of Genesis contain two
distinct accounts of creation.

Read Genesis 1:1--2:3 (see _Hist. Bib_., I, pp. 231-3 for modern
