The Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific American Supplement, No. 443,
June 28, 1884, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Scientific American Supplement, No. 443,  June 28, 1884

Author: Various

Release Date: September 29, 2005 [EBook #16773]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Josephine Paolucci and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at www.pgdp.net





[Illustration]




SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT NO. 443.




NEW YORK, JUNE 28, 1884.

Scientific American Supplement. Vol. XVII., No. 443.

Scientific American established 1845

Scientific American Supplement, $5 a year.

Scientific American and Supplement, $7 a year.

       *       *       *       *       *




TABLE OF CONTENTS.


I.    CHEMISTRY AND METALLURGY.--Beeswax and its Adulterations.
      --Chemical ingredients.--Detection of adulterations.        7064

      Phenol in the Stem, Leaves, and Cones of Pinus Sylvestris.
      --A discovery bearing on the flora of the Carboniferous
      epoch and the formation of petroleum.                       7065

      The School of Physics and Chemistry of Paris.--With
      engraving of laboratory.                                    7065

      Some Relations of Heat to Voltaic and Thermo Electric
      Action of Metals in Electrolysis.--By G. GORE.              7070

II.   ENGINEERING, MECHANICS, ETC.--Air Refrigerating
      Machine.--5 figures.                                        7071

      A Gas Radiator and Heater.                                  7071

      Concrete Water Pipes.                                       7071

      The Sellers Standard System of Screw Threads. Nuts, and
      Bolt Heads.--A table.                                       7072

      An English Railway Ferry Boat.--3 figures.                  7072

      The Problem of Flight and the Flying Machine.               7072

III.  TECHNICAL.--Concrete Buildings for Farms.--How to construct
      them.                                                       7063

      What Causes Paint to Blister and Peel?--How to prevent it.  7063

      Olive Oil.--Difficulties encountered in raising an olive
      crop.--Process of making Oil.                               7064

IV.   ELECTRICITY. ETC.--Telephony and Telegraphy on the Same
      Wires Simultaneously.--4 figures.                           7067

      The Electric Marigraph.--An apparatus for measuring the
      height of the tide.--With engravings and diagrams showing
      the Siemens and Halske marigraph and the operation of the
      same.                                                       7068

      Delune & Co.'s System of Laying Underground Cables.--2
      figures.                                                    7069

      Electricity Applied to Horseshoeing.--Quieting an unruly
      animal.--3 engravings.                                      7069

      Esteve's Automatic Pile.--1 figure.                         7070

      Woodward's Diffusion Motor.                                 7070

V.    ASTRONOMY.--Lunar Heat.--Its reflected and obscure
      heat.--Trifling influence of the moon upon wind and
      weather.--By Prof. C.A. YOUNG.                              7073

VI.   NATURAL HISTORY.--The Long-haired Pointer "Mylord."
      --With engraving.                                           7073

VII.  HORTICULTURE, ETC.--Apple Tree Borers.--Protection
      against the same.                                           7074

      Keffel's Germinating Apparatus.--With engraving.            7074

      Millet.--Its Cultivation.                                   7074

VIII. MISCELLANEOUS.--Puerta del Sol, Madrid, Spain.--With
      engraving.                                                  7063

      Dust-free Spaces.--A lecture delivered by Dr. OLIVER J.
      LODGE before the Royal Dublin Society.                      7067

       *       *       *       *       *




PUERTA DEL SOL, MADRID.


Puerta del Sol, or Gate of the Sun, Madrid, is the most famous and
favorite public square in the Spanish city of Madrid. It was the
eastern portal of the old city. From this square radiate several of
the finest streets, such as Alcala, one of the handsomest
thoroughfares in the world, Mayor, Martera, Carretas, Geronimo. In our
engraving the post office is seen on the right. Large and splendid
buildings adorn the other sides, which embrace hotels, cafes, reading
rooms, elegant stores, etc. From this square the street railway lines
traverse the city in all directions. The population of the city is
about 400,000. It contains many magnificent buildings. Our engraving
is from _Illustrirte Zeitung_.

[Illustration: THE PUERTA DEL SOL, MADRID, SPAIN (From a Photograph.)]

       *       *       *       *       *




CONCRETE BUILDINGS FOR FARMS.


Buildings made of concrete have never received the attention in this
country that they deserve. They have the merit of being durable and
fire-proof, and of not being liable to be blown down by violent winds.
It is very easy to erect them in places where sand and gravel are near
at hand and lime is comparatively cheap. Experiments made in England
show that coal screenings may be employed to good advantage in the
place of sand and gravel. Mr. Samuel Preston, of Mount Carroll, Ill.,
has a dwelling and several other buildings made of concrete and
erected by himself. They were put up in 1851, and are in excellent
condition. In _The Farmers' Review_ he gives the following directions
for building concrete walls:

First, secure a good stone foundation, the bottom below frost, the top
about one foot above ground. Near the top of the foundation bed in 2x4
scantling edgewise transversely with the walls, at such distances
apart as the length of the planks that form the boxes to hold the
concrete may require, the ends of the scantling to run six inches
beyond the outside and inside of the wall. Now take 2x6 studding, one
foot longer than the height of the concrete walls are to be, bolt in
an upright position in pairs to each end of the 2x4 scantling, and, if
a foot wall is to be built, sixteen inches apart, as the box plank
will take up four inches. To hold the studding together at the top,
take pieces of 2x6 lumber, make two mortises in each piece large
enough to slip easily up and down on the studding, forming a tie. Make
one mortise long enough to insert a key, so that the studding can be
opened at the top when the box plank are to be raised. When the box
plank are in position, nail cleats with a hole in each of them on each
side of the studding, and corresponding holes in the studding, into
which insert a pin to hold the plank to the studding. Bore holes along
up in the studding, to hold the boxes when raised.

To make the walls hollow, and I would do it in a building for any
purpose, use inch boards the same width of the box plank, one side
planed; put the two rough sides together with shingles between,
nailing them together with six-penny nails; place them in the middle
of the wall, the thin end of the shingle down. That gives them a bevel
and can be easily raised with the boxes. To tie the wall together, at
every third course place strips of boards a little shorter than the
thickness of the wall; cut notches in each so that the concrete will
fill in, holding all fast. The side walls being up, place two inch
planks on top of the wall upon which to rest the upper joists, put on
joist and rafters, remove the box plank, take inch boards for boxes,
cut to fit between joists and rafters, and fill with concrete to upper
side of rafters, which makes walls that will keep out cold and damp,
all kinds of vermin, and a roof which nothing but a cyclone can
remove. In making door and window frames, make the jambs two inches
narrower than the thickness of the walls, nailing on temporary two
inch strips.

Make the mortar bed large enough to hold the material for one course;
put in unslaked quicklime in proportion to 1 to 20 or 30 of other
material; throw into it plenty of water, and don't have that
antediluvian idea that you can drown it; put in clean sand and gravel,
broken stone, making it thin enough, so that when it is put into boxes
the thinner portion will run in, filling all interstices, forming a
solid mass. A brick trowel is necessary to work it down alongside the
boxing plank. One of the best and easiest things to carry the concrete
to the boxes is a railroad wheelbarrow, scooping it in with a scoop
shovel. Two courses a week is about as fast as it will be safe to lay
up the walls.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Medical Summary_ recommends the external use of buttermilk to
ladies who are exposed to tan or freckles.

       *       *       *       *       *




WHAT CAUSES PAINT TO BLISTER AND PEEL?

HOW TO PREVENT IT.


This subject has been treated by many, but out of the numerous ideas
that have been brought to bear upon it, the writers have failed to
elucidate the question fully, probably owing to the fact that in most
parts they were themselves dubious as to the real cause. Last year
W.S. gave a lengthy description in the _Building News_, in which he
classified blistering and peeling of paint into one of blistering
only. He stated in the beginning of his treatise the following:

"The subject of blistering of paint has from time to time engrossed
the attention of practical men; but so far as we can follow it in the
literature pertaining to the building trade, its cause has never been
clearly laid down, and hence it is a detail enshrouded in mystery."

W.S. dwells mostly, in his following explanations on blistering
paints, on steam raised in damp wood. Also an English painter,
according to the _Painters' Journal_, lately reiterates the same
theory, and gives sundry reasons how water will get into wood through
paint, but is oblivious that the channels which lead water into wood
are open to let it out again. He lays great stress on boiled oil
holding water in suspense to cause blistering, which is merely a
conjecture. Water boils at 212 deg. F. and linseed oil at 600 deg. F.,
consequently no water can possibly remain after boiling, and a drop of
water put into boiling oil would cause an explosion too dangerous to
be encountered.

It will be shown herewith that boiled oil, though in general use, is
unfit for durable painting, that it is the cause of most of the
troubles painters have to contend with, and that raw linseed oil
seasoned by age is the only source to bind pigments for durable
painting; but how to procure it is another trouble to overcome, as all
our American raw linseed oil has been heated by the manufacturers, to
qualify it for quick drying and an early market, thereby impairing its
quality. After linseed oil has been boiled, it becomes a poor varnish;
it remains soft and pliable when used in paint, giving way to air
pressure from the wood in hot weather, forming blisters. Turpentine
causes no blistering; it evaporates upon being exposed, and leaves the
paint in a porous condition for the gas in the wood to escape; but all
painters agree that blistering is caused by gas, and on investigation
we find two main sources from which gas is generated to blister
paint--one from the wood, the other from the ingredients of the paint.
The first named source of gas is started in hot weather by expansion
of air confined in painted wood, which presses against the paint and
raises blisters when the paint is too soft to resist. Tough,
well-cemented paint resists the pressure and keeps the air back. These
blisters mostly subside as soon as the air cools and returns to the
pores, but subsequently peel off.

W.S. and others assert that damp in painted wood turns into steam when
exposed to sun heat, forming blisters, which cannot be possible when
we know that water does not take a gaseous form (steam) at less than
212 deg. F. They have very likely been deluded by the known way of
distilling water with the aid of sunshine without concentrating the
rays of the sun, based upon the solubility of water in air, viz.: Air
holds more water in solution (or suspension) in a warmer than in a
cooler degree of temperature; by means of a simple apparatus
sun-heated air is guided over sun-heated water, when the air saturated
with water is conducted into a cooler, to give up its water again. But
water has an influence toward hastening to blister paint; it holds the
unhardened woodsap in solution, forming a slight solvent of the oil,
thereby loosening the paint from the wood, favoring blistering and
peeling. There is a certain kind of blister which appears in certain
spots or places only, and nowhere else, puzzling many painters. The
explanation of this is the same as before--soft paint at these spots,
caused by accident or sluggish workmen having saturated the wood with
coal oil, wax, tar, grease, or any other paint-softening material
before the wood was painted, which reacts on the paint to give way to
air pressure, forming blisters.

The second cause of paint blistering from the ingredients of the paint
happens between any layer of paint or varnish on wood, iron, stone, or
any other substance. Its origin is the gaseous formation of volatile
oils during the heated season, of which the lighter coal oils play the
most conspicuous part; they being less valuable than all other
volatile oils, are used in low priced japan driers and varnishes.
These volatile oils take a gaseous form at different temperatures, lie
partly dormant until the thermometer hovers at 90 deg. F. in the shade,
when they develop into gas, forming blisters in airtight paint, or
escape unnoticed in porous paint. This is the reason why coal-tar
paint is so liable to blister in hot weather; an elastic, soft
coal-tar covering holds part of its volatile oil confined until heated
to generate into gas; a few drops only of such oil is sufficient to
spoil the best painted work, and worse, when it has been applied in
priming, it settles into the pores of the wood, needing often from two
to three repetitions of scraping and repainting before the evil is
overcome. Now, inasmuch as soft drying paint is unfit to answer the
purpose, it is equally as bad when paint too hard or brittle has been
used, that does not expand and contract in harmony with the painted
article, causing the paint to crack and peel off, which is always the
case when either oil or varnish has been too sparingly and turpentine
too freely used. Intense cold favors the action, when all paints
become very brittle, a fact much to be seen on low-priced vehicles in
winter time. Damp in wood will also hasten it, as stated in
blistering, the woodsap undermining the paint.

To avoid peeling and blistering, the paint should be mixed with raw
linseed oil in such proportions that it neither becomes too brittle
nor too soft when dry. Priming paint with nearly all oil and hardly
any pigment is the foundation of many evils in painting; it leaves too
much free oil in the paint, forming a soft undercoat. For durable
painting, paint should be mixed with as much of a base pigment as it
can possibly be spread with a brush, giving a thin coat and forming a
chemical combination called soap. To avoid an excess of oil, the
following coats need turpentine to insure the same proportion of oil
and pigment. As proof of this, prime a piece of wood and a piece of
iron with the same paint; when the wood takes up part of the oil from
the paint and leaves the rest in proportion to harden well, where at
the same time the paint on iron remains soft. To be more lucid, it
need be explained, linseed oil boiled has lost its oleic acid and
glycerine ether, which form with the bases of pigments the insoluble
soap, as well as its albumen, which in boiling is thrown out. It
coagulates at 160 deg. F. heat; each is needed to better withstand the
action of wind and weather, preventing the dust from attaching itself
to a painted surface, a channel for ammonia in damp weather to
dissolve and wash off the paint. In later years linseed oil has been
extracted from linseed meal by the aid of naphtha and percolation, the
product of a very clear, quick drying oil, but lacking in its binding
quality, no doubt caused by the naphtha dissolving the fatty matter
only, leaving the glycerine and albumen in the meal.

All pigments of paint group according to their affinity to raw linseed
