The Project Gutenberg EBook of De La Salle Fifth Reader
by Brothers of the Christian Schools

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: De La Salle Fifth Reader

Author: Brothers of the Christian Schools

Release Date: January 23, 2004 [EBook #10811]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DE LA SALLE FIFTH READER ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, David Gundry and PG Distributed
Proofreaders





_DE LA SALLE SERIES_




FIFTH READER



[Illustration: WILLIAM McKINLEY PRESIDENT 1897-1901]



(REVISED EDITION, 1922)

BY THE BROTHERS OF THE CHRISTIAN SCHOOLS, ST. JOSEPH'S NORMAL INSTITUTE,
POCANTICO HILLS, N.Y. LA SALLE INSTITUTE, GLENCOE, MO.





       *       *       *       *       *



CONTENTS


_2_ PREFACE

_3_ INTRODUCTION

_4_ SUGGESTIONS

_5_ GUIDE TO PRONUNCIATION

_6_ DEFINITIONS

_7_ HYMN TO ST. LA SALLE. _Mercedes_

_8_ COLUMBUS AT THE CONVENT. _J.T. Trowbridge_

_9_ THE LITTLE FERN. _Mara L. Pratt_

_10_ HELPING MOTHER.

_11_ A CONTENTED WORKMAN.

_12_ TWO LABORERS. _Thomas Carlyle_

_13_ THE GRUMBLING PUSS.

_14_ THE BROOK SONG. _James Whitcomb Riley_

_15_ THE STORY OF THE SEED-DOWN. _Rydingsvard_

_16_ THE USE OF FLOWERS. _Mary Howitt_

_17_ PIERRE'S LITTLE SONG.

_18_ SEPTEMBER. _Helen Hunt Jackson_

_19_ "MY OLD KENTUCKY HOME." _Mrs. T.A. Sherrard_

_20_ THE FIRST MIRACLE OF JESUS.

_21_ MY BEADS. _Father Ryan_

_22_ THE HARP THAT ONCE THROUGH TARA'S HALLS. _Thomas Moore_

_23_ A LITTLE LADY. _Louisa M. Alcott_

_24_ WHAT HOUSE TO LIKE. _Anon._

_25_ A SONG OF DUTY. _Denis A. McCarthy_

_26_ AN EVENING WITH THE ANGELS.

_27_ MY GUARDIAN ANGEL. _Cardinal Newman_

_28_ LITTLE BELL. _Thomas Westwood_

_29_ A MODEST WIT. _Selleck Osborne_

_30_ WOODMAN, SPARE THAT TREE. _George P. Morris_

_31_ THE BOSTON TEA PARTY.

_32_ THE OLD OAKEN BUCKET. _Samuel Woodworth_

_33_ THE BOY AND THE CRICKETS. _Pierre J. Hetzel_

_34_ OUR HEROES. _Phoebe Cary_

_35_ THE MINNOWS WITH SILVER TAILS. _Jean Ingelow_

_36_ THE BROOK. _Tennyson_

_37_ LEARNING TO THINK.

_38_ ONE BY ONE. _Adelaide A. Procter_

_39_ THE BIRCH CANOE. _Longfellow_

_40_ PETER OF CORTONA.

_41_ To MY DOG BLANCO. _J.G. Holland_

_42_ A STORY OF A MONK.

_43_ THE SERMON OF ST. FRANCIS. _Longfellow_

_44_ GLORIA IN EXCELSIS. _Father Ryan_

_45_ THE FIRST CHRISTMAS TREE. _Eugene Field_

_46_ THE HOLY CITY.

_47_ THE FEAST OF TONGUES. _Aesop_

_48_ THE NIGHTINGALE AND THE GLOWWORM. _William Cowper_

_49_ JACK FROST. _Hannah F. Gould_

_50_ "GOING! GOING! GONE!" _Helen Hunt Jackson_

_51_ SEVEN TIMES TWO. _Jean Ingelow_

_52_ MY MOTHER'S GRAVE.

_53_ THE OLD ARM-CHAIR. _Eliza Cook_

_54_ BREAK, BREAK, BREAK! _Tennyson_

_55_ GOD IS OUR FATHER.

_56_ HAPPY OLD AGE. _Robert Southey_

_57_ KIND WORDS. _Father Faber_

_58_ KINDNESS IS THE WORD. _John Boyle O'Reilly_

_59_ DAFFODILS. _William Wordsworth_

_60_ THE STORY OF TARCISIUS. _Cardinal Wiseman_

_61_ LEGEND OF THE WAXEN CIBORIUM. _Eleanor C. Donnelly_

_62_ LITTLE DAFFY-DOWN-DILLY. _Nathaniel Hawthorne_

_63_ IN SCHOOL DAYS _Whittier_

_64_ THE SUN'S FAMILY

_65_ WILL AND I _Paul H. Hayne_

_66_ CHRISTMAS DINNER AT THE CRATCHITS'. _Charles Dickens_

_67_ WHICH SHALL IT BE? _Anon_

_68_ ST. DOROTHY, MARTYR.

_69_ TO A BUTTERFLY. _William Wordsworth_

_70_ THE PEN AND THE INKSTAND. _Hans Christian Andersen_

_71_ THE WIND AND THE MOON. _George MacDonald_

_72_ ST. PHILIP NERI AND THE YOUTH.

_73_ THE WATER LILY. _Jean Ingelow_

_74_ A BUILDER'S LESSON. _John Boyle O'Reilly_

_75_ WASHINGTON AND HIS MOTHER.

_76_ WASHINGTON'S BIRTHDAY. _Margaret E. Sangster_

_77_ THE SWORD OF BUNKER HILL. _William R. Wallace_

_78_ THE MARTYR'S BOY. _Cardinal Wiseman_

_79_ THE ANGEL'S STORY. _Adelaide A. Procter_

_80_ GLUCK'S VISITOR. _John Ruskin_

_81_ A VISIT FROM ST. NICHOLAS. _Clement C. Moore_

_82_ COMMODORE JOHN BARRY.

_83_ THE BOY OF THE HOUSE. _Jean Blewett_

_84_ BIOGRAPHIES


(Transcriber's Note: Although "ABOU BEN ADHEM AND THE ANGEL. _Leigh Hunt_"
and "A SIMPLE RECIPE. _James Whitcomb Riley_" were originally shown in the
list above, neither work appears in the text.)



       *       *       *       *       *




_2_



PREFACE


The object of the Christian Brothers in issuing a new series of Readers
is to place in the hands of the teachers and pupils of our Catholic
schools a set of books embodying the matter and methods best suited to
their needs. The matter has been written or chosen with a view to
interest and instruct, to cultivate a taste for the best literature, to
build up a strong moral character and to imbue our children with an
intelligent love of Faith and Country. The methods are those approved by
the most experienced and progressive teachers of reading in Europe and
America.

These Readers have also been specially designed to elicit thought and
facilitate literary composition. In furtherance of this idea, class
talks, word study, the structure of sentences, drills on certain correct
forms of expression, the proper arrangement of ideas, explanation of
phrases and literary expressions, oral and written reproductions of
narrations and descriptions, and exercises in original composition, all
receive the attention which their importance demands. Thus will the
pupils, while learning to read and from their earliest years, acquire
that readiness in grasping the thoughts of others and that fluency in
expressing their own, which are so essential to a good English
education.

In teaching the art of Reading as well as that of Composition, the
principle of order should in a great measure determine the value of the
methods to be employed. In the acquisition of knowledge, the child
instinctively follows the order of nature. This order is first,
_observation_; second, _thought_; third, _expression_. It becomes the
duty of the teacher, consequently, to lead the child to observe
_accurately_, to think _clearly_, and to express his thoughts
_correctly_. And text-books are useful only in so far as they supply the
teacher with the material and the system best calculated to accomplish
such results.

It is therefore hoped that the present new series of Readers, having
been planned in accordance with the principle just enunciated, will
prove a valuable adjunct in our Catholic schools.


       *       *       *       *       *




_3_



INTRODUCTION


In this Fifth Reader of the De La Salle Series the plan of the preceding
numbers has been continued. The pupil has now mastered the mechanical
difficulties of learning to read, and has acquired a fairly good working
vocabulary. Hence he is prepared to read intelligently and with some
degree of fluency and pleasure. Now is the time to lead him to acquire a
taste for good reading. The selections have been drawn mainly from
authors whose writings are distinguished for their moral and literary
value, and whose style is sure to excite a lasting interest.

In addition to giving the pupil practice in reading and forming a basis
for oral and written composition work, these selections will raise his
ideas of right living, will quicken his imagination, will give him his
first knowledge of many things, stimulate his powers of observation,
enlarge his vocabulary, and correct and refine his mode of expression. A
wholesome reading habit, so important to-day, will thus be easily,
pleasantly and unconsciously formed.

The following are some of the features of the book:

GUIDE TO PRONUNCIATION.--This Guide is to be referred to again and
again, and the diacritical marks carefully taught. Instruction in the
vowel sounds is an excellent drill in articulation, while a knowledge of
the diacritical marks enables the pupil to master these sounds for
himself when consulting the dictionary.

VARIETY OF MATTER.--In the volume will be found the best sentiments of
the best writers. The pupil will find fables, nature studies, tales of
travel and adventure, brave deeds from history and fiction, stories of
loyalty and heroism, examples of sublime Christian self-sacrifice, and
selections that teach industry, contentment, respect for authority,
reverence for all things sacred, attachment to home, and fidelity to
faith and Country.

LANGUAGE STUDY.--If reading is to hold its proper place in the class
room, the teaching of it must not be confined to the mere reading of the
text. In its truest sense, reading is far more comprehensive. The
teacher will question the pupil on what he has read, point out to him
the beauties of thought and language, find out what hold the reading has
taken upon his memory, how it has aroused his imagination, assisted his
judgment, directed his will, and contributed to his fund of general
information. To assist in this most important work is the object aimed
at in the matter given for Language Study. Such study will also give
fuller powers of interpretation and corresponding appreciation of the
