The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Chessmen of Mars, by Edgar Rice Burroughs

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Chessmen of Mars

Author: Edgar Rice Burroughs

Posting Date: January 28, 2010 [EBook #1153]
Release Date: January, 1998
[Last update: July 28, 2012]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHESSMEN OF MARS ***




Produced by Judy Boss









THE CHESSMEN OF MARS

by Edgar Rice Burroughs



CONTENTS

 PRELUDE - John Carter Comes to Earth
     I  Tara in a Tantrum
    II  At the Gale's Mercy
   III  The Headless Humans
    IV  Captured
     V  The Perfect Brain
    VI  In the Toils of Horror
   VII  A Repellent Sight
  VIII  Close Work
    IX  Adrift Over Strange Regions
     X  Entrapped
    XI  The Choice of Tara
   XII  Ghek Plays Pranks
  XIII  A Desperate Deed
   XIV  At Ghek's Command
    XV  The Old Man of the Pits
   XVI  Another Change of Name
  XVII  A Play to the Death
 XVIII  A Task for Loyalty
   XIX  The Menace of the Dead
    XX  The Charge of Cowardice
   XXI  A Risk for Love
  XXII  At the Moment of Marriage





THE CHESSMEN OF MARS


PRELUDE

JOHN CARTER COMES TO EARTH

Shea had just beaten me at chess, as usual, and, also as usual, I had
gleaned what questionable satisfaction I might by twitting him with
this indication of failing mentality by calling his attention for the
_n_th time to that theory, propounded by certain scientists, which is
based upon the assertion that phenomenal chess players are always found
to be from the ranks of children under twelve, adults over seventy-two
or the mentally defective--a theory that is lightly ignored upon those
rare occasions that I win. Shea had gone to bed and I should have
followed suit, for we are always in the saddle here before sunrise; but
instead I sat there before the chess table in the library, idly blowing
smoke at the dishonored head of my defeated king.

While thus profitably employed I heard the east door of the living-room
open and someone enter. I thought it was Shea returning to speak with
me on some matter of tomorrow's work; but when I raised my eyes to the
doorway that connects the two rooms I saw framed there the figure of a
bronzed giant, his otherwise naked body trapped with a jewel-encrusted
harness from which there hung at one side an ornate short-sword and at
the other a pistol of strange pattern. The black hair, the steel-gray
eyes, brave and smiling, the noble features--I recognized them at once,
and leaping to my feet I advanced with outstretched hand.

"John Carter!" I cried. "You?"

"None other, my son," he replied, taking my hand in one of his and
placing the other upon my shoulder.

"And what are you doing here?" I asked. "It has been long years since
you revisited Earth, and never before in the trappings of Mars. Lord!
but it is good to see you--and not a day older in appearance than when
you trotted me on your knee in my babyhood. How do you explain it, John
Carter, Warlord of Mars, or do you try to explain it?"

"Why attempt to explain the inexplicable?" he replied. "As I have told
you before, I am a very old man. I do not know how old I am. I recall
no childhood; but recollect only having been always as you see me now
and as you saw me first when you were five years old. You, yourself,
have aged, though not as much as most men in a corresponding number of
years, which may be accounted for by the fact that the same blood runs
in our veins; but I have not aged at all. I have discussed the question
with a noted Martian scientist, a friend of mine; but his theories are
still only theories. However, I am content with the fact--I never age,
and I love life and the vigor of youth.

"And now as to your natural question as to what brings me to Earth
again and in this, to earthly eyes, strange habiliment. We may thank
Kar Komak, the bowman of Lothar. It was he who gave me the idea upon
which I have been experimenting until at last I have achieved success.
As you know I have long possessed the power to cross the void in
spirit, but never before have I been able to impart to inanimate things
a similar power. Now, however, you see me for the first time precisely
as my Martian fellows see me--you see the very short-sword that has
tasted the blood of many a savage foeman; the harness with the devices
of Helium and the insignia of my rank; the pistol that was presented to
me by Tars Tarkas, Jeddak of Thark.

"Aside from seeing you, which is my principal reason for being here,
and satisfying myself that I can transport inanimate things from Mars
to Earth, and therefore animate things if I so desire, I have no
purpose. Earth is not for me. My every interest is upon Barsoom--my
wife, my children, my work; all are there. I will spend a quiet evening
with you and then back to the world I love even better than I love
life."

As he spoke he dropped into the chair upon the opposite side of the
chess table.

"You spoke of children," I said. "Have you more than Carthoris?"

"A daughter," he replied, "only a little younger than Carthoris, and,
barring one, the fairest thing that ever breathed the thin air of dying
Mars. Only Dejah Thoris, her mother, could be more beautiful than Tara
of Helium."

For a moment he fingered the chessmen idly. "We have a game on Mars
similar to chess," he said, "very similar. And there is a race there
that plays it grimly with men and naked swords. We call the game jetan.
It is played on a board like yours, except that there are a hundred
squares and we use twenty pieces on each side. I never see it played
without thinking of Tara of Helium and what befell her among the
chessmen of Barsoom. Would you like to hear her story?"

I said that I would and so he told it to me, and now I shall try to
re-tell it for you as nearly in the words of The Warlord of Mars as I
can recall them, but in the third person. If there be inconsistencies
and errors, let the blame fall not upon John Carter, but rather upon my
faulty memory, where it belongs. It is a strange tale and utterly
Barsoomian.



CHAPTER I

TARA IN A TANTRUM

Tara of Helium rose from the pile of silks and soft furs upon which she
had been reclining, stretched her lithe body languidly, and crossed
toward the center of the room, where, above a large table, a bronze
disc depended from the low ceiling. Her carriage was that of health and
physical perfection--the effortless harmony of faultless coordination.
A scarf of silken gossamer crossing over one shoulder was wrapped about
her body; her black hair was piled high upon her head. With a wooden
stick she tapped upon the bronze disc, lightly, and presently the
summons was answered by a slave girl, who entered, smiling, to be
greeted similarly by her mistress.

"Are my father's guests arriving?" asked the princess.

"Yes, Tara of Helium, they come," replied the slave. "I have seen
Kantos Kan, Overlord of the Navy, and Prince Soran of Ptarth, and Djor
Kantos, son of Kantos Kan," she shot a roguish glance at her mistress
as she mentioned Djor Kantos' name, "and--oh, there were others, many
have come."

"The bath, then, Uthia," said her mistress. "And why, Uthia," she
added, "do you look thus and smile when you mention the name of Djor
Kantos?"

The slave girl laughed gaily. "It is so plain to all that he worships
you," she replied.

"It is not plain to me," said Tara of Helium. "He is the friend of my
brother, Carthoris, and so he is here much; but not to see me. It is
his friendship for Carthoris that brings him thus often to the palace
of my father."

"But Carthoris is hunting in the north with Talu, Jeddak of Okar,"
Uthia reminded her.

"My bath, Uthia!" cried Tara of Helium. "That tongue of yours will
bring you to some misadventure yet."

"The bath is ready, Tara of Helium," the girl responded, her eyes still
twinkling with merriment, for she well knew that in the heart of her
mistress was no anger that could displace the love of the princess for
her slave. Preceding the daughter of The Warlord she opened the door of
an adjoining room where lay the bath--a gleaming pool of scented water
in a marble basin. Golden stanchions supported a chain of gold
encircling it and leading down into the water on either side of marble
steps. A glass dome let in the sun-light, which flooded the interior,
glancing from the polished white of the marble walls and the procession
of bathers and fishes, which, in conventional design, were inlaid with
gold in a broad band that circled the room.

Tara of Helium removed the scarf from about her and handed it to the
slave. Slowly she descended the steps to the water, the temperature of
which she tested with a symmetrical foot, undeformed by tight shoes and
high heels--a lovely foot, as God intended that feet should be and
seldom are. Finding the water to her liking, the girl swam leisurely to
and fro about the pool. With the silken ease of the seal she swam, now
at the surface, now below, her smooth muscles rolling softly beneath
her clear skin--a wordless song of health and happiness and grace.
Presently she emerged and gave herself into the hands of the slave
girl, who rubbed the body of her mistress with a sweet smelling
semi-liquid substance contained in a golden urn, until the glowing skin
was covered with a foamy lather, then a quick plunge into the pool, a
drying with soft towels, and the bath was over. Typical of the life of
the princess was the simple elegance of her bath--no retinue of useless
slaves, no pomp, no idle waste of precious moments. In another half
hour her hair was dried and built into the strange, but becoming,
coiffure of her station; her leathern trappings, encrusted with gold
and jewels, had been adjusted to her figure and she was ready to mingle
with the guests that had been bidden to the midday function at the
palace of The Warlord.

As she left her apartments to make her way to the gardens where the
guests were congregating, two warriors, the insignia of the House of
the Prince of Helium upon their harness, followed a few paces behind
her, grim reminders that the assassin's blade may never be ignored upon
Barsoom, where, in a measure, it counterbalances the great natural span
of human life, which is estimated at not less than a thousand years.

As they neared the entrance to the garden another woman, similarly
guarded, approached them from another quarter of the great palace. As
she neared them Tara of Helium turned toward her with a smile and a
happy greeting, while her guards knelt with bowed heads in willing and
voluntary adoration of the beloved of Helium. Thus always, solely at
the command of their own hearts, did the warriors of Helium greet Dejah
Thoris, whose deathless beauty had more than once brought them to
bloody warfare with other nations of Barsoom. So great was the love of
the people of Helium for the mate of John Carter it amounted
practically to worship, as though she were indeed the goddess that she
looked.

The mother and daughter exchanged the gentle, Barsoomian, "kaor" of
greeting and kissed. Then together they entered the gardens where the
guests were. A huge warrior drew his short-sword and struck his metal
shield with the flat of it, the brazen sound ringing out above the
laughter and the speech.

"The Princess comes!" he cried. "Dejah Thoris! The Princess comes! Tara
of Helium!" Thus always is royalty announced. The guests arose; the two
women inclined their heads; the guards fell back upon either side of
the entrance-way; a number of nobles advanced to pay their respects;
the laughing and the talking were resumed and Dejah Thoris and her
daughter moved simply and naturally among their guests, no suggestion
of differing rank apparent in the bearing of any who were there, though
there was more than a single Jeddak and many common warriors whose only
title lay in brave deeds, or noble patriotism. Thus it is upon Mars
where men are judged upon their own merits rather than upon those of
their grandsires, even though pride of lineage be great.

Tara of Helium let her slow gaze wander among the throng of guests
until presently it halted upon one she sought. Was the faint shadow of
a frown that crossed her brow an indication of displeasure at the sight
that met her eyes, or did the brilliant rays of the noonday sun
distress her? Who may say! She had been reared to believe that one day
she should wed Djor Kantos, son of her father's best friend. It had
been the dearest wish of Kantos Kan and The Warlord that this should
be, and Tara of Helium had accepted it as a matter of all but
accomplished fact. Djor Kantos had seemed to accept the matter in the
same way. They had spoken of it casually as something that would, as a
matter of course, take place in the indefinite future, as, for
instance, his promotion in the navy, in which he was now a padwar; or
the set functions of the court of her grandfather, Tardos Mors, Jeddak
of Helium; or Death. They had never spoken of love and that had puzzled
Tara of Helium upon the rare occasions she gave it thought, for she
knew that people who were to wed were usually much occupied with the
matter of love and she had all of a woman's curiosity--she wondered
what love was like. She was very fond of Djor Kantos and she knew that
he was very fond of her. They liked to be together, for they liked the
same things and the same people and the same books and their dancing
was a joy, not only to themselves but to those who watched them. She
could not imagine wanting to marry anyone other than Djor Kantos.

So perhaps it was only the sun that made her brows contract just the
tiniest bit at the same instant that she discovered Djor Kantos sitting
in earnest conversation with Olvia Marthis, daughter of the Jed of
Hastor. It was Djor Kantos' duty immediately to pay his respects to
Dejah Thoris and Tara of Helium; but he did not do so and presently the
daughter of The Warlord frowned indeed. She looked long at Olvia
Marthis, and though she had seen her many times before and knew her
well, she looked at her today through new eyes that saw, apparently for
the first time, that the girl from Hastor was noticeably beautiful even
among those other beautiful women of Helium. Tara of Helium was
disturbed. She attempted to analyze her emotions; but found it
difficult. Olvia Marthis was her friend--she was very fond of her and
she felt no anger toward her. Was she angry with Djor Kantos? No, she
finally decided that she was not. It was merely surprise, then, that
she felt--surprise that Djor Kantos could be more interested in another
than in herself. She was about to cross the garden and join them when
