The Project Gutenberg eBook, Object Lessons on the Human Body, by Sarah F.
Buckelew and Margaret W. Lewis


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: Object Lessons on the Human Body
       A Transcript of Lessons Given in the Primary Department of School No. 49, New York City


Author: Sarah F. Buckelew and Margaret W. Lewis

Release Date: March 21, 2005  [eBook #15435]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OBJECT LESSONS ON THE HUMAN BODY***


E-text prepared by Wallace McLean, Keith Edkins, and the Project Gutenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 15435-h.htm or 15435-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/5/4/3/15435/15435-h/15435-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/5/4/3/15435/15435-h.zip)





Practical Work in the School Room Series. Part I

OBJECT LESSONS ON THE HUMAN BODY

A Transcript of Lessons Given in the Primary Department of School No. 49,
New York City

Pupils' Edition (Revised)

New York:
Parker P. Simmons,
Successor to
A. Lovell & Company

1904







AUTHOR'S NOTE TO THE PUPIL


This book has been prepared to help you in learning about "the house you
live in," and to teach you to take care of it, and keep it from being
destroyed by two of its greatest enemies,--Alcohol and Nicotine.

As you study its pages, be sure to find out the meaning of every word in
them which you do not understand; for, if you let your tongue say what your
mind knows nothing about, you are talking _parrot-fashion_.

And do not forget that you must pay for all the knowledge you obtain,
whether you are rich or poor. Nobody else can pay for you. You, your own
self, must _pay attention_ with your own mind, through your own eyes and
ears, _or do without knowledge_.

Be wise: gain all the knowledge you can concerning everything worth
knowing, and use it for the good of yourself and other people.

"KNOWLEDGE IS POWER."



[Illustration: A, the heart; B, the lungs; light cross lines, arteries;
heavy lines, veins.]



PART I.

FORMULA FOR INTRODUCTORY LESSONS.

1. My body is built of bones covered with flesh and skin; the blood flows
through it, all the time, from my heart. I breathe through my nose and
mouth, and take the air into my lungs.

2. The parts of my body are the head, the trunk, the limbs.

3. My head.
  The crown of my head.
  The back of my head.
  The sides of my head.
  My face.
  My forehead.
  My two temples.
  My two eyes.
  My nose.
  My two cheeks.
  My mouth.
  My chin.
  My two ears.
  My neck.
  My two shoulders.
  My two arms.
  My two hands.
  My trunk.
  My back.
  My two sides.
  My chest.
  My two legs.
  My two knees.
  My two feet.
  I am sitting erect.

       *       *       *       *       *

QUESTIONS FOR THE FORMULA.

1. Tell about your body.

2. Name the parts of the body.

3. Name the parts of the head, trunk, and limbs.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE NOSE AND THE MOUTH.

Be sure to keep your mouth closed when you are not talking or singing,
especially when you are walking, running, or _asleep_. The two nostrils are
outside doors, always open to admit the air, and inside of the upper part
of the nose there are two other openings, through which it passes into the
throat. Air which goes this way is warmed, cleansed, and moistened, but
that which is breathed directly through the mouth is not so well prepared
for its work in the lungs.

Do not use your mouth as a box or a pin-cushion; the pin, or whatever yon
have put into it, may slip into your throat and cause your death.

       *       *       *       *       *

QUESTIONS ON THE INTRODUCTORY LESSONS.

Of what is the body built?--"Of bones."

What covers the bones?--"Flesh."

What covers the flesh?--"Skin."

What flows through the body?--"Blood."

Where does the blood flow from?--"The heart."

When does the blood flow from the heart?--"Every time the heart beats."

Show with your hand how the heart beats.

When does the heart beat?--"All the time."

What happens when the heart stops beating?--"We die."

What do you see on the back of your hand, beneath the skin?--"Veins"

What is in the veins?--"Bad blood."

What are the veins?--"Pipes for the bad blood to pass through."

Where do the veins carry the bad blood?--"To the heart."

Where does the heart send the bad blood?--"To the lungs."

What happens to the bad blood when in the lungs?--"It is made pure."

What makes the bad blood pure?--"The air."

How does the air get into the lungs?--"Through my nose, mouth, and
windpipe."

What is breathing?--"Letting the air into and out of my lungs, through my
nose, mouth, and windpipe."

When do you breathe?--"All the time."

What do you breathe?--"Air."

What do you breaths through?--"My nose, mouth, and windpipe."

Where do you get the air?--"Everywhere."

Where do the lungs send the pure blood?--"To the heart."

Where does the heart send the pure blood?--"All through the body."

How does the heart send the pure blood through the body?--"Through pipes
called arteries."

What kind of blood passes through the arteries?--"Pure blood."

What kind of blood passes through the veins?--"Impure blood."

What carries the pure blood through the body?--"The arteries."

What carries the impure blood through the body?--"The veins."

What makes blood?--"Food and drink."

What is food?--"Anything good to eat."

What is drink?--"Anything good to drink."

Name some kinds of wholesome food.--"Meat, potatoes, oranges, apples, etc."

Name some kinds of wholesome drink.--"Water, milk, lemonade, etc."

What do you mean by wholesome food?--"Food that will make good blood."

What do you mean by wholesome drink?--"Drink that will make good blood."

What does the blood make?--"Bones, flesh, skin, hair, nails, and
cartilage."

What use is the blood to the body?--"It makes the body grow, and keeps it
alive."

Name some kinds of poisonous drinks.--"Rum, brandy, ale, cider, etc."

What do you mean by poisonous drinks?--"Drinks which hurt or poison the
body."

Why do you say that rum and the other drinks you have named are
poisonous?--"Because they do harm to every part of the body."

Which part do they hurt most?--"The head or brain."

What harm do they do to the brain?--"They make it unfit to do its work."

What work does the brain do?--"Thinking."

Then what harm do rum, brandy, wine, and these other drinks do to the
brain?--"They make it unfit to think."

What other poison do some people use?--"Tobacco."

When do children use tobacco?--"When they chew tobacco; when they smoke
cigars or cigarettes."

How much does tobacco poison hurt children?--"More than it hurts anybody
else."

In what way does it hurt children?--"It keeps children from growing fast;
from being strong and healthy; and from learning as well as they ought."

How does it do all this mischief to children?--"It poisons their lungs,
their heart and blood, and their brain."

       *       *       *       *       *

PART II.

FORMULA FOR THE PARTS AND JOINTS OF THE BODY:

1. My limbs are my two arms and my two legs.

2. My arm has two parts:

  my upper arm,       my fore-arm;

and three joints:

  my shoulder joint,       my elbow joint,       my wrist joint.

3. My hand is used in holding, throwing, catching, and feeling:

  the palm of my hand,
  the back of my hand,
  my fingers,
  my thumb,
  my forefinger,
  my middle finger,
  my ring finger,
  my little finger,
  my knuckles,
  my finger joints,
  my nails,
  the tips of my fingers,
  the veins,
  the ball of my thumb,
  and the lines where the flesh is bent.

4. My leg has two parts:

  my thigh,       and my lower leg;

and three joints:

  my hip joint,       my knee joint,       my ankle joint.

5. My foot is used in standing, walking, running, skating, and jumping:

  my instep,
  my toes,
  the sole of my foot,
  the ball,
  the hollow,
  the heel,
  my toe joints,
  and my toe nails, which protect my toes.

       *       *       *       *       *

QUESTIONS FOR THE FORMULA.

1. Which are your limbs?

2. Tell about your arm.

3. Tell about your hand.

4. Tell about your leg.

5. Tell about your foot.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE ELBOW JOINT.
(A hinge joint.)]

[Illustration: THE HIP JOINT.
(A ball-and-socket joint.)]

Some joints, as those of the skull, are immovable; some, as those of the
spine, may be moved a little; and others more or less freely, as those of
the limbs. In machines, the parts which move upon each other need to be
oiled, to keep them from wearing out; but the joints of our bodies oil
themselves with a thin fluid, called _synovia_. This fluid resembles the
white of an egg, and comes from a smooth lining inside of the joints. The
ends of the bones which form joints are covered by gristle or _cartilage_,
and are fastened together by very strong, silvery white bands, called
_ligaments_. A sprain is caused by overstretching or tearing some of these
ligaments.

       *       *       *       *       *

QUESTIONS ON THE LIMBS AND JOINTS OF THE BODY.

What is the trunk of your body?--"All the body but the head and limbs."

Which are your limbs?--"My two arms and my two legs."

How many limbs have you?--"Four."

How many parts has your arm?--"Two parts: my upper arm and my fore-arm."

How many parts has your leg?--"Two parts: my thigh and my lower leg."

How many joints has your arm?--"Three joints: my shoulder joint, my elbow
joint, my wrist joint."

How many joints has your leg?--"Three joints: my hip joint, my knee joint,
my ankle joint."

What are joints?--"Bending places."

How many kinds of joints have you?--"Two: hinge joints, and ball-and-socket
joints."

What kind of a joint is the shoulder joint?--"A ball-and-socket joint."

Why do you call the shoulder joint a ball-and-socket joint?--"Because at
the shoulder the arm may move in any direction."

Tell how the shoulder joint is made.--"The upper end of the bone of the
upper arm is rounded and fastened in a hollow place called a socket."

Which of the joints of the arm and hand are hinge joints?--"The elbow
joint, the wrist joint, the thumb joint, the finger joints."

Which of the joints of the leg and foot are hinge joints?--"The knee joint,
the ankle joint, the toe joint."

Which of the joints of the leg is a ball-and-socket joint?--"The hip
joint."

Where is the heel?--"At the back part of the foot."

Where is the ball of the foot?--"On the sole of the foot, behind the great
toe."

Where is the hollow of the foot?--"In the middle of the sole of the foot."

Where is the sole of the foot?--"On the bottom of the foot."

Where is the instep?--"Between the ankle joint and the toes."

Where is the lower leg?--"Between the knee joint and the ankle joint."

Where is the thigh?--"Between the hip joint and the knee joint."

Where is the upper arm?--"Between the shoulder joint and the elbow joint."

Where is the fore-arm?--"Between the elbow joint and the wrist joint."

Where are the toe joints?--"Between the parts of the toes."

Where are the finger joints?--"Between the parts of the fingers."

Where is the ankle joint?--"Between the lower leg and the foot."

Where is the knee joint?--"Between the thigh and the lower leg."

Where is the hip joint?--"Between the trunk and the thigh."

Where is the wrist joint?--"Between the fore-arm and the hand."

