The Project Gutenberg EBook of Zarlah the Martian, by R. Norman Grisewood

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Zarlah the Martian

Author: R. Norman Grisewood

Release Date: September 10, 2004 [EBook #13423]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ZARLAH THE MARTIAN ***




Produced by Elaine Walker, Frank van Drogen and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.







[Frontispiece: "Zarlah's car was hurled upwards into space with
frightful velocity."]



Zarlah The Martian


By


R. Norman Grisewood



1909



_Zarlah, The Martian_



CONTENTS.

    CHAPTER                                PAGE

    I. THE STRANGE SHADOW

    II. THE MARTIAN

    III. THE VOICE FROM ANOTHER WORLD

    IV. THE STORY OF MARTIAN LIFE

    V. THE HAZARDOUS UNDERTAKING

    VI. "AS OTHERS SEE US"

    VII. THE MELODY OF FLOWERS AND ZARLAH

    VIII. A HUNDRED MILES A MINUTE IN AN AERENOID

    IX. THE REALIZATION OF A HOPELESS LOVE

    X. ZARLAH'S CONFESSION

    XI. THE DISCOVERY AT THE MARTIAN OBSERVATORY

    XII. THE WARNING OF DANGER--THE RACE WITH DEATH

    XIII. THE END OF A PERILOUS JOURNEY

    XIV. HURLED FROM THE MOON





ZARLAH, THE MARTIAN.





CHAPTER I.

THE STRANGE SHADOW.


So thrilling were my experiences during that period, so overcrowded with
feverish action and strong emotions was each wonderful moment, and so
entirely changed are the conditions of life as I now find it, that it is
with considerable difficulty that I recall in detail all that happened
prior to my remarkable discovery which opened communication between
Earth and Mars. One says "discovery" advisedly, but let it not be
imagined that communication with the planet Mars was established as a
result of any careful and systematic research, or that I possessed a
subtle genius for astronomical science that was destined to introduce
into society what must eventually revolutionize it. Nothing could be
further from the facts. Into the daily grind of my absolutely uneventful
career, burst the almost terrifying revelations with a suddenness that
stunned me, while I was engaged in experiments of an entirely extraneous
nature. Albeit one wonders that the Martian rays, which have swept our
planet with their searching gaze for so many centuries, were not
discovered long ago. But this is anticipating my story.

I had reached the age of thirty, when, in the Spring of 19--, I sailed
out of New York harbor on board _La Provence_, en route for Paris. It
was not so much my purpose to seek pleasure as the determination to turn
my eight years of experience in the United States to some avenue of
profitable livelihood, that decided me to make the journey, although I
looked forward with no small degree of pleasant anticipation to meeting
some of my fellow students in the Academie des Sciences in Paris, where
I had received five years of excellent training.

My trip across and my subsequent arrival in Paris were without any
events of particular interest, and one bright morning in the early
summer I found myself comfortably lodged in the house where I had
previously boarded while a student. Connected with my rooms, which were
at the top of the house, was one of considerable size that I had
formerly used as a laboratory, and this I now set about fitting up to
serve the same purpose. The daylight found its way into the room through
a skylight, and though admirably suited for an artist's studio, it
answered my purpose equally as well.

I had collected many new instruments and appliances by dint of days
spent in shopping, and was anxious to begin work in earnest, when one
evening, as I glanced through the columns of a newspaper, my attention
was arrested by an article of particular interest. This set forth the
great and increasing demand for a substitute for glass, one which would
answer the purpose in every respect, and at the same time be
indestructible and a good conductor of sound. The article concluded with
an enumeration of the many uses for which such a substitute would be
invaluable, hinting at the enormous financial possibilities which would
be open to the inventor. The more I considered the matter, the more
desirous I became to test several theories which forthwith presented
themselves to my mind, and the next morning found me determined to begin
my experiments at once. In theory, I saw the solution of the problem in
artificially producing increased atomic motion, and with that object in
view I went to work.

My experiments involved me in weeks of hard work, and it was toward the
end of the summer before I could admit having had any important results.
I now had a substance resembling glass in appearance, though vastly
different in composition, which I made into a film, extremely thin and
highly sensitive to vibrations. Running through this film were slender
wires made of various metals, about one inch apart, which served not
only to give rigidity to the film, but also to conduct a current of
electricity through it, engendering a high state of atomic agitation.
The current was controlled by a small switch placed in a heavy box-like
frame, which bounded the film on its four sides and contained the
batteries, coils, etc. To this were attached four legs, supporting it
about the height of an ordinary table from the floor. The whole device
measured about seven feet square.

This film substance contained certain elements which I had found to be
necessary to secure the desired intensity of agitation. It had taken me
almost a month to secure the fine quality I desired, and I looked
forward to the test with the feeling that results would prove that I was
nearing the goal, if I had not actually attained it.

At last the day arrived when my device was ready for the test. I had
worked all the afternoon giving the finishing touches and it had grown
dusk without my realizing it. But everything was now ready, and moving
the switch, I turned the current of electricity through the composition.
Just as I was about to begin my test, I noticed what appeared to be a
faint shadow of a man move across the surface of the film. My first
thought was that someone had entered the room without my knowledge, and
his figure had been reflected on the surface of the film, which was
highly glazed, but a glance around the room assured me that this
explanation was untenable. Moreover, I found, upon further
investigation, that the film was lying in such a position that it would
be impossible to reflect any person in the room. I then examined the
skylight, only to find that, owing to the sharp inclination of the roof,
it would be an utter impossibility for anyone to reach it from the
outside without the aid of a ladder. I investigated this source further,
thinking to find the reflection on the film to be from some street in
the city below, but on account of the extent of the roof, no street was
visible from the skylight.

Completely baffled, I descended into the room again and turned on the
current. Immediately the shadow appeared on the film, and this time, in
consequence of the room now being quite dark, I noticed that it was
surrounded by a phosphorus-colored glow. The figure was certainly that
of a man, although very faint, and it became evident to me, after
watching it for a while, that he was trying to signal with his arms.

I now noticed that, in addition to the peculiar light on the film, the
entire surface seemed to vibrate with frequent, but scarcely audible,
humming sounds. Upon turning off the current all disappeared, only to
reappear when I switched it on again. It was evident then that the
phenomenon was caused only when the instrument was charged with
electricity, and consequently was no ordinary reflection, as I had at
first supposed.

Everything pointed to its being the manifestation of some outside
agency; possibly electrical waves which my apparatus received and in a
measure responded to, coming through the open skylight from--where? The
question reiterated itself in my mind, as I stood gazing perplexedly at
the phenomenon. I might have been satisfied with the supposition that,
unknowingly, I had made an instrument which was capable of receiving
wireless waves from another instrument of similar tone in or near Paris,
if I had had only the humming sounds to contend with, but the shadow
impelled me to look for the reason further than this. I glanced upward,
eagerly seeking some explanation. One star was visible through the open
skylight--Mars. Clear and bright it shone in the inky blackness framed
by the window.

Once more I climbed to the skylight, feeling that I must seek the
explanation in that direction, when my attention was suddenly turned to
the apparatus below me. The glow was slowly passing off one side of the
film. I hastily descended and examined the batteries, thinking I would
find the cause of this in a failing current, but all was apparently in
perfect order. Still the glow and shadow moved steadily off, growing
fainter every moment, until it disappeared completely.

With a sudden impulse, born of a weird and almost terrifying thought, I
bent over until my eyes were on a level with the film, then I looked
upward; the star was no longer visible from the position of the
instrument, it had risen above the frame of the window. At once I was
seized with an intense excitement; could it be possible that my
apparatus was responding to waves mysteriously projected from Mars? If
not, why had the glow and shadow faded from the film at the same instant
that Mars disappeared above the window frame?

Hoping to test this further, I endeavored to move the apparatus to a
position where Mars would again be visible, but alas, I found it much
too heavy. I felt keenly disappointed at the sudden termination of this
strange phenomenon, but, upon reflection, I realized that it was only
the simultaneous disappearance of Mars and the glow on the film that had
caused me to attribute waves to that far source. The more I pondered
upon the matter, the more impossible it seemed, yet, strange to say, the
more convinced I became that the theory was correct. Light-waves, I
argued, unlike the wireless waves in common use, could be received only
when the two objects were in line of vision; but I realized that if they
were of Martian origin they were of remarkable magnification, projected
through space by some unknown and powerful agent, thousands of times
more powerful than electricity as we know it upon Earth. That the shadow
on the film had been that of a Martian, I dared not hope. Though my mind
continually reverted to this wild conjecture, I impatiently put it
aside, as the apparent impossibility of it all would force itself upon
me.

Nothing further could be done that night, and as I had worked hard all
day preparing for my experiment, without even stopping for meals, I now
felt the effect of the excitement I had undergone and resolved to take a
walk in the cool air, I wanted to think, and, if possible, to plan a
line of action for the morrow which would bring me better results, if my
theory of light-waves should prove to be correct. Needless to say, I
determined to cease my former experiments, and devote all my energy to
ascertaining whether my apparatus was actually responding to Martian
light-waves of remarkable integrity, and if such proved to be the case,
to put every effort into improving the device with the hope of obtaining
their import. I also determined to keep my discovery a secret, at least
for the present.





CHAPTER II.

THE MARTIAN.


I returned to my rooms with a much clearer conception of the conditions
with which I had to cope, if the waves to which my apparatus responded
should prove to be Martian waves. My mind was fully made up to proceed
as if this were an established fact, as, in order to give my best
efforts to improving my apparatus, I felt that I must eliminate all
scepticism. I clearly appreciated the advantage of moving my instrument
outside, where I could command a view of Mars for a much longer time,
but the necessity of being in my laboratory while I was engaged in these
improvements, decided me against any immediate change.

Accordingly I proceeded the next morning to make the changes I deemed
necessary, being goaded into a fever of haste by a feeling of
suppressed excitement. The composition I had used in the form of a film
I now liquefied, having concluded that in the former condition, although
necessary in my original experiments, it now only retarded the vibration
of the wires.

That this composition was essential there could be no doubt, as it was
its elements that responded to the agent used on Mars to project the
waves. I therefore liquefied the film substance, being careful in so
doing not to alter its properties. I then procured wires, much thinner
than those I had previously used, and dipped them-into the liquid. After
they had become perfectly dry, I stretched them on the frame as close
together as I could without their coming into contact with one another.
As light-waves are received in hundreds of different vibrations
simultaneously, according to the light or shade of the object projected,
I concluded that each wire should be capable of individual vibration.
The device now resembled a large piece of mosquito netting with the
cross wires removed, the coating of composition on each wire being so
thin that it was hardly discernible. The batteries and coils I
connected as before, taking great care not to change their arrangement.

My preparations were now completed, and before me stood an instrument as
delicate and sensitive to wave vibrations as I could make it. Raising
one side of the frame a foot higher than the other, in order that the
surface of wires would be squarely facing the star when it appeared
above the casement, I waited impatiently for the moment which should
prove the truth or falsity of my surmises.

The day had closed, and I spent the remaining time speculating upon the
results of my labors. But even the wildest flights of my imagination did
not picture, in the smallest degree, the wonderful transformation which
my new instrument would make in what had appeared before as a shadow on
the film. Little did I imagine to what an extent the unknown was to be
revealed to me.

As I stood by the side of the frame all in readiness, Mars appeared, but
it still had a little farther to climb before it would be visible from
the level of the wires. Nevertheless, I turned on the current from the
batteries. All was darkness; never before had darkness seemed to me so
profound, so absolutely appalling. Minutes passed like hours, but still
that ominous darkness reigned. I felt the keen disappointment of
failure; I grew incredulous as the time passed, and found myself
admitting and rehearsing the absurdity of it all. I even blamed myself
for having been so easily deflected from my former experiments, by what
now seemed to be merely an idle fancy.

Suddenly I bent over the frame and gazed eagerly at the surface of
wires, for there, on the top edge, appeared a touch of the
phosphorus-colored glow. My heart thumped with wild excitement. I
stooped down until my eyes were on the level of the wires, and looking
up toward the window I could just see the rim of Mars appearing above
the casement. A shout of joy burst from my lips at the sight of it, for
it was now beyond all doubt that the phenomenon was attributable to
Mars. Brighter and brighter became the light as it covered the surface
of wires, until all its resemblance to a phosphorus glow had gone, and
it shone with such brilliancy that my eyes, accustomed as they were to
the darkness of the room, quailed before it. Turning away so that my
eyes might gradually become accustomed to the glare, I noticed that in
spite of the brilliant white light on the surface of the wires, the room
was in perfect darkness--the light had no power of illumination!
Impenetrable mystery enshrouded the agent which Mars was employing to
communicate with Earth!

A curious humming sound issuing from the frame, much louder than I had
noticed the night before, caused me to turn involuntarily, and as I did
so I uttered a cry of wonder at the marvelous vision that met my eyes.
There lay before me, as bright as daylight, a picture that a thousand
times surpassed my highest, wildest hope. The great secret of another
planet was revealed, and I stood motionless, beholding an inhabitant of
a star millions of miles away.

Among the vast multitude who for centuries have yearned for a glimpse
into the unknown worlds that surround us, I stood alone gazing upon the
image of a Martian. The thought stunned me; I was seized with a wild
impulse to rush out into the street and bring in the throng, that they
might look upon the form of this wonderful being on our sister planet.
But what proof was there to give them that this was so? I would
undoubtedly be ridiculed and accused of trickery. The very fact that had
brought a cry of amazement to my lips--the remarkable brilliancy and
clearness of the image, and the appearance of the Martian himself--would
serve to bring discredit upon anything I might say. Personally I had
ample proof that the image was that of a Martian, but what instant proof
could I give a jeering crowd? I had expected to find in a Martian a
strange grotesque being in appearance, if not in mind, much after the
weird and fierce character so many authors have portrayed him. Judge,
then, my astonishment when I beheld one who, in every particular of form
and feature, resembled the people of Earth.

He appeared to be a man of about forty years of age, judging by our
earthly standard of time, possessing clear-cut features and dark
complexion. His face, which was clean-shaven, was remarkably handsome,
and his piercing dark eyes, although they enhanced the smile that
greeted my appearance at the instrument, seemed to search into my very
soul and to hold me spellbound with mute challenge. Nor could I, upon
afterthought, remember having shown the common courtesy of returning his
greeting.

My astonishment was so great that every faculty seemed to leave me, and
I stood transfixed, staring at the image of the Martian without even the
power of thought. Gradually recovering my senses, however, I took note
of the man and his surroundings. He stood in a room of about the same
dimensions as my laboratory, which seemed to be flooded with bright
daylight, though I could not see any windows on three sides of the room
to admit the light, nor any shadows to indicate that the light came from
a window in the fourth. He held in his hands an instrument unknown to
me, and seemed to be perfectly at his ease, showing neither surprise nor
curiosity. Evidently this was not the first time that he had seen an
inhabitant of the Earth. So unconcerned was he and so natural did he
appear, even in the smallest detail of dress, that it was hard to
believe I was not looking at an image of some room and its occupant in
Paris. His close-fitting clothes seemed to be of a dark green material,
and resembled, to some degree, the uniform of an army officer.
