The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Trip to Venus, by John Munro

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Trip to Venus

Author: John Munro

Release Date: October 11, 2004 [EBook #13716]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A TRIP TO VENUS ***




Produced by Steven desJardins and Distributed Proofreaders.





A TRIP TO VENUS


A NOVEL BY JOHN MUNRO

Author of the "The Wire and the Wave,"
"The Story of Electricity," etc., etc.


Published in 1897 by Jarrold & Sons, London



CONTENTS.

CHAPTER I.     A MESSAGE FROM MARS

CHAPTER II.    HOW CAN WE GET TO THE OTHER PLANETS?

CHAPTER III.   A NEW FORCE

CHAPTER IV.    THE ELECTRIC ORRERY

CHAPTER V.     LEAVING THE EARTH

CHAPTER VI.    IN SPACE

CHAPTER VII.   ARRIVING IN VENUS

CHAPTER VIII.  THE CRATER LAND

CHAPTER IX.    THE FLOWER OF THE SOUL

CHAPTER X.     ALUMION

CHAPTER XI.    THE FLYING APE

CHAPTER XII.   SUNWARD HO!

CHAPTER XIII.  HOME AGAIN





    "The heaven that rolls around cries aloud to you while it displays
    its eternal harmony, and yet your eyes are fixed upon the earth
    alone."

    DANTE.


    "This truth within thy mind rehearse,
     That in a boundless universe
     Is boundless better, boundless worse.

    "Think you this mould of hopes and fears
     Could find no statelier than his peers
     In yonder hundred million spheres?"

    TENNYSON.




A TRIP TO VENUS.


CHAPTER I.

A MESSAGE FROM MARS.


While I was glancing at the _Times_ newspaper in a morning train for
London my eyes fell on the following item:--

     A STRANGE LIGHT ON MARS.--On Monday afternoon, Dr. Krueger, who is
     in charge of the central bureau at Kiel, telegraphed to his
     correspondents:--

     "_Projection lumineuse dans region australe du terminateur de Mars
     observee par Javelle 28 courant, 16 heures.--Perrotin._"

In plain English, at 4 a.m., a ray of light had been observed on the
disc of the planet Mars in or near the "terminator"; that is to say, the
zone of twilight separating day from night. The news was doubly
interesting to me, because a singular dream of "Sunrise in the Moon" had
quickened my imagination as to the wonders of the universe beyond our
little globe, and because of a never-to-be-forgotten experience of mine
with an aged astronomer several years ago.

This extraordinary man, living the life of a recluse in his own
observatory, which was situated in a lonely part of the country, had, or
at any rate, believed that he had, opened up a communication with the
inhabitants of Mars, by means of powerful electric lights, flashing in
the manner of a signal-lantern or heliograph. I had set him down as a
monomaniac; but who knows? perhaps he was not so crazy after all.

When evening came I turned to the books, and gathered a great deal about
the fiery planet, including the fact that a stout man, a Daniel Lambert,
could jump his own height there with the greatest ease. Very likely; but
I was seeking information on the strange light, and as I could not find
any I resolved to walk over and consult my old friend, Professor Gazen,
the well-known astronomer, who had made his mark by a series of splendid
researches with the spectroscope into the constitution of the sun and
other celestial bodies.

It was a fine clear night. The sky was cloudless and of a deep dark
blue, which revealed the highest heavens and the silvery lustre of the
Milky Way. The great belt of Orion shone conspicuously in the east, and
Sirius blazed a living gem more to the south. I looked for Mars, and
soon found him farther to the north, a large red star, amongst the white
of the encircling constellations.

Professor Gazen was quite alone in his observatory when I arrived, and
busily engaged in writing or computing at his desk.

"I hope I'm not disturbing you," said I, as we shook hands; "I know that
you astronomers must work when the fine night cometh."

"Don't mention it," he replied cordially; "I'm observing one of the
nebulas just now, but it won't be in sight for a long time yet."

"What about this mysterious light on Mars. Have you seen anything of
it?"

Gazen laughed.

"I have not," said he, "though I did look the other night."

"You believe that something of the kind has been seen?"

"Oh, certainly. The Nice Observatory, of which Monsieur Perrotin is
director, has one of the finest telescopes in existence, and Monsieur
Javelle is well-known for his careful work."

"How do you account for it?"

"The light is not outside the disc," responded Gazen, "else I should
ascribe it to a small comet. It may be due to an aurora in Mars as a
writer in _Nature_ has suggested, or to a range of snowy Alps, or even
to a bright cloud, reflecting the sunrise. Possibly the Martians have
seen the forest fires in America, and started a rival illumination."

"What strikes you as the likeliest of these notions?"

"Mountain peaks catching the sunshine."

"Might it not be the glare of a city, or a powerful search-light--in
short, a signal?"

"Oh dear, no," exclaimed the astronomer, smiling incredulously. "The
idea of signalling has got into people's heads through the outcry raised
about it some time ago, when Mars was in 'opposition' and near the
earth. I suppose you are thinking of the plan for raising and lowering
the lights of London to attract the notice of the Martians?"

"No; I believe I told you of the singular experience I had some five or
six years ago with an old astronomer, who thought he had established an
optical telegraph to Mars?"

"Oh, yes, I remember now. Ah, that poor old chap was insane. Like the
astronomer in _Rasselas_, he had brooded so long in solitude over his
visionary idea that he had come to imagine it a reality."

"Might there not be some truth in his notion? Perhaps he was only a
little before his time."

Gazen shook his head.

"You see," he replied, "Mars is a much older planet than ours. In winter
the Arctic snows extend to within forty degrees of the equator, and the
climate must be very cold. If human beings ever existed on it they must
have died out long ago, or sunk to the condition of the Eskimo."

"May not the climate be softened by conditions of land and sea unknown
to us? May not the science and civilisation of the Martians enable them
to cope with the low temperature?"

"The atmosphere of Mars is as rare as ours at a height of six miles, and
a warm-blooded creature like man would expire in it."

"Like man, yes," I answered; "but man was made for this world. We are
too apt to measure things by our own experience. Why should we limit the
potentiality of life by what we know of this planet?"

"In the next place," went on Gazen, ignoring my remark, "the old
astronomer's plan of signalling by strong lights was quite
impracticable. No artificial light is capable of reaching to Mars. Think
of the immense distance and the two atmospheres to penetrate! The man
was mad, as mad as a March hare! though why a March hare is mad I'm sure
I don't know."

"I read the other day of an electric light in America which can be seen
150 miles through the lower atmosphere. Such a light, if properly
directed, might be visible on Mars; and, for aught we know, the Martians
may have discovered a still stronger beam."

"And if they have, the odds against their signalling just when we are
alive to the possibility of it are simply tremendous."

"I see nothing incredible in the coincidence. Two heads often conceive
the same idea about the same time, and why not two planets, if the hour
be ripe? Surely there is one and the same inspiring Soul in all the
universe. Besides, they may have been signalling for centuries, off and
on, without our knowing it."

"Then, again," said Gazen, with a pawky twinkle in his eye, "our
electric light may have woke them up."

"Perhaps they are signalling now," said I, "while we are wasting
precious time. I wish you would look."

"Yes, if you like; but I don't think you'll see any 'luminous
projections,' human or otherwise."

"I shall see the face of Mars, anyhow, and that will be a rare
experience. It seems to me that a view of the heavenly bodies through a
fine telescope, as well as a tour round the world, should form a part
of a liberal education. How many run to and fro upon the earth, hunting
for sights at great trouble and expense, but how few even think of that
sublimer scenery of the sky which can be seen without stirring far from
home! A peep at some distant orb has power to raise and purify our
thoughts like a strain of sacred music, or a noble picture, or a passage
from the grander poets. It always does one good."

Professor Gazen silently turned the great refracting telescope in the
direction of Mars, and peered attentively through its mighty tube for
several minutes.

"Is there any light?" I inquired.

"None," he replied, shaking his head. "Look for yourself."

I took his place at the eye-piece, and was almost startled to find the
little coppery star, which I had seen half-an-hour before, apparently
quite near, and transformed into a large globe. It resembled a gibbous
moon, for a considerable part of its disc was illuminated by the sun.

A dazzling spot marked one of its poles, and the rest of its visible
surface was mottled with ruddy and greenish tints which faded into white
at the rim. Fascinated by the spectacle of that living world, seen at a
glance, and pursuing its appointed course through the illimitable ether,
I forgot my quest, and a religious awe came over me akin to that felt
under the dome of a vast cathedral.

"Well, what do you make of it?"

The voice recalled me to myself, and I began to scrutinise the dim and
shadowy border of the terminator for the feeblest ray of light, but all
in vain.

"I can't see any 'luminous projection'; but what a magnificent object in
the telescope!"

"It is indeed," rejoined the professor, "and though we have not many
opportunities of seeing it, we know it better than the other planets,
and almost as well as the moon. Its features have been carefully mapped
like those of the moon, and christened after celebrated astronomers."

"Yourself included, I hope."

"No, sir; I have not that honour. It is true that a man I know, an
enthusiastic amateur in astronomy, dubbed a lot of holes and corners in
the moon after his private friends and acquaintances, myself amongst
them: 'Snook's Crater,' 'Smith's Bottom,' 'Tiddler's Cove,' and so on;
but I regret to say the authorities declined to sanction his
nomenclature."

"I presume that bright spot on the Southern limb is one of the polar
ice-caps," said I, still keeping my eye on the planet.

"Yes," replied the professor, "and they are seen to wax and wane in
winter and summer. The reddish-yellow tracts are doubtless continents of
an ochrey soil; and not, as some think, of a ruddy vegetation. The
greenish-grey patches are probably seas and lakes. The land and water
