The Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific American Supplement, No. 484,
April 11, 1885, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Scientific American Supplement, No. 484, April 11, 1885

Author: Various

Release Date: November 3, 2004 [EBook #13939]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN ***




Produced by PG Distributed Proofreaders





[Illustration]




SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT NO. 484




NEW YORK, APRIL 11, 1885

Scientific American Supplement. Vol. XIX, No. 484.

Scientific American established 1845

Scientific American Supplement, $5 a year.

Scientific American and Supplement, $7 a year.

       *       *       *       *       *




TABLE OF CONTENTS.


I.   ENGINEERING AND MECHANICS.--Bridge over the Blaauw
     Krantz Ravine, Cape Colony.--2 engravings.

     Torpedo Ships.

     The Gas Engine.--By DUGALD CLERK.--Combustion engines.--First
     cylinder and piston engine.--Watt's experiments.--First gas
     engine.--Principles of the gas engine.

     Rapid Construction of the Canadian Pacific Railway.--By E.T.
     ABBOTT.

     The Osgood Mammoth Excavator.--3 figures.

     Capstan Navigation on the Volga.--4 figures.

     Steamboat Equipment of War Vessels.--With engraving of winch
     for raising and lowering torpedo boats.

     Improved Steam Trap.--1 engraving.


II.  TECHNOLOGY.--Critical Methods of Detecting Errors in Plane
     Surfaces.--By JOHN A. BRASHEAR.--11 figures.

     Photometric Standards.--9 figures.

     Bleaching or Dyeing Yarns and Goods in Vacuo.--1 figure.

     On the Moulding of Porcelain.--By CHAS. LAUTH.--Moulding by
     pressure of the air.--Moulding by vacuum.--Drying the moulded
     pieces.--2 figures.

     Photo-Tricycle Apparatus.--1 figure.

     A Photo Printing Light.--1 figure.

     A New Actinometer.

     Astronomical Photography.

     Electricity as a Preventive of Scale in Boilers.


III. DECORATIVE ART.--Alphabet designed by Godfrey Sykes.--An
     engraving.

     Old Wrought Iron Gate.--An engraving.


IV.  GEOLOGY.--The Organization and Plan of the United States
     Geological Survey.--By J.W. POWELL.--A topographic map
     of the United States.--Paleontology.--Chemistry.--Physical
     researches.--Statistics.--Library.--Publications.--General
     geology.--Economic geology.--Relation of the general survey
     to the State survey.


V.   BOTANY, ETC.--The Sunflowers.--Annuals, perennials, etc.--11
     engravings.

     Lye's Fuchsias.--1 engraving.


VI.  HYGIENE, ETC.--Brief Sanitary Matters in Connection with
     Isolated Country Houses.--By E.W. BOWDITCH.

     Sanitary Cooking.--By V.L. OPPENHEIMER.

     Time required to digest Different Foods.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE BLAAUW KRANTZ VIADUCT IN CAPE COLONY.


This viaduct is built over a rocky ravine on the railway from Port Alfred
to Grahamstown, at a height of about 200 ft. from the bottom. Its length
is 480 ft. 6 in., and the width of the platform is 15 ft., the gauge of
the railway being 3 ft. 6 in. The central span of the viaduct is an arch
of 220 ft. span between abutments, and about 90 ft. height; the remainder
of the space on each side is divided into two spans by an iron pier at a
distance of 68 ft. from the retaining wall. These piers are 36 ft. 2 in.
high, and carry girders 144 ft. long, balanced each on a pivot in the
center. One end of these girders is secured to the retaining walls by
means of horizontal and vertical anchorages, while the other end rests in
a sliding bearing on the top flange of the arch.

[Illustration: BRIDGE OVER THE BLAAUW KRANTZ RAVINE, CAPE COLONY.]

[Illustration: BRIDGE OVER THE BLAAUW KRANTZ RAVINE, CAPE COLONY.]

In designing the structure the following points had to be considered: (1)
That, on account of the great height above the ground, and on account of
the high price of timber at the site, the structure could be easily
erected without the use of scaffolding supporting it as a whole. (2) That,
on account of the high freights to Port Alfred, the quantity of iron in
the structure should be as small as possible. (3) That the single parts of
the principal span should be easy to lift, and that there should be as few
of them as possible. For this latter reason most of them were made in
lengths of 20 ft. and more. The question of economy of material presented
itself as a comparison between a few standard types, viz., the girder
bridge of small independent spans; the cantilever bridge, or the
continuous girder bridge in three large spans; the single girder bridge
with one large span and several small spans; and the arch with small
girder spans on each side. The suspension bridge was left out of question
as inadmissible. A girder bridge with small independent spans on rocker
piers would probably have been the most economical, even taking into
account the great height of the piers near the middle of the ravine, but
there would have been some difficulty in holding those piers in position
until they could be secured to the girders at the top; and, moreover, such
a structure would have been strikingly out of harmony with the character
of the site. On the other hand, a cantilever or continuous girder bridge
in three spans--although such structures have been erected in similar
localities--could not enter into comparison of simple economy of material,
because such a design would entirely disregard the anomaly that the
greater part of the structure, viz., the side spans, being necessarily
constructed to carry across a large space, would be too near the ground to
justify the omission of further supports. The question was, therefore,
narrowed to a comparison between the present arch and a central
independent girder of the same span, including the piers on which it
rests. The small side spans could obviously be left out in each case. The
comparison was made with a view not only to arrive at a decision in this
particular case, but also of answering the question of the economy of the
arch more generally. The following table contains the weights of
geometrically similar structures of three different spans, of which the
second is the one here described. The so-called theoretical weight is that
which the structure would have if no part required stiffening, leaving out
also all connections and all wind bracing. The moving load is taken at one
ton per foot lineal, and the strain on the iron at an average of four tons
per square inch. The proportion of the girder is taken at 1 in 8.

--------------+-----------------------+------------------------+
              |  Theoretical Weight.  |      Total Weight.     |
Span in Feet. +-----------------------+------------------------|
              |  Arch.  |   Girder.   |     Arch.  |   Girder. |
--------------+---------+-------------+------------+-----------|
     100      | 0.0724  |   0.1663    |    0.1866  |   0.2443  |
     220      | 0.1659  |   0.4109    |    0.4476  |   0.7462  |
     300      | 0.2414  |   0.6445    |    0.6464  |   1.2588  |
--------------+---------+-------------+------------+-----------+
              |<------------Tons per foot lineal.------------->|

It can be seen from these results that the economical advantage of the
arch increases with the span. In small arches this advantage would not be
large enough to counterbalance the greater cost of manufacture; but in the
arch of 220 ft. span the advantage is already very marked. If the table
were continued, it would show that the girder, even if the platform were
artificially widened, would become impossible at a point where the arch
can still be made without difficulty. The calculations leading to the
above results would occupy too much space to make it desirable on this
occasion to produce them. Our two views are from photographs.--_The
Engineer._

       *       *       *       *       *




TORPEDO SHIPS.


Commander Gallwey lately delivered an interesting lecture on the use of
torpedoes in war before the royal U.S. Institution, London, discussed
H.M.S. Polyphemus, and urged as arguments in her favor: 1. That she has
very high speed, combined with fair maneuvering powers. 2. That she can
discharge her torpedoes with certainty either ahead or on the beam when
proceeding at full speed. 3. That her crew and weapons of defense are
protected by the most perfect of all armor possible, namely, 10 ft. of
water. 4. That she only presents a mark of 4 ft. above the water line.

Then, he asked, with what weapon is the ironclad going to vanquish these
torpedo rams? Guns cannot hit her when moving at speed; she is proof
against machine guns, and, being smaller, handier, and faster than most
ironclads, should have a better chance with her ram, the more especially
as it is provided with a weapon which has been scores of times discharged
with certainty at 300 yards. The ironclad, he answered, must use
torpedoes, and then he maintained that the speed and handiness of the
Polyphemus would enable her to place herself in positions where she could
use her own torpedo to advantage, and be less likely to be hit herself. He
then called attention to the necessity for well-protected conning towers
in these ships, and prophesied that if a submarine ship, armed with
torpedoes, be ever built, she will be the most formidable antagonist an
ironclad ever had; and the nearer the special torpedo ship approaches this
desideratum the better she will be.

       *       *       *       *       *




A PLUMBING TEST.


A recent trial of a smoke rocket for testing drains, described by Mr.
Cosmo Jones in the _Journal of the Society of Arts_, is deserving of
interest. The one fixed upon is 10 in. long, 21/2 in. in diameter, and with
the composition "charged rather hard," so as to burn for ten minutes. This
gives the engineer time to light the fuse, insert the rocket in the drain,
insert a plug behind it, and walk through the house to see if the smoke
escapes into it at any point, finishing on the roof, where he finds the
smoke issuing in volumes from the ventilating pipes. The house
experimented upon had three ventilating pipes, and the smoke issued in
dense masses from each of them, but did not escape anywhere into the
house, showing that the pipes were sound. If the engineer wishes to
increase the severity of the test, he throws a wet cloth over the top of
the ventilating pipe, and so gets a slight pressure of smoke inside it.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE GAS ENGINE.[1]

[Footnote 1: Lecture by Mr. Dugald Clerk, before the Literary and
Philosophical Society, Oldham.]

By DUGALD CLERK.


In earlier days of mechanics, before the work of the great Scottish
engineer, James Watt, the crude steam engines of the time were known as
"fire engines," not in the sense in which we now apply the term to
machines for the extinguishing of fires, but as indicating the source from
which the power was derived, motive power engines deriving their vitality
and strength from fire. The modern name--steam engine--to some extent is a
misleading one, distracting the mind from the source of power to the
medium which conveys the power. Similarly the name "Gas Engine" masks the
fact of the motors so called being really fire or heat engines.

The gas engine is more emphatically a "fire engine" than ever the steam
engine has been. In it the fire is not tamed or diluted by indirect
contact with water, but it is used direct; the fire, instead of being kept
to the boiler room, is introduced direct into the motor cylinder of the
engine. This at first sight looks very absurd and impracticable;
difficulties at once become apparent of so overwhelming a nature that the
problem seems almost an impossible one; yet this is what has been
successfully accomplished in the gas engine. Engineers accustomed to the
construction of steam engines would not many years ago have considered any
one proposing such a thing as having taken leave of his senses.

The late Sir William Siemens worked for many years on combustion engines,
some of his patents on this subject dating back to 1860. In the course of
a conversation I had with him on the subject of his earlier patents, I
asked him why he had entitled one of those patents "steam engine
improvements" when it was wholly concerned with a gas engine using
hydrogen and air in the motive cylinder, the combustion of the hydrogen
taking place in the motive cylinder. He answered me that in 1860 he did
not care to entitle his patent gas or combustion engine simply because
engineers at that time would have thought him mad.

Notwithstanding this widespread incredulity among engineers, and the
apparent novelty of the gas engine idea, fire or combustion engines have
been proposed long, long ago. The first Newcomen steam engine ever set to
work was used by a Mr. Back, of Wolverhampton, in the year 1711.
Thirty-one years before this time, in Paris--year 1680--Huyghens presented
a memoir to the Academy of Sciences describing a method of utilizing the
expansive force of gunpowder. This engineer is notable as being the very
first to propose the use of a cylinder and piston, as well as the first
combustion engine of a practical kind.

The engine consists of a vertical open topped cylinder, in which works a
piston; the piston is connected by a chain passing over a pulley above it
to a heavy weight; the upstroke is accomplished by the descent of the
weight, which pulls the piston to the top of the cylinder; gunpowder
placed in a tray at the bottom of the cylinder is now ignited, and expels
the air with which the cylinder is filled through a shifting valve, and,
after the products of combustion have cooled, a partial vacuum takes place
and the atmospheric pressure forces down the piston to the bottom of its
stroke, during which work may be obtained.

On the board I have made a sketch of this engine. Some years previous to
Huyghens' proposal, the Abbe Hautefeuille (1678) proposed a gunpowder
engine without piston for pumping water. It is similar to Savery's steam
engine, but using the pressure of the explosion instead of the pressure of
steam. This engine, however, had no piston, and was only applicable as a
pump. The Savery principle still survives in the action of the well-known
pulsometer steam pump.

Denys Papin, the pupil and assistant of Huyghens, continued experimenting
upon the production of motive power, and in 1690 published a description
of his attempts at Leipzig, entitled "A New Method of Securing Cheaply
Motive Power of Considerable Magnitude."

He mentions the gunpowder engine, and states that "until now all
experiments have been unsuccessful; and after the combustion of the
exploded powder there always remains in the cylinder one-fifth of its
volume of air."

For the explosion of the gunpowder he substituted the generation and
condensation of steam, heating the bottom of his cylinder by a fire; a
small quantity of water contained in it was vaporized, and then on
removing the fire the steam condensed and the piston was forced down. This
was substantially the Newcomen steam engine, but without the separate
boiler.

Papin died about the year 1710, a disappointed man, about the same time as
Newcomen. Thomas Newcomen, ironmonger and blacksmith, of Dartmouth,
England, had first succeeded in getting his engine to work. The hard fight
to wrest from nature a manageable motive power and to harness fire for
industrial use was continued by this clever blacksmith, and he succeeded
when the more profound but less constructively skillful philosophers had
failed.

The success of the steam method and the fight necessary to perfect it to
the utmost absorbed the energy of most able engineers--Beighton, John
Smeaton--accomplishing much in applying and perfecting it before the
appearance of James Watt upon the scene.

It is interesting to note that in England alone over 2,000 horse power of
Newcomen engines were at work before Watt commenced his series of
magnificent inventions; he commenced experimenting on a Newcomen engine
model in 1759 at Glasgow University, and in 1774 came to Birmingham,
entered into partnership with Boulton, and 1781 we find his beautiful
double acting beam condensing engine in successful work.

From that time until now the steam engine has steadily advanced,
increasing in economy of fuel from 10 lb. of coal per horse power per hour
to about 13/4 lb. per horse power per hour, which is the best result of
to-day's steam engine practice. This result, according to the highest
authorities, is so near to the theoretical result possible from a steam
engine that further improvement cannot now be looked for. Simultaneously
with the development of the steam engine, inventors continued to struggle
with the direct acting combustion or gas engine, often without any
definite understanding of why they should attempt such apparent
impossibilities, but always by their experiments and repeated failures
increasing knowledge, and forming a firm road upon which those following
them traveled to success.

In 1791 John Barber obtained a patent for an engine producing inflammable
gas, mixing it with air, igniting it, and allowing the current so produced
to impinge upon a reaction wheel, producing motion similar to the well
known Aelopile, which I have at work upon the table. About this time,
Murdoch (Jas. Watt's assistant at Birmingham) was busy introducing coal
gas into use for lighting; in 1792 Boulton and Watt's works were lighted
up with coal gas. From this time many gas engines were proposed, and the
more impracticable combustion of gunpowder received less attention.

In 1794 Thomas Mead obtained a patent for an engine using the internal
combustion of gas; the description is not a clear one, his ideas seem
confused.

In the same year Robert Street obtained a patent for an engine which is
not unlike some now in use. The bottom of a cylinder, containing a piston,
is heated by a fire, a few drops of spirits of turpentine are introduced
and evaporated by the heat, the piston is drawn up, and air entering mixes
with the inflammable vapor. A light is applied at a touch hole, and the
explosion drives up the piston, which, working on a lever, forces down the
piston of a pump for pumping water. Robt. Street adds to his description a
note: "The quantity of spirits of tar or turpentine to be made use of is
always proportional to the confined space, in general about 10 drops to a
cubic foot." This engine is quite a workable one, although the
arrangements described are very crude.

The first gas engine that was actually at work for some years; and was
applied to a variety of purposes, was Samuel Buren's. His patent was
granted in 1823, and in 1826 he built a locomotive carriage with which he
