The Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific American Supplement, Vol. XIX,
No. 470, Jan. 3, 1885, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Scientific American Supplement, Vol. XIX, No. 470, Jan. 3, 1885

Author: Various

Release Date: November 14, 2004 [EBook #14041]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, NO. 470 ***




Produced by Don Kretz, Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks and the PG
Distributed Proofreaders Team





[Illustration]




SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT NO. 470





NEW YORK, JANUARY 3, 1885

Scientific American Supplement. Vol. XIX, No. 470.

Scientific American established 1845

Scientific American Supplement, $5 a year.

Scientific American and Supplement, $7 a year.


       *       *       *       *       *




TABLE OF CONTENTS.

I.    METALLURGY, CHEMISTRY, ETC.--The Elasticity of Metals.

      The Liquefaction of the Elementary Gases.--By JULES JAMIN.

      Examination of Fats.

      Notes on Nitrification.--By R. WARINGTON.--Paper read before
      the British Association at Montreal.

II.   ENGINEERING AND MECHANICS.--Flow of Water through
      Hose Pipes.

      Iron Pile Planks in the Construction of Foundations under
      Water.--3 engravings.

      Sound Signals.--Extracts from a paper by A.B. JOHNSON.--Treating
      of gongs, guns, rockets, bells, whistling buoys, bell
      buoys, locomotive whistles, trumpets, the siren, and the use of
      natural orifices.--2 engravings.

      Trevithick's High Pressure Engine at Crewe.--2 engravings.

      Planetary Wheel Trains.--By Prof. C.W. MACCORD.--With a
      page and a half of illustrations.

      Bridge over the River Indus, at Attock. Punjaub, Northern State
      Railway, India.--Full page illustrations.

      The Harrington Rotary Engine.--3 figures.

III.  TECHNOLOGY.--Testing Car Varnishes.--By D.D. ROBERTSON.

      Aniline Dyes in Dress Materials.--By Prof. CHAS. O'NEILL.

IV.   DECORATIVE ART.--A. Chippendale Sideboard.--With engraving.

V.    PHYSICS, MAGNETISM, ETC.--The Fallacy of the Present
      Theory of Sound.--Abstract of a lecture by Dr. H.A. MOTT.

      The Fixation of Magnetic Phantoms.--With engraving.

VI.   NATURAL HISTORY.--Researches on the Origin and Life Histories
      of the Least and Lowest Living Things---By Rev. W.H.
      DALLINGER.

VII.  MEDICINE, ETC.--Case of Resuscitation and Recovery after
      Apparent Death by Hanging.--by Dr. E.W. WHITE.

VIII. MISCELLANEOUS.--The Inventors' Institute.--Address of the
      Chairman at the opening of the twenty-second session of the
      Institute, October 2.

      The New Central School at Paris.--3 engravings.

       *       *       *       *       *




FLOW OF WATER THROUGH HOSE PIPES.


At a recent meeting in this city of the American Society of Civil
Engineers, a paper by Edmund B. Weston was read, giving the description
and result of experiments on the flow of water through a 21/2 inch hose and
through nozzles of various forms and sizes; also giving the results of
experiments as to the height of jets of water. The experiments were made
at Providence, R.I. The water was taken from a hydrant to the head of
which were attached couplings holding two pressure gauges, and from the
couplings the hose extended to a tank holding 2,100 gallons, so arranged
as to measure accurately the time and amount of delivery of water by the
hose. Different lengths of hose were used. The experiments resulted in the
following formula for flow from coupling:

1. For hose between 90 and 100 feet in length, and where great accuracy is
required:

         ---------------------------------------------------
        /                   2gh
  V =  / ---------------------------------------------------
      /                   /          0.504 \
    \/ 1 - 0.0256d^{4} + ( 0.0087 + ------- ) 0.12288d^{4}l.
                          \          ---   /
                                   \/ v

[TEX: V = \sqrt{\frac{2gh}{1 - 0.0256 d^4 + (0.0087 +
\frac{0.504}{\sqrt{v}}) 0.12288 d^4 l}}.]

2. For all lengths of hose, a reliable general formula:

        ----------------------------------------------
       /                     h
  V = / ----------------------------------------------
    \/  0.0155463 - 0.000398d^{4} + 0.0000362962d^{4}l.

[TEX: V = \sqrt{\frac{h}{0.0155463 - 0.000398 d^4 + 0.0000362962 d^4 l}}.]

  g being velocity of efflux in feet per second.
  h, head in feet indicated by gauge.
  d, of coupling in inches.
  l, length of hose in feet from gauge.
  v, velocity in 21/2 inch hose.

Forty-five experiments were made on ring nozzles, resulting in the
following formula:

  f = 0.001135v squared.

f being loss of head in feet owing to resistance of nozzle, and v the
velocity of the contracted vein in feet per second.

Thirty-five experiments were made with smooth nozzles, resulting in the
following formula:

  f = 0.0009639 v squared.

f being the loss of head in feet owing to resistance, and v the
velocity of efflux in feet per second.

Experiments show that a prevailing opinion is incorrect that jets will
rise higher from ring nozzles than from smooth nozzles.

Box's formula for height of jets of water compares very favorably with
experimental results.

       *       *       *       *       *




IRON PILE PLANKS IN THE CONSTRUCTION OF FOUNDATIONS UNDER WATER.


The annexed engravings illustrate a method of constructing subaqueous
foundations by the use of iron pile planks. These latter, by reason of
their peculiar form, present a great resistance, not only to the vertical
blow of the pile driver (as it is indispensable that they should), but
also to horizontal pressure when excavating is being done or masonry being
constructed within the space which they circumscribe. Polygonal or curved
perimeters may be circumscribed with equal facility by joining the piles,
the sides of one serving as a guide to that of its neighbor, and special
pieces being adapted to the angles. Preliminary studies will give the
dimensions, form, and strength of the iron to be employed. The latter, in
fact, will be rolled to various thicknesses according to the application
to be made of it. We may remark that the strength of the iron, aside from
that which is necessary to allow the pile to withstand a blow in a
vertical direction, will not have to be calculated for all entire
resistance to the horizontal pressure due to a vacuum caused by the
excavation, for the stiffness of the piles may be easily maintained and
increased by establishing string-pieces and braces in the interior in
measure as the excavation goes on.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--CONSTRUCTION OF A DOCK WALL BEHIND PAPONOTS IRON
PILE PLANKS.]

The system is applicable to at least three different kinds of work: (1)
The making of excavations with a dredge and afterward concreting without
pumping out the water. (2) The removal of earth or the construction of
masonry under protection from water (Fig. 1). (3) The making of
excavations by dredging and afterward concreting without pumping, mid
then, after the beton has set, pumping out the water in order to continue
the masonry in the open air. This construction of masonry in the open air
has the great advantage of allowing the water to evaporate from the
mortar, and consequently of causing it to dry and effect a quick and
perfect cohesion of the materials employed.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--TRAVERSE SECTION OF TWO PILES CONNECTED BY MORTAR
JOINTS.]

This system may likewise be employed with advantage for the forming of
stockades in rivers, or for building sea walls. A single row of pile
planks will in many cases suffice for the construction of dock walls in
the river or ocean when the opposite side is to be filled in, or in any
other analogous case (Fig. 1).

The piles are driven by means of the ordinary apparatus in use. Their
heads are covered with a special apparatus to prevent them from being
flattened out under the blows of the pile driver. They may be made in a
single piece or be composed of several sections connected together with
rivets. They are designed according to circumstances, to be left in the
excavation in order to protect the masonry, or to be removed in their
entirety or in parts, as is done with caissons. In case they are to remain
wholly or in part in the excavation, they are previously galvanized or
painted with an inoxidizable coating in order to protect them and increase
their durability.

The points of the piles, whatever be their form and arrangement, are
strengthened by means of steel pieces, which assure of their penetrating
hard and compact earth.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--DREDGING WITHIN A SPACE CIRCUMSCRIBED BY IRON PILE
PLANKS.]

Fig. 2 represents a dredge at work within a space entirely circumscribed
by pile planks. Here, after the excavation is finished, beton will be put
down by means of boxes with hinged bottoms, and the water will afterward
be pumped out in order to allow the masonry to be constructed in the open
air. Fig. 3 shows a transverse section of two of these pile planks united
by mortar joints. This system is the invention of Mr. Papenot.--_Revue
Industrielle._

       *       *       *       *       *




AN ATMOSPHERIC BATTERY.


Great ingenuity is being shown in the arrangement of new forms of primary
batteries. The latest is that devised by M. Jablochkoff, which acts by the
effect of atmospheric moisture upon the metal sodium. A small rod of this
metal is flattened into a plate, connected at one end to a copper wire.
There is another plate of carbon, not precisely the same as that used for
arc lights or ordinary batteries, but somewhat lighter in texture. This
plate is perforated, and provided with small wooden pegs. The sodium plate
is wrapped in silk paper, and pressed upon the carbon in such a manner
that the wooden pegs penetrate the soft sodium. For greater security the
whole is tied together with a few turns of fine iron wire; care being
taken that the wire does not form an electric contact between the sodium
and the carbon. The element is then complete, the carbon and the small
copper wire being the electrodes. The sodium, on exposure to the air,
becomes oxidized, forming caustic soda, which with the moisture of the air
dissolves, and drains gradually away in the form of a concentrated
solution; thus constantly exposing the fresh surface of the metal, which
renders the reaction continuous. The price of the element is lower than
would be expected at first sight from the employment of so expensive a
metal. The present cost of sodium is 10 frs. per kilogramme; but M.
Jablochkoff thinks that on the large scale the metal might be obtained at
a very low figure. The elements are grouped in sets of ten, hung upon rods
in such a manner that the solution as formed may drain off. Such a battery
continues in action as long as the air contains moisture; the only means
of stopping it is to shut it up in an air-tight case. The electro-motive
force depends on the degree of humidity in the air, and also upon the
temperature.

       *       *       *       *       *

ANALYSIS OF PERFUMED SCOURING PASTES.--The analysis of No. 1 resulted in
water and traces of myrbane oil, 3.66 per cent.; fatty acid, melting at
104 deg. F., 54.18 per cent.; iron peroxide, 10.11 per cent.; silicic acid,
14.48 per cent.; alumina, 17.31 per cent.; lime and magnesia, traces. The
iron peroxide is partly soluble in hydrochloric acid, the alumina entirely
so as silicate. The scouring paste, therefore, is composed of 54 per cent.
fatty (palm oil) acid, 10 per cent. jeweler's rouge, 32 per cent.
pumice-stone powder.

       *       *       *       *       *




SOUND SIGNALS.


In Appleton's "Annual Cyclopaedia" for 1883, Mr. Arnold B. Johnson, Chief
Clerk of the Lighthouse Board, contributes a mass of very interesting
information, under the above title. His descriptions of the most approved
inventions relating thereto are interesting, and we make the following
extracts:

The sound signals generally used to guide mariners, especially during
fogs, are, with certain modifications, sirens, trumpets, steam-whistles,
bell-boats, bell-buoys, whistling buoys, bells struck by machinery,
cannons fired by powder or gun cotton, rockets, and gongs.

_Gongs._--Gongs are somewhat used on lightships, especially in British
waters. They are intended for use at close quarters. Leonce Reynaud, of
the French lighthouse service, has given their mean effective range as
barely 550 yards. They are of most use in harbors, short channels, and
like places, where a long range would be unnecessary. They have been used
but little in United States waters. The term "effective range" is used
here to signify the actual distance at which, under the most unfavorable
circumstances, a signal can generally be heard on board of a paddle-wheel
steamer in a heavy sea-way.

_Guns._--The use of guns is not so great as it once was. Instances are on
record in which they were quite serviceable. Admiral Sir A. Milne said he
had often gone into Halifax harbor, in a dense fog like a wall, by the
sound of the Sambro fog gun. But in the experiments made by the Trinity
House off Dungeness in January, 1864, in calm weather, the report of an
eighteen-pounder, with three pounds of powder, was faint at four miles.
Still, in the Trinity House experiments of 1865, made in light weather
with a light gun, the report was clearly heard seven miles away. Dr.
Gladstone records great variability in the range of gun-sound in the
Holyhead experiments. Prof. Henry says that a twenty-four-pounder was used
at Point Boneta, San Francisco Bay, Cal., in 1856-57, and that, by the
help of it alone, vessels came into the harbor during the fog at night as
well as in the day, which otherwise could not have entered. The gun was
fired every half hour, night and day, during foggy and thick weather in
the first year, except for a time when powder was lacking. During the
second year there were 1,582 discharges. It was finally superseded by a
bell-boat, which in its turn was after a time replaced by a siren. A gun
was also used at West Quoddy Head, Maine. It was a carronade, five feet
long, with a bore of five and one-quarter inches, charged with four pounds
of powder. The gun was fired on foggy days when the Boston steamer was
approaching the lighthouse from St. Johns, and the firing was begun when
the steamer's whistle was heard, often when she was six miles away, and
was kept up as fast as the gun could be loaded, until the steamer answered
with its whistle.

The report of the gun was heard from two to six miles. "This signal was
abandoned," Prof. Henry says, "because of the danger attending its use,
the length of intervals between successive explosions, and the brief
duration of the sound, which renders it difficult to determine its
direction with accuracy." In 1872 there were three fog guns on the English
coast, iron eighteen-pounders, carrying a three pound charge of powder,
which were fired at intervals of fifteen minutes in two places, and of
twenty minutes in the other. The average duration of fog at these stations
was said to be about six hours, and as it not unfrequently lasted twenty
hours, each gun required two gunners, who had to undergo severe labor, and
the risk of remissness and irregularity was considerable. In 1881 the
interval between charges was reduced to ten minutes.

The Trinity House, in its experiments at South Foreland, found that the
short twenty-four pound howitzer gave a better sound than the long
eighteen-pounder. Tyndall, who had charge of the experiments, sums up as
to the use of the guns as fog-signals by saying: "The duration of the
sound is so short that, unless the observer is prepared beforehand, the
sound, through lack of attention rather than through its own
powerlessness, is liable to be unheard. Its liability to be quenched by
local sound is so great that it is sometimes obliterated by a puff of wind
taking possession of the ears at the time of its arrival. Its liability to
be quenched by an opposing wind, so as to be practically useless at a very
short distance to windward, is very remarkable.... Still, notwithstanding
these drawbacks, I think the gun is entitled to rank as a first-class
signal."

The minute gun at sea is known the world over as a signal of distress. The
English lightships fire guns to attract the attention of the lifeboat crew
when shipwrecks take place in sight of the ships, but out of sight of the
boats; and guns are used as signals of approaching floods at freshet times
in various countries.

_Rockets._--As a signal in rock lighthouses, where it would be impossible
to mount large pieces of apparatus, the use of a gun-cotton rocket has
been suggested by Sir Richard Collinson, deputy-master of the Trinity
