The Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific American Supplement, No. 561,
October 2, 1886, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Scientific American Supplement, No. 561, October 2, 1886

Author: Various

Release Date: July 27, 2005 [EBook #16360]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Jeannie Howse, Victoria
Woosley and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
www.pgdp.net





[Illustration]




SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT NO. 561




NEW YORK, OCTOBER 2, 1886

Scientific American Supplement. Vol. XXII., No. 561.

Scientific American established 1845

Scientific American Supplement, $5 a year.

Scientific American and Supplement, $7 a year.

       *       *       *       *       *




TABLE OF CONTENTS.


I.    BOTANY.--A Century Plant in Bloom.--Interesting account of
      the recent blossoming of an _Agave Americana_ at
      Auburn, N.Y.                                                8965

      Alpine Flowers in the Pyrenees.--1 illustration.            8965

II.   CHEMISTRY.--Probable Isolation of Fluorine.--Decomposition
      of hydrofluoric acid by an electric current.--By M.H.
      MOISSAN.--Production of a new body, possibly fluorine, or
      perfluoride of hydrogen.                                    8963

      The Determination of Nitric Acid by the Absorption of Nitric
      Oxide in a Standard Solution of Permanganate of Potash.--
      By H.N. MORSE and A.F. LINN. Full description of a new and
      important volumetric determination.--1 illustration.        8964

      Water of Crystallization.--By W.W.J. NICOL, M.A., D.Sc.--
      Discussion of the state of water of crystallization in a
      salt in solution.                                           8964

III.  ENGINEERING.--Combustion, Fire Boxes, and Steam Boilers--By
      JOHN A. COLEMAN.--Address before the June Convention of
      the Master Mechanics' Association.                          8953

      Compound Hydraulic Presses.--Different forms of presses
      designed for pressing bales for shipment.--Very fully
      illustrated by 8 figures.                                   8951

      Examination Papers in General Construction.--Eighty-six
      questions in engineering propounded by the civil service
      examiners of New York city.                                 8956

IV.   MEDICINE AND PHYSIOLOGY.--A New Apparatus for the Study of
      Cardiac Drugs.--By WILLIAM GILMAN THOMPSON, M.D.--Ingenious
      application of instantaneous photography to the study
      of heart movements.--Apparatus and views produced.--3
      illustrations.                                              8966

      Creosote a Specific for Erysipelas,--A new cure for this
      complaint.                                                  8966

V.    METALLURGY.--Primitive Iron Manufacture.--Iron furnace
      and blowing apparatus in use in Bengal.--2 illustrations.   8962

VI.   MINING ENGINEERING.--The Catastrophe at Chancelade.--
      Application of photography to investigating mine disasters.
      --4 illustrations.                                          8962

VII.  MISCELLANEOUS.--Celebration of the 500th Anniversary of the
      University of Heidelberg. August, 1886.                     8957

      Useful Bags and How to Make Them.--Interesting paper on the
      trunk makers' art.--4 illustrations.                        8960

VIII. NAVAL ENGINEERING.--Atlantic Steamers.--By W. JOHN.--
      Exhaustive comparison of representative Atlantic liners
      and war ships.--3 illustrations.                            8954

      Jet Propellers.--Hydraulic propulsion of vessels.--
      Mathematical examination of this subject.                   8951

IX.   ORDNANCE.--The New Army Gun.--Description of the 8-inch
      steel gun as manufactured at the West Point, N.Y.,
      Foundry.--1 illustration.                                   8952

X.    PHYSICS.--A New Thermo Regulator.--1 illustration.          8959

      Cohesion and Cohesion Figures.--By WILLIAM ACKROYD,
      F.I.C.--Laws of vortex rings examined, and relation of
      solubility to cohesion.                                     8963

      Pipette for taking the Density of Liquids.--Apparatus and
      calculations for use.--1 illustration.                      8959

XI.   TECHNOLOGY.--Impurities in Photographic Chemicals, and
      Tests for Same.--Table referred to in a paper read before
      the Birmingham Photographic Society by G.M. Jones, M.P.S.   8957

      Molasses, how made.--Work on Plantations Graphically
      Described.*                                                 8961

      Optical errors and human mistakes.--By ERNST GUNDLACH.--On
      the examination of optical glasses.--A paper read before
      the Buffalo meeting of the A.A.A.S.                         8963

      Soap.--By HENRY LEFFMANN, Ph.D.                             8962

      Somzee's New Gas Burners.--Interesting description of
      regenerative burners.--9 figures.                           8958

      The Clamond Gas Burner.--Of value as a supplement to the
      above named article, describing an incandescent burner.
      --1 illustration.                                           8959

      Wood Oil.--A new industry worked on the large scale in
      Sweden.                                                     8962


         * Transcriber's Note: "Work on Plantations..." was
           originally part of TOC entry "Optical Errors..."


       *       *       *       *       *




COMPOUND HYDRAULIC PRESSES.


In a hydraulic packing press, the work done by the ram during one
stroke may be roughly divided into two periods, in the first of which
the resistance, although gradually increasing, may be called light,
while in the second the resistance is heavy. The former of these two
periods embraces the greater part of the stroke, and it is only a
small proportion at the end which requires the exercise of the full
power of the press to bring the material to the determined degree of
consolidation. Consequently, if a hydraulic press is to be worked so
as to waste no time, it requires to be provided with means by which
its table may be made to rise rapidly during the portion of the stroke
when the resistance is small, and afterward more slowly when the
entire power of the pumps is being expended upon the final squeeze.
Many methods of obtaining this end have been devised, and are in
common use both here and abroad. It is, however, more particularly in
the packing of raw material that such appliances are useful, since the
goods pressed into bales in this country are not usually of a very
yielding nature, and consequently do not require a long stroke to
bring them to a high state of compression. In India and Egypt, from
whence cotton is sent in bales, presses must have a long stroke; and
unless they can be worked rapidly, a very considerable amount of plant
is required to get through a moderate quantity of work. To meet the
necessities of these countries, Mr. Watson has devised several forms
of press in which not only is the table made to rise rapidly through
the greater part of its stroke, but the rams are kept almost
constantly in motion, so that the time occupied in filling the box
with raw cotton and in placing the ties round the bales is not lost.

[Illustration: COMPOUND HYDRAULIC PRESS. FIGS. 1 and 2.]

We illustrate four forms of Mr. Watson's presses, Fig. 1 being an
earlier construction, which, although very rapid at the date at which
it was brought out, has been far surpassed in celerity by the
arrangements shown in Figs. 3 to 8. It was introduced in 1873, and
forty-three presses according to this design were sent to India by the
makers, Messrs. Fawcett, Preston & Co., of Phoenix Foundry,
Liverpool, between that year and 1880. Four presses of this kind are
worked by one engine, having a cylinder 20 in. by 3 ft. stroke, and
driving eighteen to twenty pumps of varying diameter and short stroke.
The press has two long-stroke rams, LL, of small diameter, to compress
the loose material, and two short-stroke rams, FF, of large diameter,
to give the final squeeze. These two pairs of rams act alternately,
the one pair being idle while the other is in operation. The lashing
of the bale takes place while the larger rams are in action, the bale
being supported on the grid, B, which is pushed under it through
grooves formed in the press-head, S (Fig. 1). When the grid is in
place the press-head can be lowered, and the box be filled, while the
bale is receiving its final squeeze from the inverted rams above.

In Figs. 1 and 2 the press is shown in the position it would occupy if
the bale, M, were just completed and ready to be pushed out, and the
box, N, were full of material. The filling doors, CC, are shown turned
back level with the floor, the main doors, AA, are open, as are also
the end doors, KK, to admit the men to fasten up the bale. If water be
admitted to the subsidiary cylinder, H, the head, G, and two rams, FF,
will be raised, and then the bale, M, can be thrown out finished. All
the doors are now closed and water admitted to the rams, LL. These
immediately rise, pushing the contents of the box, N, before them, and
compressing them until the table, S, reaches the level of the grid, B.
At this moment the tappet rod, D, shuts off the water, and withdraws
the bolt of the doors, AA, which fly open. The grid, B (Fig. 2), is
then run through the grooves in the press-head, S, and the rams, LL,
are allowed to descend ready for a baling cloth to be inserted through
the doors, EE, and for the box, N, to be refilled. At the same time
the head, G, comes down on to the bale and compresses it still
further, while the men are at work lashing it. When the material is in
hanks, like jute, the rams, LL, are lowered slowly, while a man
standing inside the box, at about the level of the floor, packs the
material neatly on the table.

These presses can be worked with great rapidity, the average output
during a day varying from 21 to 28 bales an hour. The consumption of
coal per bale is 9 lb. of Bengal coal, in value about 3/4d. The density
of the cotton bales produced is about 45 lb. per cubic foot, 400 lb.
measuring a little under 9 cubic feet for shipment. In the case of
jute or jute roots, the same weight occupies 10 cubic feet on an
average. But rapid as this press is in action, the necessities of
recent business in India have called for still more expeditious
working, and to meet this demand Mr. Watson produced his compound
press, in which the economy of time is carried to its utmost
development. By the addition of a second pair of long-stroke rams the
output of the press has been trebled, being raised to 80 bales per
hour. To effect this, there is one pair of powerful rams, as in the
press just described, but two pairs of the long-stroke rams. Further,
each pair of the small-diameter rams is fitted with two boxes, one of
which is always being filled while the other is being pressed. The
rams in rising compress the material into a small cell or box,
situated above the box in which raw cotton is thrown. On the top of
the ram head there is a loose lashing plate, which, at the finish of
the action of the rams, is locked in the cell by bolts actuated by a
suitable locking gear. While in this cell the bale has the lashing
ropes put round it, and then it is placed under the large rams for the
final squeeze, during which the ties or ropes are permanently secured.
Thus neither of the small presses has even to wait while its box is
being filled, or while the previously pressed bale is being lashed.
Even in the large press, when the ties are finally fastened, the time
occupied does not exceed three-quarters of a minute, and is often much
less.

[Illustration: COMPOUND HYDRAULIC PRESS. FIGS. 3 and 4.]

This press is shown in Figs. 3 and 4. The small rams are arranged at
either side of the large ones, which, in this case, are not inverted.
To each of the smaller presses there is a pair of boxes mounted on a
vertical column, around which they can revolve to bring either box
over the rain head. When the left hand rams rise, the material is
delivered into the cell, D, which previously has had its doors (Fig.
4) closed. To permit of the cell, D, being moved out of the way, it is
mounted so that it can revolve on one of the columns of the main
press, first into the position shown at B (Fig. 4), and afterward to C
(Fig. 3). While at D, the bale in the cell (called from its
construction a revolver) is partly lashed, the ties or ropes being put
into position. It is then rotated until it comes over the large rams,
where the bale is still more compressed and secured.

It must be admitted that this press provides for the greatest possible
economy of time, and for the largest output, for the capital employed,
which can be attained. The rams and the men are constantly in action,
and not a single moment is lost. For filling each box 78 seconds are
allowed, and there is ample time for the preliminary lashing.

[Illustration: COMPOUND HYDRAULIC PRESS. FIGS. 5 and 6.]

Figs. 5 and 6 show a modification of this press, designed to turn out
sixty bales per hour. It has only one set of long-stroke rams, with
three revolvers. The bale receives its preliminary lashing while in
the position, B (Fig. 6). Fifty-three seconds are available for
filling the box, and the same time for the preliminary lashing. It is
found, however, that three-quarters of a minute is sufficient for the
complete hooping of a bale.

[Illustration: COMPOUND HYDRAULIC PRESS. FIGS. 7 and 8.]

Figs. 7 and 8 show a similar press intended for jute pressing. This
has only one box, which is fixed, as the material has to be packed in
an orderly manner. Its speed is sixty bales an hour.--_Engineering._

       *       *       *       *       *




JET PROPELLERS.--HYDRAULIC PROPULSION OF VESSELS.


Certain mechanical devices appear to exercise a remarkable influence
on some minds, and engineers are blamed for not adopting them, in no
very measured terms in some cases. It is not in any way necessary that
these devices should have been invented by the men who advocate their
adoption, in order to secure that advocacy. The intrinsic attractions
of the scheme suffice to evoke eulogy; and engineers sometimes find it
very difficult to make those who believe in such devices understand
that there are valid reasons standing in the way of their adoption.
One such device is hydraulic propulsion. A correspondent in a recent
impression suggested its immediate and extended use in yachts at all
events, and we willingly published his letter, because the system does
no doubt lend itself very freely to adoption for a particular class of
yachts, namely, those provided with auxiliary power only. But because
this is the case it must not be assumed that the jet propeller is
better than screw or paddle-wheel propulsion; and it is just as well,
before, correspondence extends further, that we should explain why and
in what way it is not satisfactory. The arguments to be urged in favor
of hydraulic propulsion are many and cogent; but it will not fail to
strike our readers, we think, that all these arguments refer, not to
the efficiency of the system, but to its convenience. A ship with a
hydraulic propeller can sail without let or hindrance; a powerful pump
is provided, which will deal with an enormous leak, and so on. If all
the good things which hydraulic propulsion promises could be had
combined with a fair efficiency, then the days of the screw propeller
and the paddle wheel would be numbered; but the efficiency of the
hydraulic propeller is very low, and we hope to make the reason why it
is low intelligible to readers who are ignorant of mathematics. Those
who are not ignorant of them will find no difficulty in applying them
to what we have to say, and arriving at similar conclusions in a
different way.

Professor Greenhill has advanced in our pages a new theory of the
screw propeller. As the series of papers in which he puts forward his
theory is not complete, we shall not in any way criticise it; but we
must point out that the view he takes is not that taken by other
writers and reasoners on the subject, and in any case it will not
apply to hydraulic propulsion. For these reasons we shall adhere in
what we are about to advance to the propositions laid down by
Professor Rankine, as the exponent of the hitherto received theory of
the whole subject. When a screw or paddle wheel is put in motion, a
body of water is driven astern and the ship is driven ahead. Water,
from its excessive mobility, is incapable of giving any resistance to
the screw or paddle save that due to its inertia. If, for example, we
conceive of the existence of a sea without any inertia, then we can
readily understand that the water composing such a sea would offer no
resistance to being pushed astern by paddle or screw. When a gun is
fired, the weapon moves in one direction--this is called its
recoil--while the shot moves in another direction. The same
principal--_pace_ Professor Greenhill--operates to cause the movement
of a ship. The water is driven in one direction, the ship in another.
Now, Professor Rankine has laid down the proposition that, other
things being equal, that propeller must be most efficient which sends
the largest quantity of water astern at the slowest speed. This is a
very important proposition, and it should be fully grasped and
understood in all its bearings. The reason why of it is very simple.
Returning for a moment to our gun, we see that a certain amount of
work is done on it in causing it to recoil; but the whole of the work
done by the powder is, other things being equal, a constant quantity.
The sum of the work done on the shot and on the gun in causing their
motions is equal to the energy expended by the powder, consequently
the more work we do on the gun, the less is available for the shot. It
can be shown that, if the gun weighed no more than the shot, when the
charge was ignited the gun and the shot would proceed in opposite
directions at similar velocities--very much less than that which the
shot would have had had the gun been held fast, and very much greater
than the gun would have had if its weight were, as is usually the
case, much in excess of that of the shot. In like manner, part of the
work of a steam engine is done in driving the ship ahead, and part in
pushing the water astern. An increase in the weight of water is
equivalent to an augmentation in the weight of our gun and its
carriage--of all that, in short, takes part in the recoil.

But, it will be urged, it is just the same thing to drive a large body
of water astern at a slow speed as a small body at a high speed. This
is the favorite fallacy of the advocates of hydraulic propulsion. The
turbine or centrifugal pump put into the ship drives astern through
the nozzles at each side a comparatively small body of water at a very
high velocity. In some early experiments we believe that a velocity of
88 ft. per second, or 60 miles an hour, was maintained. A screw
propeller operating with an enormously larger blade area than any pump
can have, drives astern at very slow speed a vast weight of water at
every revolution; therefore, unless it can be shown that the result is
the same whether we use high speed and small quantities or low speed
and large quantities, the case of the hydraulic propeller is hopeless.
But this cannot be done. It is a fact, on the contrary, that the work
wasted on the water increases in a very rapid ratio with its speed.
The work stored up in the moving water is expressed in foot pounds by
the formula

  W v squared / 2g

where W stands for the weight of the water, and v for its velocity.
But the work stored in the water must have been derived from the
engine; consequently the waste of engine power augments, not in the
ratio of the speed of the water, but in the ratio of the square of its
speed. Thus if a screw sends 100 tons of water astern at a speed of 10
ft. per second per second, the work wasted will be 156 foot tons per
second in round numbers. If a hydraulic propeller sent 10 tons astern
at 100 ft. per second per second, the work done on it would be 1,562
foot tons per second, or ten times as much. But the reaction effort,
or thrust on the ship, would be the same in both cases. The waste of
energy would, under such circumstances, be ten times as great with the
hydraulic propeller as with the screw. In other words, the slip would
be magnified in that proportion. Of course, it will be understood that
we are not taking into account resistances, and defects proper to the
screw, from which hydraulic propulsion is free, nor are we considering
certain drawbacks to the efficiency of the hydraulic propeller, from
which the screw is exempt; all that we are dealing with is the waste
of power in the shape of work done in moving water astern which we do
not want to move, but cannot help moving. If our readers have followed
us so far, they will now understand the bearing of Rankine's
proposition, that that propeller is best which moves the greatest
quantity of water astern at the slowest speed. The weight of water
moved is one factor of the thrust, and consequently the greater that
weight, other things being equal, the greater the propelling force
brought to bear on the ship.

It may be urged, and with propriety, that the results obtained in
practice with the jet propeller are more favorable than our reasoning
would indicate as possible; but it will be seen that we have taken no
notice of conditions which seriously affect the performance of a
screw. There is no doubt that it puts water in motion not astern. It
twists it up in a rope, so to speak. Its skin frictional resistance is
very great. In a word, in comparing the hydraulic system with the
normal system, we are comparing two very imperfect things together;
but the fact remains, and applies up to a certain point, that the
hydraulic propeller must be very inefficient, because it, of all
propellers, drives the smallest quantity of water astern at the
highest velocity.

There is, moreover, another and a very serious defect in the hydraulic
propeller as usually made, which is that every ton of water passed
through it has the velocity of the ship herself suddenly imparted to
it. That is to say, the ship has to drag water with her. To illustrate
our meaning, let us suppose that a canal boat passes below a stage or
platform a mile long, on which are arranged a series of sacks of corn.
Let it further be supposed that as the canal boat passes along the
platform, at a speed of say five miles an hour, one sack shall be
dropped into the boat and another dropped overboard continuously. It
is evident that each sack, while it remains in the boat, will have a
speed the same as that of the boat, though it had none before. Work
consequently is done on each sack, in overcoming its inertia by
imparting a velocity of five miles an hour to it, and all this work
must be done by the horse towing on the bank. In like manner the
hydraulic propeller boat is continually taking in tons of water,
imparting her own velocity to them, and then throwing them overboard.
The loss of efficiency from this source may become enormous. So great,
indeed, is the resistance due to this cause that it precludes the
notion of anything like high speeds being attained. We do not mean to
assert that a moderate degree of efficiency may not be got from
hydraulic propulsion, but it can only be had by making the quantity of
water sent astern as great as possible and its velocity as small as
possible. That is to say, very large nozzles must be employed. Again,
provision will have to be made for sending the water through the
propeller in such a way that it shall have as little as possible of
the motion of the ship imparted to it. But as soon as we begin to
reduce these principles to practice, it will be seen that we get
something very like a paddle wheel hung in the middle of the boat and
working through an aperture in her hull, or else a screw propeller put
into a tube traversing her from stem to stern.

We may sum up by saying that the hydraulic propeller is less efficient
than the screw, because it does more work on the water and less on the
boat; and that the boat in turn does more work on the water than does
one propelled by a screw, because she has to take in thousands of tons
per hour and impart to them a velocity equal to her own. Part of this
work is got back again in a way sufficiently obvious, but not all. If
it were all wasted, the efficiency of the hydraulic propeller would be
so low that nothing would be heard about it, and we certainly should
not have written this article.--_The Engineer._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE NEW ARMY GUN.


The cut we give is from a photograph taken shortly after the recent
firings. The carriage upon which it is mounted is the one designed by
the Department and manufactured by the West Point Foundry, about six
months since. It was designed as a proof carriage for this gun and
also for the 10 inch steel gun in course of construction. It is
adapted to the larger gun by introducing two steel bushing rings
fitted into the cheeks of carriage to secure the trunnion of the gun.

The gun represented is an 8 inch, all steel, breech-loading rifle,
manufactured by the West Point Foundry, upon designs from the Army
Ordnance Bureau. The tube and jacket were obtained from Whitworth, and
the hoops and the breech mechanism forgings from the Midvale Steel
Company. The total weight of the gun is 13 tons; total length,
including breech mechanism, 271 inches; length of bore in front of gas
check, 30 calibers; powder space in chamber, 3,109 cubic inches;
charge, 100 pounds. The tube extends back to breech recess from
muzzle, in one solid piece. The breech block is carried in the jacket,
the thread cut in the rear portion of the jacket. The jacket extends
forward and is shrunk over the tube about 871/2 inches. The re-enforce
is strengthened by two rows of steel hoops; the trunnion hoops form
one of the outer layers. In front of the jacket a single row of hoops
is shrunk on the tube and extends toward the muzzle, leaving 91 inches
of the muzzle end of the tube unhooped. The second row of hoops is
shrunk on forward of the trunnion hoops for a length of 38 inches to
strengthen the gun, and the hoop portion forms three conical frustums.
The elastic resistance of the gun to tangential rupture over the
powder chamber is computed by Claverino and kindred formulas to be
54,000 lb. per square inch.

[Illustration: THE ARMY 8 INCH STEEL GUN WITH CARRIAGE.]

The breech mechanism is modeled after the De Bange system. The block
has three smooth and three threaded sectors, and is locked in place by
one-sixth of a turn of a block, and secured by the eccentric end of a
