The Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific American Supplement, No. 312,
December 24, 1881, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Scientific American Supplement, No. 312, December 24, 1881

Author: Various

Release Date: February 22, 2006 [EBook #17817]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at www.pgdp.net





[Illustration]




SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT NO. 312




NEW YORK, DECEMBER 24, 1881.

Scientific American Supplement. Vol. XII., No. 312.

Scientific American established 1845

Scientific American Supplement, $5 a year.

Scientific American and Supplement, $7 a year.

       *       *       *       *       *




TABLE OF CONTENTS.


   I. ENGINEERING AND MECHANICS.--Improved Fifteen Ton Traveling
      Crane. Designed for service in the construction of Port
      Alfred Harbor. South Africa. 3 figures.                     4967

      Improved Steam Boiler. 1 figure.                            4968

      The Elevated Railways of New York.                          4968

      Some of the Developments of Mechanical Engineering during the
      Last Half Century. British Association Paper. By SIR FREDERICK
      BRAMWELL. The steam engine.--Evaporative condenser.--Steam
      navigation.--Marine governors.--Light engines and boilers.--The
      Perkins system.--Ether engine.--Quicksilver engine.--Locomotive
      engines.--Brakes.--Motors.--Transmission of power.--Compressed
      air locomotives.--Hydraulic transmission of power.--Electric
      transmission of power.--The manufacture of iron and steel.--
      Bridges.--Machine tools.--The sewing machine.--Agricultural
      machinery.--Printing machinery.                             4968

      Amateur Mechanics: Metal turning, 29 figures. Rotary cutters,
      12 figures. Wood-working and lathe attachments, 9 figures.  4971

      A New Method of Keeping Mechanical Drawings.                4978

      Achard's Electric Brake for Railway Use. 2 figures. Plan and
      elevation.                                                  4974

  II. ELECTRICITY, ETC.--Electricity. What it is and what may be
      expected of it. By JACOB REESE.                             4974

      Electric Light Apparatus for Photographic Purposes. By A.J.
      JARMAN. 2 figures.                                          4976

      Desruelles's Electric Lighter. 1 figure.                    4976

      Solenoid Underground Wires in Philadelphia.                 4976

      Dr. Herz's Telephonic Systems. 2 figures.                   4976

      Decision of the Congress of Electricians on the Units of
      Electric Measures.                                          4977

      Secondary Batteries. By J. ROUSSE.                          4977

 III. TECHNOLOGY AND CHEMISTRY.--Domestic Sugar Production.       4980

      M. Garnier's New Methods of Photo-Engraving. By Major J.
      WATERHOUSE.--Photogravure.--Photograph printing by
      vapor.--Atmography.                                         4982

      Dangers of Pyrogallic Acid. By DR. T.L. PHIPSON.            4982

  IV. ARCHITECTURE, ETC.--Artists' Homes, No. 12.--Wm. Emerson's
      house, Little Sutton, Chiswick.--Full page illustration and
      large size longitudinal section.                            4978

      Memorable English Houses. 4 figures.--Newton's house.--
      Flaxman's house.--Canning's house.--Johnson's house.        4980

   V. GEOGRAPHY.--Herald Island.--On the summit.--A midnight
      observation.--Plant life on Herald Island.--Inhabitants of
      the cliffs.                                                 4980

  VI. METALLURGY.--The Treatment of Quicksilver Ores in Spain.    4977

 VII. AERONAUTICS.--The Balloon in Aeronautics.                   4977

VIII. BIOGRAPHY.--Franz Liszt.--Large Portrait.                   4981

       *       *       *       *       *




IMPROVED FIFTEEN TON CRANE.


[Illustration: Engraving.]

[Illustration: Side and Top View Plans.
               IMPROVED FIFTEEN TON TRAVELING CRANE.]

The machine illustrated on first page has been constructed for Port
Alfred Harbor, this being one of several harbors now being made by Sir
J. Coode in South Africa. The pier for the construction of which the
crane will be employed will consist of concrete blocks laid on what is
known as the "overend system." The blocks, being brought on trucks
direct from the block yard to within the sweep of the machine, are
raised by it, swung round, and accurately set, the machine being
continually traveled forward as the work advances. The bottom blocks
are laid on bags of concrete previously deposited by the crane out of
boxes with flap bottoms.

The present machine has been specially designed throughout, and
represents the most complete development which block-setting plant has
yet attained.

The most striking features of the crane are, the great range of all
the motions, the large radius, and the method of providing for the
latter by a horizontal jib suspended from a king-post. It was at first
intended to have a straight inclined jib, and to alter the radius by
pivoting this round its lower end, as is commonly done; it occurred,
however, to Mr. Matthews, M.I.C.E., representing Sir J. Coode, that
the plan eventually adopted would be in many ways preferable; the
crane was therefore constructed by Messrs. Stothert & Pitt with this
modification, and as far as can be judged from the trial with proof
load, the arrangements can hardly be surpassed for quick and accurate
block-setting. In cranes with "derricking" jibs it is necessary to
connect the derrick and hoisting gears in such a manner that a
variation of the radius may not affect the level of the load; this
plan answers sufficiently well for ordinary purposes, but for
block-setting it is requisite to have extreme accuracy in all the
movements and great quickness in changing from one to another; the
arrangements adopted in foundry cranes, in which all the motions are
entirely independent of one another, seems therefore more suited for
this kind of work. Other not inconsiderable advantages are also
secured by the adoption of the foundry crane type, the amount of clear
headway under the jib being much increased, and the difficulty avoided
of making a jib sixty feet long sufficiently stiff without undue
weight.

The principal dimensions of the crane are, total height of lift 46
feet, radius variable from 25 feet minimum to 45 feet maximum, height
from rail to underside of jib 22 feet 23/4 inches, radius of tail to
center of boiler 22 feet, working load 15 tons, proof load 19 tons.

The general arrangement consists of a truck on which is fixed a post,
round which the crane revolves; the jib is supported midway by an
inclined strut, above which is placed the king-post; the strut is
curved round at the bottom and forms one piece with the side frames,
which are carried right back as a tail to support the boiler and
balance weight.

The hoisting gear consists of a double system of chains 13/16 in. in
diameter placed side by side; each chain is anchored by an adjustable
screw to the end of the jib, and, passing round the traveling carriage
and down to the falling block, is taken along the jib over a sliding
pulley which leads it on to the grooved barrel, 3 ft. 9 in. in
diameter. In front of the barrel is placed an automatic winder which
insures a proper coiling of the chain in the grooves. The motive power
is derived from two cylinders 10 in. in diameter and 16 in. stroke,
one being bolted to each side frame; these cylinders, which are
provided with link motion and reversing gear, drive a steel crank
shaft 23/4 in. in diameter; on this shaft is a steel sliding pinion
which drives the barrel by a double purchase.

In the center of the crank-shaft is a large reversing friction clutch,
which drives, through miter gear, a vertical shaft placed just in
front of the post; from the latter the slewing, racking, and traveling
motions are obtained.

The crane can be turned through a complete circle by a pinion gearing
into a machine-moulded toothed ring bolted to the top of the truck;
this ring is 11 ft. 4-7/8 in. in diameter, and contains 172 teeth 21/2
in pitch. The slewing pinion is driven by intermediate gearing from
the bottom of the vertical shaft mentioned above. For the turning
motion two distinct sets of rollers are provided; these are carried by
cross-girders placed between the side frames; one set runs against a
cast-iron roller path bolted round the bottom of the post, and the
other on the large horizontal roller path seen in the engraving. The
latter is 14 ft. in diameter; it is built up of two deep curved
channel irons with top and bottom plates forming a circular box
girder, on the top of which a heavy flat rail is riveted, and the
whole turned up in the lathe. The racking and traveling motions are
driven from the top end of the vertical shaft; the racking gear
consists of wire ropes attached to each side of the traveling carriage
and coiled round a large barrel, the outer rope being brought over a
pulley at the end of the jib. The rails for the carriage rest on
rolled joints bolted to the underside of jib. This arrangement
involves the use of an overhung traveling carriage, but enables the
jib to be of a stiff box section, the side stiffness being further
secured by wind ties.

The traveling motion is worked by a second vertical shaft, which
passes down the center of the post, and by means of a cross shaft is
geared to the front axle, from which four of the ground wheels are
driven.

The post is octagonal, built up of plates 3/4 in. thick; at the bottom
end it is secured to the girders of the truck, and at the top is
shrunk on to a large gudgeon 12 in. in diameter, which enters a
casting fixed in the back end of the jib; on the top of the gudgeon
are two steel disks on which an adjustable cap rests; by means of this
and the ties to the tail and the lower end of the strut a proportion
of the weight can be brought on to the post so as to relieve the
roller path to any desired extent, and enable the crane to be revolved
easily.

The truck is 24 ft. long and 16 ft. 41/2 in. wide; it is constructed of
longitudinal and transverse box girders 2 ft. 8 in. deep, and rests on
two axles 6 in. in diameter; round these axles swivel the cast-iron
bogie frames which carry the ground wheels. This arrangement was
adopted because the crane has to travel up a gradient of 1 in 30, and
the bogies enable it to take the incline better; they also distribute
the weight more evenly on the wheels. The gauge of the rails is 15 ft,
the wheels are 2 ft. 6 in. in diameter, and have heavy steel tires.
The weight on each of the front wheels when running with the ballast,
but no load, is about 16 tons. A powerful brake is applied to the
wheels when descending the incline.

All the clutch levers, break treadle, and handles are brought
together, so that one man has the crane under his entire control. An
iron house, of which the framing only is shown, extends from the
gearing right back to the boiler, forming a most spacious engine room
and stokehole. A separate donkey engine is provided for feeding the
boiler. The truck is furnished with legs under which packings can be
wedged so as to relieve the load on the wheels when block-setting. The
slings seen under the boiler are for hanging a concrete balance
weight; this will weigh about 20 tons. The weight of the crane itself
without load or ballast is about 80 tons. The crane was tested under
steam with a load of 19 tons with the most satisfactory results; the
whole machine appeared to be very rigid, an end often very difficult
to obtain with portable wrought-iron structures and live loads. The
result in the present case is probably greatly due to the careful
workmanship, and to the fact that the sides and ends of the plates are
planed throughout, so that the webs of the girders get a fair bearing
on the top and bottom plates.

The crane showed itself to be very handy and quick in working, the
speeds with 19 tons load, as actually timed at the trial, are: lifting
16 ft. per minute, racking motion 46 ft. per minute, slewing through a
complete circle 90 ft. diameter, four minutes, equivalent to a speed
at load of 60 ft. per minute. The crane was constructed by Messrs.
Stothert & Pitt, of Bath, to the order of the Crown agents for the
colonies, and we understand that the design and construction have
given complete satisfaction to Sir J. Coode, the engineer to the
harbor works, under whose supervision the crane was
constructed.--_Engineering._

       *       *       *       *       *




IMPROVED STEAM-BOILER.


An improvement in steam-boilers, best understood by reference to the
ordinary vertical form, has been introduced by Mr. T. Moy, London.
Here the flue is central, and, as shown in the accompanying
illustration, is crossed by a number of horizontal water-tubes at
different heights. The ends of these tubes are embraced, within the
steam chamber, by annular troughs. At the top domed part of the boiler
are two annular chambers, the outer one being intended to receive the
water upon entry from the feed-pump, and to contain any sedimentary
deposit which may be formed. The water next passes, by the pipe, _a_,
in the figure, into the inner chamber, surrounding the end of the
uptake flue, whence it flows through the pipe, _b_, down into the
first of the annular troughs above mentioned, and afterward overflows
these troughs in succession until it reaches the bottom. Mr. Moy
claims to have secured by this means a boiler of quick steaming
capacity, together with a reduction in the weight of metal, and
considerable economy of fuel. By the arrangement of the water in a
number of shallow layers a large steaming surface is obtained, and
there is a good steam space rendered available round the troughs. The
water also enters at a point where it may abstract as much heat as
possible from the furnace gases before they escape; and by the
separation of the top domed chamber from the rest of the boiler the
operation of scaling and cleaning is facilitated. The arrangement is
also adapted to horizontal and multitubular boilers, to be fired with
solid, liquid, or gaseous fuel.

[Illustration: IMPROVED BOILER.]

       *       *       *       *       *




THE ELEVATED RAILWAYS OF NEW YORK.


But few persons who have not been in New York since the construction
of the elevated roads, and witnessed their equipments and operations,
can have any adequate idea of the extent of them, and of the people,
machinery, and appurtenances required in working them. A recent
inventory discloses the fact that there are 32 miles of roadway, 161
stations, 203 engines, and 612 cars, while 3,480 trains a day are run.
There are 3,274 men employed on these roads, 309 of whom are
engineers, 258 ticket agents, 231 conductors, 308 firemen, 395 guards
or brakemen, 347 gatemen, 4 road inspectors, 106 porters, 33
carpenters, 27 painters, 69 car inspectors, 140 car cleaners, 40 lamp
men, and 470 blacksmiths, boiler makers, and other mechanics employed
on the structure and in the shops. Most of the ticket agents are
telegraph operators, but there are 13 other operators employed. There
are four double-track lines in operation. The aggregate daily receipts
vary from $14,000 to $18,000; and as many as 274,023 passengers have
been carried in one day. Engineers are paid from $3 to $3.50 per day;
ticket agents, $1.75 to $2.25; conductors, $1.90 to $2.50; firemen,
$1.90 to $2; guards or brakemen, $1.50 to $1.65; and gatemen, $1.20 to
$1.50. The above items do not include machinists and other _employes_
in the workshops, or the general officers, clerks, etc.

       *       *       *       *       *


AMERICAN ANTIMONY.


A Baltimore dispatch informs us that a carload of antimony, ten tons
in all, was lately received by C.L. Oudesluys & Co., from the southern
part of Utah Territory, being the first antimony received in the East
from the mines of that section. The antimony was mined about 140 miles
from Salt Lake City. The ore is a sulphide, bluish gray in color, and
yields from 60 to 65 per cent. of antimony. All antimony heretofore
came from Great Britain and the island of Borneo, and paid an import
duty of 10 per cent. ad valorem, and there is also some from Sonora.
It is believed that with proper rail facilities to the mines of the
West there will be no need of importations.

       *       *       *       *       *




SOME OF THE DEVELOPMENTS OF MECHANICAL ENGINEERING DURING THE
LAST HALF-CENTURY.[1]

   [Footnote 1: Paper read in Section G (Mechanical) of the British
   Association.]

By SIR FREDERICK BRAMWELL, V.P. Inst. C.E., F.R.S.,
Chairman of the Council of the Society of Arts.


I am quite sure the section will agree with me in thinking it was very
fortunate for us, and for science generally, that our president
refrained from occupying the time of the section by a retrospect, and
devoted himself, in that lucid and clear address with which he favored
us, to the consideration of certain scientific matters connected with
engineering, and to the foreshadowing of the directions in which he
believes it possible that further improvements may be sought for. But
I think it is desirable that some one should give to this section a
record, even although it must be but a brief and an imperfect one, of
certain of the improvements that have been made, and of some of the
progress that has taken place, during the last fifty years, in the
practical application of mechanical science, with which science and
its applications our section is particularly connected. I regret to
say that, like most of the gentlemen who sat on this platform
yesterday, who, I think, were, without exception, past presidents of
the section, I am old enough to give this record from personal
experience. Fifty years ago I had not the honor of being a member, nor
should I, it is true, have been eligible for membership of the
association; but I was at that time vigorously making models of
steam-engines, to the great annoyance of the household in which I
lived, and was looking forward to the day when I should be old enough
to be apprenticed to an engineer. Without further preface, I will
briefly allude to some of the principal developments of a few of the
branches of engineering. I am well aware that many branches will be
left unnoticed; but I trust that the omissions I may make will be
remedied by those present who may speak upon the subject after me.

I will begin by alluding to


THE STEAM-ENGINE EMPLOYED FOR MANUFACTURING PURPOSES.

In 1831, the steam-engine for these purposes was commonly the
condensing beam engine, and was supplied with steam from boilers,
known, from their shape, as wagon boilers; this shape appears to have
been chosen rather for the convenience of the sweeps, who periodically
went through the flues to remove the soot consequent on the imperfect
combustion, than for the purpose of withstanding any internal pressure
of steam. The necessary consequence was, that the manufacturing
engines of those days were compelled to work with steam of from only
