The Project Gutenberg EBook of Genesis, by H. Beam Piper

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Genesis

Author: H. Beam Piper

Release Date: April 2, 2006 [EBook #18105]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GENESIS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Geetu Melwani and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

This etext was produced from "Future combined
with Science Fiction Stories" September 1951. Extensive research did not
uncover any evidence that the copyright on this publication was renewed.

A number of typographical errors found in the
original text have been corrected in this version. A list of these
errors is provided at the end of the book.

       *       *       *       *       *





         GENESIS

     By H. Beam Piper

     FEATURE NOVELET
     OF LOST WORLDS


     Was this ill-fated expedition the end of a proud, old race--or the
     beginning of a new one?

     There are strange gaps in our records of the past. We find traces
     of man-like things--but, suddenly, man appears, far too much
     developed to be the "next step" in a well-linked chain of
     evolutionary evidence. Perhaps something like the events of this
     story furnishes the answer to the riddle.


Aboard the ship, there was neither day nor night; the hours slipped
gently by, as vistas of star-gemmed blackness slid across the
visiscreens. For the crew, time had some meaning--one watch on duty and
two off. But for the thousand-odd colonists, the men and women who were
to be the spearhead of migration to a new and friendlier planet, it had
none. They slept, and played, worked at such tasks as they could invent,
and slept again, while the huge ship followed her plotted trajectory.

Kalvar Dard, the army officer who would lead them in their new home, had
as little to do as any of his followers. The ship's officers had all the
responsibility for the voyage, and, for the first time in over five
years, he had none at all. He was finding the unaccustomed idleness more
wearying than the hectic work of loading the ship before the blastoff
from Doorsha. He went over his landing and security plans again, and
found no probable emergency unprepared for. Dard wandered about the
ship, talking to groups of his colonists, and found morale even better
than he had hoped. He spent hours staring into the forward visiscreens,
watching the disc of Tareesh, the planet of his destination, grow larger
and plainer ahead.

Now, with the voyage almost over, he was in the cargo-hold just aft of
the Number Seven bulkhead, with six girls to help him, checking
construction material which would be needed immediately after landing.
The stuff had all been checked two or three times before, but there was
no harm in going over it again. It furnished an occupation to fill in
the time; it gave Kalvar Dard an excuse for surrounding himself with
half a dozen charming girls, and the girls seemed to enjoy being with
him. There was tall blonde Olva, the electromagnetician; pert little
Varnis, the machinist's helper; Kyna, the surgeon's-aide; dark-haired
Analea; Dorita, the accountant; plump little Eldra, the armament
technician. At the moment, they were all sitting on or around the desk
in the corner of the store-room, going over the inventory when they were
not just gabbling.

"Well, how about the rock-drill bitts?" Dorita was asking earnestly,
trying to stick to business. "Won't we need them almost as soon as we're
off?"

"Yes, we'll have to dig temporary magazines for our explosives,
small-arms and artillery ammunition, and storage-pits for our
fissionables and radioactives," Kalvar Dard replied. "We'll have to have
safe places for that stuff ready before it can be unloaded; and if we
run into hard rock near the surface, we'll have to drill holes for
blasting-shots."

"The drilling machinery goes into one of those prefabricated sheds,"
Eldra considered. "Will there be room in it for all the bitts, too?"

Kalvar Dard shrugged. "Maybe. If not, we'll cut poles and build racks
for them outside. The bitts are nono-steel; they can be stored in the
open."

"If there are poles to cut," Olva added.

"I'm not worrying about that," Kalvar Dard replied. "We have a pretty
fair idea of conditions on Tareesh; our astronomers have been making
telescopic observations for the past fifteen centuries. There's a pretty
big Arctic ice-cap, but it's been receding slowly, with a wide belt of
what's believed to be open grassland to the south of it, and a belt of
what's assumed to be evergreen forest south of that. We plan to land
somewhere in the northern hemisphere, about the grassland-forest line.
And since Tareesh is richer in water that Doorsha, you mustn't think of
grassland in terms of our wire-grass plains, or forests in terms of our
brush thickets. The vegetation should be much more luxuriant."

"If there's such a large polar ice-cap, the summers ought to be fairly
cool, and the winters cold," Varnis reasoned. "I'd think that would mean
fur-bearing animals. Colonel, you'll have to shoot me something with a
nice soft fur; I like furs."

