The Project Gutenberg EBook of Space Tug, by Murray Leinster

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Space Tug

Author: Murray Leinster

Release Date: June 29, 2006 [EBook #18719]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SPACE TUG ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, LN Yaddanapudi and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







    30 MINUTES TO LIVE!


    Joe Kenmore heard the airlock close with a sickening wheeze and then
    a clank. In desperation he turned toward Haney. "My God, we've been
    locked out!"

    Through the transparent domes of their space helmets, Joe could see
    a look of horror and disbelief pass across Haney's face. But it was
    true! Joe and his crew were locked out of the Space Platform.

    Four thousand miles below circled the Earth. Under Joe's feet rested
    the solid steel hull of his home in outer space. But without tools
    there was no hope of getting back inside. Joe looked at his oxygen
    meter. It registered thirty minutes to live.

    _Space Tug_ by Murray Leinster is an independent sequel to the
    author's popular _Space Platform_, which is also available in a
    POCKET BOOK edition. Both books were published originally by Shasta
    Publishers.


_Of other books by Murray Leinster, the following are science-fiction:_


[A]SPACE PLATFORM

SIDEWISE IN TIME

MURDER MADNESS

THE LAST SPACE SHIP

THE LAWS OF CHANCE
(_anthology_)

GREAT STORIES OF SCIENCE FICTION
(_editor_)

     [A] Published in a POCKET BOOK edition.


_Murray Leinster_


SPACE TUG


_Pocket Books, Inc._
_New York, N. Y._

This Pocket Book includes every word contained in the original,
higher-priced edition. It is printed from brand-new plates made from
completely reset, clear, easy-to-read type.

       *       *       *       *       *

SPACE TUG

Shasta edition published November, 1953

POCKET BOOK edition published January, 1955
1st printing                 November, 1954

All rights reserved. This book, or any part thereof, may not be
reproduced in any manner without written permission of the publisher,
except for brief quotations embodied in critical articles or reviews.
For information, address: Shasta Publishers, 5525 South Blackstone
Avenue, Chicago 37, Illinois.


_Copyright, 1953, by Will F. Jenkins. This_ POCKET BOOK _edition is
published by arrangement with Shasta Publishers. Library of Congress
Catalog Card Number: 53-7292. Printed in the U. S. A._


+--------------------------------------------------------------+
|                      Transcriber's Note                      |
|                                                              |
|  No evidence has been found that the copyright of this book  |
|                       has been renewed.                      |
|                                                              |
+--------------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Pocket Book]

_Notice_: POCKET BOOK editions are published in the United States by
Pocket Books, Inc., in Canada by Pocket Books of Canada, Ltd. Trade
Marks registered in the United States and British Patent Offices by
Pocket Books, Inc., and registered in Canada by Pocket Books of Canada,
Ltd.




_To Joan Patricia Jenkins_




1


To the world at large, of course, it was just another day. A different
sort entirely at different places on the great, round, rolling Earth,
but nothing out of the ordinary. It was Tuesday on one side of the Date
Line and Monday on the other. It was so-and-so's wedding anniversary and
so-and-so's birthday and another so-and-so would get out of jail today.
It was warm, it was cool, it was fair, it was cloudy. One looked forward
to the future with confidence, with hope, with uneasiness or with terror
according to one's temperament and one's geographical location and past
history. To most of the human race this was nothing whatever but just
another day.

But to Joe Kenmore it was a most particular day indeed. Here, it was the
gray hour just before sunrise and already there were hints of reddish
colorings in the sky. It was chilly, and somehow the world seemed still
and breathless. To Joe, the feeling of tensity marked this morning off
from all the other mornings of his experience.

He got up and began to dress, in Major Holt's quarters back of that
giant steel half-globe called the Shed, near the town of Bootstrap. He
felt queer because he felt so much as usual. By all the rules, he should
have experienced a splendid, noble resolution and a fiery exaltation,
and perhaps even an admirable sensation of humility and unworthiness to
accomplish what was expected of him today. And, deep enough inside, he
felt suitable emotion. But it happened that he couldn't take time to
feel things adequately today.

He was much more aware that he wanted some coffee rather badly, and that
he hoped everything would go all right. He looked out of the windows at
empty, dreary desert under the dawn sky. Today was the day he'd be
leaving on a rather important journey. He hoped that Haney and the
Chief and Mike weren't nervous. He also hoped that nobody had gotten at
the fuel for the pushpots, and that the slide-rule crew that had
calculated everything hadn't made any mistakes. He was also bothered
about the steering-rocket fuel, and he was uncomfortable about the
business of releasing the spaceship from the launching cage. There was,
too, cause for worry in the take-off rockets--if the tube linings had
shrunk there would be some rather gruesome consequences--and there could
always be last-minute orders from Washington to delay or even cancel
everything.

In short, his mind was full of strictly practical details. He didn't
have time to feel noble aspirations or sensations of high destiny. He
had a very tricky and exacting job ahead of him.

The sky was growing lighter outside. Stars faded in a paling blue and
the desert showed faint colorings. He tied his necktie. A deep-toned
keening set up off to the southward, over the sere and dreary landscape.
It was a faraway noise, something like the lament of a mountain-sized
calf bleating for its mother. Joe took a deep breath. He looked, but saw
nothing. The noise, though, told him that there'd been no cancellation
of orders so far. He mentally uncrossed one pair of fingers. He couldn't
possibly cross fingers against all foreseeable disasters. There weren't
enough fingers--or toes either. But it was good that so far the schedule
held.

He went downstairs. Major Holt was pacing up and down the living room of
his quarters. Electric lights burned, but already the windows were
brightening. Joe straightened up and tried to look casual. Strictly
speaking, Major Holt was a family friend who happened also to be
security officer here, in charge of protecting what went on in the giant
construction Shed. He'd had a sufficiently difficult time of it in the
past, and the difficulties might keep on in the future. He was also the
ranking officer here and consequently the immediate boss of Joe's
enterprise. Today's affair was still highly precarious. The whole thing
was controversial and uncertain and might spoil the career of somebody
with stars on his collar if it should fail. So nobody in the high brass
wanted the responsibility. If everything went well, somebody suitable
would take the credit and the bows. Meanwhile Major Holt was boss by
default.

He looked sharply at Joe. "Morning."

"Good morning, sir," said Joe. Major Holt's daughter Sally had a sort of
understanding with Joe, but the major hadn't the knack of cordiality,
and nobody felt too much at ease with him. Besides, Joe was wearing a
uniform for the first time this morning. There were only eight such
uniforms in the world, so far. It was black whipcord, with an Eisenhower
jacket, narrow silver braid on the collar and cuffs, and a silver rocket
for a badge where a plane pilot wears his wings. It was strictly
practical. Against accidental catchings in machinery, the trousers were
narrow and tucked into ten-inch soft leather boots, and the wide leather
belt had flat loops for the attachment of special equipment. Its width
was a brace against the strains of acceleration. Sally had had much to
do with its design.

But it hadn't yet been decided by the Pentagon whether the Space
Exploration Project would be taken over by the Army or the Navy or the
Air Corps, so Joe wore no insignia of rank. Technically he was still a
civilian.

The deep-toned noise to the south had become a howl, sweeping closer and
trailed by other howlings.

"The pushpots are on the way over, as you can hear," said the major
detachedly, in the curious light of daybreak and electric bulbs
together. "Your crew is up and about. So far there seems to be no hitch.
You're feeling all right for the attempt today?"

"If you want the truth, sir, I'd feel better with about ten years'
practical experience behind me. But my gang and myself--we've had all
the training we can get without an actual take-off. We're the
best-trained crew to try it. I think we'll manage."

"I see," said the major. "You'll do your best."

"We may have to do better than that," admitted Joe wrily.

"True enough. You may." The major paused. "You're well aware that there
are--ah--people who do not altogether like the idea of the United States
possessing an artificial satellite of Earth."

"I ought to know it," admitted Joe.

The Earth's second, man-constructed moon--out in space for just six
weeks now--didn't seem nowadays like the bitterly contested achievement
it actually was. From Earth it was merely a tiny speck of light in the
sky, identifiable for what it was only because it moved so swiftly and
serenely from the sunset toward the east, or from night's darkness into
the dawn-light. But it had been fought bitterly before it was launched.
It was first proposed to the United Nations, but even discussion in the
Council was vetoed. So the United States had built it alone. Yet the
nations which objected to it as an international project liked it even
less as a national one, and they'd done what they could to wreck it.

The building of the great steel hull now out there in emptiness had been
fought more bitterly, by more ruthless and more highly trained
saboteurs, than any other enterprise in history. There'd been two
attempts to blast it with atomic bombs. But it was high aloft, rolling
grandly around the Earth, so close to its primary that its period was
little more than four hours; and it rose in the west and set in the east
six times a day.

Today Joe would try to get a supply ship up to it, a very small
rocket-driven cargo ship named Pelican One. The crew of the Platform
needed food and air and water--and especially the means of self-defense.
Today's take-off would be the first attempt at a rocket-lift to space.

"The enemies of the Platform haven't given up," said the major
formidably. "And they used spectroscopes on the Platform's rocket fumes.
Apparently they've been able to duplicate our fuel."

Joe nodded.

Major Holt went on: "For more than a month Military Intelligence has
been aware that rockets were under construction behind the Iron Curtain.
They will be guided missiles, and they will carry atom bomb heads. One
or more may be finished any day. When they're finished, you can bet
that they'll be used against the Platform. And you will carry up the
first arms for the Platform. Your ship carries half a dozen long-range
interceptor rockets to handle any attack from Earth. It's vitally
important for them to be delivered."

"They'll attack the Platform?" demanded Joe angrily. "That's war!"

"Not if they deny guilt," said the major ironically, "and if we have
nothing to gain by war. The Platform is intended to defend the peace of
the world. If it is destroyed, we won't defend the peace of the world by
going to war over it. But while the Platform can defend itself, it is
not likely that anyone will dare to make war. So you have a very
worthwhile mission. I suggest that you have breakfast and report to the
Shed. I'm on my way there now."

Joe said, "Yes, sir."

The major started for the door. Then he stopped. He hesitated, and said
abruptly, "If my security measures have failed, Joe, you'll be killed.
If there has been sabotage or carelessness, it will be my fault."

"I'm sure, sir, that everything anybody could do--"

"Everything anybody can do to destroy you has been done," said the major
grimly. "Not only sabotage, Joe, but blunders and mistakes and
stupidities. That always happens. But--I've done my best. I suspect I'm
asking your forgiveness if my best hasn't been good enough."

Then, before Joe could reply, the major went hurriedly away.

Joe frowned for a moment. It occurred to him that it must be pretty
tough to be responsible for the things that other men's lives depend
on--when you can't share their danger. But just then the smell of coffee
reached his nostrils. He trailed the scent. There was a coffeepot
steaming on the table in the dining-room. There was a note on a plate.

     _Good luck. I'll see you in the Shed.

     Sally_

Joe was relieved. Sally Holt had been somewhere around underfoot all
his life. She was a swell girl, but he was grateful that he didn't have
to talk to her just now.

He poured coffee and looked at his watch. He went to the window. The
faraway howling was much nearer, and dawn had definitely arrived. Small
cloudlets in a pale blue sky were tinted pinkish by the rising sun.
Patches of yucca and mesquite and sage out beyond the officers' quarters
area stretched away to a far-off horizon. They were now visibly
different in color from the red-yellow earth between them, and cast
long, streaky shadows. The cause of the howling was still invisible.

But Joe cared nothing for that. He stared skyward, searching. And he saw
what he looked for.

There was a small bright sliver of sunlight high aloft. It moved slowly
