The Project Gutenberg EBook of Time and Time Again, by Henry Beam Piper

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Time and Time Again

Author: Henry Beam Piper

Illustrator: Napoli

Release Date: July 15, 2006 [EBook #18831]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TIME AND TIME AGAIN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                          TIME AND TIME AGAIN

                            BY H. BEAM PIPER

                         Illustrated by Napoli

[Transcriber's note:  This etext was produced from Astounding Science
Fiction April 1947. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
the copyright on this publication was renewed.]


     _To upset the stable, mighty stream of time would probably take an
     enormous concentration of energy. And it's not to be expected that
     a man would get a second chance at life. But an atomic might
     accomplish both--_


Blinded by the bomb-flash and numbed by the narcotic injection, he could
not estimate the extent of his injuries, but he knew that he was dying.
Around him, in the darkness, voices sounded as through a thick wall.

"They mighta left mosta these Joes where they was. Half of them won't
even last till the truck comes."

"No matter; so long as they're alive, they must be treated," another
voice, crisp and cultivated, rebuked. "Better start taking names, while
we're waiting."

"Yes, sir." Fingers fumbled at his identity badge. "Hartley, Allan;
Captain, G5, Chem. Research AN/73/D. Serial, SO-23869403J."

"Allan Hartley!" The medic officer spoke in shocked surprise. "Why, he's
the man who wrote 'Children of the Mist', 'Rose of Death', and
'Conqueror's Road'!"

He tried to speak, and must have stirred; the corpsman's voice
sharpened.

"Major, I think he's part conscious. Mebbe I better give him 'nother
shot."

"Yes, yes; by all means, sergeant."

Something jabbed Allan Hartley in the back of the neck. Soft billows of
oblivion closed in upon him, and all that remained to him was a tiny
spark of awareness, glowing alone and lost in a great darkness.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Spark grew brighter. He was more than a something that merely knew
that it existed. He was a man, and he had a name, and a military rank,
and memories. Memories of the searing blue-green flash, and of what he
had been doing outside the shelter the moment before, and memories of
the month-long siege, and of the retreat from the north, and memories of
the days before the War, back to the time when he had been little Allan
Hartley, a schoolboy, the son of a successful lawyer, in Williamsport,
Pennsylvania.

His mother he could not remember; there was only a vague impression of
the house full of people who had tried to comfort him for something he
could not understand. But he remembered the old German woman who had
kept house for his father, afterward, and he remembered his bedroom,
with its chintz-covered chairs, and the warm-colored patch quilt on the
old cherry bed, and the tan curtains at the windows, edged with dusky
red, and the morning sun shining through them. He could almost see them,
now.

He blinked. He _could_ see them!

       *       *       *       *       *

For a long time, he lay staring at them unbelievingly, and then he
deliberately closed his eyes and counted ten seconds, and as he counted,
terror gripped him. He was afraid to open them again, lest he find
himself blind, or gazing at the filth and wreckage of a blasted city,
but when he reached ten, he forced himself to look, and gave a sigh of
relief. The sunlit curtains and the sun-gilded mist outside were still
there.

He reached out to check one sense against another, feeling the rough
monk's cloth and the edging of maroon silk thread. They were tangible as
well as visible. Then he saw that the back of his hand was unscarred.
There should have been a scar, souvenir of a rough-and-tumble brawl of
his cub reporter days. He examined both hands closely. An instant later,
