The Project Gutenberg EBook of Ralestone Luck, by Andre Norton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Ralestone Luck

Author: Andre Norton

Illustrator: James Reid

Release Date: July 13, 2006 [EBook #18817]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RALESTONE LUCK ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Jason Isbell, Mary Meehan and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                             RALESTONE LUCK

                             By ANDRE NORTON

                     _Author of_ The Prince Commands

                        ILLUSTRATED BY JAMES REID


D. APPLETON-CENTURY COMPANY
INCORPORATED
NEW YORK  1938  LONDON

Copyright, 1938, by
D. Appleton-Century Company, Inc.

All rights reserved. This book, or parts thereof, must not be reproduced
in any form without permission of the publisher.

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA


    TO

    D. B. N.

    _In return for many miles of proof so diligently read_




[Illustration: _"How hold ye Lorne?" Rupert's softly spoken question
brought the well-remembered answer to Val's lips: "By the oak leaf, by
the sea wave, by the broadsword blade, thus hold we Lorne!"_]




CONTENTS


I. THE RALESTONES COME HOME

II. THE LUCK OF THE LORDS OF LORNE

III. THE RALESTONES ENTERTAIN AN UNOBTRUSIVE VISITOR

IV. PISTOLS FOR TWO--COFFEE FOR ONE

V. THEIR TENANT DISCOVERS THE RALESTONES

VI. SATAN GOES A-HUNTING AND FINDS WORK FOR IDLE HANDS

VII. BY OUR LUCK!

VIII. GREAT-UNCLE RICK WALKS THE HALL

IX. PORTRAIT OF A LADY AND A GENTLEMAN

X. INTO THE SWAMP

XI. RALESTONES TO THE RESCUE!

XII. THE RALESTONES BRING HOME A RELUCTANT GUEST

XIII. ON SUCH A NIGHT AS THIS--

XIV. PIRATE WAYS ARE HIDDEN WAYS

XV. PIECES OF EIGHT--RALESTONES' FATE!

XVI. RALESTONES STAND TOGETHER

XVII. THE RETURN OF RICK RALESTONE

XVIII. RUPERT BRINGS HOME HIS MARCHIONESS




ILLUSTRATIONS

"How hold ye Lorne?" Rupert's softly spoken question brought the
well-remembered answer to Val's lips: "By the oak leaf, by the sea wave,
by the broadsword blade, thus hold we Lorne!"

"I'se Lucy," she stated, thoroughly at her ease. "An' dis is Letty-Lou"

Ricky lifted off the cover. Val stared at the canvas

"It's a genuine Audubon," Charity said

_Zzzzzrupp_! Satan was industriously ripping the remnants of lining from
its interior

The canoe floated almost of its own volition into a dead and distorted
strip of country

At the bayou at last, they wriggled Jeems awkwardly into the boat

Then came a tree burdened with a small 'coon which stared at the boy
piteously, its eyes green in the light

Ricky held aloft a great war sword. There could be no doubt in any of
them--the Luck of Lorne had returned




RALESTONE LUCK




    _How hold ye Lorne?_

    By the oak leaf,
    By the sea wave,
    By the broadsword blade,
    Thus hold we Lorne!

    _The oak leaf is dust,
    The sea wave is gone,
    The broadsword is rust,
    How now hold ye Lorne?_

    By our Luck, thus hold we Lorne!




CHAPTER I

THE RALESTONES COME HOME


"Once upon a time two brave princes and a beautiful princess set out to
make their fortunes--" began the dark-haired, dark-eyed boy by the
roadster.

"Royalty is out of fashion," corrected Ricky Ralestone somewhat
indifferently. "Can't you do better than that?" She gave her small, pert
hat an exasperated tweak which brought the unoffending bowl-shaped bit
of white felt into its proper position over her right eyebrow. "How long
does it take Rupert to ask a single simple question?"

Her brother Val watched the gas gage on the instrument board of the
roadster fluctuate wildly as the attendant of the station shook the hose
to speed the flow of the last few drops. Five gallons--a dollar ten. Did
he have that much? He began to assemble various small hoards of change
from different pockets.

"Do you think we're going to like this?" Ricky waved her hand vaguely in
a gesture which included a dilapidated hot-dog stand and a stretch of
road white-hot under the steady baking of the sun.

"Well, I think that Pirate's Haven is slightly different from our
present surroundings. Where's your proper pride? Not everyone can be
classed among the New Poor," Val observed judiciously.

"Nobility in the bread line." His sister sniffed with what she fondly
believed was the air of a Van Astor dowager.

"Nobility?"

"We never relinquished the title, did we? Rupert's still the Marquess of
Lorne."

"After some two hundred years in America I am afraid that we would find
ourselves strangers in England. And Lorne crumbled to dust long ago."

"But he's still Marquess of Lorne," she persisted.

"All right. And what does that make you?"

"Lady Richanda, of course, silly. Can't you remember the wording of the
old charter? And you're Viscount--"

"Wrong there," Val corrected her. "I'm only a lord, by courtesy, unless
we can bash Rupert on the head some dark night and chuck him into the
bayou."

"Lord Valerius." She rolled it upon her tongue. "Marquess, Lady, and
Lord Val, out to seek their fortunes. Pity we can't do it in the
traditional family way."

"But we can't, you know," he protested laughingly. "I believe that
piracy is no longer looked upon with favor by the more solid members of
any community. Though plank-walking is an idea to keep in mind when the
bill collectors start to draw in upon us."

"Here comes Rupert at last. Rupert," she raised her voice as their elder
brother opened the door by the driver's seat, "shall we all go and be
pirates? Val has some lovely gory ideas."

"Not just yet anyway--we still have a roof over our heads," he answered
as he slid in behind the wheel. "We should have taken the right turn a
mile back."

"Bother!" Ricky surveyed as much of her face as she could see in the
postage-stamp mirror of her compact. "I don't think I'm going to like
Louisiana."

"Maybe Louisiana won't care for you either," Val offered slyly. "After
all, we dyed-in-the-wool Yanks coming to live in the deep South--"

"Speak for yourself, Val Ralestone." She applied a puff carefully to the
tip of her upturned nose. "Since we've got this barn of a place on our
hands, we might as well live in it. Too bad you couldn't have persuaded
our artist tenant to sign another lease, Rupert."

"He's gone to spend a year in Italy. The place is in fairly good
condition though. LeFleur said that as long as we don't use the left
wing and close off the state bedrooms, we can manage nicely."

"State bedrooms--" Val drew a deep breath which was meant to be one of
reverence but which turned into a sneeze as the roadster's wheels raised
the dust. "How does it feel to own such magnificence, Rupert?"

"Not so good," he replied honestly. "A house as big as Pirate's Haven is
a burden if you don't have the cash to keep it up properly. Though this
artist chap did make a lot of improvements on his own."

"But think of the Long Hall--" began Ricky, rolling her eyes heavenward.

"And just what do you know about the Long Hall?" demanded Rupert.

"Why, that's where dear Great-great-uncle Rick's ghost is supposed to
walk, isn't it?" she asked innocently. "I hope that our late tenant
didn't scare him away. It gives one such a blue-blooded feeling to think
of having an active ghost on the premises. A member of one's own family,
too!"

"Sure. Teach him--or it--some parlor tricks and we'll show it--or
him--off every afternoon between three and four. We might even be able
to charge admission and recoup the family fortune," Val suggested
brightly.

"Have you no reverence?" demanded his sister. "And besides, ghosts only
walk at night."

"Now that's something we'll have to investigate," Val interrupted her.
"Do ghosts have union rules? I mean, I wouldn't want Great-great-uncle
Rick to march up and down the carriage drive with a sign reading, 'The
Ralestones are unfair to ghosts,' or anything like that."

"We'll have to use the Long Hall, of course," cut in Rupert, as usual
ignoring their nonsense. "And the old summer drawing-room. But we can
shut up the dining-room and the ball-room. We'll eat in the kitchen, and
that and a bedroom apiece--"

"I suppose there are bathrooms, or at least a bathroom," his brother
interrupted. "Because I don't care to rush down to the bayou for a good
brisk plunge every time I get my face dirty."

"Harrison put in a bathroom at his own expense last fall."

"For which blessed be the name of Harrison. If he hadn't gone to Italy,
he would have rebuilt the house. How soon do we get there? This touring
is not what I thought it might be--"

The crease which had appeared so recently between Rupert's eyes
deepened.

"Leg hurt, Val?" he asked quietly, glancing at the slim figure sharing
his seat.

"No. I'm expressing curiosity this time, old man, not just a whine. But
if we're going to be this far off the main highway--"

"Oh, it's not far from the city road. We ought to be seeing the
gate-posts any moment now."

"Prophet!" Ricky leaned forward between them. "See there!"

Two gray stone posts, as firmly planted by time as the avenue of
live-oaks they headed, showed clearly in the afternoon light. And from
the nearest, deep carven in the stone, a jagged-toothed skull, crowned
and grinning, stared blankly at the three in the shabby car. Beneath it
ran the insolent motto of an ancient and disreputable clan, "What I
want--I take!"

"This is the place all right--I recognize Joe there." Val pointed to the
crest. "Good old Joe, always laughing."

Ricky made a face. "Horrid old thing. I don't see why we couldn't have
had a swan or something nice to swank about."

"But then the Lords of Lorne were hardly a nice lot in their prime," Val
reminded her. "Well, Rupert, let's see the rest."

The car followed a graveled drive between tall bushes which would have
been the better for a pruning. Then the road made a sudden curve and
they came out upon a crescent of lawn bordering upon a stone-paved
terrace three steps above. And on the terrace stood the home a Ralestone
had not set foot in for over fifty years--Pirate's Haven.

"It looks--" Ricky stared up, "why, it looks just like the picture Mr.
Harrison painted!"

"Which proves why he is now in Italy," Val returned. "But he did capture
it on canvas."

"Gray stone--and those diamond-paned windows--and that squatty tower.
But it isn't like a Southern home at all! It's some old, old place out
of England."

"Because it was built by an exile," said Rupert softly. "An exile who
loved his home so well that he labored five years in the wilderness to
build its duplicate. Those little diamond-paned windows were once
protected with shutters an inch thick, and the place was a fort in
Indian times. But it is strange to this country. That's why it's one of
the show places. LeFleur asked me if we would be willing to keep up the
custom of throwing the state rooms open to the public one day a month."

"And shall we?" asked Ricky.

"We'll see. Well, don't you want to see the inside as well as the out?"

"Of course! Val, you lazy thing, get out!"

"Certainly, m'lady." He swung open the door and climbed out stiffly.
Although he wouldn't have confessed it for any reason, his leg had been
aching dully for hours.

"Do you know," Ricky hesitated on the first terrace step, bending down
to put aside a trail of morning-glory vine which clutched at her ankle,
"I've just remembered!"

"What?" Rupert looked up from the grid where he was unstrapping their
luggage.

"That we are the very first Ralestones to--to come home since
Grandfather Miles rode away in 1867."

"And why the sudden dip into ancient history?" Val inquired as he limped
around to help Rupert.

"I don't know," her eyes were fast upon moss-greened wall and ponderous
door hewn of a single slab of oak, "except--well, we are coming home at
last. I wonder if--if they know. All those others. Rick and Miles, the
first Rupert and Richard and--"

"That spitfire, the Lady Richanda?" Rupert smiled. "Perhaps they do. No,
leave the bags here, Val. Let's see the house first."

Together the Ralestones crossed the terrace and came to stand by the
front door which still bore faint scars left by Indian hatchets. But
Rupert stooped to insert a very modern key into a very modern lock.
There was a click and the door swung inward before his push.

"The Long Hall!" They stood in something of a hesitant huddle at the end
of a long stone-floored room. Half-way down its length a wooden
staircase led up to the second floor, and directly opposite that a great
fireplace yawned mightily, black and bare.

A leather-covered lounge was directly before this, flanked by two square
chairs. And by the stairs was an oaken marriage chest. Save for two skin
rugs, these were all the furnishings.

But Ricky had crossed hesitatingly to that cavernous fireplace and was
standing there looking up as her brothers joined her.

