Project Gutenberg's The Return, by H. Beam Piper and John J. McGuire

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Return

Author: H. Beam Piper and John J. McGuire

Illustrator: Kelly Freas

Release Date: July 17, 2006 [EBook #18855]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RETURN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Sankar Viswanathan, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                         Transcriber's Note:

        This etext was produced from Astounding Science Fiction,
        January, 1954. Extensive research did not uncover any
        evidence that the copyright on this publication was renewed.




                              THE RETURN



                           BY H. BEAM PIPER

                                 AND

                           JOHN J. McGUIRE


                            [Illustration: ]

       *       *       *       *       *




             _The isolated little group they found were doing fine--
             but their religion was most strange--and yet quite logical!_

                      Illustrated by Kelly Freas


Altamont cast a quick, routine, glance at the instrument panels and
then looked down through the transparent nose of the helicopter at the
yellow-brown river five hundred feet below. Next he scraped the last
morsel from his plate and ate it.

"What did you make this out of, Jim?" he asked. "I hope you kept
notes, while you were concocting it. It's good."

"The two smoked pork chops left over from yesterday evening," Loudons
said, "and that bowl of rice that's been taking up space in the
refrigerator the last couple of days together with a little egg
powder, and some milk. I ground the chops up and mixed them with the
rice and the other stuff. Then added some bacon, to make grease to fry
it in."

Altamont chuckled. That was Loudons, all right; he could take a few
left-overs, mess them together, pop them in the skillet, and have a
meal that would turn the chef back at the Fort green with envy. He
filled his cup and offered the pot.

"Caffchoc?" he asked.

Loudons held his cup out to be filled, blew on it, sipped, and then
hunted on the ledge under the desk for the butt of the cigar he had
half-smoked the evening before.

"Did you ever drink coffee, Monty?" the socio-psychologist asked,
getting the cigar drawing to his taste.

"Coffee? No. I've read about it, of course. We'll have to organize an
expedition to Brazil, some time, to get seeds, and try raising some."

Loudons blew a smoke ring toward the rear of the cabin.

"A much overrated beverage," he replied. "We found some, once, when I
was on that expedition into Idaho, in what must have been the
stockroom of a hotel. Vacuum-packed in moisture-proof containers, and
free from radioactivity. It wasn't nearly as good as caffchoc. But
then, I suppose, a pre-bustup coffee drinker couldn't stomach this
stuff we're drinking." He looked forward, up the river they were
following. "Get anything on the radio?" he asked. "I noticed you took
us up to about ten thousand, while I was shaving."

Altamont got out his pipe and tobacco pouch, filling the former slowly
and carefully.

"Not a whisper. I tried Colony Three, in the Ozarks, and I tried to
call in that tribe of workers in Louisiana; I couldn't get either."

"Maybe if we tried to get a little more power on the set--"

That was Loudons, too, Altamont thought. There wasn't a better man at
the Fort, when it came to dealing with people, but confront him with a
problem about things, and he was lost. That was one of the reasons why
he and the stocky, phlegmatic social scientist made such a good team,
he thought. As far as he, himself, was concerned, people were just a
mysterious, exasperatingly unpredictable, order of things which were
subject to no known natural laws. That was about the way Loudons
thought of things; he couldn't psychoanalyze them.

He gestured with his pipe toward the nuclear-electric conversion unit,
between the control-cabin and the living quarters in the rear of the
box-car-sized helicopter.

"We have enough power back there to keep this windmill in the air
twenty-four hours a day, three hundred and sixty-five days a year, for
the next fifteen years," he said. "We just don't have enough radio. If
I'd step up the power on this set any more, it'd burn out before I
could say, 'Altamont calling Fort Ridgeway.'"

"How far are we from Pittsburgh, now?" Loudons wanted to know.

Altamont looked across the cabin at the big map of the United States,
with its red and green and blue and yellow patchwork of vanished
political divisions, and the transparent overlay on which they had
plotted their course. The red line started at Fort Ridgeway, in what
had once been Arizona It angled east by a little north, to Colony
Three, in northern Arkansas; then sharply northeast to St. Louis and
its lifeless ruins; then Chicago and Gary, where little bands of Stone
Age reversions stalked and fought and ate each other; Detroit, where
things that had completely forgotten that they were human emerged from
their burrows only at night; Cleveland, where a couple of cobalt bombs
must have landed in the lake and drenched everything with
radioactivity that still lingered after two centuries; Akron, where
vegetation was only beginning to break through the glassy slag;
Cincinnati, where they had last stopped--

       *       *       *       *       *

"How's the leg, this morning, Jim?" he asked.

"Little stiff. Doesn't hurt much, though."

"Why, we're about fifty miles, as we follow the river, and that's
relatively straight." He looked down through the transparent nose of
the 'copter at a town, now choked with trees that grew among tumbled
walls. "I think that's Aliquippa."

Loudons looked and shrugged, then looked again and pointed.

