The Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific American, Volume 40, No. 13,
March 29, 1879, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Scientific American, Volume 40, No. 13, March 29, 1879
       A Weekly Journal of Practical Information, Art, Science,
       Mechanics, Chemistry, and Manufactures

Author: Various

Release Date: July 18, 2006 [EBook #18866]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, VOLUME ***




Produced by Leonard D Johnson, Juliet Sutherland and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





[Illustration: Issue Title.]




SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN




A WEEKLY JOURNAL OF PRACTICAL INFORMATION, ART, SCIENCE,
MECHANICS, CHEMISTRY, AND MANUFACTURES.




NEW YORK, MARCH 29, 1879.

Vol. XL., No. 13. [NEW SERIES.]

$3.20 PER ANNUM. [POSTAGE PREPAID.]

       *       *       *       *       *




SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN.

ESTABLISHED 1845.

MUNN & CO., Editors and Proprietors.

PUBLISHED WEEKLY AT

NO. 37 PARK ROW, NEW YORK.


O. D. MUNN.     A. E. BEACH.

TERMS FOR THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN.

One copy, one year, postage included       $3 20
One copy, six months, postage included      1 60

CLUBS.--One extra copy of THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN will be supplied
gratis for every club of five subscribers at $3.20 each; additional
copies at same proportionate rate. Postage prepaid.

Single copies of any desired number of the SUPPLEMENT sent to one
address on receipt of 10 cents.

Remit by postal order. Address

          MUNN & CO., 37 Park Row, New York.


THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT

is a distinct paper from the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN. THE SUPPLEMENT
is issued weekly. Every number contains 16 octavo pages, with handsome
cover, uniform in size with SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN. Terms of subscription
for SUPPLEMENT, $5.00 a year, postage paid, to subscribers. Single copies
10 cents. Sold by all news dealers throughout the country.

COMBINED RATES.--The SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN and SUPPLEMENT will be sent
for one year, postage free, on receipt of _seven dollars_. Both papers
to one address or different addresses, as desired.

The safest way to remit is by draft, postal order, or registered letter.

          ADDRESS MUNN & CO., 37 PARK ROW, N. Y.


SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN EXPORT EDITION.

The SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN Export Edition is a large and splendid
periodical, issued once a month. Each number contains about one
hundred large quarto pages, profusely illustrated, embracing: (1.)
Most of the plates and pages of the four preceding weekly issues of
the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, with its splendid engravings and valuable
information; (2.) Commercial, trade, and manufacturing announcements
of leading houses. Terms for Export Edition, $5.00 a year, sent
prepaid to any part of the world. Single copies 50 cents.
Manufacturers and others who desire to secure foreign trade may have
large, and handsomely displayed announcements published in this
edition at a very moderate cost.

The SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN Export Edition has a large guaranteed
circulation in all commercial places throughout the world. Address
MUNN & CO., 37 Park Row, New York.

VOL. XL., NO. 13. [NEW SERIES.] _THIRTY-FOURTH YEAR_.

NEW YORK, SATURDAY, MARCH 29, 1879.

       *       *       *       *       *




CONTENTS.


(Illustrated articles are marked with an asterisk.)

  Africa crossed again                                      193
  Aluminum                                                  197
  Barometer, aneroid                                        201
  Bolt, door, improved*                                     198
  Bread, snow-raised                                        199
  Buffalo, domestication of the                             197
  Carpet beetle, remedy for the                             195
  Chimney flues                                             198
  Clocks, pneumatic                                         196
  Cooper, Peter, as an inventor                             193
  Crusher, ore, novel*                                      194
  Electricity, statical, phenom. in                         194
  Flour, banana                                             195
  Furnace, imp., for burn'g garbage*                        198
  Hardware, English & American                              201
  Ice cave of Decorah, Iowa                                 196
  Inventions, new agricultural                              199
  Iron, advance in                                          201
  Light, albo-carbon                                        201
  Magnetism, curious facts in                               194
  Motor, Gary, the*                                         196
  Natural science, charms of                                200
  Neutral line, Gary's                                      196
  Notes and queries                                         203
  Patent laws                                               192
  Patents, American, recent                                 194
  Pen, stencil, new*                                        195
  People, a strange                                         195
  Phosphorescence                                           199
  Plants protected by insects                               201
  Pleuro-pneumonia                                          192
  Railway, Vesuvius                                         200
  Reading and eyesight                                      199
  Reading, taste for                                        193
  Regulator, engine, novel*                                 195
  Spain a field for machinery                               193
  Sponges, glass*                                           200
  Table, ironing, new*                                      194
  Telegraph, writing                                        196
  Telegraph, writing, Cowper's                              197
  Telegraphy, ocean, progress of                            195
  Tiller, steam, new*                                       191
  Tree, pottery                                             200
  Vase, Greek, ancient*                                     199

       *       *       *       *       *




TABLE OF CONTENTS OF

THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT

NO. 169,

FOR THE WEEK ENDING MARCH 29, 1879.

Price 10 cents. For sale by all newsdealers.


I. ENGINEERING AND MECHANICS.--The Herreshoff Torpedo Boat, recently
built at Bristol, R. I., for the British Government. The novelties in
the placing of the screw, etc. The Peculiar Boiler. 4
figures.--Improved Hopper Steam Dredger. 2 figures.--The St. Gothard
Tunnel.--The Beacon Tower of Lavezzi. 3 figures.

II. ARCHITECTURE.--Bath Abbey Church. Full page illustration.

III. TECHNOLOGY.--The Achison Stone Cutting Machine. 1 engraving.--The
Deep Mines of the World.--Shoemakers' Wax.--Gruber's New Method of
Germination. 1 engraving.--Improved Process for Treating Wood, etc.,
for Paper Manufacture.--Bronzing Plaster of Paris Casts.--Sal Soda for
Unhairing Hides and Skins.--Sieburger's Paste.--To Tan Lace Leather
with Softsoap.

Practical Dyeing Recipes: Blue white zephyr, Scotch blue on worsted,
Scotch green on worsted, jacquineaux on worsted, drab on worsted, gold
on venetian carpet yarn, red brown slubbing, scarlet braid, slate
braid, light drab on cotton, blue on cotton, brown on cotton, chrome
orange on cotton carpet yarn, black on common mixed carpet yarn for
filling, black on cotton and wool mixed yarn.

Damar Varnish for Negatives.--To Make Vignetters by Means of
Gelatino-Chromate.--Resorcine Colors.--Phosphate Soaps.--Substitution
of Different Metals in Ultramarine Colors.--A Harmless Green for Paper
Hangings.--Siegwart's Bath for Etching Glass.--Composition of French
Bronzes.--A New Enemy to the Tea Plant.--The Bradford Oil Sand.

IV. CHEMISTRY AND METALLURGY.--Apparatus for Titration, 1
figure.--Palladium.--Haemocyanin.--Test for Alcohol in Ethereal Oils
and Chloroform.--Reaction of Tartaric and Citric Acid.--A Peculiar
Observation.--Insolubility of Iodate of Lead.--Mode of Preventing the
Contamination of Water with Lead.--Separating Phosphorus from Iron and
Steel.--Production of Alcohol without Fermentation.

V. ELECTRICITY, LIGHT, HEAT, ETC.--Some Facts in regard to Telescopic
and Stereoscopic Vision.--The Centenary of the Birth of Sir Humphry
Davy. His boyish days. His first chemical experiments. His first
lecture at the Royal Institution. A very entertaining biographical
sketch.--Light and Heat in Gas Flames.--Nickel Needles for
Compasses.--The Nature of the Elements.--A New Compound Prism for
Direct Vision Spectroscopes.

VI. MEDICINE AND HYGIENE.--Filaria in the Eye. By CHAS. S. TURNBULL,
M. D.--The Species of Tapeworm now Prevalent.--Nitrous Oxide under
Pressure.

VII. NATURAL HISTORY, GEOLOGY, ETC.--A Gigantic American Deep-sea
Crustacean, 1 engraving.--Glaciers in the United States.--The Toulomne
Cave.--Archaeological Explorations in Tennessee. By F. W. PUTNAM. 6
figures.--Memorably Cold Winters.--Life at Timber Line. By Professor
C. E. ROBINS, Summit, Colorado.--The Walled Lake in Iowa.

VIII. ASTRONOMY.--Is the Moon Inhabited? By CAMILLE FLAMMARION. The
various opinions that have been held in regard to the moon. The best
we can do with our present telescopes. The means we possess for
judging of the condition of the moon. Recent changes on the moon.
Photographs of the moon and their defects. Facts that have been
observed by the persevering eyes of astronomers.

       *       *       *       *       *




A NEW STEAM TILLER.


Steam is now made to perform almost everything in the way of heavy
labor, to the saving of muscle and energy that may be more profitably
employed; and since inventive genius has devised means of governing
steam with absolute accuracy, there seems to be no limit to its
economical application.

A recent invention in steam engineering, which exhibits in a marked
degree the controllability and adaptability of steam, is Mr. Herbert
Wadsworth's steam tiller, an engraving of which we present herewith.

[Illustration: Fig. 1, 2, 3.]

This machine (Fig. 1) is provided with a steam cylinder, similar to
the cylinder of a steam engine, containing a piston, the rod of which
is attached to a crosshead, A, that slides on ways, B, secured to the
bed supporting the cylinder.

The tiller, D, as it is carried to starboard or port, slides through a
socket, E, pivoted to the crosshead.

The motion of the rudder is communicated to the steam cut-off by means
of the shaft, C, crank, J, rod, K, crank, I, and the hollow valve
spindle. When the tiller is amidships the valve handle, H, is at right
angles to the cylinder, and parallel to the tiller. By moving the
lever, H, to right or left, steam is admitted to one end or the other
of the cylinder, which, acting on the tiller through the piston,
piston rod, and crosshead, moves the rudder; and when the rudder
reaches the desired position the cut-off will have been moved the
amount necessary to prevent further entrance of steam. When the rudder
is influenced by the waves or by the expansion or contraction of
steam, the cut-off alters its position in relation to the valve and
automatically arranges the steam passages so that the piston is
returned to its proper position. The details of the cut-off are shown
in Fig. 2; the valve, G, which covers the cut-off, F, acts like a four
way cock. The spindle of the cut-off, F, is connected with the lever,
I, and is moved by the rudder, as already described. By enlarging or
gradually narrowing the ends of the steam ports great rigidity or
elasticity may be given to the hold of this engine, according to the
requirements of the particular vessel.

Few and simple as are the parts of this machine it is possible, by
balancing the valves and suiting the diameter of the cylinder to the
work to be performed, to overcome great resistances with a slight
effort. The inventor says that this system of valves is considered by
experts to be novel and very valuable.

In Fig. 3 is shown a pattern of a slide valve suited to special
purposes. Its working is essentially the same as that of the valve
already described. The ports are set side by side, parallel with the
sides of the valve. The supply port is in the middle, the other ports
lead to opposite ends of the cylinder.

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]

In Fig. 4 is shown another application of the controlling valve and
cut-off described above. Two oscillating steam cylinders are employed
in working the rudder. They are placed on opposite sides of the chest,
A, and are supplied with steam through the controlling valve, B. The
piston rods of the two cylinders are connected with cranks placed on
opposite ends of the shaft, C, at right angles to each other. Upon
this shaft, half-way between the pillow blocks which support it, there
is a worm which engages a toothed sector, D, on the rudder-post, E. To
an extension of the rudder-post is secured an arm, F, which is
connected with the arm, G, of the controlling valve. By shifting the
lever, H, the supply of steam to the two cylinders may be increased or
diminished, or its direction may be changed, so that the engines will
be reversed or stopped. This engine is remarkable for its simplicity.
The cylinders may be detached and changed if required, one size of bed
answering for three different sizes of cylinder, which may vary only
in diameter, the stroke being the same, so that the castings for
engines of different power are the same except in the matter of the
cylinders and pistons, and all the parts are interchangeable--a
feature of modern engine building that cannot be too highly valued.

Further information may be obtained from Herbert Wadsworth, 26
Merchants' Bank Building, 28 State street, Boston, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *




HOW OUR PATENT LAWS PROMOTE AND IMPROVE AMERICAN INDUSTRIES.


On another page we print in full a most suggestive paper recently
read before the Manchester (Eng.) Scientific and Mechanical Society,
by Mr. Frederick Smith, a prominent builder of that city, contrasting
the qualities, styles, and prices of American and English builders'
hardware--a paper which the _Ironmonger_ pronounces one of the most
serious indictments yet preferred against British workmanship in that
department.

The field covered by the paper--the supplying of house builders'
hardware--embraces a multitude of conveniences, but no real
necessities. Why is it that America has been prolific in novel devices
and clever improvements in this department of manufacture as in so
many others, while England has gone on stolidly copying ancient forms,
changing only to cheapen by the introduction of poor material and sham
construction? Mr. Smith mentions several reasons that English
manufacturers have given him for the state of things he, as an
Englishman, so greatly deplores; but evidently he is not satisfied
with any of them, and very justly; for none of them touches the real
cause--the radically different attitude of the public mind toward
inventions, characteristic of the two countries.

In England the user of household inconveniences accepts them as
matters of fact; or if he grumbles at them he never thinks of trying
to change them. It is not his business; and if he should devise an
improvement, ten to one he could not get it made. To patent it is
practically out of the question, for if it were not condemned off-hand
as trivial, the patent fees would make it cost more than it was likely
to be worth. The mechanic who makes such things is trained to work to
pattern, and not waste his time on experiments. Besides, if he should
make a clever invention he would not be able to raise the necessary
fees for a patent, or to get any one to help him thereto. The
manufacturer "makes what his customers call for." Why should he spend
his money and spoil his plant to introduce improvements? So things go,
until some pestilent Yankees flood the markets with better articles at
a lower price; and British consumers suddenly discover that they want
something that the native manufacturer cannot make. The need was
there; but invention did not follow. How happened it that the American
manufacturer did not pursue the same uninventive course? What produced
the radically different attitude of the American mind toward
newfangled notions out of which inventions proceeded and flourished?

No doubt several causes have been at work: freedom of thought and
action; popular education; a blending of races; and the tide of
adventurous spirits naturally resorting to a new and free land. These
have had their influence undoubtedly; but all these have existed, more
or less completely, in other new lands, without that outburst of
creative energy which has made America the nursery of inventions,
great and small. The determining cause, the one condition that
prevailed here and not elsewhere, was the circumstance that almost
from the start new ideas were given a market value in this country.
Unlike all others, the American patent law directly encouraged
independent thinking in all classes. The fees were low and the
protection offered fairly good. Men soon found that it paid to invent;
that one of the surest roads to competency was a patented improvement
on something of general use. If a household utensil or appliance went
wrong or worked badly, every user was directly interested in devising
something better; and, more than that, he was interested in making his
invention known and in securing its adoption. The workman at his bench
had an ever-present inducement to contrive something at once cheaper
and better than the article he was hired to make. He could patent his
improvement, or the wholly original device he might hit upon, for a
few dollars; and his patent would count as capital. It would make him
his own master, possibly bring him a fortune. The manufacturer could
not rest contented with the thing he set out to make, for the meanest
hired man in his employ might suddenly become a competitor. He must be
constantly alert for possible improvements, or his rivals would get
ahead of him. The result is a nation of inventors, at whose hands the
newest of lands has leaped to the leadership in the arts, almost at a
bound.

There is talk of changing all this; of emulating the conservative
spirit of the Old World; of putting inventors under bonds; of stopping
the rush of industrial improvement--to enable a few short-sighted yet
grasping corporations to get along without paying license fees for
such inventions as they happen to approve of. They profess to want
inventors to go on making improvements. They are willing to ascribe
all honor to the successful inventor; but they are determined not to
pay him for his work. Still more they are determined to change the
attitude of the public mind toward inventors and inventions, if such a
change can be wrought by plausible misrepresentations. The fact that
they were able to inveigle one branch of the American Congress into
assenting to their unjust and mischievous scheme is one of the
anomalies of our recent history. It should be taken as a timely
warning of impending danger to all the industrial interests of the
country. It is outrageous that the inventors of the land, after having
raised their country to the first rank among industrial nations,
should have to defend their constitutional rights against
Congressional invasion; but the fact exists; and the defense should be
made a matter of personal interest and effort not only by every
inventor and manufacturer, but by every honest citizen.

       *       *       *       *       *




PLEURO-PNEUMONIA.


The cattle plague, which is creating so much anxiety throughout the
Eastern States, is a contagious fever, affecting cows chiefly,
characterized by extensive exudations into the respiratory organs, and
attended by a low typhus inflammation of the lungs, plurae, and
bronchia. It has prevailed in Europe for ages, at times developing
into wide-spread scourges, causing incalculable loss. It was imported
into England in 1839, and again three years later; and it was
estimated that within twenty-five years thereafter the losses by
deaths alone in England had amounted to $450,000,000. In 1858 the
disease was carried to Australia by an English cow, and, spreading to
the cattle ranges, almost depopulated them.

In 1843 an infected Dutch cow brought the disease to Brooklyn, where
it has since lingered, slowly spreading among the cattle in Kings and
Queens counties. In 1847 several head of infected English cattle were
imported into New Jersey, and, spreading among a herd of valuable
cattle, made it necessary for them all to be slaughtered, the only
certain method of stamping out the disease. In 1859 four infected cows
were imported into Massachusetts from Holland; the plague spread
rapidly, and was stamped out only by persistent effort, the State
paying for over 1,000 slaughtered cattle. Since 1867 the disease has
not been known there. Meantime the pest had invaded Eastern
Pennsylvania, Delaware, and Maryland, where it has since prevailed in
isolated localities. The absence of large herds of moving cattle in
these districts, except for speedy slaughter, has prevented the
disease from developing into a general plague.

The recent action of the British Council in forbidding the importation
of American live cattle is likely to prove of inestimable benefit to
this country, in forcibly calling attention to the grave risk that the
presence of the disease on Long Island and elsewhere constantly
entails. Fortunately the drift of the cattle traffic is eastward, and
as yet there has been no propagation of the poison in the great cattle
ranges of the West. Unless summarily arrested, however, the disease
will surely reach those sources of our cattle supply, and occasion
losses that can be estimated only in hundreds of millions of dollars.

The experience of all countries into which this disease has gained
access appears to prove that there is only one way of getting rid of
it--namely, the immediate killing of all infected cattle, and the
thorough disinfection of the premises in which they are found.

The disease is purely infectious, and is never found in regions where
it has not gained a foothold by importation. Palliative measures have
in every instance failed to eradicate the disease, and are only
justifiable, as in Australia, after the plague has reached dimensions
utterly beyond the reach of any process of extermination.

Professor Law, of Cornell University, one of our best informed
veterinary surgeons, most emphatically opposes every attempt to
control the disease by quarantining the sick or by the inoculation of
the healthy. "We may quarantine the sick," he says, "but we cannot
quarantine the air." To establish quarantine yards is simply to
maintain prolific manufacturers of the poison, which is given off by
the breath of the sick, and by their excretions, to such an extent
that no watchfulness can insure against its dissemination. Besides,
the expense of thorough quarantining operations would amount to more
than the value of the infected animals whose lives might be saved
thereby. Inoculation is still less to be tolerated at this stage of
the pest.

The Professor says: "Germany, Holland, Belgium, France, and England,
have been treating the victims of this plague for nearly half a
century, but the result has only been the increase of disease and
death. Our own infected States have been treating it for a third of a
century, and to-day it exists over a wider area than ever before.
Contrast this with the results in Massachusetts and Connecticut, where
the disease has been repeatedly crushed out at small expense, and
there can be no doubt as to which is the wisest course. As all the
plagues are alike in the propagation of the poison in the bodies of
the sick, I may be allowed to adduce the experience of two adjacent
counties in Scotland when invaded by the rinderpest. Aberdeen raised a
fund of L2,000, and though she suffered several successive
invasions, she speedily crushed out the poison wherever it appeared by
slaughtering the sick beasts and disinfecting the premises. The result
was that little more than half the fund was wanted to reimburse the
owners for their losses, and the splendid herds of the county were
preserved. Forfar, on the other hand, set herself to cure the plague,
with the result of a universal infection, the loss of many thousands
of cattle, and the ruin of hundreds of farmers. Finally the malady was
crushed out in the entire island by the method adopted by Aberdeen and
other well advised counties at the outset."

And again, "Cattle have been inoculated by the tens of thousands in
Belgium and Holland, and of all Europe these are the countries now
most extensively infected. France, Prussia, Italy, Austria, and
England have each practiced it on a large scale, and each remains a
home of the plague. Australia has followed the practice, and is now
and must continue an infected country. Our own infected States have
inoculated, and the disease has survived and spread in spite of it,
and even by its aid. Whatever country has definitively exterminated
the plague (Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Holstein, Mecklenburg,
Switzerland, Massachusetts, and Connecticut), that country has
prohibited inoculation and all other methods that prevail on the
principle of preserving the sick, and has relied on the slaughter of
the infected and the thorough disinfection of their surroundings. So
will it be with us. If any State adopts or allows any of these
temporizing measures, that State will only repeat the experience of
the past alike in the Old World and the New, will perpetuate the
disease in the country, will entail great losses on its citizens, will
keep up the need for constant watchfulness and great expense by the
adjoining States for their own protection, and will indefinitely
postpone the resumption of the foreign live stock trade, which, a few
months ago, promised to be one of the most valuable branches of our
international commerce."

We are persuaded that the position taken by Professor Law, and other
similar-minded veterinary surgeons, is the only safe one. The disease
can be stamped out now with comparatively small loss. If trifled with,
and tolerated, it cannot but result in a great national calamity.

       *       *       *       *       *




SPAIN A FIELD FOR MACHINERY AND PATENTS.


From a too lengthy communication to admit in full to our columns, a
resident of Madrid communicates to the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN some facts
relative to the fertility of the soil of Spain, her necessity for
improved agricultural and other implements, and closes with the
assertion that it is a good field withal for patents. We cull from the
letter as follows:

I have lived, says the writer, for a number of years in this beautiful
country, so little understood by foreigners, so little appreciated by
its own inhabitants. The Spain of romance, poetry, and song, is the
garden as well as the California of Europe. But it stands in great
need of the health-giving touch of the North American enterprise. We
have here the same mineral treasures, the same unrivaled advantages of
climate, that made Spain once the industrial and commercial emporium
of the world.

But Spain is awakening. She is endeavoring to shake off her lethargy.
The late Exhibition of Paris has proved this; and those who are
familiar with the past history and present condition of Spain have
been astonished at the result of this effort. A new era has commenced
for the country, and it is everywhere evident that a strong current of
enterprise and industry has set in. But it is with nations, as with
individuals, when they have remained long in complete inaction, brain
and muscles are torpid and cannot at first obey the will. Spain needs
