The Project Gutenberg EBook of Brigands of the Moon, by Ray Cummings

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Brigands of the Moon

Author: Ray Cummings

Release Date: August 16, 2006 [EBook #19066]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BRIGANDS OF THE MOON ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Jason Isbell, Sankar Viswanathan,
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









                         Transcriber's Note:

       Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
       copyright on this publication was renewed.




                        _BRIGANDS of the MOON_



                                  by

                             RAY CUMMINGS




                           ACE BOOKS, INC.

               23 West 47th Street, New York 36, N. Y.



                   Copyright, 1931, by Ray Cummings


       *       *       *       *       *




I


Our ship, the space-flyer, _Planetara_, whose home port was Greater
New York, carried mail and passenger traffic to and from both Venus
and Mars. Of astronomical necessity, our flights were irregular. The
spring of 2070, with both planets close to the Earth, we were making
two complete round trips. We had just arrived in Greater New York, one
May evening, from Grebhar, Venus Free State. With only five hours in
port here, we were departing the same night at the zero hour for
Ferrok-Shahn, capital of the Martian Union.

We were no sooner at the landing stage than I found a code flash
summoning Dan Dean and me to Divisional Detective Headquarters. Dan
"Snap" Dean was one of my closest friends. He was electron-radio
operator of the _Planetara_. A small, wiry, red-headed chap, with a
quick, ready laugh and the kind of wit that made everyone like him.

The summons to Detective-Colonel Halsey's office surprised us. Dean
eyed me.

"You haven't been opening any treasure vaults, have you, Gregg?"

"He wants you, also," I retorted.

He laughed. "Well, he can roar at me like a traffic switch-man and my
private life will remain my own."

We could not think why we should be wanted. It was the darkness of
mid-evening when we left the _Planetara_ for Halsey's office. It was
not a long trip. We went on the upper monorail, descending into the
subterranean city at Park Circle 30.

We had never been to Halsey's office before. Now we found it to be a
gloomy, vaultlike place in one of the deepest corridors. The door
lifted.

"Gregg Haljan and Daniel Dean."

The guard stood aside. "Come in."

I own that my heart was unduly thumping as we entered. The door
dropped behind us. It was a small blue-lit apartment--a steel-lined
room like a vault.

Colonel Halsey sat at his desk. And the big, heavy-set, florid Captain
Carter--our commander on the _Planetara_--was here. That surprised us:
we had not seen him leave the ship.

Halsey smiled at us gravely. Captain Carter spoke with an ominous
calmness: "Sit down, lads."

We took the seats. There was an alarming solemnity about this. If I
had been guilty of anything that I could think of, it would have been
frightening. But Halsey's words reassured me.

"It's about the Grantline Moon Expedition. In spite of our secrecy,
the news has gotten out. We want to know how. Can you tell us?"

Captain Carter's huge bulk--he was about as tall as I am--towered over
us as we sat before Halsey's desk. "If you lads have told anyone--said
anything--let _slip_ the slightest hint about it...."

Snap smiled with relief; but he turned solemn at once. "I haven't. Not
a word!"

"Nor have I!" I declared.

The Grantline Moon Expedition! We had not thought of that as a reason
for this summons. Johnny Grantline was a close friend of ours. He had
organized an exploring expedition to the Moon. Uninhabited, with its
bleak, forbidding, airless, waterless surface, the Moon--even though
so close to the Earth--was seldom visited. No regular ship ever
stopped there. A few exploring parties of recent years had come to
grief.

But there was a persistent rumor that upon the Moon, mineral riches of
fabulous wealth were awaiting discovery. The thing had already caused
some interplanetary complications. The aggressive Martians would be
only too glad to explore the Moon. But the United States of the World,
which came into being in 2067, definitely warned them away. The Moon
was Earth territory, we announced, and we would protect it as such.

There was, nevertheless, a realization by our government, that
whatever riches might be upon the Moon should be seized at once and
held by some reputable Earth Company. And when John Grantline applied,
with his father's wealth and his own scientific record of attainment,
the government was glad to grant him its writ.

The Grantline Expedition had started six months ago. The Martian
government had acquiesced to our ultimatum, yet brigands have been
known to be financed under cover of a government disavowal. And so our
expedition was kept secret.

My words need give no offence to any Martian who comes upon them. I
refer to the history of our Earth only. The Grantline Expedition was
on the Moon now. No word had come from it. One could not flash helios
even in code without letting all the universe know that explorers were
on the Moon. And why they were there, anyone could easily guess.

And now Colonel Halsey was telling us that the news was abroad!
Captain Carter eyed us closely; his flashing eyes under the white
bushy brows would pry a secret from anyone.

"You're sure? A girl of Venus, perhaps, with her cursed, seductive
lure! A chance word, with you lads befuddled by alcolite?"

We assured him that we had been careful. By the heavens, I know that I
had been. Not a whisper, even to Snap, of the name Grantline in six
months or more.

Captain Carter added abruptly, "We're insulated here, Halsey?"

"Yes. Talk as freely as you like. An eavesdropping ray will never get
through to us."

They questioned us. They were satisfied at last that, though the
secret had escaped, we had not given it away. Hearing it discussed, it
occurred to me to wonder why Carter was concerned. I was not aware
that he knew of Grantline's venture. I learned now the reason why the
_Planetara_, upon each of her last voyages, had managed to pass fairly
close to the Moon. It had been arranged with Grantline that if he
wanted help or had any important message, he was to flash it locally
to our passing ship. And this Snap knew, and had never mentioned it,
even to me.

Halsey was saying, "Well, apparently we can't blame you: but the
secret is out."

Snap and I regarded each other. What could anyone do? What would
anyone dare do?

Captain Carter said abruptly, "Look here, lads, this is my chance now
to talk plainly to you. Outside, anywhere outside these walls, an
eavesdropping ray may be upon us. You know that? One may never even
dare to whisper since that accursed ray was developed."

Snap opened his mouth to speak but decided against it. My heart was
pounding.

Captain Carter went on: "I know I can trust you two more than anyone
under me on the _Planetara_."

"What do you mean by that?" I demanded. "What--"

He interrupted me. "Just what I said."

Halsey smiled grimly. "What he means, Haljan, is that things are not
always what they seem these days. One cannot always tell a friend from
an enemy. The _Planetara_ is a public vessel. You have--how many is
it, Carter?--thirty or forty passengers this trip tonight?"

"Thirty-eight," said Carter.

"There are thirty-eight people listed for the flight to Ferrok-Shahn
tonight," Halsey said slowly. "And some may not be what they seem." He
raised his thin dark hand. "We have information...." He paused. "I
confess, we know almost nothing--hardly more than enough to alarm us."

Captain Carter interjected, "I want you and Dean to be on your guard.
Once on the _Planetara_ it is difficult for us to talk openly, but be
watchful. I will arrange for us to be doubly armed."

Vague, perturbing words! Halsey said, "They tell me George Prince is
listed for the voyage. I am suggesting, Haljan, that you keep your eye
especially on him. Your duties on the _Planetara_ leave you
comparatively free, don't they?"

"Yes," I agreed. With the first and second officers on duty, and the
Captain aboard, my routine was more or less that of an understudy.

I said, "George Prince? Who is he?"

"A mechanical engineer," said Halsey. "An underofficial of the Earth
Federated Catalyst Corporation. But he associates with bad
companions--particularly Martians."

I had never heard of this George Prince, though I was familiar with
the Federated Catalyst Corporation, of course. A semigovernment trust,
which controlled virtually the entire Earth supply of radiactum, the
catalyst mineral which was revolutionizing industry.

"He was in the Automotive Department," Carter put in. "You've heard of
the Federated Radiactum Motor?"

We had, of course. It was a recent Earth discovery and invention. An
engine of a new type, using radiactum as its fuel.

Snap demanded, "What in the stars has this got to do with Johnny
Grantline?"

"Much," said Halsey quietly, "or perhaps nothing. But George Prince
some years ago mixed in rather unethical transactions. We had him in
custody once. He is known as unusually friendly with several Martians
in Greater New York of bad reputation."

"Well?"

"What you don't know," Halsey said, "is that Grantline expects to find
radiactum on the Moon."

We gasped.

"Exactly," said Halsey. "The ill-fated Ballon Expedition thought they
had found it on the Moon, shortly after its merit was discovered. A
new type of ore--a lode of it is there somewhere, without doubt."

He added vehemently, "Do you understand now why we should be
suspicious of this George Prince? He has a criminal record. He has a
thorough technical knowledge of radium ores. He associates with
Martians of bad reputation. A large Martian company has recently
developed a radiactum engine to compete with our Earth motor. There is
very little radiactum available on Mars, and our government will not
allow our own supply to be exported. What do you suppose that company
on Mars would pay for a few tons of richly radioactive radiactum such
as Grantline may have found on the Moon?"

"But," I objected, "That is a reputable Martian company. It's backed
by the government of the Martian Union. The government of Mars would
not dare--"

"Of course not!" Captain Carter exclaimed sardonically. "Not openly!
But if Martian Brigands had a supply of radiactum I don't imagine
where it came from would make much difference. The Martian company
would buy it, and you know that as well as I do!"

Halsey added, "And George Prince, my agents inform me, seems to know
that Grantline is on the Moon. Put it all together, lads. Little
sparks show the hidden current.

"More than that: George Prince knows that we have arranged to have the
_Planetara_ stop at the Moon and bring back Grantline's ore.... This
is your last voyage this year. You'll hear from Grantline this time,
we're convinced. He'll probably give you the signal as you pass the
Moon on your way out. Coming back, you'll stop at the Moon and
transport whatever radiactum ore Grantline has ready. The Grantline
Flyer is too small for ore transportation."

Halsey's voice turned grimly sarcastic. "Doesn't it seem queer that
George Prince and a few of his Martian friends happen to be listed as
passengers for this voyage?"

In the silence that followed, Snap and I regarded each other. Halsey
added abruptly:

"We had George Prince typed that time we arrested him four years ago.
I'll show him to you."

He snapped open an alcove, and said to his waiting attendant "Flash on
the type of George Prince."

Almost at once, the image glowed on the grids before us. He stood
smiling sourly before us as he repeated the official formula:

"My name is George Prince. I was born in Greater New York twenty-five
years ago."

I gazed at this televised image of George Prince. He stood somber in
the black detention uniform, silhouetted sharply against the
regulation backdrop of vivid scarlet. A dark, almost femininely
handsome fellow, well below medium height--the rod checking him showed
five foot four inches. Slim and slight. Long, wavy black hair, falling
about his ears. A pale, clean-cut, really handsome face, almost
beardless. I regarded it closely. A face that would have been
beautiful without its masculine touch of heavy black brows and firmly
set jaw. His voice as he spoke was low and soft; but at the end, with
the concluding words, "I am innocent!" it flashed into strong
masculinity. His eyes, shaded with long girlish black lashes, by
chance met mine. "I am innocent." His curving sensuous lips drew down
into a grim sneer....

