The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Keeper, by Henry Beam Piper

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Keeper

Author: Henry Beam Piper

Release Date: September 20, 2006 [EBook #19338]
Last updated: January 17, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE KEEPER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Sankar Viswanathan, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                         Transcriber's Note:

   This etext was produced from Venture Science Fiction, July 1957.
   Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
   copyright on this publication was renewed.



                     [Illustration: Frontispiece]




     _Evil men had stolen his treasure, and Raud set out with his
     deer rifle and his great dog Brave to catch the thieves
     before they could reach the Starfolk. That the men had
     negatron pistols meant little--Raud was the Keeper...._




                              THE KEEPER



                           by H. BEAM PIPER


       *       *       *       *       *




When he heard the deer crashing through brush and scuffling the dead
leaves, he stopped and stood motionless in the path. He watched them
bolt down the slope from the right and cross in front of him, wishing
he had the rifle, and when the last white tail vanished in the
gray-brown woods he drove the spike of the ice-staff into the
stiffening ground and took both hands to shift the weight of the
pack. If he'd had the rifle, he could have shot only one of them. As
it was, they were unfrightened, and he knew where to find them in the
morning.

Ahead, to the west and north, low clouds massed; the white front of
the Ice-Father loomed clear and sharp between them and the blue of the
distant forests. It would snow, tonight. If it stopped at daybreak, he
would have good tracking, and in any case, it would be easier to get
the carcasses home over snow. He wrenched loose the ice-staff and
started forward again, following the path that wound between and among
and over the irregular mounds and hillocks. It was still an hour's
walk to Keeper's House, and the daylight was fading rapidly.

Sometimes, when he was not so weary and in so much haste, he would
loiter here, wondering about the ancient buildings and the
long-vanished people who had raised them. There had been no woods at
all, then; nothing but great houses like mountains, piling up toward
the sky, and the valley where he meant to hunt tomorrow had been an
arm of the sea that was now a three days' foot-journey away. Some said
that the cities had been destroyed and the people killed in wars--big
wars, not squabbles like the fights between sealing-companies from
different villages. He didn't think so, himself. It was more likely
that they had all left their homes and gone away in starships when the
Ice-Father had been born and started pushing down out of the north.
There had been many starships, then. When he had been a boy, the old
men had talked about a long-ago time when there had been hundreds of
them visible in the sky, every morning and evening. But that had been
long ago indeed. Starships came but seldom to this world, now. This
world was old and lonely and poor. Like poor lonely old Raud the
Keeper.

He felt angry to find himself thinking like that. Never pity yourself,
Raud; be proud. That was what his father had always taught him: "Be
proud, for you are the Keeper's son, and when I am gone, you will be
the Keeper after me. But in your pride, be humble, for what you will
keep is the Crown."

The thought of the Crown, never entirely absent from his mind, wakened
the anxiety that always slept lightly if at all. He had been away all
day, and there were so many things that could happen. The path seemed
longer, after that; the landmarks farther apart. Finally, he came out
on the edge of the steep bank, and looked down across the brook to the
familiar low windowless walls and sharp-ridged roof of Keeper's House;
and when he came, at last, to the door, and pulled the latchstring, he
heard the dogs inside--the soft, coughing bark of Brave, and the
anxious little whimper of Bold--and he knew that there was nothing
wrong in Keeper's House.

The room inside was lighted by a fist-sized chunk of lumicon, hung in
a net bag of thongs from the rafter over the table. It was old--cast
off by some rich Southron as past its best brilliance, it had been old
when he had bought it from Yorn Nazvik the Trader, and that had been
years ago. Now its light was as dim and yellow as firelight. He'd have
to replace it soon, but this trip he had needed new cartridges for the
big rifle. A man could live in darkness more easily than he could live
without cartridges.

The big black dogs were rising from their bed of deerskins on the
stone slab that covered the crypt in the far corner. They did not come
to meet him, but stayed in their place of trust, greeting him with
anxious, eager little sounds.

"Good boys," he said. "Good dog, Brave; good dog, Bold. Old Keeper's
home again. Hungry?"

They recognized that word, and whined. He hung up the ice-staff on the
pegs by the door, then squatted and got his arms out of the
pack-straps.
