The Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific  American, Volume XXXVI., No. 8,
February 24, 1877, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Scientific  American, Volume XXXVI., No. 8, February 24, 1877
       A Weekly Journal of Practical Information, Art, Science,
       Mechanics, Chemistry, and Manufactures.

Author: Various

Release Date: September 29, 2006 [EBook #19406]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at www.pgdp.net





[Illustration]




SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN




A WEEKLY JOURNAL OF PRACTICAL INFORMATION, ART, SCIENCE, MECHANICS,
CHEMISTRY, AND MANUFACTURES.




NEW YORK, FEBRUARY 24, 1877.

Vol. XXXVI.--No. 8. [NEW SERIES.]

$3.20 per Annum [POSTAGE PREPAID.]

       *       *       *       *       *


SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN

ESTABLISHED 1845

MUNN & CO., Editors and Proprietors.

PUBLISHED WEEKLY AT
NO. 37 PARK ROW, NEW YORK.

O.D. MUNN.             A.E. BEACH.

       *       *       *       *       *


TERMS FOR THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN.

One copy, one year, postage included.     $3.20
One copy, six months, postage included.    1.60

Clubs.--One extra copy of THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN will be supplied
gratis for every club of five subscribers at $3.20 each; additional
copies at same proportionate rate. Postage prepaid.

THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT is a distinct paper from the
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN. THE SUPPLEMENT is issued weekly; every number
contains 16 octavo pages, with handsome cover, uniform in size with
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN. Terms of subscription for SUPPLEMENT, $5.00 a
year, postage paid, to subscribers. Single copies 10 cents. Sold by
all news dealers throughout the country.

COMBINED RATES.--The SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN and SUPPLEMENT will be sent
for one year, postage free, on receipt of seven dollars. Both papers
to one address or different addresses, as desired.

The safest way to remit is by draft, postal order, or registered
letter.

Address MUNN & CO., 37 Park Row, N.Y.

Subscriptions received and single copies of either paper sold by all
the news agents.

       *       *       *       *       *

VOL. XXXVI., No. 8. [NEW SERIES.] _Thirty-second Year_.
NEW YORK, SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 24, 1877.

       *       *       *       *       *




CONTENTS.

(Illustrated articles are marked with an asterisk.)


  Academy of Sciences, New York.         117
  Answers to correspondents.             123
  Arts, lost, in New York.               113
  Augers and drills (16).                123
  Bain, Alexander.                       121
  Blue glass deception, the.             113
  Blue glass science.                    121
  Boilers for small engines (2,14).      123
  Business and personal.                 123
  Caffeone.                              114
  Chromate of lime, acid (18).           123
  Circle problem, the three (8).         123
  Clock collector, a.                    119
  Coal, burning small (19).              123
  Cremation temple, proposed*.           119
  Dark days (11).                        123
  Dates and the date palm*.              111
  Diseases, infections.                  121
  Dyeing process, a cold (9).            123
  Engines for boats (12).                123
  Floors, filling for hardwood (6).      123
  Friction at rest (15).                 123
  Frost plant of Russia, the*.           116
  Glass making, toughened.               121
  Greenhouses, tar paint in (3).         123
  Harness cockeye, improved*.            118
  Heating ranges (17).                   123
  Heating rooms (7).                     123
  Hemi-plunger, the.*                    115
  Hens, Leghorn.                         114
  Ink, purple marking.                   117
  Iron trade in England.                 117
  Laboratory manipulations.              117
  Lathe chuck.*                          118
  Lathe, screw-cutting.*                 118
  Lead, sea water and.                   119
  Moneyed men.                           122
  Mortar, black (10).                    123
  New books and publications.            122
  Ornaments in winter, natural.          118
  Papin's steam engine.*                 120
  Patent decision, a.                    115
  Patent matters in Washington.          116
  Patent office annual report.           117
  Patents, American and foreign.         122
  Patents, official list of.             124
  Planing mill machinery.                115
  Posterity, for--a suggestion.          112
  Railroad, the Wetli mountain.*         114
  Rock sections for microscopy.          117
  Roofs, leaky slate (1).                123
  Rose bushes, soot for.                 119
  Salicylic acid for the feet.           115
  Sawdust in rough casting.              114
  Seed-distributing panthers.            111
  Self-reliance and success.             121
  Snow a fertilizer.                     119
  Something to do.                       121
  Spectroscope prisms (11).              123
  Steam engine, Papin's.                 120
  Steam engine, the Brown.               120
  Suicide statistics.                    116
  Telegraph, the speaking.               120
  Trolling hook, improved*.              114
  Watch, position of a (13).             123
  Waterproofing, suint for.              114
  White color in animals.                114
  Wire, crossing a river on a.           121
  Wool, purifying.                       114
  Zinc roofs (4).                        123

       *       *       *       *       *




TABLE OF CONTENTS OF
THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT,
No. 60,
For the Week ending February 24, 1877.


I. ENGINEERING AND MECHANICS.--Artificial Production of Ice by Steam
Power--The American Roller Skate Rink, Paris, 1 engraving.--The Little
Basses Light House, 4 figures.--The Souter Point Electric Light.--On
the Minute Measurements of Modern Science, by ALFRED MAYER.--Method of
Measuring by Means of the Micrometer Screw furnished with the Contact
Level; Method of Electric Contact Applied to Measurements with the
Micrometer Screw, 2 engravings.--Abstracts from Report of the Boston
Society of Civil Engineers on the Metric System.--New Turret Musical
and Chiming Clock for the Bombay University, with 1 page of
engravings.--Water Gas and its advantages, by GEO. S. DWIGHT.--Brattice
Cloths in Mines.--Eight Horse Power Portable Steam Engine, with
dimensions, particulars, and 1 page of engravings.--Clyde Ship
Building and Marine Engineering in 1876.--Four Masted Ships.--New
Bridges at and near New York city.--The Sutro Tunnel.--Independent Car
Wheels.--Passenger Travel, New York city.

II.--TECHNOLOGY.--Design for Iron Stairway, and Iron Grilles, with 3
engravings.--The Process of Micro-photography used in the Army Medical
Department.--Direct Positives for Enlarging.--A Monster
Barometer.--Architectural Science, Carpentry Queries and Replies.--The
Carpet Manufactures of Philadelphia. How the Centre Selvage is Formed,
3 figures.--Glass of the Ancients.--On the Preservation of Meat; a
resume of the various methods now practiced.--California
Pisciculture.--Savelle's System of Distillation, 2 engravings.--New
Bromine Still, by W. ARVINE, 1 engraving.--The Phoenix Steam Brewery,
New York.--French Cognac Distillation, 1 engraving.--Schwartz's Sugar
Refinery, London. General description of the establishment.--Vienna
Bread and Coffee.--How Pictorial Crystals are Produced and Exhibited.

III. LESSONS IN MECHANICAL DRAWING. New Series. By Professor C.W.
MACCORD; with several engravings.

IV. ELECTRICITY, LIGHT, HEAT, SOUND, ETC.--Magnetic Action of Rotatory
Conductors.--The Sensation of Sound.--Sympathetic Vibration of
Pendulums.--Protection from Lightning.--Musical Tones, photograph of.

V. MEDICINE, HYGIENE, ETC.--On the Treatment of Typhoid Fevers. By
ALFRED L. LOOMIS, M.D.--Hydrophobia Cured by Oxygen.--The efficacy of
Lymph, by M. HILLER.--Success of Chloral Hydrate for Scalds and
Burns.--Uses of Cyanide of Zinc.--Dr. Brown-Sequard on Nerve Disease.

VI. MISCELLANEOUS.--Geological Notes.--A Geological Congress.--The
last Polar Expedition.--Old Men of Science.--Pre-glacial
Men.--Post-glacial period, Esthonia.--Northern Pacific Formations.

TERMS:--SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT, one year, postpaid, _five
dollars_. One copy of SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN and one copy of SCIENTIFIC
AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT, one year, postpaid, _seven dollars_. CLUBS.--One
extra copy of the SUPPLEMENT will be supplied gratis for every club of
five SUPPLEMENT subscribers at $5.00 each.

All the back numbers of the SUPPLEMENT, from the commencement, January
1, 1876, can be had. Price 10 cents each.

NOW READY.--The SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT for 1876. Complete in
two large volumes. Over 800 quarto pages; over 2,000 engravings.
Embracing History of the Centennial Exhibition. New Illustrated
Instructions in Mechanical Drawing. Many valuable papers, etc. Price
five dollars for the two volumes, stitched in paper; or six dollars
and fifty cents, handsomely bound in stiff covers. Remit by postal
order. Address

MUNN & CO., PUBLISHERS, 37 Park Row, New York.

[Hand->] Single copies of any desired number of the SUPPLEMENT sent to any
address on receipt of 10 cents.

       *       *       *       *       *


PUBLISHERS' NOTICE.

New subscriptions to the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN and the SCIENTIFIC
AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT will, for the present, be entered upon our books
to commence with the year, and the back numbers will be sent to each
new subscriber unless a request to the contrary accompanies the order.

Instead of a notice being printed on the wrapper, announcing that a
subscription is about to end, the time of expiration is now denoted in
the printed address each week, so that the subscriber may see when the
period for which he has prepaid is about to expire.

       *       *       *       *       *




DATES AND THE DATE PALM.


Even those whose knowledge of the customs of the Orient extends no
further than a recollection of the contents of that time-honored story
book, the "Arabian Nights," are doubtless aware that, since time
immemorial, the date has been the chief food staple of the
desert-dwellers of the East. The "handful of dates and gourd of water"
form the typical meal and daily sustenance of millions of human beings
both in Arabia and in North Africa, and to this meager diet
ethnologists have ascribed many of the peculiar characteristics of the
people who live upon it. Buckle, who finds in the constant consumption
of rice among the Hindoos a reason for the inclination to the
prodigious and grotesque, the depression of spirits, and the weariness
of life manifest in that nation, likewise considers that the morbid
