Project Gutenberg's Under the Ocean to the South Pole, by Roy Rockwood

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Under the Ocean to the South Pole
       The Strange Cruise of the Submarine Wonder

Author: Roy Rockwood

Release Date: November 7, 2006 [EBook #19731]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNDER THE OCEAN TO THE SOUTH POLE ***




Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Emmy and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net











UNDER THE OCEAN TO THE SOUTH POLE

Or

The Strange Cruise of the Submarine Wonder

BY
ROY ROCKWOOD

          AUTHOR OF "THROUGH THE AIR TO THE NORTH POLE," "THE
          RIVAL OCEAN DIVERS," "A SCHOOLBOY'S
          PLUCK," ETC.

ILLUSTRATED

NEW YORK CUPPLES & LEON CO.




GOOD BOOKS FOR BOYS

BY ROY ROCKWOOD

       *       *       *       *       *

=THE GREAT MARVEL SERIES=


          THROUGH THE AIR TO THE NORTH POLE
            Or The Wonderful Cruise of the Electric Monarch

          UNDER THE OCEAN TO THE SOUTH POLE
            Or The Strange Cruise of the Submarine Wonder

Cloth. Illustrated


          Copyright, 1907, by
          CUPPLES & LEON CO.

       *       *       *       *       *

UNDER THE OCEAN TO THE SOUTH POLE




CONTENTS

          CHAPTER                                PAGE

               I. WILL THE SHIP WORK?               1

              II. A LAND OF ICE                    10

             III. RUNNING DOWN A WAR SHIP          19

              IV. IN THE MIDST OF FIRE             27

               V. A GRAVE ACCUSATION               35

              VI. ON A RUNAWAY TROLLEY             43

             VII. OFF FOR THE SOUTH POLE           52

            VIII. ASHORE IN THE DARK               60

              IX. A PRICE ON THEIR HEADS           68

               X. ATTACKED BY A MONSTER            75

              XI. CAUGHT IN A SEA OF GRASS         84

             XII. FIRE ON BOARD                    92

            XIII. THE GHOST OF THE SUBMARINE      100

             XIV. DIGGING OUT THE SHIP            108

              XV. THE STRANGE SHIPWRECK           117

             XVI. THE GHOST AGAIN                 126

            XVII. ATTACKED BY SAVAGES             134

           XVIII. ON LAND                         143

             XIX. REGAINING THE SHIP              152

              XX. ON A VOLCANIC ISLAND            160

             XXI. CAUGHT IN A WHIRLPOOL           169

            XXII. UNDER FIRE                      177

           XXIII. CAUGHT IN AN ICE FLOE           185

            XXIV. THE SHIP GRAVEYARD              193

             XXV. CAUGHT BY SEA SUCKERS           201

            XXVI. LAND UNDER ICE                  211

           XXVII. ATTACKED BY AN OCTUPUS          220

          XXVIII. OUT OF THE ICE                  228

            XXIX. THE BOILING WATER               235

             XXX. THE SOUTH POLE--CONCLUSION      240




UNDER THE OCEAN TO THE SOUTH POLE




CHAPTER I

WILL THE SHIP WORK?


"Hand me that wrench, Mark," called Professor Amos Henderson to a boy
who stood near some complicated machinery over which the old man was
working. The lad passed the tool over.

"Do you think the ship will work, Professor?" he asked.

"I hope so, Mark, I hope so," muttered the scientist as he tightened
some bolts on what was perhaps the strangest combination of apparatus
that had ever been put together. "There is no reason why she should not,
and yet--"

The old man paused. Perhaps he feared that, after all, the submarine
boat on which he had labored continuously for more than a year would be
a failure.

"Is there anything more I can do now?" asked Mark.

"Not right away," replied the professor, without looking up from the
work he was doing. "But I wish you and Jack would be around in about an
hour. I am going to start the engine then, and I'll need you. If you see
Washington outside send him to me."

Mark left the big room where the submarine boat had been in process of
construction so long. Outside he met a boy about his own age, who was
cleaning a rifle.

"How's it going, Mark?" asked this second youth, who was rather fat,
and, if one could judge by his face, of a jolly disposition.

"The professor is going to try the engine in about an hour," replied
Mark. "We must be on hand."

"I'll be there all right. But if there isn't anything else to do, let's
shoot at a target. I'll bet I can beat you."

"Bet you can't. Wait 'till I get my gun."

"Now don't yo' boys go to disportin' yo'seves in any disproportionable
anticipation ob transposin' dem molecules of lead in a contigious
direction to yo' humble servant!" exclaimed a colored man, coming from
behind the big shed at that moment, and seeing Mark and Jack with their
rifles.

"I s'pose you mean to say, Washington," remarked Jack, "that you don't
care to be shot at. Is that it?"

"Neber said nuffin truer in all yo' born days!" exclaimed Washington
earnestly. "De infliction ob distress to de exterior portion ob--"

"The professor wants you," interrupted Mark, cutting off the colored
man's flow of language.

"Yo' mind what I tole yo'," Washington muttered as he hurried into the
work room.

Soon the reports of rifles indicated that the boys were trying to
discover who was the best shot, a contest that waged with friendly
interest for some time.

The big shed, where the submarine ship was being built, was located at a
lonely spot on the coast of Maine. The nearest town was Easton, about
ten miles away, and Professor Henderson had fixed on this location as
one best suited to give him a chance to work secretly and unobserved on
his wonderful invention.

The professor was a man about sixty-five years old, and, while of simple
and kindly nature in many ways, yet, on the subjects of airships and
submarines, he possessed a fund of knowledge. He was somewhat queer, as
many persons may be who devote all their thoughts to one object, yet he
was a man of fine character.

Some time before this story opens he had invented an electric airship in
which he, with Mark Sampson, Jack Darrow and the colored man,
Washington White, had made a trip to the frozen north.

Their adventures on that journey are told of in the first volume of this
series, entitled, "Through the Air to the North Pole, or, The Wonderful
Cruise of the _Electric Monarch_."

The two boys, Mark then being fifteen and Jack a year older, had met the
professor under peculiar circumstances. They were orphans, and, after
knocking about the world a bit, had chanced to meet each other. They
agreed to seek together such fortune as might chance to come to them.

While in the town of Freeport, N. Y., they were driven away by a
constable, who said tramps were not allowed in the village. The boys
jumped on a freight train, which broke in two and ran away down the
mountain, and the lads were knocked senseless in the wreck that
followed.

As it chanced Professor Henderson had erected nearby a big shop, where
he was building his airship. He and Washington were on hand when the
wreck occurred and they took the senseless boys to the airship shed.

The boys, after their recovery, accepted the invitation of the professor
to go on a search for the north pole. As the airship was about to start
Andy Sudds, an old hunter, and two men, Tom Smith and Bill Jones, who
had been called in to assist at the flight, held on too long and were
carried aloft.

Somewhat against their will the three latter made the trip, for the
professor did not want to return to earth with them.

The party had many adventures on the voyage, having to fight savage
animals and more savage Esquimaux. They reached the north pole, but in
the midst of such a violent storm that the ship was overturned, and the
discovery of the long-sought goal availed little. After many hardships,
and a fierce fight to recover the possession of the ship, which had been
seized by natives, the adventurers reached home.

Since then a little over a year had passed. The professor, having found
he could successfully navigate the air, turned his attention to the
water, and began to plan a craft that would sail beneath the ocean.

To this end he had moved his machine shop to this lonely spot on the
Maine coast. The two boys, who had grown no less fond of the old man
than he of them, went with him, as did Washington White, the negro, who
was a genius in his way, though somewhat inclined to use big words, of
the meaning of which he knew little and cared less.

Andy Sudds, the old hunter, had also been induced to accompany the
professor.

"I hunted game up north and in the air," said Andy, "and if there's a
chance to shoot something under the water I'm the one to do it."

Needing more assistance than either the boys, Andy or Washington could
give, the professor had engaged two young machinists, who, under a
strict promise never to divulge any of the secrets of the submarine, had
labored in its building.

Now the queer craft was almost finished. As it rested on the ways in the
shed, it looked exactly like a big cigar, excepting that the top part
was level, forming a platform.

The ship, which had been named the _Porpoise_, was eighty feet long, and
twenty feet in diameter at the largest part. From that it tapered
gradually, until the ends were reached. These consisted of flattened
plates about three feet in diameter, with a hole in the center one foot
in size.

Weary months of labor had been spent on the _Porpoise_, until now it was
almost ready for a trial. The professor had discovered a new method of
propulsion. Instead of propellers or paddle-wheels, he intended to send
his craft ahead or to the rear, by means of a water cable.

Through the entire length of the ship ran a round hole or shaft, one
foot in diameter. Within this was an endless screw worked by powerful
engines. With a working model the professor had demonstrated that when
the endless screw was revolved it acted on the water just as another
sort of screw does in wood. The water coming in through the shaft served
as a rope, so to speak, and the screw, acting on it, pulled the craft
ahead or to the rear, according to the direction in which the screw was
revolved.

The submarine was a wonderful craft. It contained a powerful engine,
electric motors and dynamos, and machinery of all kinds. The engine was
a turbine, and steam was generated from heat furnished by the burning of
a powerful gas, manufactured from sea water and chemicals. So there was
no need to carry a supply of coal on the ship.

The interior of the vessel was divided into an engine-room, a kitchen,
combination dining-room and parlor, bunk rooms, and a conning tower, or
place for the steersman.

While the boys had been shooting at the target the professor and
Washington had been putting the finishing touches to the engine,
tightening nuts here and screwed up bolts there.

"I guess that will do," remarked the old inventor. "Call the boys,
Washington."

The colored man went to the door and gave three blasts on a battered
horn that hung from a string.

"Coming!" called Mark, as he and Jack ceased their marksmanship contest
and approached the shed.

"Now boys, we'll see if she works so far," said the professor. "If she
does, we'll give her a trial under water."

At the inventor's directions the boys started the gas to generating from
the chemicals. Soon the hissing of steam told them that there was power
in the boiler.

The professor entered the engine-room of the submarine. He looked over
the various wheels, levers, handles, gages and attachments, satisfying
himself that all were in proper shape and position.

"Three hundred pounds pressure," he muttered, glancing at the steam
indicator. "That ought to be enough. Are you all ready, boys?"

"All ready!" cried Jack.

Of course the test was only one to see if the engine worked, for the
boat could not move until in the water.

The professor opened a valve. The steam filled the turbine with a hiss
and throb. The _Porpoise_ trembled. Then, with a cough and splutter of
the exhaust pipes, the engine started. Slowly it went at first, but, as
the professor admitted more steam, it revolved the long screw until it
fairly hummed in the shaft.

"Hurrah! It works!" cried Mark.

"It does!" chimed in Jack.

"Gollyation! She suttinly am goin'!" yelled Washington.
