The Project Gutenberg EBook of Rip Foster Rides the Gray Planet by Blake
Savage



This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license



Title: Rip Foster Rides the Gray Planet

Author: Blake Savage

Release Date: December 20, 2006 [Ebook #20147]

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RIP FOSTER RIDES THE GRAY PLANET***





Rip Foster Rides the Gray Planet


by Blake Savage




Edition 1, (December 20, 2006)





Illustrated by E. Deane Cate





Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on
                      this publication was renewed.





                 [Illustration: hard cover illustration]
                    [Illustration: Front dust jacket]
                     [Illustration: Back dust jacket]
                       [Illustration: Inside cover]





DUST JACKET BLURB


"Foster, Lieutenant, R. I. P.," blared the voice horn, and five minutes
later Rip Foster was off into space on an assignment more exciting than
any he had ever imagined. He could hardly believe his ears. Could a green
young Planeteer, just through his training, possibly carry out orders like
these? Sunny space, what a trick it would be!

From the moment Rip boards the space ship _Scorpius_ there is a thrill a
minute. He and his nine daring Planeteers must cope with the merciless
hazing of the spacemen commanding the ship, and they must outwit the
desperate Connies, who threaten to plunge all of space into war. There are
a thousand dangers to be faced in high vacuum--and all of this while
carrying out an assignment that will take every reader's breath away.





      [Illustration: Major Barris Faced Rip and the New Planeteers]

              Major Barris Faced Rip and the New Planeteers






RIP FOSTER RIDES THE GRAY PLANET





CHAPTER ONE - SCN SCORPIUS, SPACEBOUND


A thousand miles above earth's surface the great space platform sped from
daylight into darkness. Once each two hours it circled the earth
completely, spinning along through space like a mighty wheel of steel and
plastic.

Through a telescope from earth the platform seemed a lifeless, lonely
disk, but within it, hundreds of spacemen and Planeteers went about their
work.

In a ready-room at the outer edge of the platform, a Planeteer officer
faced a dozen slim, blackclad young men who wore the single golden orbits
of lieutenants. This was a graduating class, already commissioned, having
a final, informal get-together.

The officer, who wore the three-orbit insignia of a major, was lean and
trim. His hair was cropped short, like a gray fur skull cap. One cheek was
marked with the crisp whiteness of an old radiation burn.

"Stand easy," he ordered briskly. "The general instructions of the Special
Order Squadrons say that it's my duty as senior officer to make a farewell
speech. I intend to make a speech if it kills me--and you, too."

The dozen new officers facing him broke into grins. Major Joe Barris had
been their friend, teacher, and senior officer during six long years of
training on the space platform. He could no more make a formal speech than
he could breathe high vacuum, and they all knew it.

Lieutenant Richard Ingalls Peter Foster, whose initials had given him the
nickname of "Rip," asked, "Why don't you sing us a song instead, Joe?"

Major Barris fixed Rip with a cold eye. "Foster, three orbital turns, then
front and center."

Rip obediently spun around three times, then walked forward and stood at
attention, trying to conceal his grin.

"Foster, what does SOS mean?"

"Special Order Squadrons, sir."

"Right. And what else does it mean?"

"It means, 'Help!' sir."

"Right. And what else does it mean?"

"Superman or simp, sir."

This was a ceremony in which questions and answers never changed. It was
supposed to make Planeteer cadets and junior officers feel properly
humble, but it didn't work. By tradition, the Planeteers were the cockiest
gang that ever blasted through high vacuum.

Major Barris shook his head sadly. "You admit you're a simp, Foster. The
rest of you are simps, too. But you don't believe it. You've finished six
years on the platform. You've made a few little trips out into space.
You've landed on the moon a couple times. So now you think you're seasoned
space spooks. Well, you're not. You're simps."

Rip stopped grinning. He had heard this before. It was part of the
routine. But he sensed that this time Joe Barris wasn't kidding.

The major rubbed the radiation scar on his cheek absently as he looked
them over. They were like twelve chicks out of the same nest. They were
all about the same size, a compact five-feet-eleven inches, 175 pounds.
They wore loose black tunics, belted over full trousers which gathered
into white cruiser boots. The comfortable uniforms concealed any slight
differences in build. The twelve were all lean of face, with hair cropped
to the regulation half inch. Rip was the only redhead among them.

"Sit down," Barris commanded. "I'm going to make a farewell speech."

Rip pulled a plastic stool toward him. The others did the same. Major
Barris remained standing.

"Well," he began soberly, "you are now officers of the Special Order
Squadrons. You're Planeteers. You are lieutenants by order of the Space
Council, Federation of Free Governments. And--space protect you!--to
yourselves, you're supermen. But never forget this: to ordinary spacemen,
you're just plain simps. You're trouble in a black tunic. They have about
as much use for you as they have for leaks in their air locks. Some of the
spacemen have been high-vacking for twenty years or more, and they're
tough. They're as nasty as a Callistan _teekal_. They like to eat
Planeteer junior officers for breakfast."

Lieutenant Felipe "Flip" Villa asked, "With salt, Joe?"

Major Barris sighed. "No use trying to tell you space-chicks anything.
You're lieutenants now, and a lieutenant has the thickest skull of any
rank, no matter what service he belongs to."

Rip realized that Barris had not been joking, no matter how flippant his
speech. "Go ahead," he urged. "Finish what you were going to say."

"Okay. I'll make it short. Then you can catch the Terra rocket and take
your eight earth-weeks leave. You won't really know what I'm talking about
until you've batted around space for a while. All I have to say adds up to
one thing. You won't like it, because it doesn't sound scientific. That
doesn't mean it isn't good science, because it is. Just remember this:
when you're in a jam, trust your hunch and not your head."

The twelve stared at him, open-mouthed. For six years they had been taught
to rely on scientific methods. Now their best instructor and senior
officer was telling them just the opposite!

Rip started to object, then he caught a glimmer of meaning. He stuck out
his hand. "Thanks, Joe. I hope we'll meet again."

Barris grinned. "We will, Rip. I'll ask for you as a platoon commander
when they assign me to cleaning up the goopies on Ganymede." This was the
major's idea of the worst Planeteer job in the Solar System.

The group shook hands all around; then the young officers broke for the
door on the run. The Terra rocket was blasting off in five minutes, and
they were due to be on it.

Rip joined Flip Villa and they jumped on the high speed track that would
whisk them to Valve Two on the other side of the platform. Their gear was
already loaded. They had only to take seats on the rocket and their six
years on the space platform would be at an end.

"I wonder what it will be like to get back to high gravity?" Rip mused.
The centrifugal force of the spinning platform acted as artificial
gravity, but it was considerably less than earth's.

"We probably won't be able to walk straight until we get our earth-legs
back," Flip answered. "I wish I could stay in Colorado with you instead of
going back to Mexico City, Rip. We could have a lot of fun in eight
weeks."

Rip nodded. "Tough luck, Flip. But anyway, we have the same assignment."

Both Planeteers had been assigned to Special Order Squadron Four, which
was attached to the cruiser _Bolide_. The cruiser was in high space,
beyond the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn doing comet research.

They got off the track at Valve Two and stepped through into the rocket's
interior. Two seats just ahead of the fins were vacant and they slid into
them. Rip looked through the thick port beside him and saw the distinctive
blue glow of a nuclear drive cruiser sliding sternward toward the
platform.

"Wave your eye stalks at that job," Flip said admiringly. "Wonder what
it's doing here?"

The space platform was a refueling depot where conventional chemical fuel
rockets topped off their tanks before flaming for space. The newer nuclear
drive cruisers had no need to stop. Their atomic piles needed new neutron
sources only once in a few years.

The voice horn in the rocket cabin sounded. "The SCN _Scorpius_ is passing
Valve Two, landing at Valve Eight."

"I thought that ship was with Squadron One on Mercury," Rip recalled.
"Wonder why they pulled it back here?"

Flip had no chance to reply because the chief rocket officer took up his
station at the valve and began to call the roll. Rip answered to his name.

The rocket officer finished the roll, then announced: "Buttoning up in
twenty seconds. Blast off in forty-five. Don't bother with acceleration
harness. We'll fall free, with just enough flame going for control."

The ten-second warning bell sounded, and, before the bell had ceased, the
voice horn blasted. "Get it! Foster, R.I.P., Lieutenant. Report to the
platform commander. Show an exhaust!"

Rip leaped to his feet. "Hold on, Flip. I'll see what the old man wants
and be right back."

"Get flaming," the rocket officer called. "Show an exhaust like the man
said. This bucket leaves on time, and we're sealing the port."

Rip hesitated. The rocket would leave without him!

Flip said urgently, "You better ram it, Rip."

He knew he had no choice. "Tell my folks I'll make the next rocket," he
called, and ran. He leaped through the valve, jumped for the high speed
track and was whisked around the rim of the space platform.

He ran a hand through his short red hair, a gesture of bewilderment. His
records had cleared. So far as he knew, all his papers were in order, and
he had his next assignment. He couldn't figure why the platform commander
would want to see him. But the horn had called "show an exhaust," which
meant to get there in a hurry.

He jumped off the track at the main crossrun and hurried toward the center
of the platform. In a moment he stood before the platform commander's
door, waiting to be identified.

The door swung open and a junior officer in the blue tunic and trousers of
a spaceman motioned him to the inner room. "Go in, Lieutenant."

"Thank you." He hurried into the commander's room and stood at attention.

Commander Jennsen, the Norwegian spaceman who had commanded the platform
since before Rip's arrival as a raw cadet, was dictating into his command
relay circuit. As he spoke, printed copies were being received in the
platform personnel office, Special Order Squadron headquarters on earth,
aboard the cruiser _Bolide_ in high space, and aboard the newly landed
cruiser _Scorpius_.

Rip listened, spellbound.

"Foster, R.I.P., Lieutenant, SOS. Serial seven-nine-four-three. Assigned
SOS Four. Change orders, effective this date-time. Cancel earth-leave.
Subject officer will report to commander, SCN _Scorpius_ with detachment
of nine men. Senior non-commissioned officer and second in command, Koa,
A.P., Sergeant-major, SOS. Serial two-nine-four-one. Commander _Scorpius_
will transport detachment to coordinates given in basic cruiser
astrocourse, delivering orders to detachment enroute. Take full steps for
maximum security. This is Federation priority A, Space Council security
procedures."

Rip swallowed hard. The highest possible priority, given by the Federation
itself, had cancelled his leave. Not only that, but the cruiser to which
he was assigned was instructed to follow Space Council security
procedures, which meant the job, whatever it was, was rated even more
urgent than secret!

Commander Jennsen looked up and saw Rip. He snapped, "Did you get all of
that?"

"Y-Yessir."

"You'll get written copies on the cruiser. Now flame out of here. Collect
your men and get aboard. The _Scorpius_ leaves in five minutes."

Rip ran. The realization hit him that the big nuclear cruiser had stopped
at the platform for the sole purpose of collecting him and nine enlisted
Planeteers.

The low gravity helped him cover the hundred yards to the personnel office
in five leaps. He swung to a stop by grabbing the push bar of the office
door. He yelled at the enlisted spaceman on duty, "Where do I find nine
men?"

The spaceman looked at him vacantly. "What for? You got a requisition,
Lieutenant?"

"Never mind requisitions," Rip snapped. "I've got to find nine Planeteers
and get them on the _Scorpius_ before it flames off."

The spaceman's face cleared. "Oh. You mean Koa's detachment. They left a
few minutes ago."

"Where? Where did they go?"

The spaceman shrugged. The doings of Planeteers were no concern of his.
