The Project Gutenberg EBook of Elements of Structural and Systematic Botany, by
Douglas Houghton Campbell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Elements of Structural and Systematic Botany
       For High Schools and Elementary College Courses

Author: Douglas Houghton Campbell

Release Date: January 17, 2007 [EBook #20390]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SYSTEMATIC BOTANY ***




Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Laura Wisewell and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net





  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  | Transcriber's note: In this lower-bit text version the male  |
  | and female symbols have been replaced with [Male] and        |
  | [Female] respectively. The correct symbols are used in the   |
  | UTF-8 text and HTML versions of this eBook.                  |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+



                               ELEMENTS

                                  OF

                  STRUCTURAL AND SYSTEMATIC BOTANY,


                                 FOR
                     HIGH SCHOOLS AND ELEMENTARY
                           COLLEGE COURSES.


                                  BY
                  DOUGLAS HOUGHTON CAMPBELL, PH.D.,
            PROFESSOR OF BOTANY IN THE INDIANA UNIVERSITY.


                           BOSTON, U.S.A.:
                     PUBLISHED BY GINN & COMPANY.
                                1890.



                           COPYRIGHT, 1890,
                    BY DOUGLAS HOUGHTON CAMPBELL.

                         ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.

          TYPOGRAPHY BY J. S. CUSHING & CO., BOSTON, U.S.A.
               PRESSWORK BY GINN & CO., BOSTON, U.S.A.




PREFACE.


The rapid advances made in the science of botany within the last few
years necessitate changes in the text books in use as well as in
methods of teaching. Having, in his own experience as a teacher, felt
the need of a book different from any now in use, the author has
prepared the present volume with a hope that it may serve the purpose
for which it is intended; viz., an introduction to the study of botany
for use in high schools especially, but sufficiently comprehensive to
serve also as a beginning book in most colleges.

It does not pretend to be a complete treatise of the whole science,
and this, it is hoped, will be sufficient apology for the absence from
its pages of many important subjects, especially physiological topics.
It was found impracticable to compress within the limits of a book of
moderate size anything like a thorough discussion of even the most
important topics of _all_ the departments of botany. As a thorough
understanding of the structure of any organism forms the basis of all
further intelligent study of the same, it has seemed to the author
proper to emphasize this feature in the present work, which is
professedly an _introduction_, only, to the science.

This structural work has been supplemented by so much classification
as will serve to make clear the relationships of different groups, and
the principles upon which the classification is based, as well as
enable the student to recognize the commoner types of the different
groups as they are met with. The aim of this book is not, however,
merely the identification of plants. We wish here to enter a strong
protest against the only too prevalent idea that the chief aim of
botany is the ability to run down a plant by means of an "Analytical
Key," the subject being exhausted as soon as the name of the plant is
discovered. A knowledge of the plant itself is far more important than
its name, however desirable it may be to know the latter.

In selecting the plants employed as examples of the different groups,
such were chosen, as far as possible, as are everywhere common. Of
course this was not always possible, as some important forms, _e.g._
the red and brown seaweeds, are necessarily not always readily
procurable by all students, but it will be found that the great
majority of the forms used, or closely related ones, are within the
reach of nearly all students; and such directions are given for
collecting and preserving them as will make it possible even for those
in the larger cities to supply themselves with the necessary
materials. Such directions, too, for the manipulation and examination
of specimens are given as will make the book, it is hoped, a
laboratory guide as well as a manual of classification. Indeed, it is
primarily intended that the book should so serve as a help in the
study of the actual specimens.

Although much can be done in the study, even of the lowest plants,
without microscopic aid other than a hand lens, for a thorough
understanding of the structure of any plant a good compound microscope
is indispensable, and wherever it is possible the student should be
provided with such an instrument, to use this book to the best
advantage. As, however, many are not able to have the use of a
microscope, the gross anatomy of all the forms described has been
carefully treated for the especial benefit of such students. Such
portions of the text, as well as the general discussions, are printed
in ordinary type, while the minute anatomy, and all points requiring
microscopic aid, are discussed in separate paragraphs printed in
smaller type.

The drawings, with very few exceptions, which are duly credited, were
drawn from nature by the author, and nearly all expressly for this
work.

A list of the most useful books of reference is appended, all of which
have been more or less consulted in the preparation of the following
pages.

The classification adopted is, with slight changes, that given in
Goebel's "Outlines of Morphology and Classification"; while, perhaps,
not in all respects entirely satisfactory, it seems to represent more
nearly than any other our present knowledge of the subject. Certain
groups, like the Diatoms and _Characeae_, are puzzles to the botanist,
and at present it is impossible to give them more than a provisional
place in the system.

If this volume serves to give the student some comprehension of the
real aims of botanical science, and its claims to be something more
than the "Analysis" of flowers, it will have fulfilled its mission.

DOUGLAS H. CAMPBELL.

  BLOOMINGTON, INDIANA,
    October, 1889.




TABLE OF CONTENTS.


                                                                  PAGE
  CHAPTER I.--INTRODUCTION                                           1

  Composition of Matter; Biology; Botany; Zooelogy; Departments
  of Botany; Implements and Reagents; Collecting
  Specimens.


  CHAPTER II.--THE CELL                                              6

  Parts of the Cell; Formation of New Cells; Tissues.


  CHAPTER III.--CLASSIFICATION OF PLANTS                             9

  Protophytes; Slime-moulds; Schizophytes; Blue-green Slimes,
  _Oscillaria_; Schizomycetes, _Bacteria_; Green Monads,
  _Euglena_, _Volvox_.


  CHAPTER IV.--ALGAE                                                 21

  Classification of Algae; Green Algae; _Protococcaceae_,
  _Protococcus_; _Confervaceae_, _Cladophora_, _OEdogonium_,
  _Coleochaete_.


  CHAPTER V.--GREEN ALGAE (_Continued_)                              30

  Pond-scums, _Spirogyra_; _Siphoneae_, _Vaucheria_; _Characeae_,
  _Chara_.


  CHAPTER VI.--BROWN SEAWEEDS                                       41

  _Diatomaceae_; True Brown Algae, _Fucus_; Classification of
  Brown Algae.


  CHAPTER VII.--RED ALGAE                                            49

  Structure of Red Algae; _Callithamnion_; Fresh-Water Forms.


  CHAPTER VIII.--FUNGI                                              54

  _Phycomycetes_, _Mycomycetes_; _Phycomycetes_, Black Moulds,
  _Mucor_; White Rusts and Mildews, _Cystopus_; Water Moulds.


  CHAPTER IX.--TRUE FUNGI                                           63

  Yeast; Smuts; _Ascomycetes_; Dandelion Mildew; Cup Fungi,
  _Ascobolus_; Lichens; Black Fungi.


  CHAPTER X.--TRUE FUNGI (_Continued_)                              77

  _Basidiomycetes_; Rusts; _Coprinus_; Classification.


  CHAPTER XI.--BRYOPHYTES                                           86

  Classification; Liverworts, _Madotheca_; Classification of
  Liverworts; Mosses, _Funaria_; Classification of Mosses.


  CHAPTER XII.--PTERIDOPHYTES                                      102

  Bryophytes and Pteridophytes; Germination and Prothallium;
  Structure of Maiden-hair Fern.


  CHAPTER XIII.--CLASSIFICATION OF PTERIDOPHYTES                   116

  Ferns; Horse-tails; Club Mosses.


  CHAPTER XIV.--SPERMAPHYTES                                       128

  General Characteristics; Gymnosperms and Angiosperms,
  Scotch-pine; Classification of Gymnosperms.


  CHAPTER XV.--SPERMAPHYTES (_Continued_)                          143

  Angiosperms; Flowers of Angiosperms; Classification of
  Angiosperms; Monocotyledons, Structure of _Erythronium_.


  CHAPTER XVI.--CLASSIFICATION OF MONOCOTYLEDONS                   153

  _Liliiflorae_; _Enantioblastae_; _Spadiciflorae_; _Glumaceae_;
  _Scitamineae_; _Gynandrae_, _Helobiae_.


  CHAPTER XVII.--DICOTYLEDONS                                      170

  General Characteristics; Structure of Shepherd's-purse.


  CHAPTER XVIII.--CLASSIFICATION OF DICOTYLEDONS                   181

  _Choripetalae_: _Iuliflorae_; _Centrospermae_; _Aphanocyclae_;
  _Eucyclae_; _Tricoccae_; _Calyciflorae_.


  CHAPTER XIX.--CLASSIFICATION OF DICOTYLEDONS
  (_Continued_)                                                    210

  _Sympetalae_: _Isocarpae_, _Bicornes_, _Primulinae_, _Diospyrinae_;
  _Anisocarpae_, _Tubiflorae_, _Labiatiflorae_, _Contortae_,
  _Campanulinae_, _Aggregatae_.


  CHAPTER XX.--FERTILIZATION OF FLOWERS                            225


  CHAPTER XXI.--HISTOLOGICAL METHODS                               230

  Nuclear Division in Wild Onion; Methods of Fixing, Staining,
  and Mounting Permanent Preparations; Reference Books.


  INDEX                                                            237




BOTANY.




CHAPTER I.

INTRODUCTION.


All matter is composed of certain constituents (about seventy are at
present known), which, so far as the chemist is concerned, are
indivisible, and are known as elements.

Of the innumerable combinations of these elements, two general classes
may be recognized, organic and inorganic bodies. While it is
impossible, owing to the dependence of all organized matter upon
inorganic matter, to give an absolute definition, we at once recognize
the peculiarities of organic or living bodies as distinguished from
inorganic or non-living ones. All living bodies feed, grow, and
reproduce, these acts being the result of the action of forces
resident within the organism. Inorganic bodies, on the other hand,
remain, as a rule, unchanged so long as they are not acted upon by
external forces.

All living organisms are dependent for existence upon inorganic
matter, and sooner or later return these elements to the sources
whence they came. Thus, a plant extracts from the earth and air
certain inorganic compounds which are converted by the activity of the
plant into a part of its own substance, becoming thus incorporated
into a living organism. After the plant dies, however, it undergoes
decomposition, and the elements are returned again to the earth and
atmosphere from which they were taken.

Investigation has shown that living bodies contain comparatively few
elements, but these are combined into extraordinarily complex
compounds. The following elements appear to be essential to all living
bodies: carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, sulphur, potassium.
Besides these there are several others usually present, but not
apparently essential to all organisms. These include phosphorus, iron,
calcium, sodium, magnesium, chlorine, silicon.

As we examine more closely the structure and functions of organic
bodies, an extraordinary uniformity is apparent in all of them. This
is disguised in the more specialized forms, but in the simpler ones is
very apparent. Owing to this any attempt to separate absolutely the
animal and vegetable kingdoms proves futile.

The science that treats of living things, irrespective of the
distinction between plant and animal, is called "Biology," but for
many purposes it is desirable to recognize the distinctions, making
two departments of Biology,--Botany, treating of plants; and Zooelogy,
of animals. It is with the first of these only that we shall concern
ourselves here.

When one takes up a plant his attention is naturally first drawn to
its general appearance and structure, whether it is a complicated one
like one of the flowering plants, or some humbler member of the
vegetable kingdom,--a moss, seaweed, toadstool,--or even some still
simpler plant like a mould, or the apparently structureless green scum
that floats on a stagnant pond. In any case the impulse is to
investigate the form and structure as far as the means at one's
disposal will permit. Such a study of structure constitutes
"Morphology," which includes two departments,--gross anatomy, or a
general study of the parts; and minute anatomy, or "Histology," in
which a microscopic examination is made of the structure of the
different parts. A special department of Morphology called
"Embryology" is often recognized. This embraces a study of the
development of the organism from its earliest stage, and also the
development of its different members.

From a study of the structure of organisms we get a clue to their
