Project Gutenberg's A Field Book of the Stars, by William Tyler Olcott

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Field Book of the Stars

Author: William Tyler Olcott

Release Date: March 9, 2007 [EBook #20769]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A FIELD BOOK OF THE STARS ***




Produced by Audrey Longhurst, Christine D. and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






  Transcriber's note:

  The transcription schemes for characters that could not be used in a
  plain text version of this text have been listed at the end of this
  file under the heading Transcriber's Notes.



  A FIELD BOOK
  OF
  THE STARS



BY

WILLIAM TYLER OLCOTT


_Second Edition, revised and enlarged_


WITH FIFTY DIAGRAMS



  G.P. PUTNAM'S SONS
  NEW YORK AND LONDON
  The Knickerbocker Press

  COPYRIGHT, 1907
  BY
  WILLIAM TYLER OLCOTT
  COPYRIGHT, 1914
  BY
  WILLIAM TYLER OLCOTT
  (For Second Edition)

[Illustration: The Knickerbocker Press, New York]

_Printed in the United States of America_




INTRODUCTION.


Considering the ease with which a knowledge of the constellations can
be acquired, it seems a remarkable fact that so few are conversant
with these time-honored configurations of the heavens. Aside from a
knowledge of "the Dipper" and "the Pleiades," the constellations to
the vast majority, are utterly unknown.

To facilitate and popularize if possible this fascinating recreation
of star-gazing the author has designed this field-book. It is limited
in scope solely to that purpose, and all matter of a technical or
theoretical nature has been omitted.

The endeavor has been to include in these pages only such matter as
the reader can observe with the naked eye, or an opera-glass.
Simplicity and brevity have been aimed at, the main idea being that
whatever is bulky or verbose is a hindrance rather than a help when
actually engaged in the observation of the heavens.

The constellations embraced in this manual are only those visible from
the average latitude of the New England and Middle States, and owe
their place in the particular season in which they are found to the
fact that in that season they are favorably situated for observation.

With this brief explanatory note of the purpose and design of the
book, the author proceeds to outline the scheme of study.




SCHEME OF STUDY.


The table of contents shows the scheme of study to be pursued, and to
facilitate the work it is desirable that the student follow the
therein circumscribed order.

A knowledge on the part of the reader of Ursa Major, or "the Dipper"
as it is commonly called, and "the Pleiades," the well-known group in
Taurus, is presupposed by the author.

With this knowledge as a basis, the student is enabled in any season
to take up the study of the constellations. By following out the order
dictated, he will in a few nights of observation be enabled to
identify the various configurations making up the several
constellations that are set apart for study in that particular season.

A large plate, showing the appearance of the heavens at a designated
time on the first night of the quarter, is inserted before each
season's work. This should be consulted by the student before he makes
an observation, in order that he may obtain a comprehensive idea of
the relative position of the constellations, and also know in what
part of the heavens to locate the constellation which he wishes to
identify.

A knowledge of one constellation enables the student to determine the
position of the next in order. In this work, the identification of
each constellation depends on a knowledge of what precedes, always
bearing in mind the fact that each season starts as a new and distinct
part to be taken by itself, and has no bearing on that which comes
before.




CONTENTS

                                                                PAGE

  INTRODUCTION                                                   iii

  SCHEME OF STUDY                                                  v


  The Constellations of Spring.

  MAP OF THE HEAVENS 9 P.M., APRIL FIRST                           3

  1.  URSA MAJOR                                                   4

  2.  URSA MINOR                                                   6
      Located by the pointer stars in Ursa Major.

  3.  GEMINI                                                       8
      Located by a line drawn through designated stars
      in Ursa Major.

  4.  AURIGA                                                      10
      Located in the same manner as Gemini.

  5.  CANCER                                                      12
      Located by a line drawn from Auriga to Gemini
      and prolonged.

  6.  HYDRA                                                       14
      The head of Hydra is to be seen just below Cancer.

  7.  LEO                                                         16
      Located by a line drawn from Gemini to Cancer
      and prolonged.

  8.  COMA BERENICES                                              18
      Position indicated by drawing a line through
      designated stars in Leo.

  9.  CANIS MINOR                                                 20
      Located by a line drawn from Auriga to Gemini
      and prolonged.

  10. CORVUS                                                      22
      Located by a line drawn from Ursa Minor through
      Ursa Major and prolonged.

  11. CRATER                                                      24
      Located south of Leo and just west of Corvus.

  METEORIC SHOWERS, APRIL TO JULY                                 26


  The Constellations of Summer.

  MAP OF THE HEAVENS 9 P.M., JULY FIRST                           31

  12. DRACO                                                       32
      Lies between Ursa Major and Ursa Minor, coiling
      about the latter.

  13. LYRA                                                        34
      Vega, its brightest star, is 12[deg] S.W. of the Dragon's
      head.

  14. CYGNUS                                                      36
      Deneb, its brightest star, is about 20[deg] east of Vega.

  15. AQUILA                                                      38
      Located by a line drawn from the Dragon's head
      through Vega and prolonged.

  16. DELPHINUS                                                   40
      Located about 10[deg] northeast of Altair in Aquila.

  17. SAGITTARIUS                                                 42
      Located by a line drawn from Cygnus to Aquila
      and prolonged.

  18. OPHIUCHUS AND SERPENS                                       44
      Located by a line drawn from Delphinus to Aquila
      and prolonged.

  19. SCORPIUS                                                    46
      Located just under Ophiuchus, and west of Sagittarius.

  20. LIBRA                                                       48
      Located about 15[deg] west of the head of Scorpius.

  21. CORONA BOREALIS                                             50
      Located just above the head of Serpens.

  22. HERCULES                                                    52
      Located by lines drawn from either Vega or Altair
      to Corona.

  23. BO[:O]TES                                                   54
      Located just west of the Crown. Arcturus, its
      brightest star, is about 30[deg] southeast of [[^e]] Ursae
      Majoris.

  24. VIRGO                                                       56
      Spica, its brightest star, is located by a line drawn
      from Antares in Scorpius through [a] in Libra and
      prolonged about 20[deg].

  25. CANES VENATICI                                              58
      Cor Caroli, its brightest star, is about 17[deg] south
      of Alioth in Ursa Major.

  METEORIC SHOWERS, JULY TO OCTOBER                               60


  The Constellations of Autumn.

  MAP OF THE HEAVENS 9 P.M., OCTOBER FIRST                        65

  26. CASSIOPEIA                                                  66
      Located by a line drawn from Ursa Major through
      the Pole star, the position of which is indicated
      by the pointer stars [a] and [b] Ursae Majoris.

  27. CEPHEUS                                                     68
      Located by pointer stars in Cassiopeia.

  28. PEGASUS                                                     70
      The great square of Pegasus is located by a line
      drawn from Polaris to Cassiopeia and prolonged.

  29. ANDROMEDA                                                   72
      The star Alpheratz in Andromeda is at the northeast
      corner of the great square of Pegasus.

  30. PERSEUS                                                     74
      Lies 9[deg] east of [g] Andromedae.

  31. PISCES                                                      76
      The Circlet in Pisces is to be seen just below
      Pegasus.

  32. TRIANGULUM                                                  78
      A line drawn from Pegasus to Perseus passes through
      [b] in Triangulum.

  33. AQUARIUS                                                    80
      The position of the water jar of Aquarius is determined
      by pointer stars in Pegasus.

  34. CAPRICORNUS                                                 82
      The head of the Sea Goat is located by a line drawn
      from [a] Pegasi through [z] and [th] Pegasi and prolonged
      about 25[deg].

  35. ARIES                                                       84
      Lies just south of Triangulum. A line drawn
      from [g] Andromedae through [b] Trianguli points
      out [a] Arietis.

  36. CETUS                                                       86
      The head of Cetus lies about 20[deg] southeast of
      Aries.

  37. MUSCA                                                       88
      Located between Triangulum and Aries.

  METEORIC SHOWERS, OCTOBER TO JANUARY                            90


  The Constellations of Winter.

  MAP OF THE HEAVENS 9 P.M., JANUARY FIRST                        95

  38. TAURUS                                                      96
      Contains the celebrated and unmistakable group,
      The Pleiades, to be seen almost overhead in
      the early evening during the Winter months.

  39. ORION                                                       98
      The tips of the horns of the Bull are pointer stars
      to Betelgeuze, in Orion.

  40. LEPUS                                                      100
      Located just below Orion.

  41. COLUMBA                                                    102
      Located south of Lepus, close to the horizon.

  42. CANIS MAJOR                                                104
      Located by a line drawn from the stars forming
      Orion's girdle.

  43. ARGO NAVIS                                                 106
      Located by a line drawn from Orion to Canis
      Major and prolonged 18[deg].

  44. MONOCEROS                                                  108
      Located just east of Orion.

  45. ERIDANUS                                                   110
      Located just west of Rigel, in Orion.

  METEORIC SHOWERS, JANUARY TO APRIL                             112

  THE PLANETS                                                    115

  THE MILKY WAY                                                  124

  THE MOTIONS OF THE STARS                                       126

  METEORS, OR SHOOTING STARS                                     130

  NAMES OF THE STARS AND THEIR MEANINGS                          133

  INDEX                                                          159




THE DIAGRAMS.


The diagrams, it will be observed, are grouped under the seasons, and
they indicate the positions of the constellations as they appear at 9
o'clock P.M. in mid-season.

To facilitate finding and observing the constellations, the student
should face in the direction indicated in the text. This applies to
all constellations excepting those near the zenith.

The four large plates are so arranged that the observer is supposed to
be looking at the southern skies. By turning the plate about from left
to right, the eastern, northern, and western skies are shown
successively.

On many of the diagrams the position of nebulae is indicated. These are
designated by the initial letter of the astronomer who catalogued
them, preceded by his catalogue number, as for instance 8 M. signifies
nebula number 8 in Messier's catalogue.

The magnitudes assigned to the stars in the diagrams are derived from
the Harvard Photometry. When a star is midway between two magnitudes
the numeral is underlined, thus _2_, indicates a star of magnitude
2.5.

If a star's magnitude is between 1 and 1.5 it is regarded as a
first-magnitude star. If it lies between 1.5 and 2 it is designated
second magnitude.




THE CONSTELLATIONS OF SPRING.

[Illustration: Map showing the principal stars visible from Lat. 40[deg]
N. at 9 o'clock April 1st.]




URSA MAJOR (er'sa m[=a]'-jor)--THE GREAT BEAR. (Face North.)


LOCATION.--Ursa Major is probably the best known of the constellations,
and in this work I presuppose that the reader is familiar with its
position in the heavens. It is one of the most noted and conspicuous
constellations in the northern hemisphere, and is readily and
unmistakably distinguished from all others by means of a remarkable
cluster of seven bright stars in the northern heavens, forming what is
familiarly termed "The Dipper."

The stars [a] and [b] are called the pointers, because they always
point toward the Pole Star, 28-3/4[deg] distant from [a].

Alioth is very nearly opposite Shedir in Cassiopeia, and at an equal
distance from the Pole. The same can be said of Megres, in Ursa Major,
and Caph, in Cassiopeia.

The star [o] is at the tip of the Bear's nose. A clearly defined
semicircle begins at [o] and ends in the pair [i] and [k] at the
extremity of the Bear's right fore paw. This group of stars resembles
a sickle. Note little Alcor close to Mizar. This star was used by the
Arabs as a test of good eyesight.

Mizar and Alcor are known as the horse and his rider.

This plate shows the Bear lying on his back, his feet projected up the
sky; three conspicuous pairs of stars represent three of his four
feet.

The Chaldean shepherds and the Iroquois Indians gave to this
constellation the same name. The Egyptians called it "The Thigh."

[a] and [[^e]] are moving through space in a contrary direction to the
remaining five stars in "The Dipper."

[Illustration: URSA MAJOR]




URSA MINOR (er'-sa mi'-nor)--THE LITTLE BEAR. (Face North.)


LOCATION.--The two pointer stars in Ursa Major indicate the position
of Polaris, the North Star, which represents the tip of the tail of
the Little Bear, and the end of the handle of the "Little Dipper." In
all ages of the world, Ursa Minor has been more universally observed
and more carefully noticed than any other constellation, on account of
the importance of the North Star.

Polaris is a little more than 1-1/4[deg] from the true pole. Its light
takes fifty years to reach us.

A line joining [b] Cassiopeiae, and Megres, in Ursa Major, will pass
through Polaris.

At the distance of the nearest fixed star our sun would shine as a
star no brighter than Polaris which is presumably about the sun's
size.

