The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Skylark of Space, by Edward Elmer Smith
and Lee Hawkins Garby


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Skylark of Space


Author: Edward Elmer Smith and Lee Hawkins Garby



Release Date: March 21, 2007  [eBook #20869]
Most recently updated April 18, 2011

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SKYLARK OF SPACE***


E-text prepared by Greg Weeks, L. N. Yaddanapudi, David Dyer-Bennet, and
the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 20869-h.htm or 20869-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/0/8/6/20869/20869-h/20869-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/0/8/6/20869/20869-h.zip)


      +----------------------------------------------------------+
      | Transcriber's note                                       |
      |                                                          |
      | This etext was produced from Amazing Stories August,     |
      | September and October 1928. Extensive research did not   |
      | uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this     |
      | publication was renewed.                                 |
      |                                                          |
      | Other notes and a list of corrections made will be found |
      | at the end of the book.                                  |
      +----------------------------------------------------------+





THE SKYLARK OF SPACE

by

EDWARD ELMER SMITH

In Collaboration with

LEE HAWKINS GARBY







[Illustration: Cover Page]


    +--------------------------------------+
    |                                      |
    | _Perhaps it is a bit unethical and   |
    | unusual for editors to voice their   |
    | opinion of their own wares, but when |
    | such a story as "The Skylark of      |
    | Space" comes along, we just feel as  |
    | if we must shout from the housetops  |
    | that this is the greatest            |
    | interplanetarian and space flying    |
    | story that has appeared this year.   |
    | Indeed, it probably will rank as one |
    | of the great space flying stories    |
    | for many years to come. The story is |
    | chock full, not only of excellent    |
    | science, but woven through it there  |
    | is also that very rare element, love |
    | and romance. This element in an      |
    | interplanetarian story is often apt  |
    | to be foolish, but it does not seem  |
    | so in this particular story._        |
    |                                      |
    | _We know so little about             |
    | intra-atomic forces, that this       |
    | story, improbable as it will appear  |
    | in spots, will read commonplace      |
    | years hence, when we have atomic     |
    | engines, and when we have solved the |
    | riddle of the atom._                 |
    |                                      |
    | _You will follow the hair-raising    |
    | explorations and strange ventures    |
    | into far-away worlds with bated      |
    | breath, and you will be fascinated,  |
    | as we were, with the strangeness of  |
    | it all._                             |
    |                                      |
    +--------------------------------------+




CHAPTER I

The Occurrence of the Impossible


Petrified with astonishment, Richard Seaton stared after the copper
steam-bath upon which he had been electrolyzing his solution of "X," the
unknown metal. For as soon as he had removed the beaker the heavy bath
had jumped endwise from under his hand as though it were alive. It had
flown with terrific speed over the table, smashing apparatus and bottles
of chemicals on its way, and was even now disappearing through the open
window. He seized his prism binoculars and focused them upon the flying
vessel, a speck in the distance. Through the glass he saw that it did
not fall to the ground, but continued on in a straight line, only its
rapidly diminishing size showing the enormous velocity with which it was
moving. It grew smaller and smaller, and in a few moments disappeared
utterly.

The chemist turned as though in a trance. How was this? The copper bath
he had used for months was gone--gone like a shot, with nothing to make
it go. Nothing, that is, except an electric cell and a few drops of the
unknown solution. He looked at the empty space where it had stood, at
the broken glass covering his laboratory table, and again stared out of
the window.

He was aroused from his stunned inaction by the entrance of his colored
laboratory helper, and silently motioned him to clean up the wreckage.

"What's happened, Doctah?" asked the dusky assistant.

"Search me, Dan. I wish I knew, myself," responded Seaton, absently,
lost in wonder at the incredible phenomenon of which he had just been a
witness.

Ferdinand Scott, a chemist employed in the next room, entered breezily.

"Hello, Dicky, thought I heard a racket in here," the newcomer remarked.
Then he saw the helper busily mopping up the reeking mass of chemicals.

"Great balls of fire!" he exclaimed. "What've you been celebrating? Had
an explosion? How, what, and why?"

"I can tell you the 'what,' and part of the 'how'," Seaton replied
thoughtfully, "but as to the 'why,' I am completely in the dark. Here's
all I know about it," and in a few words he related the foregoing
incident. Scott's face showed in turn interest, amazement, and pitying
alarm. He took Seaton by the arm.

"Dick, old top, I never knew you to drink or dope, but this stuff sure
came out of either a bottle or a needle. Did you see a pink serpent
carrying it away? Take my advice, old son, if you want to stay in Uncle
Sam's service, and lay off the stuff, whatever it is. It's bad enough to
come down here so far gone that you wreck most of your apparatus and
lose the rest of it, but to pull a yarn like that is going too far. The
Chief will have to ask for your resignation, sure. Why don't you take a
couple of days of your leave and straighten up?"

Seaton paid no attention to him, and Scott returned to his own
laboratory, shaking his head sadly.

Seaton, with his mind in a whirl, walked slowly to his desk, picked up
his blackened and battered briar pipe, and sat down to study out what he
had done, or what could possibly have happened, to result in such an
unbelievable infraction of all the laws of mechanics and gravitation. He
knew that he was sober and sane, that the thing had actually happened.
But why? And how? All his scientific training told him that it was
impossible. It was unthinkable that an inert mass of metal should fly
off into space without any applied force. Since it had actually
happened, there must have been applied an enormous and hitherto unknown
force. What was that force? The reason for this unbelievable
manifestation of energy was certainly somewhere in the solution, the
electrolytic cell, or the steam-bath. Concentrating all the power of his
highly-trained analytical mind upon the problem--deaf and blind to
everything else, as was his wont when deeply interested--he sat
motionless, with his forgotten pipe clenched between his teeth. Hour
after hour he sat there, while most of his fellow-chemists finished the
day's work and left the building and the room slowly darkened with the
coming of night.

Finally he jumped up. Crashing his hand down upon the desk, he
exclaimed:

"I have liberated the intra-atomic energy of copper! Copper, 'X,' and
electric current!

"I'm sure a fool for luck!" he continued as a new thought struck him.
"Suppose it had been liberated all at once? Probably blown the whole
world off its hinges. But it wasn't: it was given off slowly and in a
straight line. Wonder why? Talk about power! Infinite! Believe me, I'll
show this whole Bureau of Chemistry something to make their eyes stick
out, tomorrow. If they won't let me go ahead and develop it, I'll
resign, hunt up some more 'X', and do it myself. That bath is on its way
to the moon right now, and there's no reason why I can't follow it.
Martin's such a fanatic on exploration, he'll fall all over himself to
build us any kind of a craft we'll need ... we'll explore the whole
solar system! Great Cat, what a chance! A fool for luck is right!"

He came to himself with a start. He switched on the lights and saw that
it was ten o'clock. Simultaneously he recalled that he was to have had
dinner with his fiancee at her home, their first dinner since their
engagement. Cursing himself for an idiot he hastily left the building,
and soon his motorcycle was tearing up Connecticut Avenue toward his
sweetheart's home.




CHAPTER II

Steel Becomes Interested


Dr. Marc DuQuesne was in his laboratory, engaged in a research upon
certain of the rare metals, particularly in regard to their
electrochemical properties. He was a striking figure. Well over six feet
tall, unusually broad-shouldered even for his height, he was plainly a
man of enormous physical strength. His thick, slightly wavy hair was
black. His eyes, only a trifle lighter in shade, were surmounted by
heavy black eyebrows which grew together above his aquiline nose.

Scott strolled into the room, finding DuQuesne leaning over a delicate
electrical instrument, his forbidding but handsome face strangely
illuminated by the ghastly glare of his mercury-vapor arcs.

"Hello, Blackie," Scott began. "I thought it was Seaton in here at
first. A fellow has to see your faces to tell you two apart. Speaking of
Seaton, d'you think that he's quite right?"

"I should say, off-hand, that he was a little out of control last night
and this morning," replied DuQuesne, manipulating connections with his
long, muscular fingers. "I don't think that he's insane, and I don't
believe that he dopes--probably overwork and nervous strain. He'll be
all right in a day or two."

"I think he's a plain nut, myself. That sure was a wild yarn he sprung
on us, wasn't it? His imagination was hitting on all twelve, that's
sure. He seems to believe it himself, though, in spite of making a flat
failure of his demonstration to us this morning. He saved that waste
solution he was working on--what was left of that carboy of platinum
residues after he had recovered all the values, you know--and got them
to put it up at auction this noon. He resigned from the Bureau, and he
and M. Reynolds Crane, that millionaire friend of his, bid it in for ten
cents."

"M. Reynolds Crane?" DuQuesne concealed a start of surprise. "Where does
he come in on this?"

"Oh, they're always together in everything. They've been thicker than
Damon and Pythias for a long time. They play tennis together--they're
doubles champions of the District, you know--and all kinds of things.
Wherever you find one of them you'll usually find the other. Anyway,
after they got the solution Crane took Seaton in his car, and somebody
said they went out to Crane's house. Probably trying to humor him. Well,
ta-ta; I've got a week's work to do yet today."

As Scott left DuQuesne dropped his work and went to his desk, with a new
expression, half of chagrin, half of admiration, on his face. Picking up
his telephone, he called a number.

"Brookings?" he asked, cautiously. "This is DuQuesne. I must see you
immediately. There's something big started that may as well belong to
us.... No, can't say anything over the telephone.... Yes, I'll be right
out."

He left the laboratory and soon was in the private office of the head of
the Washington or "diplomatic" branch, as it was known in certain
circles, of the great World Steel Corporation. Offices and laboratories
were maintained in the city, ostensibly for research work, but in
reality to be near the center of political activity.

"How do you do, Doctor DuQuesne?" Brookings said as he seated his
visitor. "You seem excited."

"Not excited, but in a hurry," DuQuesne replied. "The biggest thing in
history has just broken, and we've got to work fast if we get in on it.
Have you any doubts that I always know what I am talking about?"

"No," answered the other in surprise. "Not the slightest. You are widely
known as an able man. In fact, you have helped this company several
times in various deal--er, in various ways."

"Say it. Brookings. 'Deals' is the right word. This one is going to be
the biggest ever. The beauty of it is that it should be easy--one simple
burglary and an equally simple killing--and won't mean wholesale murder,
as did that...."

"Oh, no, Doctor, not murder. Unavoidable accidents."

"Why not call things by their right names and save breath, as long as
we're alone? I'm not squeamish. But to get down to business. You know
Seaton, of our division, of course. He has been recovering the various
rare metals from all the residues that have accumulated in the Bureau
for years. After separating out all the known metals he had something
left, and thought it was a new element, a metal. In one of his attempts
to get it into the metallic state, a little of its solution fizzed out
and over a copper steam bath or tank, which instantly flew out of the
window like a bullet. It went clear out of sight, out of range of his
binoculars, just that quick." He snapped his fingers under Brookings'
nose. "Now that discovery means such power as the world never dreamed
of. In fact, if Seaton hadn't had all the luck in the world right with
him yesterday, he would have blown half of North America off the map.
Chemists have known for years that all matter contains enormous stores
of intra-atomic energy, but have always considered it 'bound'--that is,
incapable of liberation. Seaton has liberated it."

"And that means?"

"That with the process worked out, the Corporation could furnish power
to the entire world, at very little expense."

       *       *       *       *       *

A look of scornful unbelief passed over Brookings' face.

"Sneer if you like," DuQuesne continued evenly. "Your ignorance doesn't
change the fact in any particular. Do you know what intra-atomic energy
is?"

"I'm afraid that I don't, exactly."

"Well, it's the force that exists between the ultimate component parts
of matter, if you can understand that. A child ought to. Call in your
