The Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific American Supplement, No. 1157,
March 5, 1898, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Scientific American Supplement, No. 1157, March 5, 1898

Author: Various

Release Date: April 27, 2007 [EBook #21225]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Victoria Woosley and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at www.pgdp.net





[Illustration]




SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT NO. 1157




NEW YORK, March 5, 1898.

Scientific American Supplement. Vol. XLV., No. 1157.

Scientific American established 1845

Scientific American Supplement, $5 a year.

Scientific American and Supplement, $7 a year.

       *       *       *       *       *




TABLE OF CONTENTS.

                                                              PAGE
I.     ARCHAEOLOGY.--Requirements of Palestine Explorer       18489

II.    BIOGRAPHY.--Emperor William II. of Germany.--An
       interesting biographical account of the German
       Emperor, with his latest portrait.--1 illustration    18486

III.   CIVIL ENGINEERING.--Heat in Great Tunnels             18492

IV.    ECONOMICS.--Causes of Poverty                         18490

V.     ELECTRICITY.--Liquid Rheostats.--By H. S. WEBB        18498

       The Neutral Use of Cables                             18489

VI.    ETHNOLOGY.--The Influence of Scenery upon the
       Character of Man                                      18488

VII.   FORESTRY.--Apparatus for Obtaining the Cubature of
       Trees.--3 illustrations                               18493

VIII.  GYMNASTICS.--A Novel Way of Riding a Bicycle.
       --1 illustration                                      18489

IX.    HYDROGRAPHY.--Influence of Ocean Currents on Climate  18490

X.     LANDSCAPE GARDENING.--Park Making                     18490

XI.    MARINE ENGINEERING.--The Newfoundland and Nova Scotia
       Passenger Steamer "Bruce."--1 illustration            18492

XII.   MECHANICAL ENGINEERING.--Machine Moulding without
       Stripping Plates.--By E. H. MUMFORD.--A full
       description of an ingenious moulding machine.--7
       illustrations                                         18494

XIII.  MEDICINE.--The Progress of Medical Education in the
       United States                                         18499

       Deaths under Anaesthetics                              18499

XIV.   MISCELLANEOUS:

       Engineering Notes                                     18491

       Miscellaneous Notes                                   18491

       Selected Formulae                                      18491

XV.    NATURAL HISTORY.--Tapirs in the Zoological Garden at
       Breslau.--1 illustration                              18488

XVI.   STEAM ENGINEERING.--An English Steam Fire Engine.
       --1 illustration                                      18493

XVII.  TRAVEL AND EXPLORATION.--My Recent Journey from the
       Nile to Suakim.--By FREDERIC VILLIERS.--The advance
       to Khartoum.--An important account of the recent
       travels of the celebrated war correspondent.          18486

XVIII. TECHNOLOGY.--Artificial India Rubber.--This article
       describes some important experiments which have been
       made in which India rubber substitutes have been
       produced from oil of turpentine                       18495

       Deep and Frosted Etching on Glass                     18496

       The Koppel Electric Locomotives.--This article
       describes a system of electric trolley traction for
       narrow gage railroads.--7 illustrations               18497

       Slate and its Applications.--This article details
       some of the various uses to which slate is put in the
       arts, with a view of slate store vats for breweries.  18496

       Birthplace of the Oilcloth Industry.                  18496

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: LATEST PORTRAIT OF WILLIAM II. OF GERMANY]

EMPEROR WILLIAM II. OF GERMANY.


Since William II. of Germany ascended the throne as German Emperor and
King of Prussia, on June 15, 1888, the eyes of Europe have been fixed
on him. He has always been rather an unknown quantity, and he is
regarded by the powers as an _enfant terrible_. The press of the world
delights in showing up his weak points, and the "war lord" undoubtedly
has them, but, at the same time, he has qualities which are to be
admired and which make him conspicuous among the rulers of Europe.

He is popular in Germany, and it is not surprising, for, in spite of
being autocratic to the last degree, he is honest, courageous,
ambitious, hard working, and, withal, a thorough German, being
intensely patriotic. Indeed, if the people of the Fatherland had the
right to vote for a sovereign, they would undoubtedly choose the
present constitutional ruler, for, while the virtues we have named may
seem commonplace, they are not so when embodied in an emperor. One
thing which places William at a disadvantage is his excessive
frankness, which is, in him, almost a fault, for if he couched his
utterances in courtly or diplomatic phrases, they would pass
unchallenged, instead of being cited to ridicule him. His mistakes
have largely resulted from his impulsive nature coupled with
chauvinism, which is, perhaps, justifiable, or, at least, excusable,
in a ruler.

Since the time when William was a child he evidenced a strong desire
to become acquainted with the details of the office to which his lofty
birth entitled him. It is doubtful if any king since the time of
Frederick the Great has studied the routine of the public offices and
has made such practical inspections of industries of all kinds;
indeed, there is hardly a man in Germany who has more general
knowledge of the material development of the country.

In the army he has worked his way up like any other officer and has a
firm grasp on all the multifarious details of the military
establishment of the great country. He believes in militarism, or in
force to use a more common expression, but in this he is right, for it
has taken two hundred and fifty years to bring Prussia to the position
she now holds, and what she has gained at the point of the sword must
be retained in the same way. The immense sacrifices which the people
make to support the army and navy are deemed necessary for
self-preservation, and with France on one side and Russia on the
other, there really seems to be ample excuse for it. To-day the German
army is as ready as in 1870, when Von Moltke walked down the Unter den
Linden, the day after hostilities were declared, looking in the shop
windows.

No ruler, except possibly Peter the Great, ever gave so many _ex
cathedra_ opinions on so many different subjects in the same length of
time, and of course it cannot be supposed that he has not made
mistakes, but it shows that it is only by prodigious industry that he
has been able to gather the materials on which these utterances are
based. He is indeed the "first servant of the state," and long before
his court or indeed many of the housemaids of Berlin are awake, he is
up and attending to affairs of all kinds.

He is a great traveler, and knows Europe from the North Cape to the
Golden Horn; and while flying across country in his comfortable
vestibuled train, he dispatches business and acquires an excellent
idea of the country, and no traveler can speak more intelligently of
the countries through which he has traveled, and this information is
brought out with good effect in his excellent after-dinner speeches.

In speaking of the versatility of the Emperor, something should be
said of him as a sportsman. He has given a splendid example to the
Germans. He has tried to introduce baseball, football and polo, three
American games. This may be traced to the time when Poultney Bigelow
and J. A. Berrian were the Emperor's playmates. Fenimore Cooper was
one of the favorite authors with the young scion of royalty. The
Emperor is fond of hunting, yachting, tennis and other sports and is
never so happy as when he stands on the bridge of the royal yacht
Hohenzollern. He is a well known figure at Cowes and won the Queen's
Cup in 1891.

William II. was born January 27, 1859, in Berlin, and until he was
fourteen years old his education was intrusted to Dr. Hintzpeter,
assisted by Major Von Gottberg, who was military instructor. At this
time his corps of teachers was increased by the addition of Prediger
Persius, who prepared him for his confirmation, which took place
September 1, 1874, at Potsdam. As William was to lead an active life,
it was thought best to send him to the gymnasium at Cassel.

Orders were given that he and his younger brother Henry, who
accompanied him, should receive the same treatment as the other
pupils, and this order was strictly obeyed. He graduated from this
school January 24, 1877, just before his eighteenth birthday. After
this his military career began with his entrance as an officer into
the first Garde-regiment at Potsdam, that he might become thoroughly
acquainted with practical service. The young prince was assigned to
the company which his father had once commanded. After serving here
for a short time he went to the university at Bonn, and from there he
went back to the army again. Emperor William ascended the throne in
June, 1888, upon the death of his father Frederick III.

In 1880 he was betrothed to Augusta Victoria, Princess of
Schleswig-Holstein, and on February 9, 1881, they were married. The
Empress is about a year younger than the Emperor, and makes an
excellent mother to her four little sons, to whom she is devoted.
Their oldest child, little Prince William, the present Crown Prince,
was born at Potsdam, May 6, 1882. His father's devotion to the army
will doubtless prompt him to make a soldier of his son at an early
age; in fact, he wore the uniform of a fusilier of the Guard before he
was six years old.

The imperial family consists of seven children. The
eldest, the Crown Prince of Germany and Prussia, is Prince
Friedrich-Wilhelm-Victor-August-Ernst, born May 6, 1882. The second
child is Prince Wilhelm-Eitel-Friedrich-Christian-Karl, born July 7,
1883. The third is Prince Adalbert-Ferdinand-Berenger-Victor, born
July 14, 1884. Prince August-Wilhelm-Heinrich-Victor was born January
29. 1887. The fifth child, Prince Oscar-Karl-Gustav-Adolf, was born
July 27, 1888. The sixth child is Prince Joachim-Francois-Humbert. He
was born December 17, 1890. The youngest is a girl, Princess
Victoria-Louise-Adelaide-Mathilde-Charlotte. She was born September
13, 1892.

Our engraving is from the last portrait of the Emperor William, and we
are indebted for it to the Illustrirte Zeitung.

       *       *       *       *       *




MY RECENT JOURNEY FROM THE NILE TO SUAKIM.

BY FREDERIC VILLIERS, IN THE JOURNAL OF THE SOCIETY OF ARTS.


THE ADVANCE TO KHARTOUM.

The recent campaign in the Soudan was a bloodless one to the
correspondent with the expedition, or, rather, on the tail of the
advance. Yet I think, in spite of this little drawback, there is
enough in the vicissitudes of my colleagues and myself during the
recent advance of the Egyptian troops up the Nile to warrant me
addressing you this afternoon. Especially as toward the end of the
campaign the Sirdar, or Commander-in-Chief of the Egyptian army, Sir
Herbert Kitchener, became more sympathetic with our endeavors to get
good copy for our journals, and allowed us to return home by the old
trade route of the Eastern Soudan, over which no European had passed
since the revolt of the Eastern tribes in 1883. Unfortunately, the
period for campaigning in the Soudan is in the hottest months in the
year, on the rising of the Nile at the end of July, when the cataracts
begin to be practicable for navigation. At the same time, in spite of
the heat, it is the healthiest period, for the water, in its brown,
muddy, pea soup state, is wholesomer to drink, and the banks of the
river, which, when exposed at low Nile, give off unhealthy
exhalations, are protected from spreading fever germs by the flood. To
show you how much the people of Egypt depend for their very existence
on this extraordinary river, the average difference between high and
low Nile, giving favorable results, is 26 feet. Twenty-eight feet
would cause serious damage by inundation, and the Nile as low as 20
feet would create a famine. The flood of the river depends entirely on
the equatorial rains which cause the Upper White Nile to rise in April
and the Blue Nile early in June. The muddy Atbara, joining her two
sisters about the same time, sends the flood down to Lower Egypt
toward the end of August at the rate of 100 miles a day. The Blue Nile
in the middle of September falls rapidly away, while the Atbara leaves
the trio in October. The White Nile is then left by herself to recede
slowly and steadily from a current of four knots an hour to a sluggish
and, in many parts, an unwholesome stream. Flies and mosquitoes
increase, and fever is rife.

I arrived in Cairo on a sweltering day in July, and found four
colleagues, who had been waiting for a week the Sirdar's permission to
proceed to the front, still waiting. Luckily, the day after my arrival
a telegram came from headquarters, saying that "we might proceed as
far as Assouan and their await further orders." This, anyhow, was a
move in the right direction; so we at once started. It was rather a
bustle for me to get things ready, for Sunday blocked the way and
little could be done, even on that day, in Cairo. I procured a
servant, a horse and two cases of stores, for the cry was "nothing to
be had up country in the shape of food; hardly sufficient sustenance
to keep the flies alive." My colleagues, who had the start of me, were
able to procure many luxuries--a case of cloudy ammonia for their
toilet, and one of chartreuse, komel and benedictine to make their
after dinner coffee palatable, and some plum pudding, if Christmas
should still find them on the warpath, were a few of the many items
that made up the trousseau of these up-to-date war correspondents,
though at least one of them had been wedded to the life for many
years. Unfortunately I had no time to procure these luxuries, and I
had to proceed ammonialess and puddingless to the seat of war. My
comrades were quite right. Why not do yourself well if you can? One of
them even went in for the luxury of having three shooting irons, two
revolvers and a double-barrel slug pistol, so that when either of the
weapons got hot while he was holding Baggara horsemen at bay, there
was always one cooling, ready to hand. He also, which I believe is a
phenomenal record with any campaigner, took with him thirteen pairs of
riding breeches, a half dozen razors and an ice machine. Even our
commander-in-chief, when campaigning, denies himself more than two
shirts and never travels with ice machines. But the thirteen pairs
impressed me considerably. Why thirteen, more than fifteen, or any
other number? I came to the conclusion that my colleague must
certainly be a member of that mystic body the "Thirteen Club," and as
he had to bring in the odd number somewhere to keep the club fresh in
his memory, he occasionally sat upon it.

I found, after all, there was some wisdom in his eccentricity, for,
when riding the camel, mounted on the rough saddle of the country, I
often wished that I had my friend's forethought, and I should have
been glad to have supplemented mine with his odd number. No doubt my
colleague's idea in having such a variety of nether garments was to
use them respectively, on a similar principle to the revolvers, when
he rode in hot haste with his vivid account of the latest battle to
the telegraph office.

But, unfortunately, this recent campaign did not, after all,
necessitate these elaborate preparations, for there were no dervishes
for us to shoot at or descriptions of bloody battles to be
telegraphed. At all events, the cloudy ammonia and the thirteen
breeches, with the assistance of a silken sash--a different color for
each day of the week--made the brightest and smartest looking little
man in camp. However, when I reflect on this new style of war
correspondent, who, I forgot to mention, also carried with him two
tents, a couple of beds, sundry chairs and tables, a silver-mounted
dressing case, two baths, and a gross of toothpicks, and I think of
the severe simplicity of the old style of campaigning when a famous
correspondent who is still on the warpath, and who always sees the
fighting if there be any, on one arduous campaign took with him the
modest outfit of a tooth brush and a cake of carbolic soap, I joyfully
feel that with the younger generation our profession is keeping pace
with the luxury of the times.


FROM BERBER TO SUAKIM.

Toward the end of the campaign four colleagues--Messrs. Knight,
Gwynne, Scudamore, Maud--and myself, took this opportunity of
traversing a country very little known to the outside world, and a
route which no European had followed for fourteen years, from Berber
to Suakim. Moreover, there was a spice of adventure about it; there
was an uncertainty regarding an altogether peaceful time on the way--a
contingency which always appeals strongly to Englishmen of a roving
and adventurous disposition. Only quite recently raids organized by
the apparently irrepressible Osman Digna had been successfully carried
out a few miles north and south of Berber. At the moment General
Hunter, with two battalions of troops, was marching along the banks of
the River Atbara to hunt for Osman and his followers, but there was
much speculation as to whether five-and-twenty dervish raiders were
still this side of the river, and drawing their water from the wells
on the Suakim road.

I was hardly prepared for this journey--one, probably, of twelve
days--for my campaigning outfit, which I was compelled to leave on
board my nugger on the Nile, had not yet arrived in Berber.
Unfortunately, I could not wait for the gear, as the Sirdar insisted
on our departure at once, for the road would be certainly insecure
directly General Hunter returned from covering our right flank on the
Atbara. I had no clothes but what I stood up in, and I had been more
or less standing up in them without change for the last two weeks.

Our caravan of nineteen camels, with two young ones, quite babies,
following their mothers, and a couple of donkeys, about seven in the
evening of the 30th of October quitted the mud-baked town of Berber,
sleeping in the light of a new moon, and silently moved across the
desert toward the Eastern Star. Next morning at the Morabeh Well, six
miles from Berber, our camels having filled themselves up with water,
and our numerous girbas, or water skins, being charged with the
precious liquid--till they looked as if they were about to burst--our
loads were packed and we started on a journey of fifty-two miles
before the next water could be reached.

We made quite a formidable show trailing over the desert. Probably it
would have been more impressive if our two donkeys had restrained
their ambition, and kept in the rear instead of leading the van. But
animals mostly have their own way in these parts, and asses are no
exception to this rule. The two baby camels commenced "grousing" with
their elders directly we halted or made a fresh advance; they probably
had an inkling of what was in store for them. After all, the world
must seem a hard and unsympathetic place when, having only known it
for two or three weeks, you are compelled to make a journey of 240
miles to keep up with your commissariat. One of these babies was only
in its eighteenth day. In spite of its tender youth the little beast
trotted by the side of its mother, refreshing itself whenever we came
to a halt with a pull from her teats, and, to the astonishment of all,
