The Project Gutenberg EBook of Gambler's World, by John Keith Laumer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Gambler's World

Author: John Keith Laumer

Release Date: May 28, 2007 [EBook #21627]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GAMBLER'S WORLD ***




Produced by Robert Cicconetti, V. L. Simpson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






    Transcriber's Notes:

    This etext was produced from "Worlds of If" November 1961.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
    U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.

    Obvious typesetting errors have been corrected.
    ========================================================




GAMBLER'S
WORLD

By KEITH LAUMER


Illustrated by GAUGHAN




I


Retief paused before a tall mirror to check the overlap of the four sets
of lapels that ornamented the vermilion cutaway of a First Secretary and
Consul.

"Come along, Retief," Magnan said. "The Ambassador has a word to say to
the staff before we go in."

"I hope he isn't going to change the spontaneous speech he plans to make
when the Potentate impulsively suggests a trade agreement along the
lines they've been discussing for the last two months."

"Your derisive attitude is uncalled for, Retief," Magnan said sharply.
"I think you realize it's delayed your promotion in the Corps."

Retief took a last glance in the mirror. "I'm not sure I want a
promotion," he said. "It would mean more lapels."

Ambassador Crodfoller pursed his lips, waiting until Retief and Magnan
took places in the ring of Terrestrial diplomats around him.

"A word of caution only, gentlemen," he said. "Keep always foremost in
your minds the necessity for our identification with the Nenni Caste.
Even a hint of familiarity with lower echelons could mean the failure of
the mission. Let us remember that the Nenni represent authority here on
Petreac. Their traditions must be observed, whatever our personal
preferences. Let's go along now. The Potentate will be making his
entrance any moment."

Magnan came to Retief's side as they moved toward the salon.

"The Ambassador's remarks were addressed chiefly to you, Retief," he
said. "Your laxness in these matters is notorious. Naturally, I believe
firmly in democratic principles myself--"

"Have you ever had a feeling, Mr. Magnan, that there's a lot going on
here that we don't know about?"

Magnan nodded. "Quite so. Ambassador Crodfoller's point exactly. Matters
which are not of concern to the Nenni are of no concern to us."

"Another feeling I get is that the Nenni aren't very bright. Now
suppose--"

"I'm not given to suppositions, Retief. We're here to implement the
policies of the Chief of Mission. And I should dislike to be in the
shoes of a member of the staff whose conduct jeopardized the agreement
that will be concluded here tonight."

       *       *       *       *       *

A bearer with a tray of drinks rounded a fluted column, shied as he
confronted the diplomats, fumbled the tray, grabbed and sent a glass
crashing to the floor.

Magnan leaped back, slapping at the purple cloth of his pants leg.
Retief's hand shot out to steady the tray. The servant rolled terrified
eyes.

"I'll take one of these, now that you're here," Retief said. He took a
glass from the tray, winking at the servant.

"No harm done," he said. "Mr. Magnan's just warming up for the big
dance."

A Nenni major-domo bustled up, rubbing his hands politely.

"Some trouble here?" he said. "What happened, Honorables, what,
what...."

"The blundering idiot," Magnan spluttered. "How dare--"

"You're quite an actor, Mr. Magnan," Retief said. "If I didn't know
about your democratic principles, I'd think you were really mad."

The servant ducked his head and scuttled away.

"Has this fellow...." The major-domo eyed the retreating bearer.

"I dropped my glass," Retief said. "Mr. Magnan's upset because he hates
to see liquor wasted."

Retief turned to find himself face-to-face with Ambassador Crodfoller.

"I witnessed that," The Ambassador hissed. "By the goodness of
Providence, the Potentate and his retinue haven't appeared yet. But I
can assure you the servants saw it. A more un-Nenni-like display I would
find it difficult to imagine!"

Retief arranged his features in an expression of deep interest.

"More un-Nenni-like, sir?" he said. "I'm not sure I--"

"Bah!" The Ambassador glared at Retief, "Your reputation has preceded
you, sir. Your name is associated with a number of the most bizarre
incidents in Corps history. I'm warning you; I'll tolerate nothing." He
turned and stalked away.

"Ambassador-baiting is a dangerous sport, Retief," Magnan said.

Retief took a swallow of his drink. "Still," he said, "it's better than
no sport at all."

"Your time would be better spent observing the Nenni mannerisms.
Frankly, Retief, you're not fitting into the group at all well."

"I'll be candid with you, Mr. Magnan. The group gives me the willies."

"Oh, the Nenni are a trifle frivolous, I'll concede," Magnan said. "But
it's with them that we must deal. And you'd be making a contribution to
the overall mission if you merely abandoned that rather arrogant manner
of yours." Magnan looked at Retief critically. "You can't help your
height, of course. But couldn't you curve your back just a bit--and
possibly assume a more placating expression? Just act a little more...."
