The Project Gutenberg eBook, Breaking Point, by James E. Gunn


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Breaking Point


Author: James E. Gunn



Release Date: July 2, 2007  [eBook #21988]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BREAKING POINT***


E-text prepared by Greg Weeks, Pat A. Benoy, and the Project Gutenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 21988-h.htm or 21988-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/1/9/8/21988/21988-h/21988-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/1/9/8/21988/21988-h.zip)


      +------------------------------------------------------------+
      |                                                            |
      | Transcriber's note:                                        |
      |                                                            |
      |    Illustration captions were added by transcriber.        |
      |                                                            |
      |    Three obvious typographical errors were corrected:      |
      |    undertsood//understood, detectible//detectable,         |
      |    and loosend//loosened.                                  |
      |                                                            |
      |    This etext was produced from Space Science Fiction,     |
      |    March, 1953. Extensive research did not uncover any     |
      |    evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication    |
      |    was renewed.                                            |
      |                                                            |
      +------------------------------------------------------------+





BREAKING POINT

by

JAMES E. GUNN

Illustrated by Ebel







[Illustration: Frontispiece: spaceman studying a chess board.]

[Illustration: Spider and rat in outer space surrounded by planets.]



The ship was proof against any test, but the men inside her could be
strained and warped, individually and horribly. Unfortunately, while the
men knew that, they couldn't really believe it. The Aliens could--and
did.

    _They sent the advance unit out to scout the new planet in the
    _Ambassador_, homing down on the secret beeping of a featureless
    box dropped by an earlier survey party. Then they sat back at
    GHQ and began the same old pattern of worry that followed every
    advance unit._

    _Not about the ship. The _Ambassador_ was a perfect machine,
    automatic, self-adjusting, self-regulating. It was built to last
    and do its job without failure under any and all conditions, as
    long as there was a universe around it. And it could not fail.
    There was no question about that._

    _But an advance unit is composed of men. The factors of safety
    are indeterminable; the duplications of their internal
    mechanisms are conjectural, variable. The strength of the unit
    is the sum of the strengths of its members. The weakness of the
    unit can be a single small failing in a single man._


_Beep ... boop ..._

"Gotcha!" said Ives. Ives was Communications. He had quick eyes, quick
hands. He was huge, almost gross, but graceful. "On the nose," he
grinned, and turned up the volume.

_Beep ... boop ..._

"What else do you expect?" said Johnny. Johnny was the pilot--young,
wide, flat. His movements were as controlled and decisive as those of
the ship itself, in which he had an unshakeable faith. He slid into the
bucket seat before the great master console.

_Beep ... boop ..._

"We expect the ship to do her job," said Hoskins, the Engineer. He was
mild and deft, middle-aged, with a domed head and wide, light-blue eyes
behind old fashioned spectacles. He shared Johnny's belief in the
machine, but through understanding rather than through admiration. "But
it's always good to see her do it."

_Beep ... boop ..._

"Beautiful," said Captain Anderson softly, and he may have been talking
about the way the ship was homing in on the tiny, featureless box that
Survey had dropped on the unexplored planet, or about the planet itself,
or even about the smooth integration of his crew.

_Beep ... boop ..._

Paresi said nothing. He had eyebrows and nostrils as sensitive as a
radarscope, and masked eyes of a luminous black. Faces and motives were
to him what gauges and log-entries were to the Engineer. Paresi was the
Doctor, and he had many a salve and many a splint for invisible ills. He
saw everything and understood much. He leaned against the bulkhead, his
gaze flicking from one to the other of the crew. Occasionally his small
mustache twitched like the antennae of a cat watching a bird.

Barely audible, faint as the blue outline of a distant hill, hungry and
lost as the half-heard cry of a banshee, came the thin sound of high
atmosphere against the ship's hull.

An hour passed.


_Bup-bup-bup-bup ..._

"Shut that damned thing off!"

Ives looked up at the pilot, startled. He turned the gain down to a
whisper. Paresi left the bulkhead and stood behind Johnny. "What's the
matter?" he asked. His voice was feline, too--a sort of purr.

Johnny looked up at him quickly, and grinned. "I can put her down," he
said. "That's what I'm here for. I--like to think maybe I'll get to do
it, that's all. I can't think that with the autopilot blasting out an
'on course'." He punched the veering-jet controls. It served men
perfectly. The ship ignored him, homed on the beam. The ship computed
velocity, altitude, gravity, magnetic polarization, windage; used and
balanced and adjusted for them all. It adjusted for interference from
the manual controls. It served men perfectly. It ignored them utterly.

Johnny turned to look out and downward. Paresi's gaze followed. It was a
beautiful planet, perhaps a shade greener than the blue-green of earth.
It seemed, indefinably, more park-like than wild. It had an air of
controlled lushness and peace.

The braking jets thundered as Johnny depressed a control. Paresi nodded
slightly as he saw the pilot's hand move, for he knew that the autopilot
had done it, and that Johnny's movement was one of trained reflex. The
youngster was intense and alert, hair-trigger schooled, taught to
pretend in such detail that the pretense was reality to him; a precise
pretense that would become reality for all of them if the machine
failed.

But of course the machine would not fail.

Fields fled beneath them, looking like a crazy-quilt in pastel. On them,
nothing moved. Hoskins moved to the viewport and watched them mildly.
"Very pastoral," he said. "Pretty."

"They haven't gotten very far," said Ives.

"Or they've gotten very far indeed," said Captain Anderson.

Johnny snorted. "No factories. No bridges. Cow-tracks and goat paths."

The Captain chuckled. "Some cultures go through an agrarian stage to
reach a technological civilization, and some pass through technology to
reach the pastoral."

"I don't see it," said Johnny shortly, eyes ahead.

Paresi's hand touched the Captain's arm, and the Captain then said
nothing.


_Pwing-g-g!_

"Stand by for landing," said the Captain.

Ives and Hoskins went aft to the shock-panels in the after bulkhead.
Paresi and the Captain stepped into niches flanking the console. Johnny
touched a control that freed his chair in its hydraulic gimbals. Chair
and niches and shock-panels would not be needed as long as the
artificial gravity and inertialess field functioned; it was a ritual.

The ship skimmed treetops, heading phlegmatically for a rocky bluff. A
gush of flame from its underjets and it shouldered heavily upward, just
missing the jagged crest. A gout of fire forward, another, and it went
into a long flat glide, following the fall of a foothill to the plain
beyond. It held course and reduced speed, letting the ground billow up
to it rather than descending. There was a moment of almost-flight,
almost-sliding, and then a rush of dust and smoke which over-took and
passed them. When it cleared, they were part of the plain, part of the
planet.

"A good landing, John," Paresi said. Hoskins caught his eye and frowned.
Paresi grinned broadly, and the exchange between them was clear: _Why do
you needle the kid?_ and _Quiet, Engine-room. I know what I'm doing._
Hoskins shrugged, and, with Ives, crossed to the communications desk.

Ives ran his fat, skilled hands over the controls and peered at his
indicators. "It's more than a good landing," he grunted. "That
squeak-box we homed in on can't be more than a hundred meters from here.
First time I've ever seen a ship bullseye like that."

Johnny locked his gimbals, ran a steady, sensitive hand over the turn of
the console as if it were a woman's flank. "Why--how close do you
usually come?"

"Planetfall's close enough to satisfy Survey," said the Captain. "Once
in a while the box will materialize conveniently on a continent. But
this--this is too good to be true. We practically landed on it."

Hoskins nodded. "It's usually buried in some jungle, or at the bottom of
a sea. But this is really all right. What a lineup! Point nine-eight
earth gravity, Earth-type atmosphere--"

"Argon-rich," said, Ives, from the panel. "Very rich."

"That'll make no real difference," Hoskins went on. "Temperature, about
normal for an early summer back home ... looks as if there's a fiendish
plot afoot here to make things easy for us."

Paresi said, as if to himself, "I worry about easy things."


"Yeah, I know," snorted Johnny, rising to stretch. "The head-shrinker
always does it the hard way. You can't just dislike rice pudding; it has
to be a sister-syndrome. If the shortest distance is from here to there,
don't take it--remember your Uncle Oedipus."

Captain Anderson chuckled. "Cut your jets, Johnny. Maybe Paresi's
tortuous reasoning does seem out of order on such a nice day. But
remember--eternal vigilance isn't just the price of liberty, as the old
books say. It's the price of existence. We know we're here--but we don't
know where 'here' is, and won't until after we get back. This is
_really_ Terra Incognita. The location of Earth, or even of our part of
the galaxy, is something that has to be concealed at all costs, until
we're sure we're not going to turn up a potentially dangerous, possibly
