The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hunters, by William Morrison

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Hunters

Author: William Morrison

Illustrator: Van Dongen

Release Date: September 6, 2007 [EBook #22524]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HUNTERS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Jana Srna and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                                  THE
                                HUNTERS

                          BY WILLIAM MORRISON

                       ILLUSTRATED BY VAN DONGEN


            To all who didn't know him, Curt George was a
            mighty hunter and actor. But this time he was
            up against others who could really act, and
            whose business was the hunting of whole worlds.


There were thirty or more of the little girls, their ages ranging
apparently from nine to eleven, all of them chirping away like a flock
of chicks as they followed the old mother hen past the line of cages.
"Now, now, girls," called Miss Burton cheerily. "Don't scatter. I can't
keep my eye on you if you get too far away from me. You, Hilda, give me
that water pistol. No, don't fill it up first at that fountain. And
Frances, stop bouncing your ball. You'll lose it through the bars, and a
polar bear may get it and not want to give it back."

Frances giggled. "Oh, Miss Burton, do you think the polar bear would
want to play catch?"

The two men who were looking on wore pleased smiles. "Charming," said
Manto. "But somewhat unpredictable, despite all our experiences, _muy
amigo_."

[Illustration]

"No attempts at Spanish, Manto, not here. It calls attention to us. And
you are not sure of the grammar anyway. You may find yourself saying
things you do not intend."

"Sorry, Palit. It wasn't an attempt to show my skill, I assure you. It's
that by now I have a tendency to confuse one language with another."

"I know. You were never a linguist. But about these interesting
creatures--"

"I suggest that they could stand investigation. It would be good to know
how they think."

"Whatever you say, Manto. If you wish, we shall join the little ladies."

"We must have our story prepared first."

Palit nodded, and the two men stepped under the shade of a tree whose
long, drooping, leaf-covered branches formed a convenient screen. For a
moment, the tree hid silence. Then there came from beneath the branches
the chatter of girlish voices, and two little girls skipped merrily
away. Miss Burton did not at first notice that now she had an additional
two children in her charge.

"Do you think you will be able to keep your English straight?" asked one
of the new little girls.

The other one smiled with amusement and at first did not answer. Then
she began to skip around her companion and chant, "I know a secret, I
know a secret."

There was no better way to make herself inconspicuous. For some time,
Miss Burton did not notice her.

                   *       *       *       *       *

The polar bears, the grizzlies, the penguins, the reptiles, all were
left behind. At times the children scattered, but Miss Burton knew how
to get them together again, and not one was lost.

"Here, children, is the building where the kangaroos live. Who knows
where kangaroos come from?"

"Australia!" clanged the shrill chorus.

"That's right. And what other animals come from Australia?"

"I know, Miss Burton!" cried Frances, a dark-haired nine-year-old with a
