The Project Gutenberg EBook of The K-Factor, by 
Harry Harrison (AKA Henry Maxwell Dempsey)

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The K-Factor

Author: Harry Harrison (AKA Henry Maxwell Dempsey)

Illustrator: Summers

Release Date: September 8, 2007 [EBook #22540]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE K-FACTOR ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]




 THE
 K-FACTOR

 By HARRY HARRISON

 _Speed never hurt anybody--it's the sudden stop
 at the end. It's not how much change that signals
 danger, but how fast it's changing...._

 Illustrated by Summers


"We're losing a planet, Neel. I'm afraid that I can't ... understand
it."

The bald and wrinkled head wobbled a bit on the thin neck, and his eyes
were moist. Abravanel was a very old man. Looking at him, Neel realized
for the first time just how old and close to death he was. It was a
profoundly shocking thought.

"Pardon me, sir," Neel broke in, "but is it possible? To lose a planet,
I mean. If the readings are done correctly, and the k-factor equations
worked to the tenth decimal place, then it's really just a matter of
adjustment, making the indicated corrections. After all, Societics is an
exact science--"

"Exact? _Exact!_ Of course it's not! Have I taught you so little that
you dare say that to me?" Anger animated the old man, driving the shadow
of death back a step or two.

Neel hesitated, feeling his hands quiver ever so slightly, groping for
the right words. Societics was his faith, and his teacher, Abravanel,
its only prophet. This man before him, carefully preserved by the
age-retarding drugs, was unique in the galaxy. A living anachronism, a
refugee from the history books. Abravanel had singlehandedly worked out
the equations, spelled out his science of Societics. Then he had trained
seven generations of students in its fundamentals. Hearing the article
of his faith defamed by its creator produced a negative feedback loop in
Neel so strong his hands vibrated in tune with it. It took a jarring
effort to crack out of the cycle.

"The laws that control Societics, as postulated by ... you, are as exact
as any others in the unified-field theory universe."

"No they're not. And, if any man I taught believes that nonsense, I'm
retiring tomorrow and dropping dead the day after. My science--and it is
really not logical to call it a science--is based on observation,
experimentation, control groups and corrected observations. And though
we have made observations in the millions, we are dealing in units in
the billions, and the interactions of these units are multiples of that.
And let us never forget that our units are people who, when they operate
as individuals, do so in a completely different manner. So you cannot
truthfully call my theories exact. They fit the facts well enough and
produce results in practice, that has been empirically proven. So far.
Some day, I am sure, we will run across a culture that doesn't fit my
rules. At that time the rules will have to be revised. We may have that
situation now on Himmel. There's trouble cooking there."

"They have always had a high activity count, sir," Neel put in
hopefully.

"High yes, but _always_ negative. Until now. Now it is slightly positive
and nothing we can do seems to change it. That's why I've called you in.
I want you to run a new basic survey, ignoring the old one still in
operation, to re-examine the check points on our graphs. The trouble
may lie there."

Neel thought before he answered, picking his words carefully. "Wouldn't
that be a little ... unethical, sir? After all Hengly, who is operator
there now, is a friend of mine. Going behind his back, you know."

"I know nothing of the sort." Abravanel snorted. "We are not playing for
poker chips, or seeing who can get a paper published first. Have you
forgotten what Societics is?"

Neel answered by rote. "The applied study of the interaction of
individuals in a culture, the interaction of the group generated by
these individuals, the equations derived therefrom, and the application
of these equations to control one or more factors of this same culture."

"And what is the one factor that we have tried to control in order to
make all the other factors possible of existence?"

"War." Neel said, in a very small voice.

"Very good then, there is no doubt what it is we are talking about. You
are going to land quietly on Himmel, do a survey as quickly as possible
and transmit the data back here. There is no cause to think of it as
sneaking behind Hengly's back, but as doing something to help him set
the matter right. Is that understood?"

"Yes, sir," Neel said firmly this time, straightening his back and
letting his right hand rest reassuringly on the computer slung from his
belt.

"Excellent. Then it is now time to meet your assistant." Abravanel
touched a button on his desk.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was an unexpected development and Neel waited with interest as the
door opened. But he turned away abruptly, his eyes slitted and his face
white with anger. Abravanel introduced them.

"Neel Sidorak, this is--"

"Costa. I know him. He was in my class for six months." There wasn't the
slightest touch of friendliness in Neel's voice now. Abravanel either
ignored it or didn't hear it. He went on as if the two cold, distant
young men were the best of friends.

"Classmates. Very good--then there is no need to make introductions.
