The Project Gutenberg EBook of Wind, by Charles Louis Fontenay

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Wind

Author: Charles Louis Fontenay

Release Date: September 12, 2007 [EBook #22590]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WIND ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                                  WIND

                         By CHARLES L. FONTENAY


            _When you have an engine with no fuel, and fuel
            without an engine, and a life-and-death deadline
           to meet, you have a problem indeed. Unless you are
           a stubborn Dutchman--and Jan Van Artevelde was the
                     stubbornest Dutchman on Venus._


Jan Willem van Artevelde claimed descent from William of Orange. He had
no genealogy to prove it, but on Venus there was no one who could
disprove it, either.

Jan Willem van Artevelde smoked a clay pipe, which only a Dutchman can
do properly, because the clay bit grates on less stubborn teeth.

Jan needed all his Dutch stubbornness, and a good deal of pure physical
strength besides, to maneuver the roach-flat groundcar across the
tumbled terrain of Den Hoorn into the teeth of the howling gale that
swept from the west. The huge wheels twisted and jolted against the
rocks outside, and Jan bounced against his seat belt, wrestled the
steering wheel and puffed at his _pijp_. The mild aroma of
Heerenbaai-Tabak filled the airtight groundcar.

There came a new swaying that was not the roughness of the terrain.
Through the thick windshield Jan saw all the ground about him buckle and
heave for a second or two before it settled to rugged quiescence again.
This time he was really heaved about.

Jan mentioned this to the groundcar radio.

"That's the third time in half an hour," he commented. "The place tosses
like the IJsselmeer on a rough day."

"You just don't forget it _isn't_ the Zuider Zee," retorted Heemskerk
from the other end. "You sink there and you don't come up three times."

"Don't worry," said Jan. "I'll be back on time, with a broom at the
masthead."

"This I shall want to see," chuckled Heemskerk; a logical reaction,
considering the scarcity of brooms on Venus.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two hours earlier the two men had sat across a small table playing
chess, with little indication there would be anything else to occupy
their time before blastoff of the stubby gravity-boat. It would be their
last chess game for many months, for Jan was a member of the Dutch
colony at Oostpoort in the northern hemisphere of Venus, while Heemskerk
was pilot of the G-boat from the Dutch spaceship _Vanderdecken_,
scheduled to begin an Earthward orbit in a few hours.

It was near the dusk of the 485-hour Venerian day, and the Twilight Gale
already had arisen, sweeping from the comparatively chill Venerian
nightside into the superheated dayside. Oostpoort, established near some
outcroppings that contained uranium ore, was protected from both the
Dawn Gale and the Twilight Gale, for it was in a valley in the midst of
a small range of mountains.

Jan had just figured out a combination by which he hoped to cheat
Heemskerk out of one of his knights, when Dekker, the _burgemeester_ of
Oostpoort, entered the spaceport ready room.

"There's been an emergency radio message," said Dekker. "They've got a
passenger for the Earthship over at Rathole."

"Rathole?" repeated Heemskerk. "What's that? I didn't know there was
another colony within two thousand kilometers."

"It isn't a colony, in the sense Oostpoort is," explained Dekker. "The
people are the families of a bunch of laborers left behind when the
colony folded several years ago. It's about eighty kilometers away,
right across the Hoorn, but they don't have any vehicles that can
navigate when the wind's up."

Heemskerk pushed his short-billed cap back on his close-cropped head,
leaned back in his chair and folded his hands over his comfortable
stomach.
