The Project Gutenberg EBook of On Laboratory Arts, by Richard Threlfall

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: On Laboratory Arts

Author: Richard Threlfall

Release Date: September 27, 2007 [EBook #22784]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ON LABORATORY ARTS ***




Produced by Jon Richfield






ON LABORATORY ARTS





BY


RICHARD THRELFALL, M.A.


PROFESSOR OF PHYSICS IN THE UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY;

MEMBER OF THE INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS;

ASSOCIATE-MEMBER OF THE INSTITUTE OF CIVIL ENGINEERS;

MEMBER OF THE PHYSICAL SOCIETY




London


MACMILLAN AND CO, LIMITED

NEW YORK: THE MACMILLAN COMPANY


1898


All rights reserved




PREFACE    5

CHAPTER I    8

HINTS ON THE MANIPULATION OF GLASS AND ON GLASS-BLOWING FOR LABORATORY
PURPOSES    8

Sec. 4.  Soft Soda Glass.

Sec. 6.  Flint Glass.

Sec. 9.  Hard or Bohemian, Glass.

Sec. 10.  On the Choice of Sizes of Glass Tube.

Sec. 11.  Testing Glass.

Sec. 13.  Cleaning Glass Tubes.

Sec. 14.  The Blow-pipe.

Sec. 18.  The Table.

Sec. 19.  Special Operations.

Sec. 20.  Closing and blowing out the End of a Tube.

Sec. 21.  To make a Weld.

Sec. 22.  To weld two Tubes of different Sizes.

Sec. 24.  To weld Tubes of very small Bore.

Sec. 30.  To cut very thick Tubes.

Sec. 31.  To blow a Bulb at the End of a Tube.

Sec. 32.  To blow a bulb in the middle of a tube.

Sec. 33.  To make a side Weld.

Sec. 34.  Inserted Joints.

Sec. 35.  Bending Tubes.

Sec. 36.  Spiral Tubes.

Sec. 37.  On Auxiliary Operations on Glass.

Sec. 38.  Boring small Holes.

Sec. 39.  For boring large holes through thick glass sheets.

Sec. 41.  Operations depending on Grinding: Ground-in Joints.

Sec. 42.  Use of the Lathe in Glass-working.

Sec. 46.  Making Ground Glass.

Sec. 47.  Glass-cutting.

Sec. 48.  Cementing.

Sec. 49.  Fusing Electrodes into Glass.

Sec. 51.  The Art of making Air-light Joints.

APPENDIX TO CHAPTER I.

ON THE PREPARATION OF VACUUM TUBES FOR THE PRODUCTION OF PROFESSOR
ROENTGEN'S RADIATION.

CHAPTER II.

GLASS-GRINDING AND OPTICIANS' WORK.

Sec. 61.  Details of the Process of Fine Grinding.

Sec. 62.  Polishing.

Sec. 63.  Centering.

Sec. 65.  Preparing Small Mirrors for Galvanometers.

Sec. 66.  Preparation of Large Mirrors or Lenses for Telescopes.

Sec. 69.  The Preparation of Flat Surfaces of Rock Salt.

Sec. 70.  Casting Specula for Mirrors.

Sec. 71.  Grinding and polishing Specula.

Sec. 72.  Preparation of Flat Surfaces.

Sec. 73.  Polishing Flat Surfaces on Glass or on Speculum Metal.

CHAPTER III.

MISCELLANEOUS PROCESSES.

Sec. 74.  Coating Glass with Aluminium and Soldering Aluminium.

Sec. 75.  The Use of the Diamond-cutting Wheel.

Sec. 76.  Arming a Wheel.

Sec. 77.  Cutting a Section.

Sec. 78.  Grinding Rock Sections, or Thin Slips of any Hard Material.

Sec. 79.  Cutting Sections of Soft Substances.

Sec. 80.  On the Production of Quartz Threads.

Sec. 84.  Drawing Quartz Threads.

Sec. 86.  Drawing Threads by the Catapult.

Sec. 87.  Drawing Threads by the Flame alone.

Sec. 88.  Properties of Threads.

Sec. 90.  On the Attachment of Quartz Fibres.

Sec. 91.  Other Modes of soldering Quartz.

Sec. 92.  Soldering.

Sec. 94.  Preparing a Soldering Bit.

Sec. 95.  Soft Soldering.

Sec. 97.  Soldering Zinc.

Sec. 98.  Soldering other Metals.

Sec. 99.  Brazing.

Sec. 100.  Silver Soldering.

Sec. 101.  On the Construction of Electrical Apparatus--Insulators.

Sec. 102.  Sulphur.

Sec. 103.  Fused Quartz.

Sec. 104.  Glass.

Sec. 105.  Ebonite or Hard Rubber.

Sec. 106.  Mica.

Sec. 107.  Use of Mica in Condensers.

Sec. 108.  Micanite.

Sec. 109.  Celluloid.

Sec. 110.  Paper.

Sec. 111.  Paraffined Paper.

Sec. 112.  Paraffin.

Sec. 113.  Vaseline, Vaseline Oil, and Kerosene Oil.

Sec. 114.  Imperfect Conductors.

Sec. 116.  Conductors.

Sec. 117.  Platinoid.

Sec. 119.  Platinum Silver.

Sec. 120.  Platinum Iridium.

Sec. 121.  Manganin.

Sec. 122.  Other Alloys.

Sec. 123.  Nickelin.

Sec. 124.  Patent Nickel.

Sec. 125.  Constantin.

126.  Nickel Manganese Copper.

CHAPTER IV.

ELECTROPLATING AND ALLIED ARTS.

Sec. 127.  Electroplating.

Sec. 128.  The Dipping Bath.

Sec. 130.  Scratch-brushing.

Sec. 131. Burnishing.

Sec. 132.  Silver-plating.

Sec. 133.  Cold Silvering.

Sec. 134.  Gilding.

Sec. 135.  Preparing Surfaces for Gilding.

Sec. 136.  Gilding Solutions.

Sec. 137.  Plating with Copper.

Sec. 138.  Coppering Aluminium.

Sec. 140.  Alkaline Coppering Solution.

Sec. 141.  Nickel-plating.

142.  Miscellaneous Notes on Electroplating.

Sec. 143.  Blacking Brass Surfaces.

Sec. 144.  Sieves.

Sec. 145.  Pottery making in the Laboratory.

APPENDIX.

PLATINISING GLASS.

PREFACE

EXPERIMENTAL work in physical science rests ultimately upon the
mechanical arts.  It is true that in a well-appointed laboratory,
where apparatus is collected together in greater or less profusion,
the appeal is often very indirect, and to a student carrying out a set
experiment with apparatus provided to his hand, the temptation to
ignore the mechanical basis of his work is often irresistible.

It often happens that young physicists are to be found whose
mathematical attainments are adequate, whose observational powers are
perfectly trained, and whose general capacity is unquestioned, but who
are quite unable to design or construct the simplest apparatus with
due regard to the facility with which it ought to be constructed.
That ultimate knowledge of materials and of processes which by long
experience becomes intuitive in the mind of a great inventor of course
cannot be acquired from books or from any set course of instruction.

There are, however, many steps between absolute ignorance and
consummate knowledge of the mechanical arts, and it is the object of
the following pages to assist the young physicist in making his first
steps towards acquiring a working knowledge of "laboratory arts."
However humble the ambition may be, no one can be more keenly alive
than the writer to the inadequacy of his attempt; and it is only from
a profound sense of the necessity which exists for some  beginning to
be made, that he has had the courage to air his views on matters about
which there are probably hundreds or thousands of people whose
knowledge is superior to his own.

Moreover, nothing has been further from the writer's mind than any
idea of "instructing" any one;  his desire is--if happily it may so
befall--to be of assistance, especially to young physicists or
inventors who wish to attain definite mechanical ends with the minimum
expenditure of time.  Most people will agree that one condition
essential to success in such an undertaking is brevity, and it is for
this reason that alternative methods as a rule have not been given,
which, of course, deprives the book of any pretence to being a
"treatise."  The writer, therefore, is responsible for exercising a
certain amount of discretion in the selection he has made, and it is
hardly to be hoped that he has in all--or even in the majority of
cases--succeeded in recommending absolutely the best method of
procedure.

This brings another point into view.  Before all things the means
indicated must be definite and reliable.  It is for this reason that
the writer has practically confined himself to matters lying within
his own immediate experience, and has never recommended any process
(with one or two minor exceptions, which he has noted) which he has
not actually and personally carried through to a successful issue.
This, although it is a matter which he considers of the highest
importance, and which is his only title to a hearing, has
