The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Link, by Alan Edward Nourse

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Link

Author: Alan Edward Nourse

Release Date: October 3, 2007 [EBook #22876]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LINK ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _The Counterfeit Man More Science
    Fiction Stories by Alan E. Nourse_ published in 1963. Extensive
    research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on
    this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and typographical
    errors have been corrected without note.




 The
 Link




It was nearly sundown when Ravdin eased the ship down into the last slow
arc toward the Earth's surface. Stretching his arms and legs, he tried
to relax and ease the tension in his tired muscles. Carefully, he
tightened the seat belt for landing; below him he could see the vast,
tangled expanse of Jungle-land spreading out to the horizon. Miles ahead
was the bright circle of the landing field and the sparkling glow of the
city beyond. Ravdin peered to the north of the city, hoping to catch a
glimpse of the concert before his ship was swallowed by the brilliant
landing lights.

A bell chimed softly in his ear. Ravdin forced his attention back to the
landing operation. He was still numb and shaken from the Warp-passage,
his mind still muddled by the abrupt and incredible change. Moments
before, the sky had been a vast, starry blanket of black velvet; then,
abruptly, he had been hovering over the city, sliding down toward warm
friendly lights and music. He checked the proper switches, and felt the
throbbing purr of the anti-grav motors as the ship slid in toward the
landing slot. Tall spires of other ships rose to meet him, circle upon
circle of silver needles pointing skyward. A little later they were
blotted out as the ship was grappled into the berth from which it had
risen days before.

With a sigh, Ravdin eased himself out of the seat, his heart pounding
with excitement. Perhaps, he thought, he was too excited, too eager to
be home, for his mind was still reeling from the fearful discovery of
his journey.

The station was completely empty as Ravdin walked down the ramp to the
shuttles. At the desk he checked in with the shiny punch-card robot, and
walked swiftly across the polished floor. The wall panels pulsed a
somber blue-green, broken sharply by brilliant flashes and overtones of
scarlet, reflecting with subtle accuracy the tumult in his own mind. Not
a sound was in the air, not a whisper nor sign of human habitation.
Vaguely, uneasiness grew in his mind as he entered the shuttle station.
Suddenly, the music caught him, a long, low chord of indescribable
beauty, rising and falling in the wind, a distant whisper of life....

The concert, of course. Everyone would be at the concert tonight, and
even from two miles away, the beauty of four hundred perfectly
harmonized voices was carried on the breeze. Ravdin's uneasiness
disappeared; he was eager to discharge his horrible news, get it off his
mind and join the others in the great amphitheater set deep in the
hillside outside the city. But he knew instinctively that Lord Nehmon,
anticipating his return, would not be at the concert.

Riding the shuttle over the edges of Jungle-land toward the shining
bright beauty of the city, Ravdin settled back, trying to clear his mind
of the shock and horror he had encountered on his journey. The curves
and spires of glowing plastic passed him, lighted with a million hues.
He realized that his whole life was entangled in the very beauty of this
wonderful city. Everything he had ever hoped or dreamed lay sheltered
here in the ever-changing rhythm of colors and shapes and sounds. And
now, he knew, he would soon see his beloved city burning once again,
turning to flames and ashes in a heart-breaking memorial to the age-old
fear of his people.

