The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Ideal, by Stanley Grauman Weinbaum

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Ideal

Author: Stanley Grauman Weinbaum

Release Date: October 5, 2007 [EBook #22897]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE IDEAL ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _A Martian Odyssey and Others_
    published in 1949. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
    that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor
    spelling and typographical errors have been corrected without note.




THE IDEAL




_"This," said the Franciscan, "is my Automaton, who at the proper time
will speak, answer whatsoever question I may ask, and reveal all secret
knowledge to me." He smiled as he laid his hand affectionately on the
iron skull that topped the pedestal._

_The youth gazed open-mouthed, first at the head and then at the Friar.
"But it's iron!" he whispered. "The head is iron, good father."_

_"Iron without, skill within, my son," said Roger Bacon. "It will speak,
at the proper time and in its own manner, for so have I made it. A
clever man can twist the devil's arts to God's ends, thereby cheating
the fiend--Sst! There sounds vespers!_ Plena gratia, ave Virgo--"

_But it did not speak. Long hours, long weeks, the_ doctor mirabilis
_watched his creation, but iron lips were silent and the iron eyes dull,
and no voice but the great man's own sounded in his monkish cell, nor
was there ever an answer to all the questions that he asked--until one
day when he sat surveying his work, composing a letter to Duns Scotus in
distant Cologne--one day--_

_"Time is!" said the image, and smiled benignly._

_The Friar looked up. "Time is, indeed," he echoed. "Time it is that you
give utterance, and to some assertion less obvious than that time is.
For of course time is, else there were nothing at all. Without time--"_

_"Time was!" rumbled the image, still smiling, but sternly at the statue
of Draco._

_"Indeed time was," said the Monk. "Time was, is, and will be, for time
is that medium in which events occur. Matter exists in space, but
events--"_

_The image smiled no longer. "Time is past!" it roared in tones deep as
the cathedral bell outside, and burst into ten thousand pieces_.

       *       *       *       *       *

"There," said old Haskel van Manderpootz, shutting the book, "is my
classical authority in this experiment. This story, overlaid as it is
with mediaeval myth and legend, proves that Roger Bacon himself attempted
the experiment--and failed." He shook a long finger at me. "Yet do not
get the impression, Dixon, that Friar Bacon was not a great man. He
was--extremely great, in fact; he lighted the torch that his namesake
Francis Bacon took up four centuries later, and that now van Manderpootz
rekindles."

I stared in silence.

"Indeed," resumed the Professor, "Roger Bacon might almost be called a
thirteenth century van Manderpootz, or van Manderpootz a twenty-first
century Roger Bacon. His _Opus Majus_, _Opus Minus_, and _Opus
Tertium_--"

"What," I interrupted impatiently, "has all this to do with--that?" I
indicated the clumsy metal robot standing in the corner of the
laboratory.

"Don't interrupt!" snapped van Manderpootz. "I'll--"

At this point I fell out of my chair. The mass of metal had ejaculated
something like "_A-a-gh-rasp_" and had lunged a single pace toward the
window, arms upraised. "What the devil!" I sputtered as the thing
dropped its arms and returned stolidly to its place.

"A car must have passed in the alley," said van Manderpootz
indifferently. "Now as I was saying, Roger Bacon--"

I ceased to listen. When van Manderpootz is determined to finish a
statement, interruptions are worse than futile. As an ex-student of his,
I know. So I permitted my thoughts to drift to certain personal problems
of my own, particularly Tips Alva, who was the most pressing problem of
the moment. Yes, I mean Tips Alva the 'vision dancer, the little blonde
imp who entertains on the Yerba Mate hour for that Brazilian company.
Chorus girls, dancers, and television stars are a weakness of mine;
maybe it indicates that there's a latent artistic soul in me. Maybe.

I'm Dixon Wells, you know, scion of the N. J. Wells Corporation,
Engineers Extraordinary. I'm supposed to be an engineer myself; I say
supposed, because in the seven years since my graduation, my father
hasn't given me much opportunity to prove it. He has a strong sense of
value of time, and I'm cursed with the unenviable quality of being late
to anything and for everything. He even asserts that the occasional
designs I submit are late Jacobean, but that isn't fair. They're
Post-Romanesque.

Old N. J. also objects to my penchant for ladies of the stage and
'vision screen, and periodically threatens to cut my allowance, though
