The Project Gutenberg eBook, Second Sight, by Alan Edward Nourse


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Second Sight


Author: Alan Edward Nourse



Release Date: October 16, 2007  [eBook #22997]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SECOND SIGHT***


E-text prepared by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan, and the Project Gutenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Transcriber's Note:

   This etext was produced from "The Counterfeit Man; More Science
   Fiction Stories by Alan E. Nourse" published in 1963. Extensive
   research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright
   on this publication was renewed.





SECOND SIGHT


(Note: The following excerpts from Amy Ballantine's journal have never
actually been written down at any time before. Her account of
impressions and events has been kept in organized fashion in her mind
for at least nine years (even she is not certain when she started), but
it must be understood that certain inaccuracies in transcription could
not possibly have been avoided in the excerpting attempted here. _The
Editor_.)

       *       *       *       *       *

_Tuesday, 16 May._ Lambertson got back from Boston about two this
afternoon. He was tired; I don't think I've ever seen Lambertson so
tired. It was more than just exhaustion, too. Maybe anger? Frustration?
I couldn't be sure. It seemed more like _defeat_ than anything else, and
he went straight from the 'copter to his office without even stopping
off at the lab at all.

It's good to have him back, though! Not that I haven't had a nice enough
rest. With Lambertson gone, Dakin took over the reins for the week, but
Dakin doesn't really count, poor man. It's such a temptation to twist
him up and get him all confused that I didn't do any real _work_ all
week. With Lambertson back I'll have to get down to the grind again, but
I'm still glad he's here. I never thought I'd miss him so, for such a
short time away.

But I wish he'd gotten a rest, if he ever rests! And I wish I knew why
he went to Boston in the first place. Certainly he didn't _want_ to go.
I wanted to read him and find out, but I don't think I'm supposed to
know yet. Lambertson didn't want to talk. He didn't even tell me he was
back, even though he knew I'd catch him five miles down the road. (I can
do that now, with Lambertson. Distance doesn't seem to make so much
difference any more if I just ignore it.)

So all I got was bits and snatches on the surface of his mind. Something
about me, and Dr. Custer; and a nasty little man called Aarons or
Barrons or something. I've heard of him somewhere, but I can't pin it
down right now. I'll have to dig that out later, I guess.

But if he saw Dr. Custer, _why doesn't he tell me about it_?

       *       *       *       *       *

_Wednesday, 17 May._ It was _Aarons_ that he saw in Boston, and now I'm
sure that something's going wrong. I know that man. I remember him from
