The Project Gutenberg EBook of Greylorn, by John Keith Laumer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Greylorn

Author: John Keith Laumer

Release Date: October 13, 2007 [EBook #23028]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GREYLORN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, LN Yaddanapudi and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









GREYLORN

By KEITH LAUMER

Keith Laumer is a writer new to science fiction. In this story he
displays the finesse, artistry and imagination of an old pro. Here is
one of the tightest, tautest stories of interplanetary adventure in a
long while:




PROLOGUE


The murmur of conversation around the conference table died as the World
Secretary entered the room and took his place at the head of the table.

"Ladies and Gentlemen," he said. "I'll not detain you with formalities
today. The representative of the Navy Department is waiting outside to
present the case for his proposal. You all know something of the scheme;
it has been heard and passed as feasible by the Advisory Group. It will
now be our responsibility to make the decision. I ask that each of you
in forming a conclusion remember that our present situation can only be
described as desperate, and that desperate measures may be in order."

The Secretary turned and nodded to a braided admiral seated near the
door who left the room and returned a moment later with a young
gray-haired Naval Officer.

"Members of the Council," said the admiral, "this is Lieutenant
Commander Greylorn." All eyes followed the officer as he walked the
length of the room to take the empty seat at the end of the table.

"Please proceed, Commander," said the Secretary.

"Thank you, Mr. Secretary." The Commander's voice was unhurried and low,
yet it carried clearly and held authority. He began without preliminary.

"When the World Government dispatched the Scouting Forces forty-three
years ago, an effort was made to contact each of the twenty-five worlds
to which this government had sent Colonization parties during the
Colonial Era of the middle Twentieth Centuries. With the return of the
last of the scouts early this year, we were forced to realize that no
assistance would be forthcoming from that source."

The Commander turned his eyes to the world map covering the wall. With
the exception of North America and a narrow strip of coastal waters, the
entire map was tinted an unhealthy pink.

"The latest figures compiled by the Department of the Navy indicate that
we are losing area at the rate of one square mile every twenty-one
hours. The organism's faculty for developing resistance to our chemical
and biological measures appears to be evolving rapidly. Analyses of
atmospheric samples indicate the level of noxious content rising at a
steady rate. In other words, in spite of our best efforts, we are not
holding our own against the Red Tide."

A mutter ran around the table, as Members shifted uncomfortably in their
seats.

       *       *       *       *       *

"A great deal of thought has been applied to the problem of increasing
our offensive ability. This in the end is still a question of manpower
and raw resources. We do not have enough. Our small improvements in
effectiveness have been progressively offset by increasing casualties
and loss of territory. In the end, alone, we must lose."

The Commander paused, as the murmur rose and died again. "There is
however, one possibility still unexplored," he said. "And recent work
done at the Polar Research Station places the possibility well within
the scope of feasibility. At the time the attempt was made to establish
contact with the colonies, one was omitted. It alone now remains to be
sought out. I refer to the Omega Colony."

A portly Member leaned forward and burst out, "The location of the
colony is unknown!"

The Secretary intervened. "Please permit the Commander to complete his
remarks. There will be ample opportunity for discussion when he has
finished."

"This contact was not attempted for two reasons," the Commander
continued. "First, the precise location was not known; second, the
distance was at least twice that of the earlier colonies. At the time,
there was a feeling of optimism which seemed to make the attempt
superfluous. Now the situation has changed. The possibility of
contacting Omega Colony now assumes paramount importance.

"The development of which I spoke is a new application of drive
principle which has given to us a greatly improved effective velocity
for space propulsion. Forty years ago, the minimum elapsed time of
return travel to the presumed sector within which the Omega World should
lie was about a century. Today we have the techniques to construct a
small scouting vessel capable of making the transit in just over five
years. We cannot hold out here for a century, perhaps; but we can manage
a decade.

"As for location, we know the initial target point toward which Omega
was launched. The plan was of course that a precise target should be
selected by the crew after approaching the star group closely enough to
permit telescopic planetary resolution and study. There is no reason why
the crew of a scout could not make the same study and examination of
possible targets, and with luck find the colony.

"Omega was the last colonial venture undertaken by our people, two
centuries after the others. It was the best equipped and largest
expedition of them all. It was not limited to one destination, little
known, but had a presumably large selection of potentials from which to
choose; and her planetary study facilities were extremely advanced. I
have full confidence that Omega made a successful planetfall and has by
now established a vigorous new society.

"Honorable Members of the Council, I submit that all the resources of
this Government should be at once placed at the disposal of a task force
with the assigned duty of constructing a fifty-thousand-ton scouting
vessel, and conducting an exhaustive survey of a volume of space of one
thousand A.U.'s centered on the so-called Omega Cluster."

The World Secretary interrupted the babble which arose with the
completion of the officer's presentation.

"Ladies and gentlemen, time is of the essence of our problem. Let's
proceed at once to orderly interrogation. Mr. Klayle, lead off, please."

       *       *       *       *       *

The portly Councillor glared at the Commander. "The undertaking you
propose, sir, will require a massive diversion of our capacities from
defense. That means losing ground at an increasing rate to the obscenity
crawling over our planet. That same potential applied to direct
offensive measures may yet turn the balance in our favor. Against this,
the possibility of a scouting party stumbling over the remains of a
colony the location of which is almost completely problematical, and
which by analogy with all of the earlier colonial attempts has at best
managed to survive as a marginal foothold, is so fantastically remote as
to be inconsiderable."

The Commander listened coolly, seriously. "Mr. Councillor," he replied,
"as to our defensive measures, we have passed the point of diminishing
returns. We have more knowledge now than we are capable of employing
against the plague. Had we not neglected the physical sciences as we
have for the last two centuries, we might have developed adequate
measures before we had been so far reduced in numbers and area as to be
unable to produce and employ the new weapons our laboratories have
belatedly developed. Now we must be realistic; there is no hope in that
direction.

"As to the location of the Omega World, our plan is based on the fact
that the selection was not made at random. Our scout will proceed along
the Omega course line as known to us from the observations which were
carried on for almost three years after its departure. We propose to
continue on that line, carrying out systematic observation of each
potential sun in turn. As we detect planets, we will alter course only
as necessary to satisfy ourselves as to the possibility of suitability
of the planet. We can safely assume that Omega will not have bypassed
any likely target. If we should have more than one prospect under
consideration at any time, we shall examine them in turn. If the Omega
World has developed successfully, ample evidence should be discernible
at a distance."

       *       *       *       *       *

Klayle muttered "Madness," and subsided. The angular member on his left
spoke gently, "Mr. Greylorn, why, if this colonial venture has met with
the success you assume, has its government not reestablished contact
with the mother world during the last two centuries?"

"On that score, Mr. Councillor, we can only conjecture," the Commander
said. "The outward voyage may have required as much as fifty or sixty
years. After that, there must have followed a lengthy period of
development and expansion in building the new world. It is not to be
expected that the pioneers would be ready to expend resources in
expeditionary ventures for some time."

"I do not completely understand your apparent confidence in the ability
of the hypothetical Omega culture to supply massive aid to us, even if
its people should be so inclined," said a straight-backed woman member.
"The time seems very short for the mastery of an alien world."

"The population development plan, Madam, provided for an increase from
the original 10,000 colonists to approximately 40,000 within twenty
years, after which the rate of increase would of course rapidly grow.
Assuming sixty years for planetfall, the population should now number
over one hundred sixty millions. Given population, all else follows."

Two hours later, the World Secretary summed up. "Ladies and gentlemen,
we have the facts before us. There still exist differences in
interpretation, which however will not be resolved by continued
repetition. I now call for a vote on the resolution proposed by the
Military Member and presented by Commander Greylorn."

There was silence in the Council Chamber as the votes were recorded and
tabulated. Then the World Secretary sighed softly.

"Commander," he said, "the Council has approved the resolution. I'm
sure that there will be general agreement that you will be placed at the
head of the project, since you were director of the team which developed
the new drive and are also the author of the plan. I wish you the best
of luck." He rose and extended his hand.

The first keel plate of the Armed Courier Vessel _Galahad_ was laid
thirty-two hours later.




CHAPTER 1


I expected trouble when I left the bridge. The tension that had been
building for many weeks was ready for release in violence. The ship was
silent as I moved along the passageway. Oddly silent, I thought;
something was brewing.

I stopped before the door of my cabin, listening; then I put my ear to
the wall. I caught the faintest of sounds from within; a muffled click,
voices. Someone was inside, someone attempting to be very quiet. I was
not overly surprised. Sooner or later the trouble had had to come into
the open. I looked up the passage, dim in the green glow of the
nightlights. There was no one in sight.

I listened. There were three voices, too faint to identify. The clever
thing for me to do now would be to walk back up to the bridge, and order
the Provost Marshall to clear my cabin, but I had an intuitive feeling
that that was not the way to handle the situation. It would make things
much simpler all around if I could push through this with as little
commotion as possible.

There was no point in waiting. I took out my key and placed it
soundlessly in the slot. As the door slid back I stepped briskly into
the room. Kramer, the Medical Officer, and Joyce, Assistant
Communications Officer, stood awkwardly, surprised. Fine, the Supply
Officer, was sprawled on my bunk. He sat up quickly.

They were a choice selection. Two of them were wearing sidearms. I
wondered if they were ready to use them, or if they knew just how far
they were prepared to go. My task would be to keep them from finding
out.

I avoided looking surprised. "Good evening, gentlemen," I said
cheerfully. I stepped to the liquor cabinet, opened it, poured Scotch
into a glass. "Join me in a drink?" I said.

None of them answered. I sat down. I had to move just a little faster
