The Project Gutenberg EBook of Traders Risk, by Roger Dee

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Traders Risk

Author: Roger Dee

Illustrator: Martin

Release Date: October 20, 2007 [EBook #23103]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRADERS RISK ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









TRADERS RISK

By ROGER DEE

 _Keeping this cargo meant death--to
 jettison it meant to make flotsam
 and jetsam of a world!_

Illustrated by MARTIN


The Ciriimian ship was passing in hyperdrive through a classic
three-body system, comprising in this case a fiercely white sun circled
by a fainter companion and a single planet that swung in precise
balance, when the Canthorian Zid broke out of its cage in the specimen
hold.

Of the ship's social quartet, Chafis One and Two were asleep at the
moment, dreaming wistful dreams of conical Ciriimian cities spearing up
to a soft and plum-colored sky. The Zid raged into their communal rest
cell, smashed them down from their gimbaled sleeping perches and, with
the ravening blood-hunger of its kind, devoured them before they could
wake enough to teleport to safety.

Chafis Three and Four, on psi shift in the forward control cubicle,
might have fallen as easily if the mental screamings of their fellows
had not warned them in time. As it was, they had barely time to teleport
themselves to the after hold, as far as possible from immediate danger,
and to consider the issue while the Zid lunged about the ship in search
of them with malignant cries and a great shrieking of claws on metal.

Their case was the more desperate because the Chafis were professional
freighters with little experience of emergency. Hauling a Zid from
Canthorian jungles to a Ciriimian zoo was a prosaic enough assignment so
long as the cage held, but with the raging brute swiftly smelling them
out, they were helpless to catch and restrain it.

When the Zid found them, they had no other course but to teleport back
to the control cubicle and wait until the beast should snuff them down
again. The Zid learned quickly, so quickly that it was soon clear that
its physical strength would far outlast their considerable but limited
telekinetic ability.

Still they possessed their share of owlish Ciriimian logic and hit soon
enough upon the one practical course--to jettison the Zid on the nearest
world demonstrably free of intelligent life.

       *       *       *       *       *

They worked hurriedly, between jumps fore and aft. Chafi Three, while
they were still in the control cubicle, threw the ship out of hyperdrive
within scant miles of the neighboring sun's single planet. Chafi Four,
on the next jump, scanned the ship's charts and identified the system
through which they traveled.

Luck was with them. The system had been catalogued some four Ciriimian
generations before and tagged: _Planet undeveloped. Tranquil marine
intelligences only._

The discovery relieved them greatly for the reason that no Ciriimian,
even to save his own feathered skin, would have set down such a monster
as the Zid among rational but vulnerable entities.

The planet was a water world, bare of continents and only sparsely
sprinkled with minor archipelagoes. The islands suited the Chafis'
purpose admirably.

"The Zid does not swim," Chafi Four radiated. "Marooned, it can do no
harm to marine intelligences."

"Also," Chafi Three pointed out as they dodged to the control cubicle
again just ahead of the slavering Zid, "we may return later with a
Canthorian hunting party and recover our investment."
