The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Invaders, by Benjamin Ferris

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Invaders

Author: Benjamin Ferris

Release Date: November 18, 2007 [EBook #23535]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE INVADERS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                              The Invaders

                          _BY BENJAMIN FERRIS_

                        Heading by Vincent Napoli

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from Weird Tales March 1951.
Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright
on this publication was renewed.]

[Illustration: _Magic--there's no such thing. But the crops were
beginning to grow backwards...._]


Big Joe Merklos was the first of them. He appeared at the Wide Bend
National Bank one day, cash in hand. The charm of him, his flashing
smile, the easy strength in his big body, were persuasive
recommendations. But the bank's appraisal scarcely got that far. Wasn't
he the first buyer in fifteen years for that bone-yard of lonely dreams,
Dark Valley?

The county seat of Wide Bend presided over three valleys, corresponding
to the forks of the Sallinook River. Once, Dark Valley had been the
richest of these. Solid houses and barns stood among orchards laden with
fruit, fields chock-full of heavy-bearded grain ... till, one Spring,
the middle fork of the river had dried up.

The farmers called in specialists who sank wells and pilot holes,
measured the slopes. They heard much talk about water tables, about
springs undercutting rock formations. But when it was done the fact
remained: Dark Valley's water supply was choked off beyond man's ability
to restore it. In the end the farmers gave up, left their dusty houses
and shriveled orchards, and Dark Valley died.

Boys hiked over there occasionally. Men scouted for fence posts or pipe.
Young couples passed quickly through on moonlight nights. And at least
two stubborn old-timers still squatted at the upper end.

Now that Joe Merklos had bought it, of course, they would have to move.

"Well, won't they?" Henderson asked.

Jerry Bronson looked around at the other members of the Wide Bend
Businessmen's Club. "Doesn't take a lawyer to answer that, Hen."

"Dam' shame," said Caruso, the barber, who always championed underdogs.

"They've had no equity in that land for years. The bank just let them
stay on."

"They can move on over the hill."

Jerry nodded. "Maybe somebody ought to suggest that to them."

"Don't look at me," Caruso said. "Those old coots ain't been near my
shop for years."

When the chuckles died, MacAllister, the druggist, voiced the thought
that rested unspoken on all their minds. "I wonder if that fellow
realizes what a worthless piece of land he's bought."

"He looked it over." This was Hammond, of the bank.

"'Course, you didn't try to talk him out of it!"

"Would you have?" Hammond retorted indignantly.

Henderson jabbed the air with his cigar. "I think he was a coal miner,
back East. Saved up his money to get on the land."

"_I_ think he's a gypsy," Caruso said.

"You ought to know," Tipton, the grocer, laughed. Caruso got fined for
his reply, and with the tinkle of coins in the luncheon club kitty the
men dispersed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Joe Merklos' relatives arrived that night. Henderson, who told Jerry
Bronson about it, had made an early morning delivery of feed nearby, and
driven on to take a look at Merklos' purchase. From the ridge, he viewed
Dark Valley's three miles of width and six or so of length. Figures were
moving about the gaunt and windowless farm buildings. At least one plow
was in operation, and the good blue friendliness of smoke arose here and
there.

"Looked like a lot of people, Jerry. But you know--I didn't see any cars
or trucks around."

Jerry's blue eyes crinkled. Human nature didn't like puzzles any more
than it liked strangers. He returned to the tedious civil case he was
working on. About three o'clock, he decided he was tired and bored
