Project Gutenberg's Talents, Incorporated, by William Fitzgerald Jenkins

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Talents, Incorporated

Author: William Fitzgerald Jenkins

Release Date: December 13, 2007 [EBook #23845]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALENTS, INCORPORATED ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Cover Illustration]




Bors felt as if he'd been hit over the head. This was ridiculous! He'd
planned and carried out the destruction of that warship because the
information of its existence and location was _verified_ by a
magnetometer.

But, if he'd known _how_ the information had been obtained--if he'd
known it had been _guessed at_ by a discharged spaceport employee, and a
paranoid personality, and a man who used a hazel twig or something
similar--if he'd known _that_, he'd never have dreamed of accepting it.
He'd have dismissed it flatly!

       *       *       *       *       *

Aficionados of science fiction recognize and respect MURRAY LEINSTER as
a writer of rare talent. His ingenuity of plot, his technical know-how
and flight of imagination in TALENTS, INCORPORATED will go far to
increase his stature and popularity as an exciting and thought-provoking
storyteller.




 AVON BOOK DIVISION
 The Hearst Corporation
 572 Madison Avenue--New York 22, N.Y.




 _TALENTS,
 INCORPORATED_


 Murray
 Leinster




 Copyright, (C), 1962, by Murray Leinster.
 All rights reserved.
 Published by arrangement with the author.
 Printed in the U.S.A.


Transcriber's Note:

    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note. Subscript
    characters are shown within {braces}.




TALENTS, INCORPORATED




_Part One_




Chapter 1


Young Captain Bors--who impatiently refused to be called anything
else--was strangely occupied when the communicator buzzed. He'd ripped
away the cord about a thick parcel of documents and heaved them into the
fireplace of the office of the Minister for Diplomatic Affairs. A fire
burned there, and already there were many ashes. The carpet and the
chairs of the cabinet officer's sanctum were coated with fine white
dust. As the communicator buzzed again, Captain Bors took a fireplace
tool and stirred the close-packed papers to looseness. They caught and
burned instead of only smouldering.

The communicator buzzed yet again. He brushed off his hands and pressed
the answer-stud.

He said bleakly: "Diplomatic Affairs. Bors speaking."

The communicator relayed a voice from somewhere else with an astonishing
fidelity of tone.

"_Spaceport, sir. A ship just broke out of overdrive. We don't identify
its type. One ship only, sir._"

Bors said grimly;

"You'd recognize a liner. If it's a ship from the Mekinese fleet and
stays alone, it could be coming to receive our surrender. In that case
play for time and notify me."

"_Yes, sir.--One moment! It's calling, sir! Here it is--._"

There was a clicking, and then there came a voice which had the curious
quality of a loudspeaker sound picked up and relayed through another
loudspeaker.

"_Calling ground! Calling ground! Space-yacht_ Sylva _reports arrival
and asks coordinates for landing. Our mass is two hundred tons standard.
Purpose of visit, pleasure-travel._"

A pause. The voice from the spaceport:

"_Sir?_"

Captain Bors said impatiently, "Oh, let him down and see if he knows
anything about the Mekinese. Then advise him to go away at once. Tell
him why."

"_Yes, sir._"

A click. Young Captain Bors returned to his task of burning papers.
These were the confidential records of the Ministry for Diplomatic
Affairs. Captain Bors wore the full-dress uniform of the space navy of
the planet Kandar. It was still neatly pressed but was now smudged with
soot and smeared with ashes. He had burned a great many papers today.
Elsewhere in the Ministry other men were burning other documents. The
other papers were important enough; they were confidential reports from
volunteer- and paid-agents on twenty planets. In the hands of
ill-disposed persons, they could bring about disaster and confusion and
interplanetary tension. But the ones Captain Bors made sure of were
deadly.

He burned papers telling of conditions on Mekin itself. The authors of
such memoranda would be savagely punished if they were found out. Then
there were papers telling of events on Tralee. If it could be said that
he were more painstakingly destructive than average about anything,
Captain Bors was about them. He saw to it that they burned to ashes. He
crushed the ashes. He stirred them. It would be unthinkable that such
morsels could ever be pieced together and their contents even guessed
at.

He went on with the work. His jaunty uniform became more smeared and
smudged. He gave himself no rest. There were papers from other planets
now under the hegemony of Mekin. Some were memoranda from citizens of
this planet, who had traveled upon the worlds which Mekin dominated as
it was about to dominate Kandar. They, especially had to be pulverized.
Every confidential document in the Ministry for Diplomatic Affairs was
in the process of destruction, but Captain Bors in person destroyed
those which would cause most suffering if read by the wrong persons.

In other ministries and other places similar holocausts were under way.
There was practically nothing going on on Kandar which was not related
to the disaster for which the people of that world waited. The feel of
bitterness and despair was everywhere. Broadcasting stations stayed on
the air only to report monotonously that the tragic event had not yet
happened. The small space-navy of Kandar waited, aground, to take the
king and some other persons on board at the last moment. When the
Mekinese navy arrived--or as much of it as was needed to make resistance
hopeless--the end for Kandar would have come. That was the impending
disaster. If it came too soon, Bors's task of destruction couldn't be
completed as was wished. In such a case this Ministry and all the others
would hastily be doused with incendiary material and fired, and it would
desperately be hoped that all the planet's records went up in the
flames.

Captain Bors flung more and more papers on the blaze. He came to an end
of them.

The communicator buzzed, again. He answered once more.

"_Sir, the space-yacht_ Sylva _is landed. It comes from Norden and has
no direct information about the Mekinese. But there's a man named Morgan
with a very important letter for the Minister for Diplomatic Affairs.
It's from the Minister for Diplomatic Affairs on Norden._"

Bors said sardonically, "Maybe he should wait a few days or hours and
give it to the Mekinese! Send him over if he wants to take the chance,
but warn him not to let anybody from his yacht leave the spaceport!"

"_Yes, sir._"

Bors made a quick circuit of the Ministry building to make sure the rest
of the destruction was thoroughly carried out. He glanced out of a
window and saw the other ministries. From their chimneys thick smoke
poured out--the criminal records were being incinerated in the Ministry
of Police. Tax records were burning in the Ministry of Finance.
Educational information about Kandarian citizens flamed and smoked in
the Ministry of Education. Even voting and vehicle-registry lists were
being wiped out of existence by flames and the crushing of ashes at
appropriate agencies. The planet's banks were completing the
distribution of coin and currency, with promissory notes to those
depositors they could not pay in full, and the real-estate registers
were open so individuals could remove and hide or destroy their titles
to property. The stockholders' books of corporations were being burned.
Small ships parted with their wares and took promises of payment in
return. The planet Kandar, in fact, made ready to receive its
conquerors.

It was not conquered yet, but there could be no hope.

Bors was in the act of brushing off his hands again, in a sort of
symbolic gesture of completion, when a ground-car stopped before the
Ministry. A stout man got out. A rather startlingly pretty girl
followed. They advanced to the door of the Ministry.

Presently, Captain Bors received the two visitors. His once-jaunty
uniform looked like a dustman's. He was much more grim than anybody his
age should ever be.

"Your name is Morgan," he said formidably to the stout man. "You have a
letter for the Minister. He's not here. He's gathering up his family. If
anyone's in charge, I am."

The stout man cheerfully handed over a very official envelope.

Bors said caustically, "I don't ask you to sit down because everything's
covered with ash-dust. Excuse me."

He tore open the envelope and read its contents. His impatience
increased.

"In normal times," he said, "I'm sure this would be most interesting.
But these are not normal times. I'm afraid--"

"I know! I know!" said the stout man exuberantly. "If times were normal
I wouldn't be here! I'm president and executive director of Talents,
Incorporated. From that letter you'll see that we've done very
remarkable things for different governments and businesses. I'd like to
talk to someone with the authority to make a policy decision. I want to
show what we can do for you."

"It's too late to do anything for us," said Bors. "Much too late. We
expect the Mekinese fleet at any instant. You'd better go back to the
spaceport and take off in your yacht. They're going to take over this
planet after a slight tumult we expect to arrange. You won't want to be
here when they come."

Morgan waved a hand negligently.

"They won't arrive for four days," he said confidently. "That's Talents,
Incorporated information. You can depend on it! There's plenty of time
to prepare before they get here!" He smiled, as if at a joke.

Young Captain Bors was not impressed. He and all the other officers of
the Kandarian defense forces had searched desperately for something that
could be done to avert the catastrophe before them. They'd failed to
find even the promise of a hope. He couldn't be encouraged by the
confidence of a total stranger,--and a civilian to boot. He'd taken
refuge in anger.

The pretty girl said suddenly, "Captain, at least we can reassure you on
one thing. Your government chartered four big liners to remove
government officials and citizens who'll be on the Mekinese black list.
You're worried for fear they won't get here in time. But my father--"

The stout man looked at his watch.

"Ah, yes! You don't want the fleet cluttered up with civilians when it
takes to space! I'm happy to tell you it won't be. The first of your
four liners will break out of overdrive in--hm--three minutes, twenty
seconds. Two others will arrive tomorrow, one at ten minutes after noon,
the other three hours later. The last will arrive the day after, at
about sunrise here."

Bors went a trifle pale.

"I doubt it. It's supposed to be a military secret that such ships are
on the way. Since you know it, I assume that the Mekinese do, too. In
effect, you seem to be a Mekinese spy. But you can hardly do any more
harm! I advise you to go back to your yacht and leave Kandar
immediately. If our citizens find out you are spies, they will literally
tear you to pieces."

He looked at them icily. The stout man grinned.

"Listen, your h-- Captain, listen to me! The first liner will report
inside of five minutes. That'll be a test. Here's another. There's a
Mekinese heavy cruiser aground on Kandar right now! It's on the sea
bottom fifty fathoms down, five miles magnetic north-north-east from
Cape Farnell! You can check that! The cruiser's down there to lob a
fusion bomb into your space-fleet when it starts to take off for the
flight you're planning--to get all the important men on Kandar in one
smash! That's Talents, Incorporated information! It's a free sample. You
can verify it without it costing you anything, and when you want more
and better information--why--we'll be at the spaceport ready to give it
to you. And you will want to call on us! That's Talents, Incorporated
information, too!"

He turned and marched confidently--almost grandly--out of the room. The
girl smiled faintly at Bors.

"He left out something, Captain. That cruiser-- It could hardly act
without information on when to act. So there's a pair of spies in a
little shack on the cape. They've got an underwater cable going under
the sand beach and out and down to the space-cruiser. They're watching
the fleet on the ground with telescopes. When they see activity around
it, they'll tell the cruiser what to do." Then she smiled more broadly.
"Honestly, it's true! And don't forget about the liner!"

