The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Aliens, by Murray Leinster

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Aliens

Author: Murray Leinster

Illustrator: van Dongen

Release Date: January 1, 2008 [EBook #24104]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ALIENS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Bruce Albrecht, Louise Pryor and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net





[Transcriber's note:

This etext was produced from Astounding Science Fiction August 1959.
Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright
on this publication was renewed.]




THE ALIENS

BY MURRAY LEINSTER


Illustrated by van Dongen

[Illustration]

     _The human race was expanding through the galaxy ... and so, they
     knew, were the Aliens. When two expanding empires meet ... war is
     inevitable. Or is it ...?_


At 04 hours 10 minutes, ship time, the _Niccola_ was well inside the
Theta Gisol solar system. She had previously secured excellent evidence
that this was not the home of the Plumie civilization. There was no tuned
radiation. There was no evidence of interplanetary travel--rockets would
be more than obvious, and a magnetronic drive had a highly characteristic
radiation-pattern--so the real purpose of the _Niccola's_ voyage would
not be accomplished here. She wouldn't find out where Plumies came from.

There might, though, be one or more of those singular, conical,
hollow-topped cairns sheltering silicon-bronze plates, which constituted
the evidence that Plumies existed. The _Niccola_ went sunward toward the
inner planets to see. Such cairns had been found on conspicuous landmarks
on oxygen-type planets over a range of some twelve hundred light-years.
By the vegetation about them, some were a century old. On the same
evidence, others had been erected only months or weeks or even days
before a human Space Survey ship arrived to discover them. And the
situation was unpromising. It wasn't likely that the galaxy was big
enough to hold two races of rational beings capable of space travel. Back
on ancient Earth, a planet had been too small to hold two races with
tools and fire. Historically, that problem was settled when _Homo
sapiens_ exterminated _Homo neanderthalis_. It appeared that the same
situation had arisen in space. There were humans, and there were Plumies.
Both had interstellar ships. To humans, the fact was alarming. The need
for knowledge, and the danger that Plumies might know more first, and
thereby be able to exterminate humanity, was appalling.

Therefore the _Niccola_. She drove on sunward. She had left one frozen
outer planet far behind. She had crossed the orbits of three others. The
last of these was a gas giant with innumerable moonlets revolving about
it. It was now some thirty millions of miles back and twenty to one side.
The sun, ahead, flared and flamed in emptiness against that expanse of
tinted stars.

Jon Baird worked steadily in the _Niccola's_ radar room. He was one of
those who hoped that the Plumies would not prove to be the natural
enemies of mankind. Now, it looked like this ship wouldn't find out in
this solar system. There were plenty of other ships on the hunt. From
here on, it looked like routine to the next unvisited family of planets.
But meanwhile he worked. Opposite him, Diane Holt worked as steadily, her
dark head bent intently over a radar graph in formation. The immediate
job was the completion of a map of the meteor swarms following cometary
orbits about this sun. They interlaced emptiness with hazards to
navigation, and nobody would try to drive through a solar system without
such a map.

Elsewhere in the ship, everything was normal. The engine room was a place
of stillness and peace, save for the almost inaudible hum of the drive,
running at half a million Gauss flux-density. The skipper did whatever
skippers do when they are invisible to their subordinates. The weapons
officer, Taine, thought appropriate thoughts. In the navigation room the
second officer conscientiously glanced at each separate instrument at
least once in each five minutes, and then carefully surveyed all the
screens showing space outside the ship. The stewards disposed of the
debris of the last meal, and began to get ready for the next. In the
crew's quarters, those off duty read or worked at scrimshaw, or simply
and contentedly loafed.

Diane handed over the transparent radar graph, to be fitted into the
three-dimensional map in the making.

"There's a lump of stuff here," she said interestedly. "It could be the
comet that once followed this orbit, now so old it's lost all its gases
and isn't a comet any longer."

       *       *       *       *       *

At this instant, which was 04 hours 25 minutes ship time, the alarm-bell
rang. It clanged stridently over Baird's head, repeater-gongs sounded all
through the ship, and there was a scurrying and a closing of doors. The
alarm gong could mean only one thing. It made one's breath come faster or
one's hair stand on end, according to temperament.

The skipper's face appeared on the direct-line screen from the navigation
room.

"_Plumies?_" he demanded harshly. "_Mr. Baird! Plumies?_"

Baird's hands were already flipping switches and plugging the radar room
apparatus into a new setup.

"There's a contact, sir," he said curtly. "No. There was a contact. It's
broken now. Something detected us. We picked up a radar pulse. One."

The word "one" meant much. A radar system that could get adequate
information from a single pulse was not the work of amateurs. It was the
product of a very highly developed technology. Setting all equipment to
full-globular scanning, Baird felt a certain crawling sensation at the
back of his neck. He'd been mapping within a narrow range above and below
the line of this system's ecliptic. A lot could have happened outside the
area he'd had under long-distance scanning.

But seconds passed. They seemed like years. The all-globe scanning
covered every direction out from the _Niccola_. Nothing appeared which
had not been reported before. The gas-giant planet far behind, and the
only inner one on this side of the sun, would return their pulses only
after minutes. Meanwhile the radars reported very faintfully, but they
only repeated previous reports.

"No new object within half a million miles," said Baird, after a suitable
interval. Presently he added: "Nothing new within three-quarter million
miles." Then: "Nothing new within a million miles ..."

The skipper said bitingly:

"_Then you'd better check on objects that are not new!_" He turned aside,
and his voice came more faintly as he spoke into another microphone.
"_Mr. Taine! Arm all rockets and have your tube crews stand by in combat
readiness! Engine room! Prepare drive for emergency maneuvers!
Damage-control parties, put on pressure suits and take combat posts with
equipment!_" His voice rose again in volume. "_Mr. Baird! How about
observed objects?_"

Diane murmured. Baird said briefly:

"Only one suspicious object, sir--and that shouldn't be suspicious. We
are sending an information-beam at something we'd classed as a burned-out
comet. Pulse going out now, sir."

Diane had the distant-information transmitter aimed at what she'd said
might be a dead comet. Baird pressed the button. An extraordinary complex
of information-seeking frequencies and forms sprang into being and leaped
across emptiness. There were microwaves of strictly standard amplitude,
for measurement-standards. There were frequencies of other values, which
would be selectively absorbed by this material and that. There were
laterally and circularly polarized beams. When they bounced back, they
would bring a surprising amount of information.

They returned. They did bring back news. The thing that had registered as
a larger lump in a meteor-swarm was not a meteor at all. It returned four
different frequencies with a relative-intensity pattern which said that
they'd been reflected by bronze--probably silicon bronze. The polarized
beams came back depolarized, of course, but with phase-changes which said
the reflector had a rounded, regular form. There was a smooth hull of
silicon bronze out yonder. There was other data.

"It will be a Plumie ship, sir," said Baird very steadily. "At a guess,
they picked up our mapping beam and shot a single pulse at us to find out
who and what we were. For another guess, by now they've picked up and
analyzed our information-beam and know what we've found out about them."

The skipper scowled.

"_How many of them?_" he demanded. "_Have we run into a fleet?_"

"I'll check, sir," said Baird. "We picked up no tuned radiation from
outer space, sir, but it could be that they picked us up when we came out
of overdrive and stopped all their transmissions until they had us in a
trap."

"_Find out how many there are!_" barked the skipper. "_Make it quick!
Report additional data instantly!_"

His screen clicked off. Diane, more than a little pale, worked swiftly to
plug the radar-room equipment into a highly specialized pattern. The
