Project Gutenberg's A Transmutation of Muddles, by Horace Brown Fyfe

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Transmutation of Muddles

Author: Horace Brown Fyfe

Illustrator: H. R. Van Dongen

Release Date: January 7, 2008 [EBook #24187]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A TRANSMUTATION OF MUDDLES ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Bruce Albrecht, Stephen Blundell
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









 A
 TRANSMUTATION
 OF MUDDLES

 _An experienced horse-trader, bargain-haggler,
 and general swapper has a very special talent for
 turning two headaches into one aspirin pill...._

 By H. B. FYFE

 Illustrated by Van Dongen


The rugged little stellar scout ship flared down to the surface of Kappa
Orionis VII about a mile from the aboriginal village. The pilot,
Lieutenant Eric Haruhiku, scorched an open field, but pointed out to
Louis Mayne that he had been careful to disturb neither woodland nor
shoreline.

"The Kappans are touchy about those, Judge," he explained, "They fish a
lot, as you'd guess from all these shallow seas, and they pick fruit in
the forests; but they don't farm much."

"No use provoking trouble," Mayne approved. "It's a long way from
Rigel."

"It's a longer way from Sol," said the pilot.

"Don't I know, boy! If it weren't, I'd be just another retired space
captain, quietly struggling with my ranch on Rigel IX. As it is, to get
the grant, I had to remain on call as an arbitrator."

"Somebody has to settle these things," said Haruhiku. "There's not much
law way out here, except what the Space Force can apply. Well, if you'll
excuse me, sir, I'll have them get out the helicopter and take us over
to the village."

"Let me see that last message again, before you go," Mayne requested.

The pilot extracted a sheet from his clipboard and handed it to Mayne as
he left. Mayne studied the text with little pleasure.

Terran Space Force headquarters on Rigel IX wished to inform him that
the long awaited envoy from Terra to Kappa Orionis VII not only had
arrived but had departed two days behind Mayne.

It was hoped, the communication continued, that nothing would interfere
with the desired objective of coming to some friendly agreement with the
Kappans that would permit Terran use of the planet as a base for
spaceships. The envoy, of course, was prepared to offer trade
inducements and various other forms of help to the semi-civilized
natives. Mayne was requested to lay whatever groundwork he could.

_In my spare time, no doubt_, he reflected. _I'm to settle this silly
business any way at all--as long as the natives get their way. But has
anybody told the government about insurance companies? If it costs money
or a lawsuit, will they back me up?_

He felt himself to be in a ridiculous dilemma. The Kappans were reported
to have seized a Terran spaceship as it landed to trade. Naturally, the
captain had squawked for help. He claimed he had crashed; his insurance
company thought otherwise; the Kappans seemed to have some entirely
different idea in mind. Mayne had been summoned into action to render a
decision, after the rough and ready system of these settlements on the
surface of Terra's sphere of explored space.

Regretfully, he made his way now to the cubbyhole allowed him on the
cramped scout, where he changed to a more formal tunic of a bright blue
he hoped would look impressive to native eyes. By the time he was ready,
the helicopter was waiting. He and Haruhiku entered, and the crewman at
the controls took off for the scene of the dispute.

Arriving over the village, they hovered a few minutes while Haruhiku
studied the lay of the land. The lieutenant had been to this world
before, long enough to pick up some of the language and customs, so
Mayne was content to follow his advice about landing a little way off
from a spaceship that towered outside the village.

They came down about a hundred yards away, between a rutted sort of road
and a long hut covered by a curved, thatched roof.

"They're expecting us," said Haruhiku, gesturing at the group before the
hut.

It consisted of half a dozen humans and several of the Kappan natives.
The latter, naturally, caught Mayne's eye first. The most imposing
individual among them stood about five feet tall. The planet being of
about the same mass as Terra, the Kappan probably weighed over two
