The Project Gutenberg eBook, Alarm Clock, by Everett B. Cole, Illustrated
by Van Dongen


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Alarm Clock


Author: Everett B. Cole



Release Date: January 6, 2008  [eBook #24180]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALARM CLOCK***


E-text prepared by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, Bruce Albrecht, and the
Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 24180-h.htm or 24180-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/4/1/8/24180/24180-h/24180-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/4/1/8/24180/24180-h.zip)


Transcriber's note:

      This e-text was produced from _Astounding Science Fiction_,
      September, 1960. Extensive research did not uncover any
      evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication was
      renewed.





ALARM CLOCK

by

EVERETT B. COLE

Illustrated by Van Dongen







     _Most useful high explosives, like ammonium nitrate, are
     enormously violent ... once they're triggered. But they will
     remain seemingly inert when beaten, burned, variously
     punished--until the particular shock required comes
     along...._



Many years had passed since the original country rock had been broken,
cut and set, to form solid pavement for the courtyard at Opertal
Prison. And over those years the stones had suffered change as
countless feet, scuffing and pressing against once rough edges, had
smoothed the bits of rock, burnishing their surfaces until the light
of the setting sun now reflected from them as from polished mosaic.

As Stan Graham crossed the wide expanse from library to cell block,
his shoe soles added their small bit to the perfection of the age-old
polish.

He looked up at the building ahead of him, noting the coarse,
weathered stone of the walls. The severe, vertical lines of the mass
reminded him of Kendall Hall, back at the Stellar Guard Academy. He
smiled wryly.

There were, he told himself, differences. People rarely left this
place against their wishes. None had wanted to come here. Few had any
desire to stay. Whereas at the Academy--

How, he wondered, had those other guys they'd booted out really felt?
None had complained--or even said much. They'd just packed their gear
and picked up their tickets. There had been no expression of
frustrated rage to approach his. Maybe there was something wrong with
him--some unknown fault that put him out of phase with all others.

He hadn't liked it at all.

His memory went back to his last conversation with Major Michaels. The
officer had listened, then shaken his head decisively.

"Look, Graham, a re-examination wouldn't help. We just can't retain
you."

"But I'm sure--"

"No, it won't work. Your academic record isn't outstanding in any area
and Gravitics is one of the most important courses we've got."

"But I don't see how I could have bugged it, sir. I got a good grade
on the final examination."

"True, but there were several before that. And there were your daily
grades." Michaels glanced at the papers on his desk.

"I can't say what went wrong, but I think you missed something, way
back at the beginning. After that, things got worse and you ran out of
time. This is a pretty competitive place, you know, and we probably
drop some pretty capable men, but that's the way it is."

"Sir, I'm certain I know--"

"It isn't enough to know. You've got to know better than a lot of
other people."

Michaels got to his feet and came around the desk.

"Look, there's no disgrace in getting an academic tossout from here.
You had to be way above average to get here. And very few people can
make it for one year, let alone three or four."

He raised a hand as Stan started to speak.

"I know. You think it looks as though you'd broken down somehow. You
didn't. From the day you came here, everyone looked for weaknesses. If
there'd been a flaw, they'd have found it--and they'd have been on you
till you came apart--or the flaw disappeared. We lose people that
way." He shrugged.

"You didn't fall apart. They just got to you with some pretty rough
theory. You don't have to bow your head to anybody about that."

       *       *       *       *       *

Stan looked at the heavily barred door before him.

"No," he told himself, "I don't suppose I'm the galaxy's prize boob,
but I'm no high value shipment, either. I'm just some guy that not
only couldn't make the grade, but couldn't even make it home without
getting into trouble."

He pushed the door aside and went into the building, pausing for an
instant between two monitor pillars. There was no warning buzz and he
continued on his way through a hallway.

He barely noticed his surroundings. Once, when he had first been
brought here, he had studied the stone walls, the tiny, grilled
windows, the barred doors, with fascinated horror. But the feeling had
dulled. They were just depressingly familiar surroundings now.

He stopped at a heavy metal grill and handed a slip through the bars.
A bored guard turned, dropped the paper into a slot, then glanced at a
viewplate. He nodded.

"All right, forty-two ninety. You're on time. Back to your cell." He
punched a button and a gate slid aside.

Stan glanced at the cell fronts as he walked. Men were going about
their affairs. A few glanced at him as he passed, then looked away.
Stan closed his eyes for an instant.

[Illustration]

That much hadn't changed. At school, he had never been one with any of
the cadet groups. He had been accepted at first, then coolly
tolerated, then shunted to the outer edges.

Oh, he'd had his friends, of course. There were those other oddballs,
like Winton and Morgan. But they'd gone. For one reason or another,
most of them had packed up and left long before he'd had his final
run-in with the academic board.

And there had been Major Michaels. For a while, the officer had been
warm--friendly. Stan could remember pleasant chats--peaceful hours
spent in the major's comfortable quarters. And he could remember
parties, with some pretty swell people around.

Then the older man had become a forbidding stranger. Stan had never
been able to think of a reason for that. Maybe it was because of the
decline in his academic work. Maybe he'd done something to offend.
Maybe--

He shook the thoughts away, walked to a cell door, and stood waiting
till the guard touched the release button.

       *       *       *       *       *

As Stan tossed his books on his bunk, Jak Holme raised his head and
looked across the cell.

"More of them books?"

"Yeah." Stan nodded. "Still trying to find out about this planet."

"You trying to be some kinda big politician when you get out?" Holme
snorted.

"Tell you, be better you try mixing with the guys, 'stead of pushing
'em around with that fancy talk, making 'em jump now and then, see.
You get along with 'em, you'll see. They'll tell you all you need. Be
working with some of 'em, too, remember?"

"Oh, I don't try to push anybody around." Stan perched on his bunk.
"Doesn't hurt anyone to study, though."
