The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Coffin Cure, by Alan Edward Nourse

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Coffin Cure

Author: Alan Edward Nourse

Release Date: January 14, 2008 [EBook #24276]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COFFIN CURE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 The
 Coffin
 Cure

 by Alan E. Nourse


When the discovery was announced, it was Dr. Chauncey Patrick Coffin who
announced it. He had, of course, arranged with uncanny skill to take
most of the credit for himself. If it turned out to be greater than he
had hoped, so much the better. His presentation was scheduled for the
last night of the American College of Clinical Practitioners' annual
meeting, and Coffin had fully intended it to be a bombshell.

It was. Its explosion exceeded even Dr. Coffin's wilder expectations,
which took quite a bit of doing. In the end he had waded through more
newspaper reporters than medical doctors as he left the hall that night.
It was a heady evening for Chauncey Patrick Coffin, M.D.

Certain others were not so delighted with Coffin's bombshell.

"It's idiocy!" young Dr. Phillip Dawson wailed in the laboratory
conference room the next morning. "Blind, screaming idiocy. You've gone
out of your mind--that's all there is to it. Can't you see what you've
done? Aside from selling your colleagues down the river, that is?" He
clenched the reprint of Coffin's address in his hand and brandished it
like a broadsword. "'Report on a Vaccine for the Treatment and Cure of
the Common Cold,' by C. P. Coffin, _et al._ That's what it says--_et
al._ My idea in the first place. Jake and I both pounding our heads on
the wall for eight solid months--and now you sneak it into publication a
full year before we have any business publishing a word about it."

"Really, Phillip!" Dr. Chauncey Coffin ran a pudgy hand through his
snowy hair. "How ungrateful! I thought for sure you'd be delighted. An
excellent presentation, I must say--terse, succinct, unequivocal--" he
raised his hand--"but _generously_ unequivocal, you understand. You
should have heard the ovation--they nearly went wild! And the look on
Underwood's face! Worth waiting twenty years for."

"And the reporters," snapped Phillip. "Don't forget the reporters." He
whirled on the small dark man sitting quietly in the corner. "How about
that, Jake? Did you see the morning papers? This thief not only steals
our work, he splashes it all over the countryside in red ink."

Dr. Jacob Miles coughed apologetically. "What Phillip is so stormed up
about is the prematurity of it all," he said to Coffin. "After all,
we've hardly had an acceptable period of clinical trial."

"Nonsense," said Coffin, glaring at Phillip. "Underwood and his men were
ready to publish their discovery within another six weeks. Where would
we be then? How much clinical testing do you want? Phillip, you had the
worst cold of your life when you took the vaccine. Have you had any
since?"

"No, of course not," said Phillip peevishly.

"Jacob, how about you? Any sniffles?"

"Oh, no. No colds."

"Well, what about those six hundred students from the University? Did I
misread the reports on them?"

"No--98 per cent cured of active symptoms within twenty-four hours. Not
a single recurrence. The results were just short of miraculous." Jake
hesitated. "Of course, it's only been a month...."

"Month, year, century! Look at them! Six hundred of the world's most
luxuriant colds, and now not even a sniffle." The chubby doctor sank
down behind the desk, his ruddy face beaming. "Come, now, gentlemen, be
reasonable. Think positively! There's work to be done, a great deal of
work. They'll be wanting me in Washington, I imagine. Press conference
in twenty minutes. Drug houses to consult with. How dare we stand in the
path of Progress? We've won the greatest medical triumph of all
times--the conquering of the Common Cold. We'll go down in history!"

And he was perfectly right on one point, at least.
