The Project Gutenberg EBook of Criminal Negligence, by Jesse Francis McComas

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Criminal Negligence

Author: Jesse Francis McComas

Release Date: January 22, 2008 [EBook #24399]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CRIMINAL NEGLIGENCE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Greg Bergquist and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Astounding Science
Fiction June 1955. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor typographical
errors have been corrected without note.]




CRIMINAL NEGLIGENCE

[Illustration]

     _Somebody was going to have to be left behind ... and who it would
     be was perfectly obvious...._

BY J. FRANCIS MCCOMAS

Illustrated by Freas


Warden Halloran smiled slightly. "You expect to have criminals on Mars,
then?" he asked. "Is that why you want me?"

"Of course we don't, sir!" snapped the lieutenant general. His name was
Knox. "We need men of your administrative ability--"

"Pardon me, general," Lansing interposed smoothly, "I rather think we'd
better give the warden a ... a more detailed picture, shall we say? We
have been rather abrupt, you know."

"I'd be grateful if you would," Halloran said.

He watched the lanky civilian as Lansing puffed jerkily on his cigar. A
long man, with a shock of black hair tumbling over a high, narrow
forehead, Lansing had introduced himself as chairman of the project's
cooerdinating committee ... whatever that was.

"Go ahead," grunted Knox. "But make it fast, doctor."

Lansing smiled at the warden, carefully placed his cigar in the ash tray
before him and said, "We've been working on the ships night and day.
Both the dust itself and its secondary effects are getter closer to us
all the time. We've been so intent on the job--it's _really_ been a race
against time!--that only yesterday one of my young men remembered the
Mountain State Penitentiary was well within our sphere of control."

"The country--what's left of it--has been split up into regions," the
general said. "So many ships to each region."

"So," Lansing went on, "learning about you meant there was another batch
of passengers to round up. And when I was told the warden was
yourself--I know something of your career, Mr. Halloran--I was
delighted. Frankly," he grinned at Knox, "we're long on military and
scientific brass and short on people who can manage other people."

"I see." Halloran pressed a buzzer on his desk. "I think some of my
associates ought to be in on this discussion."

"Discussion?" barked Knox. "Is there anything to discuss? We simply want
you out of here in an hour--"

"Please, general!" the warden said quietly.

       *       *       *       *       *

If the gray-clad man who entered the office at that moment heard the
general's outburst, he gave no sign. He stood stiffly in front of the
warden's big desk, a little to one side of the two visitors, and said,
"Yes sir, Mr. Halloran?"

"Hello, Joe. Know where the captain is?"

"First afternoon inspection, sir." He cocked an eye at the clock on the
wall behind Halloran. "Ought to be in the laundry about now."

The warden scribbled a few words on a small square of paper. "Ask him to
come here at once, please. On your way, please stop in at the hospital
and ask Dr. Slade to come along, too." He pushed the paper across the
desk to the inmate. "There's your pass."

"Yes sir. Anything else, warden?" He stood, a small, square figure in
neat gray shirt and pants, seemingly oblivious to the ill-concealed
stares of the two visitors.

Halloran thought a moment, then said, "Yes ... I'd like to see Father
Nelson and Rabbi Goldsmid, too."

"Uh, Father Nelson's up on the Row, sir. With Bert Doyle."

"Then we'll not bother him, of course. Just the others."

"Yes, sir. On the double."

Lansing slouched around in his chair and openly watched Joe Mario walk
out. Then he turned back to Halloran and said, "That chap a ... a
trusty, warden?"

"To a degree. Although we no longer use the term. We classify the
inmates according to the amount of responsibility they can handle."

"I see. Ah--" he laughed embarrassedly, "this is the first time I've
been in a prison. Mind telling me what his crime was?"

Halloran smiled gently. "We try to remember the man, Dr. Lansing, and
not his crime." Then he relented. "Joe Mario was just a small-time crook
who got mixed up in a bad murder."

