The Project Gutenberg EBook of Wizard, by 
Laurence Mark Janifer                         (AKA Larry M. Harris)

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Wizard

Author: Laurence Mark Janifer (AKA Larry M. Harris)

Release Date: January 21, 2008 [EBook #24375]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WIZARD ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Greg Bergquist, Bruce Albrecht and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net





[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Astounding Science
Fiction May 1960. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor typographical
errors have been corrected without note.]




WIZARD.

By Larry M. Harris

     _Although the Masquerade itself, as a necessary protection against
     non-telepaths, was not fully formulated until the late years of the
     Seventeenth Century, groups of telepaths-in-hiding existed long
     before that date. Whether such groups were the results of natural
     mutations, or whether they came into being due to some other cause,
     has not yet been fully determined, but that a group did exist in
     the district of Offenburg, in what is now Prussia, we are quite
     sure. The activities of the group appear to have begun,
     approximately, in the year 1594, but it was not until eleven years
     after that date that they achieved a signal triumph, the first and
     perhaps the last of its kind until the dissolution of the
     Masquerade in 2103._

--Excerpt from "A Short History of the Masquerade," by A. Milge, Crystal
704-54-368, Produced 2440.

Jonas came over the hill whistling as if he had not a care in the
world--which was not even approximately true, he reflected happily. The
state of complete and utter quiet was both foreign and slightly
repugnant to him; he was never more pleased than when he had a job in
hand, a job that involved a slight and unavoidable risk.

This time, of course, the risk was more than slight. Why, he thought
happily, it was even possible for him to get killed, and most painfully,
too! With a great deal of pleasure, he stood for a second at the crest
of the hill, his hands on his hips, looking down at the town of Speyer
as it baked in the May afternoon sunlight.



[Illustration]

     _"Behold the Tortoise: He maketh no progress unless he sticketh out
     his neck." But he maketh very little progress unless he pick the
     right time and place to "sticketh out his neck"--which can be quite
     a sticky problem for a man in a medieval culture!_

Illustrated by Schoenherr

Jonas did not, in spite of his pose, look like the typical hero of folk
tale or scribe's tome; he was not seven feet tall, for instance, nor did
he have a handsome, lovesome face with flashing blue eyes, or a
broad-shouldered, narrow-waisted marvel of a figure. He was, instead,
somewhat shorter than the average of men in Europe in 1605 and for some
time thereafter. He had small, almost hidden eyes that seemed to see a
great deal, but failed completely to make a fuss about the fact. And
while his figure was just a trifle dumpy, his face completed the rhyme
by being extraordinarily lumpy. The nose, as a matter of strict truth,
was hard to distinguish from the other contusions, swellings and marks
that covered the head.

Nor, of course, did he carry the sword of a great hero, or a noble.
Jonas had no _von_ to stick on his name, and he had never thought it
worth his while to claim one and accept the tiny risk of disclosure.
After all, a noble was only a man like other men.

And, besides, Jonas knew perfectly well that he had no need of a sword.

His adventures, too, were a little out of the common run of tales. Jonas
had, he thought regretfully, few duels to look forward to, and he had
even fewer to look back on. And, as a maid is won by face, figure and
daring, and a wife by riches, position or prospects, there was a notable
paucity of lissome ladies in Jonas' career.

All in all, he thought sadly, he was not a _usual_ hero.

But he refused to let the thought spoil his enjoyment. After all, he was
a hero, though of his own unique kind; there was no denying that. And,
in his own way, he had his reward. He took one hand off his hip to
scratch at the top of his head, wondering briefly if he had managed to
pick up lice in the last town he had visited, and he took another look
at the city.

Speyer seemed a lot better, at first glance, than some of the other
places Jonas had visited. For one thing, it had a full town hall,
built--no less--of honest stone, and probably a relict of the Roman
times. There was the parish church, of course, a good solid wooden
structure, and a collection of houses strung along the dirt paths of the
town. The houses of the rich were, naturally, wooden; the poor built of
baked mud. There were a great many baked-mud structures, and only one
wooden one, besides the church, that Jonas could see.

The paths were winding, but comparatively free from slop. That was
pleasing, he told himself. And the buildings themselves, wood, mud and
stone, clustered in the valley below him as if they were afraid, and
needed each other's protection.

Which, in a way, they did. Jonas reflected on that a trifle grimly,
thinking of the Holy Inquisition with its hierarchy of priests and lay
folk, busily working in Speyer just as it worked in every other town
throughout Offenburg, and throughout the civilized world.

Ordinarily, he would not have given it a thought, beyond a passing sigh
for the ways of the world; he had other business. But now--

He grinned to himself, and the grin turned to a laugh as he started down
the hill. The grislier methods of the Inquisitorial process were
