The Project Gutenberg EBook of Experiments upon magnesia alba, Quicklime,
and some other Alcaline Substances, by Joseph Black

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Experiments upon magnesia alba, Quicklime, and some other Alcaline Substances

Author: Joseph Black

Release Date: February 13, 2008 [EBook #24591]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EXPERIMENTS UPON MAGNESIA ALBA ***




Produced by Bryan Ness, Greg Bergquist, Jamie Atiga and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









Alembic Club Reprints--No. 1.

EXPERIMENTS

UPON

MAGNESIA ALBA,

QUICKLIME,

AND SOME OTHER

ALCALINE SUBSTANCES.


BY JOSEPH BLACK, M.D.,
_Professor of Chemistry in the University of Edinburgh, 1766-1797_.

(1755.)


Edinburgh:
PUBLISHED BY THE ALEMBIC CLUB.

_Edinburgh Agent:_
WILLIAM F. CLAY, 18 TEVIOT PLACE.

_London Agents:_
SIMPKIN, MARSHALL, HAMILTON, KENT, & CO. LTD.

1898.

[Illustration: Insignia]




PREFACE.


Black's Paper entitled "Experiments upon Magnesia Alba, Quicklime, and
some other Alcaline Substances" was read in June 1755, and was first
published in "Essays and Observations, Physical and Literary. Read
before a Society in Edinburgh, and Published by them," Volume II.,
Edinburgh, 1756; pp. 157-225. It was subsequently reprinted several
times during the life of the author, not only in later editions of these
Essays, but also in a separate form. Copies of the original Paper are
now very difficult to obtain, and the later reprints have also become
scarce.

The present reprint is a faithful copy of the Paper as it first appeared
in 1756, the spelling, &c., of the original having been carefully
reproduced.

The Paper constitutes a highly important step in the laying of the
foundations of chemistry as an exact science, and furnishes a model of
carefully planned experimental investigation, and of clear reasoning
upon the results of experiment. It is neither so widely read by the
younger chemists nor is it so readily accessible as it ought to be, and
the object of the Alembic Club in issuing it as the first volume of a
series of Reprints of historically important contributions to Chemistry,
is to place it within easy reach of every student of Chemistry and of
the History of Chemistry.

The student's attention may be particularly called to Black's tacit
adoption of the quantitative method in a large number of his
experiments, and to the way in which he bases many of his conclusions
upon the results obtained in these experiments. Even yet it is very
frequently stated that the introduction of the quantitative method into
Chemistry (which did not by any means originate with Black) took place
at a considerably later date.

L. D.




EXPERIMENTS

UPON

MAGNESIA ALBA, QUICKLIME,

AND SOME OTHER

ALCALINE SUBSTANCES;

BY JOSEPH BLACK, M.D.[1]

PART I.


Hoffman, in one of his observations, gives the history of a powder
called _magnesia alba_, which had long been used and esteemed as a mild
and tasteless purgative; but the method of preparing it was not
generally known before he made it public.[2]

It was originally obtained from a liquor called the _mother of nitre_,
which is produced in the following manner:

Salt-petre is separated from the brine which first affords it, or from
the water with which it is washed out of nitrous earths, by the process
commonly used in crystallizing salts. In this process the brine is
gradually diminished, and at length reduced to a small quantity of an
unctuous bitter saline liquor, affording no more salt-petre by
evaporation; but, if urged with a brisk fire, drying up into a confused
mass which attracts water strongly, and becomes fluid again when exposed
to the open air.

To this liquor the workmen have given the name of the _mother of
nitre_; and _Hoffman_, finding it composed of the _magnesia_ united to
an acid, obtained a separation of these, either by exposing the compound
to a strong fire in which the acid was dissipated and the _magnesia_
remained behind, or by the addition of an alkali which attracted the
acid to itself: and this last method he recommends as the best. He
likewise makes an inquiry into the nature and virtues of the powder thus
prepared; and observes, that it is an absorbent earth which joins
readily with all acids, and must necessarily destroy any acidity it
meets in the stomach; but that its purgative power is uncertain, for
sometimes it has not the least effect of that kind. As it is a mere
insipid earth, he rationally concludes it to be purgative only when
converted into a sort of neutral salt by an acid in the stomach, and
that its effect is therefore proportional to the quantity of this acid.

Altho' _magnesia_ appears from this history of it to be a very innocent
medicine, yet having observed, that some hypochondriacs who used it
frequently, were subject to flatulencies and spasms, he seems to have
suspected it of some noxious quality. The circumstances however which
gave rise to his suspicion, may very possibly have proceeded from the
imprudence of his patients, who, trusting too much to _magnesia_, (which
is properly a palliative in that disease,) and neglecting the assistance
of other remedies, allowed their disorder to increase upon them. It may
indeed be alledged, that _magnesia_, as a purgative, is not the most
eligible medicine for such constitutions, as they agree best with those
that strengthen, stimulate and warm; which the saline purges commonly
used are not observed to do. But there seems at least to be no objection
to its use when children are troubled with an acid in their stomach; for
gentle purging in this case is very proper, and it is often more
conveniently procured by means of _magnesia_ than of any other medicine,
on account of its being intirely insipid.

The above-mentioned Author observing, some time after, that a bitter
saline liquor, similar to that obtained from the brine of salt-petre,
was likewise produced by the evaporation of those waters which contain
common salt, had the curiosity to try if this would also yield a
_magnesia_. The experiment succeeded: and he thus found out another
process for obtaining this powder, and at the same time assured himself
by experiments, that the product from both was exactly the same.[3]

My curiosity led me some time ago to inquire more particularly into the
