The Project Gutenberg EBook of Tinker's Dam, by Joseph Tinker

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Tinker's Dam

Author: Joseph Tinker

Illustrator: John Schoenherr

Release Date: February 20, 2008 [EBook #24655]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TINKER'S DAM ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]


 TINKER'S
 DAM

By JOSEPH TINKER


 _There is something very fundamental
 indeed about the ancient showman's
 trick--divert their attention from
 the thing you're really doing ..._


Illustrated by Schoenherr


The call on the TV-phone came right in the middle of my shaving. They
have orders not to call me before breakfast for anything less than a
national calamity. I pressed "Accept," too startled to take the lather
from my face.

"Hi, Gyp," George Kelly said to me from the screen. "Hurry it up, boy."
He made no reference to my appearance on his screen. "Quit draggin' your
feet!"

This I take from George Kelly. First of all, he's Director of the F.B.I.
Even more important, he's my boss. "Hey, George," I protested, knowing
he would not have called on a routine matter. "I got up before breakfast
as it is. What's up?" I hardly needed to ask. When they call me, it's
always the same sickening kind of trouble.

"Fred Plaice and his gang got their hands on a telepath in the District
last night," George told me. "It's been on the newscast already.
There'll be a damned ugly mob at the office--a lynch mob. Listen, Gyp, I
want you to go through the main entrance this morning."

I nodded my willingness to fight my way through the crowd that would be
gathering at the office. Usually I have my taxi drop me on the roof of
the building. Call it a petty vanity if you want. It's one of the
perquisites of being Washington brass.

"Swell, Gyp," George Kelly said, as if there had been any question about
whether I'd come in through the main entrance. "The public has a world
of confidence in you. Now, damn it, Gyp, if they want to make a fuss
over you this morning, let them. We've got to get that snake out of the
building alive!"

"Oh, no," I protested. "You don't mean Fred took a telepath to the
office?"

"I'm afraid so," George said, his tone so neutral that I couldn't take
it as personal criticism. "See you down there." His rugged features
faded from the screen as he cut the image.

I had my driver drop the skim-copter to the street when we got to
Pennsylvania Avenue within a block of the building, and he skimmed to
the outskirts of the crowd that was pressing around the entrance. There
were four or five hundred people there, milling around like a herd of
restless cattle. Tighter knots of humanity were pressed around the usual
four or five firebrands who were ranting and yelling for
blood--telepathic blood.

The guards around the entrance, apparently tipped by George Kelly,
started yelling, "Let him through!" They charged the mob to open a lane
for me. The crowd drew back sullenly. As I pressed toward the guards, I
could see the fear and panic on the faces around me.

Then a man recognized me. "God bless Gyp Tinker!" he bellowed in a voice
loud enough to conjure an echo out of a prairie. People started jumping
like so many animated pogo sticks, trying to get a sight of me over the
heads of others. By the time I reached the steps, the whole mob was
cheering and yelling, "Gyp!"

As George Kelly had asked, I paused on the steps and held up my hands
for a chance to speak. It's flattering when they give you silence. In
the space of two breaths it was like the inside of a morgue.

"Thanks, friends," I called out to them. "George Kelly and I have
already gotten the facts on the telepath who was captured here in
Washington last night. There is absolutely no cause for alarm. I hope
you'll go to your homes and offices promptly. Let's not give the
Russians any more satisfaction than we have to. And rest easy, friends.
We'll use the full summary powers conferred by Congress."

They gave me a terrific cheer. You'd think I had said something. At
least they were reminded of the summary powers granted the F.B.I. to
deal with telepaths, because of the gruesome danger they are to all of
us.

       *       *       *       *       *

Anita Hadley, my secretary, was waiting for me in the outer office,
although it was a good hour before we were supposed to open.

"He's in there," she said, pointing to the door to my private office.

"The snake?" I asked, startled.

"Fred Plaice," she said. "And he's got the snake in there with him." Her
gray eyes flashed. She could guess how I felt about that.

