The Project Gutenberg EBook of Final Weapon, by Everett B. Cole

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Final Weapon

Author: Everett B. Cole

Illustrator: Alexander Leydenfrost

Release Date: March 1, 2008 [EBook #24723]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FINAL WEAPON ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]


 FINAL
 WEAPON

 BY EVERETT B. COLE

 _Man has developed many a deadly
 weapon. Today, the weapon most
 effective in destroying a man's
 hopes and security is the file
 folder ... and that was the weapon
 Morely knew and loved. But there
 was something more potent to come._

 Illustrated by Leydenfrost


District Leader Howard Morely leaned back in his seat, to glance down at
the bay. Idly, he allowed his gaze to wander over the expanse of water
between the two blunt points of land, then he looked back at the
skeletonlike spire which jutted upward from the green hills he had just
passed over. He could remember when that ruin had been a support for one
of the world's great bridges.

Now, a crumbling symbol of the past, it stubbornly resisted the attacks
of the weather, as it had once resisted the far more powerful blasts of
explosives. Obstinately, it pointed its rusty length skyward, to remind
the observer of bygone conflict--and more.

Together with the tangled cables, dimly seen in the shoal water, the
line of wreckage in the channel, and the weed-covered strip of torn
concrete which led through the hills, it testified to the arrival of the
air age. Bridges, highways, and harbors alike had passed their day of
usefulness.

Not far from the ruined bridge support, Morely could see the huge, well
maintained intake of one of the chemical extraction plants. He shook his
head at the contrast.

"That eyesore should be pulled down," he muttered. "Should have been
pulled down long ago. Suggested it in a report, but I suppose it never
got to the Old Man. He depends on his staff too much. If I had the
region, I'd--"

He shook his head. He was not the regional director--yet. Some day, the
old director would retire. Then, Central Coordination would be examining
the records of various district leaders, looking for a successor. Then--

He shrugged and turned his attention to his piloting of the borrowed
helicopter. It was a clumsy machine, and he had to get in to Regional
Headquarters in time for the morning conference. There would be no sense
it getting involved in employee traffic--not if he could avoid it.

The conference, his informant had told him, would be a little out of the
ordinary. It seemed that the Old Man had become somewhat irritated by
the excess privileges allowed in a few of the eastern districts. And he
was going to jack everyone up about it. After that would come the usual
period of reports, and possibly a few special instructions. Some of the
leaders would have pet projects to put forward, he knew. They always
did. Morely smiled to himself. He'd have something to come up with, too.

And this conference might put a crimp in Harwood's style. Morely had
carefully worded his progress report to make contrast with the type of
report that he knew would come from District One. George Harwood had
been allowing quite a few extra privileges to his people, stating that
it was good for morale. And, during the past couple of months, he'd
seemed to be proving his point. Certainly, the production of the
employees from the peninsula had been climbing. Harwood, Morely decided
would be the most logical person--after himself--for the region when the
Old Man retired. In fact, for a time, it had looked as though the
director of District One was going to be a dangerous rival.

But this conference would change things. Morely smiled slowly as he
thought of possible ways of shading the odds.

He looked ahead. Commuters were streaming in from the peninsula now, to
make for the factory parking lots. His face tightened a little. Why, he
wondered, had the Old Man decided to call the conference at this hour?
He could have delayed a little, until commuter traffic was less heavy.
He'd been a district leader once. And before that, under the old
government, a field leader. He should know how annoying the employee
classes could be. And to force his leaders to mingle with commuting
employees in heavy traffic!

       *       *       *       *       *

For that matter, everyone seemed to be conspiring to make things
uncomfortable today. Those heavy-handed mechanics in the district motor
pool, for example. They'd failed him today. His own sleek machine, with
its distinctive markings was still being repaired. And he'd been forced
to use this unmarked security patrol heli. The machine wasn't really too
bad, of course. It had a superb motor, and it carried identification
lights and siren, which could be used if necessary. But it resembled
some lower-class citizen's family carryall. And, despite its
modifications, it still handled like one. Morely grimaced and eased the
wheel left a little. The helicopter swung in a slow arc.

Helis were rising from the factory lots, to interlace with incoming
ships before joining with the great stream headed south. The night
workers were heading for home. Morely hovered his machine for a moment,
to watch the ships jockey for position, sometimes barely avoiding
collisions in the stream of traffic. He watched one ship, which edged
forward, stopped barely in time to avoid being hit, edged forward again,
and finally managed to block traffic for a time while its inept driver
fooled with the controls and finally got on course.

"Quarrelsome, brawling fools," he muttered. "Even among themselves, they
can't get along."

He looked around, noting that the air over the Administrative Group was
comparatively free of traffic. To be sure, he would have to cross the
traffic lines, but he could take the upper lanes, avoiding all but
official traffic. A guard might challenge, but he could use his
identifying lights. He wouldn't be halted. He corrected his course a
little, glanced at the altimeter, and put his ship into a climb.

At length, he eased his ship over the parklike area over Administrative
Square and hovered over the parking entry. A light blinked on his dash,
to tell him that all the official spaces were occupied. He grunted.

"Wonder they couldn't leave a clear space in Official. They know I'm
coming in for conference."

He moved the control wheel, allowing his ship to slide over to a
shopping center parking slot, and hovered over the entry, debating. He
could park here and take the sub-surface to Administrative, or he could
use the surface lot just outside of the headquarters group. Of course,
the director frowned on use of the surface lot, except in emergency. The
underground lots were designated for all normal parking. Morely thought
over the problem, ignoring the helis which hovered, waiting for him to
clear the center of the landing area. Finally, his hand started for the
throttle. He would settle in the landing slot, let the guards shove his
heli to a space, and avoid any conflict with the director's orders
regarding the surface lot.

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly, there was a sputtering roar. Someone had become impatient at
the delay. A small sports heli swept by, impellers reversed, and dropped
rapidly toward the entry to the underground parking space. Morely's ship
rocked a little in the air blast.

For an instant, Morely felt a sharp pain which gnawed at the pit of his
stomach. His head was abruptly light, and his hand, apparently of its
own volition, closed over the throttle knob.

This joy boy was overdue for a lesson.

Morely measured the distance quickly, judging the instant when the other
pilot would have to repitch his impellers and halt his downward rush. He
allowed his own heavy ship to wallow earthward.

Scant feet from ground surface, the sportster pilot flicked his pitch
control and pulled his throttle out for the brief burst of power which
would allow him to drop gently to the landing platform.

Morely grinned savagely as he saw the impellers below him change pitch
and start to move faster. He twisted his own impellers to full pitch and
pulled out the throttle for a sudden, roaring surge of power, then swung
the control column, jerking his ship up and away. As he steadied his
heli and cut power, he looked down.

The powerful downblast had completely upset the sportster pilot's
calculations. The small ship, struck by the gale from above, had listed
to the right and gone out of control, grazing one of the heavy splinter
shutters at the side of the landing slot. The ship lay on its side,
amidst the wreckage of its impellers.

Morely flicked on his warning siren and lights, then feathered his own
impellers, dropping his ship in free fall. He dropped to the grassy area
by the landing slot, ignoring the other ships which scattered like
frightened chickens, to give him room. At the last instant, he twisted
the impellers to full pitch again, pulled out the throttle for a moment,
then slammed the lever to the closed position. His ship touched down on
springy turf, its landing gear settling gently to accept the weight. A
klaxon was sounding, and warning lights flashed from the landing slot,
to warn ships away from an attempted landing.

It would be a long time before the shiny, new sportster would be in
condition to sweep into another parking area. And, after paying his fine
and taking care of his extra duties, it would be an even longer time
before the employee-pilot would have much business in the luxury
shopping center, anyway.

Morely smiled bitterly as he closed the door of his ship. It didn't pay
to cross Howard Morely--ever.

He walked slowly toward the landing slot, motioning imperiously to an
approaching guard.

"Have someone place that ship for me," he ordered, jerking a thumb back
toward his heli. "Then come over to that wreck. I shall want words with
the pilot." He held out his small identification folder.

The guard's glance went to the folder. For an instant, he studied the
card exposed before him, then he straightened and saluted, his face
expressionless.

"Yes, sir." He signaled another guard, then pointed toward Morely's
ship, and to the landing slot. "I can go with you now."

The two went down in the elevator and walked over to the wrecked
sportster. A slender man was crawling from a door. When the man was
clear of his ship, Morely beckoned.

"Over here, Fellow," he commanded.

The sportster pilot approached, the indignation on his face changing to
bewilderment, then dismay as he noted Morely's insignia and the attitude
of the two men who faced him.

Morely turned to the guard.

"Get me his name, identification number, and the name of his leader."

"Yes, sir."

The guard turned to the man, who grimaced a little with pain as he
slowly put a hand in his pocket. Wordlessly, he extracted a bulky
folder, from which he took a small booklet. He held out the booklet to
the guard.

Morely held out a hand. "Never mind," he said. "Simply put him in
custody. I'll turn this over to his leader myself."

He had noted the cover design on the booklet. It was from District
One--Harwood's district. He flipped the cover open, ascertaining that
there was no transfer notice. He'd give this to Harwood all right--at
the right time. He looked at his watch.

"I shall want my heli in about three hours," he announced. "See to it
that it's ready. And have a man check the fuel and see if the ship's
damaged in any way." He turned away.

       *       *       *       *       *

The district leaders sat before the large conference table. Among them,
close to the director's place, was Morely, his face fixed in an
expression of alert interest. His informant had been right. The man must
have gotten a look at the Old Man's notes. The regional director was
criticizing the laxity in inspection and control of employee activities.
He objected to the excessive luxury activity allowed to some members of
the employee classes, as well as to the overabundance of leisure allowed
in several cases, some of which he described in detail.

He especially pointed up the fact that a recent heli meet had been
almost dominated by employee class entries. And he pointed out the fact
that there was considerable rehabilitation work to be done in bombed
areas. It could be done by employees, during their time away from their
subsistence jobs. That was all community time, he reminded.

It was all very well, he said, to allow the second- and even third-class
citizens a certain amount of leisure recreation. That kept morale up.
But they were certainly not to be allowed any position of dominance,
either individually, or as a class. That, he said, was something else
again. It was precisely the sort of thing that had led to the collapse
and downfall of many previous civilizations.

"Keep 'em busy," he ordered. "So busy they don't have time to think up
mischief to get into. Remember, gentlemen, second- and third-class
citizens have no rights--only privileges. And privileges may be
withdrawn at any time."
