Project Gutenberg's Elements of Agricultural Chemistry, by Thomas Anderson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Elements of Agricultural Chemistry

Author: Thomas Anderson

Release Date: March 28, 2008 [EBook #24931]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ELEMENTS OF AGRICULTURAL CHEMISTRY ***




Produced by Steven Giacomelli, Jeannie Howse, Josephine
Paolucci and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net. (This file was produced from images
produced by Core Historical Literature in Agriculture
(CHLA), Cornell University).









ELEMENTS

OF

AGRICULTURAL CHEMISTRY

BY

THOMAS ANDERSON, M.D.

F.R.S.E., F.C.S.

PROFESSOR OF CHEMISTRY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW, AND CHEMIST TO THE
HIGHLAND AND AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY OF SCOTLAND.

EDINBURGH:

ADAM AND CHARLES BLACK.

1860.


ERRATUM.

Page 190, line 11, for "gallon" read "ton."

PRINTED BY R. AND R. CLARK, EDINBURGH.


Transcriber's note: Many of the tables needed to be split to fit space
constraints. Minor typos have been corrected and footnotes moved to the
end of the chapters. A word surrounded by underscores like _this_
signifies the word is italics in the text. For numbers and equations,
underscores before bracketed numbers in equations denote a subscript.



PREFACE.


The object of the present work is to offer to the farmer a concise
outline of the general principles of Agricultural Chemistry. It has no
pretensions to be considered a complete treatise on the subject. On the
contrary, its aim is strictly elementary, and with this view I have
endeavoured, as far as possible, to avoid unnecessary technicalities so
as to make it intelligible to those who are unacquainted with the
details of chemical science, although I have not hesitated to discuss
such points as appeared essential to the proper understanding of any
particular subject.

The rapid progress of agricultural chemistry, and the numerous
researches prosecuted under the auspices of agricultural societies and
private experimenters in this and other countries, render it by no means
an easy task to make a proper selection from the mass of facts which is
being daily accumulated. In doing this, however, I have been guided by a
pretty intimate knowledge of the wants of the farmer, which has induced
me to enlarge on those departments of the subject which bear more
immediately on the every-day practice of agriculture; and for this
reason the composition and properties of soils, the nature of manures,
and the principles by which their application ought to be governed, have
been somewhat minutely treated.

In all cases numerical details have been given as fully as is consistent
with the limits of the work; and it may be right to state that a
considerable number of the analyses contained in it have been made in my
own laboratory, and that even when I have preferred to quote the results
of other chemists, they have not unfrequently been confirmed by my own
experiments.

     UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW,
     _1st November 1860._




CONTENTS.


                                                                       Page

INTRODUCTION                                                              1


CHAPTER I.

THE ORGANIC CONSTITUENTS OF PLANTS.

Carbon ... Carbonic Acid ... Hydrogen ... Nitrogen ... Nitric Acid ...
Ammonia ... Oxygen ... Sources whence obtained ... The Atmosphere ...
The Soil ... Source of the Inorganic Constituents of Plants ... Manner
in which the Constituents of Plants are absorbed                          8


CHAPTER II.

THE PROXIMATE CONSTITUENTS OF PLANTS.

The Saccharine and Amylaceous Constituents ... Cellulose ... Incrusting
Matter ... Starch ... Lichen Starch ... Inuline ... Gum ... Dextrine ...
Sugar ... Mucilage ... Pectine and Pectic Acid ... Oily or Fatty Matters
... Margaric, Stearic, and Oleic Acids ... Wax ... Nitrogenous or
Albuminous Constituents of Plants and Animals ... Albumen ... Fibrine
... Casein ... Diastase                                                  40


CHAPTER III.

THE CHANGES WHICH TAKE PLACE IN THE FOOD OF
PLANTS DURING THEIR GROWTH.

Changes occurring during Germination ... Changes during the After-Growth
of the Plant ... Decomposition of Carbonic Acid ... Decomposition of
Water ... Decomposition of Ammonia ... Decomposition of Nitric Acid      54


CHAPTER IV.

THE INORGANIC CONSTITUENTS OF PLANTS.

The Amount of Inorganic Matters in Different Plants ... The Relative
Proportions of Ash in the Different Parts of Plants ... Influence of the
Nature of the Soil on the Proportion of Mineral Matters in the Plant ...
The Composition of the Ashes of Plants ... Classification of Different
Plants                                                                   63


CHAPTER V.

THE SOIL--ITS CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL CHARACTERS.

The Origin of Soils ... Composition of Crystalline and Sedimentary Rocks
... their Disintegration ... Chemical Composition of the Soil ...
Fertile and Barren Soils ... Mechanical Texture of Soils ... Absorbent
Action of Soils ... their Physical Characters ... Relation to Heat and
Moisture ... The Subsoil ... Classification of Soils                     83


CHAPTER VI.

THE IMPROVEMENT OF THE SOIL BY MECHANICAL
PROCESSES.

Draining ... Its Advantageous Effects ... Subsoil and Deep Ploughing
... Improving the Soil by Paring and Burning ... Warping
... Mixing of Soils ... Chalking                                        137


CHAPTER VII.

THE GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF MANURING.

Fundamental Principles upon which Manures are applied ... _Special_ and
_General_ Manures ... Importance of this distinction ... Views regarding
the Theory of Manures ... Remarks on Special Manures ... Action of
Manures on the Chemical and Physical Properties of a Soil ... Remarks on
the Application of Manures                                              152


CHAPTER VIII.

THE COMPOSITION AND PROPERTIES OF FARM-YARD
AND LIQUID MANURES.

Farm-yard Manure ... Urine ... Composition of ... Dung ... Composition
of ... Farm-yard Manure ... Composition of ... Management of Dung-Heaps
... Box-feeding ... Fermentation and application of Manure ... Liquid
Manure ... Composition and application of ... Sewage Manure ... Its
composition and application                                             166


CHAPTER IX.

THE COMPOSITION AND PROPERTIES OF VEGETABLE
MANURES.

Rape-Dust, Mustard, Cotton and Castor Cake ... Composition of various
Oil-Cakes ... Malt-Dust, Bran, Chaff, etc. ... Straw and Saw-dust ...
Manuring with Fresh Vegetable Matter ... Green Manuring ... Sea-Weed ...
Composition of various Sea-Weeds ... Leaves ... Peat                    195


CHAPTER X.

THE COMPOSITION AND PROPERTIES OF ANIMAL
MANURES.

Guano, different varieties of ... Average composition of ... Division
into Ammoniacal and Phosphatic ... Characters of ... Adulteration of ...
Application of ... Pigeons' Dung ... Urate and Sulphated Urine ...
Night-Soil and Poudrette ... Hair, Skin, Horn, Wool, etc. ... Blood ...
Fish ... "Fish-Guano"--Bones                                            204


CHAPTER XI.

THE COMPOSITION AND PROPERTIES OF MINERAL
MANURES.

Mineral Manures ... Sulphate and Muriate of Ammonia ... Sulphomuriate
of Ammonia ... Ammoniacal Liquor ... Nitrates of Potash and Soda ...
Muriate and Sulphate of Potash ... Chloride of Sodium, or Common Salt
... Carbonates of Potash and Soda ... Silicates of Potash and Soda ...
Sulphate of Magnesia ... Phosphate of Lime ... Bone-ash ... Coprolites
... Apatite ... Sombrero Guano ... Superphosphates and Dissolved Bones
... Biphosphate of Lime or Soluble Phosphates ... Phospho-Peruvian Guano
... Lime ... Chalk ... Marl ... Application and Action of Lime on Soils
... Sulphate of Lime or Gypsum                                          226


CHAPTER XII.

THE VALUATION OF MANURES.

The Principle on which Manures are valued ... Its application to
different simple and complex Manures ... Method of Calculation ...
General Remarks                                                         255


CHAPTER XIII.

THE ROTATION OF CROPS.

Its necessity explained ... Quantity of Mineral Matters in the produce
of an Acre of Different Crops ... The Theory of Rotation                266


CHAPTER XIV.

THE FEEDING OF FARM STOCK.

The Principles of Feeding ... The Composition of different Animals in
different stages of Fattening ... The Composition of the Food of Animals
... Milk ... The Principal Varieties of Cattle Food ... General
Observations on Feeding                                                 276




AGRICULTURAL CHEMISTRY.




INTRODUCTION.


That the phenomena of vegetation are dependent on certain chemical
changes occurring in the plant, by which the various elements of its
food are elaborated and converted into vegetable matter, was very early
recognised by chemists; and long before the correct principles of that
science were established, Van Helmont maintained that plants derived
their nourishment from water, while Sir Kenelm Digby, Hook, Bradley, and
others, attributed an equally exclusive influence to air, and enlarged
on the practical importance of the conclusions to be deduced from their
views. These opinions, which were little better than hypotheses, and
founded on very imperfect chemical data, are mentioned by Jethro Tull,
the father of modern agriculture, only to deny their accuracy; and he
contended that the plants absorb and digest the finer particles of the
earth, and attributed the success of the particular system of husbandry
he advocated to the comminution of the soil, by which a larger number
of its particles are rendered sufficiently small to permit their ready
absorption by the roots. Popular opinion at that time was in favour of
the mechanical rather than the chemical explanation of agricultural
facts, and Tull's work had the effect of confirming this opinion, and
turning attention away from the application of chemistry to agriculture.
Indeed, no good results could have followed its study at that time, for
chemistry, especially in those departments bearing more immediately on
agriculture, was much too imperfect, and it was only towards the close
of the last century, when Lavoisier established its true principles,
that it became possible to pursue it with any prospect of success.

Very soon after Lavoisier's system was made known, Lord Dundonald
published his "Treatise on the Intimate Connexion between Chemistry and
Agriculture," in which the important bearings of the recent chemical
discoveries on the practice of agriculture were brought prominently
under the notice of the farmer, and almost at the same time De Saussure
commenced those remarkable researches, which extended over a long series
of years, and laid the foundation of almost all our accurate knowledge
of the chemistry of vegetation. Saussure traced with singular care and
accuracy the whole phenomena of the life of plants, and indicated the
mode in which the facts he established might be taken advantage of in
improving the cultivation of the soil. But neither his researches, nor
Lord Dundonald's more direct appeal to the farmer, excited the attention
they deserved, or produced any immediate effect on the progress of
agriculture. It was not till the year 1812 that the interest of
practical men was fairly awakened by a course of lectures given by Sir
Humphrey Davy, at the instance of Sir John Sinclair, who was at that
time president of the Board of Agriculture. In these lectures, written
with all the clearness and precision which characterised their author's
style, the results of De Saussure's experiments were for the first time
presented to the farmer in a form in which they could be easily
understood by him, the conclusions to which they led were distinctly
indicated, and a number of useful practical suggestions made, many of
which have been adopted into every-day practice, and become so
thoroughly incorporated with it, that their scientific origin has been
altogether forgotten. A lively interest was excited by the publication
of Davy's work, but it soon died out, and the subject lay in almost
complete abeyance for a considerable number of years. Nor could any
other result be well expected, for at that time agriculture was not ripe
for chemistry, nor chemistry ripe for agriculture. The necessities of a
rapidly increasing population had not yet begun to compel the farmer to
use every means adapted to increase the amount of production to its
utmost limit; and though the fundamental principles of chemistry had
been established, its details, especially in that department which
treats of the constituents of plants and animals, were very imperfectly
known. It is not surprising, therefore, that matters should have
remained almost unchanged for the comparatively long period of nearly
thirty years. Indeed, with the exception of the investigation of soils
by Schuebler, and some other inquiries of minor importance, and which, in
this country at least, excited no attention on the part of the
agriculturist, nothing was done until the year 1840, when Liebig
published his treatise on _Chemistry, in its application to Agriculture
and Physiology_.

Saussure's researches formed the main groundwork of Liebig's treatise,
as they had before done for Davy's; but the progress of science had
supplied many new facts which confirmed the opinions of the older
chemists in most respects, and enabled Liebig to generalise with greater
confidence, and illustrate more fully the principles upon which
chemistry ought to be applied to agriculture. Few works have ever
produced a more profound impression. Written in a clear and forcible
style, dealing with scientific truths in a bold and original manner, and
producing a strong impression, as well by its earnestness as by the
importance of its conclusions, it was received by the agricultural
public with the full conviction that the application of its principles
was to be immediately followed by the production of immensely increased
crops, and by a rapid advance in every branch of practical agriculture.
The disappointment of these extravagant expectations, which _chemists_
themselves foresaw, and for which they vainly attempted to prepare the
agriculturist, was followed by an equally rapid reaction; and those who
had embraced Liebig's views, and lauded them as the commencement of a
new era, but who had absurdly expected an instantaneous effect, changed
their opinion, and contemned, as strongly as they had before supported,
the application of chemistry to agriculture.

That this effect should have been produced is not unnatural; for
practical men, having at that time little or no knowledge of chemistry,
were necessarily unable to estimate its true position in relation to
agriculture, and forgetting that this department of science was still in
its early youth, and burthened with all the faults and errors of youth,
they treated it as if it were already perfect in all its parts. Neither
could they distinguish between the fully demonstrated scientific truths,
and the uncertain, though probable conclusions deduced from them; and
when the latter, as occasionally happened, proved to be at variance with
practice, it is not surprising: that this should have produced a feeling
of distrust on the part of persons incapable, from an imperfect, and
still oftener from no knowledge of science, of drawing the line of
demarcation, which Liebig frequently omitted to do, between the positive
fact and the hypothetical inference, which, however probable, is, after
all, merely a suggestion requiring to be substantiated by experiment.
This omission, which the scientific reader can supply for himself,
becomes a source of serious misapprehension in a work addressed to
