Project Gutenberg's What The Left Hand Was Doing, by Gordon Randall Garrett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: What The Left Hand Was Doing

Author: Gordon Randall Garrett

Release Date: April 25, 2008 [EBook #25166]
Last updated: January 31, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHAT THE LEFT HAND WAS DOING ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Bruce Albrecht, LN Yaddanapudi and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









WHAT THE LEFT HAND ... WAS DOING

By DARRELL T. LANGART

Illustrated by Freas

     _There is no lie so totally convincing as something the other
     fellow already knows-for-sure is the truth. And no cover-story so
     convincing...._

[Illustration]


The building itself was unprepossessive enough. It was an old-fashioned,
six-floor, brick structure that had, over the years, served first as a
private home, then as an apartment building, and finally as the
headquarters for the organization it presently housed.

It stood among others of its kind in a lower-middle-class district of
Arlington, Virginia, within howitzer range of the capitol of the United
States, and even closer to the Pentagon. The main door was five steps up
from the sidewalk, and the steps were flanked by curving balustrades of
ornamental ironwork. The entrance itself was closed by a double door
with glass panes, beyond which could be seen a small foyer. On both
doors, an identical message was blocked out in neat gold letters: _The
Society For Mystical and Metaphysical Research, Inc._

It is possible that no more nearly perfect cover, no more misleading
front for a secret organization ever existed in the history of man. It
possessed two qualities which most other cover-up titles do not have.
One, it was so obviously crackpot that no one paid any attention to it
except crackpots, and, two, it was perfectly, literally true.

Spencer Candron had seen the building so often that the functional
beauty of the whole setup no longer impressed him as it had several
years before. Just as a professional actor is not impressed by being
allowed backstage, or as a multimillionaire considers expensive luxuries
as commonplace, so Spencer Candron thought of nothing more than his own
personal work as he climbed the five steps and pushed open the
glass-paned doors.

Perhaps, too, his matter-of-fact attitude was caused partially by the
analogical resemblance between himself and the organization. Physically,
Candron, too, was unprepossessing. He was a shade less than five eight,
and his weight fluctuated between a hundred and forty and a hundred and
forty-five, depending on the season and his state of mind. His face
consisted of a well-formed snub nose, a pair of introspective gray eyes,
a rather wide, thin-lipped mouth that tended to smile even when relaxed,
a high, smooth forehead, and a firm cleft chin, plus the rest of the
normal equipment that normally goes to make up a face. The skin was
slightly tanned, but it was the tan of a man who goes to the beach on
summer weekends, not that of an outdoorsman. His hands were strong and
wide and rather large; the palms were uncalloused and the fingernails
were clean and neatly trimmed. His hair was straight and light brown,
with a pronounced widow's peak, and he wore it combed back and rather
long to conceal the fact that a thin spot had appeared on the top rear
of his scalp. His clothing was conservative and a little out of style,
having been bought in 1981, and thus three years past being up-to-date.

Physically, then, Spencer Candron, was a fine analog of the Society. He
looked unimportant. On the outside, he was just another average man
whom no one would bother to look twice at.

The analogy between himself and the S.M.M.R. was completed by the fact
that his interior resources were vastly greater than anything that
showed on the outside.

The doors swung shut behind him, and he walked into the foyer, then
turned left into the receptionist's office. The woman behind the desk
smiled her eager smile and said, "Good morning, Mr. Candron!"

Candron smiled back. He liked the woman, in spite of her semifanatic
overeagerness, which made her every declarative sentence seem to end
with an exclamation point.

"Morning, Mrs. Jesser," he said, pausing at the desk for a moment. "How
have things been?"

Mrs. Jesser was a stout matron in her early forties who would have been
perfectly happy to work for the Society for nothing, as a hobby. That
she was paid a reasonable salary made her job almost heaven for her.

"Oh, just _fine_, Mr. Candron!" she said. "Just _fine_!" Then her voice
lowered, and her face took on a serious, half conspiratorial expression.
"Do you know what?"

"No," said Candron, imitating her manner. "What?"

"We have a gentleman ... he came in yesterday ... a _very_ nice man ...
and very intelligent, too. And, you know what?"

Candron shook his head. "No," he repeated. "What?"

Mrs. Jesser's face took on the self-pleased look of one who has
important inside knowledge to impart. "He has actual photographs ...
three-D, full-color _pho_tographs ... of the con_trol_ room of a flying
saucer! And one of the Saucerites, too!"

"Really?" Candron's expression was that of a man who was both impressed
and interested. "What did Mr. Balfour say?"

"Well--" Mrs. Jesser looked rather miffed. "I don't really _know_! But
the gentleman is supposed to be back to_mor_row! With some _more_
pictures!"

"Well," said Candron. "Well. That's really fine. I hope he has
something. Is Mr. Taggert in?"

"Oh, yes, Mr. Candron! He said you should go on up!" She waved a plump
hand toward the stairway. It made Mrs. Jesser happy to think that she
was the sole controller of the only way, except for the fire escape,
that anyone could get to the upper floors of the building. And as long
as she thought that, among other things, she was useful to the Society.
Someone had to handle the crackpots and lunatic-fringe fanatics that
came to the Society, and one of their own kind could do the job better
than anyone else. As long as Mrs. Jesser and Mr. Balfour were on duty,
the Society's camouflage would remain intact.

Spencer Candron gave Mrs. Jesser a friendly gesture with one hand and
then headed up the stairs. He would rather not have bothered to take the
stairway all the way up to the fifth floor, but Mrs. Jesser had sharp
ears, and she might wonder why his foot-steps were not heard all the
way up. Nothing--but _nothing_--must ever be done to make Mrs. Jesser
wonder about anything that went on here.

