The Project Gutenberg EBook of Cum Grano Salis, by Gordon Randall Garrett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Cum Grano Salis

Author: Gordon Randall Garrett

Release Date: April 29, 2008 [EBook #25234]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CUM GRANO SALIS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Bruce Albrecht, LN Yaddanapudi and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









CUM GRANO SALIS.

BY DAVID GORDON

Illustrated by Emsh

     _Just because a man can do something others can't does not,
     unfortunately, mean he knows how to do it. One man could eat the
     native fruit and live ... but how?_


"And that," said Colonel Fennister glumly, "appears to be that."

The pile of glowing coals that had been Storage Shed Number One was
still sending up tongues of flame, but they were nothing compared with
what they'd been half an hour before.

"The smoke smells good, anyway," said Major Grodski, sniffing
appreciatively.

The colonel turned his head and glowered at his adjutant.

"There are times, Grodski, when your sense of humor is out of place."

"Yes, sir," said the major, still sniffing. "Funny thing for lightning
to do, though. Sort of a dirty trick, you might say."

"_You_ might," growled the colonel. He was a short, rather roundish man,
who was forever thankful that the Twentieth Century predictions of
skin-tight uniforms for the Space Service had never come true. He had
round, pleasant, blue eyes, a rather largish nose, and a rumbling basso
voice that was a little surprising the first time you heard it, but
which seemed to fit perfectly after you knew him better.

Right at the moment, he was filing data and recommendations in his
memory, where they would be instantly available for use when he needed
them. Not in a physical file, but in his own mind.

_All right, Colonel Fennister_, he thought to himself, _just what does
this mean--to me? And to the rest?_

The Space Service was not old. Unlike the Air Service, the Land Service,
or the Sea Service, it did not have centuries or tradition behind it.
But it had something else. It had something that none of the other
Services had--_Potential_.

In his own mind, Colonel Fennister spelled the word with an upper case
_P_, and put the word in italics. It was, to him, a more potent word
than any other in the Universe.

Potential.

_Potential!_

[Illustration]

Because the Space Service of the United Earth had more potential than
any other Service on Earth. How many seas were there for the Sea Service
to sail? How much land could the Land Service march over? How many
atmospheres were there for the Air Service to conquer?

Not for any of those questions was there an accurate answer, but for
each of those questions, the answer had a limit. But how much space was
there for the Space Service to conquer?

Colonel Fennister was not a proud man. He was not an arrogant man. But
he _did_ have a sense of destiny; he _did_ have a feeling that the human
race was going somewhere, and he did not intend that that feeling should
become totally lost to humanity.

Potential.

Definition: _Potential; that which has a possibility of coming into
existence._

No, more than that. That which has a--

       *       *       *       *       *

He jerked his mind away suddenly from the thoughts which had crowded
into his forebrain.

What were the chances that the first expedition to Alphegar IV would
succeed? What were the chances that it would fail?

And (Fennister grinned grimly to himself) what good did it do to
calculate chances after the event had happened?

Surrounding the compound had been a double-ply, heavy-gauge, woven
fence. It was guaranteed to be able to stop a diplodocus in full charge;
the electric potential (_potential!_ That word again!) great enough to
carbonize anything smaller than a blue whale. No animal on Alphegar IV
could possibly get through it.

And none had.

Trouble was, no one had thought of being attacked by something immensely
greater than a blue whale, especially since there was no animal larger
than a small rhino on the whole planet. Who, after all, could have
expected an attack by a blind, uncaring colossus--a monster that had
already been dying before it made its attack?

Because no one had thought of the forest.

The fact that the atmospheric potential--the voltage and even the
amperage difference between the low-hanging clouds and the ground
below--was immensely greater than that of Earth, that had already been
determined. But the compound and the defenses surrounding it had already
been compensated for that factor.

Who could have thought that a single lightning stroke through one of the
tremendous, twelve-hundred-foot trees that surrounded the compound could
have felled it? Who could have predicted that it would topple toward the
compound itself?

That it would have been burning--that was something that could have been
