The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Airlords of Han, by Philip Francis Nowlan

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Airlords of Han

Author: Philip Francis Nowlan

Illustrator: Frank R. Paul

Release Date: May 11, 2008 [EBook #25438]
[Most recently updated: August 27, 2008]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AIRLORDS OF HAN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Amazing Stories Fact and Science
    Fiction_ May 1962 and was first published in _Amazing Stories_ March
    1929. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note. A table of
    contents has been provided below:

         I. The Airlords Besieged
        II. The "Ground Ships" Threaten
       III. We "Sink" the "Ground Ships"
        IV. Han Electrono-Ray Science
         V. American Ultronic Science
        VI. An Unequal Duel
       VII. Captured!
      VIII. Hypnotic Torture
        IX. The Fall of Nu-Yok
         X. Life in Lo-Tan, the Magnificent
        XI. The Forest Men Attack
       XII. The Mysterious "Air Balls"
      XIII. Escape!
       XIV. The Destruction of Lo-Tan
        XV. The Counter-Attack
       XVI. Victory




[Illustration: A Classic Reprint from AMAZING STORIES, March, 1929]




_The AIRLORDS of HAN_

By PHILIP FRANCIS NOWLAN


Illustrated by FRANK R. PAUL

_Copyright, 1927, by E. P. Co., Inc._




CHAPTER I

The Airlords Besieged


In a previous record of my adventures in the early part of the Second
War of Independence I explained how I, Anthony Rogers, was overcome by
radioactive gases in an abandoned mine near Scranton in the year 1927,
where I existed in a state of suspended animation for nearly five
hundred years; and awakened to find that the America I knew had been
crushed under the cruel tyranny of the Airlords of Han, fierce
Mongolians, who, as scientists now contend, had in their blood a taint
not of this earth, and who with science and resources far in advance of
those of a United States, economically prostrate at the end of a long
series of wars with a Bolshevik Europe, in the year 2270 A.D., had swept
down from the skies in their great airships that rode "repeller rays" as
a ball rides the stream of a fountain, and with their terrible
"disintegrator rays" had destroyed more than four-fifths of the American
race, and driven the other fifth to cover in the vast forests which grew
up over the remains of the once mighty civilization of the United
States.

I explained the part I played in the fall of the year 2419, when the
rugged Americans, with science secretly developed to terrific efficiency
in their forest fastness, turned fiercely and assumed the aggressive
against a now effete Han population, which for generations had shut
itself up in the fifteen great Mongolian cities of America, having
abandoned cultivation of the soil and the operation of mines; for these
Hans produced all they needed in the way of food, clothing, shelter and
machinery through electrono-synthetic processes.

I explained how I was adopted into the Wyoming Gang, or clan,
descendants of the original populations of Wilkes-Barre, Scranton and
the Wyoming Valley in Pennsylvania; how quite by accident I stumbled
upon a method of destroying Han aircraft by shooting explosive rockets,
not directly at the heavily armored ships, but at the repeller ray
columns, which automatically drew the rockets upward where they exploded
in the generators of the aircraft; how the Wyomings threw the first
thrill of terror into the Airlords by bringing an entire squadron
crashing to earth; how a handful of us in a rocketship successfully
raided the Han city of Nu-Yok; and how by the application of military
principles I remembered from the First World War, I was able to lead the
Wyomings to victory over the Sinsings, a Hudson River tribe which had
formed a traitorous alliance with the hereditary enemies and oppressors
of the White Race in America.

       *       *       *       *       *

By the Spring of 2420 A.D., a short six months after these events, the
positions of the Yellow and the White Races in America had been
reversed. The hunted were now the hunters. The Hans desperately were
increasing the defenses of their fifteen cities, around each of which
the American Gangs had drawn a widely deployed line of long-gunners;
while nervous air convoys, closely bunched behind their protective
screen of disintegrator beams, kept up sporadic and costly systems of
transportation between the cities.

During this period our own campaign against the Hans of Nu-Yok was
fairly typical of the development of the war throughout the country. Our
force was composed of contingents from most of the Gangs of
Pennsylvania, Jersey and New England. We encircled the city on a wide
radius, our line running roughly from Staten Island to the forested site
of the ancient city of Elizabeth, to First and Second Mountains just
west of the ruins of Newark, Bloomfield and Montclair, thence
northeasterly across the Hudson, and down to the Sound. On Long Island
our line was pushed forward to the first slopes of the hills.

We had no more than four long-gunners to the square mile in our first
line, but each of these was equal to a battery of heavy artillery such
as I had known in the First World War. And when their fire was first
concentrated on the Han city, they blew its outer walls and roof levels
into a chaotic mass of wreckage before the nervous Yellow engineers
could turn on the ring of generators which surrounded the city with a
vertical film of disintegrator rays. Our explosive rockets could not
penetrate this film, for it disintegrated them instantly and harmlessly,
as it did all other material substance with the sole exception of
"inertron," that synthetic element developed by the Americans from the
sub-electronic and ultronic orders.

       *       *       *       *       *

The continuous operation of the disintegrators destroyed the air and
maintained a constant vacuum wherever they played, into which the
surrounding air continuously rushed, naturally creating atmospheric
disturbances after a time, which resulted in a local storm. This,
however, ceased after a number of hours, when the flow of air toward the
city became steady.

The Hans suffered severely from atmospheric conditions inside their city
at first, but later rearranged their disintegrator ring in a system of
overlapping films that left diagonal openings, through which the air
rushed to them, and through which their ships emerged to scout our
positions.

We shot down seven of their cruisers before they realized the folly of
floating individually over our invisible line. Their beams traced paths
of destruction like scars across the countryside, but caught less than
half a dozen of our gunners all told, for it takes a lot of time to
sweep every square foot of a square mile with a beam whose cross section
is not more than twenty or twenty-five feet in diameter. Our gunners,
completely concealed beneath the foliage of the forest, with weapons
which did not reveal their position, as did the flashes and detonation
of the Twentieth Century artillery, hit their repeller rays with
comparative ease.

The "drop ships," which the Hans next sent out, were harder to handle.
Rising to immense heights behind the city's disintegrator wall, these
tiny, projectile-like craft slipped through the rifts in the cylinder of
destruction, and then turning off their repeller rays, dropped at
terrific speed until their small vanes were sufficient to support them
as they volplaned in great circles, shooting back into the city defenses
at a lower level.

The great speed of these craft made it almost impossible to register a
direct hit against them with rocket guns, and they had no repeller rays
at which we might shoot while they were over our lines.

But by the same token they were able to do little damage to us. So great
was the speed of a drop ship, that the only way in which it could use a
disintegrator ray was from a fixed generator in the nose of the
structure, as it dropped in a straight line toward its target. But since
they could not sight the widely deployed individual gunners in our line,
their scouting was just as ineffective as our attempts were to shoot
them down.

       *       *       *       *       *

For more than a month the situation remained a deadlock, with the Hans
locked up in their cities, while we mobilized gunners and supplies.

Had our stock of inertron been sufficiently great at this period, we
could have ended the war quickly, with aircraft impervious to the "dis"
ray. But the production of inertron is a painfully slow process,
involving the building up of this weightless element from ultronic
vibrations through the sub-electronic, electronic and atomic states into
molecular form. Our laboratories had barely begun production on a
quantity basis, for we had just learned how to protect them from Han air
raids, and it would be many months more before the supply they had just
started to manufacture would be finished. In the meantime we had enough
for a few aircraft, for jumping belts and a small amount of armor.

We Wyomings possessed one swooper completely sheathed with inertron and
counterweighted with ultron. The Altoonas and the Lycomings also had
one apiece. But a shielded swooper, while impervious to the "dis" ray,
was helpless against squadrons of Han aircraft, for the Hans developed a
technique of playing their beams underneath the swooper in such fashion
as to suck it down flutteringly into the vacuum so created, until they
brought it finally, and more or less violently, to earth.

Ultimately the Hans broke our blockade to a certain extent, when they
resumed traffic between their cities in great convoys, protected by
squadrons of cruisers in vertical formation, playing a continuous
cross-fire of disintegrator beams ahead of them and down on the sides in
a most effective screen, so that it was very difficult for us to get a
rocket through to the repeller rays.

But we lined the scar paths beneath their air routes for miles at a
stretch with concealed gunners, some of whom would sooner or later
register hits, and it was seldom that a convoy made the trip between
Nu-Yok and Bos-Tan, Bah-Flo, Si-ka-ga or Ah-la-nah without losing
several of its ships.

Hans who reached the ground alive were never taken prisoner. Not even
the splendid discipline of the Americans could curb the wild hate
developed through centuries of dastardly oppression, and the Hans were
mercilessly slaughtered, when they did not save us the trouble by
committing suicide.

Several times the Hans drove "air wedges" over our lines in this
vertical or "cloud bank" formation, ploughing a scar path a mile or more
wide through our positions. But at worst, to us, this did not mean the
loss of more than a dozen men and girls, and generally their raids cost
them one or more ships. They cut paths of destruction across the map,
but they could not cover the entire area, and when they had ploughed out
over our lines, there was nothing left for them to do but to turn around
and plough back to Nu-Yok. Our lines closed up again after each raid,
and we continued to take heavy toll from convoys and raiding fleets.
Finally they abandoned these tactics.

So at the time of which I speak, the Spring of 2420 A.D., the Americans
and the Hans were temporarily at pretty much of a deadlock. But the Hans
were as desperate as we were sanguine, for we had time on our side.

It was at this period that we first learned of the Airlords'
determination, a very unpopular one with their conscripted populations,
to carry the fight to us on the ground. The time had passed when
command of the air meant victory. We had no visible cities nor massed
bodies of men for them to destroy, nothing but vast stretches of silent
forests and hills, where our forces lurked, invisible from the air.




CHAPTER II

The "Ground Ships" Threaten


One of our Wyoming girls, on contact guard near Pocono, blundered into a
hunting camp of the Bad Bloods, one of the renegade American Gangs,
which occupied the Blue Mountain section north of Delaware Water Gap. We
had not invited their cooperation in this campaign, for they were under
some suspicion of having trafficked with the Hans in past years, but
they had offered no objection to our passage through their territory in
our advance on Nu-Yok.

Fortunately our contact guard had been able to leap into the upper
branches of a tree without being discovered by the Bad Bloods, for their
discipline was lax and their guard careless. She overheard enough of the
conversation of their Bosses around the camp fire beneath her to
indicate the general nature of the Han plans.

After several hours she was able to leap away unobserved through the
topmost branches of the trees, and after putting several miles between
herself and their camp, she ultrophoned a full report to her Contact
Boss back in the Wyoming Valley. My own Ultrophone Field Boss picked up
the message and brought the graph record of it to me at once.

Her report was likewise picked up by the Bosses of the various Gang
units in our line, and we had called a council to discuss our plans by
word of mouth.

We were gathered in a sheltered glade on the eastern slope of First
Mountain on a balmy night in May. Far to the east, across the forested
slopes of the lowlands, the flat stretches of open meadow and the rocky
ridge that once had been Jersey City, the iridescent glow of Nu-Yok's
protecting film of annihilation shot upward, gradually fading into a
starry sky.

In the faint glow of our ultronolamps, I made out the great figure and
rugged features of Boss Casaman, commander of the Mifflin unit, and the
gray uniform of Boss Warn, who led the Sandsnipers of the Barnegat
Beaches, and who had swooped over from his headquarters on Sandy Hook.
By his side stood Boss Handan of the Winslows, a Gang from Central
Jersee. In the group also were the leaders of the Altoonas, the
Camerons, the Lycomings, Susquannas, Harshbargs, Hagersduns, Chesters,
Reddings, Delawares, Elmirans, Kiugas, Hudsons and Connedigas.

       *       *       *       *       *

Most of them were clad in forest-green uniforms that showed black at
night, but each had some distinctive badge or item of uniform or
equipment that distinguished his Gang.

Both the Mifflin and Altoona Bosses, for instance, wore heavy-looking
boots with jointed knees. They came from sections that were not only
mountainous, but rocky, where "leaping" involves many a slip and bruised
limb, unless some protection of this sort is worn. But these boots were
not as heavy as they looked, being counter-balanced somewhat with
inertron.

The headgear of the Winslows was quite different from the close-fitting
helmet of the Wyomings, being large and bushy-looking, for in the
Winslow territory there were many stretches of nearly bare land, with
occasional scrubby pines, and a Winslow caught in the open, on the
approach of a Han airship, would twist himself into a motionless
imitation of a scrubby plant, that passed very successfully for the real
thing, when viewed from several thousand feet in the air.

The Susquannas had a unit that was equipped with inertron shields, that
were of the same shape as those of the ancient Romans, but much larger,
and capable of concealing their bearers from head to foot when they
crouched slightly. These shields, of course, were colored forest green,
and were irregularly shaded; they were balanced with inertron, so that
their effective weight was only a few ounces. They were curious too, in
that they had handles for both hands, and two small reservoir
rocket-guns built into them as integral parts.

In going into action, the Susquannas crouched slightly, holding the
shields before them with both hands, looking through a narrow vision
slit, and working both rocket guns. The shields, however, were a great
handicap in leaping, and in advancing through heavy forest growth.

The field unit of the Delawares was also heavily armored. It was one of
the most efficient bodies of shock troops in our entire line. They
carried circular shields, about three feet in diameter, with a vision
slit and a small rocket gun. These shields were held at arm's length in
the left hand on going into action. In the right hand was carried an
ax-gun, an affair not unlike the battle-ax of the Middle Ages. It was
about three feet long. The shaft consisted of a rocket gun, with an
ax-blade near the muzzle, and a spike at the other end. It was a
terrible weapon. Jointed leg-guards protected the ax-gunner below the
rim of his shield, and a hemispherical helmet, the front section of
which was of transparent ultron reaching down to the chin, completed his
equipment.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Susquannas also had a long-gun unit in the field.

One company of my Wyomings I had equipped with a weapon which I designed
myself. It was a long-gun which I had adapted for bayonet tactics such
as American troops used in the First World War, in the Twentieth
Century. It was about the length of the ancient rifle, and was fitted
with a short knife bayonet. The stock, however, was replaced by a narrow
ax-blade and a spike. It had two hand-guards also. It was fired from the
waist position.

In hand-to-hand work one lunged with the bayonet in a vicious, swinging
up-thrust, following through with an up-thrust of the ax-blade as one
rushed in on one's opponent, and then a down-thrust of the butt-spike,
developing into a down-slice of the bayonet, and a final upward jerk of
the bayonet at the throat and chin with a shortened grip on the barrel,
