The Project Gutenberg EBook of Impact, by Irving E. Cox

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Impact

Author: Irving E. Cox

Release Date: May 23, 2008 [EBook #25567]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IMPACT ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Andrew Wainwright and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                                IMPACT

                        By IRVING E. COX, Jr.

                        Illustrated by GRAYAM

              _They were languorous, anarchic, shameless
                in their pleasures ... were they lower
                       than man ... or higher?_


Over the cabin 'phone, Ann's voice was crisp with anger. "Mr. Lord, I must
see you at once."

"Of course, Ann." Lord tried not to sound uncordial. It was all part of a
trade agent's job, to listen to the recommendations and complaints of the
teacher. But an interview with Ann Howard was always so arduous, so stiff
with unrelieved righteousness. "I should be free until--"

"Can you come down to the schoolroom, Mr. Lord?"

"If it's necessary. But I told you yesterday, there's nothing we can do to
make them take the lessons."

"I understand your point of view, Mr. Lord." Her words were barely civil,
brittle shafts of ice. "However, this concerns Don; he's gone."

"Gone? Where?"

"Jumped ship."

"Are you sure, Ann? How long ago?"

"I rather imagined you'd be interested," she answered with smug
satisfaction. "Naturally you'll want to see his note. I'll be waiting for
you."

The 'phone clicked decisively as she broke the connection. Impotent fury
lashed Lord's mind--anger at Don Howard, because the engineer was one of
his key men; and, childishly, anger at Don's sister because she was the one
who had broken the news. If it had come from almost anyone else it would,
somehow, have seemed less disastrous. Don's was the fourth desertion in
less than a week, and the loss of trained personnel was becoming serious
aboard the _Ceres_. But what did Ann Howard expect Lord to do about it?
This was a trading ship; he had no military authority over his crew.

As Lord stood up, his desk chair collapsed with a quiet hiss against the
cabin wall, and, on greased tubes, the desk dropped out of sight beneath
the bunk bed, giving Lord the luxury of an uncluttered floor space eight
feet square. He had the only private quarters on the ship--the usual
distinction reserved for a trade agent in command.

From a narrow wardrobe, curved to fit the projectile walls of the ship,
Lord took a lightweight jacket, marked with the tooled shoulder insignia of
command. He smiled a little as he put it on. He was Martin Lord, trade
agent and heir to the fabulous industrial-trading empire of Hamilton Lord,
Inc.; yet he was afraid to face Ann Howard without the visible trappings of
authority.

       *       *       *       *       *

He descended the spiral stairway to the midship airlock, a lead-walled
chamber directly above the long power tubes of the _Ceres_. The lock door
hung open, making an improvised landing porch fifty feet above the charred
ground. Lord paused for a moment at the head of the runged landing ladder.
Below him, in the clearing where the ship had come down, he saw the rows of
plastic prefabs which his crew had thrown up--laboratories, sleeping
quarters, a kitchen, and Ann Howard's schoolroom.

Beyond the clearing was the edge of the magnificent forest which covered so
much of this planet. Far away, in the foothills of a distant mountain
range, Lord saw the houses of a village, gleaming in the scarlet blaze of
the setting sun. A world at peace, uncrowded, unscarred by the feverish
excavation and building of man. A world at the zenith of its native
culture, about to be jerked awake by the rude din of civilization. Lord
felt a twinge of the same guilt that had tormented his mind since the
_Ceres_ had first landed, and with an effort he drove it from his mind.

He descended the ladder and crossed the clearing, still blackened from the
landing blast; he pushed open the sliding door of the schoolroom. It was
large and pleasantly yellow-walled, crowded with projectors, view-booths,
stereo-miniatures, and picture books--all the visual aids which Ann Howard
would have used to teach the natives the cultural philosophy of the
Galactic Federation. But the rows of seats were empty, and the gleaming
machines still stood in their cases. For no one had come to Ann's school,
in spite of her extravagant offers of trade goods.

Ann sat waiting, ramrod straight, in front of a green-tinged projectoscope.
She made no compromise with the heat, which had driven the men to strip
to their fatigue shorts. Ann wore the full, formal uniform. A less
strong-willed woman might have appeared wilted after a day's work. Ann's
face was expressionless, a block of cold ivory. Only a faint mist of
perspiration on her upper lip betrayed her acute discomfort.

"You came promptly, Mr. Lord." There was a faint gleam of triumph in her
eyes. "That was good of you."

She unfolded her brother's note and gave it to Lord. It was a clear,
straight-forward statement of fact. Don Howard said he was deserting the
mission, relinquishing his Federation citizenship. "I'm staying on this
world; these people have something priceless, Ann. All my life I've been
