The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hunted Heroes, by Robert Silverberg

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Hunted Heroes

Author: Robert Silverberg

Release Date: May 27, 2008 [EBook #25627]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HUNTED HEROES ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 THE
 HUNTED
 HEROES

 By ROBERT SILVERBERG


         _The planet itself was tough enough--barren, desolate,
         forbidding; enough to stop the most adventurous and
         dedicated. But they had to run head-on against a mad
         genius who had a motto:_

                        _Death to all Terrans!_


"Let's keep moving," I told Val. "The surest way to die out here on Mars
is to give up." I reached over and turned up the pressure on her oxymask
to make things a little easier for her. Through the glassite of the
mask, I could see her face contorted in an agony of fatigue.

And she probably thought the failure of the sandcat was all my fault,
too. Val's usually about the best wife a guy could ask for, but when she
wants to be she can be a real flying bother.

It was beyond her to see that some grease monkey back at the Dome was at
fault--whoever it was who had failed to fasten down the engine hood.
Nothing but what had stopped us _could_ stop a sandcat: sand in the
delicate mechanism of the atomic engine.

But no; she blamed it all on me somehow: So we were out walking on the
spongy sand of the Martian desert. We'd been walking a good eight hours.

"Can't we turn back now, Ron?" Val pleaded. "Maybe there isn't any
uranium in this sector at all. I think we're crazy to keep on searching
out here!"

I started to tell her that the UranCo chief had assured me we'd hit
something out this way, but changed my mind. When Val's tired and
overwrought there's no sense in arguing with her.

I stared ahead at the bleak, desolate wastes of the Martian landscape.
Behind us somewhere was the comfort of the Dome, ahead nothing but the
mazes and gullies of this dead world.

[Illustration: He was a cripple in a wheelchair--helpless as a
rattlesnake.]

"Try to keep going, Val." My gloved hand reached out and clumsily
enfolded hers. "Come on, kid. Remember--we're doing this for Earth.
We're heroes."

She glared at me. "Heroes, hell!" she muttered. "That's the way it
looked back home, but, out there it doesn't seem so glorious. And
UranCo's pay is stinking."

"We didn't come out here for the pay, Val."

"I know, I know, but just the same--"

It must have been hell for her. We had wandered fruitlessly over the red
sands all day, both of us listening for the clicks of the counter. And
the geigers had been obstinately hushed all day, except for their
constant undercurrent of meaningless noises.

Even though the Martian gravity was only a fraction of Earth's, I was
starting to tire, and I knew it must have been really rough on Val with
her lovely but unrugged legs.

"Heroes," she said bitterly. "We're not heroes--we're suckers! Why did I
ever let you volunteer for the Geig Corps and drag me along?"

Which wasn't anywhere close to the truth. Now I knew she was at the
