The Project Gutenberg EBook of Child's Health Primer For Primary Classes, by
Jane Andrews

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Child's Health Primer For Primary Classes
       With Special Reference to the Effects of Alcoholic Drinks,
       Stimulants, and Narcotics upon The Human System

Author: Jane Andrews

Release Date: May 30, 2008 [EBook #25646]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HEALTH PRIMER ***




Produced by Stephen Hope, Joseph Cooper, Emmy and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net











CHILD'S HEALTH PRIMER.

[Illustration: WASTING MONEY. (See p. 123.)]


PATHFINDER PHYSIOLOGY No. 1




CHILD'S

HEALTH PRIMER

FOR PRIMARY CLASSES

          WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO THE EFFECTS OF ALCOHOLIC DRINKS,
          STIMULANTS, AND NARCOTICS UPON THE HUMAN SYSTEM


          INDORSED BY THE
          SCIENTIFIC DEPARTMENT OF THE
          WOMEN'S CHRISTIAN TEMPERANCE UNION
          OF THE
          UNITED STATES


          COPYRIGHT, 1885
          A. S. BARNES & COMPANY
          NEW YORK AND CHICAGO




          PATHFINDER SERIES
          OF TEXT BOOKS ON
          ANATOMY, PHYSIOLOGY, AND HYGIENE.

          With Special Reference to the Influence of Alcoholic
          Drinks and Narcotics on the Human System.

          INDORSED BY THE SCIENTIFIC DEPARTMENT OF THE
          WOMEN'S CHRISTIAN TEMPERANCE UNION OF THE UNITED
          STATES.


          I.
          FOR PRIMARY GRADES.
          THE CHILD'S HEALTH PRIMER.
          12mo. Cloth.

          An introduction to the study of the science, suited to
          pupils of the ordinary third reader grade.

          Full of lively description and embellished by many apt
          illustrations.


          II.
          FOR INTERMEDIATE CLASSES.
          HYGIENE FOR YOUNG PEOPLE.
          12mo. Cloth. Beautifully illustrated.

          Suited to pupils able to read any fourth reader.

          An admirable elementary treatise upon the subject.

          The principles of the science more fully announced
          and illustrated.


          III.
          FOR HIGH SCHOOLS AND ACADEMIES.
          HYGIENIC PHYSIOLOGY.
          12mo. Beautifully illustrated.
          A MORE ELABORATE TREATISE.

          Prepared for the instruction of youth in the principles which
          underlie the preservation of health and the
          formation of correct physical habits.




PREFACE


As this little book goes to press, Massachusetts, by an act of its
legislature, is made the fourteenth state in this country that requires
the pupils in the primary, as well as in the higher grades of public
schools, to be taught the effects of alcoholics and other narcotics upon
the human system, in connection with other facts of physiology and
hygiene.

The object of all this legislation is, not that the future citizen may
know the technical names of bones, nerves, and muscles, but that he may
have a _=timely=_ and _=forewarning=_ knowledge of the effects of
alcohol and other popular poisons upon the human body, and therefore
upon life and character.

With every reason in favor of such education, and the law requiring it,
its practical tests in the school-room will result in failure, unless
there shall be ready for teacher and scholar, a well-arranged, simple,
and practical book, bringing these truths down to the capacity of the
child.

A few years hence, when the results of this study in our Normal Schools
shall be realized in the preparation of the teacher, we can depend upon
her adapting oral lessons from advanced works on this theme, but now,
the average primary teacher brings to this study no experience, and
limited previous study.

To meet this need, this work has been prepared. Technical terms have
been avoided, and only such facts of physiology developed as are
necessary to the treatment of the effects of alcohol, tobacco, opium,
and other truths of hygiene.

To the children in the Primary Schools of this country, for whom it was
prepared, this work is dedicated.




[Illustration]




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                      PAGE

          FRONTISPIECE                            2

          TITLE-PAGE                              3

          PREFACE                                 5

          CONTENTS                                7

      I.--JOINTS AND BONES                        9

     II.--MUSCLES                                19

    III.--NERVES                                 25

     IV.--WHAT IS ALCOHOL?                       37

      V.--BEER                                   43

     VI.--DISTILLING                             47

    VII.--ALCOHOL                                50

   VIII.--TOBACCO                                53

     IX.--OPIUM                                  59

      X.--WHAT ARE ORGANS?                       61

     XI.--WHAT DOES THE BODY NEED FOR FOOD?      71

    XII.--HOW FOOD BECOMES PART OF THE BODY      79

   XIII.--STRENGTH                               85

    XIV.--THE HEART                              93

     XV.--THE LUNGS                              97

    XVI.--THE SKIN                              103

   XVII.--THE SENSES                            109

  XVIII.--HEAT AND COLD                         115

    XIX.--WASTED MONEY                          122




CHAPTER I.

JOINTS AND BONES.


[Illustration: L]ITTLE girls like a jointed doll to play with, because
they can bend such a doll in eight or ten places, make it stand or sit,
or can even play that it is walking.

[Illustration: _Jointed dolls._]

As you study your own bodies to-day, you will find that you each have
better joints than any dolls that can be bought at a toy shop.


HINGE-JOINTS.

Some of your joints work like the hinges of a door, and these are called
hinge-joints.

You can find them in your elbows, knees, fingers, and toes.

How many hinge-joints can you find?

Think how many hinges must be used by the boy who takes off his hat and
makes a polite bow to his teacher, when she meets him on the street.

How many hinges do you use in running up-stairs, opening the door,
buttoning your coat or your boots, playing ball or digging in your
garden?

You see that we use these hinges nearly all the time. We could not do
without them.


BALL AND SOCKET JOINTS.

All our joints are not hinge-joints.

Your shoulder has a joint that lets your arm swing round and round, as
well as move up and down.

Your hip has another that lets your leg move in much the same way.

[Illustration: _The hip-joint._]

This kind of joint is the round end or ball of a long bone, which moves
in a hole, called a socket.

Your joints do not creak or get out of order, as those of doors and
gates sometimes do. A soft, smooth fluid, much like the white of an egg,
keeps them moist and makes them work easily.


BONES.

What parts of our bodies are jointed together so nicely? Our bones.

How many bones have we?

If you should count all your bones, you would find that each of you has
about two hundred.

Some are large; and some, very small.

There are long-hones in your legs and arms, and many short ones in your
fingers and toes. The backbone is called the spine.

[Illustration: _Backbone of a fish._]

If you look at the backbone of a fish, you can see that it is made up-of
many little bones. Your own spine is formed in much the same way, of
twenty-four small bones. An elastic cushion of gristle (gr[)i]s'l) fits
nicely in between each little bone and the next.

When you bend, these cushions are pressed together on one side and
stretched on the other. They settle back into their first shape, as
soon as you stand straight again.

If you ever rode in a wheelbarrow, or a cart without springs, you know
what a jolting it gave you. These little spring cushions keep you from
being shaken even more severely every time you move.

Twenty-four ribs, twelve on each side, curve around from the spine to
the front, or breast, bone. (_See page 38._)

They are so covered with flesh that perhaps you can not feel and count
them; but they are there.

Then you have two flat shoulder-blades, and two collar-bones that almost
meet in front, just where your collar fastens.

Of what are the bones made?

Take two little bones, such as those from the legs or wings of a
chicken, put one of them into the fire, when it is not very hot, and
leave it there two or three hours. Soak the other bone in some weak
muriatic (m[=u] r[)i] [)a]t'[)i]k) acid. This acid can be bought of any
druggist.

You will have to be careful in taking the bone out of the fire, for it
is all ready to break. If you strike it a quick blow, it will crumble to
dust. This dust we call lime, and it is very much like the lime from
which the mason makes mortar.

[Illustration: _Bone tied to a knot._]

The acid has taken the lime from the other bone, so only the part which
is not lime is left. You will be surprised to see how easily it will
bend. You can twist it and tie it into a knot; but it will not easily
break.

You have seen gristle in meat. This soft part of the bone is gristle.

Children's bones have more gristle than those of older people; so
children's bones bend easily.

I know a lady who has one leg shorter than the other. This makes her
lame, and she has to wear a boot with iron supports three or four inches
high, in order to walk at all.

One day she told me how she became lame.

