The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Judas Valley, by Gerald Vance

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Judas Valley

Author: Gerald Vance

Release Date: June 7, 2008 [EBook #25713]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JUDAS VALLEY ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration: He had lost all sense of right or wrong. Justice and
injustice were the same, and his only thought was, kill--kill--kill!]




                         THE JUDAS VALLEY

                         By GERALD VANCE


    _Why did everybody step off the ship in this strange valley
    and promptly drop dead? How could a well-equipped corps of
    tough spacemen become a field of rotting skeletons in this
    quiet world of peace and contentment? It was a mystery Peter
    and Sherri had to solve. If they could live long enough!_


Peter Wayne took the letter out of the machine, broke the seal, and
examined it curiously. It was an official communication from the
Interstellar Exploration Service. It read:

    FROM: Lieutenant General Martin Scarborough, I.E.S.
    TO: Captain Peter Wayne, Preliminary Survey Corps

    Report immediately to this office for assignment to I.E.S. _Lord
    Nelson_. Full briefing will be held at 2200 hours, 14 April 2103.

                                       By order of the Fleet Commandant.

It was short, brief, and to the point. And it gave no information
whatsoever. Peter Wayne shrugged resignedly, put the letter down on his
bed, walked over to the phone, and dialed a number.

A moment later, a girl's face appeared--blonde-haired, with high
cheekbones, deep blue-green eyes, and an expression of the lips that
intriguingly combined desirability and crisp military bearing.

"Lieutenant James speaking," she said formally. Then, as Wayne's image
appeared on her screen, she grinned. "Hi, Pete. What's up?"

"Listen, Sherri," Wayne said quickly. "I'm going to have to cancel that
date we had for tomorrow night. I just got my orders."

The girl laughed. "I was just going to call _you_, I got a fac-sheet
too. Looks as though we won't see each other for a while, Pete."

"What ship are you getting?"

"The _Lord Nelson_."

It was Wayne's turn to laugh. "It looks as though we _will_ be seeing
each other. That's my ship too. We can keep our date in the briefing
room."

Her face brightened. "Good! I'll see you there, then," she said. "I've
got to get my gear packed."

"Okay," Wayne said. "Let's be on time, you know how General Scarborough
is."

She smiled. "Don't worry, Peter. I'll be there. So long for now."

"Bye, Sherri." He cut the connection, watched the girl's face melt away
into a rainbow-colored diamond of light, and turned away. There were a
lot of things to do before he would be ready to leave Earth for an
interstellar tour of duty.

He wondered briefly as he started to pack just what was going on. There
was usually much more notice on any big jump of this order. Something
special was up, he thought, as he dragged his duffle-bag out of the
closet.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was at the briefing room at 2158 on the nose. The Interstellar
Exploration Service didn't much go for tardiness, but they didn't pay
extra if you got there a half-hour early. Captain Peter Wayne made it a
point of being at any appointment two minutes early--no more, no less.

The room was starting to fill up, with men and women Wayne knew well,
had worked with on other expeditions, had lived with since he'd joined
the IES. They looked just as puzzled as he probably did, he saw; they
knew they were being called in on something big, and in the IES big
meant _big_.

At precisely 2200, Lieutenant General Scarborough emerged from the inner
office, strode briskly up the aisle of the briefing room, and took his
customary stance on the platform in front. His face looked stern, and he
held his hands clasped behind his back. His royal blue uniform was neat
and trim. Over his head, the second hand of the big clock whirled
endlessly. In the silence of the briefing room, it seemed to be ticking
much too loudly.

The general nodded curtly and said, "Some of you are probably wondering
why the order to report here wasn't more specific. There are two reasons
for that. In the first place, we have reason to believe that we have
found a substantial deposit of double-nucleus beryllium."

There was a murmur of sound in the briefing room. Wayne felt his heart
starting to pound; D-N beryllium _was_ big. So big that a whole fleet of
IES ships did nothing but search the galaxy for it, full time.

"Naturally," the general continued, "we don't want any of this
information to leak out, just in case it should prove false. The
prospect of enough D-N beryllium to make fusion power really cheap could
cause a panic if we didn't handle it properly. The Economics Board has
warned us that we'll have to proceed carefully if there actually is a
big deposit on this planet."

Captain Wayne stared uneasily at Sherri James, who frowned and chewed
her lip. To his left, a short, stubby private named Manetti murmured
worriedly, "That means trouble. D-N beryllium always means trouble.
There's a catch somewhere."

General Scarborough, on the platform, said, "There's a second reason for
secrecy. I think it can better be explained by a man who has the
evidence first-hand."

He paused and looked around the room. "Four weeks ago, the Scout Ship
_Mavis_ came back from Fomalhaut V." There was a dead silence in the
briefing room.

"Lieutenant Jervis, will you tell the crew exactly what happened on
Fomalhaut V?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Lieutenant Jervis stepped forward and took his place on the platform. He
was small and wiry, with a hawk nose and piercingly intense eyes. He
cleared his throat and smiled a little sheepishly.

"I've told this story so many times that it doesn't even sound real to
me any more. I've told it to the Supreme Senate Space Committee, to half
the top brass in the IES, and to a Board of Physicians from the Medical
Department.

"As well as I can remember it, it goes something like this."

Laughter rippled through the room.

"We orbited around Fomalhaut V for a Scouting Survey," Jervis said. "The
planet is hot and rocky, but it has a breathable atmosphere. The
detectors showed various kinds of metals in the crust, some of them in
commercially feasible concentration. But the crust is so mountainous and
rocky that there aren't very many places to land a ship.

"Then we picked up the double-nucleus beryllium deposit on our
detectors. Nearby, there was a small, fairly level valley, so we brought
the ship down for a closer check. We wanted to make absolutely positive
that it was double-nucleus beryllium before we made our report."

He paused, as if arranging the story he wanted to tell in his mind, and
went on. "The D-N beryllium deposit lies at the top of a fairly low
mountain about five miles from the valley. We triangulated it first, and
then we decided we ought to send up a party to get samples of the ore if
it were at all possible.

"I was chosen to go, along with another member of the crew, a man named
Lee Bellows. We left the ship at about five in the morning, and spent
most of the day climbing up to the spot where we had detected the
beryllium. We couldn't get a sample; the main deposit is located several
feet beneath the surface of the mountaintop, and the mountain is too
rough and rocky to climb without special equipment. We got less than
halfway before we had to stop."

