The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Cosmic Express, by John Stewart Williamson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Cosmic Express

Author: John Stewart Williamson

Release Date: July 15, 2008 [EBook #26066]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COSMIC EXPRESS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Amazing Stories_ December 1961 and was
    first published in _Amazing Stories_ November 1930. Extensive
    research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on
    this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and typographical
    errors have been corrected without note.




A Classic Reprint from AMAZING STORIES, November, 1930

_Copyright 1931, by Experimenter Publications Inc._


_The Cosmic Express_

By JACK WILLIAMSON




Introduction by Sam Moskowitz


_The year 1928 was a great year of discovery for_ AMAZING STORIES. _They
were uncovering new talent at such a great rate, (Harl Vincent, David H.
Keller, E. E. Smith, Philip Francis Nowlan, Fletcher Pratt and Miles J.
Breuer), that Jack Williamson barely managed to become one of a
distinguished group of discoveries by stealing the cover of the December
issue for his first story_ The Metal Man.

_A disciple of A. Merritt, he attempted to imitate in style, mood and
subject the magic of that late lamented master of fantasy. The imitation
found great favor from the readership and almost instantly Jack
Williamson became an important name on the contents page of_ AMAZING
STORIES. _He followed his initial success with two short novels_, The
Green Girl _in_ AMAZING STORIES _and_ The Alien Intelligence _in_
SCIENCE WONDER STORIES, _another Gernsback publication. Both of these
stories were close copies of A. Merritt, whose style and method Jack
Williamson parlayed into popularity for eight years._

_Yet the strange thing about it was that Jack Williamson was one of the
most versatile science fiction authors ever to sit down at the
typewriter. When the vogue for science-fantasy altered to super science,
he created the memorable super lock-picker Giles Habilula as the major
attraction in a rousing trio of space operas_, The Legion of Space, The
Cometeers _and_ One Against the Legion. _When grim realism was the order
of the day, he produced_ Crucible of Power _and when they wanted
extrapolated theory in present tense, he assumed the disguise of Will
Stewart and popularized the concept of contra terrene matter in science
fiction with_ Seetee Ship _and_ Seetee Shock. _Finally, when only
psychological studies of the future would do, he produced_ "With Folded
Hands ..." "... And Searching Mind."

The Cosmic Express _is of special interest because it was written during
Williamson's A. Merritt "kick," when he was writing little else but, and
it gave the earliest indication of a more general capability. The
lightness of the handling is especially modern, barely avoiding the
farcical by the validity of the notion that wireless transmission of
matter is the next big transportation frontier to be conquered. It is
especially important because it stylistically forecast a later trend to
accept the background for granted, regardless of the quantity of
wonders, and proceed with the story. With only a few thousand
scanning-disk television sets in existence at the time of the writing,
the surmise that this media would be a natural for westerns was
particularly astute._

