The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Romance of Mathematics, by P. Hampson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Romance of Mathematics
       Being the Original Researches of a Lady Professor of Girtham
       College in Polemical Science, with some Account of the Social
       Properties of a Conic; Equations to Brain Waves; Social Forces;
       and the Laws of Political Motion.

Author: P. Hampson

Release Date: August 29, 2008 [EBook #26481]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ROMANCE OF MATHEMATICS ***




Produced by David Wilson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)









                              THE
                    ROMANCE OF MATHEMATICS.




                              The
                    Romance of Mathematics:

                             BEING
                    THE ORIGINAL RESEARCHES
                               OF
              A LADY PROFESSOR OF GIRTHAM COLLEGE
                               IN
      _Polemical Science, with some Account of the Social
           Properties of a Conic; Equations to Brain
               Waves; Social Forces; and the Laws
                     of Political Motion._


                               BY
                       P. HAMPSON, M.A.,
                     ORIEL COLLEGE, OXFORD.


                            LONDON:
               ELLIOT STOCK, 62, PATERNOSTER ROW.
                             1886.




INTRODUCTION.


The lectures, essays, and other matter contained in these pages have
been discovered recently in a well-worn desk which was formerly the
property of a Lady Professor of Girtham College; and as they contain
some original thoughts and investigations, they have been considered
worthy of publication.

How they came into the possession of the present writer it is not his
intention to disclose; but inasmuch as they seemed to his unscientific
mind to contain some important discoveries which might be useful to the
world, he determined to investigate thoroughly the contents of the
mysterious desk, and make the public acquainted with its profound
treasures. He found some documents which did not refer exactly to the
subject of 'Polemical Mathematics;' but knowing the truth of the Hindoo
proverb, 'The words of the wise are precious, and never to be
disregarded,' and feeling sure that this Lady Professor of Girtham
College was entitled to that appellation, he ventured to include them in
this volume, and felt confident that in so doing he would be carrying
out the intention of the Authoress, had she expressed any wishes on the
subject. In fact, as he valued the interests of the State and his own
peace of mind, he dared not withhold any particle of that which he
conceived would confer a lasting benefit on mankind.

Internal evidence seems to show that the earlier portion of the MS. was
written during the period when the authoress was still _in statu
pupillari_; but her learning was soon recognised by the Collegiate
Authorities, and she was speedily elected to a Professorship. Her
lectures were principally devoted to the abstruse subject of Scientific
Politics, and are worthy of the attention of all those whose high duty
it is to regulate the affairs of the State.

The Editor has been able to gather from the varied contents of the desk
some details of the Author's life, which increase the interest which her
words excite; and he ventures to hope that the public will appreciate
the wisdom which created such a profound impression upon those whose
high privilege it was to hear the lectures for the first time in the
Hall of Girtham College.




CONTENTS.


  PAPER                                                             PAGE
    I. Some Remarks on Female Education:

         Cambridge Man's Powers of Application.--Torturing Ingenuity
         of Examiners.--Slaying an Enemy.--'Concentration.'--
         'Tangential Action.'--'Gravity'                               1

   II. Lecture on the Theory of Brain Waves and the Transmigration
       and Potentiality of Mental Forces                              15

  III. The Social Properties of a Conic Section, and the Theory of
       Polemical Mathematics:

        'Circle.'--'Parabola.'--'Ellipse.' 'Eccentricity of Curves'   25

   IV. The Social Properties of a Conic Section (_continued_):

        'Ellipse.'--Most favoured State.--Alarming Result of
         Suppression of House of Lords.--Analogies of Nature.--
         Directrix.--Contact of Curves and States.--'Hyperbola.'--
         Problems.--Radical Axis and Patriotism.--Extension of
         Franchise to Women.--Correspondence                          39

    V. Social Forces, with some Account of Polemical Kinematics:

         The Use of Imagination in Scientific Discovery.--Kinetic and
         Potential Energy.--Social Statics and Dynamics.--Attractive
         Forces.--Cohesion.--Formation of States.--Inertia.--Dr.
         Tyndall on Social Forces                                     71

   VI. Social Forces (_continued_): Polemical Statics and Dynamics:

        'Personal Equation.'--Public Opinion, how calculated.--
         Impulsive Forces.--Friction.--Progress                       89

  VII. Laws of Political Motion:

         M. Auguste Comte on Political Science.--First Law of
         Motion.--The Biology of Politics.--Stages of Growth and
         Decay of States.--Doctrine of Nationality.--Doctrine of
         Independence.--Law of Morality.--Ignorance of Electors and
         Selfishness of Statesmen opposed to Action of Law.--Final
         'Reign of Law'                                              101

 VIII. The Principle of Polemical Cohesion:

         Centralization.--Co-operation of States.--Marriage.--Trade
         Unions.--International Law                                  115

       Extracts from the Diary of the Lady Professor                 125

       Conclusion                                                    129




PAPER I.

SOME REMARKS OF A GIRTHAM GIRL ON FEMALE EDUCATION.


[_This essay upon Female Education was evidently written when the future
Professor of Girtham College was still in the lowlier condition of
studentship, before she attained that eminence for which her talents so
justly entitled her. Its unfinished condition tends to show that it was
probably evolved during moments of relaxation from severer studies,
without any idea of subsequent publication._]

Oh, why should I be doomed to the degradation of bearing such a foolish
appellation! A Girtham Girl! I suppose we have to thank that fiend of
invention who is responsible for most of the titular foibles and follies
of mankind--artful Alliteration. The two _G_'s, people imagine, run so
well together; and it is wonderful that they do not append some other
delectable title, such as 'The Gushing Girl of Girtham,' or 'The Glaring
Girl of Glittering Girtham.' O Alliteration! Alliteration! what crimes
have been wrought in thy name! Little dost thou think of the mischief
thou hast done, flooding the world with meaningless titles and absurd
phrases. How canst thou talk of 'Lyrics of Loneliness,' 'Soliloquies of
Song,' 'Pearls of the Peerage'? Why dost thou stay thine hand? We long
for thee to enrich the world with 'Dreams of a Dotard,' the 'Dog
Doctor's Daughters,' and other kindred works. Exercise thine art on
these works of transcendent merit, but cease to style thy humble, but
rebellious, servant a Girtham Girl!

But what's in a name? Let the world's tongue wag. I am a student, a
hard-working, book-devouring, never-wearied student, who burns her
midnight oil, and drinks the strong bohea, to keep her awake during the
long hours of toil, like any Oxford or Cambridge undergraduate. I often
wonder whether these mighty warriors in the lists--the class lists, I
mean--really work half so hard as we poor unfortunate 'Girls of
Girtham.' Now that I am writing in strict confidence, so that not even
the walls can hear the scratchings of my pen, or understand the meaning
of all this scribbling, I beg to state that I have my serious doubts
upon the subject; and when last I attended a soiree of the
Anthropological Society, sounds issued forth from the windows of the
snug college rooms, which could not be taken as evidences of profound
and undisturbed study.

Sometimes I glance at the examination papers set for these hard-working
students, in order that they may attain the glorious degree of B.A., and
astonish their sisters, cousins, and aunts by the display of these magic
letters and all-resplendent hood. And again I say in strict confidence
that if this same glorious hood does not adorn the back of each
individual son of Alma Mater, he ought to be ashamed of himself, and not
to fail to assume a certain less dignified, but expressive,
three-lettered qualification. But before those Tripos Papers I bow my
head in humble adoration. They sometimes take my breath away even to
read the terrible excruciating things, which seem to turn one's brain
round and round, and contort the muscles of one's face, and stop the
pulsation of one's heart, when one tries to grasp the horrid things.

Here is a fair example of the ingenuity of the hard-hearted examiners,
who resemble the inquisitors presiding over the tortures of the rack,
and giving the hateful machine just one turn more by way of bestowing a
parting benediction on their miserable victims:

'A uniform rod' (it is a marvellous act of mercy that the examiner
invented it _uniform_; it is strange that its thickness did not vary in
some complicated manner, and become a veritable birch-rod!) 'of length
_2c_, rests in stable equilibrium' (stable! another act of leniency!),
'with its lower end at the vertex of a cycloid whose plane is vertical'
(why not incline it at an angle of 30 degrees?) 'and vertex downwards,
and passes through a small, smooth, fixed ring situated in the axis at a
distance _b_ from the vertex. Show that if the equilibrium be slightly
disturbed, the rod will perform small oscillations with its lower end on
the arc of the cycloid in the time

           +---------------------
           | a{c^2 + 3(b - c)^2}
    4[pi]\ | ------------------- ,
          \|    3g(b^2 - 4ac)

where _2a_ is the length of the axis of the cycloid.'

A sweet pretty problem, truly! And there are hundreds of the same
kind--birch-rods for every back! How the examiner must have rejoiced
when he invented this diabolical rod, with its equilibrium, its
oscillations, its cycloid, and other tormenting accessories. And yet, I
suppose, before my days of studentship are over, I shall be called upon
to attack some such impregnable fortresses of mathematics, when I hope
to be declared equal to some twentieth wrangler, if I escape the
misfortune of sharing a portion of the 'wooden spoon.'

Ah, you male sycophants! You would prevent us from competing with you;
you would separate yourselves on your island of knowledge, and sink the
punt which would bear us over to your privileged shore. Of all the
twaddle--forgive me, male sycophants!--that the world has ever heard, I
think the greatest is that which you have talked about female education.
And the best of it is, you are so anxious about our welfare; you are so
afraid that we should injure our health by overmuch mental exertion; you
profess to think that our brains are not calculated to stand the strain
of continued mental exercise; you think that competition is not good for
the female mind; that we are too competitive by nature--too ambitious!
Yes, we are so ambitious that we would enter the lists with those who
are asked in Public Examinations to find the simple interest on 1,000
pounds for 5 years at 6-1/4 per cent.; so ambitious that we would
compete with those who are requested to disclose the first aorist middle
of [Greek: tupto]. Oh, think of the mental strain involved in such
questions! How it must ruin your health to find out how many times a
wheel of radius 6 feet will turn round between York and London, a
