The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Rat Racket, by David Henry Keller

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Rat Racket

Author: David Henry Keller

Illustrator: Kotzky

Release Date: October 12, 2008 [EBook #26890]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RAT RACKET ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 THE
 RAT
 RACKET

 By DAVID H. KELLER, M.D.

    _With Dr. Keller's genius for hitting at vital spots every time, he
    now gives us a brand new idea and an ingenious solution. We hope no
    racketeers read this story. They might, as a result, cause the
    police some trouble. Fortunately, however, the racket has a flaw._


Richard Moyer, senior partner of the firm of Moyer & Perkins, read that
letter over twice before he called in the man who had helped him make
the importing of high grade groceries from England a most profitable
business for over twenty years.

He simply handed the letter over to Paul Perkins without a word of
explanation. The latter read it through and handed it back in equal
silence, but the hand that held the letter trembled.

"Just another racket," exclaimed Moyer, finally.

"Looks like it. I suppose we were foolish to start in paying for
protection. First our trucks were threatened; then the new building;
after that our best customers were bombed, and we had to pay to protect
them. Your son was kidnapped--and the police! They even went so far as
to advise that we keep on paying--and now this letter! We might as well
close out the business. All our profits go toward supporting a gang of
criminals who have muscled into every type of American industry."

[Illustration: They were running out through the picture. A crazed man
tore it from the wall.]

"On the face of it the letter looks innocent enough," sighed Perkins, as
he picked it up and gave it another reading. "Simply says that the rat
menace is increasing, cites several business houses where the rodents
have done a great deal of damage, and offers to give our warehouses
complete protection for five thousand a week. You could show that letter
to a hundred police officials and they would laugh at your fears. But I
am not laughing. Because that letter was written on the same damaged
typewriter that the other letters were written on and those gangsters
have not failed to make any of their threats good."

"Suppose we pretend that they are honest, and answer their letter and
send them a check for the first week's protection?"

"They will laugh at you and send back the check."

"They may, at that. Then we will give them the cash. In either case, it
will give us time to think. I feel that they are only experimenting with
us. They are after larger game than five thousand a week. We shall see
and hear more of this rat business in a while. Write to them and tell
them that we will pay the cash, and put the entire matter in the hands
of the Chamber of Commerce. If it does not act soon, the entire city
will be in the hands of the gangsters."

The complaint of Moyer & Perkins was only one of a dozen similar ones
which reached the Chamber of Commerce that day. In a secluded room of
the Manufacturers' Club a dozen wealthy men met day after day, hearing
and weighing evidence against a hundred forms of racketeering which was
rapidly becoming a terrible and powerful enemy to the varied industries
of the Metropolis. Practically every business had been threatened and
more than one captain of industry blustered openly, but paid his weekly
tribute silently in order to protect his business, family, and home.

Up to this time the usual weapon had been the strong arm man and the
bomb. While these were bad enough, they were at least understood. When
it came to rats, it was different. Of course, everybody knew something
about rats--that they were supposed to be numerous around the river
fronts and warehouses--but on the other hand, rats were seldom seen in
daylight, and there were many New Yorkers who never saw one.

Not one of the dozen men had been raised on a farm and none had served
in the trenches during the World War. They did not understand rats, so,
they hesitated, and finally simply advised the merchants who had
received the rat letters to use their own judgement. As a result, some
paid tribute and some did not. There is no evidence to show that those
who paid were one hundred per cent free from rats in their warehouses,
but within a week there was ample proof that at least three wholesale
groceries and one laundry had been invaded overnight by rats in
sufficient quantity to cause thousands of dollars' worth of damages.
Moyer & Perkins heard the news and decided to pay another five thousand.

