The Project Gutenberg eBook, Zoonomia, Vol. II, by Erasmus Darwin


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Zoonomia, Vol. II
       Or, the Laws of Organic Life


Author: Erasmus Darwin



Release Date: December 23, 2008  [eBook #27600]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ZOONOMIA, VOL. II***


E-text prepared by Robert Shimmin, Greg Alethoup, Keith Edkins, and the
Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 27600-h.htm or 27600-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/7/6/0/27600/27600-h/27600-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/7/6/0/27600/27600-h.zip)


Transcriber's note

A few typographical errors have been corrected: they are
listed at the end of the text.





ZOONOMIA;

OR,

THE LAWS

OF

ORGANIC LIFE.

VOL. II.

_By ERASMUS DARWIN, M.D. F.R.S._

AUTHOR OF THE BOTANIC GARDEN.



  Principio coelum, ac terras, camposque liquentes,
  Lucentemque globum lunae, titaniaque astra,
  Spiritus intus alit, totamque infusa per artus
  Mens agitat molem, et magno se corpore miscet.--VIRG. Aen. vi.

  Earth, on whose lap a thousand nations tread,
  And Ocean, brooding his prolific bed,
  Night's changeful orb, blue pole, and silvery zones,
  Where other worlds encircle other suns,
  One Mind inhabits, one diffusive Soul
  Wields the large limbs, and mingles with the whole.







London:
Printed for. J. Johnson, in St. Paul's Church-Yard.
1796.

Entered at Stationers' Hall.




ZOONOMIA;

OR,

THE LAWS OF ORGANIC LIFE.

PART II.

CONTAINING

A CATALOGUE OF DISEASES

DISTRIBUTED INTO

NATURAL CLASSES ACCORDING TO THEIR PROXIMATE CAUSES,

WITH THEIR

SUBSEQUENT ORDERS, GENERA, AND SPECIES,

AND WITH

THEIR METHODS OF CURE.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Haec, ut potero, explicabo; nec tamen, quasi Pythius Apollo, certa ut
    sint et fixa, quae dixero; sed ut Homunculus unus e multis probabiliora
    conjectura sequens.--CIC. TUSC. DISP. l. 1. 9.

       *       *       *       *       *

PREFACE.

All diseases originate in the exuberance, deficiency, or retrograde action,
of the faculties of the sensorium, as their proximate cause; and consist in
the disordered motions of the fibres of the body, as the proximate effect
of the exertions of those disordered faculties.

The sensorium possesses four distinct powers, or faculties, which are
occasionally exerted, and produce all the motions of the fibrous parts of
the body; these are the faculties of producing fibrous motions in
consequence of irritation which is excited by external bodies; in
consequence of sensation which is excited by pleasure or pain; in
consequence of volition which is excited by desire or aversion; and in
consequence of association which is excited by other fibrous motions. We
are hence supplied with four natural classes of diseases derived from their
proximate causes; which we shall term those of irritation, those of
sensation, those of volition, and those of association.

In the subsequent classification of diseases I have not adhered to the
methods of any of those, who have preceded me; the principal of whom are
the great names of Sauvages and Cullen; but have nevertheless availed
myself, as much as I could, of their definitions and distinctions.

The essential characteristic of a disease consists in its proximate cause,
as is well observed by Doctor Cullen, in his Nosologia Methodica, T. ii.
Prolegom. p. xxix. Similitudo quidem morborum in similitudine causae eorum
proximae, qualiscunque sit, revera consistit. I have taken the proximate
cause for the classic character. The characters of the orders are taken
from the excess, or deficiency, or retrograde action, or other properties
of the proximate cause. The genus is generally derived from the proximate
effect. And the species generally from the locality of the disease in the
system.

Many species in this system are termed genera in the systems of other
writers; and the species of those writers are in consequence here termed
varieties. Thus in Dr. Cullen's Nosologia the variola or small-pox is
termed a genus, and the distinct and confluent kinds are termed species.
But as the infection from the distinct kind frequently produces the
confluent kind, and that of the confluent kind frequently produces the
distinct; it would seem more analogous to botanical arrangement, which
these nosologists profess to imitate, to call the distinct and confluent
small-pox varieties than species. Because the species of plants in
botanical systems propagate others similar to themselves; which does not
uniformly occur in such vegetable productions as are termed varieties.

In some other genera of nosologists the species have no analogy to each
other, either in respect to their proximate cause, or to their proximate
effect, though they may he somewhat similar in less essential properties;
thus the thin and saline discharge from the nostrils on going into the cold
air of a frosty morning, which is owing to the deficient action of the
absorbent vessels of the nostrils, is one species; and the viscid mucus
discharged from the secerning vessels of the same membrane, when inflamed,
is another species of the same genus, Catarrhus. Which bear no analogy
either in respect to their immediate cause or to their immediate effect.

The uses of the method here offered to the public of classing diseases
according to their proximate causes are, first, more distinctly to
understand their nature by comparing their essential properties. Secondly,
to facilitate the knowledge of the methods of cure; since in natural
classification of diseases the species of each genus, and indeed the genera
of each order, a few perhaps excepted, require the same general medical
treatment. And lastly, to discover the nature and the name of any disease
previously unknown to the physician; which I am persuaded will be more
readily and more certainly done by this natural system, than by the
artificial classifications already published.

The common names of diseases are not well adapted to any kind of
classification, and least of all to this from their proximate causes. Some
of their names in common language are taken from the remote cause, as
worms, stone of the bladder; others from the remote effect, as diarrhoea,
salivation, hydrocephalus; others from some accidental symptom of the
disease, as tooth-ach, head-ach, heart-burn; in which the pain is only a
concomitant circumstance of the excess or deficiency of fibrous actions,
and not the cause of them. Others again are taken from the deformity
occasioned in consequence of the unnatural fibrous motions, which
constitute diseases, as tumours, eruptions, extenuations; all these
therefore improperly give names to diseases; and some difficulty is thus
occasioned to the reader in endeavouring to discover to what class such
disorders belong.

Another difficulty attending the names of diseases is, that one name
frequently includes more than one disease, either existing at the same time
or in succession. Thus the pain of the bowels from worms is caused by the
increased action of the membrane from the stimulus of those animals; but
the convulsions, which sometimes succeed these pains in children, are
caused by the consequent volition, and belong to another class.

To discover under what class any disease should be arranged, we must first
investigate the proximate cause; thus the pain of the tooth-ach is not the
cause of any diseased motions, but the effect; the tooth-ach therefore does
not belong to the class of Sensation. As the pain is caused by increased or
decreased action of the membranes of the tooth, and these actions are owing
to the increase or decrease of irritation, the disease is to be placed in
the class of irritation.

To discover the order it must be inquired, whether the pain be owing to
increased or defective motion of the pained membrane; which is known by the
concomitant heat or coldness of the part. In tooth-ach without inflammation
there is generally a coldness attends the cheek in its vicinity; as may be
perceived by the hand of the patient himself, compared with the opposite
cheek. Hence odontalgia is found to belong to the order of decreased
irritation. The genus and species must be found by inspecting the synopsis
of the second order of the class of Irritation. See Class I. 2. 4. 12.

This may be further elucidated by considering the natural operation of
parturition; the pain is occasioned by the increased action or distention
of the vessels of the uterus, in consequence of the stimulus of the fetus;
and is therefore caused by increased irritation; but the action of the
abdominal muscles in its exclusion are caused by the pain, and belong to
the class of increased sensation. See Class II. 1. 1. 12. Hence the
difficulty of determining, under what class of diseases parturition should
be arranged, consists in there being two kinds of diseased actions
comprehended under one word; which have each their different proximate
cause.

In Sect. XXXIX. 8. 4. and in Class II. 1. 1. 1. we have endeavoured to give
names to four links of animal causation, which conveniently apply to the
classification of diseases; thus in common nictitation, or winking with the
eyes without our attention to it, the increased irritation is the proximate
cause; the stimulus of the air on the dry cornea is the remote cause; the
closing of the eyelid is the proximate effect; and the diffusion of tears
over the eye-ball is the remote effect. In some cases two more links of
causation may be introduced; one of them may be termed the pre-remote
cause; as the warmth or motion of the atmosphere, which causes greater
exhalation from the cornea. And the other the post-remote effect; as the
renewed pellucidity of the cornea; and thus six links of causation may be
expressed in words.

But if amid these remote links of animal causation any of the four powers
or faculties of the sensorium be introduced, the reasoning is not just
according to the method here proposed; for these powers of the sensorium
are always the proximate causes of the contractions of animal fibres; and
therefore in true language cannot be termed their remote causes. From this
criterion it may always be determined, whether more diseases than one are
comprehended under one name; a circumstance which has much impeded the
investigation of the causes, and cures of diseases.

Thus the term fever, is generally given to a collection of morbid symptoms;
which are indeed so many distinct diseases, that sometimes appear together,
and sometimes separately; hence it has no determinate meaning, except it
signifies simply a quick pulse, which continues for some hours; in which
sense it is here used.

In naming diseases I have endeavoured to avoid the affectation of making
new compound Greek words, where others equally expressive could be
procured: as a short periphrasis is easier to be understood, and less
burthensome to the memory.

In the Methodus Medendi, which is marked by M.M. at the end of many of the
species of diseases, the words incitantia, sorbentia, torpentia, &c. refer
to the subsequent articles of the Materia Medica, explaining the operations
of medicines.

The remote causes of many diseases, their periods, and many circumstances
concerning them, are treated of in the preceding volume; the descriptions
of many of them, which I have omitted for the sake of brevity, may be seen
in the Nosologia Methodica of Sauvages, and in the Synopsis Nosologiae of
Dr. Cullen, and in the authors to which they refer.

In this arduous undertaking the author solicits the candour of the critical
reader; as he cannot but foresee, that many errors will be discovered, many
additional species will require to be inserted; and others to be
transplanted, or erased. If he could expend another forty years in the
practice of medicine, he makes no doubt, but that he could bring this work
nearer perfection, and thence render it more worthy the attention of
philosophers.----As it is, he is induced to hope, that some advantages will
be derived from it to the science of medicine, and consequent utility to
the public, and leaves the completion of his plan to the industry of future
generations.

  DERBY, _Jan._ 1, 1796.

       *       *       *       *       *


ZOONOMIA.

PART II.

       *       *       *       *       *

CLASSES OF DISEASES.

       *       *       *       *       *

  I.  DISEASES OF IRRITATION.

  II. DISEASES OF SENSATION.

  III. DISEASES OF VOLITION.

  IV. DISEASES OF ASSOCIATION.

       *       *       *       *       *


_The Orders and Genera of the First Class of Diseases._

       *       *       *       *       *

CLASS I.

DISEASES OF IRRITATION.

ORDO I.

_Increased Irritation._

GENERA.

  1. With increased actions of the sanguiferous system.
  2. With increased actions of the secerning system.
  3. With increased actions of the absorbent system.
  4. With increased actions of other cavities and membranes.
  5. With increased actions of the organs of sense.

ORDO II.

_Decreased Irritation._

GENERA.

  1. With decreased actions of the sanguiferous system.
  2. With decreased actions of the secerning system.
  3. With decreased actions of the absorbent system.
  4. With decreased actions of other cavities and membranes.
  5. With decreased actions of the organs of sense.

ORDO III.

_Retrograde Irritative Motions._

GENERA.

  1. Of the alimentary canal.
  2. Of the absorbent system.
  3. Of the sanguiferous system.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Orders, Genera, and Species, of the First Class of Diseases._

       *       *       *       *       *

CLASS I.

DISEASES OF IRRITATION.

ORDO I.

_Increased Irritation._

GENUS I.

_With Increased Actions of the Sanguiferous System._

SPECIES.

  1. _Febris irritativa._            Irritative fever.
  2. _Ebrietas._                     Drunkenness.
  3. _Haemorrhagia arteriosa._       Arterial haemorrhage.
  4. _Haemoptoe arteriosa._          Spitting of arterial blood.
  5. _Haemorrhagia narium._          Bleeding from the nose.

GENUS II.

_With Increased Actions of the Secerning System._

SPECIES.

   1. _Calor febrilis._              Febrile heat.
   2. _Rubor febrilis._              Febrile redness.
   3. _Sudor calidus._               Warm sweat.
      ---- _febrilis._               Sweat in fevers.
      ---- _a labore._               ---- from exercise.
      ---- _ab igne._                ---- from fire.
      ---- _a medicamentis._         ---- from medicines.
   4. _Urina uberior colorata._      Copious coloured urine.
   5. _Diarrhoea calida._            Warm diarrhoea.
      ---- _febrilis._               ---- from fever.
      ---- _crapulosa._              ---- from indigestion.
      ---- _infantum._               ---- of infants.
   6. _Salivatio calida._            ---- salivation.
   7. _Catarrhus calidus._           ---- catarrh.
   8. _Expectoratio calida._         ---- expectoration.
   9. _Exsudatio pone aures._        Discharge behind the ears.
  10. _Gonorrhoea calida._           Warm gonorrhoea.
  11. _Fluor albus calidus._         ---- fluor albus.
  12. _Haemorrhois alba._            White piles.
  13. _Serum e visicatorio._         Discharge from a blister.
  14. _Perspiratio foetida._         Fetid perspiration.
  15. _Crines novi._                 New hairs.

GENUS III.

_With increased Actions of the Absorbent System._

SPECIES.

   1. _Lingua arida._                 Dry tongue.
   2. _Fauces aridae._                Dry throat.
   3. _Nares aridi._                  Dry nostrils.
   4. _Expectoratio solida._          Solid expectoration.
   5. _Constipatio alvi._             Costiveness.
   6. _Cutis arida._                  Dry skin.
   7. _Urina parcior colorata._       Diminished coloured urine.
   8. _Calculus felleus et icterus._  Gall-stone and jaundice.
   9. ---- _renis._                   Stone of the kidney.
  10. ---- _vesicae._                 Stone of the bladder.
  11. ---- _arthriticus._             Gout-stone.
  12. _Rheumatismus chronicus._       Chronic rheumatism.
  13. _Cicatrix vulnerum._            Healing of ulcers.
  14. _Corneae obfuscatio._           Scar on the cornea.

GENUS IV.

_With increased Actions of other Cavities and Membranes._

SPECIES.

   1. _Nictitatio irritativa._        Irritative nictitation.
   2. _Deglutitio irritativa._        Irritative deglutition.
   3. _Respiratio et tussis._         Respiration and cough.
   4. _Exclusio bilis._               Exclusion of the bile.
   5. _Dentitio._                     Toothing.
   6. _Priapismus._                   Priapism.
   7. _Distensio mamularum._          Distention of the nipples.
   8. _Descensus uteri._              Descent of the uterus.
   9. _Prolapsus ani._                Descent of the rectum.
  10. _Lumbricus._                    Round worm.
  11. _Taenia._                       Tape-worm.
  12. _Ascarides._                    Thread-worms.
  13. _Dracunculus._                  Guinea-worm.
  14. _Morpiones._                    Crab-lice.
  15. _Pediculi._                     Lice.

GENUS V.

_With increased Actions of the Organs of Sense._

SPECIES.

   1. _Visus acrior._              Acuter sight.
   2. _Auditus acrior._            ---- hearing.
   3. _Olfactus acrior._           ---- smell.
   4. _Gustus acrior._             ---- taste.
   5. _Tactus acrior._             ---- touch.
   6. _Sensus caloris acrior._     ---- sense of heat.
   7. ---- _extensionis acrior._   ---- sense of extension.
   8. _Titillatio._                Tickling.
   9. _Pruritus._                  Itching.
  10. _Dolor urens._               Smarting.
  11. _Consternatio._              Surprise.

ORDO II.

_Decreased Irritation._

GENUS I.

_With decreased Actions of the Sanguiferous System._

SPECIES.

   1. _Febris inirritativa._     Inirritative fever.
   2. _Paresis inirritativa._    ---- debility.
   3. _Somnus interruptus._      Interrupted sleep.
   4. _Syncope._                 Fainting.
   5. _Haemorrhagia venosa._     Venous haemorrhage.
   6. _Haemorrhois cruenta._     Bleeding piles.
   7. _Haemorrhagia renum._      ---- from the kidneys.
   8. ---- _hepatis._            ---- from the liver.
   9. _Haemoptoe venosa._        Spitting of venous blood.
  10. _Palpitatio cordis._       Palpitation of the heart.
  11. _Menorrhagia._             Exuberant menstruation.
  12. _Dysmenorrhagia._          Deficient menstruation.
  13. _Lochia nimia._            Too great lochia.
  14. _Abortio spontanea._       Spontaneous abortion.
  15. _Scorbutus._               Scurvy.
  16. _Vibices._                 Extravasations of blood.
  17. _Petechiae._               Purple spots.

GENUS II.

_With decreased Actions of the Secerning System._

SPECIES.

   1. _Frigus febrile._          Coldness in fevers.
      ---- _chronicum._          ---- permanent.
   2. _Pallor fugitivus._        Paleness fugitive.
      ---- _permanens._          ---- permanent.
   3. _Pus parcius._             Diminished pus.
   4. _Mucus parcior._           Diminished mucus.
   5. _Urina parcior pallida._   Pale diminished urine.
   6. _Torpor hepaticus._        Torpor of the liver.
   7. _Torpor pancreatis._       Torpor of the pancreas.
   8. _Torpor renis._            Torpor of the kidney.
   9. _Punctae mucosae vultus._  Mucous spots on the face.
  10. _Maculae cutis fulvae._    Tawny blots on the skin.
  11. _Canities._                Grey hairs.
  12. _Callus._                  Callus.
  13. _Cataracta._               Cataract.
  14. _Innutritio ossium._       Innutrition of the bones.
  15. _Rachitis._                Rickets.
  16. _Spina distortio._         Distortion of the spine.
  17. _Claudicatio coxaria._     Lameness of the hip.
  18. _Spina protuberans._       Protuberant spine.
  19. _Spina bifida._            Divided spine.
  20. _Defectus palati._         Defect of the palate.

GENUS III.

_With decreased Actions of the Absorbent System._

SPECIES.

   1. _Mucus faucium frigidus._           Cold mucus from the throat.
   2. _Sudor frigidus._                   ---- sweat.
   3. _Catarrhus frigidus._               ---- catarrh.
   4. _Expectoratio frigida._             ---- expectoration.
   5. _Urina uberior pallida._            Copious pale urine.
   6. _Diarrhoea frigida._                Cold diarrhoea.
   7. _Fluor albus frigidus._             ---- fluor albus.
   8. _Gonorrhoea frigida._               ---- gonorrhoea.
   9. _Hepatis tumor._                    Swelling of the liver.
  10. _Chlorosis._                        Green sickness.
  11. _Hydrocele._                        Dropsy of the vagina testis.
  12. _Hydrocephalus internus._           ---- of the brain.
  13. _Ascites._                          ---- of the belly.
  14. _Hydrothorax._                      ---- of the chest.
  15. _Hydrops ovarii._                   ---- of the ovary.
  16. _Anasarca pulmonum._                ---- of the lungs.
  17. _Obesitas._                         Corpulency.
  18. _Splenis tumor._                    Swelling of the spleen.
  19. _Genu tumor albus._                 White swelling of the knee.
  20. _Bronchocele._                      Swelled throat.
  21. _Scrophula._                        King's evil.
  22. _Schirrus._                         Schirrus.
  23. ---- _recti._                       ---- of the rectum.
  24. ---- _urethrae._                    ---- of the urethra.
  25. ---- _oesophagi._                   ---- of the throat.
  26. _Lacteorum inirritabilitas._        Inirritability of the lacteals.
  27. _Lymphaticorum inirritabilitas._    Inirritability of the lymphatics.

GENUS IV.

_With decreased Actions of other Cavities and Membranes._

SPECIES.

   1. _Sitis calida._                    Thirst warm.
      ---- _frigida._                    ---- cold.
   2. _Esuries._                         Hunger.
   3. _Nausea sicca._                    Dry Nausea.
   4. _Aegritudo ventriculi._             Sickness of stomach.
   5. _Cardialgia._                      Heart-burn.
   6. _Arthritis ventriculi._            Gout of the stomach.
   7. _Colica flatulenta._               Flatulent colic.
   8. _Colica saturnina._                Colic from lead.
   9. _Tympanitis._                      Tympany.
  10. _Hypochondriasis._                 Hypochondriacism.
  11. _Cephalaea frigida._               Cold head-ach.
  12. _Odontalgia._                      Tooth-ach.
  13. _Otalgia._                         Ear-ach.
  14. _Pleurodyne chronica._             Chronical pain of the side.
  15. _Sciatica frigida._                Cold sciatica.
  16. _Lumbago frigida._                 ---- lumbago.
  17. _Hysteralgia frigida._             ---- pain of the uterus.
  18. _Proctalgia frigida._              ---- pain of the rectum.
  19. _Vesicae felleae inirritibilitas_  Inirritability of the gall-bladder
      _et icterus._                      and jaundice.

GENUS V.

_With decreased Actions of the Organs of Sense._

SPECIES.

   1. _Stultitia inirritabilis._      Folly from inirritability.
   2. _Visus imminutus._              Impaired vision.
   3. _Muscae volitantes._            Dark moving specks.
   4. _Strabismus._                   Squinting.
   5. _Amaurosis._                    Palsy of the optic nerve.
   6. _Auditus imminutus._            Impaired hearing.
   7. _Olfactus imminutus._           ---- smell.
   8. _Gustus imminutus._             ---- taste.
   9. _Tactus imminutus._             ---- touch.
  10. _Stupor._                       Stupor.

ORDO III.

_Retrograde Irritative Motions._

GENUS I.

_Of the Alimentary Canal._

SPECIES.

   1. _Ruminatio._              Chewing the cud.
   2. _Ructus._                 Eructation.
   3. _Apepsia._                Indigestion, water-qualm.
   4. _Vomitus._                Vomiting.
   5. _Cholera._                Cholera.
   6. _Ileus._                  Iliac passion.
   7. _Globus hystericus._      Hysteric strangulation.
   8. _Vomendi conamen inane._  Vain efforts to vomit.
   9. _Borborigmus._            Gurgling of the bowels.
  10. _Hysteria._               Hysteric disease.
  11. _Hydrophobia._            Dread of water.

GENUS II.

_Of the Absorbent System._

SPECIES.

   1. _Catarrhus lymphaticus._      Lymphatic catarrh.
   2. _Salivatio lymphatica._       Lymphatic salivation.
   3. _Nausea humida._              Moist nausea.
   4. _Diarrhoea lymphatica._       Lymphatic flux.
   5. _Diarrhoea chylifera._        Flux of chyle.
   6. _Diabaetes._                  Diabetes.
   7. _Sudor lymphaticus._          Lymphatic sweat.
   8. _Sudor asthmaticus._          Asthmatic sweat.
   9. _Translatio puris._           Translation of matter.
  10. ---- _lactis._                ---- of milk.
  11. ---- _urinae._                ---- of urine.

GENUS III.

_Of the Sanguiferous System._

SPECIES.

  1. _Capillarium motus retrogressus._   Retrograde motion of the
                                         capillaries.
  2. _Palpitatio cordis._                Palpitation of the heart.
  3. _Anhelatio spasmodica._             Spasmodic panting.

       *       *       *       *       *

CLASS I.

DISEASES OF IRRITATION.

ORDO I.

_Increased Irritation._

GENUS I.

_With increased Actions of the Sanguiferous System._

The irritability of the whole, or of part, of our system is perpetually
changing; these vicissitudes of irritability and of inirritability are
believed to depend on the accumulation or exhaustion of the sensorial
power, as their proximate cause; and on the difference of the present
stimulus, and of that which we had previously been accustomed to, as their
remote cause. Thus a smaller degree of heat produces pain and inflammation
in our hands, after they have been for a time immersed in snow; which is
owing to the accumulation of sensorial power in the moving fibres of the
cutaneous vessels during their previous quiescence, when they were benumbed
with cold. And we feel ourselves cold in the usual temperature of the
atmosphere on coming out of a warm room; which is owing to the exhaustion
of sensorial power in the moving fibres of the vessels of the skin by their
previous increased activity, into which they were excited by unusual heat.

Hence the cold fits of fever are the occasion of the succeeding hot ones;
and the hot fits contribute to occasion in their turn the succeeding cold
ones. And though the increase of stimulus, as of heat, exercise, or
distention, will produce an increased action of the stimulated fibres; in
the same manner as it is produced by the increased irritability which was
occasioned by a previous defect of stimulus; yet as the excesses of
irritation from the stimulus of external things are more easily avoided
than the deficiencies of it; the diseases of this country, except those
which are the consequences of drunkenness, or of immoderate exercise, more
frequently begin with torpor than with orgasm; that is, with inactivity of
some parts, or of the whole of the system, and consequent coldness, than
with increased activity, and consequent heat.

If the hot fit be the consequence of the cold one, it may be asked if they
are proportionate to each other: it is probable that they are, where no
part is destroyed by the cold fit, as in mortification or death. But we
have no measure to distinguish this, except the time of their duration;
whereas the extent of the torpor over a greater or less part of the system,
which occasions the cold fit; or of the exertion which occasions the hot
one; as well as the degree of such torpor or exertion, are perhaps more
material than the time of their duration. Besides this some muscles are
less liable to accumulate sensorial power during their torpor, than others,
as the locomotive muscles compared with the capillary arteries; on all
which accounts a long cold fit may often be followed by a short hot one.

SPECIES.

1. _Febris irritativa._ Irritative fever. This is the synocha of some
writers, it is attended with strong pulse without inflammation; and in this
circumstance differs from the febris inirritativa of Class I. 2. 1. 1.
which is attended with weak pulse without inflammation. The increased
frequency of the pulsation of the heart and arteries constitutes fever;
during the cold fit these pulsations are always weak, as the energy of
action is then decreased throughout the whole system; and therefore the
general arterial strength cannot be determined by the touch, till the cold
part of the paroxysm ceases. This determination is sometimes attended with
difficulty; as strong and weak are only comparative degrees of the greater
or less resistance of the pulsation of the artery to the compression of the
finger. But the greater or less frequency of the pulsations affords a
collateral evidence in those cases, where the degree of strength is not
very distinguishable, which may assist our judgment concerning it. Since a
moderately strong pulse, when the patient is in a recumbent posture, and
not hurried in mind, seldom exceeds 120 strokes in a minute; whereas a weak
one often exceeds 130 in a recumbent posture, and 150 in an erect one, in
those fevers, which are termed nervous or putrid. See Sect. XII. 1. 4.

The increased frequency of the pulsation of the heart and arteries, as it
is occasioned either by excess or defect of stimulus, or of sensorial
power, exists both in the cold and hot fits of fever; but when the cold fit
ceases, and the pulse becomes strong and full as well as quick, in
consequence of the increased irritability of the heart and arteries, it
constitutes the irritative fever, or synocha. It is attended with
considerable heat during the paroxysm, and generally terminates in a
quarter of a lunation, without any disturbance of the faculties of the
mind. See Class IV. 1. 1. 8.

M. M. Venesection. Emetics. Cathartics. Cool the patient in the hot fit,
and warm him in the cold one. Rest. Torpentia.

2. _Ebrietas._ Drunkenness. By the stimulus of wine or opium the whole
arterial system, as well as every other part of the moving system, is
excited into increased action. All the secretions, and with them the
production of sensorial power itself in the brain, seem to be for a time
increased, with an additional quantity of heat, and of pleasureable
sensation. See Sect. XXI. on this subject. This explains, why at the
commencement of the warm paroxysm of some fevers the patient is in greater
spirits, or vivacity; because, as in drunkenness, the irritative motions
are all increased, and a greater production of sensation is the
consequence, which when in a certain degree, is pleasureable, as in the
diurnal fever of weak people. Sect. XXXVI. 3. 1.

3. _Haemorrhagia arteriosa._ Arterial haemorrhage. Bleeding with a quick,
strong, and full pulse. The haemorrhages from the lungs, and from the nose,
are the most frequent of these; but it sometimes happens, that a small
artery but half divided, or the puncture of a leech, will continue to bleed
pertinaciously.

M. M. Venesection. Cathartic with calomel. Divide the wounded artery. Bind
sponge on the puncture. If coffee or charcoal internally? If air with less
oxygen?

4. _Haemoptoe arteriosa._ Spitting of arterial blood. Blood spit up from
the lungs is florid, because it has just been exposed to the influence of
the air in its passage through the extremities of the pulmonary artery; it
is frothy, from the admixture of air with it in the bronchia. The patients
frequently vomit at the same time from the disagreeable titillation of
blood about the fauces; and are thence liable to believe, that the blood is
rejected from the stomach.

Sometimes an haemoptoe for several successive days returns in gouty persons
without danger, and seems to supply the place of the gouty paroxysms. Is
not the liver always diseased previous to the haemoptoe, as in several
other haemorrhages? See Class I. 2. 1. 9.

M. M. Venesection, a purge, a blister, diluents, torpentia; and afterwards
sorbentia, as the bark, the acid of vitriol, and opium. An emetic is said
to stop a pulmonary haemorrhage, which it may effect, as sickness decreases
the circulation, as is very evident in the great sickness sometimes
produced by too large a dose of digitalis purpurea.

Dr. Rush says, a table spoonful or two of common salt is successful in
haemoptoe; this may be owing to its stimulating the absorbent systems, both
the lymphatic, and the venous. Should the patient respire air with less
oxygen? or be made sick by whirling round in a chair suspended by a rope?
One immersion in cold water, or a sudden sprinkling all over with cold
water, would probably stop a pulmonary haemorrhage. See Sect. XXVII. 1.

5. _Haemorrhagia narium._ _Epistaxis_. Bleeding at the nose in elderly
subjects most frequently attends those, whose livers are enlarged or
inflamed by the too frequent use of fermented liquors.

In boys it occurs perhaps simply from redundancy of blood; and in young
girls sometimes precedes the approach of the catamenia; and then it shews a
disposition contrary to chlorosis; which arises from a deficiency of red
blood.

M. M. It is stopped by plunging the head into cold water, with powdered
salt hastily dissolved in it; or sometimes by lint strewed over with wheat
flour put up the nostrils; or by a solution of steel in brandy applied to
the vessel by means of lint. The cure in other respects as in haemoptoe;
when the bleeding recurs at certain periods, after venesection, and
evacuation by calomel, and a blister, the bark and steel must be given, as
in intermittent fevers. See Section XXVII. 1.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORDO I.

_Increased Irritation._

GENUS II.

_With increased Actions of the Secerning System._

These are always attended with increase of partial or of general heat; for
the secreted fluids are not simply separated from the blood, but are new
combinations; as they did not previously exist as such in the blood
vessels. But all new combinations give out heat chemically; hence the
origin of animal heat, which is always increased in proportion to the
secretion of the part affected, or to the general quantity of the
secretions. Nevertheless there is reason to believe, that as we have a
sense purposely to distinguish the presence of greater or less quantities
of heat, as mentioned in Sect. XIV. 6. so we may have certain minute glands
for the secretion of this fluid, as the brain is believed to secrete the
sensorial power, which would more easily account for the instantaneous
production of the blush of shame, and of anger. This subject deserves
further investigation.

SPECIES.
