The Project Gutenberg EBook of Tulan, by Carroll Mather Capps

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Tulan

Author: Carroll Mather Capps

Release Date: February 2, 2009 [EBook #27968]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TULAN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









TULAN

By C. C. MacAPP


    _To disobey the orders of the
       Council of Four was unthinkable
     to a Space Admiral of the old
      school. But the trouble was,
        the school system had changed.
       A man, a fighter, an Admiral
     had to think for himself now, if
          his people were to live._


While facing the Council of Four his restraint had not slipped; but
afterward, shaking with fury, the Admiral of the Fleets of Sennech
slammed halfway down the long flight of stone steps before he realized
someone was at his elbow. He slowed. "Forgive me, Jezef. They made me so
mad I forgot you were waiting."

Jezef (adjutant through most of Tulan's career, and for some years
brother-in-law as well) was shorter and less harshly carved than his
superior. "So they wouldn't listen to you. Not even Grefen?"

"Even Grefen." That vote had stabbed deepest of all.

Jezef took it with the detachment that still irritated Tulan. "The end
of a hundred years of dreams; and we go back under the yoke. Well,
they've always been soft masters."

They reached the ground cars. Before getting into his own Tulan said
coldly, "Since you're so philosophical about it, you'll be a good one to
bear the sight of men saying good-bye to their families. We're to take
full crews to Coar and surrender them with the ships. Requisition what
help you need and get everybody aboard by noon tomorrow."

Jezef saluted with a hint of amused irony, and left.

       *       *       *       *       *

Whipping through the dark icy streets, Tulan smiled sourly, thinking how
Sennech's scientists had reversed themselves on the theory of hyperspace
now that Coar had demonstrated its existence. Maybe the Council was
right in mistrusting their current notions. As for himself, he saw only
two things to consider: that with Coar swinging behind the sun, the
accuracy of her new weapon had gone to pot; and that before she was
clear again he could pound her into surrender.

His swift campaigns had already smashed her flabby fleets and driven the
remnants from space, but the Council, faced with the destruction and
casualties from just a few days of the weird surprise bombardment, was
cowed.

He'd spent the previous night at home, but wasn't going back now, having
decided to make his farewell by visiphone. It was the thing he dreaded
most, or most immediately, so as soon as he reached the flagship he went
to his quarters to get it over with.

Anatu's eyes--the same eyes as Jezef's--looked at him out of the screen,
filling him with the familiar awkward worship. "You've heard?" he asked
finally.

"Yes. You won't be home before you go?"

"No; I ..." He abandoned the lie he'd prepared. "I just didn't feel up
to it."

She accepted that. "I'll wake the boys."

"No! It's--" Something happened to his throat.

She watched him for a moment. "You won't be back from Coar. You've _got_
to speak to them."

He nodded. This wasn't going according to plan; he'd intended it to be
brief and controlled. Damn it, he told himself, I'm Admiral of the
Fleets; I've no right to feelings like this. He straightened, and knew
he looked right when the two sleepy stares occupied the screen.

Their hair was stiff and stubborn like his own, so that they wore it
cropped in the same military cut. It could have stood a brush right now.
They were quiet, knowing enough of what was wrong to be frightened.

He spoke carefully. "I'm going to Coar to talk to them about stopping
the war. I want you to look after things while I'm away. All right?"

"All right, Dad." The older one was putting on a brave front for the
benefit of the younger and his mother, but the tears showed.

As Tulan cut the connection he saw that Anatu's eyes were moist too, and
realized with surprise that he'd never before, in all the years, seen
her cry. He watched the last faint images fade from the screen.
