The Project Gutenberg EBook of Empire, by Clifford Donald Simak

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Empire

Author: Clifford Donald Simak

Release Date: February 28, 2009 [EBook #28215]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EMPIRE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                 EMPIRE

 A Powerful Novel of Intrigue and Action
      in the Not-So-Distant Future

                  _by_

            CLIFFORD D. SIMAK


  _A Complete ORIGINAL Book_, UNABRIDGED


          WORLD EDITIONS, INC.
          105 WEST 40TH STREET
          NEW YORK 18, NEW YORK




   _Copyright 1951_
         _by_
  WORLD EDITIONS, INC.


 PRINTED IN THE U.S.A.




Transcriber's Note:

    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.




_CHAPTER ONE_


Spencer Chambers frowned at the spacegram on the desk before him. John
Moore Mallory. That was the man who had caused so much trouble in the
Jovian elections. The troublemaker who had shouted for an investigation
of Interplanetary Power. The man who had said that Spencer Chambers and
Interplanetary Power were waging economic war against the people of the
Solar System.

Chambers smiled. With long, well-kept fingers, he rubbed his iron-gray
mustache.

John Moore Mallory was right; for that reason, he was a dangerous man.
Prison was the place for him, but probably a prison outside the Jovian
confederacy. Perhaps one of the prison ships that plied to the edge of
the System, clear to the orbit of Pluto. Or would the prison on Mercury
be better?

Spencer Chambers leaned back in his chair and matched his fingertips,
staring at them, frowning again.

Mercury was a hard place. A man's life wasn't worth much there. Working
in the power plants, where the Sun poured out its flaming blast of heat,
and radiations sucked the energy from one's body, in six months, a year
at most, any man was finished.

Chambers shook his head. Not Mercury. He had nothing against Mallory. He
had never met the man but he rather liked him. Mallory was just a man
fighting for a principle, the same as Chambers was doing.

He was sorry that it had been necessary to put Mallory in prison. If the
man only had listened to reason, had accepted the proposals that had
been made, or just had dropped out of sight until the Jovian elections
were over ... or at least had moderated his charges. But when he had
attempted to reveal the offers, which he termed bribery, something had
to be done.

Ludwig Stutsman had handled that part of it. Brilliant fellow, this
Stutsman, but as mean a human as ever walked on two legs. A man utterly
without mercy, entirely without principle. A man who would stoop to any
depth. But a useful man, a good one to have around to do the dirty work.
And dirty work sometimes was necessary.

Chambers picked up the spacegram again and studied it. Stutsman, out on
Callisto now, had sent it. He was doing a good job out there. The Jovian
confederacy, less than one Earth year under Interplanetary domination,
was still half rebellious, still angry at being forced to turn over its
government to the hand-picked officials of Chambers' company. An iron
heel was needed and Stutsman was that iron heel.

       *       *       *       *       *

So the people on the Jovian satellites wanted the release of John Moore
Mallory. "They're getting ugly," the spacegram said. It had been a
mistake to confine Mallory to Callisto. Stutsman should have thought of
that.

Chambers would instruct Stutsman to remove Mallory from the Callisto
prison, place him on one of the prison ships. Give instructions to the
captain to make things comfortable for him. When this furor had blown
over, after things had quieted down in the Jovian confederacy, it might
be possible to release Mallory. After all, the man wasn't really guilty
of any crime. It was a shame that he should be imprisoned when
racketeering rats like Scorio went scot-free right here in New York.

A buzzer purred softly and Chambers reached out to press a stud.

"Dr. Craven to see you," his secretary said. "You asked to see him, Mr.
Chambers."

"All right," said Chambers. "Send him right in."

He clicked the stud again, picked up his pen, wrote out a spacegram to
Stutsman, and signed it.

Dr. Herbert Craven stood just inside the door, his black suit wrinkled
and untidy, his sparse sandy hair standing on end.

"You sent for me," he said sourly.

"Sit down, Doctor," invited Chambers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Craven sat down. He peered at Chambers through thick-lensed glasses.

"I haven't much time," he declared acidly.

"Cigar?" Chambers offered.

"Never smoke."

"A drink, then?"

"You know I don't drink," snapped Craven.

"Doctor," said Chambers, "you're the least sociable man I've ever known.
What do you do to enjoy yourself?"

"I work," said Craven. "I find it interesting."

"You must. You even begrudge the time it takes to talk with me."

"I won't deny it. What do you want this time?"

Chambers swung about to face him squarely across the desk. There was a
cold look in the financier's gray eyes and his lips were grim.

"Craven," he said, "I don't trust you. I've never trusted you. Probably
that's no news to you."

"You don't trust anyone," countered Craven. "You're watching everybody
all the time."

"You sold me a gadget I didn't need five years ago," said Chambers. "You
outfoxed me and I don't hold it against you. In fact, it almost made me
admire you. Because of that I put you under a contract, one that you and
all the lawyers in hell can't break, because someday you'll find
something valuable, and when you do, I want it. A million a year is a
high price to pay to protect myself against you, but I think it's worth
it. If I didn't think so, I'd have turned you over to Stutsman long ago.
Stutsman knows how to handle men like you."

"You mean," said Craven, "that you've found I'm working on something I
haven't reported to you."

"That's exactly it."

"You'll get a report when I have something to report. Not before."

"That's all right," said Chambers. "I just wanted you to know."

Craven got to his feet slowly. "These talks with you are so refreshing,"
he remarked.

"We'll have to have them oftener," said Chambers.

Craven banged the door as he went out.

Chambers stared after him. A queer man, the most astute scientific mind
anywhere, but not a man to be trusted.

       *       *       *       *       *

The president of Interplanetary Power rose from his chair and walked to
the window. Below spread the roaring inferno of New York, greatest city
in the Solar System, a strange place of queer beauty and weighty
materialism, dreamlike in its super-skyscraper construction, but
utilitarian in its purpose, for it was a port of many planets.

The afternoon sunlight slanted through the window, softening the
iron-gray hair of the man who stood there. His shoulders almost blocked
the window, for he had the body of a fighting man, one, moreover, in
good condition. His short-clipped mustache rode with an air of dignity
above his thin, rugged mouth.

His eyes looked out on the city, but did not see it. Through his brain
went the vision of a dream that was coming true. His dream spun its
fragile net about the planets of the Solar System, about their moons,
about every single foot of planetary ground where men had gone to build
and create a second homeland--the mines of Mercury and the farms of
Venus, the pleasure-lands of Mars and the mighty domed cities on the
moons of Jupiter, the moons of Saturn and the great, cold laboratories
of Pluto.

Power was the key, supplied by the accumulators owned and rented by
Interplanetary Power. A monopoly of power. Power that Venus and Mercury
had too much of, must sell on the market, and that the other planets and
satellites needed. Power to drive huge spaceships across the void, to
turn the wheels of industry, to heat the domes on colder worlds. Power
to make possible the life and functioning of mankind on hostile worlds.

In the great power plants of Mercury and Venus, the accumulators were
charged and then shipped out to those other worlds where power was
needed. Accumulators were rented, never sold. Because they belonged at
all times to Interplanetary Power, they literally held the fate of all
the planets in their cells.

A few accumulators were manufactured and sold by other smaller
companies, but they were few and the price was high. Interplanetary saw
to that. When the cry of monopoly was raised, Interplanetary could point
to these other manufacturers as proof that there was no restraint of
trade. Under the statute no monopoly could be charged, but the cost of
manufacturing accumulators alone was protection against serious
competition from anyone.

Upon a satisfactory, efficient power-storage device rested the success
or failure of space travel itself. That device and the power it stored
were for sale by Interplanetary ... and, to all practical purposes, by
Interplanetary only.

Accordingly, year after year, Interplanetary had tightened its grip upon
the Solar System. Mercury was virtually owned by the company. Mars and
Venus were little more than puppet states. And now the government of the
Jovian confederacy was in the hands of men who acknowledged Spencer
Chambers as their master. On Earth the agents and the lobbyists
representing Interplanetary swarmed in every capital, even in the
capital of the Central European Federation, whose people were dominated
by an absolute dictatorship. For even Central Europe needed
accumulators.

"Economic dictatorship," said Spencer Chambers to himself. "That's what
John Moore Mallory called it." Well, why not? Such a dictatorship would
insure the best business brains at the heads of the governments, would
give the Solar System a business administration, would guard against the
mistakes of popular government.

Democracies were based on a false presumption--the theory that all
people were fit to rule. It granted intelligence where there was no
intelligence. It presumed ability where there was not the slightest
trace of any. It gave the idiot the same political standing as the wise
man, the crackpot the same political opportunity as the man of
well-grounded common sense, the weakling the same voice as the strong
man. It was government by emotion rather than by judgment.

       *       *       *       *       *

Spencer Chambers' face took on stern lines. There was no softness left
now. The late afternoon sunlight painted angles and threw shadows and
created highlights that made him look almost like a granite mask on a
solid granite body.

There was no room for Mallory's nonsense in a dynamic, expanding
civilization. No reason to kill him--even he might have value under
certain circumstances, and no really efficient executive destroys
value--but he had to be out of the way where his mob-rousing tongue
could do no damage. The damned fool! What good would his idiotic
idealism do him on a prison spaceship?




_CHAPTER TWO_


Russell Page squinted thoughtful eyes at the thing he had created--a
transparent cloud, a visible, sharply outlined cloud of _something_. It
was visible as a piece of glass is visible, as a globe of water is
visible. There it lay, within his apparatus, a thing that shouldn't be.

"I believe we have something there, Harry," he said slowly.

Harry Wilson sucked at the cigarette that drooped from the corner of his
mouth, blew twin streams of smoke from his nostrils. His eyes twitched
nervously.

"Yeah," he said. "Anti-entropy."

"All of that," said Russell Page. "Perhaps a whole lot more."

"It stops all energy change," said Wilson, "as if time stood still and
things remained exactly as they were when time had stopped."

"It's more than that," Page declared. "It conserves not only energy _in
toto_, not only the energy of the whole, but the energy of the part. It
is perfectly transparent, yet it has refractive qualities. It won't
absorb light because to do so would change its energy content. In that
field, whatever is hot stays hot, whatever is cold can't gain heat."

He scraped his hand over a week's growth of beard, considering. From his
pocket he took a pipe and a leather pouch. Thoughtfully he filled the
pipe and lit it.

It had started with his experiments in Force Field 348, an experiment to
observe the effects of heating a conductor in that field. It had been
impossible to heat the conductor electrically, for that would have upset
the field, changed it, twisted it into something else. So he had used a
Bunsen burner.

Through half-closed eyes, he still could see that slender strand of
imperm wire, how its silvery length had turned to red under the blue
flame. Deep red at first and then brighter until it flamed in almost
white-hot incandescence. And all the while the humming of the
transformer as the force field built up. The humming of the transformer
and the muted roaring of the burner and the glowing heat in the length
of wire.

Something had happened then ... an awesome something. A weird wrench as
if some greater power, some greater law had taken hold. A glove of
force, invisible, but somehow sensed, had closed about the wire and
flame. Instantly the roaring of the burner changed in tone; an odor of
gas spewed out of the vents at its base. Something had cut off the flow
of flame in the brass tube. Some force, _something_ ...

The flame was a transparent cloud. The blue and red of flame and hot
wire had changed, in the whiplash of a second, to a refractive but
transparent cloud that hung there within the apparatus.

       *       *       *       *       *

The red color had vanished from the wire as the blue had vanished from
the flame. The wire was shining. It wasn't silvery; it wasn't white.
There was no hint of color, just a refractive blur that told him the
wire was there. Colorless reflection. _And that meant perfect
reflection!_ The most perfect reflectors reflect little more than 98 per
