The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Weakling, by Everett B. Cole

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Weakling

Author: Everett B. Cole

Illustrator: van Dongen

Release Date: April 3, 2009 [EBook #28486]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WEAKLING ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, David Wilson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









THE WEAKLING

By EVERETT B. COLE


    _A strong man can, of course, be dangerous, but he doesn't
    approach the vicious deadliness of a weakling--with a weapon!_


Illustrated by van Dongen




[Illustration]


[Illustration]


Naran Makun looked across the table at the caravan master.

"And you couldn't find a trace of him?"

"Nothing. Not even a scrap of his cargo or so much as the bones of a
long-neck. He just dropped out of sight of his whole train. He went
through this big estate, you see. Then he cut back to pick up some of
his stops on the northern swing. Well, that was all. He didn't get to
the first one." The other waved a hand.

"Weird situation, too. Oh, the null was swirling, we know that, and he
could have been caught in an arm. It happens, but it isn't too often
that an experienced man like your brother gets in so deep he can't get
out somehow--or at least leave some trace of what happened." The man
picked up his cup, eying it thoughtfully.

"Oh, we've all had close ones, sure. We've all lost a long-neck or so,
now and then. Whenever the null swirls, it can cover big territory in a
big hurry and most of that northern swing is null area at one time or
another. One of those arms can overrun a train at night and if a man
loses his head, he's in big trouble." He sipped from his cup.

"Young caravan master got caught that way, just a while back. A friend
of mine, Dr. Zalbon, was running the swing after the null retracted. He
found what was left."

"Told me he ran into a herd of carnivores. Fifteen or twenty real big
fellows. Jaws as long as a man. He killed them off and then found they'd
been feeding on what was left of Dar Konil's train."

He shook his head. "It's not a nice area."

"Hold everything." Naran leaned forward. "You said my brother went
through this big estate. Anyone see him come out?"

Dar Girdek smiled. "Oh, sure. The Master of the Estates, Kio Barra,
himself. He saw him to the border and watched him go on his way."

Naran looked doubtful. "And what kind of a character is this Barra?"

"Oh, him!" Dar Girdek waved a hand. "Nothing there. In the first place,
he holds one of the biggest estates in the mountain area. So what would
he want to rob a freight caravan for?" He laughed.

"In the second place, the guy's practically harmless. Oh, sure, he's got
a title. He's Lord of the Mountain Lake. And he wears a lot of psionic
crystalware. But he's got about enough punch to knock over some
varmint--if it's not too tough. Dar Makun might be your weak brother,
but he'd have eaten that guy for breakfast if he'd tried to be rough."

"Psionic weakling, you mean? But how does he manage to be a master
Protector of an Estate?"

Dar Girdek smiled wryly. "Father died. Brother sneaked off somewhere.
That left him. Title's too clear for anyone to try any funny business."

"I see." Naran leaned back. "Now, what about this null?"

"Well, of course you know about the time the pseudomen from the Fifth
managed to sneak in and lay a mess of their destructors on Carnol?"

"I might. I was one of the guys that saw to it they didn't get back to
celebrate." Naran closed his eyes for an instant.

"Yeah. Way I heard it, you were the guy that wrapped 'em up. Too bad
they didn't get you on the job sooner. Maybe we wouldn't have this mess
on our hands now." Dar Girdek shrugged.

"Anyway, they vaporized the city and a lot of area around it. That was
bad, but the aftereffect is worse. We've got scholars beating their
brains cells together, but all they can tell us is that there's a big
area up there just as psionically dead as an experimental chamber." He
grinned.

"I could tell 'em that much myself. It's a sort of cloud. Goes
turbulent, shoots out arms, then folds in again.

"We'd by-pass the whole thing, but it's right on the main trade route.
Only way around it is plenty of days out of the path, clear down around
the middle sea and into the lake region. Then you have to go all the way
back anyway, if you plan to do any mid-continent trading. And you still
take a chance of getting caught in a swirl arm."

Naran tilted his head. "So? Suppose you do get into a swirl? All you
need to do is wait." He smiled.

"You know. Just sort of ignore it. It'll go away."

"Uh huh. Sounds easy enough. It's about what we do when we have to. But
there are things living there. They can be hard to ignore."

"You mean the carnivores?"

"That's right. If you meet one of those fellow out in normal territory,
he's no trouble at all. You hit him with a distorter and he flops. Then
you figure out whether to reduce him to slime or leave the carcass for
his friends and relations." He smiled.

"From what your brother said, you wouldn't need the distorter."

Naran smiled deprecatingly. "That's one of the things they pay me for,"
he remarked. "We run into some pretty nasty beasties at sea."

"Yeah. I've heard. Big, rough fellows. Our varmints are smaller. But
what would you do if you ran into twenty tons or so of pure murder, and
you with no more psionic power than some pseudoman?"

Naran looked at him thoughtfully. "I hadn't thought of that," he
admitted. "I might not like it. Jaws as longs as a man, you said?"

The other nodded. "Longer, sometimes. And teeth as long as your hand.
One snap and there's nothing left.

"When they kill a long-neck, they have a good meal and walk away from
whatever's left. But people are something else. They just can't get
enough and they don't leave any crumbs." He waved a hand.

"There've been several trains caught by those things. A swirl arm comes
over at night, you see, and the caravan master loses his head. He can't
think of anything but getting out. Oh, he can yell at his drivers.
They've got a language, and we all know it. That's easy. But did you
ever try to get a long-neck going without psionic control?"

"I see what you mean. It could be a little rough."

"Yeah. It could be. Anyway, about this time, everybody's yelling at
everybody else. The long-necks are squealing and bellowing. Drivers are
jerking on reins. And a herd of carnivores hears the commotion. So, they
drop around to see the fun. See what I mean?"

Naran nodded and Dar Girdek went on.

"Well, that's about it. Once in a great while, some guy manages to get
into a cave and hide out till the null swings away and another caravan
comes along. But usually, no one sees anything but a little of the cargo
and some remains of long-necks. No one's ever come up with any part of
man or pseudoman. As I said, one snap and there's nothing left."

Naran smiled wryly. "Tough to be popular, I guess." He leaned forward.

"But you've been over the trail several times since he disappeared. And
you said you've seen nothing. No trace of the train. That right?"

The other shook his head. "Not even a cargo sling."

"You're making up a train now, aren't you? I'd like to go along on this
next trip. Fact is, I've been thinking some nasty thoughts. And I'm
going to be uneasy till I find out whether I'm right or not."

Dar Girdek rubbed his chin. "Want to buy in, maybe?"

"No, I don't think so. I'll work my way--as your lead driver."

"Oh, no!" Dar Girdek laughed. "You don't put a psionic on some
long-neck. Lead driver's pseudoman, just like the rest." He sobered.

"Oh, sure. You could handle the drivers, but it just isn't done."

Naran smiled. "Oh, as far as the other drivers'll know, I'm just another
pseudoman. I've been a ship's non-psi agent, remember? We earn our keep
by dealing with the people in non-psi areas."

"It won't work." The caravan master shook his head. "These drivers can
get pretty rough with each other. You'd have to set two or three of them
back on their heels the first day. It would be either that, or get a lot
of bruises and end up as camp flunky."

"Could be," Naran told him. "Tell you what. You turn me loose in an
experimental chamber so I can't fudge. Then send your toughest driver in
and tell him to kick me out of there. I'll show him some tricks I
learned from the non-psi's overseas and he'll be a smarter man when he
wakes up."

       *       *       *       *       *

Leuwan, Kio Barra, Lord of the Mountain Lake, Master of the Estates Kira
Barra, and Protector of the Common Good, stood examining the assortment
of crystals in a cabinet. He hesitated over a large, brilliantly
gleaming sphere of crystallized carbon, then shook his head. That one
would be pretty heavy going, he was sure. The high intensity summary
said something about problems of the modern world, so it could be
expected to be another of those dull reports on the welfare of the
Commonwealth.

Why, he wondered, did some projection maker waste good time and effort
by making up things like that? And why did they waste more time and
effort by sending them around? When a man wanted to relax, he wanted
something to relax with. What he was looking for was something light.

He turned his attention to other crystals, at last selecting a small,
blue prism. He held it up, regarding it, then nodded and placed it on
the slender black pedestal near his chair, where he could observe
without undue effort.

He turned, examining each corner of his empty study, then took his
sapphire-tipped golden staff from under his arm, placing it carefully on
a rack built into his chair arm, where it would be convenient to his
hand should the need arise.

One could never be too careful, he thought. Of course, he could deal
with any recalcitrant slave by other means, but the distorter was
convenient and could be depended upon to give any degree of pressure
desired. And it was a lot less trouble to use than to concentrate on
