The Project Gutenberg EBook of Devil Crystals of Arret, by Hal K. Wells

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Devil Crystals of Arret

Author: Hal K. Wells

Release Date: April 28, 2009 [EBook #28628]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEVIL CRYSTALS OF ARRET ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Barbara Tozier and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





    This etext was produced from Astounding Stories September 1931.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.




[Illustration: The tip sprayed a web around his body.]




Devil Crystals of Arret

_By Hal K. Wells_

    Facing a six-hour deadline of death, young Larry raids a
    hostile world of rat-men and tinkling Devil Crystals.


Benjamin Marlowe and his young assistant, Larry Powell, opened the
door of the Marlowe laboratory, then stopped aghast at the sight
which greeted their startled eyes.

There on the central floor-plate directly in the focus of the big
atomic projector stood the slender figure of Joan Marlowe, old
Benjamin Marlowe's niece and Larry Powell's fiancee.

The girl had apparently only been awaiting their return to the
laboratory for around her gray laboratory smock was already fastened
one of their Silver Belts, and a cord was already in place running
from her wrist to the main switch of the projection mechanism.

Joan's clear blue eyes sparkled with the thrill of high adventure as
she swiftly raised a slender hand in a gesture of warning to the two
men.

"Don't try to stop me," she warned quietly. "I can jerk the switch
and be in Arret, before you've taken two steps. I'm going to Arret,
anyway. I was only waiting for you to return to the laboratory so
I'd be sure of having you here to bring me back to Earth again
before I have time to get into any serious trouble over there."

"But, Joan," Benjamin Marlowe protested, "this is sheer madness! No
one can possibly guess what terrible conditions you may confront in
Arret. We've never dared to send a human being across the atomic
barrier yet!"

"We've sent all kinds of animals across, though," Joan retorted
calmly, "and as long as we recalled them within the twelve-hour
limit they always came back alive and unhurt. There's no reason why
a human being should not be able to make the round trip just as
safely. Ever since our Silver Belts first came back with the weird
plant and mineral fragments which proved that there really is such a
place as Arret, I've been wild to see with my own eyes the
incredible things that must exist there."

Joan waved her hand in gay farewell. "Good-by, Uncle Ben and Larry!
I know that you'll drag me back just as quickly as you can possibly
dash over to the recall switch, but I'll at least have had a few
precious seconds of sightseeing as Earth's first human visitor to
Arret!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Larry Powell was already sprinting for the mechanism as Joan jerked
the cord that ran to the switch, but he was barely half-way across
the intervening space when the big atomic projector flared forth in
a brilliant gush of roseate flame.

For a fraction of a second Joan's slender figure was outlined in the
very heart of the ruddy glow, then vanished completely. There was
left only a short length of the switch cord to indicate that the
girl had ever stood there.

Powell reached the mechanism and shut off the projector's flame,
then turned swiftly to the control-panel of the recall mechanism. As
he closed the switch on this panel, three banks of tubes set in
triangular form around the floor-plate upon which Joan had stood
glowed a brilliant and blinding green.

Shielding his eyes from the glare with an upraised forearm, Powell
began stepping a rheostat up to more and more power. In his anxiety,
he increased the power far too quickly. There was a sudden gush of
blue-white flame from the heart of the mechanism, together with the
hissing crackle of fusing metal. The green light in the tubes
promptly died.

Benjamin Marlowe was bending over the apparatus almost instantly. A
moment later he raised a face that had suddenly gone white. There
was terror in his eyes as he turned to his assistant.

"The entire second series of coils is burned out, Larry!" he gasped
in consternation. "Joan is marooned over there in Arret--marooned in
that grim unknown land as completely beyond our reach as though she
were upon one of the moons of Mars!"

For a long moment the two men gazed at each other with
horror-stricken faces, dazed and shaken. Then they quickly drew
themselves together again and set about the herculean task of making
the necessary repairs to the damaged mechanism in time to rescue
Joan before the twelve-hour limit should doom the girl to forever
remain an exile in that land of alien mystery beyond the atomic
barrier.

       *       *       *       *       *

Their previous experiments with animals had proved that no living
creature from Earth could be brought back after it had been in Arret
over twelve hours. After that time the change in the atoms
constituting living tissues apparently became permanently Arretian,
for the Silver Belts returned without any trace of their original
wearers.

The necessary repairs to the damaged coils were of such an exacting
and intricate nature that any great speed was impossible. Hours
passed while the two men bent to their work with grim concentration.
Neither of them dared think too much of what nameless dangers might
be confronting Joan during those weary hours. Their actual knowledge
of Arret was so pitiably slight.
