The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Dome on Mercury, by Arthur Leo Zagat

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Great Dome on Mercury

Author: Arthur Leo Zagat

Release Date: June 21, 2009 [EBook #29190]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT DOME ON MERCURY ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

     This etext was produced from Astounding Stories April 1932.
     Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
     U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.


     [Illustration: "_Once more! Will you give me the recognition
                      signal?"_]



                      The Great Dome on Mercury

                          By Arthur L. Zagat

       *       *       *       *       *




[Sidenote: Trapped in the great dome, Darl valiantly defends Earth's
outpost against the bird-man of Mars and his horde of pigmy henchmen.]


Darl Thomas mopped the streams of perspiration from his bronzed face
and lean-flanked, wiry body, nude save for clinging shorts and fiber
sandals. "By the whirling rings of Saturn," he growled as he gazed
disconsolately at his paper-strewn desk. "I'd like to have those
directors of ITA here on Mercury for just one Earth-month. I'll bet
they wouldn't be so particular about their quarterly reports after
they'd sweated a half-ton or so of fat off their greasy bellies.
'Fuel consumption per man-hour.': Now what in blazes does that mean?
Hey, Jim!" He swiveled his chair around to the serried bank of
gauge-dials that was Jim Holcomb's especial charge, then sprang to his
feet with a startled, "What's the matter?"

The chunky, red-haired control-man was tugging at a lever, his muscles
bulging on arms and back, his face white-drawn and tense. "Look!" he
grunted, and jerked a grim jaw at one of the dials. The long needle
was moving rapidly to the right. "I can't hold the air pressure!"

"Wow, what a leak!" Darl started forward. "How's it below, in the
mine?"

"Normal. It's the Dome air that's going!"

"Shoot on the smoke and I'll spot the hole. Quick, man!"

"Okay!"

Thomas' long legs shot him out of the headquarters tent. Just beyond
the entrance flap was one of the two gyrocopters used for flying
within the Dome. He leaped into the cockpit and drove home the
starter-piston. The flier buzzed straight up, shooting for the misted
roof.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Earthman fought to steady his craft against the hurricane wind,
while his gray eyes swept the three-mile circle of the vault's base.
He paled as he noted the fierce speed with which the white smoke-jets
were being torn from the pipe provided for just such emergencies. His
glance followed the terrific rush of the vapor. Big as a man's head, a
hole glared high up on the Dome's inner surface. Feathered wisps of
tell-tale vapor whisked through it at blurring speed.

"God, but the air's going fast," Darl groaned. The accident he had
feared through all the months he had captained Earth's outpost on
Mercury had come at last. The Dome's shell was pierced! A half-mile
high, a mile across its circling base, the great inverted bowl was all
that made it possible for man to defy the white hell of Mercury's
surface. Outside was an airless vacuum, a waste quivering under the
heat of a sun thrice the size it appears from Earth. The silvered
exterior of the hemisphere shot back the terrific blaze; its
quartz-covered network of latticed steel inclosed the air that all
beings need to sustain life.

Darl tugged desperately at the control-stick, thrust the throttle over
full measure. A little more of this swift outrush and the precious air
would be gone. He caught a glimpse of the Dome floor beneath him and
the shaft-door that gave entrance to the mine below. Down there, in
underground tunnels whose steel-armored end-walls continued the Dome's
protection below the surface, a horde of friendly Venusians were
laboring. If the leak were not stopped in a few minutes that shaft
door would blow in, and the mine air would whisk through the hole in
its turn. Only the Dome would remain, a vast, rounded sepulcher,
hiding beneath its curve the dead bodies of three Earthmen and the
silent forms of their Venusian charges.

       *       *       *       *       *

Darl's great chest labored as he strove to reach the danger spot.
Invisible fingers seemed to be clamped about his throat. His eyes
blurred. The gyrocopter was sluggish, dipped alarmingly when it should
have darted, arrow-like, to its mark. With clenched teeth, the
Terrestrian forced the whirling lifting vanes to the limit of their
power. They bit into the fast thinning air with a muffled whine,
raised the ship by feet that should have been yards.

By sheer will he forced his oxygen-starved faculties to function, and
realized that he had reached the wall. He was drifting downward, the
hole draining the Dome's air was five feet above him, beyond his
reach. The driven vanes were powerless to stem the craft's fall.

One wing-tip scraped interlaced steel, a horizontal girder, part of
the vault's mighty skeleton. Darl crawled along the wing, dragging
with him a sheet of flexible quartzite. The metal foil sagged under
him and slanted downward, trying like some animate thing to rid itself
of the unwonted burden. He clutched the beam, hung by one leg and one
