Project Gutenberg's Priestess of the Flame, by Sewell Peaslee Wright

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Priestess of the Flame

Author: Sewell Peaslee Wright

Release Date: July 2, 2009 [EBook #29293]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRIESTESS OF THE FLAME ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net








                         Transcriber's Note:

      This etext was produced from Astounding Stories June 1932.
      Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
      U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.


[Illustration: "_Be still! The power of Liane is absolute here!_"]


                        Priestess of the Flame

                       By Sewell Peaslee Wright

       *       *       *       *       *




[Sidenote: Commander John Hanson recounts the extraordinary story of
Liane, Priestess of the Flame.]


I have been rather amused by the protests which have come to me
regarding the "disparaging" comments I have made, in previous tales of
the Special Patrol Service, regarding women. The rather surprising
thing about it is that the larger proportion of these have come from
men. Young men, of course.

Now, as a matter of fact, a careful search has failed to reveal to me
any very uncomplimentary remarks. I have suggested, I believe, that
women have, in my experience, shown a sad lack of ability to
understand mechanical contrivances. Perhaps I have pictured some few
of them as frivolous and shallow. If I have been unfair, I wish now to
make humble apology.

I am not, as some of my correspondents have indicated, a bitter old
man, who cannot remember his youth. I remember it very well indeed,
else these tales would not be forthcoming. And women have their great
and proper place, even in a man's universe.

Some day, perhaps, the mood will seize me to write of my own love
affair. That surprises you? You smile to think that old John Hanson,
lately a commander of the Special Patrol Service, now retired, should
have had a love affair? Well, 'twas many years ago, before these eyes
lost their fire, and before these brown, skinny hands wearied as
quickly as they weary now....

But I have known many women--good women and bad; great women and women
of small souls; kindly women, and women fierce as wild bears are
fierce. Divinity has dealt lavishly with women; has given them an
emotional range far greater than man's. They can sink to depths
unknown to masculinity; they can rise to heights of love and sacrifice
before which man can only stand with reverently bowed head and marvel.

This is a story of a woman--one of those no man could know and not
remember. I make no apologies for her; I pay her no homage. I record
only a not inaccurate account of an adventure of my youth, in which
she played a part; I leave to you the task of judging her.

       *       *       *       *       *

We were some three days out from Base, as I recall it, on a mission
which promised a welcome interlude in a monotonous sequence of routine
patrols. I was commander then of the _Ertak_, one of the crack ships
of the Service, and assisted by the finest group of officers, I
believe, that any man ever had under him.

I was standing a watch in the navigating room with Hendricks, my
junior officer, when Correy brought us the amazing news.

Correy was my first officer, a square-jawed fighting man if one ever
breathed, a man of action, such as these effete times do not produce.
His eyes were fairly blazing as he came into the room, and his
generous mouth was narrowed into a grim line.

"What's up, Mr. Correy?" I asked apprehensively. "Trouble aboard?"

"Plenty of it, sir!" he snapped. "A stowaway!"

"A stowaway?" I repeated wonderingly. A new experience, but hardly
cause for Correy's obvious anger. "Well, send him below, and tell Miro
to put him to work--the hardest work he can find. We'll make him--"

"_Him?_" blurted Correy. "If it were a him it wouldn't be so bad, sir.
But it's a _she_!"

       *       *       *       *       *

To understand the full effect of the statement, you'd have to be
steeped in the traditions of the Service. Women are seldom permitted
on board a ship of the Service; despite their many admirable
qualities, women play the very devil with discipline. And here were
we, three days out from Base on a tour of duty which promised more
than a little excitement, with a female stowaway on board!

I felt my own mouth set grimly.

"Where is she, Mr. Correy?" I asked quietly.

"In my quarters, under guard. It was my watch below, as you know, sir.
I entered my stateroom, figuring on catching forty winks, and there
she was, seated in my big chair, smiling at me.

"Well, for a second I couldn't speak. I just stared at her, and she
kept smiling back at me. 'What are you doing here?' I managed to ask
her, at last. 'Do you know where you are?'

"'I'll talk to your commanding officer,' she told me, cool as you
please. 'Will you bring him, please?'

"'You'll see him plenty soon enough,' I snapped at her, getting over
my surprise somewhat by that time. I called in a couple of men to keep
her from getting into mischief, and reported to you. What are your
orders, sir?"

I hesitated a second, wondering. From Correy's account, she must be a
rather remarkable person.

"Bring her up here, if you will, Mr. Correy. I'd like to see her
before we put her in the brig." The brig, I might explain, was a small
room well forward, where members of the crew were confined for
discipline.

"Right, sir!" It seemed to me that there was a peculiar twinkle in
Correy's eyes as he went out, and I wondered about it while we waited
for him to return with the prisoner.

"What an infernal nuisance, sir!" complained Hendricks, looking up
from his glowing charts. "We'll be the laughing-stock of the Service
if this leaks out!"

"_When_ it leaks out," I corrected him glumly. I'd already thought of
the unpleasant outcome he mentioned. "I'll have to report it, of
course, and the whole Service will know about it. We'll just have to
grin and make the most of it, I guess." There was still another
possibility which I didn't mention: the silver-sleeves at Base would
very likely call me on the carpet for permitting such a thing to
happen. A commander was supposed to be responsible for everything that
happened; no excuses available in the Service as it was in those days.

       *       *       *       *       *

I scowled forbiddingly as I heard Correy open the door; at least I
could make her very sorry she had selected the _Ertak_ for her
adventure. I am afraid, however, that it was a startled, rather than a
scowling face to which she lifted her eyes.

"This is the stowaway, sir," said Correy briskly, closing the door. He
was watching my face, and I saw, now, the reason for the twinkle in
his eye when I mentioned placing the stowaway in the brig.

The woman was startlingly beautiful; one of the most beautiful women I
have ever seen, and I have roamed the outer limits of space, and seen
the women of many worlds. Hendricks, standing behind me, gasped
audibly as his eyes fell upon her.

The stowaway was regally tall and exquisitely modeled. Her hair was
the color of pale morning sunlight on Earth; her eyes an amazing blue,
the equal of which I have never seen.
