The Project Gutenberg EBook of Be It Ever Thus, by Robert Moore Williams

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Be It Ever Thus

Author: Robert Moore Williams

Release Date: June 25, 2009 [EBook #29240]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BE IT EVER THUS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _Men have fought and died for life and liberty since the beginning
    of time, and they will continue the fight until time finally comes
    to an end. Here is a thoroughly readable story about just such a
    situation--a story which could well be a forecast of the chilling
    future of your children and ours._


   be
   it
 ever
 thus

 _by ... Robert Moore Williams_


 The planet's natives were so similar to their conquerors that no
 one could tell them apart--except for their difference in thinking.


This was Graduation Day. The senior class from the Star Institute of
Advanced Science was scheduled to go through the Museum of the Conquered
and observe the remnants of the race that had once ruled this planet.
There were many such museums maintained for the purpose of allowing the
people to see the greatness their ancestors had displayed in conquering
this world and also to demonstrate how thorough and how complete that
conquest had been. Perhaps the museums had other reasons for existing,
but the authorities did not reveal these reasons. Visiting such a museum
was part of the exercises of every graduating class.

Billy Kasker arrived early, to take care of all last minute problems for
Mr. Phipper, the instructor who would take the group through the museum,
and to make certain that all of the members of the graduating class knew
what they were supposed to do on the trip. Billy Kasker was class
president. A handsome, husky youth, accommodating, generous, and
thoughtful to a fault. He was well liked both by the faculty and the
students. He was pleasant to everybody, even to Joe Buckner, who called
him "teacher's pet" and sneeringly remarked that he had been elected
class president as a result of a superb job of boot-licking.

Even such remarks as these had not disturbed Bill Kasker. He still acted
as if Joe Buckner was his best friend.

"Are we all here, Billy?" the instructor called.

"All here, sir," Billy Kasker answered.

"Very well. Let's start to the museum. As we go through you may ask any
questions you wish. However, I must insist you stay close to me and not
wander from the group. We will be in no danger, you understand--the
creatures living in the museum have had their fangs pulled most
effectively--but even so we must not take chances."

The instructor led off. He was a fussy little person in a shiny black
coat and a soft hat that was too big for him. No matter how much paper
he stuffed inside the brim, the hat never seemed to fit right. Peering
through glasses that were always threatening to fall off, he moved away
from the Star Institute toward the nearby museum. The class of eight
girls and nine boys followed him.

"Why do we have to go through this old museum?" Joe Buckner complained.
"We already know everything about it."

"It's the rule," Billy Kasker answered. "The faculty thinks we should
see the situation at first hand. Then we will have a better
understanding of it."

Joe Buckner grunted disdainfully. "You're always sucking in with the big
shots and telling everybody what they say."

"You asked me. I tried to tell you." Billy Kasker's voice was still
pleasant. If a slight glint appeared in his eyes, it remained there for
