The Project Gutenberg EBook of No Hiding Place, by Richard R. Smith

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: No Hiding Place

Author: Richard R. Smith

Release Date: June 29, 2009 [EBook #29272]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NO HIDING PLACE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _Turnabout may not always be fair play in the gulfs between the
    stars. But so destructive and malicious are the Agronians of this
    story that we can readily forgive Richard Smith for filling their
    ship with an unexpected reversal of a victory technique almost too
    ghastly to contemplate. We have no sympathy for them--and neither
    has Mr. Smith. Still, we're rather glad he decided to make human
    heroism the cornerstone of a most exciting tale of conflict in
    space._


     no
 hiding
  place

 _by ... Richard R. Smith_


 The Earth was enveloped in atomic fire and the ship was
 a prize of war. But disaster may make victory mandatory.


The ship leaped toward the stars, its engines roaring with a desperate
burst of energy and its bulkheads audibly protesting the tremendous
pressures.

In the control room, Emmett Corbin listened to the screech of tormented
metal and shuddered. The heat was suffocating, and acrid fumes assailed
his nostrils and burned his eyes until he almost cried out in pain.

Despite the agony, his gaze did not waver from the video set across the
room. In the screen, Earth was a rapidly diminishing orb, charred and
mottled with glowing atomic fires.

_Everything_, a far corner of his mind whispered. _Everything on Earth
is dead!_

He was a carpenter and luckily, he had been working inside the
barricades of an Army spaceport when the news came that the enemy had
broken through the defense ring beyond Pluto. He had continued nailing
the cedar siding on the building, knowing that if he stopped his work
and waited, he would start screaming.

An MP running by the building several minutes later had shouted at him,
urging him to board one of the ships on the landing field. In those last
hours, they had loaded the few remaining spaceships as quickly as
possible, ignoring the importance of the passengers. He reflected that
many millionaires and influential politicians were now dead simply
because they hadn't been close enough to the spaceports when the
unexpected news came. Watching the pilots as they sat tense before the
