The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Goat-gland Transplantation, by 
Sydney B. Flower and John R. Brinkley

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Goat-gland Transplantation
       As Originated and Successfully Performed by J. R. Brinkley,
       M. D., of Milford, Kansas, U. S. A., in Over 600 Operations
       Upon Men and Women

Author: Sydney B. Flower
        John R. Brinkley

Release Date: July 10, 2009 [EBook #29362]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOAT-GLAND TRANSPLANTATION ***




Produced by Louise Hope and The Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)





[Typographical errors, whether corrected or not, are listed at the end
of the e-text. Boldface type is shown with +marks+.

_Historical Note:_ The Milford facility closed in 1930 when Brinkley's
Kansas medical license was revoked. He then moved to south Texas and
established his million-watt Mexican radio station.]




[Illustration: J. R. BRINKLEY, M.D., MILFORD, KANSAS, U.S.A.]




        No. 5 The One-Best-Way Series of
               New Thought Books

                 THE GOAT-GLAND
                TRANSPLANTATION


    As Originated and Successfully Performed
      by J. R. Brinkley, M.D., of Milford,
     Kansas, U.S.A., in Over 600 Operations
               Upon Men and Women


                       By
                SYDNEY B. FLOWER


          New Thought Book Department
            722-732 Sherman Street
                 Chicago, Ill.




  Set Up and Electrotyped
  May, 1921

  Copyright, 1921
  By Sidney B. Flower




TABLE OF CONTENTS


AUTHOR'S PREFACE                                       5

Chapter.                                            Page.

     I. DR. BRINKLEY'S THEORY                         11
    II. THE PRACTICE, MEN                             17
   III. THE PRACTICE, WOMEN                           23
    IV. DR. BRINKLEY'S OWN STORY                      30
     V. A YEAR OF DEVELOPMENT                         42
    VI. THE STORY OF CHANCELLOR TOBIAS                48
   VII. PROFESSOR STEINACH AND THE RAT                60
  VIII. A WEEK AT DR. BRINKLEY'S HOSPITAL             66
    IX. SUMMARY                                       72
     X. "THE SPARK OF LIFE"                           78




AUTHOR'S PREFACE


Though dealing exactly with a surgical subject, this book is a layman's
word to laymen. It is an attempt to say to the general public a few
things about this amazing work of Dr. J. R. Brinkley, of Milford,
Kansas, which he is debarred from saying for himself in this simple
form. He has under consideration a book of his own covering the subject
of Goat-Gland Transplantation, his experiments, successes, failures,
theories, and conclusions, which will probably be issued during the
winter of 1922, and in that book he expects to treat his subject
exhaustively with full medical and surgical detail, in a manner
acceptable to the medical profession. But, in the meantime, no
satisfactory effort has been made to tell the story to the general
public, except in the fragmentary form of occasional newspaper notices.
The author feels that the chief interest in this matter abides with the
patient rather than with the practitioner, or, if not the chief
interest, at least an equal interest. It seems proper, therefore, that
the subject should be briefly dealt with at this time, while it is yet
in its infancy, in such a manner that the general public may grasp the
essentials of what is being done in America in this new application of
endocrinology. Some attention is paid to the pioneer work of Dr. Frank
Lydston of Chicago in the transplanting of human glands into human
beings, but rather by way of emphasizing the fact that Dr. Brinkley,
with the choice of human, monkey, goat, or sheep glands before him,
chose the goat-glands in preference to any other for his field of
experiment and operation, and has never for a moment regretted his
choice, or seen any reason to alter it.

Without any wish to enter upon a controversy, the author is impelled to
take some notice of the statement of Dr. Serge Voronoff of Paris, who,
during his recent visit to the United States, announced that he pinned
his faith almost exclusively to the glands of the anthropoid apes as
most suitable for transplantation into human beings, while he lamented
the natural scarcity of obtainable material. Dr. Voronoff is credited
with having performed over 150 transplantations upon rams, but none
whatever of goat-glands upon human beings, and not more than two or
three of simian glands upon human beings. His statement, therefore, that
successful transplantation of the glands of the goat into a human being
is "impossible, and cannot succeed," is empirical, and entirely
unsupported by any experience of his own in the matter. Against it, and
completely confuting it, we set the clear conclusions of Dr. Brinkley,
backed by his unequalled record of over 600 successful transplants of
goat-glands into men and women, during the past three years. Since there
is no other human being who has had experience sufficient in this matter
upon which he may justly found an opinion, it seems to the author that
only one man, Dr. Brinkley himself, is qualified to speak at all, and
until members of the medical profession here and in Europe have mastered
Dr. Brinkley's technique, and learned what to do, and how and why, and
what not to do, and why not, a dogmatic negative is not the proper
comment with regard to the question of whether successful
transplantation of goat-glands can be made upon human beings. If, after
learning what Dr. Brinkley has learned by laborious experiments,
continued for years, they find that their conclusions differ from his,
they will at least have earned the right to speak. But it is
unreasonable to suppose, in that event, that their conclusions would in
any way or degree differ from Dr. Brinkley's conclusion that, in brief,
the implanting of the glands of the young goat into men and women is an
actual triumph of modern surgery and medical skill, which has resulted,
in hundreds of cases, clearly recorded, and filed for reference, in
rejuvenating both men and women; removing impotence from old men; curing
arterio-sclerosis, or hardening of the arteries, in every case treated;
curing five cases of Dementia Praecox out of a total of five cases
treated; curing six cases of Locomotor Ataxia out of six cases treated;
curing two cases of Paralysis Agitans out of two cases treated;
restoring normal conditions in one hundred cases of Psychopathia
Sexualis; bringing about the parenthood of barren women and impotent men
not yet past middle-age; restoring the function of menstruation or
regular periodicity to women who have passed through the change of life;
and, in a word, making good in the cure of so-called incurables, and
doing something that was never done before, to our knowledge, in the
history of the earth.

It is not the intention in this little book to follow Dr. Brinkley in
exact detail through his amazing list of cases of all manner of diseases
cured by this treatment. His files are open to the profession at all
times, and the records may be consulted by the earnest investigator at
the hospital at Milford, Kansas.

The intention in this little book is to cover particularly that phase of
human longing which asks that the clock be turned back, and that old age
be deferred.

It is a fact beyond all gainsaying that Dr. Brinkley's operation has in
truth cheated old age of its toll in very many cases of both sexes, and
the improvement, or rejuvenation, affects both the minds and bodies of
those treated by this method; and this rejuvenation is lasting to the
extent of the doctor's observation. It would be presuming to say that it
is a permanent improvement. Upon that point no one has any right to
offer an opinion, because there are no facts upon which to found it. But
Dr. Brinkley's earliest cases, operated upon three years ago, up to the
present time have shown no diminution whatever in the good effects
secured. Neither the women nor the men have lost any particle of their
increased vitality during this lapse of time. Who can say how long the
good effects will continue? Dr. Brinkley's opinion is that the
improvement will run for possibly fifteen years, at the end of which
time he expects to re-operate upon any cases that show a slowing-down in
the life-processes, and believes that the introduction of two new glands
after that time will result in a return of the vitality in full force as
before. That is his guess of the probable duration of the improvement,
but it is quite possible that his estimate errs on the side of
conservatism. There is one assuring and comforting fact, however,
bearing on this point, which should be carefully noted here, namely,
when a retransplantation was made by Dr. Brinkley upon a goat which had
first been cured of old age by transplantation of new glands, which was
allowed to retain this new adolescence for a year, and was then deprived
of the glands, causing a speedy return to the miserable condition of old
age and its ills, and which was then re-operated upon and given two new
glands, the instant improvement was every whit as noticeable and as
perfect in this second implantation as in the first. Now it is a
reasonable inference from this clear-cut result that Dr. Brinkley is
right in his opinion that a second transplantation of the goat-glands
into a human being after a lapse of years, when the first implant may be
expected to have worn itself thin, will result in the same improvement
in the physical and mental condition of either man or woman as took
place upon the first implant. This is, in fact, the basis of his theory
that the normal age of man and woman today can be surely extended from
the three score and ten limit to possibly twice that number of years.
You are invited to consider what this discovery of Dr. Brinkley's
operation, for it is no less than a discovery, would have meant to the
world in the prolongation of the lives of those benefactors in all
fields of human endeavor, Literature, Science, Art, etc., if it had been
known and understood when Shakespeare wrote, when Darwin worked, when
Rubens painted, and when Patti sang. It will please your fancy to
picture what might have been, but we have before us the consideration of
what is, and it is more than comforting to know that we shall deal here
with the hard cold facts of what is being done today, and will be done
tomorrow. This is no poet's dream, but the stern reality of a young
surgeon's work in hospital, extending over three memorable years of
achievement in a virgin field. Dr. Brinkley has worked out his problem
alone, save for the devoted aid of his wife, who is also a licensed
physician. He is today a poor man, and expects to remain so, because he
has refused every alluring offer made him looking to the establishment
of this Goat-Gland operation as a commercial proposition on a big scale.
He is governed by his ethical vows, and retains his independence, but
the world would call him a fool for not turning his discovery to his
greatest pecuniary profit. Since he prefers to remain true to his ideals
in this matter it is for us at least to be thankful, and accord him the
recognition to which the scientist is entitled who puts his work above
his profits.

Chicago, April, 1921.




CHAPTER I

DR. BRINKLEY'S THEORY


We are not privileged to be discursive in a little book which seeks to
hit the nail on the head in every paragraph, drive it home in every
page, and clinch it in every chapter, and there would be no excuse,
therefore, for sketching, even in brief outline, the history of the
various attempts that have been made, from Brown-Sequard, with his
Elixir, to Metchnikoff, with his benevolent bacteria of the intestinal
tract, to extract from Life its secret of human longevity. It has been a
long quest, and, in the main, fruitless, though it might be said in
fairness that Brown-Sequard's method of using the expressed testicular
juice as a medicine, by mouth or injection, for the renewal of youth,
was probably the true parent of the present familiar method of using the
extracts of various glands, or the pulverized substance of the glands
themselves, notably the thyroid and the adrenal, as medicines to be
taken internally for the relief of various diseased conditions. The
constant objection to such form of medication is, of course, that when
the medicine is stopped the good results stop, so that a temporary
relief is the utmost that can be hoped for from the method. Genius is
synthetic, elliptic, sudden, but always clear and sure. Dr. Brinkley
began with a theory, and by no means a new theory. From the theory he
deduced rapidly, and acted. The results of the acts proved the truth of
the theory. That theory has been variously stated, its most familiar
