The Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific American magazine Vol 2. No. 3
Oct 10 1846, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Scientific American magazine Vol 2. No. 3 Oct 10 1846
       The Advocate of Industry and Journal of Scientific,
       Mechanical and Other Improvements

Author: Various

Editor: Rufus Porter

Release Date: July 14, 2009 [EBook #29411]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, OCT 10, 1846 ***




Produced by David T. Jones and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Canada Team at http://www.pgdpcanada.net
Images generously provided by "Making of America" Cornell
University.







THE NEW YORK
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN:

_Published Weekly at 128 Fulton Street,
(Sun Building,) New York._

BY MUNN & COMPANY.

    *    *    *    *    *

RUFUS PORTER, EDITOR.

    *    *    *    *    *

TERMS.--$2 a year--$1 in advance, and the remainder in 6 months.

[Illustration: hand pointing right] _See Advertisement on last page._


=The New Roman Road.=

[The present Pope has given his consent to build railroads in his
dominions, which the former Pope was averse to. The following lines
are predicated on his consent.]

    Ancient Romans, ancient Romans--
    Cato, Scipio Africanus,
    Ye whose fame's eclips'd by no man's,
    Publius AEmilianus,
    Sylla, Marius, Pompey, Caesar,
    Fabius, dilatory teaser,
    Coriolanus, and ye Gracchi
    Who gave so many a foe a black eye,
    Antony, Lepidus, and Crassus;
    And you, ye votaries of Parnassus,
    Virgil, and Horace, and Tibullus,
    Terence and Juvenal, Catullus,
    Martial, and all ye wits beside,
    On Pegasus expert to ride;
    Numa, good king, surnamed Pampilius,
    And Tullus, eke 'yclept Hostilius--
    Kings, Consuls, Imperators, Lictors,
    Praetors, the whole world's former victors,
    Who sleep by yellow Tiber's brink;
    Ye mighty names--what d'ye think?
    The Pope has sanctioned Railway Bills!
    And so the lofty Aventine,
    And your six other famous hills
    Will soon look down upon a 'Line.'
    Oh! if so be that hills could turn
    Their noses up, with gesture antic,
    Thus would the seven deride and spurn
    A Roman work so unromantic:
    'Was this the ancient Roman Way.

      With tickets taken, fares to pay,
    Stockers and Engineers, perhaps--
    Nothing more likely--English chaps
    Brawling away, 'Go on!' for Ito,
    And 'Cut along!' instead of Cito;
    The engine letting off its steam,
    With puff and whistle, snort and scream;
    A smell meanwhile, like burning clothes,
    Flouting the angry Roman nose?
    Is it not Conscript Fathers shocking?
    Does it not seem your mem'ry mocking?
    The Roman and the Railway station--
    What an incongruous combination!
    How odd, with no one to adore him,
      Terminus--and in the Forum!'--[Punch.


=Good Advice.=

Somebody lays down the following rules to young men in business. They
will apply equally well to young and old. 'Let the business of every
one alone, and attend to your own.--Don't buy what you don't want. Use
every hour to advantage, and study even to make leisure hours useful.
Think twice before you spend a shilling; remember you have another to
make for it. Find recreation in looking after your business, and so
your business will not be neglected in looking after recreation.--Buy
fair, sell fair, take care of the profits; look over the books
regularly, and if you find an error, trace it out. Should a stroke of
misfortune come upon you in trade, retrench--work harder, but never
fly the track; confront difficulties with unflinching perseverance,
and they will disappear at last, and you will be honored; but shrink
from the task, and you will be despised.'

    *    *    *    *    *

In Russia, coffins are generally brown, but children have pink, grown
up unmarried girls sky blue, while other females are indulged with a
violet color.

[Illustration: Barnum's Safety Apparatus]

INTRODUCTION.--Much has been said of late in and about New York on the
subject of the adoption by steamboat proprietors of some apparatus
that will in some measure secure the passengers against such
casualties as have occurred on board the Excelsior and several other
boats. There have been a great variety of inventions introduced for
the purpose of preventing explosions; but from the best information we
can obtain on the subject, we are of the opinion that Mr. Barnum's
apparatus takes a general preference over all others. It consists of
an arrangement of machinery, partly within the boiler, and which is
constructed on such a self-regulating principle as to keep up a supply
of water within the boiler, without any attention from the engineer;
and in case that the apparatus itself should become impaired or cease
to operate regular, the engineer becomes instantly notified thereof.

EXPLANATION.--It is inexpedient for us to give a full and minute
description of the several points and peculiarities of the mechanism
of this apparatus; but we may so far explain as to say that a
horizontal lever inside of the boiler, being mounted on a pivot near
its centre, and connected to a buoy or float at one end, as
represented in the engraving, (a part of the surface of the boiler
being omitted for that purpose, and not, as some might infer, to
represent the apparatus attached to a boiler already burst by an
explosion.) One of these floats is placed within a small enclosed box
within the boiler, that it may be secure from the effect of foam which
sometimes pervades the surface of the water in a steam boiler.--This
lever, near its bearing, is connected to a short valve-rod, which
governs the valves in a small valve-chamber, whereby the steam is
occasionally admitted to operate a small steam engine, placed directly
over the boiler; and this engine puts in motion a pump, by which the
water in the boiler is replenished. This engine, it will be
understood, is never put in operation except when the water in the
boiler becomes too low: and when the water rises, the elevation of the
encased float closes the valve and stops the engine. The ball on the
end of the lever acts as a counterpoise to the float, (which is of
stone) that it may be freely influenced by the rising or falling of
the surface of the water.

The small engine constructed by Mr. Barnum for this purpose, is well
adapted to its place, and has several peculiarities whereby the
valves, and consequent reciprocal motion of the engine are regulated
without the use of a crank or fly-wheel: but of these we cannot at
present give a minute description. The whole of this apparatus evinces
much scientific ability of the inventor, Daniel Barnum, Esq., resident
at present in this city, and who has received many certificates from
the first scientific men in the Union, in commendation of his
invention.


=A Piggish Parvenue.=

A proud porker, fancying that it was degrading to his dignity to root
in the gutter, came upon the sidewalk, and full of his consequence,
promenaded from morning till night, leaving his humbler companions to
munch corn, husks and potatoe parings. He fared as people usually do,
who from vanity assume a station they are not qualified to fill. In
the gutter he would have lived in unnoticed enjoyment. On the walk he
got kicked by every passenger and bitten by every cur, till hungry and
bruised he was glad to return to his proper station.--[Ex, paper.


=Wanting Workmen back Again.=

The proprietors of the cotton mill in Schuylerville, N. Y., who
reduced the wages of their hands, a week or two since, says the
Schuylerville Herald, twenty-five per cent., are now, and have been
for several days, endeavoring to induce them to return to their work,
at the old wages; but they are too late, as most of them are engaged
to work in other mills.


=Hard Climbing.=

A man in Orange county was found one night climbing an over-shot wheel
in a fulling mill. He was asked what he was doing. He said he was
'trying to go up to bed, but some how or other these stairs won't hold
still.' There are many unlucky wights who are laboriously endeavoring
to climb fortune's ladder on the same principle.


=Power of Imagination.=

An amusing incident recently occurred at Williams College, which is
thus related by a correspondent of the Springfield Gazette:

The professor of chemistry, while administering, in the course of his
lectures, the protoxide of nitrogen, or, as it is commonly called,
laughing gas, in order to ascertain how great an influence the
imagination had in producing the effects consequent on respiring it,
secretly filled the India rubber gas-bag with common air instead of
gas. It was taken without suspicion, and the effects, if anything,
were more powerful than upon those who had really breathed the pure
gas. One complained that it produced nausea and dizziness, another
immediately manifested pugilistic propensities, and before he could be
restrained, tore in pieces the coat of one of the bystanders, while
the third exclaimed, 'this is life. I never enjoyed it before.' The
laughter that followed the exposure of this gaseous trick may be
imagined.


=True Policy.=

Under all circumstances there is but one honest course; and that is,
to do right and trust the consequences to Divine Providence. 'Duties
are ours: events are God's.' Policy, with all her cunning, can devise
no rule so safe, salutary and effective, as this simple maxim.

    *    *    *    *    *

Six thousand pounds of Saxony wool have been purchased in Pennsylvania,
at sixty-two and a half cents per pound.


A LIST OF PATENTS

_Issued from the 20th of July to the 28th of July, 1846, inclusive._


To M. W. Obenchain, of Springfield, Ohio, for improvement in Carding
Machines. Patented 20th July, 1846.

To Russell Wildman, of Hartford, Ct., for improvement in Machinery for
forming Hat Bodies. Patented 20th July, 1846.

To William Sherwood, of Ridgefield, Ct., for improvement in Carpet
Looms. Patented 20th July, 1846.

To Richard Garsed, of Frankford, Pa., for improvement in Operating
Treadle Cams in Looms for Tweeling. Patented 20th July, 1846.

To James Ives, of Hamden, Ct., for improvement in Locks for Carriage
Doors. Patented 20th July, 1846.

To Jacob Peebles, of Concordia, La., for improvement in Brick
Cisterns. Patented 20th July, 1846.

To Jacob Shermer, of New Valley, Md., for improvement in Winnowing
Machines. Patented, 20th July, 1846.

To George Levan, of Gap, Pa., for improvement in Doubling and Twisting
and Reeling. Patented 20th July, 1846.

To Joseph Stevens, of Northumberland, N. Y., for improvement in
Fences. Patented 20th July, 1846.

To James Boss, of Philadelphia, Pa., for improvement in Ever Pointed
Pencils. Patented 20th July, 1846.

To Richard C. Holmes and Jonathan J. Springer, of Cape May C. H., N.
J., for improvement in Machinery for Steering Vessels. Patented 20th
July, 1846.

To Daniel Hoats, of Mifflingburgh, Pa., for improvement in Threshing
Machines. Patented 20th July, 1846.

To Tappan Townsend, of Albany, N. Y., for improvement in Warming
Railroad Cars.--Patented 24th July, 1846.

To Elizur L. Booth, of Canandaigua, N. Y., for improvement in
Threshing Machines. Patented 24th July, 1846.

To Allen Eldred, of Oppenheim, N. Y., for improvement in Potatoe
Ploughs. Patented 24th July, 1846.

To Amos L. Reed, of Pittsburgh, Pa., for improvement in Feeding Nail
Plates. Patented 24th July, 1846.

To Joseph Greenleaf, of North Yarmouth, Me., for improvement in
Washing Machines. Patented 24th July, 1846.

