The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Solar Magnet, by Sterner St. Paul Meek

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Solar Magnet

Author: Sterner St. Paul Meek

Release Date: July 13, 2009 [EBook #29401]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SOLAR MAGNET ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Tamise Totterdell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    Transcriber's Note: This e-text was produced from Astounding Stories
    October 1931. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
    the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.




[Illustration: _Pistol in hand, the two men watched the oncoming lights._]




The Solar Magnet

By Capt. S. P. Meek


     +------------------------------------+
     | Another episode in Dr. Bird's long |
     | scientific duel with his country's |
     |       arch-enemy, Saranoff.        |
     +------------------------------------+


The milling crowd in front of the Capitol suddenly grew quiet. A tall
portly figure came out onto the porch of the building and stepped before
a microphone erected on the steps. A battery of press cameras clicked. A
newsreel photographer ground away on his machine. Wild cheers rent the
air. The President held up his hand for silence. As the cheering died
away he spoke into the microphone.

"My countrymen," he said, "the Congress of the United States has met in
extraordinary session and is ready to cope with the condition with
which we are confronted. While they deliberate as to the steps to be
taken, it is essential that you meet this danger, if it be a danger,
with the bravery and the calm front which has always characterized the
people of the United States in times of trial and danger. You may rest
assured--"

A slightly built, inconspicuous man who had followed the President out
onto the porch was surveying the crowd intently. He turned and spoke in
an undertone to a second man who mysteriously appeared from nowhere as
the first man spoke. He listened for a moment, nodded, and edged closer
to the President. The first man slipped unobtrusively down the Capitol
steps and mingled with the crowd.

"--that no steps will be neglected which may prove of value," went on
the President. "The greatest scientists of the country have gathered in
this city in conference and they undoubtedly will soon find a simple and
natural explanation for what is happening. In the meantime--"

       *       *       *       *       *

The President paused. From the crowd in front of him came a sudden
disturbance. A man sprang free of the crowd and broke through the
restraining cordon of police. In his hand gleamed an ugly blue steel
automatic pistol. Quickly he leveled it and fired. A puff of dust came
from the Capitol. The bullet had landed a few inches from one of the
lower windows, fifty feet from where the President stood. He raised his
weapon for a second shot but it was never fired. The man who had come
down the Capitol steps sprang forward like a cat and grasped the weapon.
For a moment the two men struggled, but only for a moment. From the
crowd, stunned for a moment by the sheer audacity of the attack, came a
roar of rage. The police closed in about the struggling men but the
crowd rolled over them like a wave. The captor shouted his identity and
tried to display the gold badge of the secret service but the mob was
in no state of mind to listen. The police were trampled underfoot and
the would-be assassin torn from the hands of the secret service
operative. Every man in reach tried to strike a blow. The secret service
man was buffeted and thrown aside. Realizing that the affair had been
taken out of his hands, he made his way to the rear of the Capitol where
his badge gained him ready passage through the cordon of police. He
entered the building and reappeared in a few moments by the side of the
President.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two hours later he leaned forward in his chair in Dr. Bird's private
laboratory in the Bureau of Standards and spoke earnestly.

"Dr. Bird," he said, "that bullet was never meant for the President.
That man was after bigger game."

The famous scientist nodded thoughtfully.

"Even a very rotten pistol shot should have come closer to him," he
replied. "He must have missed by a good forty feet."

"He missed by a matter of inches. Doctor, that bullet struck the Capitol
only two inches from a window. In that window was standing a man. The
bullet was intended for the occupant of that window. I was directly
behind him when he raised his weapon for a second shot and I am sure of
his aim. He deliberately ignored the President and aimed again at that
window. That was when I tackled him."

"Who was standing there, Carnes?"

"_You_ were, Doctor."

Dr. Bird whistled.

"Then you think that bullet was intended for me?"

"I am sure of it, Doctor. That fact proves one thing to me. You are
right in your idea that this whole affair is man-made and not an
accident of nature. The guiding intelligence back of it fears you more
than he fears anyone else and he took this means to get rid of you
unobtrusively. Attention was focused on the President. Your death would
have been laid to accident. It was a clever thought."

"It does look that way, Carnes," said the doctor slowly. "If you are
right, this incident confirms my opinion. There is only one man in the
world clever enough to have disturbed the orderly course of the seasons,
and such a plan for my assassination would appeal to his love of the
dramatic."

"You mean--"

"Ivan Saranoff, of course."

"We are pretty sure that he hasn't got back to the United States,
Doctor."

"You may be right but I am sure of nothing where that man is concerned.
However, that fact has no bearing. He may be operating from anywhere.
His organization is still in the United States."

       *       *       *       *       *

A knock sounded at the door. In response to the doctor's command a
messenger entered and presented a letter. Dr. Bird read it and dropped
it in a waste basket.

"Tell them that I am otherwise engaged just now," he said curtly. The
