Project Gutenberg's They Twinkled Like Jewels, by Philip Jose Farmer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: They Twinkled Like Jewels

Author: Philip Jose Farmer

Release Date: August 1, 2009 [EBook #29559]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THEY TWINKLED LIKE JEWELS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _It was only a year and a half ago that Phil Farmer, till then a
    totally unknown (editorially speaking at any rate) young man of
    Peoria, wrote himself a novel that won him instantaneous acclaim as
    perhaps the hottest new science fiction writer currently astir. Its
    title was "The Lovers" and since then he has gone right on proving
    himself a top-hand craftsman._


     they
 twinkled
     like
   jewels

 _by ... Philip Jose Farmer_


 Crane didn't get the nice man's name--until it
 was far too late to do anything at all about it.


Jack Crane lay all morning in the vacant lot. Now and then he moved a
little to quiet the protest of cramped muscles and stagnant blood, but
most of the time he was as motionless as the heap of rags he resembled.
Not once did he hear or see a Bohas agent, or, for that matter, anyone.
The predawn darkness had hidden his panting flight from the transie
jungle, his dodging across backyards while whistles shrilled and voices
shouted, and his crawling on hands and knees down an alley into the high
grass and bushes which fringed a hidden garden.

For a while his heart had knocked so loudly that he had been sure he
would not be able to hear his pursuers if they did get close. It seemed
inevitable that they would track him down. A buddy had told him that a
new camp had just been built at a place only three hours drive away from
the town. This meant that Bohas would be thick as hornets in the
neighborhood. But no black uniforms had so far appeared. And then, lying
there while the passionate and untiring sun mounted the sky, the
bang-bang of his heart was replaced by a noiseless but painful movement
in his stomach.

He munched a candy bar and two dried rolls which a housewife had given
him the evening before. The tiger in his belly quit pacing back and
forth; it crouched and licked its chops, but its tail was stuck up in
his throat. Jack could feel the dry fur swabbing his pharynx and mouth.
He suffered, but he was used to that. Night would come as surely as
anything did. He'd get a drink then to quench his thirst.

Boredom began to sit on his eyelids. Just as he was about to accept some
much needed sleep, he moved a leaf with an accidental jerk of his hand
and uncovered a caterpillar. It was dark except for a row of yellow
spots along the central line of some of its segments. As soon as it was
exposed, it began slowly shimmying away. Before it had gone two feet, it
was crossed by a moving shadow. Guiding the shadow was a black wasp with
an orange ring around the abdomen. It closed the gap between itself and
the worm with a swift, smooth movement and straddled the dark body.

Before the wasp could grasp the thick neck with its mandibles, the
intended victim began rapidly rolling and unrolling and flinging itself
from side to side. For a minute the delicate dancer above it could not
succeed in clenching the neck. Its sharp jaws slid off the frenziedly
jerking skin until the tiring creature paused for the chip of a second.

Seizing opportunity and larva at the same time, the wasp stood high on
its legs and pulled the worm's front end from the ground, exposing the
yellowed band of the underpart. The attacker's abdomen curved beneath
its own body; the stinger jabbed between two segments of the prey's
jointed length. Instantly, the writhing stilled. A shudder, and the
caterpillar became as inert as if it were dead.

Jack had watched with an eye not completely clinical, feeling the
sympathy of the hunted and the hounded for a fellow. His own struggles
of the past few months had been as desperate, though not as hopeless,
and ...

He stopped thinking. His heart again took up the rib-thudding. Out of
the corner of his left eye he had seen a shadow that fell across the
garden. When he slowly turned his head to follow the stain upon the
sun-splashed soil, he saw that it clung to a pair of shining black
boots.

Jack did not say anything. What was the use? He put his hands against
