The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hohokam Dig, by Theodore Pratt

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Hohokam Dig

Author: Theodore Pratt

Release Date: August 24, 2009 [EBook #29793]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOHOKAM DIG ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _From_ where _had these attacking Indians come? Out of a long
    forgotten and dim past? Had their medicine man seen the one supreme
    vision?_


     the
 hohokam
     dig

 _by ... Theodore Pratt_


 At first they thought the attack was a
 joke. And then they realized the truth!


At first the two scientists thought the Indian attack on them was a joke
perpetrated by some of their friends. After all, modern Indians did not
attack white men any more.

Except that these did.

George Arthbut and Sidney Hunt were both out of New York, on the staff
of the Natural History Museum. George was an ethnologist who specialized
in what could be reconstructed about the prehistoric Indians of North
America, with emphasis on those of the Southwest. He was a tall, lean,
gracious bald man in his early sixties.

Sidney was an archeologist who was fascinated by the ruins of the same
kind of ancient Indians. Medium-sized, with black hair that belied his
sixty-five years, he and George made an excellent team, being the
leaders in their field.

They had come west on a particular bit of business this spring, trying
to solve the largest question that remained about the old cliff dwellers
and the prehistoric desert Indians, both of whom had deserted their
villages and gone elsewhere for reasons that remained a mystery.

One theory was that drought had driven them both away. Another theory
ran to the effect that enemies wiped them out or made off with them as
captives. Still another supposition, at least for the Hohokam desert
people, the builders of Casa Grande whose impressive ruins still stood
near Coolidge, had to do with their land giving out so they could no
longer grow crops, forcing them to go elsewhere to find better soil.

No one really knew. It was all pure guesswork.

       *       *       *       *       *

The two scientists meant to spend the entire summer trying to solve this
riddle for all time, concentrating on it to the exclusion of everything
else. They drove west in a station wagon stuffed with equipment and
tracking a U-Haul-It packed with more.

George drove, on a road that was only two sand tracks across the wild
empty desert between Casa Grande Monument and Tonto National Monument
where cliff dwellers had lived. It was here, not far ahead, in new ruins
that were being excavated, that they hoped to solve the secret of the
exodus of the prehistoric Indians. The place was known as the Hohokam
Dig.

They topped a rise of ground and came to the site of the dig. Here the
sand tracks ended right in the middle of long trenches dug out to reveal
thick adobe walls. In the partially bared ruins the outline of a small
village could be seen; the detailed excavation would be done this summer
by workmen who would arrive from Phoenix and Tucson.

George stopped their caravan and the two men got out, stretching their
