The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Second Voice, by Mann Rubin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Second Voice

Author: Mann Rubin

Release Date: September 5, 2009 [EBook #29910]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SECOND VOICE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _We proudly enter a new name in the science-fiction sweepstakes.
    This is Mr. Rubin's initial appearance in the field. His literary
    efforts to date add up quite handsomely, we think. QUOTE. I have
    sold to the TV show, TALES OF TOMORROW and two literary quarterlies
    have published my fiction. Last year I won the Stephen Vincent Benet
    Award for my one-act plays produced at Stanford University. UNQUOTE.
    The reading pleasure is yours._


    the
 second
  voice

 _by ... Mann Rubin_


 Spud, world-famous dummy, talks
 to Mars with surprising results.


Crawford completed the rehearsal in less than an hour. He listened to
the orchestra run through its selections, okayed the song the guest
vocalist had chosen, then finished up with a long dialogue between Spud
and himself. When it was over he checked timing with the program
director, made a few script changes and conferred briefly with a Special
Service Officer about the number of troops the auditorium could hold.
Everything was running smoothly. It was going to be a neat,
action-packed show.

Backstage he looked at his watch. He had almost two hours before the
regular show began and he was restless. Two hours at Harlow Field could
seem like two years. Guards and restrictions all over the place.

Harlow Field was the largest experimental base in the world, a veritable
garden of atoms, the proving grounds for every secret weapon ever
imagined. The security and the tight regulations gave Crawford the
jitters on each of his visits.

He smoked a cigarette and tried making small talk with some of the
soldiers on backstage detail. He posed for a picture and gave an
interview to a reporter from an army newspaper, then excused himself and
went to his dressing room with Spud propped in the crook of his arm.

He was used to it now; the applause, the audiences, the pictures, the
autographs, the fuss. Everywhere the response was the same. They had
either seen him in the movies or on television or in the nightclubs,
where he first broke in his act. Now they wanted to establish an
identity with him, to touch the merchandise, to stand close so that they
could write home about the visiting celebrity. Crawford was a realist.
It was all part of being a name.

It had taken him just five years to make the big time. Five years of
road shows, coast-to-coast tours, one-night stands and a dummy named
Spud to make him the hottest ventriloquist in the business. His act was
tight, well-paced and popular. He had a weekly radio show, a television
program and a seven-year contract with a major Hollywood studio. He was
riding high.

Still he hadn't forgotten the soldiers. Two months each year he took
time off to travel the USO circuit. His agent tore his hair, reminding
him of the financial losses, but the USO had given him his first break
so he had always answered their call. He liked enthusiastic audiences
and the cheering of laugh-hungry men made him happy. Entertainment was
