The Project Gutenberg EBook of Sjambak, by John Holbrook Vance

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Sjambak

Author: John Holbrook Vance

Illustrator: Virgil Finlay

Release Date: September 16, 2009 [EBook #30002]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SJAMBAK ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _If Worlds of Science Fiction_ July
    1953. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note. Within the
    text, [=o] represents a lowercase _o_ with an upper macron.




[Illustration]


    _Wilbur Murphy sought romance, excitement, and an impossible
    Horseman of Space. With polite smiles, the planet frustrated him at
    every turn--until he found them all the hard way!_


SJAMBAK

By Jack Vance

Illustrated by VIRGIL FINLAY


Howard Frayberg, Production Director of _Know Your Universe!_, was a man
of sudden unpredictable moods; and Sam Catlin, the show's Continuity
Editor, had learned to expect the worst.

"Sam," said Frayberg, "regarding the show last night...." He paused to
seek the proper words, and Catlin relaxed. Frayberg's frame of mind was
merely critical. "Sam, we're in a rut. What's worse, the show's dull!"

Sam Catlin shrugged, not committing himself.

"_Seaweed Processors of Alphard IX_--who cares about seaweed?"

"It's factual stuff," said Sam, defensive but not wanting to go too far
out on a limb. "We bring 'em everything--color, fact, romance, sight,
sound, smell.... Next week, it's the Ball Expedition to the Mixtup
Mountains on Gropus."

Frayberg leaned forward. "Sam, we're working the wrong slant on this
stuff.... We've got to loosen up, sock 'em! Shift our ground! Give 'em
the old human angle--glamor, mystery, thrills!"

Sam Catlin curled his lips. "I got just what you want."

"Yeah? Show me."

Catlin reached into his waste basket. "I filed this just ten minutes
ago...." He smoothed out the pages. "'Sequence idea, by Wilbur Murphy.
Investigate "Horseman of Space," the man who rides up to meet incoming
space-ships.'"

Frayberg tilted his head to the side. "Rides up on a _horse_?"

"That's what Wilbur Murphy says."

"How far up?"

"Does it make any difference?"

"No--I guess not."

"Well, for your information, it's up ten thousand, twenty thousand
miles. He waves to the pilot, takes off his hat to the passengers, then
rides back down."

"And where does all this take place?"

"On--on--" Catlin frowned. "I can write it, but I can't pronounce it."
He printed on his scratch-screen: CIRGAMESC.

"Sirgamesk," read Frayberg.

Catlin shook his head. "That's what it looks like--but those consonants
are all aspirated gutturals. It's more like 'Hrrghameshgrrh'."

"Where did Murphy get this tip?"

"I didn't bother to ask."

"Well," mused Frayberg, "we could always do a show on strange
superstitions. Is Murphy around?"

"He's explaining his expense account to Shifkin."

"Get him in here; let's talk to him."

       *       *       *       *       *

Wilbur Murphy had a blond crew-cut, a broad freckled nose, and a serious
sidelong squint. He looked from his crumpled sequence idea to Catlin and
Frayberg. "Didn't like it, eh?"

"We thought the emphasis should be a little different," explained
Catlin. "Instead of 'The Space Horseman,' we'd give it the working
title, 'Odd Superstitions of Hrrghameshgrrh'."

"Oh, hell!" said Frayberg. "Call it Sirgamesk."

"Anyway," said Catlin, "that's the angle."

"But it's not superstition," said Murphy.

"Oh, come, Wilbur ..."

"I got this for sheer sober-sided fact. A man rides a horse up to meet
the incoming ships!"

"Where did you get this wild fable?"

"My brother-in-law is purser on the _Celestial Traveller_. At Riker's
Planet they make connection with the feeder line out of Cirgamesc."

"Wait a minute," said Catlin. "How did you pronounce that?"

"Cirgamesc. The steward on the shuttle-ship gave out this story, and my
brother-in-law passed it along to me."

"Somebody's pulling somebody's leg."

"My brother-in-law wasn't, and the steward was cold sober."

"They've been eating _bhang_. Sirgamesk is a Javanese planet, isn't it?"

"Javanese, Arab, Malay."

"Then they took a _bhang_ supply with them, and _hashish_, _chat_, and a
few other sociable herbs."

"Well, this horseman isn't any drug-dream."

"No? What is it?"

"So far as I know it's a man on a horse."

"Ten thousand miles up? In a vacuum?"

"Exactly."

"No space-suit?"

"That's the story."

Catlin and Frayberg looked at each other.

"Well, Wilbur," Catlin began.

Frayberg interrupted. "What we can use, Wilbur, is a sequence on
Sirgamesk superstition. Emphasis on voodoo or witchcraft--naked girls
dancing--stuff with roots in Earth, but now typically Sirgamesk. Lots of
color. Secret rite stuff...."

"Not much room on Cirgamesc for secret rites."
