The Project Gutenberg EBook of Lost in Translation, by Larry M. Harris

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Lost in Translation

Author: Larry M. Harris

Illustrator: Schoenherr

Release Date: September 19, 2009 [EBook #30029]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LOST IN TRANSLATION ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net








                         Transcriber's Note:

     This etext was produced from Analog Science Fact & Fiction August
     1961. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
     U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.


                                 LOST

                                  IN

                             TRANSLATION


                            [Illustration]


                                  By

                               LARRY M.

                                HARRIS


    _In language translation, you may get a literally accurate
    word-for-word translation ... but miss the meaning entirely.
    And in space-type translation ... the effect may be the
    same!_


                      Illustrated by Schoenherr

       *       *       *       *       *




The cell had been put together more efficiently than any Korvin had
ever been in. But that was only natural, he told himself sadly; the
Tr'en were an efficient people. All the preliminary reports had agreed
on that; their efficiency, as a matter of fact, was what had made
Korvin's arrival a necessity. They were well into the atomic era, and
were on the verge of developing space travel. Before long they'd be
settling the other planets of their system, and then the nearer stars.
Faster-than-light travel couldn't be far away, for the magnificently
efficient physical scientists of the Tr'en--and that would mean, in
the ordinary course of events, an invitation to join the Comity of
Planets.

An invitation, the Comity was sure, which the Tr'en would not accept.

Korvin stretched out on the cell's single bunk, a rigid affair which
was hardly meant for comfort, and sighed. He'd had three days of
isolation, with nothing to do but explore the resources of his own
mind. He'd tried some of the ancient Rhine experiments, but that was
no good; he still didn't show any particular psi talents. He couldn't
unlock the cell door with his unaided mind; he couldn't even alter the
probability of a single dust-mote's Brownian path through the somewhat
smelly air. Nor could he disappear from his cell and appear, as if by
magic, several miles away near the slightly-damaged hulk of his ship,
to the wonder and amazement of his Tr'en captors.

He could do, as a matter of fact, precisely nothing. He wished quietly
that the Tr'en had seen fit to give him a pack of cards, or a book, or
even a folder of tourist pictures. The Wonders of Tr'en, according to
all the advance reports, were likely to be pretty boring, but they'd
have been better than nothing.

In any decently-run jail, he told himself with indignation, there
