The Project Gutenberg EBook of Astounding Stories of Super-Science January
1931, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Astounding Stories of Super-Science January 1931

Author: Various

Release Date: October 5, 2009 [EBook #30177]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASTOUNDING STORIES, JAN 1931 ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Barbara Tozier and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





                              ASTOUNDING
                               STORIES

                                 20c

              _On Sale the First Thursday of Each Month_

    W. M. CLAYTON, Publisher
                         HARRY BATES, Editor
                            DR. DOUGLAS M. DOLD, Consulting Editor


======================================================================

The Clayton Standard on a Magazine Guarantees:

    _That_ the stories therein are clean, interesting, vivid, by
           leading writers of the day and purchased under conditions
           approved by the Authors' League of America;

    _That_ such magazines are manufactured in Union shops by
           American workmen;

    _That_ each newsdealer and agent is insured a fair profit;

    _That_ an intelligent censorship guards their advertising pages.


                  _The other Clayton magazines are:_

      ACE-HIGH MAGAZINE, RANCH ROMANCES, COWBOY STORIES, CLUES,
   FIVE-NOVELS MONTHLY, ALL STAR DETECTIVE STORIES, RANGELAND LOVE
    STORY MAGAZINE, WESTERN ADVENTURES, and WESTERN LOVE STORIES.

     _More Than Two Million Copies Required to Supply the Monthly
                    Demand for Clayton Magazines._

======================================================================

  VOL. V, No. 1                CONTENTS                JANUARY, 1931

  COVER DESIGN                   H. W. WESSO
    _Painted in Water-Colors from a Scene in "The Gate to Xoran."_

  THE DARK SIDE OF ANTRI         SEWELL PEASLEE WRIGHT             9
    _Commander John Hanson Relates an Interplanetary Adventure
    Illustrating the Splendid Service Spirit of the Men of the
    Special Patrol._

  THE SUNKEN EMPIRE              H. THOMPSON RICH                 24
    _Concerning the Strange Adventures of Professor Stevens with
    the Antillians on the Floor of the Mysterious Sargasso Sea._

  THE GATE TO XORAN              HAL K. WELLS                     46
    _A Strange Man of Metal Comes to Earth on a Dreadful Mission._

  THE EYE OF ALLAH               C. D. WILLARD                    58
    _On the Fatal Seventh of September a Certain Secret Service
    Man Sat in the President's Chair and--Looked Back into the Eye
    of Allah._

  THE FIFTH-DIMENSION CATAPULT   MURRAY LEINSTER                  72
    _The Story of Tommy Reames' Extraordinary Rescue of Professor
    Denham and his Daughter--Marooned in the Fifth Dimension._
    (A Complete Novelette.)

  THE PIRATE PLANET              CHARLES W. DIFFIN               109
    _Two Fighting Yankees--War-Torn Earth's Sole Representatives
    on Venus--Set Out to Spike the Greatest Gun of All Time._
    (Part Three of a Four-Part Novel.)

  THE READERS' CORNER            ALL OF US                       132
    _A Meeting Place for Readers of_ ASTOUNDING STORIES.

======================================================================

    Single Copies, 20 Cents (In Canada, 25 Cents)
                                        Yearly Subscription, $2.00

Issued monthly by Readers' Guild, Inc., 80 Lafayette Street, New York,
N. Y. W. M. Clayton, President; Francis P. Pace, Secretary. Entered as
second-class matter December 7, 1929, at the Post Office at New York,
N. Y., under Act of March 3, 1879. Title registered as a Trade Mark in
the U. S. Patent Office. Member Newsstand Group--Men's List. For
advertising rates address E. R. Crowe & Co., Inc., 25 Vanderbilt Ave.,
New York; or 225 North Michigan Ave., Chicago.




[Illustration: "_Behold one of those who live in the darkness._"]

The Dark Side of Antri

_By Sewell Peaslee Wright_

    Commander John Hanson relates an interplanetary adventure
    illustrating the splendid Service spirit of the men of the
    Special Patrol.


An officer of the Special Patrol Service dropped in to see me the
other day. He was a young fellow, very sure of himself, and very
kindly towards an old man.

He was doing a monograph, he said, for his own amusement, upon the
early forms of our present offensive and defensive weapons. Could I
tell him about the first Deuber spheres and the earlier disintegrator
rays and the crude atomic bombs we tried back when I first entered the
Service?

I could, of course. And I did. But a man's memory does not improve in
the course of a century of Earth years. Our scientists have not been
able to keep a man's brain as fresh as his body, despite all their
vaunted progress. There is a lot these deep thinkers, in their great
laboratories, don't know. The whole universe gives them the credit for
what's been done, yet the men of action who carried out the ideas--but
I'm getting away from my pert young officer.

He listened to me with interest and toleration. Now and then he helped
me out, when my memory failed me on some little detail. He seemed to
have a very fair theoretical knowledge of the subject.

"It seems impossible," he commented, when we had gone over the ground
he had outlined, "that the Service could have done its work with such
crude and undeveloped weapons, does it not?" He smiled in a superior
sort of way, as though to imply we had probably done the best we
could, under the circumstances.

       *       *       *       *       *

I suppose I should not have permitted his attitude to irritate me, but
I am an old man, and my life has not been an easy one.

"Youngster," I said--like many old people, I prefer spoken
conversation--"back in those days the Service was handicapped in every
way. We lacked weapons, we lacked instruments, we lacked popular
support, and backing. But we had men, in those days, who did their
work with the tools that were at hand. And we did it well."

"Yes, sir!" the youngster said hastily--after all, a retired commander
in the Special Patrol Service does rate a certain amount of respect,
even from these perky youngsters--"I know that, sir. It was the
efforts of men like yourself who gave us the proud traditions we have
to-day."

"Well, that's hardly true," I corrected him. "I'm not quite so old as
that. We had a fine set of traditions when I entered the Service, son.
But we did our share to carry them on, I'll grant you that."

"'Nothing Less than Complete Success,'" quoted the lad almost
reverently, giving the ancient motto of our service. "That is a fine
tradition for a body of men to aspire to, sir."

"True. True." The ring in the boy's voice brought memories flocking.
It was a proud motto; as old as I am, the words bring a thrill even
now, a thrill comparable only with that which comes from seeing old
Earth swell up out of the darkness of space after days of outer
emptiness. Old Earth, with her wispy white clouds and her broad seas--
Oh, I know I'm provincial, but that is another thing that must be
forgiven an old man.

"I imagine, sir," said the young officer, "that you could tell many a
strange story of the Service, and the sacrifices men have made to keep
that motto the proud boast it is to-day."

"Yes," I told him. "I could do that. I have done so. That is my
occupation, now that I have been retired from active service. I--"

"You are a historian?" he broke in eagerly.

       *       *       *       *       *

I forgave him the interruption. I can still remember my own rather
impetuous youth.

"Do I look like a historian?" I think I smiled as I asked him the
question, and held out my hands to him. Big brown hands they are,
hardened with work, stained and drawn from old acid burns, and the
bite of blue electric fire. In my day we worked with crude tools
indeed; tools that left their mark upon the workman.

"No. But--"

I waved the explanation aside.

"Historians deal with facts, with accomplishments, with dates and
places and the names of great men. I write--what little I do write--of
men and high adventures, so that in this time of softness and easy
living some few who may read my scribblings may live with me those
days when the worlds of the universe were strange to each other, and
there were many new things to be found and marveled at."

"And I'll venture, sir, that you find much enjoyment in the work,"
commented the youngster with a degree of perception with which I had
not credited him.

"True. As I write, forgotten faces peer at me through the mists of the
years, and strong, friendly voices call to me from out of the
past...."

"It must be wonderful to live the old adventures through again," said
the young officer hastily. Youth is always afraid of sentiment in old
people. Why this should be, I do not know. But it is so.

The lad--I wish I had made a note of his name; I predict a future for
him in the Service--left me alone, then, with the thoughts he had
stirred up in my mind.

       *       *       *       *       *

Old faces ... old voices. Old scenes, too.

Strange worlds, strange peoples. A hundred, a thousand different
tongues. Men that came only to my knee, and men that towered ten feet
above my head. Creatures--possessed of all the attributes of men
except physical form--that belonged only in the nightmare realms of
sleep.

An old man's most treasured possessions: his memories. A face drew
close out of the flocking recollections; the face of a man I had known
and loved more than a brother so many years--dear God, how many
years--ago.

Anderson Croy. Search all the voluminous records of the bearded
historians, and you will not find his name. No great figure of history
was this friend of mine; just an obscure officer on an obscure ship of
the Special Patrol Service.

And yet there is a people who owe to him their very existence.

I wonder if they have forgotten him? It would not surprise me.

The memory of the universe is not a reliable thing.

       *       *       *       *       *

Anderson Croy was, like most of the officer personnel of the Special
Patrol Service, a native of Earth.

They had tried to make a stoop-shouldered dabbler in formulas out of
him, but he was not the stuff from which good scientists are moulded.
He was young, when I first knew him, and strong; he had mild blue eyes
and a quick smile. And he had a fine, steely courage that a man could
love.

I was in command, then, of the _Ertak_, my second ship. I inherited
Anderson Croy with the ship, and I liked him from the first time I
laid eyes upon him.

As I recall it, we worked together on the _Ertak_ for nearly two
years, Earth time. We went through some tight places together. I
remember our experience, shortly after I took over the _Ertak_, on the
monstrous planet Callor, whose tiny, gentle people were attacked by
strange, vapid Things that come down upon them from the fastness of
the polar cap, and--

But I wander from the story I wish to tell here. An old man's mind is
a weak and weary thing that totters and weaves from side to side; like
a worn-out ship, it is hard to keep on a straight course.

We were out on one of those long, monotonous patrols, skirting the
outer boundaries of the known universe, that were, at that time,
before the building of all the many stations we have to-day a dreaded
part of the Special Patrol Service routine.

Not once had we landed to stretch our legs. Slowing up to atmospheric
speed took time, and we were on a schedule that allowed for no waste
of even minutes. We approached the various worlds only close enough to
report, and to receive an assurance that all was well. A dog's life,
but part of the game.

       *       *       *       *       *

My log showed nearly a hundred "All's well" reports, as I remember it,
when we slid up to Antri, which was, so far as size is concerned, one
of our smallest ports o' call.

Antri, I might add, for the benefit of those who have forgotten their
maps of the universe, is a satellite of A-411, which, in turn, is one
of the largest bodies of the universe, and both uninhabited and
uninhabitable. Antri is somewhat larger than the moon, Earth's
satellite, and considerably farther from its controlling body.

"Report our presence, Mr. Croy," I ordered wearily. "And please ask
Mr. Correy to keep a sharp watch on the attraction meter." These huge
bodies such as A-411 are not pleasant companions at space speeds. A
few minute's trouble--space ships gave trouble, in those days--and you
melted like a drop of solder when you struck the atmospheric belt.

"Yes, sir!" There never was a crisper young officer than Croy.

I bent over my tables, working out our position and charting our
course for the next period. In a few seconds Croy was back, his blue
eyes gleaming.

"Sir, an emergency is reported on Antri. We are to make all possible
speed, to Oreo, their governing city. I gather that it is very
important."

"Very well, Mr. Croy." I can't say the news was unwelcome. Monotony
kills young men. "Have the disintegrator ray generators inspected and
tested. Turn out the watch below in such time that we may have all
hands on duty when we arrive. If there is an emergency, we shall be
prepared for it. I shall be with Mr. Correy in the navigating room; if
there are any further communications, relay them to me there."

       *       *       *       *       *

I hurried up to the navigating room, and gave Correy his orders.

"Do not reduce speed until it is absolutely necessary," I concluded.
"We have an emergency call from Antri, and minutes may be important.
How long do you make it to Oreo?"

"About an hour to the atmosphere; say an hour more to set down in the
city. I believe that's about right, sir."

I nodded, frowning at the twin charts, with their softly glowing
lights, and turned to the television disc, picking up Antri without
difficulty.

Of course, back in those days we had the huge and cumbersome discs,
their faces shielded by a hood, that would be suitable only for museum
pieces now. But they did their work very well, and I searched Antri
carefully, at varying ranges, for any sign of disturbances. I found
none.
