The Project Gutenberg EBook of Gone Fishing, by James H. Schmitz

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Gone Fishing

Author: James H. Schmitz

Illustrator: Krenkel

Release Date: September 30, 2009 [EBook #30140]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GONE FISHING ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net








                         Transcriber's Note:

  This etext was produced from Analog Science Fact & Fiction May 1961.
  Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright
  on this publication was renewed.



                             GONE FISHING


                         By JAMES H. SCHMITZ


    _There is no predictable correlation between intelligence and
     ethics, nor is ruthlessness necessarily an evil thing. And
     there is nothing like enforced, uninterrupted contemplation
     to learn to distinguish one from another...._


                        Illustrated by Krenkel

       *       *       *       *       *




Barney Chard, thirty-seven--financier, entrepreneur, occasional
blackmailer, occasional con man, and very competent in all these
activities--stood on a rickety wooden lake dock, squinting against the
late afternoon sun, and waiting for his current business prospect to
give up the pretense of being interested in trying to catch fish.

The prospect, who stood a few yards farther up the dock, rod in one
hand, was named Dr. Oliver B. McAllen. He was a retired physicist,
though less retired than was generally assumed. A dozen years ago he
had rated as one of the country's top men in his line. And, while
dressed like an aging tramp in what he had referred to as fishing
togs, he was at the moment potentially the country's wealthiest
citizen. There was a clandestine invention he'd fathered which he
called the McAllen Tube. The Tube was the reason Barney Chard had come
to see McAllen.

Gently raising and lowering the fishing rod, and blinking out over the
quiet water, Dr. McAllen looked preoccupied with disturbing
speculations not connected with his sport. The man had a secrecy bug.
The invention, Barney thought, had turned out to be bigger than the
inventor. McAllen was afraid of the Tube, and in the forefront of his
reflections must be the inescapable fact that the secret of the
McAllen Tube could no longer be kept without Barney Chard's
co-operation. Barney had evidence of its existence, and didn't really
need the evidence. A few hints dropped here and there would have made
McAllen's twelve years of elaborate precaution quite meaningless.

Ergo, McAllen must be pondering now, how could one persuade Mr. Chard
to remain silent?

But there was a second consideration Barney had planted in the old
scientist's mind. Mr. Chard, that knowledgeable man of the world,
exuded not at all by chance the impression of great quantities of
available cash. His manner, the conservatively tailored business suit,
the priceless chip of a platinum watch ... and McAllen needed cash
badly. He'd been fairly wealthy himself at one time; but since he
had refrained from exploiting the Tube's commercial possibilities, his
continuing work with it was exhausting his capital. At least that
could be assumed to be the reason for McAllen's impoverishment, which
was a matter Barney had established. In months the old man would be
living on beans.

Ergo again, McAllen's thoughts must be running, how might one not
merely coax Mr. Chard into silence, but actually get him to come
through with some much-needed financial support? What inducement,
aside from the Tube, could be offered someone in his position?

Barney grinned inwardly as he snapped the end of his cigarette out on
the amber-tinted water. The mark always sells himself, and McAllen was
well along in the process. Polite silence was all that was necessary
at the moment. He lit a fresh cigarette, feeling a mild curiosity
about the little lake's location. Wisconsin, Minnesota, Michigan
seemed equally probable guesses. What mattered was that half an hour
ago McAllen's Tube had brought them both here in a wink of time from
his home in California.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. McAllen thoughtfully cleared his throat.

"Ever do any fishing, Mr. Chard?" he asked. After getting over his
first shock at Barney's revelations, he'd begun speaking again in the
brisk, abrupt manner Barney remembered from the last times he'd heard
McAllen's voice.

"No," Barney admitted smiling. "Never quite got around to it."

"Always been too busy, eh?"

"With this and that," Barney agreed.

McAllen cleared his throat again. He was a roly-poly little man; over
seventy now but still healthy-looking, with an apple-cheeked,
sunburned face. Over a pair of steel-rimmed glasses his faded blue
eyes peered musingly at Barney. "Around thirty-five, aren't you?"

"Thirty-seven."

"Married?"

"Divorced."

"Any particular hobbies?"

Barney laughed. "I play a little golf. Not very seriously."

McAllen clicked his tongue. "Well, what do you do for fun?"

"Oh ... I'd say I enjoy almost anything I get involved in." Barney,
still smiling, felt a touch of wariness. He'd been expecting questions
from McAllen, but not quite this kind.

"Mainly making money, eh? Well," McAllen conceded, "that's not a bad
hobby. Practical, too. I ... whup! Just a moment."

The tip of the slender rod in his left hand dipped slightly, and sixty
feet out beyond the end of the old dock a green and white bobber began
twitching about. Then the bobber suddenly disappeared. McAllen lifted
the rod tip a foot or two with a smooth, swift motion, and paused.

"Hooked!" he announced, looking almost childishly pleased.

The fish on the far end of the line didn't seem to put up much of a
struggle, but the old man reeled it in slowly and carefully, giving
out line from time to time, then taking it back. He seemed completely
absorbed. Not until the fish had been worked close to the dock was
there a brief minor commotion near the surface. Then McAllen was down
on one knee, holding the rod high with one hand, reaching out for his
catch with the other. Barney had a glimpse of an unimpressive green
and silver disk, reddish froggy eyes. "_Very_ nice crappie!" McAllen
informed him with a broad smile. "Now--" He placed the rod on the
dock, reached down with his other hand. The fish's tail slapped the
water; it turned sideways, was gone.

"Lost it!" Barney commented, surprised.

"Huh?" McAllen looked around. "Well, no, young man--I _turned_ him
loose. He wasn't hooked bad. Crappies have delicate lips, but I use a
barbless hook. Gives them better than a fighting chance." He stood up
with the rod, dusting the knees of his baggy slacks. "Get all the
eating fish I want anyway," he added.

"You really enjoy that sport, don't you?" Barney said curiously.

       *       *       *       *       *

McAllen advised him with the seriousness of the true devotee to try it
some time. "It gets to you. It can get to be a way of living. I've
been fishing since I was knee-high. Three years ago I figured I'd
become good enough to write a book on the subject. I got more
arguments over that book--sounder arguments too, I'd say--than about
any paper I've published in physics." He looked at Barney a moment,
still seriously, and went on. "I told you wetting a line would calm me
down after that upset you gave me. Well, it has--fishing is as good a
form of therapy as I know about. Now I've been doing some thinking.
I'd be interested ... well, I'd like to talk some more about the Tube
with you, Mr. Chard. And perhaps about other things too."

"Very gratifying to hear that, doctor," Barney said gravely. "I did
regret having to upset you, you know."

McAllen shrugged. "No harm done. It's given me some ideas. We'll talk
right here." He indicated the weather-beaten little cabin on the bank
behind Barney. "I'm not entirely sure about the California place.
That's one reason I suggested this trip."

"You feel your houseman there mightn't be entirely reliable?"

"Fredericks unreliable? Heavens no! He knows about the Tube, of
course, but Fredericks _expects_ me to invent things. It wouldn't
occur to him to talk to an outsider. He's been with me for almost
forty years."

"He was," remarked Barney, "listening in on the early part of our
conversation today."

"Well, he'll do that," McAllen agreed. "He's very curious about anyone
who comes to see me. But otherwise ... no, it's just that in these
days of sophisticated listening devices one shouldn't ever feel too
sure of not being overheard."

"True enough." Barney glanced up at the cabin. "What makes you so
sure of it here, doctor?"

"No reason why anyone would go to the trouble," McAllen said. "The
property isn't in my name. And the nearest neighbor lives across the
lake. I never come here except by the Tube so I don't attract any
attention."

He led the way along the dock. Barney Chard followed, eyes
reflectively on the back of McAllen's sunburned neck and the wisps of
unclipped white hair sticking out beneath his beaked fishing cap.
Barney had learned to estimate accurately the capacity for physical
violence in people he dealt with. He would have offered long odds that
neither Dr. McAllen nor Fredericks, the elderly colored man of all
work, had the capacity. But Barney's right hand, slid idly into the
pocket of his well-tailored coat, was resting on a twenty-five caliber
revolver. This was, after all, a very unusual situation. The human
factors in themselves were predictable. Human factors were Barney's
specialty. But here they were involved with something unknown--the
McAllen Tube.

When it was a question of his personal safety, Barney Chard preferred
