Project Gutenberg's The Four-Faced Visitors of Ezekiel, by Arthur W. Orton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Four-Faced Visitors of Ezekiel

Author: Arthur W. Orton

Illustrator: Orton

Release Date: October 14, 2009 [EBook #30252]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FOUR-FACED VISITORS OF EZEKIEL ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

  This etext was produced from Analog Science Fact & Fiction March 1961.
  Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright
  on this publication was renewed.



                                 THE

                              FOUR-FACED

                               VISITORS

                            OF ... EZEKIEL




                          By ARTHUR W. ORTON



     _Ezekiel, they say, "saw de wheel"--but he saw somewhat more
      than that. And Orton suggests that what he saw made
      perfectly good sense ... to the understanding!_



                         Illustrated by Orton

       *       *       *       *       *




We are told from our Sunday School days that the Bible is a "living
book," the oldest of man's written works that is read and used anew,
from generation to generation. It remains "living" because we are able
to find new meaning to fit our daily lives. Although it is not the
usual kind of new meaning, I believe that I have found something of
the sort in the very old prophesies of Ezekiel.

Bible scholars have long recognized the first chapter of Ezekiel as a
strange and nearly unfathomable account of a vision. I suggest that it
is strange only because it is written by a man far removed from us in
time and experience, about a subject totally unfamiliar to men of his
time. I do not think that this was a vision in the usual sense, nor
was it meant to be mystical. This particular chapter has been called
"Science fiction in the Bible" and many attempts have been made to
unravel the meaning of the original author, along both spiritual and
mundane lines. I am convinced that this chapter is the account of an
actual happening; the landing of extraterrestial beings, reported by a
careful, truthful and self-possessed observer.

I am not a student of theology and therefore you may feel that I am
being presumptive in attempting to throw light on a mystery as old and
well-studied as Ezekiel's first chapter. I feel that any success that
I may have in doing so will be due to the accident of my birth at the
very beginning of an era when the events I have to describe are fact,
or are about to become fact.

If, as I believe, this is an account of an actual encounter with men
from space, I may be better able to interpret the meaning than a
student of theology, who by training and interest, is looking for a
theological meaning. I have worked with mechanical things, and as an
instructor of aircraft mechanics for most of my adult life. During
this time I have had to untangle a lot of mechanical misconceptions
and misunderstandings. I think that this gives me some insight into
this problem.

If you are not too familiar with the Old Testament, I suggest that you
read through the first chapter of Ezekiel to get the feeling of the
flow of words, and a general idea of what sort of material we will be
covering. If you have done a considerable amount of reading in the
Bible, I am sure you will notice at once how different and
"un-Bible-like" this chapter sounds. It isn't long. The first chapter
covers little more than one page. Don't expect to get a clear picture
the first time through. It seems to have an elusive quality. About the
time you feel that you have hold of a fact, it seems to be
contradicted in a later verse. I am going to try to show you that this
is due to your own preconceived notions of what some of the words and
phrases mean. You, not Ezekiel, are supplying the contradictions.

You will see that I am not going to make excuses for the words, as
written. It is my belief that those who had the task of translating
the Bible from its original tongue and re-copying it through the ages
were particularly careful of this chapter because they did not
