The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Other Likeness, by James H. Schmitz

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Other Likeness

Author: James H. Schmitz

Illustrator: Schelling

Release Date: November 3, 2009 [EBook #30398]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OTHER LIKENESS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









THE OTHER LIKENESS


    _There is a limit to how perfect a counterfeit can be--a limit that
    cannot be passed without an odd phenomenon setting in...._


BY JAMES H. SCHMITZ

ILLUSTRATED BY SCHELLING


When he felt the sudden sharp tingling on his skin which came from the
alarm device under his wrist watch, Dr. Halder Leorm turned unhurriedly
from the culture tray he was studying, walked past the laboratory
technician to the radiation room, entered it and closed the door behind
him. He slipped the instrument from his wrist, removed its back plate,
and held it up to his eye.

He was looking into the living room of his home, fifty miles away in
another section of Orado's great city of Draise. A few steps from the
entry, a man lay on his back on the carpeting, eyes shut, face deeply
flushed, apparently unconscious. Halder Leorm's mouth tightened. The man
on the carpet was Dr. Atteo, his new assistant, assigned to the
laboratory earlier in the week. Beyond Atteo, the entry from the
residence's delivery area and car port stood open.

Fingering the rim of the tiny scanner with practiced quickness, Halder
Leorm shifted the view to other sections of the house, finally to the
car port. An empty aircar stood in the port; there was no one in sight.

Halder sighed, replaced the instrument on his wrist, and glanced over at
a wall mirror. His face was pale but looked sufficiently composed.
Leaving the radiation room, he picked up his hat, said to the
technician, "Forgot to mention it, Reef, but I'll have to head over to
central laboratories again."

[Illustration]

Reef, a large, red-headed young man, glanced around in mild surprise.
"They've got a nerve, calling you across town every two days!" he
observed. "Whose problem are you supposed to solve now?"

"I wasn't informed. Apparently, something urgent has come up and they
want my opinion on it."

"Yeah, I bet!" Reef scratched his head, glanced along the rows of
culture trays. "Well ... nothing here at the moment I can't handle, even
if Atteo doesn't show up. Will you be back before evening?"

"I wouldn't count on it," Halder said. "You know how those conferences
tend to go."

"Uh-huh. Well, Dr. Leorm, if I don't see you before tomorrow, give my
love to your beautiful wife."

Halder smiled back at him from the door. "Will do, Reef!" He let the
door slide shut behind him, started towards the exit level of the huge
pharmaceutical plant. Reef had acted in a completely normal manner. If,
as seemed very probable, "Dr. Atteo" was a Federation agent engaged in
investigating Dr. Halder Leorm, Halder's co-workers evidently had not
been apprised of the fact. Still, Halder thought, he must warn Kilby
instantly. It was quite possible that an attempt to arrest him would be
made before he left the building.

He stepped into the first ComWeb booth on his route, and dialed Kilby's
business number. His wife had a desk job in one of the major fashion
stores in the residential section of Draise, and--which was fortunate
just now--a private office. Her face appeared almost immediately on the
screen before him, a young face, soft-looking, with large, gray eyes.
She smiled in pleased surprise. "'Lo, Halder!"

"'Lo, Kilby.... Did you forget?"

Kilby's smile became inquiring. "Forget what?"

"That we're lunching together at Hasmin's today."

