The Project Gutenberg EBook of Hanging by a Thread, by Gordon Randall Garrett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Hanging by a Thread

Author: Gordon Randall Garrett

Illustrator: Douglas

Release Date: October 21, 2009 [EBook #30308]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HANGING BY A THREAD ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

  This etext was produced from Analog Science Fact & Fiction August 1961.
  Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright
  on this publication was renewed.


                         HANGING BY A THREAD


                           By DAVID GORDON


     _It's seldom that the fate of a shipful of men literally
     hangs by a thread--but it's also seldom that a device, every
     part of which has been thoroughly tested, won't work...._


                        Illustrated by Douglas

       *       *       *       *       *




Jayjay Kelvin was sitting in the lounge of the interplanetary cargo
vessel _Persephone_, his feet propped up on the low table in front of
the couch, and his attention focused almost totally on the small book
he was reading. The lounge itself was cozily small; the _Persephone_
had not been designed as a passenger vessel, and the two passengers
she was carrying at the time had been taken on as an accommodation
rather than as a money-making proposition. On the other hand, the
_Persephone_ and other ships like her were the only method of getting
to where Jayjay Kelvin wanted to go; there were no regular passenger
runs to Pluto. It's hardly the vacation spot of the Solar System.

On the other side of the table, Jeffry Hull was working industriously
with pencil and paper. Jayjay kept his nose buried in his book--not
because he was deliberately slighting Hull, but because he was
genuinely interested in the book.

_"Now wait," said Masterson, looking thoughtfully at the footprints on
the floor of the cabin where Jed Hooker had died. "Jest take another
look at these prints, Charlie. Silver Bill Greer couldn't have got
much more than his big toe into boots that small! Somethin' tells me
the Pecos Kid has...."_

"... Traveled nearly two billion miles since then," said Hull.

Jayjay lifted his head from his book. "What?" He blinked. "I'm sorry;
I wasn't listening. What did you say?"

The younger man was still grinning triumphantly. "I said: We are
approaching turnover, and, according to my figures, nine days of
acceleration at one standard gee will give us a velocity of seventeen
million, five hundred and fifty miles per hour, and we have covered a
distance of nearly two billion miles." Then he added: "That is, if I
remembered my formulas correctly."

Jayjay Kelvin looked thoughtfully at the ceiling while he ran through
the figures in his head. "Something like that. It's the right order of
magnitude, anyway."

Hull looked a little miffed. "What answer did you get?"

"A little less than eight times ten to the third kilometers per
second. I was just figuring roughly."

Hull scribbled hastily, then smiled again. "Eighteen million miles an
hour, that would be. My memory's better than I thought at first. I'm
glad I didn't have to figure the time; doing square roots is a process
I've forgotten."

That was understandable, Jayjay thought. Hull was working for his
doctorate in sociology, and there certainly wasn't much necessity for
a sociologist to remember his freshman physics, much less his
high-school math.

Still, it was somewhat of a relief to find that Hull was interested in
something besides the "sociological reactions of Man in space". The
boy had spent six months in the mining cities in the Asteroid Belt,
and another six investigating the Jovian chemical synthesis planes and
their attendant cities. Now he was heading out to spend a few more
months observing the "sociological organization Gestalt" of the men
and women who worked at the toughest job in the System--taking the
heavy metals from the particularly dense sphere of Pluto.

Hull began scribbling on his paper again, evidently lost in the joys
of elementary physics, so Jayjay Kelvin went back to his book.

He had just read three words when Hull said: "Mr. Kelvin, do you mind
if I ask a question?"

Jayjay looked up from his book and saw that Jeffry Hull had reverted
to his role of the earnest young sociologist. Ah, well. "As I've told
you before, Mr. Hull, questions do not offend me, but I can't
guarantee that the answers won't offend you."

"Yes; of course," Hull said in his best investigatory manner. "I
appreciate that. It's just that ... well, I have trained myself to
notice small things. The little details that are sometimes so
important in sociological investigations. Not, you understand, as an
attempt to pry into the private life of the individual, but to round
out the overall picture."

Jayjay nodded politely. To his quixotic and pixie-like mind, the term
_overall picture_ conjured up the vision of a large and carefully
detailed painting of a pair of dirty overalls, but he kept the smile
off his face and merely said: "I understand."

"Well, I've noticed that you're quite an avid reader. That isn't
unusual in a successful businessman, of course; one doesn't become a
successful businessman unless one has a thirst for knowledge."

"Hm-m-m," said Jayjay.

"But," Hull continued earnestly, "I noticed that you've read most of
the ... uh ... historical romances in the library...."

"You mean Westerns," Jayjay corrected quietly.

"Uh ... yes. But you don't seem to be interested in the modern
adventure fiction. May I ask why?"

"Sure." Jayjay found himself becoming irrationally irritated with
Hull. He knew that the young sociologist had nothing to do with his
own irritation, so he kept the remarks as impersonal as possible. "In
the first place, you, as a sociologist, should know what market most
fiction is written for."

"Why ... uh ... for people who want to relax and--"

