The Project Gutenberg EBook of Status Quo by Dallas McCord Reynolds



This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license



Title: Status Quo

Author: Dallas McCord Reynolds

Release Date: October 26, 2009 [Ebook #30339]

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STATUS QUO***





                                Status Quo

                        by Dallas McCord Reynolds

                      Illustrated by John Schoenherr

                      Analog Science Fact & Fiction

                               August 1961






[Transcriber's Note: This text was produced from Analog Science Fact &
Fiction August 1961.  Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]

In his income bracket and in the suburb in which he lived, government
employees in the twenty-five to thirty-five age group were currently
wearing tweeds. Tweeds were in. Not to wear tweeds was Non-U.

Lawrence Woolford wore tweeds. His suit, this morning, had first seen the
light of day on a hand loom in Donegal. It had been cut by a Swede widely
patronized by serious young career men in Lawrence Woolford's status
group; English tailors were out currently and Italians unheard of.

Woolford sauntered down the walk before his auto-bungalow, scowling at the
sportscar at the curb--wrong year, wrong make. He'd have to trade it in on
a new model. Which was a shame in a way, he liked the car. However, he had
no desire to get a reputation as a weird among colleagues and friends.
What was it Senator Carey MacArthur had said the other day? Show me a
weird and I'll show you a person who has taken the first step toward being
a Commie.

Woolford slid under the wheel, dropped the lift lever, depressed gently
the thrust pedal and took off for downtown Greater Washington.
Theoretically, he had another four days of vacation coming to him. He
wondered what the Boss wanted. That was the trouble in being one of the
Boss' favorite trouble shooters, when trouble arose you wound up in the
middle of it. Lawrence Woolford was to the point where he was thinking in
terms of graduating out of field work and taking on a desk job which meant
promotion in status and pay.

He turned over his car to a parker at the departmental parking lot and
made his way through the entrance utilized by second-grade departmental
officials. In another year, he told himself, he'd be using that other
door.

The Boss' reception secretary looked up when Lawrence Woolford entered the
anteroom where she presided. "Hello, Larry," she said. "Hear they called
your vacation short. Darn shame."

LaVerne Polk was a cute little whizz of efficiency. Like Napoleon and his
army, she knew the name of every member of the department and was on a
first-name basis with all. However, she was definitely a weird. For
instance, styles might come and styles might go, but LaVerne dressed for
comfort, did her hair the way she thought it looked best, and wore
low-heeled walking shoes on the job. In fact, she was ready and willing to
snarl at anyone, no matter how kindly intentioned, who even hinted that
her nonconformity didn't help her promotion prospects.

Woolford said, "Hi, LaVerne. I think the Boss is expecting me."

"That he is. Go right in, Larry."

She looked after him when he turned and left her desk. Lawrence Woolford
cut a pleasant figure as thirty year old bachelors go.

The Boss looked up from some report on his desk which he'd been frowning
at, nodded to his field man and said, "Sit down, Lawrence. I'll be with
you in a minute. Please take a look at this while you're waiting." He
handed over a banknote.

Larry Woolford took it and found himself a comfortable chair. He examined
the bill, front and back. It was a fifty dollar note, almost new.

Finally the Boss, a stocky but impeccable career bureaucrat of the
ultra-latest school, scribbled his initials on the report and tossed it
into an Out chute. He said to Woolford, "I am sorry to cut short your
vacation, Lawrence. I considered giving Walter Foster the assignment, but
I think you're the better choice."

Larry decided the faint praise routine was the best tactic, said earnestly
about his closest rival. "Walt's a good man, sir." And then, "What's the
crisis?"

"What do you think of that fifty?"

His trouble shooter looked down at it. "What is there to think about it?"

The Boss grunted, slid open a desk drawer and brought forth another bill.
"Here, look at this, please."

It was another fifty. Larry Woolford frowned at it, not getting whatever
was going on.

"Observe the serial numbers," the Boss said impatiently.

They were identical.

Woolford looked up. "Counterfeit. Which one is the bad one?"

"That is exactly what we would like to know," the Boss said.

Larry Woolford stared at his superior, blinked and then examined the bills
again. "A beautiful job," he said, "but what's it got to do with us, sir?
This is Secret Service jurisdiction, counterfeiting."

"They called us in on it. They think it might have international
ramifications."

Now they were getting somewhere. Larry Woolford put the two bills on the
Boss' desk and leaned back in his chair, waiting.

His superior said, "Remember the Nazis turning out American and British
banknotes during the Second War?"

"I was just a kid."

"I thought you might have read about it. At any rate, obviously a
government--with all its resources--could counterfeit perfectly any currency
in the world. It would have the skills, the equipment, the funds to
accomplish the task. The Germans turned out hundreds of millions of
dollars and pounds with the idea of confounding the Allied financial
basics."

"And why didn't it work?"

"The difficulty of getting it into circulation, for one thing. However,
they did actually use a quantity. For a time our people were so alarmed
that they wouldn't allow any bills to come into this country from Mexico
except two-dollar denomination--the one denomination the Germans hadn't
bothered to duplicate. Oh, they had the Secret Service in a dither for a
time."

Woolford was frowning. "What's this got to do with our current situation?"

The Boss said, "It is only a conjecture. One of those bills is counterfeit
but such an excellent reproduction that the skill involved is beyond the
resources of any known counterfeiter. Secret Service wants to know if it
might be coming from abroad, and, if so, from where. If it's a
governmental project, particularly a Soviet Complex one, then it comes
into the ken of our particular cloak-and-dagger department."

"Yes, sir." Woolford said. He got up and examined the two bills again.
"How'd they ever detect that one was bad?"

"Pure fortune. A bank clerk with an all but eidetic memory was going
through a batch of fifties. It's not too commonly used a denomination, you
know. Coincidence was involved since in that same sheaf the serial number
was duplicated."

"And then?"

"The reproduction was so perfect that Secret Service was in an immediate
uproar. Short of the Nazi effort, there has never been anything like it. A
perfect duplication of engraving and paper identically the same. The
counterfeiters have even evidently gone to the extent of putting a certain
amount of artificial wear on the bills before putting them into
circulation."

Larry Woolford said, "This is out of my line. How were they able to check
further, and how many more did they turn up?"

"The new I.B.M. sorters help. Secret Service checked every fifty dollar
bill in every institution in town both banking and governmental. Thus far,
they have located ten bills in all."

"And other cities?"

"None. They've all been passed in Greater Washington, which is suspicious
in itself. The amount of expense that has gone into the manufacture of
these bills does not allow for only a handful of them being passed. They
should be turning up in number. Lawrence, this reproduction is such that a
pusher could walk into a bank and have his false currency changed by any
clerk."

"Wow," Larry whistled.

"Indeed."

"So you want me to work with Secret Service on this on the off chance that
the Soviet Complex is doing us deliberate dirt."

"That is exactly the idea, Lawrence. Get to work, please, and keep in
touch with me. If you need support, I can assign Walter Foster or some of
the other operatives to assist you. This might have endless
ramifications."

                  -------------------------------------

Back in the anteroom, Woolford said to the Boss' receptionist, "I'm on a
local job, LaVerne, how about assigning me a girl?"

"Can do," she said.

"And, look, tell her to get hold of every available work on counterfeiting
and pile it on my desk."

"Right. Thinking of going into business, Larry?"

He grinned down at her. "That's the idea. Keeping up with the Jones clan
in this man's town costs roughly twice my income."

LaVerne said disapprovingly, "Then why not give it up? With the
classification you've got a single man ought to be able to save half his
pay." She added, more quietly, "Or get married and support a family."

"Save half my pay?" Larry snorted. "And get a far out reputation, eh? No
thanks, you can't afford to be a weird these days."

She flushed--and damn prettily, Larry Woolford decided. She could be an
attractive item if it wasn't for obviously getting her kicks out of being
individualistic.

Larry said suddenly, "Look, promise like a good girl not to make us
conspicuous and I'll take you to the Swank Room for dinner tonight."

"Is that where all the bright young men currently have to be seen once or
twice a week?" she snapped back at him. "Get lost, Larry. Being a healthy,
normal woman I'm interested in men, but not necessarily in walking
status-symbols."

It was his turn to flush, and, he decided wryly, he probably didn't do it
as prettily as she did.

On his way to his office, he wondered why the Boss kept her on.
Classically, a secretary-receptionist should have every pore in place, but
in her time LaVerne Polk must have caused more than one bureaucratic
eyebrow to raise. Efficiency was probably the answer; the Boss couldn't
afford to let her go.

Larry Woolford's office wasn't much more than a cubicle. He sat down at
the desk and banged a drawer or two open and closed. He liked the work,
liked the department, but theoretically he still had several days of
vacation and hated to get back into routine.

Had he known it, this was hardly going to be routine.

He flicked the phone finally and asked for an outline. He dialed three
numbers before getting his subject. The phone screen remained blank.

"Hans?" he said. "Lawrence Woolford."

The Teutonic accent was heavy, the voice bluff. "Ah, Larry! you need some
assistance to make your vacation? Perhaps a sinister, exotic young lady,
complete with long cigarette holder?"

Larry Woolford growled, "How'd you know I was on vacation?"

The other laughed. "You know better than to ask that, my friend."

Larry said, "The vacation is over, Hans. I need some information."

The voice was more guarded now. "I owe you a favor or two."

"Don't you though? Look, Hans, what's new in the Russkie camp?"

The heartiness was gone. "How do you mean?"

"Is there anything big stirring?  Is there anyone new in this country from
the Soviet Complex?"

"Well now--" the other's voice drifted away.

Larry Woolford said impatiently, "Look, Hans, let's don't waste time
fencing. You run a clearing agency for, _ah_, information. You're strictly
a businessman, nonpartisan, so to speak. Fine, thus far our department has
tolerated you. Perhaps we'll continue to. Perhaps the reason is that we
figure we get more out of your existence than we lose. The Russkies
evidently figure the same way, the proof being that you're alive and have
branches in the capitals of every power on Earth."

"All right, all right," the German said. "Let me think a moment. Can you
give me an idea of what you're looking for?" There was an undernote of
interest in the voice now.

"No. I just want to know if you've heard anything new anti-my-side, from
the other side. Or if you know of any fresh personnel recently from
there."

"Frankly, I haven't. If you could give me a hint."

"I can't," Larry said. "Look, Hans, like you say, you owe me a favor or
two. If something comes up, let me know. Then I'll owe you one."

The voice was jovial again. "It's a bargain, my friend."

After Woolford had hung up, he scowled at the phone. He wondered if Hans
Distelmayer was lying. The German commanded the largest professional spy
ring in the world. It was possible, but difficult, for anything in
espionage to develop without his having an inkling.

The phone rang back. It was Steve Hackett of Secret Service on the screen.

Hackett said, "Woolford, you coming over? I understand you've been
assigned to get in our hair on this job."

"Huh," Larry grunted. "The way I hear it, your whole department has given
up, so I'm assigned to help you out of your usual fumble-fingered
confusion."

Hackett snorted. "At any rate, can you drop over? I'm to work in liaison
with you."

"Coming," Larry said. He hung up, got to his feet and headed for the door.
If they could crack this thing the first day, he'd take up that vacation
where it'd been interrupted and possibly be able to wangle a few more days
out of the Boss to boot.

At this time of day, parking would have been a problem, in spite of
automation of the streets. He left his car in the departmental lot and
took a cab.

                  -------------------------------------

The Counterfeit Division of the Secret Service occupied an impressive
section of an impressive governmental building. Larry Woolford flashed his
credentials here and there, explained to guards and receptionists here and
there, and finally wound up in Steve Hackett's office which was all but a
duplicate of his own in size and decor.

Steve Hackett himself was a fairly accurate carbon copy of Woolford,
barring facial resemblance alone.  The fact was, Steve was almost
Lincolnesque in his ugliness. Career man, about thirty, good university,
crew cut, six foot, one hundred and seventy, earnest of eye. He wore
Harris tweed. Larry Woolford made a note of that; possibly herringbone was
coming back in. He winced at the thought of a major change in his
wardrobe; it'd cost a fortune.

They'd worked on a few cases together before when Steve Hackett had been
assigned to the presidential bodyguard and co-operated well.

Steve came to his feet and shook hands. "Thought that you were going to be
down in Florida bass fishing this month. You like your work so well you
can't stay away, or is it a matter of trying to impress your chief?"

Larry growled, "Fine thing. Secret Service bogs down and they've got to
call me in to clean up the mess."

Steve motioned him to a chair and immediately went serious. "Do you know
anything about pushing queer, Woolford?"

"That means passing counterfeit money, doesn't it?  All I know is what's
in the TriD crime shows."

"I can see you're going to be a lot of help. Have you got anywhere at all
on the possibility that the stuff might be coming from abroad?"

"Nothing positive," Larry said. "Are you people accomplishing anything?"

"We're just getting underway. There's something off-trail about this deal,
Woolford. It doesn't fit into routine."

Larry Woolford said, "I wouldn't think so if the stuff is so good not even
a bank clerk can tell the difference."

"That's not what I'm talking about now. Let me give you a run down on
standard counterfeiting." The Secret Service agent pushed back in his
swivel chair, lit a cigarette, and propped his feet onto the edge of a
partly open desk drawer. "Briefly, it goes like this. Some smart lad gets
himself a set of plates and a platen press and--"

Larry interrupted, "Where does he get the plates?"

"That doesn't matter now," Steve said. "Various ways. Maybe he makes them
himself, sometimes he buys them from a crooked engraver. But I'm talking
about pushing green goods once it's printed. Anyway, our friend runs off,
say, a million dollars worth of fives. But he doesn't try to pass them
himself. He wholesales them around netting, say, fifty thousand dollars.
