The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Helpful Hand of God, by Tom Godwin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Helpful Hand of God

Author: Tom Godwin

Illustrator: Barberis

Release Date: October 24, 2009 [EBook #30322]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HELPFUL HAND OF GOD ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

  This etext was produced from Analog Science Fact & Fiction December 1961.
  Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright
  on this publication was renewed.



                         the helpful hand of

                                 god


     ... Can be very helpful indeed. But of course, it's long
     been known that God helps those who wisely help
     themselves....


                            BY TOM GODWIN

                       ILLUSTRATED BY BARBERIS

       *       *       *       *       *




(From "Vogarian Revised Encyclopedia":

_SAINTS: Golden Saints, properly, Yellow Saints, a term of contempt
applied by the Vogarian State Press to members of the Church Of The
Golden Rule because of their opposition to the war then being planned
against Alkoria. See CHURCHES._

_CHURCH, GOLDEN RULE, OF THE: A group of reactionary fanatics who
resisted State control and advocated social chaos through "Individual
Freedom." They were liquidated in the Unity Purge but for two-thousand
of the more able-bodied, who were sentenced to the moon mines of Belen
Nine. The prison ship never arrived there and it is assumed that the
condemned Saints somehow overpowered the guards and escaped to some
remote section of the galaxy.)_


Kane had observed Commander Y'Nor's bird-of-prey profile with detached
interest as Y'Nor jerked his head around to glare again at the
chronometer on the farther wall of the cruiser's command room.

"What's keeping Dalon?" Y'Nor demanded, transferring his glare to
Kane. "Did you assure him that I have all day to waste?"

"He should be here any minute, sir," Kane answered.

"I didn't find the Saints, after others had failed for sixty years, to
then sit and wait. The situation on Vogar was already very critical
when we left." Y'Nor scowled at the chronometer again. "Every hour we
waste waiting here will delay our return to Vogar by an hour--I
presume you realize that?

"It does sound like a logical theory," Kane agreed.

Y'Nor's face darkened dangerously. "You will--"

Quick, hard-heeled footsteps sounded in the corridor outside. The
guard officer, Dalon, stepped through the doorway and saluted; his
eyes like ice under his pale brows and his uniform seeming to bristle
with weapons.

"The native is here, sir," he said to Y'Nor.

He turned, and made a commanding gesture. The leader of the Saints
appeared; the man whose resistance Y'Nor would have to break.

A frail, white-bearded old man, scuffed uncertainly into the room in
straw sandals, his faded blue eyes peering nearsightedly toward Y'Nor.

"Go to the commander's desk," Dalon ordered in his metallic tones.

The old man obeyed and stopped before Y'Nor's desk, his hands clasped
together as though to hide their trembling.

"You are Brenn," Y'Nor said, "and you hold, I believe, the impressive
titles of Chief Executive of the Council Of Provinces and Supreme
Elder of the Churches Of The Golden Rule?"

"Yes, sir." There was a faint quaver in old Brenn's voice. "I welcome
you to our world, sir, and offer you our friendship."

"I understand you can produce Elusium X fuel?"

"Yes, sir. Our Dr. Larue told me the process is within our ability.
We--" He hesitated. "We know you haven't enough fuel to return to
Vogar."

Y'Nor stiffened in his chair. "What makes you think that?"

"It requires a great deal of fuel to get through the Whirlpool star
cluster--and even sixty years ago, the Elusium ores of Vogar were
almost exhausted."

Y'Nor smiled thinly. "That reminds me--you would be one of the Saints
who murdered their guards and stole a ship to get here."

"We killed no guards, sir. In fact, all of them eventually joined our
church."

"Where is the ship?"

"We had to cut it up for our start in mechanization."

"I presume you know you will pay for it?"

"It was taking us to our deaths in the radium mines--but we will pay
whatever you ask."

"The first installment will be one thousand units of fuel, to be
produced with the greatest speed possible."

"Yes, sir. But in return"--the old man stood a little straighter and
an underlying resolve was suddenly revealed--"you must recognize us as
a free race."

"Free? A colony founded by escaped criminals?"

