The Project Gutenberg EBook of Astounding Stories,  April, 1931, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Astounding Stories,  April, 1931

Author: Various

Release Date: November 11, 2009 [EBook #30452]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASTOUNDING STORIES,  APRIL, 1931 ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net








                              ASTOUNDING

                               STORIES

                                 20c


              _On Sale the First Thursday of Each Month_


                       W. M. CLAYTON, Publisher
                         HARRY BATES, Editor
                  DOUGLAS M. DOLD, Consulting Editor


The Clayton Standard on a Magazine Guarantees

    _That_ the stories therein are clean, interesting, vivid, by leading
           writers of the day and purchased under conditions approved by
           the Authors' League of America;

    _That_ such magazines are manufactured in Union shops by American
           workmen;

    _That_ each newsdealer and agent is insured a fair profit;

    _That_ an intelligent censorship guards their advertising pages.


_The other Clayton magazines are:_

ACE-HIGH MAGAZINE, RANCH ROMANCES, COWBOY STORIES, CLUES, FIVE-NOVELS
MONTHLY, ALL STAR DETECTIVE STORIES, RANGELAND LOVE STORY MAGAZINE,
WESTERN ADVENTURES, and WESTERN LOVE STORIES.

_More than Two Million Copies Required to Supply the Monthly Demand
for Clayton Magazines._

       *       *       *       *       *




VOL. VI, No. 1            CONTENTS            APRIL, 1931


COVER DESIGN                  H. W. WESSO
    _Painted in Water-Colors from a Scene in "Monsters of Mars."_

MONSTERS OF MARS              EDMOND HAMILTON             4
    _Three Martian-Duped Earth-Men Swing Open the Gates of Space That for
     So Long Had Barred the Greedy Hordes of the Red Planet._
     (A Complete Novelette.)

THE EXILE OF TIME             RAY CUMMINGS               26
    _From Somewhere Out of Time Come a Swarm of Robots Who Inflict on
     New York the Awful Vengeance of the Diabolical Cripple Tugh._
     (Beginning a Four-Part Novel.)

HELL'S DIMENSION              TOM CURRY                  51
    _Professor Lambert Deliberately Ventures into a Vibrational Dimension
     to Join His Fiancee in Its Magnetic Torture-Fields._

THE WORLD BEHIND THE MOON     PAUL ERNST                 64
    _Two Intrepid Earth-Men Fight It Out with the Horrific Monsters of
     Zeud's Frightful Jungles._

FOUR MILES WITHIN             ANTHONY GILMORE            76
    _Far Down into the Earth Goes a Gleaming Metal Sphere Whose Passengers
     Are Deadly Enemies._  (A Complete Novelette.)

THE LAKE OF LIGHT             JACK WILLIAMSON           100
    _In the Frozen Wastes at the Bottom of the World Two Explorers Find a
     Strange Pool of White Fire--and Have a Strange Adventure._

THE GHOST WORLD               SEWELL PEASLEE WRIGHT     118
    _Commander John Hanson Records Another of His Thrilling Interplanetary
     Adventures with the Special Patrol Service._

THE READERS' CORNER           ALL OF US                 134
    _A Meeting Place for Readers of Astounding Stories._


Single Copies, 20 Cents (In Canada, 25 Cents) Yearly Subscription,
$2.00

Issued monthly by Readers' Guild, Inc., 80 Lafayette Street, New York,
N. Y. W. M. Clayton, President; Francis P. Pace, Secretary. Entered as
second-class matter December 7, 1929, at the Post Office at New York,
N. Y., under Act of March 3, 1879. Title registered as a Trade Mark in
the U. S. Patent Office. Member Newsstand Group--Men's List. For
advertising rates address E. R. Crowe & Co., Inc., 25 Vanderbilt Ave.,
New York; or 225 North Michigan Ave., Chicago.

       *       *       *       *       *




Monsters of Mars

A COMPLETE NOVELETTE

_By Edmond Hamilton_

[Illustration: _The Martian gestured with a reptilian arm toward the
ladder._]

[Sidenote: Three Martian-duped Earth-men swing open the gates of space
that for so long had barred the greedy hordes of the Red Planet.]


Allan Randall stared at the man before him. "And that's why you sent
for me, Milton?" he finally asked.

The other's face was unsmiling. "That's why I sent for you, Allan," he
said quietly. "To go to Mars with us to-night!"

There was a moment's silence, in which Randall's eyes moved as though
uncomprehendingly from the face of Milton to those of the two men
beside him. The four sat together at the end of a roughly furnished
and electric-lit living-room, and in that momentary silence there came
in to them from the outside night the distant pounding of the Atlantic
upon the beach. It was Randall who first spoke again.

"To Mars!" he repeated. "Have you gone crazy, Milton--or is this some
joke you've put up with Lanier and Nelson here?"

[Illustration]

Milton shook his head gravely. "It is not a joke, Allan. Lanier and I
are actually going to flash out over the gulf to the planet Mars
to-night. Nelson must stay here, and since we wanted three to go I
wired you as the most likely of my friends to make the venture."

"But good God!" Randall exploded, rising. "You, Milton, as a physicist
ought to know better. Space-ships and projectiles and all that are but
fictionists' dreams."

"We are not going in either space-ship or projectile," said Milton
calmly. And then as he saw his friend's bewilderment he rose and led
the way to a door at the room's end, the other three following him
into the room beyond.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a long laboratory of unusual size in which Randall found
himself, one in which every variety of physical and electrical
apparatus seemed represented. Three huge dynamo-motor arrangements
took up the room's far end, and from them a tangle of wiring led
through square black condensers and transformers to a battery of great
tubes. Most remarkable, though, was the object at the room's center.

It was like a great double cube of dull metal, being in effect two
metal cubes each twelve feet square, supported a few feet above the
floor by insulated standards. One side of each cube was open, exposing
the hollow interiors of the two cubical chambers. Other wiring led
from the big electronic tubes and from the dynamos to the sides of the
two cubes.

The four men gazed at the enigmatic thing for a time in silence.
Milton's strong, capable face showed only in its steady eyes what
feelings were his, but Lanier's younger countenance was alight with
excitement; and so too to some degree was that of Nelson. Randall
simply stared at the thing, until Milton nodded toward it.

"That," he said, "is what will flash us out to Mars to-night."

Randall could only turn his stare upon the other, and Lanier chuckled.
"Can't take it in yet, Randall? Well, neither could I when the idea
was first sprung on us."

       *       *       *       *       *

Milton nodded to seats behind them, and as the half-dazed Randall sank
into one the physicist faced him earnestly.

"Randall, there isn't much time now, but I am going to tell you what I
have been doing in the last two years on this God-forsaken Maine
coast. I have been for those two years in unbroken communication by
radio with beings on the planet Mars!

"It was when I still held my physics professorship back at the
university that I got first onto the track of the thing. I was
studying the variation of static vibrations, and in so doing caught
steady signals--not static--at an unprecedentedly high wave-length.
They were dots and dashes of varying length in an entirely
unintelligible code, the same arrangement of them being sent out
apparently every few hours.

"I began to study them and soon ascertained that they could be sent
out by no station on earth. The signals seemed to be growing louder
each day, and it suddenly occurred to me that Mars was approaching
opposition with earth! I was startled, and kept careful watch. On the
day that Mars was closest the earth the signals were loudest.
Thereafter, as the red planet receded, they grew weaker. The signals
were from some being or beings on Mars!

"At first I was going to give the news to the world, but saw in time
that I could not. There was not sufficient proof, and a premature
statement would only wreck my own scientific reputation. So I decided
to study the signals farther until I had irrefutable proof, and to
answer them if possible. I came up here and had this place built, and
the aerial towers and other equipment I wanted set up. Lanier and
Nelson came with me from the university, and we began our work.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Our chief object was to answer those signals, but it proved
heartbreaking work at first. We could not produce a radio wave of
great enough length to pierce out through earth's insulating layer and
across the gulf to Mars. We used all the power of our great
windmill-dynamo hook-ups, but for long could not make it. Every few
hours like clockwork the Martian signals came through. Then at last we
heard them repeating one of our own signals. We had been heard!

"For a time we hardly left our instruments. We began the slow and
almost impossible work of establishing intelligent communication with
the Martians. It was with numbers we began. Earth is the third planet
from the sun and Mars the fourth, so three represented earth and four
stood for Mars. Slowly we felt our way to an exchange of ideas, and
within months were in steady and intelligent communication with them.

"They asked us first concerning earth, its climates and seas and
continents, and concerning ourselves, our races and mechanisms and
weapons. Much information we flashed out to them, the language of our
communication being English, the elements, of which they had learned,
with a mixture of numbers and symbolical dot-dash signals.

"We were as eager to learn about them. They were somewhat reticent, we
found, concerning their planet and themselves. They admitted that
their world was a dying one and that their great canals were to make
life possible on it, and also admitted that they were different in
bodily form from ourselves.

"They told us finally that communication like this was too
ineffective to give us a clear picture of their world, or vice versa.
If we could visit Mars, and then they visit earth, both worlds would
benefit by the knowledge of the other. It seemed impossible to me,
though I was eager enough for it. But the Martians said that while
spaceships and the like were impossible, there was a way by which
living beings could flash from earth to Mars and back by radio waves,
even as our signals flashed!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Randall broke in in amazement. "By radio!" he exclaimed, and Milton
nodded.

"Yes, so they said, nor did the idea of sending matter by radio seem
too insane, after all. We send sound, music by radio waves across half
the world from our broadcasting stations. We send light, pictures,
across the world from our television stations. We do that by changing
the wave length of the light-vibrations to make them radio vibrations,
flashing them out thus over the world, to receivers which alter their
wave-lengths again and change them back into light-vibrations.

"Why then could not matter be sent in the same way? Matter, it has
been long believed, is but another vibration of the ether, like light
and radiant heat and radio vibrations and the like, having a lower
wave-length than any of the others. Suppose we take matter and by
applying electrical force to it change its wave-length, step it up to
the wave-length of radio vibrations? Then those vibrations can be
flashed forth from the sending station to a special receiver that will
step them down again from radio vibrations to matter vibrations. Thus
matter, living or non-living, could be flashed tremendous distances in
a second!

       *       *       *       *       *

"This the Martians told us, and said they would set up a
matter-transmitter and receiver on Mars and would aid and instruct us
so that we could set up a similar transmitter and receiver here. Then
part of us could be flashed out to Mars as radio vibrations by the
transmitter, and in moments would have flashed across the gulf to the
red planet and would be transformed back from radio vibrations to
matter-vibrations by the receiver awaiting us there!

"Naturally we agreed enthusiastically to build such a
matter-transmitter and receiver, and then, with their instructions
signalled to us constantly, started the work. Weeks it took, but at
last, only yesterday, we finished it. The thing's two cubical chambers
are one for the transmitting of matter and the other for its
reception. At a time agreed on yesterday we tested the thing, placing
a guinea pig in the transmitting chamber and turning on the actuating
force. Instantly the animal vanished, and in moments came a signal
from the Martians saying that they had received it unharmed in their
receiving chamber.

"Then we tested it the other way, they sending the same guinea pig to
us, and in moments it flashed into being in our receiving chamber. Of
course the step-down force in the receiving chamber had to be in
operation, since had it not been at that moment the radio-vibrations
of the animal would have simply flashed on endlessly in endless space.
And the same would happen to any of us were we flashed forth and no
receiving chamber turned on to receive us.

"We signalled the Martians that all tests were satisfactory, and told
them that on the next night at exactly midnight by our time we would
flash out ourselves on our first visit to them. They have promised to
have their receiving chamber operating to receive us at that moment,
of course, and it is my plan to stay there twenty-four hours,
gathering ample proofs of our visit, and then flash back to earth.

"Nelson must stay here, not only to flash us forth to-night, but above
all to have the receiving chamber operating to receive us at the
destined moment twenty-four hours later. The force required to
operate it is too great to use for more than a few minutes at a time,
so it is necessary above all that that force be turned on and the
receiving chamber ready for us at the moment we flash back. And since
Nelson must stay, and Lanier and I wanted another, we wired you,
Randall, in the hope that you would want to go with us on this
venture. And do you?"

       *       *       *       *       *

As Milton's question hung, Randall drew a long breath. His eyes were
on the two great cubical chambers, and his brain seemed whirling at
what he had heard. Then he was on his feet with the others.

"Go? Could you keep me from going? Why, man, it's the greatest
adventure in history!"

Milton grasped his hand, as did Lanier, and then the physicist shot a
glance at the square clock on the wall. "Well, there's little enough
time left us," he said, "for we've hardly an hour before midnight, and
at midnight we must be in that transmitting chamber for Nelson to send
