Project Gutenberg's Nor Iron Bars a Cage...., by Gordon Randall Garrett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Nor Iron Bars a Cage....

Author: Gordon Randall Garrett

Illustrator: Schoenherr

Release Date: January 2, 2010 [EBook #30832]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOR IRON BARS A CAGE.... ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

  This etext was produced from Analog Science Fact & Fiction May 1962.
  Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright
  on this publication was renewed.


                       NOR IRON BARS A CAGE....


     Iron bars do not confine a Man--only his body. There are
     more subtle, and more confining bindings, however....


                       JONATHAN BLAKE MACKENZIE

                      ILLUSTRATED BY SCHOENHERR

       *       *       *       *       *




Her red-blond hair was stained and discolored when they found her in
the sewer, and her lungs were choked with muck because her killer
hadn't bothered to see whether she was really dead when he dumped her
body into the manhole, so she had breathed the stuff in with her last
gasping breaths. Her face was bruised, covered with great blotches,
and three of her ribs had been broken. Her thighs and abdomen had been
bruised and lacerated.

[Illustration]

If she had lived for three more days, Angela Frances Donahue would
have reached her seventh birthday.

I didn't see her until she was brought to the morgue. My phone chimed,
and when I thumbed it on, the face of Inspector Kleek, of Homicide
South, came on the screen. His heavy eyelids always hang at half mast,
giving him a sleepy, bored look and the rest of his fleshy face sags
in the same general pattern. "Roy," he said as soon as he could see my
face on his own screen, "we just found the little Donahue girl. The
meat wagon's taking her down to the morgue now. You want to come down
here and look over the scene, or you want to go to the morgue? It
looks like it's one of your special cases, but we won't know for sure
until Doc Prouty does the post on her."

I took a firm grip on my temper. I should have been notified as soon
as Homicide had been; I should have been there with the Homicide
Squad. But I knew that if I said anything, Kleek would just say,
"Hell, Roy, they don't notify me until there's suspicion of homicide,
and you don't get a call until there's suspicion that it might be the
work of a degenerate. That's the way the system works. You know that,
Roy." And rather than hear that song-and-dance again, I gave myself
thirty seconds to think.

"I'll meet you at the morgue," I said. "Your men can get the whole
story at the scene without my help."

That mollified him, and it showed a little on his face. "O.K., Roy,
see you there." And he cut off.

I punched savagely at the numbered buttons on the phone to get an
intercommunication hookup with Dr. Barton Brownlee's office, on the
third floor of the same building as my own office. His face, when it
came on, was a calming contrast to Kleek's.

[Illustration]

He's nearly ten years younger than I am, not yet thirty-five, and his
handsome, thoughtful face and dark, slightly wavy hair always make me
think of somebody like St. Edward Pusey or maybe Albert Einstein. Not
that he looks like either one of them, or even that he looks saintly,
but he does look like a man who has the courage of his convictions
and is calmly, quietly, but forcefully ready to shove what he knows to
be the truth down everybody else's throat if that becomes necessary.
Or maybe I am just reading into his face what I know to be true about
the man himself.

"Brownie," I said, "they've found the Donahue girl. Taking her down to
the morgue now. Want to come along?"

"I don't think so," he said without hesitation. "I'll get all the
information I need from the photos and the reports. The man I do want
to see is the killer; I need more data, Roy--always more data. The
more my boys and I know about these zanies, the more effectively we
can deal with them."

"I know. O.K.; I've got to run." I cut off, grabbed my hat, and headed
out to fulfill my part of the bargain Brownlee and I had once made.
"You find 'em," he'd once said, "and I'll fix 'em." So far, that
bargain had paid off.

       *       *       *       *       *

I got to the morgue a few minutes after the body was brought in. The
man at the front desk looked up at me as I walked in and gave me a
bored smile. "Evening, Inspector. The Donahue kid's in the clean-up
room." Then he went back to his paper work.

The lab technicians were standing around watching while the morgue
attendant sluiced the muck off the corpse with a hose, watching to see
if anything showed up in the gooey filth. Inspector Kleek stood to
one side. All he said was, "Hi, Roy."

The morgue attendant lifted up one small arm with a gloved hand and
played the hose over the thin biceps. "Good thing the rigor mortis has
gone off," he said, "these stiffs are hell to handle when they're
stiff." It was an old joke, but everybody grinned out of habit.

The clear water from the hose flowed over the skin and turned a
grayish brown as it ran down to the bottom of the shallow, waist-high
stainless-steel trough in which the body was lying.

One of the lab techs stepped over and began going through the long
hair very carefully, and Doc Prouty, the Medical Examiner, began
cleaning out the mouth and nose and eyes and ears with careful hands.

I turned to Kleek. "You sure it's the Donahue girl?"

He sighed and looked away from the small dead thing on the cleaning
table. "Who else could it be? She was found only three blocks from the
Donahue home. No other female child reported missing in that area. We
haven't checked the prints yet, but you can bet they'll tally with her
school record."

I had to agree. "What about the time of death?"

"Doc Prouty figures forty-eight to sixty hours ago."

"I'll be able to give you a better figure after the post," the Medical
Examiner said without looking up from his work.

A tall, big-nosed man in plain-clothes suddenly turned away from the
scene on the table, his mouth moving queerly, his eyes hard. After a
moment, his lips relaxed. Still staring at the wall, he said: "I guess
the case is out of Federal jurisdiction, then. We'll co-operate, as
usual, of course." He looked at me. "Could I talk to you outside,
Inspector Royall?"

I looked at Kleek. "O.K., Sam?" I didn't have to have his O.K.; it was
just professional courtesy. He knew I'd tell him whatever it was that
the FBI man had to say, and we both knew why the Federal agent wanted
to leave.

Sam Kleek nodded. "Sure. I'll keep an eye out here."

       *       *       *       *       *

The FBI man followed me into the outer room.

"Do you figure this as a sex-degenerate case, Inspector?" he asked.

"Looks like it. You saw the bruises. Dr. Prouty will be able to tell
us for sure after the post mortem."

He shook his head as if to clear it of a bad memory. "You New York
police can sure be cold-blooded at times."

The thing that was bothering him, as Kleek and I both knew, was that
the FBI agent hadn't been exposed to this sort of thing often enough.
They deal with the kind of crimes that actually don't involve the
callous murder of children very often. Even the murder of adults
doesn't normally come under the aegis of the FBI.

"We're not cold blooded," I said. "Not by inclination, I mean. But a
man gets that way--he has to get that way--after he's seen enough of
this sort of thing. You either get yourself an emotional callous or
you get deathly sick from the repetition--and then you have to get out
of the job."

"Yeah," he said. "Sure." He quit rubbing his chin with a knuckle,
looked at me, and said: "What I wanted to say is that there's no
evidence that she was taken across a state line. Whoever sent that
ransom note to the Donahue parents was trying to throw us off the
track."

"Looks like it. Look at the time-table. The note was sent _after_ the
girl was murdered, but _before_ the information hit the papers or the
newscasts. The killer wanted us to think it was a ransom kidnaping. It
isn't likely that the note was sent by a crank. A crank wouldn't have
known the girl was missing at all at the time the note was sent."

"That's the way it seems to me," he agreed. The color was coming back
into his face. "But why would he want to make it look like a kidnaping
instead of ... of what it was? The penalty's the same for both."

My grin had anger, pity, and disgust for the killer in it--plus a
certain amount of satisfaction. Some day, I'd like to see my face in a
mirror when I feel like that.

"He was hoping the body wouldn't be found until it was too late for us
to know that it was a rape killing. And that means that he knew that
he would be on our list if we did find out that it was rape.
Otherwise, he wouldn't have bothered. If I'm right, then he has
outsmarted himself. He has told us that we know him, and he's told us
that he's smart enough to figure out a dodge--that he's not one of the
helplessly stupid ones."

"That should help to narrow the field down," he said in a hard voice.
He felt in his pocket for a cigarette, found his pack, took one out,
and then held it, unlit, between the fingers of his right hand.
"Inspector Royall, I've studied the new law of this state--the one
you're working under here--and I think it'll be great if it works out.
I wish you luck. Now, if you'll excuse me, I have to call the office."

As he went out to the desk phone, I gave him a silent thanks. Words of
encouragement were hard to come by at that time.

I turned and went back towards the clean-up room.

She didn't look as though she were asleep. They never do. She looked
dead. She'd been head down in the sewer, and the blood had pooled and
coagulated in her head and shoulders. Now that the filth had been
washed off, the dark purple of the dead blood cells showed through the
translucent skin. She would look better after she was embalmed.

