The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Barbarians, by John Sentry

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Barbarians

Author: John Sentry

Illustrator: Ed Emshwiller

Release Date: January 2, 2010 [EBook #30828]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BARBARIANS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _History was repeating itself; there were moats and nobles in
    Pennsylvania and vassals in Manhattan and the barbarian hordes were
    overrunning the land._


The Barbarians

BY JOHN SENTRY


It was just as he saw The Barbarian's squat black tankette lurch
hurriedly into a nest of boulders that young Giulion Geoffrey realized
he had been betrayed. With the muzzle of his own cannon still hot from
the shell that had jammed The Barbarian's turret, he had yanked the
starboard track lever to wheel into position for the finishing shot. All
around him, the remnants of The Barbarian's invading army were being cut
to flaming ribbons by the armored vehicles of the Seaboard League. The
night was shot through by billows of cannon fire, and the din of
laboring engines, guns, and rent metal was a cacophonic climax to the
Seaboard League's first decisive victory over the inland invaders. Young
Geoffrey could justifiably feel that he would cap that climax by
personally accounting for the greatest of the inland barbarians; the
barbarian general himself. He trained his sights on the scarlet bearpaw
painted on the skewed turret's flank, and laid his hand on the firing
lever.

Out of the corner of his eye, he caught a glimpse of another tankette
rushing up on his port side. He glanced at it, saw its graceful
handcrafting, and knew it for one of the League's own. He could even see
the insigne; the mailed heel trampling a stand of wheat; Harolde Dugald,
of the neighboring fief. Geoffrey was on coldly polite terms with
Dugald--he had no use for the other man's way of treating his serfs--and
now he felt a prickle of indignant rage at this attempt to usurp a
share of his glory. He saw Dugald's turret begin to traverse, and
hastily tried to get the finishing shot into The Barbarian's tankette
before the other Leaguesman could fire. But Dugald was not aiming for
The Barbarian. First he had to eliminate Geoffrey from the scene
entirely. When he fired, at almost point-blank range, the world seemed
to explode in Giulion's eyes.

[Illustration: _Illustrated by Ed Emsh_]

Somehow, no whistling shard of metal actually hit him. But the tankette,
sturdy as it was, could not hope to protect him entirely. He was thrown
viciously into the air, his ribs first smashing into the side of the
hatch, and then he was thrown clear, onto the rocky ground of the
foothills; agonized, stunned to semi-consciousness, he lay feebly
beating at his smoldering tunic while Dugald spun viciously by him,
almost crushing him under one tread. He saw Dugald's tankette plunge
into the rocks after The Barbarian, and then, suddenly, the battle was
beyond him. Dugald, The Barbarian; all the thundering might that had
clashed here on the eastern seaboard of what had, long ago, been The
United States of America--all of this had suddenly, as battles will,
whirled off in a new direction and left Giulion Geoffrey to lie hurt and
unconscious in the night.

       *       *       *

He awoke to the trickle of cold water between his teeth. His lips bit
into the threaded metal of a canteen top, and a huge arm supported his
shoulders. Broad shoulders and a massive head loomed over him against
the stars. A rumbling, gentle voice said: "All right, lad, now swallow
some before it's all wasted."

He peered around him in the night. It was as still as the bottom of a
grave. Nothing moved. He drew a ragged breath that ended in a sharp
gasp, and the rumbling voice said: "Ribs?"

He nodded and managed a strangled "Yes."

"Shouldn't wonder," the stranger grunted. "I saw you pop out of your
tank like a cork coming out of a wine bottle. That was a fair shot he
hit you. You're lucky." A broad hand pressed him down as the memory of
Dugald's treachery started him struggling to his feet. "Hold still, lad.
We'll give you a chance to catch your breath and wrap some bandages
around you. You'll live to give him his due, but not tonight. You'll
have to wait for another day."

There was something in the stranger's voice that Geoffrey recognized for
the quality that made men obey other men. It was competence,
self-assurance, and, even more, the calm expression of good sense.
Tonight, Geoffrey needed someone with that quality. He sank back,
grateful for the stranger's help. "I'm Giulion Geoffrey of Geoffrion,"
he said, "and indebted to you. Who are you, stranger?"

The darkness rumbled to a deep, rueful laugh. "In these parts, lad, I'm
not called by my proper name. I'm Hodd Savage--The Barbarian. And that
was a fair knock _you_ gave _me_."

Young Geoffrey's silence lasted for a long while. Then he said in a
flat, distant voice: "Why did you give me water, if you're going to kill
me anyway?"

The Barbarian laughed again, this time in pure amusement. "Because I'm
not going to kill you, obviously. You're too good a cannoneer to be
despatched by a belt knife. No--no, lad, I'm not planning to kill anyone
for some time. All I want right now is to get out of here and get home.
I've got another army to raise, to make up for this pasting you
Leaguesmen have just given me."

"Next time, you won't be so lucky," Geoffrey muttered. "We'll see your
hide flapping in the rain, if you're ever foolish enough to raid our
lands again."

The Barbarian slapped his thigh. "By God," he chuckled, "I knew it
wasn't some ordinary veal-fed princeling that outmaneuvered _me_!" He
shook his head. "That other pup had better watch out for you, if you
ever cross his path again. I lost him in the rocks with ease to spare.
Bad luck your shot smashed my fuel tanks, or I'd be halfway home by
now." The rolling voice grew low and bitter. "No sense waiting to pick
up my men. Not enough of 'em left to make a corporal's guard."

"What do you mean, _if_ I ever cross Dugald's path again? I'll have him
