The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Instant of Now, by Irving E. Cox, Jr.

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Instant of Now

Author: Irving E. Cox, Jr.

Release Date: March 15, 2010 [EBook #31651]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE INSTANT OF NOW ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Fantastic Universe Aug-Sept 1953.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


[_One of the most intriguing of all science fiction patterns
  is that of the galactic sweep--the story which takes for granted human
  travel between stars at speeds far faster than the speed of light. In
  its most successful form, such a story combines cosmic action with a
  wholly human plot. In this case Mr. Cox--but read it yourself._]


                          the instant of now


                     _by ... Irving E. Cox, Jr._


     Revolution is not necessarily a noble thing. Unless shrewdly
     directed, its best elements may fall victim to its basest
     impulses.

       *       *       *       *       *




Eddie Dirrul had destroyed the message seconds after reading it. Yet,
as he left the pneumotube from the University, he felt as if it were
burning a hole in his pocket. It had come to him from Paul Sorgel, the
new top-agent from the Planet Vinin. It had been written in High
Vininese.

For a moment the alien language had slowed Eddie's reaction to its
contents, as had the shocking nature of its words. It had read--

     _Need your help. Glenna and Hurd in brush with Secret
      Police--both hurt. Come at once._

Luckily old Dr. Kramer had asked no awkward questions when Eddie
excused himself from the balance of the lecture. If the kindly
bumbling professor had been inquisitive, Eddie had no idea how he
would have answered. Glenna was his fiancee, Hurd his best friend--and
their disaster meant disaster for the underground movement that had
become the guiding purpose of his entire life.

The night was still young when he emerged from the pneumotube and the
slanting ramp-lines of windows in the massive unit-blocks of the
Workers' Suburb rose about him within the darkness of the structural
frames that encased them.

Parks, recreation centers and gaudy amusement halls were aswirl with
the usual evening crowds. With a sort of angry heedlessness Eddie
forced his way among tall perpetually-youthful men in bright leisure
clothing--and consciously alluring women clad in filmy garments as
teasingly transparent as mist.

_Glenna hurt--and Hurd!_ Seriously, of course, or Paul Sorgel would
never have risked a hand-message. With quiet desperation he pushed
through the crowds--in his trim grey Air-command uniform he was one
with them, a nonentity like themselves.

He knew where to find the three he sought. Beyond the outdoor courts,
where his fellow-Agronians amused themselves with a variety of
racquet-games, lay a tiny park, wherein a state of wild disorder was
carefuly maintained in imitation of nature.

Few were attracted by its rugged growth, save in very warm weather,
when hardy souls ventured within its borders to relax in artificial
breezes created by silent concealed fans. In its center stood a small
stone building that housed the maintenance machinery. It was deserted,
except for once each year when the city engineering crews came to
check the machines and to make minor repairs. There the Libero-Freedom
Movement held its meetings, in the shadow of the whirring wheels.

Sorgel came out of the shadows as Dirrul pushed through the thicket of
brush that surrounded the stone building. In a hushed whisper he
asked, "That you, Eddie?"

"Yes--where are they?"

"Inside. I gave them a hypo--they're both under now. It makes it
easier."

"How did it happen, Paul?"

"I was to meet Glenna and Hurd at her apartment, to talk over the
details of the Plan. The police were there ahead of me but I broke up
the party before they could finish the job. Since they've got to do
this sort of thing unofficially, to be able to deny it later if any
questions are asked, I scared them off easily enough. I brought Glenna
and Hurd here in my Unicyl but I'll need your help to get them out."

"This is the second time it's happened, Paul!" said Eddie. "And the
Plan--we'll have to organize all over again. As soon as our people
hear about this most of them will run like scared rabbits."

"Not if they don't know, Eddie. That's where you come in. We've got to
get Glenna and Hurd away from Agron. If there's no evidence of a crime
there's no reason for an investigation."

"But what can I do?"

"Borrow one of the Air-command's surface jets for a while."

Paul Sorgel's plan was simple and efficient. The Air-Command field was
fenced with electronic paralysis barriers and the entrance was heavily
guarded. But no watch was kept inside the encampment except for a
daily inspection of the machines when the guard was changed at dawn.
Since Dirrul was a Captain of the Space-maintenance Division, 73rd
Air-Command Wing, he was able to enter the area at any time without
question. Among the scheduled night training flights for new cadets,
the departure of one more surface jet would pass unobserved.

"Come back here for Glenna and Hurd," Sorgel said, "and take them out
to the South Desert. If there's no hitch you should be back before
dawn, with time to spare. If not...." Sorgel shrugged. "Eddie, we
can't build a better universe without taking occasional risks."

Slowly Dirrul's body tensed with fear. In a cold dead voice he asked,
"Am I to leave them there, without help or medicine, to die of thirst
and hunger?"

"Many sacrifices are necessary for the good of the Movement."

"But Glenna and Hurd are our leaders!"

"The freedom of the universe means a little more, I think, than the
temporary safety of two individuals." Sorgel lit a cigarette. In the
faint pink reflection of the Glo-Wave lighter his face was emptily
placid, a faint smile twisting the corners of his lips. "Suppose I say
it's a command, Dirrul--a Vininese command, calling for Vininese
discipline."

After a moment Dirrul replied in a choked whisper, "I'll take them,
sir."

Sorgel smiled and the crisp tone of authority edged out of his voice.
"As a matter of fact, Eddie, I was curious to see what you would do.
The Vininese Confederacy practises neither cruelty nor deception.
You'll find one of our Space-dragons hidden in a gorge of the Katskain
Range. It's the ship I came in a week ago.

"The pilot was instructed to wait fifteen planetary revolutions in the
event that I might have a report to send back to Headquarters. You
must learn to trust me, Eddie. From the first, you see, I intended to
send Glenna and Hurd to Vinin. If they get there in time there's a
chance our Medical Corps can pull them through. They may even be back
here with us for the day when we carry out the Plan."

Dirrul was in no real danger. Much as it benefited the Movement the
laxity of Agronian security was one of the chief reasons why Dirrul
scorned the Planetary Union. The space-wide patrols of the
Air-Command, the city guards and the electronic paralysis barricades
created a feeling of internal control--but it was all a glittering
sham. If it were not for the Nuclear Beams the whole system would long
since have crumbled under the first pressure from outside.

With no difficulty he picked up Glenna and Hurd and took them to the
South Desert, where he put them aboard the sleek Vininese space-ship.
It was one of the new Dragon design--compact, efficient, faster than
anything built by the Planetary Union, protected by sixteen circular
batteries and yet small enough to be handled by one man.

Dirrul had seen only one other Vininese Space-dragon and that from a
distance at the Agronian commercial airport, when the last Vininese
ambassador arrived. Technically there was no reason why Paul Sorgel
could not have landed there as well, except that the Customs
questionnaire might have proved embarrassing.

Twenty years earlier, when Dirrul was still a schoolboy, the Galactic
War had ended. Since that time relations between the Planetary Union
and the Vininese Confederacy had steadily improved--at least in
appearance. Undoubtedly there were commercial interests on both sides
anxious to maintain peace and in recent years the quantity of goods in
trade had grown enormously. But it was a truce, not a peace--a
compromise, rather than a victory--forced on the galaxy when the
scientists of the Planetary Union discovered the Nuclear Beams.

Pain shot through Dirrul's mind as he carried Glenna into the
pressurized chamber under the control room. She and Hurd were still
unconscious but Glenna turned in his arms and her eyes fluttered open.
She looked at him and screamed in terrible agony before the pilot of
the Space-dragon plunged a hypodermic sedative into her arm.

"It is better," he said to Dirrul in throaty Vininese. "So beautiful a
one should not feel the pain." Carefully he fastened the needlepoint
of a wall tube into Glenna's vein and another into Hurd's.

"Synthetic blood feeding," he said with a smile. "It will keep them
alive, perhaps even permitting minor wounds to heal, until I deliver
them to the authorities on Vinin. You see, sir, my little ship is
well-equipped." He slammed the round door of the hospital room shut
and led Dirrul to the control blister.

"How long will it be, this trip to Vinin?" Dirrul asked, speaking very
slowly in classical Vininese. Like everyone in the Movement he had
studied the language of Vinin as a sort of courtesy and duty but he
had no illusion about his small ability to handle it.

"In terms of your time," the pilot said, "about thirty days."

"Only thirty? The Planetary Union hasn't a ship that could make it
