The Project Gutenberg EBook of Garth and the Visitor, by L. J. Stecher

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Garth and the Visitor

Author: L. J. Stecher

Illustrator: Dick Francis

Release Date: April 12, 2010 [EBook #31956]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GARTH AND THE VISITOR ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Barbara Tozier and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





    This etext was produced from Galaxy Science Fiction April
    1958. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
    U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.




Garth and the Visitor


BY L. J. STECHER


    _If you could ask them, you might be greatly surprised--some
    tabus very urgently want to be broken!_

Illustrated by DICK FRANCIS


Although as brash as any other ace newspaper reporter for a high
school weekly--and there is no one brasher--Garth was scared. His head
crest lifted spasmodically and the rudimentary webbing between his
fingers twitched. To answer a dare, Garth was about to attempt
something that had never been dared before: a newspaper interview with
The Visitor. There had been questions enough asked and answered during
the thousands of years The Visitor had sat in his egg-shaped palace on
the mountaintop, but no interviews. It was shocking even to think
about--something like requesting a gossippy chat with God.

Of course, nobody believed the fable any longer that The Visitor would
vanish if he was ever asked a personal question--and that he would
first destroy the man who asked. It was known, or at least suspected,
that the Palace was merely a mile-long spaceship.

Garth, as tradition required, climbed the seven-mile-long rock-hewn
path to the Palace on foot. He paused for a moment on the broad
platform at the top of the pyramid to catch his breath and let the
beating of his heart slow to normal after his long climb before he
entered The Palace. He sighed deeply. The sufferings a reporter was
willing to go through to get a story or take a dare!

"Well, come in if you're going to," said an impatient voice. "Don't
just stand there and pant."

"Yes, my Lord Visitor," Garth managed to say.

He climbed the short ladder, passed through the two sets of doors and
entered a small room to kneel, with downcast eyes, before the ancient
figure huddled in the wheelchair.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Visitor looked at the kneeling figure for a moment without
speaking. The boy looked very much like a human, in spite of such
