The Project Gutenberg EBook of Atom Drive, by Charles Louis Fontenay

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Atom Drive

Author: Charles Louis Fontenay

Release Date: April 20, 2010 [EBook #32067]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ATOM DRIVE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






Transcriber's note:

This etext was produced from If Worlds of Science Fiction April 1956.
Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright
on this publication was renewed.




[Illustration]




ATOM DRIVE

BY CHARLES FONTENAY

     _It was a race between the tortoise and the hare. But this hare was
     using some dirty tricks to make sure the ending would be
     different...._

[Illustration: _Illustrated by Ed Emsh_]


The two spaceship crews were friendly enemies, sitting across the table
from each other for their last meal before blastoff. Outside the ports,
the sky was nothing but light-streaked blackness, punctured periodically
by Earth glare, for Space Station 2 whirled swiftly on its axis,
creating an artificial gravity.

"Jonner, I figured you the last man ever to desert the rockets for a
hot-rod tow-job," chided Russo Baat, captain of the Mars Corporation's
gleaming new freighter, _Marsward XVIII_. Baat was fat and red-faced,
and one of the shrewdest space captains in the business.

Jonner Jons, at the other end of the table, inclined his grizzled head
and smiled.

"Times change, Russo," he answered quietly. "Even the Mars Corporation
can't stop that."

"Is it true that you're pulling five thousand tons of cargo, Captain?"
asked one of the crewmen of the _Marsward XVIII_.

"Something like that," agreed Jonner, and his smile broadened. "And I
have only about twice the fuel supply you carry for a 100-ton payload."

The communicator above them squawked and blared:

"Captain Jons and Captain Baat of Martian competition run, please report
to control for final briefing."

"I knew it!" grumbled Baat, getting heavily and reluctantly to his feet.
"I haven't gotten to finish a meal on this blasted merry-go-round yet."

In the space station's control section, Commander Ortega of the Space
Control Commission, an ascetic officer in plain blues, looked them up
and down severely.

"As you know, gentlemen," he said, "blastoff time is 0600. Tonnage of
cargo, fuel and empty vessels cannot be a factor, under the law. The
Mars Corporation will retain its exclusive franchise to the Earth-Mars
run, unless the ship sponsored by the Atom-Star Company returns to Earth
with full cargo at least twenty hours ahead of the ship sponsored by the
Mars Corporation. Cargo must be unloaded at Mars and new cargo taken on.
I do not consider the twenty-hour bias in favor of the Mars Corporation
a fair one," said Ortega severely, turning his gaze to Baat, "but the
Space Control Commission does not make the laws. It enforces them.
Docking and loading facilities will be available to both of you on an
equal basis at Phobos and Marsport. Good luck."

He shook hands with both of them.

"Saturn, I'm glad to get out of there!" exclaimed Baat, mopping his brow
as they left the control section. "Every time I take a step, I feel like
I'm falling on my face."

"It's because the control section's so close to the center," replied
Jonner. "The station's spinning to maintain artificial gravity, and your
feet are away from the center. As long as you're standing upright, the
pull is straight up and down to you, but actually your feet are moving
faster than your head, in a larger orbit. When you try to move, as in
normal gravity, your body swings out of that line of pull and you nearly
fall. The best corrective, I've found, is to lean backward slightly when
you start to walk."

As the two space captains walked back toward the wardroom together, Baat
said:

"Jonner, I hear the Mars Corporation offered you the _Marsward XVIII_
for this run first, and you turned them down. Why? You piloted the
_Marsward V_ and the _Wayward Lady_ for Marscorp when those upstarts in
the Argentine were trying to crack the Earth-Mars run. This Atom-Star
couldn't have enough money to buy you away from Marscorp."

"No, Marscorp offered me more," said Jonner, soberly now. "But this
atomic drive is the future of space travel, Russo. Marscorp has it, but
they're sitting on it because they've got their fingers in hydrazine
interests here, and the atom drive will make hydrazine useless for space
