Project Gutenberg's The World That Couldn't Be, by Clifford Donald Simak

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The World That Couldn't Be

Author: Clifford Donald Simak

Illustrator: Gaughan

Release Date: April 17, 2010 [EBook #32026]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WORLD THAT COULDN'T BE ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Galaxy Science Fiction January 1958.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                      The World That Couldn't Be


                         By CLIFFORD D. SIMAK


                        Illustrated by GAUGHAN


     _Like every farmer on every planet, Duncan had to hunt down
      anything that damaged his crops--even though he was aware
      this was--_

       *       *       *       *       *




The tracks went up one row and down another, and in those rows the
_vua_ plants had been sheared off an inch or two above the ground. The
raider had been methodical; it had not wandered about haphazardly, but
had done an efficient job of harvesting the first ten rows on the west
side of the field. Then, having eaten its fill, it had angled off into
the bush--and that had not been long ago, for the soil still trickled
down into the great pug marks, sunk deep into the finely cultivated
loam.

[Illustration]

Somewhere a sawmill bird was whirring through a log, and down in one
of the thorn-choked ravines, a choir of chatterers was clicking
through a ghastly morning song. It was going to be a scorcher of a
day. Already the smell of desiccated dust was rising from the ground
and the glare of the newly risen sun was dancing off the bright leaves
of the hula-trees, making it appear as if the bush were filled with a
million flashing mirrors.

Gavin Duncan hauled a red bandanna from his pocket and mopped his
face.

"No, mister," pleaded Zikkara, the native foreman of the farm. "You
cannot do it, mister. You do not hunt a Cytha."

"The hell I don't," said Duncan, but he spoke in English and not the
native tongue.

He stared out across the bush, a flat expanse of sun-cured grass
interspersed with thickets of hula-scrub and thorn and occasional
groves of trees, criss-crossed by treacherous ravines and spotted with
infrequent waterholes.

It would be murderous out there, he told himself, but it shouldn't
take too long. The beast probably would lay up shortly after its
pre-dawn feeding and he'd overhaul it in an hour or two. But if he
failed to overhaul it, then he must keep on.

"Dangerous," Zikkara pointed out. "No one hunts the Cytha."

"I do," Duncan said, speaking now in the native language. "I hunt
anything that damages my crop. A few nights more of this and there
would be nothing left."

       *       *       *       *       *

Jamming the bandanna back into his pocket, he tilted his hat lower
across his eyes against the sun.

"It might be a long chase, mister. It is the _skun_ season now. If you
were caught out there...."

"Now listen," Duncan told it sharply. "Before I came, you'd feast one
day, then starve for days on end; but now you eat each day. And you
like the doctoring. Before, when you got sick, you died. Now you get
sick, I doctor you, and you live. You like staying in one place,
instead of wandering all around."

"Mister, we like all this," said Zikkara, "but we do not hunt the
Cytha."

"If we do not hunt the Cytha, we lose all this," Duncan pointed out.
"If I don't make a crop, I'm licked. I'll have to go away. Then what
happens to you?"

"We will grow the corn ourselves."

"That's a laugh," said Duncan, "and you know it is. If I didn't kick
your backsides all day long, you wouldn't do a lick of work. If I
leave, you go back to the bush. Now let's go and get that Cytha."

"But it is such a little one, mister! It is such a young one! It is
scarcely worth the trouble. It would be a shame to kill it."

Probably just slightly smaller than a horse, thought Duncan, watching
the native closely.

It's scared, he told himself. It's scared dry and spitless.

"Besides, it must have been most hungry. Surely, mister, even a Cytha
has the right to eat."

"Not from my crop," said Duncan savagely. "You know why we grow the
_vua_, don't you? You know it is great medicine. The berries that it
grows cures those who are sick inside their heads. My people need that
medicine--need it very badly. And what is more, out there--" he swept
his arm toward the sky--"out there they pay very much for it."

"But, mister...."

"I tell you this," said Duncan gently, "you either dig me up a
bush-runner to do the tracking for me or you can all get out, the kit
and caboodle of you. I can get other tribes to work the farm."

"No, mister!" Zikkara screamed in desperation.

"You have your choice," Duncan told it coldly.

       *       *       *       *       *

He plodded back across the field toward the house. Not much of a house
as yet. Not a great deal better than a native shack. But someday it
would be, he told himself. Let him sell a crop or two and he'd build a
house that would really be a house. It would have a bar and swimming
pool and a garden filled with flowers, and at last, after years of
wandering, he'd have a home and broad acres and everyone, not just one
lousy tribe, would call him mister.

Gavin Duncan, planter, he said to himself, and liked the sound of it.
Planter on the planet Layard. But not if the Cytha came back night
after night and ate the _vua_ plants.

He glanced over his shoulder and saw that Zikkara was racing for the
native village.

Called their bluff, Duncan informed himself with satisfaction.

He came out of the field and walked across the yard, heading for the
house. One of Shotwell's shirts was hanging on the clothes-line, limp
in the breathless morning.

Damn the man, thought Duncan. Out here mucking around with those
stupid natives, always asking questions, always under foot. Although,
to be fair about it, that was Shotwell's job. That was what the
Sociology people had sent him out to do.

Duncan came up to the shack, pushed the door open and entered.
Shotwell, stripped to the waist, was at the wash bench.

Breakfast was cooking on the stove, with an elderly native acting as
cook.

Duncan strode across the room and took down the heavy rifle from its
peg. He slapped the action open, slapped it shut again.

Shotwell reached for a towel.

"What's going on?" he asked.

"Cytha got into the field."

"Cytha?"

"A kind of animal," said Duncan. "It ate ten rows of _vua_."

"Big? Little? What are its characteristics?"

The native began putting breakfast on the table. Duncan walked to the
table, laid the rifle across one corner of it and sat down. He poured
a brackish liquid out of a big stew pan into their cups.

God, he thought, what I would give for a cup of coffee.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shotwell pulled up his chair. "You didn't answer me. What is a Cytha
like?"

"I wouldn't know," said Duncan.

"Don't know? But you're going after it, looks like, and how can you
hunt it if you don't know--"

"Track it. The thing tied to the other end of the trail is sure to be
the Cytha. Well find out what it's like once we catch up to it."

"We?"

"The natives will send up someone to do the tracking for me. Some of
them are better than a dog."

"Look, Gavin. I've put you to a lot of trouble and you've been decent
with me. If I can be any help, I would like to go."

"Two make better time than three. And we have to catch this Cytha fast
or it might settle down to an endurance contest."

"All right, then. Tell me about the Cytha."

Duncan poured porridge gruel into his bowl, handed the pan to
Shotwell. "It's a sort of special thing. The natives are scared to
death of it. You hear a lot of stories about it. Said to be
unkillable. It's always capitalized, always a proper noun. It has been
