The Project Gutenberg EBook of Breeder Reaction, by Winston Marks

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Breeder Reaction

Author: Winston Marks

Illustrator: Kelly Freas

Release Date: April 21, 2010 [EBook #32077]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BREEDER REACTION ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from If Worlds of Science Fiction April 1954.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                           Breeder Reaction


                           By Winston Marks


                      Illustrated by Kelly Freas


     _The remarkable thing about Atummyc Afterbath Dusting Powder
      was that it gave you that lovely, radiant, atomic look--just
      the way the advertisements said it would. In fact, it also
      gave you a little something_ more!

       *       *       *       *       *




The advertising game is not as cut and dried as many people think.
Sometimes you spend a million dollars and get no results, and then
some little low-budget campaign will catch the public's fancy and walk
away with merchandising honors of the year.

Let me sound a warning, however. When this happens, watch out! There's
always a reason for it, and it isn't always just a matter of bright
slogans and semantic genius. Sometimes the product itself does the
trick. And when this happens people in the industry lose their heads
trying to capitalize on the "freak" good fortune.

This can lead to disaster. May I cite one example?

I was on loan to Elaine Templeton, Inc., the big cosmetics firm, when
one of these "prairie fires" took off and, as product engineer from
the firm of Bailey Hazlitt & Persons, Advertising Agency, I figured I
had struck pure gold. My assay was wrong. It was fool's gold on a pool
of quicksand.

Madame "Elaine", herself, had called me in for consultation on a huge
lipstick campaign she was planning--you know, NOW AT LAST, A TRULY
KISS-PROOF LIPSTICK!--the sort of thing they pull every so often to
get the ladies to chuck their old lip-goo and invest in the current
dream of non-smearability. It's an old gimmick, and the new product is
never actually kiss-proof, but they come closer each year, and the
gals tumble for it every time.

Well, they wanted my advice on a lot of details such as optimum
shades, a new name, size, shape and design of container. And they were
ready to spend a hunk of moolah on the build-up. You see, when they
give a product a first-class advertising ride they don't figure on
necessarily showing a profit on that particular item. If they break
even they figure they are ahead of the game, because the true purpose
is to build up the brand name. You get enough women raving over the
new Elaine Templeton lipstick, and first thing you know sales start
climbing on the whole line of assorted aids to seduction.

