The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Ego Machine, by Henry Kuttner

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Ego Machine

Author: Henry Kuttner

Release Date: April 24, 2010 [EBook #32108]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EGO MACHINE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









THE EGO MACHINE

_by_ HENRY KUTTNER

[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Space Science Fiction
May 1952. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
copyright on this publication was renewed.]

[Sidenote: When a slightly mad robot drunk on AC, wants you to join an
experiment in optimum ecology--don't do it! After all, who wants to
argue like Disraeli or live like Ivan the Terrible?]




I


Nicholas Martin looked up at the robot across the desk.

"I'm not going to ask what you want," he said, in a low, restrained
voice. "I already know. Just go away and tell St. Cyr I approve. Tell
him I think it's wonderful, putting a robot in the picture. We've had
everything else by now, except the Rockettes. But clearly a quiet little
play about Christmas among the Portuguese fishermen on the Florida coast
_must_ have a robot. Only, why not six robots? Tell him I suggest a
baker's dozen. Go away."

"Was your mother's name Helena Glinska?" the robot asked.

"It was not," Martin said.

"Ah, then she must have been the Great Hairy One," the robot murmured.

Martin took his feet off the desk and sat up slowly.

"It's quite all right," the robot said hastily. "You've been chosen for
an ecological experiment, that's all. But it won't hurt. Robots are
perfectly normal life forms where I come from, so you needn't--"

"Shut up," Martin said. "Robot indeed, you--you bit-player! This time
St. Cyr has gone too far." He began to shake slightly all over, with
some repressed but strong emotion. The intercom box on the desk caught
his eye, and he stabbed a finger at one of the switches. "Get me Miss
Ashby! Right away!"

"I'm so sorry," the robot said apologetically. "Have I made a mistake?
The threshold fluctuations in the neurons always upset my mnemonic norm
when I temporalize. Isn't this a crisis-point in your life?"

Martin breathed hard, which seemed to confirm the robot's assumption.

"Exactly," it said. "The ecological imbalance approaches a peak that may
destroy the life-form, unless ... mm-m. Now either you're about to be
stepped on by a mammoth, locked in an iron mask, assassinated by helots,
or--is this Sanskrit I'm speaking?" He shook his gleaming head. "Perhaps
I should have got off fifty years ago, but I thought--sorry. Good-bye,"
he added hastily as Martin raised an angry glare.

Then the robot lifted a finger to each corner of his naturally rigid
mouth, and moved his fingers horizontally in opposite directions, as
though sketching an apologetic smile.

"No, don't go away," Martin said. "I want you right here, where the
sight of you can refuel my rage in case it's needed. I wish to God I
could get mad and stay mad," he added plaintively, gazing at the
telephone.

"Are you sure your mother's name wasn't Helena Glinska?" the robot
asked. It pinched thumb and forefinger together between its nominal
brows, somehow giving the impression of a worried frown.

"Naturally I'm sure," Martin snapped.

"You aren't married yet, then? To Anastasia Zakharina-Koshkina?"

"Not yet or ever," Martin replied succinctly. The telephone rang. He
snatched it up.

        *        *       *        *        *

"Hello, Nick," said Erika Ashby's calm voice. "Something wrong?"

Instantly the fires of rage went out of Martin's eyes, to be replaced by
a tender, rose-pink glow. For some years now he had given Erika, his
very competent agent, ten percent of his take. He had also longed
hopelessly to give her approximately a pound of flesh--the cardiac
muscle, to put it in cold, unromantic terms. Martin did not; he put it
in no terms at all, since whenever he tried to propose marriage to Erika
he was taken with such fits of modesty that he could only babble o'
green fields.

"Well," Erika repeated. "Something wrong?"

"Yes," Martin said, drawing a long breath. "Can St. Cyr make me marry
somebody named Anastasia Zakharina-Koshkina?"

"What a wonderful memory you have," the robot put in mournfully. "Mine
used to be, before I started temporalizing. But even radioactive neurons
won't stand--"

"Nominally you're still entitled to life, liberty, et cetera," Erika
said. "But I'm busy right now, Nick. Can't it wait till I see you?"

"When?"

"Didn't you get my message?" Erika demanded.

"Of course not," Martin said, angrily. "I've suspected for some time
that all my incoming calls have to be cleared by St. Cyr. Somebody might
try to smuggle in a word of hope, or possibly a file." His voice
brightened. "Planning a jailbreak?"

"Oh, this is outrageous," Erika said. "Some day St. Cyr's going to go
too far--"

"Not while he's got DeeDee behind him," Martin said gloomily. Summit
Studios would sooner have made a film promoting atheism than offend
their top box-office star, DeeDee Fleming. Even Tolliver Watt, who owned
Summit lock, stock and barrel, spent wakeful nights because St. Cyr
refused to let the lovely DeeDee sign a long-term contract.

"Nevertheless, Watt's no fool," Erika said. "I still think we could get
him to give you a contract release if we could make him realize what a
rotten investment you are. There isn't much time, though."

"Why not?"

"I told you--oh. Of course you don't know. He's leaving for Paris
tomorrow morning."

Martin moaned. "Then I'm doomed," he said. "They'll pick up my option
automatically next week and I'll never draw a free breath again. Erika,
do something!"

"I'm going to," Erika said. "That's exactly what I want to see you
about. Ah," she added suddenly, "now I understand why St. Cyr stopped my
message. He was afraid. Nick, do you know what we've got to do?"

"See Watt?" Nick hazarded unhappily. "But Erika--"

"See Watt _alone_," Erika amplified.

"Not if St. Cyr can help it," Nick reminded her.

"Exactly. Naturally St. Cyr doesn't want us to talk to Watt privately.
We might make him see reason. But this time, Nick, we've simply got to
manage it somehow. One of us is going to talk to Watt while the other
keeps St. Cyr at bay. Which do you choose?"

"Neither," Martin said promptly.

"Oh, Nick! I can't do the whole thing alone. Anybody'd think you were
afraid of St. Cyr."

"I _am_ afraid of St. Cyr," Martin said.

"Nonsense. What could he actually do to you?"

"He could terrorize me. He does it all the time. Erika, he says I'm
indoctrinating beautifully. Doesn't it make your blood run cold? Look at
all the other writers he's indoctrinated."

"I know. I saw one of them on Main Street last week, delving into
garbage cans. Do you want to end up that way? Then stand up for your
rights!"

"Ah," said the robot wisely, nodding. "Just as I thought. A
crisis-point."

"Shut up," Martin said. "No, not you, Erika. I'm sorry."

"So am I," Erika said tartly. "For a moment I thought you'd acquired a
backbone."

"If I were somebody like Hemingway--" Martin began in a miserable voice.

"Did you say Hemingway?" the robot inquired. "Is this the
Kinsey-Hemingway era? Then I must be right. You're Nicholas Martin, the
next subject. Martin, Martin? Let me see--oh yes, the Disraeli type,
that's it." He rubbed his forehead with a grating sound. "Oh, my poor
neuron thresholds! Now I remember."

        *        *       *        *        *

"Nick, can you hear me?" Erika's voice inquired. "I'm coming over there
right away. Brace yourself. We're going to beard St. Cyr in his den and
convince Watt you'll never make a good screen-writer. Now--"

"But St. Cyr won't _ever_ admit that," Martin cried. "He doesn't know
the meaning of the word failure. He says so. He's going to make me into
a screen-writer or kill me."

"Remember what happened to Ed Cassidy?" Erika reminded him grimly. "St.
Cyr didn't make him into a screen-writer."

"True. Poor old Ed," Martin said, with a shiver.

"All right, then. I'm on my way. Anything else?"

"Yes!" Martin cried, drawing a deep breath. "Yes, there is! I love you
madly!"

But the words never got past his glottis. Opening and closing his mouth
noiselessly, the cowardly playwright finally clenched his teeth and
tried again. A faint, hopeless squeak vibrated the telephone's disk.
Martin let his shoulders slump hopelessly. It was clear he could never
propose to anybody, not even a harmless telephone.

"Did you say something?" Erika asked. "Well, good-bye then."

"Wait a minute," Martin said, his eyes suddenly falling once more upon
the robot. Speechless on one subject only, he went on rapidly, "I forgot
to tell you. Watt and the nest-fouling St. Cyr have just hired a mock-up
phony robot to play in _Angelina Noel_!"

But the line was dead.

"I'm not a phony," the robot said, hurt.

Martin fell back in his chair and stared at his guest with dull,
hopeless eyes. "Neither was King Kong," he remarked. "Don't start
feeding me some line St. Cyr's told you to pull. I know he's trying to
break my nerve. He'll probably do it, too. Look what he's done to my
play already. Why Fred Waring? I don't mind Fred Waring in his proper
place. There he's fine. But not in _Angelina Noel_. Not as the
Portuguese captain of a fishing boat manned by his entire band,
accompanied by Dan Dailey singing _Napoli_ to DeeDee Fleming in a
mermaid's tail--"

Self-stunned by this recapitulation, Martin put his arms on the desk,
his head in his hands, and to his horror found himself giggling. The
telephone rang. Martin groped for the instrument without rising from his
semi-recumbent position.
