The Project Gutenberg EBook of Pastoral Affair, by Charles A. Stearns

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Pastoral Affair

Author: Charles A. Stearns

Illustrator: Dick Francis

Release Date: May 9, 2010 [EBook #32303]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PASTORAL AFFAIR ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                              PASTORAL AFFAIR

                           By CHARLES A. STEARNS

                        Illustrated by DICK FRANCIS

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from Galaxy Science Fiction
February 1959. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: No wonder Stefanik meant to fight to the last--he wasn't
going to turn his kids over to an old goat like Glinka!]


The seaplane cast its silhouette from aloft upon the blue Arabian Sea,
left its white wake across the shallows, and taxied alongside the
ancient stone jetty, clawing into the sandy bottom with its small fore
and after anchors.

Colonel Glinka stepped out upon the wing, carefully measured the
distance to the jetty, and sprang for it, wetting himself up to the seat
of his voluminous khaki shorts.

This lonely sandspit, these barren slopes and frowning, ocher cliffs,
the oceanic silence around him, broken by the plaintive cries of
wheeling Caspian terns that were badly in need of laundering, were not,
he thought as he clambered ashore, exactly as one pictures a tropical
paradise.

And it helped the desolation of his mood not at all that upon these same
arid ridges scores of silent, burnoosed figures watched him as he stood
there, allowing the water to drain from his perforated white oxfords and
all unaware that his vast pith helmet, curiously heavy malacca cane and
formidable fundament cast a centaur's shadow upon the rocks in the later
afternoon sun.

Colonel Glinka took a pair of green sun goggles from his pocket and put
them on, resolutely hitched up his shorts, assumed the stern yet
conciliatory expression of a hedgehog in mating season, and set off up
the rocky path.

Ahead of him, the burnoosed ones scrambled nimbly up the slope, looking
over their shoulders, intent upon not missing a thing, yet endeavoring
to keep their distance. But two there had been who either had not seen
him arrive, or did not give a damn, for they suddenly appeared upon the
rise before him, racing down toward the sea with very little regard for
life or limb.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the lead, a brown young man in flying green turban and white duck
trousers appeared to be losing steadily to his pursuer, who, though
swathed from head to food in that featureless native garb of the others,
might yet be identified by subtle conformations as a female.

Both of them stopped at once upon sighting Colonel Glinka in the
pathway, the female hurriedly retreating to what might be deemed a safer
