The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mind Digger, by Winston Marks

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Mind Digger

Author: Winston Marks

Release Date: May 12, 2010 [EBook #32353]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MIND DIGGER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                         The Mind Digger

                         By Winston Marks

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from Imagination Stories of
Science and Fantasy April 1958. Extensive research did not uncover any
evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]

[Sidenote: There was a reason why his scripts were smash hits--they had
realism. And why not? He was reliving every scene and emotion in them!]


It was really a pretty fair script, and it caught me at a moment when
every playwright worth his salt was playing in France, prostituting in
Hollywood or sulking in a slump. I needed a play badly, so I told Ellie
to get this unknown up to my office and have a contract ready.

When she announced him on the inter-com, my door banged open and a
youngster in blue-jeans, sweatshirt and a stubbly crew-cut popped in
like a carelessly aimed champagne cork.

I said, "I'm sorry, son, but I have an interview right now. Besides we
aren't casting yet. Come back in a couple of weeks."

His grin never faltered, being of the more durable kind that you find on
farms and west of the Rockies. His ragged sneakers padded across my
Persian, and I thought he was going to spring over my desk like a losing
tennis player.

"I'm your interview," he announced. "At least I'm Hillary Hardy, and
your girl just told me you'd see me."

"You--are Hillary Hardy?"

"In the morbid flesh," he said jamming out five enthusiastic fingers
that gulped my hand and jack-hammered until I broke his grip with a
Red-Cross life-saving hold.

"Spare the meat," I groaned. "I have to sign the contract, too."

"I did it! I did it! They said I was crazy, but I did it the first
time."

"Did what?"

"Sold the first play I wrote."

"This--is--your first work?"

"My very first," he said, splitting his freckles with a double row of
white teeth a yard wide. "They said I'd have to go to college, and then
I'd have to write a million words before I'd produce anything
worthwhile."

If he hadn't owned such an honest, open face I'd have thrown him out as
an imposter right then. The ream of neatly typed pages on my desk would
have fooled any agent, editor or producer like myself, on Broadway. The
format was professional, the plot carefully constructed, the dialogue
breezy as a May afternoon in Chicago and the motivation solidly adult.

"How old are you?" I asked.

"Nineteen."

"And you'll sign an affidavit that you wrote this play, and it's an
original work?"

"Certainly!" The smile faded a little. "Look, Mr. Crocker, you're not
just kidding about this contract, are you? Is the play really okay?"

"That," I said trying to restrain my own enthusiasm, "is only determined
on the boards. But I'm willing to risk a thousand-dollar advance on your
signature to this." I shoved the papers at him with my fountain pen on
top.

He didn't uncap the pen until he had read the whole thing, and while he
pored over the fine print I had time to catch my breath.

