Project Gutenberg's "And That's How It Was, Officer", by Ralph Sholto

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: "And That's How It Was, Officer"

Author: Ralph Sholto

Release Date: May 28, 2010 [EBook #32562]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "AND THAT'S HOW IT WAS, OFFICER" ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _When Uncle Peter decided to clean out the underworld, it was a fine
    thing for the town, but it was tough on the folks in Tibet._


                            "And that's how
                            it was, officer"

                            By Ralph Sholto


 David Nixon,
 Chief of Police,
 Morton City.

Dear Chief Nixon:

No doubt, by this time, you and your boys are a pretty bewildered lot.
You have all probably lost weight wondering what has been going on in
Morton City; where all the gangsters went, and why the underworld has
vanished like a bucket of soap bubbles.

Not being acquainted with my uncle, Peter Nicholas, with Bag Ears
Mulligan, with the gorgeous Joy Nicholas, my bride of scarcely
twenty-four hours, or with me, Homer Nicholas, you have of course been
out of touch with a series of swiftly moving events just culminated.

You, above all others, are entitled to know what has been happening in
our fair city. Hence this letter. When you receive it, Joy and I will be
on the way to Europe in pursuit of a most elusive honeymoon. Uncle Peter
will be headed for Tibet in order to interview certain very important
people you and your department never heard of. Bag Ears will probably be
off somewhere searching for his bells, and I suggest you let him keep
right on searching, because Bag Ears isn't one to answer questions with
very much intelligence.

So, because of the fact that a great deal of good has been done at no
cost whatever to the taxpayers, I suggest you read this letter and then
forget about the whole thing.

It all started when Joy and I finally got an audience with Uncle Peter
in his laboratory yesterday morning. Possibly you will think it strange
that I should have difficulty in contacting my own close relative. But
you don't know Uncle Peter.

He is a strange mixture of the doer and the dreamer--the genius and the
child. Parts of his brain never passed third grade while other parts
could sit down and tie Einstein in knots during a discussion of nuclear
physics, advanced mathematics or what have you. He lives in a small
bungalow at the edge of town, in the basement of which is his
laboratory. A steel door bars the public from this laboratory and it was
upon this door that Joy and I pounded futilely for three days. Finally
the door opened and Uncle Peter greeted us.

"Homer--my dear boy! Have you been knocking long?"

"Quite a while, Uncle Peter--off and on that is. I have some news for
you. I am going to get married."

My uncle became visibly disturbed. "My boy! That's wonderful--truly
wonderful. But I'm certainly surprised at you. Tsk-tsk-tsk!"

"What do you mean by tsk-tsk-tsk?"

"Your moral training has been badly neglected. You plan marriage even
while traveling about in the company of this woman you have with you."

Joy is a lady of the finest breeding, but she can be caught off-guard at
times. This was one of the times. She said, "Listen here, you
bald-headed jerk. Nobody calls me a woman--"

Uncle Peter was mildly interested. "Then if you aren't a woman, what--?"

I hastened to intervene. "You didn't let Joy finish, Uncle Peter. She no
doubt would have added--'in that tone of voice.' And I think her
attitude is entirely justified. Joy is a fine girl and my intended
bride."

"Oh, why didn't you say so?"

"I supposed you would assume as much."

"My boy, I am a scientist. A scientist assumes nothing. But I wish to
apologize to the young lady and I hope you two will be very happy."

"That's better," Joy said, with only a shade of truculence.

"And now," Uncle Peter went on. "It would be very thoughtful of you to
leave. I am working on a serum which will have a great deal to do with
changing the course of civilization. In fact it is already perfected and
must be tested. It is a matter of utmost urgency to me that I be left
alone to arrange the tests."

"I am afraid," I said, "that you will have to delay your work a few
hours. It is not every day that your nephew gets married and in all
decency you must attend the wedding and the reception. I don't wish you
to be inconvenienced too greatly, but--"

Uncle Peter's mind had gone off on another track. He stopped me with a
wave of his hand and said, "Homer, are you still running around with
those bums from the wrong side of town?"

       *       *       *       *       *

These words from anyone but Uncle Peter would have been insulting. But
Uncle Peter is the most impersonal man I have known. He never bothers
insulting people for any personal satisfaction. When he asks a question,
he always has a reason for so doing.

By way of explaining Uncle Peter's question, let me say that I am a firm
believer in democracy and I demonstrate this belief in my daily life.
More than once I have had to apologize for the definitely unsocial
attitude of my family. They have a tendency to look down on those less
fortunate in environment and financial stability than we Nicholases.

I, however, do not approve of this snobbishness. I cannot forget that a
great-uncle, Phinias Nicholas, laid the foundations of our fortune by
stealing cattle in the days of the Early West and selling them at an
amazing profit.

I personally am a believer in the precept that all men are created
equal. I'll admit they don't remain equal very long, but that is beside
the point.

In defense of my convictions, I have always sought friends among the
underprivileged brotherhood sometimes scathingly referred to as bums,
tramps, screwballs, and I've found them, on the whole, to be pretty
swell people.

But to get back--I answered Uncle Peter rather stiffly. "My friends are
my own affair and are not to be discussed."

"No offense. My question had to do with an idea I got rather suddenly.
Will any of these--ah, friends, be present at the reception?"

"It is entirely possible."

"Then I could easily infiltrate--"

"You could what?"

"Never mind, my boy. It is not important. I'll be indeed honored to
attend your wedding."

At that moment there was a muffled commotion from beyond a closed door
to our left; the sound of heels kicking on the panel and an irate female
voice:

"They gone yet? There's cobwebs in this damn closet--and it's dark!"

Uncle Peter had the grace to blush. In fact he could do little else as
the closet door opened and a young lady stepped forth.

In the vulgar parlance of the day, this girl could be described only as
a dream-boat. This beyond all doubt, because the trim hull, from stem to
stern, was bared to the gaze of all who cared to observe and admire. She
was a blonde dream-boat--and most of her present apparel had come from
lying under a sun lamp.

