The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Telenizer, by Don Thompson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Telenizer

Author: Don Thompson

Illustrator: VIDMER

Release Date: May 28, 2010 [EBook #32574]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TELENIZER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









The Telenizer

By DON THOMPSON

Illustrated by VIDMER

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from Galaxy Science Fiction
March 1954. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]

[Sidenote: Langston had technicolor delusions; inanimate objects came
alive in his hands; THEY were persecuting him, out to get him ... what a
relief it was to know he wasn't going insane!]


When I saw the blood dripping from the tap in the bathtub, I knew that
someone had a telenosis beam on me, and I breathed a very audible sigh
of relief.

During the past few days, I had begun to wonder if I was really cracking
up.

When you start seeing visions of a bearded gent with a halo, or having
vague but wonderful dreams about some sort of perfect world, feeling
intense loyalties to undefined ideals, and experiencing sudden impulses,
sometimes cruel and sometimes kind--you know that something's wrong.

At least I do.

If he--whoever he was--had just kept up the slow, subtle pace he'd
maintained for the past two or three days, he would have had me in a
little while. For whatever he wanted.

But now, he'd overplayed his hand. I knew, at least, what was going on.
Who was doing it, or why, I still didn't know--nor whether I could stand
it, even knowing.

       *       *       *       *       *

The thick, bright red blood dripping steadily from the water tap in the
bath tub wasn't so bad.

I stood before the mirror, with my softly humming razor in my hand, and
I watched the blood ooze from the tap, quiver as it grew heavy and
pregnant, then pull itself free and fall with a dull _plonk_ to the
enamel as another drop began to form.

That wasn't so bad. But my sigh of relief became a gurgle of almost
hysterical apprehension as I braced myself for what might come, with the
telenizer knowing that I was aware.

There was something I could do--should do--but my mind refused to focus.
It bogged down in a muck of unreasoning terror and could only scream
_Why? Why? Why?_

The drops of blood from the water tap increased both in size and
rapidity, as I watched. Heavy, red, marble-sized tears followed one
another from the tap, _plonk, plonk, plonk_, splashing in the tub and on
the floor. Faster and faster, and then the drip became a flow, a gush,
as though the vein of some giant creature had been slashed.

The tub filled rapidly, and blood flowed like a crimson waterfall over
the edge and across the floor toward me.

I heard a tiny howling, and looked down.

I screamed and threw the soft, brown, fuzzy, squirming puppy-thing that
had been a razor into the advancing tide of blood.

The fuzzy thing shattered when it hit the blood, and each of the
thousand pieces became another tiny puppy-thing that grew and grew,
yapping and swimming in the blood. The tide was now rising about my
shoes.

I backed away from the mirror, trembling violently. I forced myself to
slosh through the thick blood into the bedroom, groping for a bottle of
whisky on the bureau.

       *       *       *       *       *

"What the hell are you doing here?" the boss asked when I opened his
office door and peeked in. "You're supposed to be in Palm Beach. Well,
damn it, come on in!"

I clung to the door firmly as I maneuvered myself through the opening.
And when I closed the door, I leaned back against it heavily.

I could see the boss--Carson Newell, managing editor of Intergalaxy News
Service--half rising from behind his big desk across the room; but he
was pretty dim and I couldn't get him to stay in one place. His voice
was clear enough, though:

"Must be mighty important to bring you back from.... Damn it, Langston,
are you drunk?"

I grinned then, and said, "Carshon. Carton. Old boy. Do you know that
telenosis therapy is no sonofabitchin' good on alcoholics?"

Carson Newell sat back down, frowning.

I stumbled to a chair by the corner of his desk and gripped the arms
tightly.

"Telenosis therapy," I repeated, "is just no--"

"Snap out of it," Newell barked. "It's no good on dumb animals, either,
and you're probably out of range by now, anyway."

He took a small bottle from his desk and tossed a yellow Anti-Alch pill
across the desk to me. I popped it into my mouth.

It didn't take long to work. A few minutes later, still weak and a
little trembly, I said, "Would have thought of that myself, if I hadn't
been so damn drunk."

The boss grunted. "Now what's this business about telenosis?"

"Somebody's been using it on me," I said. "Maliciously. Damn near
drowned in a lake of blood from a water faucet."

"Couldn't have been DTs?"

"I'm serious. It's been going on for three or four days now. Not the
blood. That's what gave it away. But other things."

"You've been working pretty hard lately," Newell reminded me.

"Which is why I'm on vacation and all nice and relaxed. Or at least, I
_was_. No, it's not that. Listen, Carson, I admit that I'm no technical
expert on telenosis. But a long time ago--seven or eight years ago, I
guess--I did a feature series on it. I learned a little bit. Enough to
save my life this time."

Newell shrugged. "Okay. You probably know more about it than I do. I
just know it's damned restricted stuff." He paused thoughtfully. "Any
missing telenizer equipment would cause a helluva fuss, and there hasn't
been any fuss."

"No machines in Palm Beach or vicinity that somebody on the inside could
be using illegally?" And then I answered that question myself: "No ... I
doubt it. The machines are used only in the larger hospitals."

"Don't suppose you have any hunches?"

I shook my head slowly, frowning. "You couldn't really call it a hunch.
Just a bare possibility. But I noticed on a news report the other day
that Isaac Grogan--you know, 'the Millionaire Mayor of Memphis,'
released about a month ago, bribery and corruption sentence--anyway,
he's taken up temporary residence in Palm Beach."

The boss rubbed his chin. "As I recall, you did an expose series on him
four or five years ago. Corroborated by official investigation, and
Grogan was later sentenced. You thinks he's after revenge?"

I raised a hand warningly. "Now, hold on--I said it was a bare
possibility. All I know is that Grogan hates my guts--or might think he
has some reason to. I know that Grogan is in Palm Beach, and that I've
been under telenosis attack. There's no necessary connection at all."

"No," Newell said. "But it's something to start on." He looked at his
wrist watch. "Tell you what. It's nearly noon now. Let's go out for
lunch, and while I'm thinking, you can tell me all you remember about
telenosis."

       *       *       *       *       *

It's altogether possible that you may have no more than barely heard of
telenosis--its technical details are among the most closely guarded
secrets of our time. So I'll go over some of the high spots of what I
told Newell.

Mind you, I'm no authority on the subject, and it has been a full seven
years since I have done any research on it. However, I learned all I
know from Dr. Homer Reighardt, who, at the time, was the world's
outstanding authority.

Telenosis, nowadays, is confined almost exclusively to use in
psychiatric hospitals and corrective institutions. It's used chiefly on
neurotics. In cases of extreme dementia, it's worthless. In fact, the
more normal you are, the more effective the telenosis.

Roughly--without going into any of the real technicalities--it's this
way:

Science has known for a long time that electrical waves emanate from the
brain. The waves can be measured on an electroencaphalograph, and vary
with the physiological and psychological condition of the individual.
Extreme paranoia, for example, or epilepsy, or alcoholism are
accompanied by violent disturbances of the waves.

Very interesting, but....

It wasn't until 2037 that Professor Martin James decided that these
brain waves are comparable to radio waves, and got busy inventing a
device to listen in on them.

The result, of course, was telenosis. The machine that James came up
with, after twenty years of work, could not only listen in on a person's
thoughts, which are carried on the brain waves, but it could transmit
messages to the brain from the outside.

"Unless the waves are in a state of disturbance caused by alcohol or
insanity or some such thing?" Newell commented.

I nodded.

"The word 'telenosis' comes from 'hypnosis,' doesn't it?"

"Yes, but not very accurately," I said. "In hypnosis, you need some sort
of visual or auditory accompaniment. With telenosis, you can gain
control of a person's mind directly, through the brain waves."

"You say 'gain control of a person's mind,'" Newell said. "Do you mean
that if you tell someone who is under telenosis to do something, he's
got to do it?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Not necessarily," I said. "All you can do with telenosis is transmit
thoughts to a person--counting visual and auditory sensations as
thoughts. If you can convince him that the thoughts you're sending are
_his_ thoughts ... then you can make him do almost anything. But if he
knows or suspects he's being telenized--"

"I'm with you," Newell interrupted. "He still gets the thoughts--visions
and sounds or what have you--but he doesn't have to obey them."

I nodded. My mind was skipping ahead to more immediate problems. "Don't
you suppose we ought to notify Central Investigation Division right
away? This is really a problem for them."

But Newell was there ahead of me. "So was the Memphis affair," he said.
