The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Test Colony, by Winston Marks

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Test Colony

Author: Winston Marks

Illustrator: Kelly Freas

Release Date: June 3, 2010 [EBook #32676]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TEST COLONY ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                            THE TEST COLONY

                            BY WINSTON MARKS

                       Illustrated by Kelly Freas

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from If Worlds of Science
Fiction September 1954. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _Benson did his best to keep his colony from going native,
but what can you do when the Natives have a rare human intelligence and
know all about the facts of life?_]


It was the afternoon of our arrival. Our fellow members of the "test
colony" were back in the clearing at the edge of the lake, getting their
ground-legs and drinking in the sweet, clean air of Sirius XXII. I was
strolling along the strip of sandy beach with Phillip Benson, leader of
our group, sniffing the spicy perfume of the forest that crowded within
twenty feet of the water's edge.

Half a billion miles overhead, Sirius shone with an artificially white
glow. Somewhere on the horizon, Earth lay, an invisible, remote speck of
dust we had forsaken 24 dreary, claustrophobic months ago.

The trip had taken its toll from all of us, even tough-minded Phil
Benson. We both found it difficult to relax and enjoy the invigorating,
oxygen-rich air and the balmy climate. As official recorder, I was
trying to think of words suitable to capture the magnificence, the sheer
loveliness of the planet which would be our home for at least four
years, perhaps forever.

Each absorbed in his own thoughts, Benson and I were some 500 yards from
the clearing when he stopped me with a hand on my arm. "Who is that?" he
demanded.

Up the beach where he pointed, two naked forms emerged from the calm
waters. They skipped across the sand and began rolling together
playfully in the soft grasses at the forest's edge. Even at this
distance they were visibly male and female.

"I can't make them out," I said. My only thought was that one of the
young couples had swum down ahead of us and was enjoying the first
privacy attainable in two years.

Benson's eyes were sharper. "Sam, they--they look like--"

Our voices must have reached them, for they sprang apart and rose to
their feet facing us.

"Like youngsters," I supplied.

"We have no kids with us," Benson reminded me. He began to move forward,
slowly, as though stalking a wild animal.

"Wait, Phil," I said. "The planet is uninhabited. They can't be--"

He continued shuffling ahead, and I followed. Within 20 paces I knew he
was right. Whoever they were they hadn't come with us!

Benson stopped so quickly I bumped into him. "Look, Sam! Their hands and
feet! Four digits and--no thumbs!"

I could now make out the details. The two forms were not quite human.
The toes were long and prehensile. The fingers, too, were exceptionally
long, appearing to have an extra joint, but as Benson mentioned, there
was no opposing thumb.

They stood well apart now, the female seeking no protection from the
male. Curiosity was written in their faces, and when we stopped
advancing they began edging forward until they were only five yards
away.

Their outlines, instead of becoming clearer, had fuzzed up more as they
approached. Now it was evident that their bodies were lightly covered
with a silky hair, some two or three inches long. It had already dried
out in the warm sun and was standing out away from their skins like
golden haloes.

They stood well under five feet tall, and in every detail, except the
body hair and digits, appeared to be miniature adults, complete with
navels.

Even in the midst of the shock of surprise, I was taken by their
remarkable beauty. "They're true mammals!" I exclaimed.

"Without a doubt," Benson said, eyeing the full contours of the lithe
little female. Her pink flesh tones were a full shade lighter than those
of the male. Both had well-spaced eyes under broad foreheads. Their fine
features were drawn into fearless, half-quizzical, half-good-natured
expressions of deep interest. They stood relaxed as if waiting for a
parley to begin.

"This," said Benson, "is one hell of a note!"

They cocked their heads at the sound like robins. I said, "Why? They
don't appear very vicious to me."

"Neither does man," Benson replied. "It's his brain that makes him
deadly. Look at those skulls, the ear placement, the eyes and forehead.
If I know my skull formations, I think man has met his intellectual
equal at last--maybe, even, his superior."

"What makes you think they may have superior minds?" As a psychologist I
felt Benson was jumping to a pretty quick conclusion.

"The atmosphere. Forty percent oxygen. Invariably, on other planets,
that has meant higher metabolisms in the fauna. In a humanoid animal
that strongly implies high mental as well as physical activity."

As if to prove his point, the two little creatures tired of the
one-sided interview, bent slightly at the knees and leaped at a
forty-five degree angle high into the tree branches. The female caught
the first limb with her long fingers and swung out of sight into the
foliage. The male hung by his long toes for a moment, regarding us with
an inverted impish expression, then he, too, vanished.

I grunted with disappointment. Benson said, "Don't worry, they'll be
back. Soon enough."

       *       *       *       *       *

As we returned to the clearing Jane Benson and Susan, my wife, came to
meet us. Although both brunettes rated high in feminine charms among the
forty women of our group, somehow they appeared a little ungainly and
uncommonly tall against my mental image of the little people we had just
left. Their faces were pale from the long interment in the ship, and
bright spots of sunburn on cheekbones and forehead gave them a clownish,
made-up appearance.

"We've sorted and identified the fruits," Sue called to us. "The
handbook is right. They're delicious! We've got a feast spread. Just
wait until you--" She caught our expressions. "What's wrong?"

Benson shrugged. "You girls go on ahead and get the crowd together. I
have an important announcement to make." Jane pouted a little and
hesitated, but Benson insisted. "Run along now, please. I want to gather
my thoughts."

We trailed after them slowly. I didn't like Benson's moody reaction to
our discovery of an intelligent life-form. To me it was exciting. What
fabulous news I would have to send back with the first liaison ship to
contact us four years hence! And it would be entirely unexpected,
because the original exploration party had failed to make the discovery.
That in itself was an intriguing mystery. How could twenty-two
scientists, bent on a minute examination of a planet's flora and fauna,
overlook the most fabulous creation of all--an animal virtually in men's
image? The only guess I could make was that they must belong to a
nomadic tribe small enough to escape discovery.

Benson broke silence as the narrow beach strip began to widen into the
grassy plain where our ship squatted like a hemispherical cathedral.
"This poses so many problems," he said shaking his head.

I said, "Phil, I think you're taking your job too seriously. You just
can't plan every detail of organizing our community down to the
rationing of tooth-powder."

"Planning never hurt any project," Benson said.

"I disagree," I told him. "You've had too long to dwell on your plans.
Now the first unpredictable incident throws you into an uproar. Relax,
