The Project Gutenberg EBook of Uniform of a Man, by Dave Dryfoos

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Uniform of a Man

Author: Dave Dryfoos

Illustrator: Rudolph Palais

Release Date: June 7, 2010 [EBook #32737]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNIFORM OF A MAN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                            Uniform of a Man

                             By Dave Dryfoos

                      Illustrated by Rudolph Palais

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from IF Worlds of Science
Fiction March 1954. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _After rescue, revenge was uppermost in Chet Barfield's mind;
the hideous, bestial Agvars had to be taught a lesson they'd never
forget. His rescuers seemed to disagree, however--until Chet learned his
lesson too!_]


In the village clearing, under the diffuse red sun of Hedlot, Chet
Barfield listened intently. Mostly he heard the villagers, the Agvars,
noisy with the disregard for sound that comes of defective hearing.

But above their clamor was another note. No ... Yes! There it was
again--the swish-roar-scream of a spaceship!

Chet's heart lifted to the altitude of that ship. Rescue! Rescue was at
hand for him, after three years as a prisoner.

Thought of it momentarily overcame the passivity that years of
starvation had made his habit. He even forgot himself enough to walk
erect a few steps, staring skyward--heavenward!--within cupped hands.

But the dense hardwood chain on his ankle brought him up short. When it
tightened, he remembered, and slouched to all fours again, moving with
the gorilla-like gait of the Agvars toward the unshaded post he was
chained to.

He'd been observed. Pawfulls of dirt stung his bent and whip-scarred
back, and a treble chorus stung his ears and nerves. The village boys
were chanting derisively. Chet had never been able to learn the
language, but the tone of voice was unmistakable.

He huddled against the post, knees to chin, hands clasped around his
matted hair, awaiting the inevitable sticks and slops. He heard the
children's voices fade as they scattered throughout the village of
haphazard lean-tos in search of especially sickening things to throw.
For a few minutes, then, he'd have a breather. But not for long--they
wouldn't forget....

No. But the fellows hadn't forgotten him, either. He could stand this
for a day or two more. A week or a month, even. It didn't matter. This
would end--soon.

His turn would come! He'd make these devils suffer as he had suffered.
He swore it!

He was glad he'd stayed alive for this. It had been a fight to live, a
struggle he'd often thought futile while he made it. Learning to eat
whatever he could get, training himself to breathe the local atmosphere
in the special rhythm its composition required, accepting degradations
too cruel for a captive animal, avoiding the resistance that would have
brought merciful murder.... All that, yet it felt strange, now, to be so
glad he was alive.

He heard the children returning, and crouched lower. A few clots of
garbage spattered against the post--teasers, to make him angry, so he'd
turn to howl his rage, and offer his face as a target.

Good memories, these little beasts had. It was almost a year since he'd
last done that....

Well, he had a memory, too. And while they pelted him--from fairly close
