The Project Gutenberg EBook of Forsyte's Retreat, by Winston Marks

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Forsyte's Retreat

Author: Winston Marks

Illustrator: Kelly Freas

Release Date: June 7, 2010 [EBook #32735]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FORSYTE'S RETREAT ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                        FORSYTE'S RETREAT

                        By Winston Marks

                   Illustration by Kelly Freas

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from IF Worlds of Science
Fiction May 1954. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _Sextus Rollo Forsyte had his trouble with the bottle, but
nothing out of a bottle ever produced such a hotel as the Mahoney-Plaza:
only 260 rooms ... only two guests to a room ... but accommodating 5200
guests--all at the same time!... Floor please?_]


At last he was second in line. He squared his shoulders and pulled at
the lower edges of his black double-breasted suitcoat to erase the
travel wrinkles. The applicant ahead of him exploded the words, "Nuts!
I'll leave town first. I just _came_ from the Phony-Plaza. You can take
that squirrel-cage and--"

"Next!" the employment agent called sadly. Sextus Rollo Forsyte moved up
and sat in the oak chair before the oak desk and faced the oak-featured
man with the jobs.

"Forsyte is the name," Sextus reminded. The man riffled through the
application cards.

"Yes. Indeed. Lucky you came back. I have a fine position for you, Mr.
Forsyte. Right in your line." He held out a blue slip. "The general
manager's position is open at the Mahoney-Plaza. Six hundred a month,
board and room. Now if you will...."

Sextus staggered from the employment office stunned.

He could handle the job, all right. As he'd said on the application
form, in his forty years he had managed half a dozen large hotels. But
they were handing him this plum without comment on his failure to fill
in the spaces marked: COMPLETE REFERENCES (names and addresses).

He shrugged. They did a lot of things different in California. The most
he had hoped for was a waiter's job or maybe a short order cook in a fry
joint. But if they wanted to ignore the hotel associations' black list,
he wouldn't argue.

Sextus Forsyte craved anonymity with the passion that most men seek fame
and glory. Beneath his suave, mature exterior beat the shrinking heart
of a perennial hermit whose delight was an adventure book and a bottle
of whiskey.

His recent employer had not objected to his fondness for reading nor
solitude, but his appetite for liquor had revealed itself in a series of
unfortunate crises which plague the life of any hotel executive.

Yes, Sextus Forsyte had sought his solitude in that remotest of all
places, the large city hotel. His career of smiling at strange faces,
welcoming famous people and snapping crisp commands to assistant
managers had provided the near-perfect isolation from normal society. To
the transient eye he was the poised, gregarious greeter. Actually he
lived in a deep well of introversion. Of course, this was no affair of
the succession of boards of directors who had uttered the harsh charges
of "dipsomania" and fired him. But then boards of directors are never
notable for their sympathy or understanding.

And finally word got around the eastern seaboard about Sextus. "A
competent man, yes. Drinks on the job. Wouldn't have him as a busboy."

