The Project Gutenberg EBook of Think Yourself to Death, by C.H. Thames

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Think Yourself to Death

Author: C.H. Thames

Release Date: June 15, 2010 [EBook #32827]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THINK YOURSELF TO DEATH ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                         THINK YOURSELF TO DEATH

                       A "JOHNNY MAYHEM" ADVENTURE

                             By C. H. THAMES

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from Amazing Stories March
1957. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _If you've never read a Johnny Mayhem story before, you are
in for a treat. Johnny, who wears different bodies the way ordinary
people wear clothes, is one of the most fascinating series characters in
science fiction._]


When he reached Ophiuchus, Johnny Mayhem was wearing the body of an
elderly Sirian gentleman.

Nothing could have been more incongruous. The Sirian wore a pince-nez, a
dignified two-piece jumper in a charcoal color, sedate two-tone boots
and a black string-tie.

The loiterers in the street near the Galactic Observer's building
looked, and pointed, and laughed. Using the dignity of the dead Sirian,
whose body he wore like other people wear clothing, Johnny Mayhem
ignored them. They had a point, of course. It was hot and humid on
Ophiuchus IX. The loiterers in the dusty, evil-smelling streets wore
nothing but loin cloths.

Mayhem went inside the building, which was air-conditioned. Probably it
was the only air-conditioned structure on the entire planet. Mayhem
dabbed at his Sirian forehead gratefully, mopping at sweat. As near as
he could figure, his life expectancy in this body was down to three
days, Earth style. He wondered fleetingly why the Galactic League had
sent him here to Ophiuchus. He shrugged, knowing he would find out soon
enough.

The Galactic Observer on Ophiuchus IX, a middle-aged Indian from Bombay
named Kovandaswamy, wore an immaculate white linen loin cloth on his
plump body and a relieved smile on his worried face when Mayhem entered
his office. The two men shook hands.

"So you're Mayhem?" Kovandaswamy said in English. "They told me to
expect you, sir. Pardon my staring, but I've never been face to face
with a legend before. I'm impressed."

       *       *       *       *       *

Mayhem laughed. "You'll get over it."

"Well, at least as a Sirian gentleman, you're not very prepossessing.
That helps."

"It wasn't my idea. It never is."

"I know. I know that, sir." Kovandaswamy got up nervously from his desk
and paced across the room. "Do you know anything about Ophiuchus IX,
Mayhem?"

"Not much. It's one of the Forgotten Worlds, isn't it?"

"Precisely, sir. Ophiuchus IX is one of scores of interstellar worlds
colonized in the first great outflux from Earth."

"You mean during the population pressure of the 24th century?"

"Exactly. Then Ophiuchus IX, like the other Forgotten Worlds, was all
but forgotten. As you know, Mayhem, the first flux of colonization
receded like a wave, inertia set in, and the so-called Forgotten Worlds
became isolated from the rest of the galaxy for generations. Only in the
past fifty years are we finding them again, one by one. Ophiuchus IX is
typical, isolated from the galaxy at large by a dust cloud that--"

"I know. I came through it."

"It was colonized originally with Indians from southern and eastern
India, on Earth. That's why the Galactic League appointed me Observer.
I'm an Indian. These people--well, they're what my people might have
developed into if they'd lived for hundreds of years in perfect
isolation."

"What's the trouble?"

Kovandaswamy answered with a question of his own. "You are aware of the
Galactic League's chief aim?"

"Sure. To see that no outworld, however small or distant, is left in
isolation. Is that what you mean?"

"Yes," agreed Kovandaswamy. "Their reason is obvious. For almost a
thousand years now the human race has outpaced its social and moral
development with development in the physical sciences. For almost a
thousand years mankind has had the power to destroy itself. In isolation
this is possible. With mutual interchange of ideas, it is extremely
unlikely. Thus, in the interests of human survival, the Galactic League
tries to thwart isolated development. So far, the Forgotten Worlds have
cooperated. But Ophiuchus IX is an exception."

"And the League wants me to find out why?"

"Precisely."

"How are they thwarting--"

Kovandaswamy was sweating despite the air-conditioning, despite his
almost-naked state. "You have the right to turn this mission down, of
course. The League told me that."
