The Project Gutenberg EBook of Thy Name Is Woman, by Bryce Walton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Thy Name Is Woman

Author: Bryce Walton

Illustrator: Zimmerman

Release Date: June 20, 2010 [EBook #32906]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THY NAME IS WOMAN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Meehan and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                           Thy Name Is WOMAN

                           By Kenneth O'Hara

                        Illustrated by Zimmerman

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from IF Worlds of Science
Fiction March 1953. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Illustration: _There wasn't a woman left on earth. They had just packed
their bags and left._]


[Sidenote: _Women of earth had finally attained their objective: a new
world all their own and--without men! But was it?_]


After the Doctor gave him the hypo and left the ship, Bowren lay
in absolute darkness wondering when the change would start. There
would be pain, the Doctor had said. "Then you won't be aware of
anything--anything at all."

That was a devil of a thing, Bowren thought, not to be aware of the
greatest adventure any man ever had. He, Eddie Bowren, the first to
escape the Earth into space, the first man to Mars!

He was on his back in a small square steel cubicle, a secretly
constructed room in the wall of the cargo bin of the big spaceship
cradled at the New Chicago Port. He was not without fear. But before the
ship blasted he wouldn't care--he would be changed by then. He would
start turning any minute now, becoming something else; he didn't know
exactly what, but that wouldn't matter. After it was over, he wouldn't
remember because the higher brain centers, the cortex, the analytical
mind, would be completely cut off, short-circuited, during the
alteration.

The cubicle was close, hot, sound-proofed, like a tomb. "You will
probably make loud unpleasant noises," the Doctor had said, "but no one
will hear you. Don't worry about anything until you get to Mars."

That was right, Bowren thought. My only problem is to observe, compute,
and get back into this dungeon without being observed, and back to
Earth.

The idea was to keep it from the women. The women wouldn't go for this
at all. They would object. The women would be able to bring into effect
several laws dealing with spaceflight, among them the one against
stowaways, and especially that particular one about aberrated males
sneaking into space and committing suicide.

A lot of men had tried it, in the beginning. Some of them had managed
it, but they had all died. For a long time, the men's egos hadn't been
able to admit that the male organism was incapable of standing the
rigors of acceleration. Women had had laws passed, and if the women
caught him doing this, the punishment would be extreme for him,
personally, and a lot more extreme for Earth civilization in general. If
you could call it a civilization. You could call it anything, Bowren
groaned--but it didn't make sense. A world without women. A birthrate
reduced to zero.

A trickle of sweat slid past Bowren's eyes, loosening a nervous flush
along his back that prickled painfully. His throat was tense and his
heart pounded loud in the hot dark.

A sharp pain ran up his body and exploded in his head. He tried to
swallow, but something gagged in his throat. He was afraid of retching.
He lay with his mouth open, spittle dribbling over his lips. The pain
returned, hammered at his entrails. He fought the pain numbly, like a
man grappling in the dark.

The wave subsided and he lay there gasping, his fists clenched.

"The pain will come in increasingly powerful waves," the Doctor had
said. "At a certain point, it will be so great, the analytical mind will
completely short-circuit. It will stay that way enroute to Mars, and
meanwhile your body will rapidly change into that of a beast. Don't
worry about it. A catalytic agent will return you to normal before you
reach the planet. If you live, you'll be human again."

       *       *       *       *       *

A male human couldn't stand the acceleration. But a woman could. Animals
could. They had experimented on human males and animals in the giant
centrifuges, and learned what to do. Animals could stand 25 "G"
consistently, or centrifugal forces as high as 120 revolutions a minute.
About 10 "G" was the limit of female endurance. Less for men.

It had never been thoroughly determined why women had been able to stand
higher acceleration. But human females had the same physical advantages
over men as female rats, rabbits, and cats over males of the same
species. A woman's cellular structure was different; her center of
gravity was different, the brain waves given off during acceleration
were different. It was suspected that the autonomic nervous system in
women could function more freely to protect the body during emergency
situations. The only certainty about it was that no man had ever been
able to get into space and live.

