The Project Gutenberg EBook of Astounding Stories,  August, 1931, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Astounding Stories,  August, 1931

Author: Various

Release Date: June 28, 2010 [EBook #33016]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASTOUNDING STORIES,  AUGUST, 1931 ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                              ASTOUNDING

                               STORIES

                                 20c


              _On Sale the First Thursday of Each Month_


                       W. M. CLAYTON, Publisher
                         HARRY BATES, Editor


The Clayton Standard on a Magazine Guarantees

    _That_ the stories therein are clean, interesting, vivid, by leading
           writers of the day and purchased under conditions approved by
           the Authors' League of America;

    _That_ such magazines are manufactured in Union shops by American
           workmen;

    _That_ each newsdealer and agent is insured a fair profit;

    _That_ an intelligent censorship guards their advertising pages.


_The other Clayton magazines are:_

ACE-HIGH MAGAZINE, RANCH ROMANCES, COWBOY STORIES, CLUES, FIVE-NOVELS
MONTHLY, ALL STAR DETECTIVE STORIES, RANGELAND LOVE STORY MAGAZINE,
WESTERN ADVENTURES, WESTERN LOVE STORIES and JUNGLE STORIES.

_More than Two Million Copies Required to Supply the Monthly Demand
for Clayton Magazines._

       *       *       *       *       *




VOL. VII, No. 2            CONTENTS           AUGUST, 1931


THE DANGER FROM THE DEEP      RALPH MILNE FARLEY            149

    _Marooned on the Sea-Floor, His Hoisting Cable Cut, Young Abbot Is
     Left at the Mercy of the Man-Sharks._

BROOD OF THE DARK MOON        CHARLES WILLARD DIFFIN        168

    _Once More Chet, Walt and Diane Are United in a Wild Ride to the Dark
     Moon. But This Time They Go as Prisoners of Their Deadly Enemy
     Schwartzmann._ (Beginning a Four-Part Novel.)

IF THE SUN DIED               R. F. STARZL                  198

    _Tens of Millenniums After the Death of the Sun There Comes a Young
     Man Who Dares to Open the Frozen Gate of Subterranea._

THE MIDGET FROM THE ISLAND    H. G. WINTER                  214

    _Garth Howard, Prey to Half the Animals of the Forest, Fights Valiantly
     to Regain His Lost Five Feet of Size._  (A Complete Novelette.)

THE MOON WEED                 HARL VINCENT                  236

    _Unwittingly the Traitor of the Earth, Van Pits Himself Against the
     Inexorably Tightening Web of Plant-Beasts He Has Released from the
     Moon._

THE PORT OF MISSING PLANES    CAPTAIN S. P. MEEK            255

    _In the Underground Caverns of the Selom, Dr. Bird Once Again Locks
     Wills with the Subversive Genius, Saranoff._

THE READERS CORNER            ALL OF US                     273

    _A Meeting Place for Readers of Astounding Stories_

       *       *       *       *       *

Single Copies, 20 Cents (In Canada, 25 Cents) Yearly Subscription, $2.00

Issued monthly by The Clayton Magazines, Inc., 80 Lafayette Street,
New York, N. Y. W. M. Clayton, President; Francis P. Pace, Secretary.
Entered as second-class matter December 7, 1929, at the Post Office at
New York, N. Y., under Act of March 3, 1879. Title registered as a
Trade Mark in the U. S. Patent Office. Member Newsstand Group. For
advertising rates address The Newsstand Group, Inc., 80 Lafayette
Street, New York; or The Wrigley Bldg., Chicago.

       *       *       *       *       *




The Danger from the Deep

_By Ralph Milne Farley_

[Illustration: _He caught a glimpse of the grinning fish-face._]


[Sidenote: Marooned on the sea-floor, his hoisting cable cut, young
Abbot is left at the mercy of the man-sharks.]

Within a thick-walled sphere of steel eight feet in diameter, with
crystal-clear fused-quartz windows, there crouched an alert young
scientist, George Abbot. The sphere rested on the primeval muck and
slime at the bottom of the Pacific Ocean, one mile beneath the
surface.

The beam from his 200-watt searchlight, which shot out through one of
his three windows into the dark blue depths beyond, seemed faint
indeed, yet it served to illuminate anything which crossed it, or on
which it fell.

For a considerable length of time since his descent to the ocean
floor, young Abbot had clung to one of the thick windows of his
bathysphere, absorbed by the marine life outside. Slender small fish
with stereoscopic eyes, darted in and out of the beam of light.
Swimming snails floated by, carrying their own phosphorescent
lanterns. Paper-thin transparent crustaceans swam into view, followed
by a few white shrimps, pale as ghosts. Then a mist of tiny fish swept
across his field of vision. Abbot cupped his face in his hands, and
stared out.

The incongruous thought flashed across his mind that thus he had often
sat by the window of his club in New York, and gazed out at the
passing motor traffic.

His searchlight cut a sharp swath through the blue muck. More than
once he thought he saw large moving fish-like forms far away.

"Speed up the generator," he called into his phone.

Immediately the shaft of light brightened. He set about trying to
focus upon one of those dim elusive shapes which had so intrigued him.

       *       *       *       *       *

But suddenly the searchlight went out! Intent on repairing the
apparatus as rapidly as possible, Abbot snapped the button-switch,
which ought to have illuminated the interior of his diving-sphere; but
the lights did not go on. Then he noticed that the electric fan, on
which he depended to keep his air-supply properly mixed, had stopped.

He spoke into the telephone transmitter, which hung in front of his
mouth: "Hi, there, up on the boat! My electric power is cut off. I'm
down here with my fan stopped and my heat cut off. Hoist me up, and be
quick about it!"

"O.K., sir."

As the young man waited for the winch to get under way on the boat a
mile above him, he pulled out his electric pocket flashlight and sent
its feeble ray out through his quartz-glass window into the dim
royal-purple depths beyond, in one last attempt to get a look at those
mysterious fish-shapes which had so intrigued him.

And then he saw one of them distinctly.

Evidently they had swum closer when the glow of his searchlight had
stopped; and so the sudden flash of his pocket-light had taken them by
surprise.

For, as he snapped it on, he caught an instant's glimpse of a grinning
fish-face pressed close against the outside of his thick window-pane,
as though trying to peer in at him. The fish-face somewhat resembled
the head of a shark, except that the mouth was a bit smaller and not
quite so leeringly brutal, and the forehead was rather high and domed.

But what most attracted Abbot's attention, in the brief instant before
the startled fish whisked away in a swirl of phosphorescent foam, was
the fact that, from beneath each of the two pectoral fins, there
protruded what appeared to be a skinny human arm, terminating in three
fingers and a thumb!

Then the fish was gone. Abbot snapped off his little light.

The diving-sphere quivered, as the hoisting-cable tautened. But
suddenly the sphere settled back to the bottom of the sea with a
jarring thud. "Cable's parted, sir!" spoke a frantic voice in his
ear-phones.

       *       *       *       *       *

For a moment George Abbot sat stunned with horror. Then his mind began
to race, like a squirrel in a cage, seeking some way of escape.

Perhaps he could manage to unscrew the 400-pound trap door at the top
of the sphere, and shoot to the surface, with the bubbling-out of the
confined air. But his scientifically trained mind made some rapid
calculations which showed him this was absurd.

At the depth of a mile, the pressure is roughly 156 atmospheres, that
is to say, 156 times the air-pressure at the surface of the earth; and
the moment that his sphere was opened to this pressure, he would be
blown back inwardly away from the man-hole, and the air inside his
sphere would suddenly be compressed to only 1/156 of its former
volume.

Not only would this pressure be sufficient to squash him into a
mangled pulp, but also the sudden compression of the air inside the
sphere would generate enough heat to fry that mangled pulp to a crisp
cinder almost instantly.

As George Abbot came to a full realization of the horror of these
facts, he recoiled from the trap-door as though it were charged with
death.

"For Heaven's sakes, do something!" he shrieked in agony into the
transmitter.

"Courage, sir," came back the reply. "We are rigging up a grapple just
as fast as we can. Long before your oxygen gives out, we shall slide
it down to you along the telephone line, which is the only remaining
connection between us. When it settles about your sphere, and you can
see its hooks outside your window by the light of your pocket-flash,
let us know, and we'll trip the grapple and haul you up."

"Thank you," replied the young man.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was calm now, but it was an enforced and numb kind of calmness.
Mechanically he throttled down his oxygen supply, so as to make it
last longer. Mechanically he took out his notebook and pencil and
started to write down, in the dark, his experiences; for he was
determined to leave a full account for posterity, even though he
himself should perish.

After setting down a categorical description of the successive
partings of the electric light cable and the hoist cable, and his
thoughts and feelings in that connection, he described in detail the
shark with hands, which he had seen through the window of his sphere.
He tried to be very explicit about this, for he realized that his
account would probably be laid, by everyone, to the disordered
imagination of his last dying moments; being a true scientist, George
Abbot wanted the world to believe him, so that another sphere would be
built and sent down to the ocean depths, to find out more about these
peculiar denizens of the deep.

Of course, no one would believe him. This thought kept drumming in his
ears. No one--except Professor Osborne. Old Osborne would believe!

George Abbot's mind flashed back to a conversation he had had with the
old professor, just before the oil interests had sent him on this
exploring trip to discover the source of the large quantities of
petroleum which had begun to bubble up from the bottom of a certain
section of the Pacific very near where Abbot now was.

       *       *       *       *       *

Osborne had said, "This petroleum suggests a gusher to me. And what
causes gushers? Human beings, boring for oil, to satisfy human needs."

"But, Professor," Abbot had objected, "there can't be any human beings
at the bottom of the sea!"

"Why not?" Professor Osborne had countered. "Life is supposed to have
originated spontaneously in the slime of the ocean depths; therefore
that part of the earth has had a head-start on us in the game of
evolution. May not this head-start have been maintained right down to
date, thus producing at the bottom of the sea a race superior to
anything upon the dry land?"

"But," Abbot had objected further, "if so, why haven't they come up to
visit or conquer us? And why haven't we ever found any trace of them?"

"Quite simple to explain," the old professor had replied. "Any
creature who can live at the frightful pressures of the ocean depths
could never survive a journey even halfway to the surface. It would be
like our trying to live in an almost perfect vacuum. We should
explode, and so would these denizens of the deep, if they tried to
come up here. Even one of their dead bodies could not be brought to
the surface in recognizable form. No contact with them will ever be
possible, nor will they ever constitute a menace to any one--for which
we may thank the Lord!"

George Abbot now reviewed this conversation as he crouched in his
diving-sphere in the purple darkness of the marine depths. Yes, old
Osborne would believe him. The diary must be written for Osborne's
eyes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Abbot sent another beam from his pocket light suddenly out into the
water; and this time he surprised several of the peculiar fish. These,
like the first, had arms and hands and high intelligent foreheads.

Then suddenly Abbot laughed a harsh laugh. Old Osborne had been wrong
in one thing, namely in saying that the super-race of the deep would
never be a menace to anyone. They were being a menace to George Abbot,
right now, for it was undoubtedly they who had cut his cables.
Probably they were possessed of much the same scientific curiosity
with regard to him as he was with regard to them, and so they had
determined to secure him as a museum specimen.

The idea was a weird one. He laughed again, mirthlessly.

"What is the matter, sir?" came an anxious voice in his ear-phones.

"Hurry that grapple!" was his reply. "I have found out what cut my
cables. There are some very intelligent-looking fish down here, and I
think they want me for--"

An ominous click sounded in his ears. Then silence.

"Hello! Hello there!" he shouted. "Can you hear me up on the boat?"

