The Project Gutenberg EBook of Delayed Action, by Charles Vincent De Vet

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Delayed Action

Author: Charles Vincent De Vet

Illustrator: Dick Francis

Release Date: September 21, 2010 [EBook #33790]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DELAYED ACTION ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Robert Cicconetti, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:


    This etext was produced from the September 1953 issue of Galaxy
    Science Fiction. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
    that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.


     _This planet gave him the perfect chance to commit
      the perfect crime--only he couldn't remember just
      what it was he had committed._


                          [Illustration]


                            DELAYED ACTION


                         By CHARLES V. DeVET


                     Illustrated by DICK FRANCIS

       *       *       *       *       *




It was just a hunch. Johnson knew that, but his hunches had often paid
off in the past, and now he waited with a big man's patience. For five
hours he sat in the wooden stands, under the rumpled canvas the
concessionaires had put up to protect the tourists from Marlock's
yellow sun.

The sun was hot and soon Johnson's clothing was marked with large
soiled patches of sweat. Now and then a light breeze blew across the
stands from the native section and at each breath his nostrils
crinkled in protest at the acrid smell.

Marlock wasn't much of a planet. Its one claim to fame was its
widely advertised Nature's Moebius Strip. For eighteen months of the
year--nine months of sub-zero cold, and nine months of sultry,
sand-driven summer--the only outsiders to visit the planet came to buy
its one export, the fur of the desert ox. But during the two months of
fall and two months of spring the tourists poured in to gape at the
Strip.

Idly, for the hundredth time, Johnson let his gaze run over the
tourists lining up for their "thrill" journey out onto the Strip. Most
of them wouldn't go far; they only wanted to be able to say they'd
been on it. They would build up some pretty exciting stories about it
by the time they returned home.

There was no sign of Johnson's man.

       *       *       *       *       *

The party started out onto the Strip. At the first sensation of
giddiness women squealed and most of them turned back. Their men came
with them, secretly relieved at the excuse.

Johnson watched disinterestedly until only two remained: the young
couple he had designated in his mind as honeymooners. The girl had
grit. Perhaps more than the young fellow with her. He was affecting
bored bravado, laughing loudly as the girl hesitated, but white
streaks had appeared along his jawline and across his temples as he
waited his turn.

The young couple had gone far enough out now so that they were in the
first bend of the Strip's twisting dip. Already their bodies were
leaning sharply, as the mysterious gravity of the Strip held them
perpendicular with their pathway. From where he sat Johnson could read
nausea on their faces.

When they had followed the Strip around until they were leaning at a
35-degree angle, the girl seemed to lose her nerve. She stopped and
stood gripping the guide rope with both hands. The boy said something
to her, but she shook her head. He'd have to show his superiority now
by going on, but it wouldn't be for much farther, Johnson was willing
to wager.

The boy took three more steps and paused. Then his body bent in the
middle and he was sick. He'd had enough.

Both turned and hurried back. The crowd of tourists, watching or
waiting their turn, cheered. In a few minutes, Johnson knew, the kid
