The Project Gutenberg EBook of Problem on Balak, by Roger D. Aycock

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Problem on Balak

Author: Roger D. Aycock

Release Date: October 4, 2010 [EBook #33839]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PROBLEM ON BALAK ***




Produced by Robert Cicconetti, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                          PROBLEM ON BALAK

                            By ROGER DEE

                     Illustrated by DICK FRANCIS

[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from the September 1953
issue of Galaxy Science Fiction. Extensive research did not uncover any
evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _Sometimes you can solve your problem by running out on it!_]


What I'm getting at is that you don't ever have to worry about being
bored stiff in Solar Exploitations field work. It never gets dull--and
in some pretty strange places, at that.

Take the _S.E.2100's_ discovery of Balak, which is a little planet
circling 70 Ophiuchi some 20,000 light-years from Earth, for example.
You'd never expect to run across the greatest race of surgeons in the
Galaxy--structural, neural or what have you--on a little apple like
that, any more than you'd expect a four man complement like ours to be
handed the sort of life-and-death problem they put to us.

And, if by some miracle of prophecy you anticipated both, it's a cinch
you'd never expect that problem to be solved in the way ours was.

       *       *       *       *       *

Captain Corelli and Gibbons and I couldn't have gone more than a hundred
yards from the _S.E.2100_ before we met our first Balakian native. Or,
to be more accurate, before he met us.

Corelli and I were filling our little sterilized bottles with samples of
soil and vegetation and keeping a wary eye out for possible predators
when it happened. Gibbons, our ecologist and the scientific mainspring
of our crew, was watching a swarm of little twelve-legged bugs that were
busily pollinating a dwarf shrub at the top and collecting payment in
drops of white sap that oozed out at the bottom in return. His eyes were
shining behind their spectacles, and he was swearing to himself in a
pleased monotone.

"Signal the ship and tell the Quack--if you can pry that hypochondriac
idiot away from his gargles and germicide sprays--to bring out a
live-specimen container," he called to Captain Corelli. "We've stumbled
onto something really new here, a conscious symbiosis between entirely
dissimilar life-forms! If the rest of the flora and fauna cooperate like
this...."

At the moment, Gibbons' discovery didn't register, because it was just
then that the first Balakian showed himself.

The native looked at first glance something like a wrinkled pink
octopus, standing three feet high and nearly as broad, and he walked in
a skip-a-step swing like a man on crutches because his three short legs
were set in a horizontal row. He had four arms to each side, the lower
ones meant for grasping and holding and the upper ones for manipulation.
He didn't have a head, exactly, but there was a face of sorts up near
the top of the body that looked like nothing so much as a politely
grinning Oriental's.

He wasn't armed, but I took no chances--I dropped my specimen kit and
yanked out the heat-gun that is a part of every S.E. field operative's
gear. Captain Corelli, who was on the point of calling the Quack at the
