The Project Gutenberg EBook of The gradual acceptance of the Copernican
theory of the universe, by Dorothy Stimson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The gradual acceptance of the Copernican theory of the universe

Author: Dorothy Stimson

Release Date: April 1, 2011 [EBook #35744]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GRADUAL ACCEPTANCE ***




Produced by Suzanne Lybarger, Linda Cantoni, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries,
http://www.archive.org/details/gradualacceptan00stim)









[Transcriber's Note: Obvious printer errors have been corrected
without note. Other questionable items are marked with a
[Transcriber's Note].]




The Gradual Acceptance

OF THE

Copernican Theory of the Universe


DOROTHY STIMSON, Ph.D.


NEW YORK
1917

COPYRIGHT 1917 BY DOROTHY STIMSON

  Trade Selling Agents
  The Baker & Taylor Co.,
  354 Fourth Ave.,
  New York




TO MY FATHER AND MOTHER




[Illustration: THE SYSTEMS OF THE WORLD IN 1651 ACCORDING TO FATHER
RICCIOLI

(Reduced facsimile of the frontispiece in Riccioli: _Almagestum
Novum_. Bologna, 1651.)]


EXPLANATION

"Astrea, goddess of the heaven, wearing angel's wings and gleaming
everywhere with stars, stands at the right; on the left is Argus of
the hundred eyes, not tense, but indicating by the position of the
telescope at his knee rather than at the eyes in his head, that while
observing the work of God's hand, he appears at the same time to be
worshipping as in genuflexion." (Riccioli: _Alm. Nov._, _Praefatio_,
xvii). He points to the cherubs in the heavens who hold the planets,
each with its zodiacal sign: above him at the top is Mars, then
Mercury in its crescent form, the Sun, and Venus also in the crescent
phase; on the opposite side are Saturn in its "tripartite" form (the
ring explanation was yet to be given), the sphere of Jupiter encircled
by its four satellites, the crescent Moon, its imperfections clearly
shown, and a comet. Thus Father Riccioli summarized the astronomical
knowledge of his day. The scrolls quote Psalms 19:2, "Day unto day
uttereth speech and night unto night showeth knowledge."

Astrea holds in her right hand a balance in which Riccioli's theory of
the universe (an adaptation of the Tychonic, see p. 68) far outweighs
the Copernican or heliocentric one. At her feet is the Ptolemaic
sphere, while Ptolemy himself half lies, half sits, between her and
Argus, with the comment issuing from his mouth: "I will arise if only
I am corrected." His left hand rests upon the coat of arms of the
Prince of Monaco to whom the _Almagestum Novum_ is dedicated.

At the top is the Hebrew _Yah-Veh_, and the hand of God is stretched
forth in reference to the verse in the Book of Wisdom (10:20): "But
thou hast ordered all things in measure, and number and weight."




CONTENTS


  ILLUSTRATIONS                                                      7

  PREFACE                                                            8


  PART I. AN HISTORICAL SKETCH OF THE HELIOCENTRIC
  THEORY OF THE UNIVERSE.

  Chapter I. The Development of Astronomical Thought to 1400:
  Preliminary Review                                                 9

  Chapter II. Copernicus and his Times                              20

  Chapter III. Later Development and Scientific Defense
  of the Copernican Theory                                          33


  PART II. THE RECEPTION OF THE COPERNICAN THEORY.

  Chapter I. Opinions and Arguments in the Sixteenth Century        39

  Chapter II. Bruno and Galileo                                     49

  Chapter III. The Opposition and their Arguments                   71

  Chapter IV. The Gradual Acceptance of the Copernican Theory       85

  Chapter V. The Church and the New Astronomy: Conclusion           95


  APPENDICES: TRANSLATIONS BY THE WRITER.

  A. Ptolemy: _Almagest_. Bk. I, chap. 7: That the earth has no
  movement of rotation                                             107

  B. Copernicus: _De Revolutionibus_, Dedication to the Pope       109

  C. Bodin: _Universae Naturae Theatrum_, Bk. V, sections 1 and 2
  in part, and section 10 entire                                   115

  D. Fienus: _Epistolica Quaestio_: Is it true that the heavens
  are moved and the earth is at rest?                              124


  BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                     130

  INDEX                                                            145




ILLUSTRATIONS


  Facsimile of the frontispiece "The Systems of the
  World" in Riccioli: _Almagestum Novum_,
  1651                                                  _Frontispiece_

  Photographic facsimile (reduced) of a page from a
  copy of Copernicus: _De Revolutionibus_, as
  "corrected" in the 17th century according to
  the directions of the Congregations of the
  Index in 1620                                                  p. 61

  Photographic facsimile (reduced) of another "corrected"
  page from the same copy                                       p. 113




PREFACE


This study does not belong in the field of astronomy, but in that of
the history of thought; for it is an endeavor to trace the changes in
people's beliefs and conceptions in regard to the universe as these
were wrought by the dissolution of superstition resulting from the
scientific and rationalist movements. The opening chapter is intended
to do no more than to review briefly the astronomical theories up to
the age of Copernicus, in order to provide a background for the better
comprehension of the work of Copernicus and its effects.

Such a study has been rendered possible only by the generous loan of
rare books by Professor Herbert D. Foster of Dartmouth College,
Professor Edwin E. Slosson of Columbia University, Doctor George A.
Plimpton and Major George Haven Putnam, both of New York, and
especially by the kindly generosity of Professor David Eugene Smith of
Teachers College who placed his unique collection of rare mathematical
books at the writer's disposal and gave her many valuable suggestions
as to available material. Professors James T. Shotwell and Harold
Jacoby of Columbia University have read parts of this study in
manuscript. The writer gratefully acknowledges her indebtedness not
only to these gentlemen, but to the many others, librarians and their
assistants, fellow-students and friends, too numerous to mention
individually, whose ready interest and whose suggestions have been of
real service, and above all to Professor James Harvey Robinson at
whose suggestion and under whose guidance the work was undertaken, and
to the Reverend Doctor Henry A. Stimson whose advice and criticism
have been an unfailing source of help and encouragement.




PART ONE

AN HISTORICAL SKETCH OF THE HELIOCENTRIC THEORY OF THE UNIVERSE.




CHAPTER I.

THE DEVELOPMENT OF ASTRONOMICAL THOUGHT TO 1400 A.D.

_A Preliminary Sketch of Early Theories as a Background._


The appearances in the heavens have from earliest historic ages filled
men with wonder and awe; then they gradually became a source of
questioning, and thinkers sought for explanations of the daily and
nightly phenomena of sun, moon and stars. Scientific astronomy,
however, was an impossibility until an exact system of chronology was
devised.[1] Meanwhile men puzzled over the shape of the earth, its
position in the universe, what the stars were and why the positions of
some shifted, and what those fiery comets were that now and again
appeared and struck terror to their hearts.

[Footnote 1: The earliest observation Ptolemy uses is an Egyptian one
of an eclipse occurring March 21, 721 B.C. (Cumont: 7). [In these
references, the Roman numerals refer to the volume, the Arabic to the
page, except as stated otherwise. The full title is given in the
bibliography at the back under the author's name.]]

In answer to such questions, the Chaldean thinkers, slightly before
the rise of the Greek schools of philosophy, developed the idea of the
seven heavens in their crystalline spheres encircling the earth as
their center.[2] This conception seems to lie back of both the later
Egyptian and Hebraic cosmologies, as well as of the Ptolemaic. Through
the visits of Greek philosophers to Egyptian shores this conception
helped to shape Greek thought and so indirectly affected western
civilization. Thus our heritage in astronomical thought, as in many
other lines, comes from the Greeks and the Romans reaching Europe (in
part through Arabia and Spain), where it was shaped by the influence
of the schools down to the close of the Middle Ages when men began
anew to withstand authority in behalf of observation and were not
afraid to follow whither their reason led them.

[Footnote 2: Warren: 40. See "Calendar" in Hastings: _Ency. of
Religion and Ethics_.]

But not all Greek philosophers, it seems,[3] either knew or accepted
the Babylonian cosmology.[4] According to Plutarch, though Thales
(640?-546? B.C.) and later the Stoics believed the earth to be
spherical in form, Anaximander (610-546? B.C.) thought it to be like a
"smooth stony pillar," Anaximenes (6th cent.) like a "table."
Beginning with the followers of Thales or perhaps Parmenides (?-500
B.C.), as Diogenes Laertius claims,[5] a long line of Greek thinkers
including Plato (428?-347? B.C.) and Aristotle (384-322 B.C.) placed
the earth in the center of the universe. Whether Plato held that the
earth "encircled" or "clung" around the axis is a disputed point;[6]
but Aristotle claimed it was the fixed and immovable center around
which swung the spherical universe with its heaven of fixed stars and
its seven concentric circles of the planets kept in their places by
their transparent crystalline spheres.[7]

[Footnote 3: For a summary of recent researches, see the preface of
Heath: _Aristarchus of Samos_. For further details, see Heath: _Op.
cit._, and the writings of Kugler and Schiaparelli.]

[Footnote 4: See Plutarch: _Moralia: De placitas Philosophorum_, Lib.
I et II, (V. 264-277, 296-316).]

[Footnote 5: Diogenes Laertius: _De Vitis_, Lib. IX, c. 3 (252).]

[Footnote 6: Plato: _Timaeus_, sec. 39 (III, 459 in Jowett's
translation).]

[Footnote 7: Aristotle: _De Mundo_, c. 2 et 6 (III, 628 and 636).]

The stars were an even greater problem. Anaximenes thought they were
"fastened like nails" in a crystalline firmament, and others thought
them to be "fiery plates of gold resembling pictures."[8] But if the
heavens were solid, how could the brief presence of a comet be
explained?

[Footnote 8: Plutarch: _Op. cit._, Lib. III, c. 2 (V, 303-4).]

Among the philosophers were some noted as mathematicians whose leader
was Pythagoras (c. 550 B.C.). He and at least one of the members of
his school, Eudoxus (409?-356? B.C.), had visited Egypt, according to
Diogenes Laertius,[9] and had in all probability been much interested
in and influenced by the astronomical observations made by the
Egyptian priests. On the same authority, Pythagoras was the first to
declare the earth was round and to discuss the antipodes. He too
emphasized the beauty and perfection of the circle and of the sphere
in geometry, forms which became fixed for 2000 years as the fittest
representations of the perfection of the heavenly bodies.

[Footnote 9: Diogenes Laertius: _De Vitis_, Lib. VIII, c. 1, et 8
(205, 225).]

There was some discussion in Diogenes' time as to the author of the
theory of the earth's motion of axial rotation. Diogenes[10] gives the
honor to Philolaus (5th cent. B.C.) one of the Pythagoreans, though he
adds that others attribute it to Icetas of Syracuse (6th or 5th cent.
B.C.). Cicero, however, states[11] the position of Hicetas of Syracuse
as a belief in the absolute fixedness of all the heavenly bodies
except the earth, which alone moves in the whole universe, and that
its rapid revolutions upon its own axis cause the heavens apparently
to move and the earth to stand still.

[Footnote 10: Diogenes: _Op. cit._, Lib. VIII, c. 7 (225).]

[Footnote 11: Cicero: _Academica_, Lib. II, c. 39 (322).]

Other thinkers of Syracuse may also have felt the Egyptian influence;
for one of the greatest of them, Archimedes (c. 287-212 B.C.), stated
the theory of the earth's revolution around the sun as enunciated by
Aristarchus of Samos. (Perhaps this is the "hearth-fire of the
universe" around which Philolaus imagined the earth to whirl.[12]) In
_Arenarius_, a curious study on the possibility of expressing infinite
sums by numerical denominations as in counting the sands of the
universe, Archimedes writes:[13] "For you have known that the universe
is called a sphere by several astrologers, its center the center of
the earth, and its radius equal to a line drawn from the center of the
sun to the center of the earth. This was written for the unlearned, as
you have known from the astrologers.... [Aristarchus of Samos][14]
concludes that the world is many times greater than the estimate we
have just given. He supposes that the fixed stars and the sun remain
