                             SECURITY RISK


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost
no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license.

Title: Security Risk

Author: Ed M. Clinton

Release Date: April 02, 2011 [EBook #35759]

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SECURITY RISK ***




Produced by Frank van Drogen, Greg Weeks, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.


                             SECURITY RISK

                         BY ED M. CLINTON, JR.

                        _Illustrated by Ed Emsh_



At moments like this, General David Walker always thought fleetingly of
the good old days when he had hated the army. As usual, he smashed the
thought out of his mind with a distinct sense of remorse.

He looked up again at the seamed face of the Chief of Staff, General
Marcus Meriwether. "This could be serious," he said slowly, with a sick
sense of the statement's inadequacy. An old tic suddenly returned,
tugging at the left corner of his mouth.

The deadly, unsmiling expression on Meriwether's face did not change as
he slid more tightly into his chair. "You know as well as I that it
means the Interplanetary Confederation is ready to go to war with us."

Walker stared at the typed statement on his desk. It was a decoded
intelligence message from United Terra's prime agent in the
Interplanetary Confederation, and it was very brief: the Confederation
had developed a long-range neural weapon effectively cancelling out
every armament development achieved by United Terra in fifteen years of
a cold war that of late had become bitter cold. The all-but-autonomous
colonies of Mars and Venus, united now for twenty years in an economic
league, had been itching for independence for a quarter of a century.
The itch had developed into a mighty burning.

"You are fully aware," Meriwether continued, his face still set, "of our
feeling that the Confederation has been eager to take on Terra. They've
clearly been waiting for some positive advantage to offset our pure
strength-in-numbers."


[Illustration: __It was a touchable touching an untouchable. Both
scientist and general were doing their own version of right....__]


Walker forced his eyes upward and stared at his superior. "Your tone
says that such a war might be--"

"Unwelcome at this time. Unwelcome at this time." Meriwether shifted
around in his chair, and scratched at its leather arms with the
manicured tips of his gnarled fingers. "Walker, I don't have to tell you
that this weapon, if it is what our agent infers--and there is no reason
to believe otherwise--that this weapon makes it impossible for us to go
to war with the Confederation--unless, as Chief of Weapons Development,
you can tell me that we have something in our arsenal to combat it."

Walker rubbed at the tic. "Nothing," he said quietly.

Meriwether leaned forward, his hands crooked backward against the chair
arms like catapult springs. "That answer is unacceptable. There are
other questions you must answer, Walker, questions in some ways even
more important than that basic one. Why haven't we developed this weapon
ourselves? Why haven't we been aware of its potential existence? Where
are the defensive devices which would naturally develop from such
cognizance? These things are all your department, Walker." His voice
pitched upward an hysterical fraction. "It just doesn't make sense, you
know. We've a hundred times the personnel, ten times the facilities,
unlimited funds--but they've beaten us to it." He stood up and pushed
