The Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific American, Vol. XXXVII.--No. 2.
[New Series.], July 14, 1877, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Scientific American, Vol. XXXVII.--No. 2. [New Series.], July 14, 1877
       A Weekly Journal Of Practical Information, Art, Science,
       Mechanics, Chemistry, And Manufactures

Author: Various

Release Date: January 3, 2012 [EBook #38481]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Lesley Halamek, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






[Illustration]


SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN


A WEEKLY JOURNAL OF PRACTICAL INFORMATION, ART, SCIENCE, MECHANICS,
CHEMISTRY, AND MANUFACTURES.


NEW YORK, JULY 14, 1877.

Vol. XXXVII.--No. 2. [NEW SERIES.]

[$3.20 per Annum [POSTAGE PREPAID.]]

       *       *       *       *       *


CONTENTS.

(Illustrated articles are marked with an asterisk.)

  Africa, carrying peace into          16
  Air compressor, Bower's *            15
  Alloy, new                           18
  American inventions. N.S.Wales       25
  American Institute Exhibition        24
  Answers to correspondents            27
  Artesian well, pumping (13)          27
  Billiard ball holder *               22
  Billiard table *                     22
  Bisulphide of lime (35)              28
  Bleaching silk and wool              24
  Boot and shoe machinery *            19
  Bookbinding, new method of *         19
  Books and publications               25
  Business prospects                   15
  Carrigeen crop                       17
  Catastrophism, Clarence King on      16
  Catastrophe in geology               17
  Chalk cup *                          22
  Coloring matter from herbs (2)       27
  Copper plates covered with steel     22
  Curtain fixture *                    19
  Disinfecting rooms                   15
  Duplex education                     17
  Dyspepsia, on                        20
  Education in Germany                 24
  Electricity, conducting power (21)   27
  Electrotyping cylinders (33)         28
  Electricity and magnetism (5)        27
  Gold, dentists' (24)                 27
  Horses, dead, standing erect         20
  Inventions patented in England       25
  Lightning, effects of                20
  Lime, precipitating (22)             27
  Locomotive valves, setting           21
  Man's place in Nature                25
  Measures of the U. S. (32)           28
  Mints of the U. S. (30)              27
  Papier Mache (40)                    28
  Patents, American and foreign        25
  Patent decisions, recent             25
  Patents, official list of            28
  Phosphorescent sweating              18
  Plague, extension of the             24
  Plants, curious carnivorous *        23
  Popular fallacies                    24
  Santini, death of Professor          15
  Sebastin, a new explosive            18
  Solar heat, apparatus for utilizing  18
  Special notice                       25
  Steamer, new                         21
  Steam pump, pounding (20)            27
  Sulphur, test for                    22
  Sunstroke                            20
  Tin scrap, utilization of *          18
  Tin-can telephone                    21
  Tin and phosphorus, alloy of         24
  Yule, John                           15

       *       *       *       *       *




BOWER'S PATENT AIR COMPRESSOR.


The new air compressor herewith illustrated may be operated by steam
or water power, and is available for work in mines, tunnels, or
quarries, for driving rock drills, coal cutters, and hauling and
pumping engines, working mining pumps, for use in factories, and in
fact for all service where a safe and efficient power is required. The
construction of the machine, the capacity of which differs according
to the amount of power required, will readily be understood from the
illustration. Above the air cylinder are two distinct air chambers,
each having two induction or receiving valves, which cushion on
rubbers. With the movement of the piston these chambers alternately
receive and force the compressed air through check valves placed
in the upper part of the air compartment, both compartments being
connected with one pipe conveying the air to the ordinary air
receiver. These check valves lift alternately, and cushion on water;
and as the compressed air is forced into the pipe connecting with the
receiver, without a possibility of any of it escaping back into the
receiving chambers, it is claimed that there is the smallest possible
loss of power, and that the machine will give fully 90 per cent of
steam power expended in the shape of compressed air. The compressor is
compact in form, strongly made, simple in construction, and not liable
to get out of order. One peculiarity in its construction is that no
water jacket or hollow piston is used; yet under any of the extreme
pressures to which the machine has been tested, no inconvenience, we
are informed, from heat has been perceptible.

In connection with the compressor, receivers of various sizes are
used, into which the air is pumped and thence conveyed by pipe to the
location where required, even if it be a mile or more, the loss by
friction between receiver and point of utilization of the air being,
it is claimed, under 2 lbs. of the pressure.

The manufacturers also build water-power compressors, one of which,
driven by 75 to 100 horse power, they have recently shipped to Utah.
The machine is intended to convey the air through iron tubes 5,000
feet to the mouth of a silver mine, where a 50 horse power hoisting
and a 25 horse power pumping engine will be driven by air instead
of steam, and a tube will be extended into the mine 1,000 feet deep,
where the power drills and small pumps will be operated by air also.

The manufacturers submit a number of excellent testimonials from
parties using the machine. From one, we learn, that at the Antelope
and Prince of Wales mine, near Alta City, Utah, the compressor runs 10
hours per day, and supplies compressed air to two 3 inch drills used
in running levels. The distribution terminates at distances of from
1,000 to 2,000 feet from the compressor. The machine also drives one
hoisting engine and ventilates the lower part of the mine. The main
supply pipe is three inches in diameter, 2,300 feet long, and is
tapped by two inch pipe wherever power is required. The expenditure
of fuel is one cord of green pine wood and 600 lbs. of bituminous
coal per 10 hours. Air pressure in receiver 100 lbs. This pressure
is reported to be obtained by 70 lbs. of steam as indicated by the
gauges.

For further particulars, address the manufacturers, Messrs. Griffith
and Wedge, Zanesville, Ohio.

[Illustration: BOWER'S AIR COMPRESSOR.]

       *       *       *       *       *




DEATH OF PROFESSOR SANTINI.


A cable dispatch announces the death of the Italian astronomer,
Giovanni Santini. The Professor was born at Tuscany, June 30, 1786,
and was in the ninety-first year of his age. He graduated at the
University of Pisa. He soon devoted himself to a study of the exact
sciences, and in 1814 he had achieved so much distinction that he was
appointed to a professorship in the Padowa Observatory in place
of Vincenzo Cheminello. In 1825 he was appointed Rector of the
University, and up to the time of his death he held the position of
Professor of Astronomy and Director of Mathematical Studies. He was
generally esteemed by the learned societies of Europe, and held
a number of honorary titles and degrees from various leading
universities. He was also a correspondent of the French Academy. The
principal books published by him are strictly scientific, such
as "Decimal Arithmetic" (1808), "Elements of Astronomy" (1820),
"Logarithms and Trigonometry," and "Optical Problems" (1821-23). Some
of his elementary works on astronomy for beginners are the best ever
published in Italy.

       *       *       *       *       *




JOHN YULE.


The death is announced of Mr. John Yule, of the Hutchestown Engine
Works, Rutherglen, N. B., at the age of 66. During early life, Mr.
Yule went the round of the best engineers' shops in Scotland and
England, and became one of the recognized leaders in engineering
progress. His inventiveness took various directions, amongst other
fruits being an improved rotary engine, a compensating governor for
the steam engine, and a screw tap, drill, and mandrel. For the latter
he was awarded the silver medal of the Scottish Society of Arts. For
some years Mr. Yule acted as the manager of the boiler department of
Messrs. Robert Napier & Son's establishment, but eventually resumed
business at the Hutchestown Works, and devoted attention amongst
other matters to the improvement of swing bridges and steam cranes and
hammers. In the former line two of his most important works are the
plate girder bridge over the entrance to one of the docks at Port
Glasgow, for the Caledonian Railway, erected from plans by Messrs.
Bell and Miller, C.E., Glasgow; and a lattice girder bridge over the
entrance to Kingston Dock, Glasgow Harbor. Owing to the angle at which
this last bridge crosses the dock, great difficulties were experienced
in working out the mechanical details so as to admit of easy motion.
These were skillfully overcome, and the bridge was, as finally
erected, a monument of his design as well as workmanship. The
Blackhill incline on the Monkland Canal, constructed nearly a quarter
of a century ago, is a sample of Mr. Yule's mechanical powers. Of late
years he was largely engaged as a professional valuator.


       *       *       *       *       *




BUSINESS PROSPECTS.


We have recently taken the pains to make inquiries from the more
eminent bankers and merchants in the chief cities of the interior, and
the results of our inquiries have tended to confirm the belief we have
more than once expressed in this journal, that although, from various
causes, there is overhanging a portion of our American industries a
cloud of gloom and depression, still throughout the nation at large
there is going on a process of growth and recovery from which the best
results are anticipated. How long we shall have to wait before the
life which is at work silently and secretly beneath the surface will
put forth its full power, in the full harvest of productive activity,
is, of course, impossible to foretell. What is chiefly important for
us to know, however, is that the progress we are making tends upwards
and not downwards, and that it promises to lead our industry and
commerce to a brighter and not to a darker future.--_Financial
Chronicle._


       *       *       *       *       *




TO DISINFECT ROOMS.


The disinfection of a room is not complete unless the walls have been
thoroughly cleansed. If they are papered, the paper must be removed
and the surface beneath carefully scraped and washed. If the walls are
painted, they should be washed with caustic soda. The ceiling should
also be subjected to a similar treatment.

       *       *       *       *       *




SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN.

ESTABLISHED 1845.

MUNN & CO., Editors and Proprietors.

PUBLISHED WEEKLY AT NO. 37 PARK ROW, NEW YORK.

O. D. MUNN.

A. E. BEACH.

       *       *       *       *       *




TERMS FOR THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN.


One copy, one year, postage included              $3.20
One copy, six months, postage included             1.60

CLUBS.--One extra copy of the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN will be supplied
gratis for every club of five subscribers at $3.20 each; additional
copies at same proportionate rate. Postage prepaid.

