The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Review of Algebra, by Romeyn Henry Rivenburg

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Review of Algebra

Author: Romeyn Henry Rivenburg

Release Date: January 9, 2012 [EBook #38536]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A REVIEW OF ALGEBRA ***




Produced by Peter Vachuska, Alex Buie, Erica
Pfister-Altschul and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net





[Transcriber's Note:

This book includes extensive mathematical expressions and equations,
which can not always be easily represented in plain text. The reader is
encouraged to download the HTML version of the text, which represents
the math more clearly.

For the plain text version, the following conventions are used:

Mixed fractions are represented by a dash with no spaces, while
subtraction is represented by a dash with spaces on either side. For
example: 1-1/2 is "one and one half." 1 - 1/2 is "one minus one half."

The "sideways-8" symbol for infinity is represented as [infinity].

Square, cube, and other roots are shown by raising a quantity to the
appropriate fractional power. For example: [4]^(1/2) is "the square root
of 4." [x]^(1/n) is "the nth root of x."

Extra parentheses have been added as needed to clarify the correct order
of operations.]




    A REVIEW OF ALGEBRA


    BY
    ROMEYN HENRY RIVENBURG, A.M.

    HEAD OF THE DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS
    THE PEDDIE INSTITUTE, HIGHTSTOWN, N.J.

    [Illustration]

    AMERICAN BOOK COMPANY
    NEW YORK    CINCINNATI    CHICAGO


    COPYRIGHT, 1914,
    BY ROMEYN H. RIVENBURG.


    COPYRIGHT, 1914, IN GREAT BRITAIN.


    A REVIEW OF ALGEBRA.

    E. P. 6




PREFACE


In most high schools the course in Elementary Algebra is finished by the
end of the second year. By the senior year, most students have forgotten
many of the principles, and a thorough review is necessary in order to
prepare college candidates for the entrance examinations and for
effective work in the freshman year in college. Recognizing this need,
many schools are devoting at least two periods a week for part of the
senior year to a review of algebra.

For such a review the regular textbook is inadequate. From an
embarrassment of riches the teacher finds it laborious to select the
proper examples, while the student wastes time in searching for
scattered assignments. The object of this book is to conserve the time
and effort of both teacher and student, by providing a thorough and
effective review that can readily be completed, if need be, in two
periods a week for a half year.

Each student is expected to use his regular textbook in algebra for
reference, as he would use a dictionary,--to recall a definition, a
rule, or a process that he has forgotten. He should be encouraged to
_think_ his way out wherever possible, however, and to refer to the
textbook only when _forced_ to do so as a last resort.

The definitions given in the General Outline should be reviewed as
occasion arises for their use. The whole Outline can be profitably
employed for rapid class reviews, by covering the part of the Outline
that indicates the answer, the method, the example, or the formula, as
the case may be.

The whole scheme of the book is ordinarily to have a page of problems
represent a day's work. This, of course, does not apply to the Outlines
or the few pages of theory, which can be covered more rapidly. By this
plan, making only a part of the omissions indicated in the next
paragraph, the essentials of the algebra can be readily covered, if need
be, in from thirty to thirty-two lessons, thus leaving time for tests,
even if only eighteen weeks, of two periods each, are allotted to the
course.

If a brief course is desired, the Miscellaneous Examples (pp. 31 to 35,
50 to 52), many of the problems at the end of the book, and the College
Entrance Examinations may be omitted without marring the continuity or
the comprehensiveness of the review.

                                                ROMEYN H. RIVENBURG.




CONTENTS


                                                       PAGES

    OUTLINE OF ELEMENTARY AND INTERMEDIATE ALGEBRA      7-13

    ORDER OF OPERATIONS, EVALUATION, PARENTHESES          14

    SPECIAL RULES OF MULTIPLICATION AND DIVISION          15

    CASES IN FACTORING                                16, 17

    FACTORING                                             18

    HIGHEST COMMON FACTOR AND LOWEST COMMON MULTIPLE      19

    FRACTIONS                                             20

    COMPLEX FRACTIONS AND FRACTIONAL EQUATIONS        21, 22

    SIMULTANEOUS EQUATIONS AND INVOLUTION             23, 24

    SQUARE ROOT                                           25

    THEORY OF EXPONENTS                                26-28

    RADICALS                                          29, 30

    MISCELLANEOUS EXAMPLES, ALGEBRA TO QUADRATICS      31-35

    QUADRATIC EQUATIONS                               36, 37

    THE THEORY OF QUADRATIC EQUATIONS                  38-41

    OUTLINE OF SIMULTANEOUS QUADRATICS                42, 43

    SIMULTANEOUS QUADRATICS                               44

    RATIO AND PROPORTION                              45, 46

    ARITHMETICAL PROGRESSION                              47

    GEOMETRICAL PROGRESSION                               48

    THE BINOMIAL THEOREM                                  49

    MISCELLANEOUS EXAMPLES, QUADRATICS AND BEYOND      50-52

    PROBLEMS--LINEAR EQUATIONS, SIMULTANEOUS EQUATIONS,
    QUADRATIC EQUATIONS, SIMULTANEOUS QUADRATICS       53-57

    COLLEGE ENTRANCE EXAMINATIONS                      58-80




OUTLINE OF ELEMENTARY AND INTERMEDIATE ALGEBRA


~Important Definitions~

    Factors; coefficient; exponent; power; base; term; algebraic
    sum; similar terms; degree; homogeneous expression; linear
    equation; root of an equation; root of an expression; identity;
    conditional equation; prime quantity; highest common factor (H.
    C. F.); lowest common multiple (L. C. M.); involution;
    evolution; imaginary number; real number; rational; similar
    radicals; binomial surd; pure quadratic equation; affected
    quadratic equation; equation in the quadratic form; simultaneous
    linear equations; simultaneous quadratic equations;
    discriminant; symmetrical expression; ratio; proportion; fourth
    proportional; third proportional; mean proportional; arithmetic
    progression; geometric progression; S [infinity]


~Special Rules for Multiplication and Division~

    1. Square of the sum of two quantities.
        (x + y)^2.

    2. Square of the difference of two quantities.
        (x - y)^2.

    3. Product of the sum and difference of two quantities.
        (s + t)(s - t).

    4. Product of two binomials having a common term.
        (x + r)(x + m).

    5. Product of two binomials whose corresponding terms are similar.
        (3x + 2t)(2x - 5t).

    6. Square of a polynomial.
        (m - n/3 + k)^2.

    7. Sum of two cubes.
        (x^3 + y^3)/(x + y) = x^2 - xy + y^2.

    8. Difference of two cubes.
        (x^3 - y^3)/(x - y) = x^2 + xy + y^2.

    9. Sum or difference of two like powers.
        (x^7 + y^7)/(x + y),
        (x^5 - y^5)/(x - y),
        (x^4 - y^4)/(x - y),
        (x^4 - y^4)/(x + y).

~Cases in Factoring~

    1. Common monomial factor.
        mx + my - mz = m(x + y - z).

    2. Trinomial that is a perfect square.
        x^2 +- 2xy + y^2 = (x +- y)^2.

    3. The difference of two squares.
        (a) Two terms.
            x^2 - y^2 = (x + y)(x - y).
        (b) Four terms.
            x^2 + 2xy + y^2 - m^2 = (x + y + m)(x + y - m).
        (c) Six terms.
            x^2 + 2xy + y^2 - p^2 - 2pq - q^2
              = [(x + y) + (p + q)][(x + y) - (p + q)].
        (d) Incomplete square.
            x^4 + x^2 y^2 + y^4
              = x^4 + 2x^2 y^2 + y^4 - x^2 y^2
              = (x^2 + y^2 + xy)(x^2 + y^2 - xy).

    4. Trinomial of the form x^2 + bx + c.
        x^2 - 5x + 6 = (x - 2)(x - 3).

    5. Trinomial of the form ax^2 + bx + c.
        20x^2 + 7x - 6 = (4x + 3)(5x - 2).

    6. Sum or difference of
        two cubes. See "Special Rules," 7 and 8.
        two like powers. See "Special Rules," 9.

    7. Common polynomial factor. Grouping.
        t^2 p + t^2 q - 2mp - 2mq
          = t^2(p + q) - 2m(p + q) = (p + q)(t^2 - 2m).

    8. Factor Theorem.
        x^3 + 17x - 18 = (x - 1)(x^2 + x + 18).

~H. C. F. and L. C. M.~

    a^2 + 2a - 3 = (a + 3)(a - 1).

    a^2 + 7a + 12 = (a + 3)(a + 4).

    a^4 + 27a = a(a + 3)(a^2 - 3a + 9).

    H. C. F. = a + 3.

    L. C. M. = (a + 3)(a - 1)(a + 4)a(a^2 - 3a + 9).

~Fractions~

    Reduction to lowest terms.

    Reduction of a mixed number to an improper fraction.

    Reduction of an improper fraction to a mixed number.

    Addition and subtraction of fractions.

    Multiplication and division of fractions.

    Law of signs in division, changing signs of factors, etc.

    Complex fractions.

~Simultaneous Equations~

    Solved by
        addition or subtraction.
        substitution.
        comparison.

    Graphical representation.

~Involution~

    Law of signs.

    Binomial theorem laws.

    Expansion of
        monomials and fractions.
        binomials.
        trinomials.

~Evolution~

    Law of signs.

    Evolution of monomials and fractions.

    Square root of algebraic expressions.

    Square root of arithmetical numbers.

    Optional
        Cube root of algebraic expressions.
        Cube root of arithmetical numbers.

~Theory of Exponents~

    Proofs: a^m x a^n = a^(m + n);
            (a^m)/(a^n) = a^(m - n);
            (a^m)^n = a^(mn);
            [a^(mn)]^(1/n) = a^m;
            (a/b)^n = (a^n)/(b^n);
            (abc)^n = a^n b^n c^n.

    Meaning of
        fractional exponent.
        zero exponent.
        negative exponent.

    Four rules
        To multiply quantities having the same base, add exponents.
        To divide quantities having the same base, subtract
            exponents.
        To raise to a power, multiply exponents.
        To extract a root, divide the exponent of the power by the
            index of the root.

~Radicals~

    Radical in its simplest form.

    Transformation of radicals
        Fraction under the radical sign.
        Reduction to an entire surd.
        Changing to surds of different order.
        Reduction to simplest form.

    Addition and subtraction of radicals.

    Multiplication and division of radicals
        a^(1/n) . b^(1/n) = [ab]^(1/n).
        ([ab]^(1/n))/(a^(1/n)) = b^(1/n).

    Rationalization
        Monomial denominator.
        Binomial denominator.
        Trinomial denominator.

    Square root of a binomial surd.

    Radical equations. _Always_ check results to avoid extraneous roots.

~Quadratic Equations~

    Pure. x^2 = a.

