The Project Gutenberg EBook of Luna Escapade, by H. B. Fyfe

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Luna Escapade

Author: H. B. Fyfe

Release Date: October 6, 2012 [EBook #40961]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LUNA ESCAPADE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net











                             Luna Escapade

                            _by H. B. Fyfe_

[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Orbit volume 1 number
2, 1953. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
copyright on this publication was renewed.]

[Sidenote: _SHE WAS JUST A CRAZY BRAT--OR WAS SHE?_]

[Illustration]


With over an hour to go before he needed to start braking for his
landing on Luna, Pete Dudley sat at the controls of the rocket freighter
and tried to think of anything else that needed checking after his
spinning the ship. He drummed absently with the fingers of his right
hand upon the buckle of the seat strap which restrained him from
floating out of the padded acceleration seat.

"Let's see, tail's right out there in front. I got the angle perfect.
Guess everything's okay."

He noticed his fingers drumming, and stopped.

"Cut that out!" he told himself. "Get nervous now and Jack'll be sending
some other vacuum on the next Mars run. There's Ericsson dead center in
the screen, waiting for you to plop down beside the domes. You couldn't
miss a crater that size if you tried."

He leaned back and stared speculatively at the curving tip of the Lunar
Rockies that ended in one of the largest craters on the far side of
Luna. His eyes squinted slightly and there was a crease between them, as
if he spent much time peering into instruments. There were deeper lines
beside his mouth, but the thin lips and pointed chin neutralized that
evidence of frequent smiling.

"Are we nearly there?"

Dudley's brown eyes opened so wide that the whites gleamed in the dim
light from his instruments. Then he shut them tightly and shook his head
quickly.

He had thought he heard a woman's voice, and of course he couldn't have.
Freight rockets were checked out of Terran spaceports with only a pilot
aboard. A lonely job for a man, but it was really only a way of keeping
in practice. He made six round trips to Luna a year, but the big one was
the three-month kick to Mars.

Then he smelled the perfume, so out of place in the machine-crowded
compartment. He turned around slowly.

She stood with one hand gripping the lead of a computing machine to keep
her feet on the deck. Dudley stared her up and down two or three times
before he realized his mouth hung open.

Slim and about five-feet-four, she looked like a nice little girl making
her first disastrous experiments with adult make-up. The slack suit of
deep blue, revealing a soft white blouse at the neck of the jacket, was
in the best of taste, but her heavy application of lipstick was crude.

_And her hair isn't naturally ash-blonde_, Dudley thought. _Yet she
looks like such a kid. Not pretty, but she might be in a few years._

"What are you doing here?" he demanded harshly.

For a second, her eyes were scared. Then the expression was supplanted
by a hard, make-believe confidence, leaving him merely with a fading
sense of shame at his tone.

"Same as you," she said boldly. "Going to Luna."

Dudley snorted. "Then relax," he growled, "because I can't stop you now.
