The Project Gutenberg EBook of Spacewrecked on Venus, by Neil R. Jones

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Spacewrecked on Venus

Author: Neil R. Jones

Release Date: October 9, 2012 [EBook #40993]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SPACEWRECKED ON VENUS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                       Spacewrecked on Venus

                         By NEIL R. JONES

[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Wonder Stories
Quarterly Winter 1932. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]

[Illustration: A beam of electricity leaped from the ship. Instantly
shafts of light spread from the nearest projectile to the ones on either
side of it.]

       *       *       *       *       *

                           NEIL R. JONES

    [Illustration]

    Interplanetary commerce, if and when it begins, will be fraught with
    all of the dangers that accompany pioneering expeditions. There will
    be the terrible climatic conditions on other worlds to be faced,
    strange beasts and plants; and perhaps desperate and greedy men.
    That was the case when every new land was opened on earth and it may
    be expected to be true when we conquer the solar planets.

    Mr. Jones understands these things well. His vivid imagination, his
    sense of a good story and his knowledge of what may be expected upon
    other worlds combine to make this a novel and exciting yarn. And, as
    is always desired, it comes to a smashing finish with a surprising
    ending.

    His scientific weapons are quite novel, but so realistically does he
    portray them, that they strike one as being quite possible and
    likely to be used at some future time.

       *       *       *       *       *

I stood looking from the space ship into the dense fog banks which
rolled about us. We were descending through the dense cloud blanket of
Venus. How near we actually were to the ground I did not know. Nothing
but an unbroken white haze spread mistily, everywhere I looked.

With jarring suddenness, a terrific shudder throbbed the length of the
_C-49_, rattling the loose articles on the desk nearby. The dictatyper,
with which I had lately been composing a letter, crashed violently to
the floor. I reeled unsteadily to the door. It was nearly flung open in
my face.

"Hantel!"

Captain Cragley steadied himself on the threshold of my room. The
captain and I had become intimate friends during the trip from the
earth. In his eyes I saw concern.

"What's wrong?" I queried.

"Don't know yet! Come--get out of there, man! We may have to use the
emergency cylinder!"

I followed Cragley. The crew, numbering seven, were gathered in the
observation chamber. Most of the passengers were there too.

The _C-49_ carried twelve passengers, all men, to the Deliphon
settlement of Venus. In the earlier days of space travel, few women
dared the trip across space.

Several of the crew worked feverishly at the controls above the
instrument board.

"What's our altitude?" demanded Cragley.

"Fifteen thousand feet!" was the prompt reply. "Our drop is better than
a hundred feet a second!"

Worried wrinkles creased the kindly old face of Captain Cragley. He
debated the issue not one moment.

"Into the emergency cylinder--everybody!"

Herding the passengers ahead of them, Cragley's men entered a
compartment shaped like a long tube, ending in a nose point. When we
were buckled into a spiral of seats threading the cylinder, Cragley
pulled the release lever. Instantly, the cylinder shot free of the
doomed _C-49_. For a moment we dropped at a swifter pace than the
abandoned ship. After that, our speed of descent was noticeably
decreased.

Peering at the proximity detector, Cragley announced that we were quite
safe from a collision. The _C-49_ was far below us and dropping fast.

"No danger now," he assured the passengers. "We'll come down like a
feather. Then all we have to do is radio Deliphon to send out a ship for
us."

Cragley was equal to the situation. In this year of 2342, when the days
of pioneer space flying were commencing to fade into history, it
required capable men to cope with interplanetary flight. If Cragley
brought his crew and passengers safely through this adversity and also
salvaged the valuable cargo of the _C-49_, it was another feather in his
cap.

Quentin, second to Cragley in command, labored over the sending
apparatus. Quentin looked up at his superior officer with an uneasy
expression. The captain was quick to sense trouble.

"What's wrong?"

"I don't like the looks of this," was Quentin's reply. "The sender
refuses to function properly. I can do nothing with it."

Cragley's face bore a troubled look. He stepped to the side of his
subordinate for a hasty inspection of the radio sender.

"The receiver plate doesn't light up, either," said Quentin. "Looks to
me as though someone has been tampering with this."

