Project Gutenberg's The Martian, by Allen Glasser and A. Rowley Hilliard

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Martian

Author: Allen Glasser
        A. Rowley Hilliard

Release Date: October 9, 2012 [EBook #40992]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MARTIAN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net











                             The Martian

based upon the Third Prize ($15.00) Winning Plot of the Interplanetary
Plot Contest won by Allen Glasser, 1610 University Ave., New York

                  By A. R. Hilliard and Allen Glasser

[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Wonder Stories
Quarterly Winter 1932. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]

[Illustration: The water was evaporated by the ever-shining sun until
there was none left for the thirsty plants. Every year more workers died
in misery.]

       *       *       *       *       *

     [Illustration: ALLEN GLASSER who furnished the plot]

     [Illustration:A. ROWLEY HILLIARD who wrote the story]

     Many writers of science fiction, who have not given the matter much
     thought, assume that a man of intelligence from one planet would
     meet a cordial and sympathetic welcome on another world. It is
     assumed that people are everywhere educated, curious about other
     worlds and other cultures, and eager to help a visitor from an
     alien race.

     Unfortunately there is no assurance that such is the case. Even
     were the members of another race, on another world possessed of
     education, there would be bound to be among them low and brutish
     elements. And if a stranger from another world, dazed by new
     conditions and unable to make his wants known, were to fall into
     their hands his fate might not be happy.

     We have read no story that pictures with such clarity and insight
     the experiences of a man on another world than his own, than does
     this present story. With the basis of a splendid plot Mr. Hilliard
     has worked up a simply marvelous story.

       *       *       *       *       *

The rolling, yellow sand reflected the heat of the sun in little,
shimmering waves. It reflected the sun's light blindingly throughout all
its visible expanse, with the exception of one spot where lay a circular
shadow. In the great steely-blue dome of the sky there were no clouds.

The shadow, although not large, was very dark and distinct. The curved,
even line of its circumference was precisely drawn.

In the air was a persistent rattle of sound--a series of closely spaced
explosions, ever rising in intensity.

Suddenly a small, uneven shadow detached itself from the circular one;
and floated swiftly across the sand. The rattling sound increased to a
tremendous booming roar, and the large shadow began to fade. At the same
time, the smaller one grew steadily darker.

High above the sand, a man was falling--much too swiftly.

The surface of the sand had been shaped into hills by the prevailing
winds. These long, ridge-like hills, or dunes, were convex and gradual
in slope on their windward sides, but on their lee sides they were
concave, and very steep.

It was near the top of one of these steep slopes that the man landed.
His frail legs and body crumpled under the weight of his head; he
pitched forward, and half rolled, half slid to the bottom where he came
to rest more gently, the target of a small avalanche of sand.

Immediately, he began to struggle; and, failing in his attempts to
rise, stretched his slim arms skyward and uttered a sharp, squealing
cry, painfully prolonged. Far above him a spherical object rapidly
diminished in size. Fixedly he watched the sunlight glinting on its
polished grey sides; watched it shrink to a tiny ball, a point, and
then--nothing. He was alone.

The pressure was horrible. He buried his head in the hot sand, and
clapped his ears in a vain attempt to ease the throbbing pain. They must
have underestimated the weight of the Toonian atmosphere if they had
expected him to live long here! It did not hurt his body, but his head
was being crushed. He knew that he would soon die--and was glad. This
wild, senseless punishment would be at an end.

He opened his eyes again, and stared in growing fascination and wonder
at the great arched blue dome above him. Gradually the spectacle of this
weirdly beautiful canopy occupied his whole attention. It was like a
soft curtain of light blue material hiding the blackness of the sky and
the gleaming stars;--yet the sun shone through. For a moment he forgot
his loneliness, his pain, in rapt contemplation of the immense
perfection above him--but only for a moment. Then the explanation came
to him. That beautiful blue was the heavy atmosphere of Toon, which was
slowly crushing him to death! He closed his eyes.

The heat was terrific, but not as intense as he had expected. Toon was
nearer the Sun than was his own world--millions of miles nearer; yet he
was not badly burnt, and this puzzled him. The explanation must again
lie in the heavy atmosphere--serving as insulation, he finally
decided.... He didn't care.

He felt strangely detached. What signifies life--or death--to a tiny
being separated by fifty million miles from any of its kind? Deposited
on this strange planet, he had no hopes of survival; his only emotion
was astonishment that he had lived a moment.

He struggled to remove the parachute that had been so inadequate in
easing his fall. Movement--even the raising of an arm was serious
effort. He was glued to the ground by the tremendous gravitational pull
of a planet so much greater in size than his own. He relaxed.

Why struggle? With the passing of hope, all incentive to effort passes
also. He felt no distress at the thought of death. Life, not death,
would be freakish in this great wasteland.

And he was past anger now. What they had done to him they had done
through hate and fear. Only hate and fear could conceive of so fantastic
a torture for a fellow being. There was no satisfaction now in the
knowledge that they had feared him; nor did he care about their hate....
They had won. They would have their way, and all the people of the Loten
would suffer in consequence....

Loten! A wave of sick loneliness swept over him.... A point in the sky,
obscured by a weird curtain of blue--his home!

       *       *       *       *       *

Certainly, no man had ever suffered thus! A surge of self-pity welled up
within him. Certainly no being had ever been forced to long for the
world--the globe which gave it birth! This horror was reserved for him
alone....

He clenched his fists. Reason returned to rescue him from emotion. Loten
did not exist for him. He was outside of the world--a tiny flame of
consciousness in space. And what did that amount to, after all, he asked
himself.... What, but Death?...

For a long time he lay there in the sand, quite motionless.

The sun was sinking. Its blazing heat was abating somewhat; its face was
