The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Final Figure, by Samuel Kimball Merwin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Final Figure

Author: Samuel Kimball Merwin

Release Date: October 14, 2012 [EBook #41062]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FINAL FIGURE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                           THE FINAL FIGURE

                   Novelet of the Day After Tomorrow

                          by Sam Merwin, Jr.

                     (_illustrated by Paul Orban_)

[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Dynamic Science
Fiction January 1954. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




[Illustration: The General had an unpleasant vision as he watched this
model in operation....]


     Was it a wild talent that MacReedy had, or was it just prophetic
     genius that led him to figure out new, improved ordnance weapons
     and make models of them--before the armed forces had them?
     Whichever it was, MacReedy was both valuable and dangerous--and
     when the general saw MacReedy's final figure, the weapons following
     the mobile rocket A-missile launcher....


The General was in mufti. He stood briefly within the entrance of
_Models and Miniatures, Inc._, feeling a mild envy of the civilians who
brushed past him, coming and going. They looked so easy, so relaxed, so
casual in posture and dress. He was wistfully aware of the West Point
ramrod that was his spine, the razor-edged bandbox neatness of his
banker's grey suit, the Herbert Hoover four-squareness of his homburg,
the stiff-symmetry of his dark-blue fore-in-hand.

He found compensation in visualizing some of these casual civilians in
uniform--then shuddered, and moved on into the shop, poise and assurance
restored.

Save for the display-counters and wall-cases, the shop was softly
lighted. And although it was well filled with customers and lookers of
all ages there was about it the hushed quality of a library--or a
chapel. Even the children talked softly as they pointed at and discussed
this 100-gauge English locomotive or that working jet-model of a
Vought-Chance _Cutlass_. They were well-aware of being in sight of wish
and dream-fulfillment.

He moved slowly toward the rear of the shop, past the glass counters
that displayed gaily-painted models of carriages, coaches and early
automobiles; past the fire-engines in red and gold; past the railroads;
past the planes and past the tiny ships--from Phoenician galleys and
Viking vessels with gaudily-decorative sails and shields to the latest
bizarre-decked atomic aircraft carrier.

He stood in front of the miniature soldiers and, for a happy moment,
recaptured the glamour of parades and gay uniforms that had beckoned
him into a career whose color and band-music had long since been worn
off by the nerve-wracking tragedy of battle and the endless ulcerating
paper-work of peace.

_Busman's holiday_, he thought. _Sailors in a rowboat in Central Park._
And he was glad he had not worn his uniform.

Each miniature-soldier manufacturer had a glass shelf to his own wares,
labeled with a white-cardboard rectangle upon which his name had been
neatly brushed with India ink. Here were the comparatively rude
Britains, mass-produced, work-horses of toy armies throughout the
Western World since before his own boyhood.

Here were the heavy and magnificent Courtleys, specializing in medieval
knights and men-at-arms, beautifully caparisoned in all the colors of
the rainbow. Here were the Barker Napoleonics, the one-inch Staddens,
the incredible half-inch Emery Penninsulars--each a costly little work
of art that defied the enlarging of a magnifying glass. Here were Comets
in khaki and grey, perfect models of the guns, tanks and trucks of
America, England and Soviet Russia.

To his left along the counter a chunky blond citizen, with wide
cheekbones and a faint Slavic accent, was discussing a sale with the
clerk. The general was only subconsciously aware of him as he moved in
that direction, marveling a little at the painstaking craftsmanship, the
endless hours of eye-destroying labor that had produced such microscopic
perfection--as well as at some of the follies with which men had attired
themselves in the name of martial glory.

He recalled having read of an order, issued at the time of the Mexican
War, that the collars of all officers in the United States Army should
rise to the tips of the ears. It was scarcely surprising, he thought,
that the Seminoles--clad virtually in nothing at all--should have been
able to stalemate an army thus uniformed in the steaming swamps of
Florida.

"They're great, aren't they?"

The voice came from a lower level, and the General looked down to meet
the excited blue eyes of a curly-haired male moppet who could scarcely
have been more than twelve. There was an aura of friendliness about the
leather-jacketed-and-corduroyed youngster, a sharing of manifest
interest, that pierced the hide of the old soldier.

He smiled back and said, "Quite wonderful," and was briefly afraid his
words had been too condescending. But the quick answering smile on the
