The Project Gutenberg EBook of Futuria Fantasia, Winter 1940, by Ray Bradbury

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Futuria Fantasia, Winter 1940

Author: Ray Bradbury

Release Date: December 15, 2012 [EBook #41627]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FUTURIA FANTASIA, WINTER 1940 ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net










                           FUTURIA FANTASIA

                             Winter 1940

                           By Ray Bradbury




LAST ISSUE: We made a mistake that we will try not to repeat again very
soon. We printed the editorial page three weeks ahead of the remainder
of Futuria Fantasia, thereby creating no end of humorous confusion. We
babbled glibly, in the editorial, about two or three yarns that we later
decided were unprintable, and, at the same time, threw in some horrible
mistakes in grammar that must have left Shakespeare doing nip-ups in his
shroud.

[Illustration]

THIS ISSUE; J. Harvey Haggard bows into what we hope will be a regular
spotlight in Futuria Fantasia.... Emil Petaja, whose verses have
appeared in Weird Tales, makes his self known with a neat little weird
yarn and a poem.... Again H.V.B. comes to the fore with a sequel to THE
GALAPURRED FORSENDYKE--THE VOICE OF SCARILIOP ... and, in case you have
wondered about or will wonder about these two unusual yarns, we are
printing them for no other reason than that we like their description,
they tickle our mental palate, they are word pictures of surrealistic
dreams ... and anyone who guesses who H.V.B is will get the next edition
of Futuria Fantasia gratis.... Henry Hasse blows in and blows up with a
rebuttle against Foo E. Onya and does himself right proud by
science-fiction.... Ross Rocklynne, prominent Eastern schlameel, offers
us a pitiful excuse for an article, HOW TO GET ABOUT.... Ron Reynolds,
we have no doubt, will manage to get into the magazine somehow with his
horrendous FIGHT OF THE GOOD SHIP CLARISSA, but if we can do anything at
all we'll print it on invisible paper.... Anthony Corvais, if you start
guessing who did it, wrote the short story in the rear by the title of
THE SYMPHONIC ABDUCTION.... Hannes Bok, who has another cover on Weird
Tales for March, has drawn our cover again and many inside
illustrations, including a large advertisement for Hell, under which you
will find a descriptive poem written by Guy Amory. Unlike Finlay, who
draws pictures from poems, we procure pictures from Bok and write poems
about them. In fact, I blushingly admit, I even wrote a ten thousand
word novelette around that little creature on the cover of the first
Futuria Fantasia ... which, no doubt, will have its share of rejections
very soon, in which case I will foist on my poor unsuspecting public,
both of them, this story now titled LORELEI. I would have included it in
this issue, but Russell J. Hodgkins threatened me so venemously that I
gave in told him to put down his gun. It might be a good idea, by the
way, if more of you readers wrote us letters criticizing FuFa. So far we
have heard nothing from Madle, Baltadonis, E.E. Smith, Kuslan,
Marconette, Taurasi, Dikty, Wilson, or Speer. How in hell, we ask you
guys, can we improve if you won't write in and tell us if and why we
stink? Co-operation, please....

       *       *       *       *       *

NEXT ISSUE: Robert A Heinlein, of the LA SFL, whose _noval_ is now
current in Astounding, will begin the first of a series of short stories
written on order for Futuria Fantasia. Ross Rocklynne, also, takes an
encore with a thot-provoking, accent on provoking, story or article.
Henry Hasse will be here in company with Ross Hodgkins. Hodgkins
possibly writing on Technocracy. And, if schedules go through, an
article to end all articles, by Charlie Hornig, fresh and sassay from
New Yawk. Other possible bets are Fred Shroyer, Guy Amory, Anthony
Corvais, Emil Petaja, Willy Ley, Doug Rogers, August Derleth, Ackerman
and T. Bruce Yerke. Send your dime for the Spring Edition now--or a
quarter for the Spring, Summer and Fall issues. Introduce FuFa to your
friends and help us grow.




THE VOICE OF SCARILIOP

H. V. B.


Four pillars, arising out of the stone like strange growing things of
demoniac shape--these Redforth saw and comprehended, knowing full well
that Tarath had always abounded in monstrosities. "But what," he asked
himself, "will knowing of such as this, be of use to me, as I search for
Ghiltharmie?" For he had at last come to realise, to admit even to
himself, that he was a lost thing. The Yulphog had taken his soul. They
had exiled him to this lost land of dread. But they'd hinted of escape,
if he could find it. "Si Yamlon," he had told him, pointing to a
writhing belt of suns, lifting and lowering at the horizon like the
yellow crest of a flaming wave. And he had nodded his head. They had
vanished, disintegrating, it seemed. He didn't then know that they were
related to Topper's friends and the jeep in one thing: that their
Typonisif and Tregoifer was applicable to the atmosphere.

The four pillars were bending from their own weight. Strange
colors--like an idiot's conception of a spectrum, spectrally rippled
like irid waves across the columns. Like music in color. Assailed by
their complex harmonies, Redforth could only stand speechless, hands
thrust defensively forward. IT WAS THEN THAT HE SAW EIRY.

The pillars split. From each of then drifted a whiff of steam. They
united into a wavering cloud which shimmered an instant in mid-air, then
settled to the ground. And as it touched the metallic grass blades which
stretched on and on like the upraised swords of a midget army, the
vapor-cloud condensed into a woman's body. EIRY. Queen of Scariliop!

He recognized her at once, tho he had only read of her. She was not
human. Her body was like a snake's, and she had bat wings. From a
cluster of writhing worm-tentacles leered her face, like a mask in the
heart of a seething flower. It was oval, and the scarlet mouth was like
a velvet cushion--disproportionate--waiting for some priceless burden.
Her nose was negligible, but her lone eye was vast and blue; like a
doorway opening upon a sky too blue to belong to our world. Like blue
incarnate: and blue is the color of MYSTERY.

