The Project Gutenberg EBook of Futuria Fantasia, Fall 1939, by Ray Bradbury

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Futuria Fantasia, Fall 1939

Author: Ray Bradbury

Release Date: December 15, 2012 [EBook #41624]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FUTURIA FANTASIA, FALL 1939 ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                            FUTURIA FANTASIA

                               fall 1939

                              vol. 1 no. 2

                            Ray D. Bradbury
                                editor

                               10 cents




[Illustration: WORRY!!!]


A newer, plumper Futuria Fantasia greets you, with more articles, more
value and less Technocracy! The reason for the scanty garb of our summer
issue was TIME, that villain who holds his sword over all humanity. I
didn't have time to contact various authors and fans--and there was
little time for mimeographing, since the Angel expedition to New York
was fast approaching, and ye editor was wandering around in a daze
waiting for the day when his bus would sweep him off to Manhattan. The
trip to New York was a happily successful thing. Futuria Fantasia would
like to toss an orchid to the editors who contributed so generously to
the convention, and at the same time blare forth with a juicy razzberry
for a certain trio of fans who made fools of themselves at the Conv.
(and u know who we meen).

But enuf of this boring fan quarreling ** action should have been taken
at the convention and there's no use bawling over fused rockets. This
issue we bring you another cover by Hans Bok. We sincerely believe his
work is superior to any work done in fan mags for a long time. He has to
be good ** for he is a protegee of no less a person than Maxfield
Parrish, whose paintings have, at one time or another in the past
decades, made more than one home beautiful. If you haven't had a
Maxfield Parrish painting in yur home, it ain't a home. And, we feel
proud of Hans becuz we acted as agent to Weird Tales while
conventioneering in New York. Latest report is that Hans is doing an
Illustration for Weird Tales. Here's luck, Hans, and may you keep up the
good work while staying in Manhattan.

With this issue we introduce two new fans, and two new authors. They are
Anthony Corvais, who makes his part-time home in Tucson, Arizona, and
Guy Amory of Phoenix. Corvais, twenty-two years old, has done a neat job
with his RETURN FROM THE DEAD. In the winter edition he will let go with
another original SYMPHONIC ABDUCTION. Guy Amory, after sum few hours of
hard labor, finally got an interview out of Hankuttner, which is work in
any man's lingo. Both boys were in L.A. for two weeks about a month
back, and gave their promise to support FuFa from now to TDWACOH (the
day when _astounding_ comes out hourly).

Ron Reynolds, whose satire on Technocracy received favorable comment,
comes back with his views and news about the Convention ** and Corrinne
Ellsworth, gracious female fan of L.A. presents us with something that
is distasteful to me, THE CASE OF THE VANISHING CAFETERIA. I protest
against her grossly horrid insinuations about my Ghoul's Broths.
Manhattaneers will tell you that it is only at the full moon that I can
concoct one ... tho a cafeteria or Automat atmosphere does work wonders
with my ego--specially if there are enuf people watching to make it
profitable.

As you will notice there is not a great deal to be sed about Technocracy
in this issue ** mainly becuz I am tired of talking and the response we
get is vury, vury funny, if not childish. If someone cares to challenge
us on Technocracy we shall be only too glad to answer all questions, but
when a bunch of crackpots start dragging in their own theories,
relatives and human nature then we give up the ghost. We take this
occasion to challenge the so-far-silent John W. Campbell to a duel of
words on this subject. How's about it, Campbell?




The Galapurred Forsendyke

A tale of the Indies

By H.V.B.


He remembered--but never dreamed its source--the old poem which began,
"A swibosh is an Indian," and as he leaned back in his chair puffing on
a pipe, his lean bronzed face darkly serious against the moonglow, a
little echo hooted from the hills as if an owl'd cried.

Then Edris called. At the alarmant tingle of the bell, like a tinnient
tang of a rattlesnake's tremor, he ran to the telephone and shouted
eagerly, "Edris! My darling." Then he remembered to take receiver off
the hook. He was answered by dead silence. Then, to his amazement and
utter horror, a long damp tongue swished out of the mouthpiece, lapped
his cheek and disappeared in a puff of acrid steam. "The Martians!" was
his first thot, as he tremblingly buttered his toast. Then he heard
Edris' voice. It floated easily from the ceiling as if it were inverted
steam. He looked up, and discovered overhead that the planet India had
vanished from the map. It had peeled itself loose and inched over the
wallpaper and was now wrapping itself like a second skin around a baked
potato. "But that's impossible!" he breathed, "There aren't any potatoes
in August, and especially in bathtubs." Again Edris' voice reached him.
What was she saying? "Go with the pretty men, dear, they'll feed you an
orange." But that sounded crazy. He was worried, and clung to a red-hot
radiator which melted into a puddle at his touch, burning a round red
hole in the rug.

Seventeen puffs of black vapor--he counted them--whiffed up winsomely
from the charred circle. "Around and around," he said, dreamily,
remembering the second line of the poem, "When Fifthly is perplexed."
Edris oozed out of the shadows to him, longlike and snaky, with fearthy
fettles adorning her foresome, and a blaze in her eyes like the
hurmwurst of Whidby. Island, island, he repeated to himself, thrusting
an negatory hand thru the farthing of her wrabdy--and her mouth parted
to disclose another mouth, from which issued visible words like ticker
tape of steam in chilly air, so surprising him that he could only stand
rooted, like a tree. It was then that he noticed the snakes in her hair,
as the leaves sprouted from his cheeks end from every simple vascicle of
his tubular perpendages sometimes cursorily applellated, eyebreams.
