The Project Gutenberg EBook of Futuria Fantasia, Spring 1940, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Futuria Fantasia, Spring 1940

Author: Various

Editor: Ray Bradbury

Release Date: December 18, 2012 [EBook #41651]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FUTURIA FANTASIA, SPRING 1940 ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net











                        futuria fantasia

                          Spring 1940

                         vol. 1. no. 4.

                        Ray D. Bradbury
                            editor

                          ten cents


[Illustration: _CONTENTS_]


    COVER                               Hannes Bok

    3 GOLGONO AND SLITH                 Ray Bradbury

    4 HEIL!                             Lyle Monroe

    7 THE PHANTOMS                      J.E. Kelleam

    8 THOTS ON THE WORLD STATE          Hank Kuttner

    9 WOULD YOU?                        J.H. Haggard

    10 THE PIPER                        Ron Reynolds

    14 THE ITCHING HOUR                 Damon Knight

    15 THE FLIRTENFLOG                  Hannes V. Bok

    16 BOKARICATURE                     Hannes V. Bok

    17 NINEVAH                          J.E. Kelleam

    18 advertisements

    19 ART: CREATURES FROM LORELEI      Hannes V. Bok


FUTURIA FANTASIA IS PUBLISHED IRREGULARLY AND GESTATED AT THE DOW-JONES
BUYING LEVEL OF TEN CENTS AN ISSUE. THE FIFTH ISSUE WILL BE SCARING YOU
AROUND ABOUT HALLOWEEN--SEND YOUR DIME TO EDITOR BRADBURY AT #3054 1/2
W. 12th St. Los Angeles, Calif. CONTRIBUTIONS WILL BE HAPPILY FONDLED
AND SEWED UP IN A GREEN VELVET SACK. ALL STORIES SUBMITTED MUST BE
SHAVED AND IN THE COMPANY OF ADULT MARTIANS.




[Illustration]

gorgono _and_ slith--


"Let us, by all means, be lucid," said Gorgono to Slith. Slith fluttered
his reptile tongue and turned his morbid eyes to me. "Yes," he said,
"let us, certainly be lucid, Bradbury. From now on use a contents page
in Futuria Fantasia." And he spanked his tail slickly on my typewriter.

I don't mind Slith so much, he's only a little anachronistic reptile, a
descendent of happier days in dinosaurial dawndom. I never feared Slith.
But Gorgono!

Gorgono pierced me with his slanting green, clear eyes, heavy-lidded,
extending one claw and attempting to keep it from shaking while his
pointed ears stood up straight. A moment before he had been hunting
fleas in the fertile hair that clothed his muscular limbs, but now he
was serious; so very serious it frightened me.

And when the thunder-voiced, evil-eyed, shaggy haired and monstrous
Gorgono reclined on the shelf over my head, saliva drooling with silent
precision from his pendulous lips, and gave orders I hastened to obey
them. Gorgono was the voice of the critics--the ogre of opinion, the
harsh guttural commandment of style and fashion. And now Gorgono had
grumbled, "Number your pages from now on, MISTER Bradbury or else YOUR
number'll be up. Why, Gad, man, the last issue of Futuria Fantasia I
didn't know if I was coming or going, the way you heiroglyphed the
sheets. And I might add, you're going to use even margins from here on
in."

"Okay, okay, okay," I said, slinking with flushed visage behind my
stencils. "But from now on Futuria Fantasia will be ten cents straight
an issue. Ten cents straight." "Agreed," snapped Gorgono, "if you are
neater. But you must be new, neotiric, different." Then I flashed them
the newly processed cover done by Bok. "Gods!" bellowed Gorgono. "That
is stupendous! A fine beginning, mortal, a very fine beginning!" Slith
agreed by pounding vigorously on the table with his scaly rump. "And
wait until you read Monroe's yarn," I jubilantly exclaimed. "It's not
science-fiction, but it's certainly a fine bit of story." "Yes," said
