The Project Gutenberg EBook of Captives of the Flame, by Samuel R. Delany

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Captives of the Flame

Author: Samuel R. Delany

Release Date: January 24, 2013 [EBook #41905]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAPTIVES OF THE FLAME ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





       *       *       *       *       *



                          CAPTIVES OF THE FLAME

                           by SAMUEL R. DELANY

    [Transcriber's Note: Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
    that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


    ACE BOOKS, INC.
    1120 Avenue of the Americas
    New York 36, N.Y.

    CAPTIVES OF THE FLAME

    Copyright (C), 1963, by Ace Books, Inc.

    All Rights Reserved

    Printed in U.S.A.

       *       *       *       *       *

    _This is for Marilyn, of course._

       *       *       *       *       *

     SAMUEL R. DELANY considers _Captives of the Flame_ to be the first
     of a trilogy dealing with the same epoch and characters. It is,
     however, his second published novel, his first being _The Jewels of
     Aptor_, Ace Book F-173, which has received considerable acclaim.

     A young man, resident in New York City, Delany is a prolific and
     talented writer, whose work in poetry and prose have won him many
     awards. Asked for comment on his literary ambitions, he preferred
     to quote one of the characters from one of his works:

     "I wanted to wield together a prose luminous as twenty sets of
     headlights flung down a night road; I wanted my words tinged with
     the green of mercury vapor street lamps seen through a shaling of
     oak leaves in the park past midnight. I needed phrases that would
     break open like thunder, or leave a brush as gentle as willow
     boughs passed in a dark room.... The finest writing is always the
     finest delineation of surfaces."

       *       *       *       *       *




PROLOGUE


The green of beetles' wings ... the red of polished carbuncle ... a web
of silver fire. Lightning tore his eyes apart, struck deep inside his
body; and he felt his bones split. Before it became pain, it was gone.
And he was falling through blue smoke. The smoke was inside him, cool as
blown ice. It was getting darker.

He had heard something before, a ... voice: the _Lord of the Flames_....
Then:

Jon Koshar shook his head, staggered forward, and went down on his knees
in white sand. He blinked. He looked up. There were two shadows in front
of him.

To his left a tooth of rock jutted from the sand, also casting a double
shadow. He felt unreal, light. But the backs of his hands had real dirt
on them, his clothes were damp with real sweat, and they clung to his
back and sides. He felt immense. But that was because the horizon was so
close. Above it, the sky was turquoise--which was odd because the sand
was too white for it to be evening. Then he saw the City.

It hit his eyes with a familiarity that made him start. The familiarity
was a refuge, and violently his mind clawed at it, tried to find other
familiar things. But the towers, the looped roadways, that was all there
was--and one small line of metal ribbon that soared out across the
desert, supported by strut-work pylons. The transit ribbon! He followed
it with his eyes, praying it would lead to something more familiar. The
thirteenth pylon--he had counted them as he ran his eye along the silver
length--was crumpled, as though a fist had smashed it. The transit
ribbon snarled in mid-air and ceased. The abrupt end again sent his mind
clawing back toward familiarity: _I am Jon Koshar_ (followed by the
meaningless number that had been part of his name for five years). _I
want to be free_ (and for a moment he saw again the dank, creosoted
walls of the cabins of the penal camp, and heard the clinking chains of
the cutter teeth as he had heard them for so many days walking to the
mine entrance while the yard-high ferns brushed his thighs and
forearms ... but that was in his mind).

The only other things his scrambling brain could reach were facts of
negation. He was some place he had _never_ been before. He did _not_
know how he had gotten there. He did _not_ know how to get back. And the
close horizon, the double shadows ... now he realized that this was
_not_ Earth (Earth of the Thirty-fifth Century, although he gave it
another name, Fifteenth Century G.F.).

But the City.... It was on earth, and he was on earth, and he was--had
been--in it. Again the negations: the City was _not_ on a desert, nor
could its dead, deserted towers cast double shadows, nor was the transit
ribbon broken.

The transit ribbon!

No!

It couldn't be broken. He almost screamed. _Don't let it be broken,
please...._

The entire scene was suddenly jerked from his head. There was nothing
left but blue smoke, cool as blown ice, inside him, around him. He was
spinning in blue smoke. Sudden lightning seared his eyeballs, and the
shivering after-image faded, shifted, became ... a web of silver fire,
the red of polished carbuncle, the green of beetles' wings.




CHAPTER I


Silent as a sleeping serpent for sixty years, it spanned from the heart
of Telphar to the royal palace of Toromon. From the ashes of the dead
city to the island capital, it connected what once had been the two
major cities, the only cities of Toromon. Today there was only one.

In Telphar, it soared above ashes and fallen roadways into the night.

Miles on, the edge of darkness paled before the morning and in the faint
shadow of the transit ribbon, at the edge of a field of lava, among the
whispering, yard-high ferns, sat row on row of squat shacks, cheerless
as roosting macaws. They stood near the entrance of the tetron mines.

A few moments before, the light rain had stopped. Water dribbled down
the supporting columns of the transit ribbon which made a black band on
the fading night.

Now, six extraordinarily tall men left the edge of the jungle. They
carried two corpses among them. Two of the tall men hung back to
converse.

"The third one won't get very far."

"If he does," said the other, "he'll be the first one to get through the
forest guards in twelve years."

"I'm not worried about his escaping," said the first. "But why have
there been such an increase in attempts over the past year?"

The other one laughed. Even in the dull light, the three scars that ran
down the side of his face and neck were visible. "The orders for tetron
have nearly doubled."

"I wonder just what sort of leeches in Toron make their living off these
miserable--" He didn't finish, but pointed ahead to the corpses.

"The hydroponic growers, the aquarium manufacturers," answered the man
with the scars. "They're the ones who use the ore. Then, of course,
there's the preparation for the war."

"They say that since the artificial food growers have taken over, the
farmers and fishermen near the coast are being starved out. And with the
increased demand for tetron, the miners are dying off like flies here at
the mine. Sometimes I wonder how they supply enough prisoners."

"They don't," said the other. Now he called out. "All right. Just drop
them there, in front of the cabins."

The rain had made the ground mud. Two dull splashes came through the
graying morning. "Maybe that'll teach them some sort of lesson," said
the first.

"Maybe," shrugged the one with the scars.

Now they turned back toward the jungle.

       *       *       *       *       *

Soon, streaks of light speared the yellow clouds and pried apart the
billowing rifts. Shafts of yellow sank into the lush jungles of Toromon,
dropping from wet, green fronds, or catching on the moist cracks of
boulders. Then the dawn snagged on the metal ribbon that arced over the
trees, and webs of shadow from the immense supporting pylons fell across
the few, gutted lava beds that dotted the forest.

A formation of airships flashed through a tear in the clouds like a
handful of hurled, silver chips. As the buzz from their tetron motors
descended through the trees, Quorl, the forest guard, stretched his
seven-foot body and rolled over, crushing leaves beneath his shoulder.
Instinctively his stomach tensed. But silence had returned. With large,
yellow-brown eyes, he looked about the grove in which he had spent the
night. His broad nostrils flared even wider. But the air was still,
clean, safe. Above, the metal ribbon glinted. Quorl lay back on the
dried leaves once more.

       *       *       *       *       *

As dawn slipped across the jungle, more and more of the ribbon caught
fire from beneath the receding shadows, till at last it soared above the
yellow crescent of sand that marked the edge of the sea.

Fifty yards down the beach from the last supporting pylon whose base
still sat on dry land, Cithon, the fisherman, emerged from his shack.

"Tel?" he called. He was a brown, wiry man whose leathery face was
netted with lines from sand and wind. "Tel?" he called once more. Now he
turned back into the cottage. "And where has the boy gotten off to now?"

Grella had already seated herself at the loom, and her strong hands now
began to work the shuttle back and forth while her feet stamped the
treadle.

"Where has he gone?" Cithon demanded.

"He went out early this morning," Grella said quietly. She did not look
at her husband. She watched the shuttle moving back and forth, back and
forth between the green and yellow threads.

"I can see he's gone out," Cithon snapped. "But where? The sun is up. He
should be out with me on the boat. When will he be back?"

Grella didn't answer.

"When will he be back?" Cithon demanded.

"I don't know."

Outside there was a sound, and Cithon turned abruptly and went to the
side of the shack.

The boy was leaning over the water trough, sloshing his face.

"Tel."

The boy looked up quickly at his father. He was perhaps fourteen, a thin
child, with a shock of black hair, yet eyes as green as the sea. Fear
had widened them now.

"Where were you?"

"No place," was the boy's quietly defensive answer. "I wasn't doing
anything."

"Where were you?"

"No place," Tel mumbled again. "Just walking...."

Suddenly Cithon's hand, which had been at his waist jerked up and then
down, and the leather strap that had been his belt slashed over the
boy's wet shoulder.

The only sound was a sudden intake of breath.

"Now get down to the boat."

Inside the shack, the shuttle paused in Grella's fist the length of a
drawn breath. Then it shot once more between the threads.

       *       *       *       *       *

Down the beach, the transit ribbon leapt across the water. Light shook
on the surface of the sea like flung diamonds, and the ribbon above was
dull by comparison.

Dawn reached across the water till at last the early light fell on the
shore of an island. High in the air, the ribbon gleamed above the busy
piers and the early morning traffic of the wharf. Behind the piers, the
towers of the City were lanced with gold, and as the sun rose, gold
light dropped further down the building faces.

On the boardwalk, two merchants were talking above the roar of
tetron-powered winches and chuckling carts.

"It looks like your boat's bringing in a cargo of fish," said the stout
one.

"It could be fish. It could be something else," answered the other.

"Tell me, friend," asked the portly one, whose coat was of cut and cloth
expensive enough to suggest his guesses were usually right, "why do you
trouble to send your boat all the way to the mainland to buy from the
little fishermen there? My aquariums can supply the City with all the
food it needs."

The other merchant looked down at the clip-board of inventory slips.

"Perhaps my clientele is somewhat different from yours."

The first merchant laughed. "You sell to the upper families of the City,
who still insist on the doubtful superiority of your imported
