The Project Gutenberg EBook of Nightmare Planet, by Murray Leinster

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Nightmare Planet

Author: Murray Leinster

Release Date: June 19, 2013 [EBook #42987]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NIGHTMARE PLANET ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Denny Lien, Mary Meehan and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                       Nightmare Planet

                     _by_ MURRAY LEINSTER

               (_Illustrations by Tom O'Reilly_)

    [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Science Fiction
    Plus June 1953. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
    the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    _In science-fiction, as in all categories of fiction, there are
    stories that are so outstanding from the standpoint of
    characterization, concept, and background development that they
    remain popular for decades. Two such stories were Murray Leinster's_
    The Mad Planet _and_ Red Dust. _Originally published in 1923, they
    have been reprinted frequently both here and abroad. They are now
    scheduled for book publication. Especially for this magazine, Murray
    Leinster has written the final story in the series. It is not
    necessary to have read the previous stories to enjoy this one. Once
    again, Burl experiences magnificent adventures against a colorful
    background, but to the whole the author has added philosophical and
    psychological observations that give this story a flavor seldom
    achieved in science-fiction._

    Under his real name of Will Fitzgerald Jenkins, the author has sold
    to _The Saturday Evening Post_, _Colliers'_, _Today's Woman_, in
    fact every important publication in America. He has had over 1200
    stories published, 15 books and 35 science-fiction stories
    anthologized. His writing earned him a listing in _Who's Who in
    America_.

       *       *       *       *       *




The Directory-ship _Tethys_ made the first landing on the planet,
L216^{12}. It was a goodly world, with an ample atmosphere and many
seas, which the nearby sun warmed so lavishly that a perpetual
cloud-bank hid them and all the solid ground from view. It had mountains
and islands and high plateaus. It had day and night and rain. It had an
equable climate, rather on the tropical side. But it possessed no life.

No animals roamed its solid surface. No vegetation grew from its rocks.
Not even bacteria struggled with the stones to turn them into soil. No
living thing, however small, swam in its oceans. It was one of that
disappointing vast majority of otherwise admirable worlds which was
unsuited for colonization solely because it had not been colonized
before. It could be used for biological experiments in a completely
germ-free environment, or ships could land upon it for water and
supplies of air. The water was pure and the air breathable, but it had
no other present utility. Such was the case with an overwhelming number
of Earth-type planets when first discovered in the exploration of the
galaxy. Life simply hadn't started there.

So the ship which first landed upon it made due note for the Galactic
Directory and went away, and no other ship came near the planet for
eight hundred years.

But nearly a millennium later, the Seed-Ship _Orana_ arrived. It landed
and carefully seeded the useless world. It circled endlessly above the
clouds, dribbling out a fine dust comprised of the spores of every
conceivable microorganism that could break down rock to powder and turn
the powder to organic matter. It also seeded with moulds and fungi and
lichens, and everything that could turn powdery primitive soil into
stuff on which higher forms of life could grow. The _Orana_ seeded the
seas with plankton. Then it, too, went away.

Centuries passed. Then the Ecological Preparation Ship _Ludred_ swam to
the planet from space. It was a gigantic ship of highly improbable
construction and purpose. It found the previous seeding successful. Now
there was soil which swarmed with minute living things. There were fungi
which throve monstrously. The seas stank of teeming minuscule
life-forms. There were even some novelties on land, developed by
strictly local conditions. There were, for example, _paramecium_ as big
as grapes, and yeasts had increased in size so that they bore flowers
visible to the naked eye. The life on the planet was not aboriginal,
though. It had all been planted by the seed-ship of centuries before.

The _Ludred_ released insects, it dumped fish into the seas. It
scattered plant-seeds over the continents. It treated the planet to a
sort of Russell's Mixture of living things. The real Russell's Mixture
is that blend of simple elements in the proportions found in suns. This
was a blend of living creatures, of whom some should certainly survive
by consuming the now habituated flora, and others which should survive
by preying on the first. The planet was stocked, in effect, with
everything it could be hoped might live there.

But at the time of the _Ludred's_ visit of course no creature needing
parental care had any chance of survival. Everything had to be able to
care for itself the instant it burst its egg. So there were no birds or
mammals. Trees and plants of divers sorts, and fish and crustaceans and
insects could be planted. Nothing else.

The _Ludred_ swam away through emptiness.

There should have been another planting, centuries later still, but it
was never made. When the Ecological Preparation Service was moved to
Algol IV, a file was upset. The cards in it were picked up and replaced,
but one was missed. So that planet was forgotten. It circled its sun in
emptiness. Cloud-banks covered it from pole to pole. There were hazy
markings in certain places, where high plateaus penetrated the clouds.
But from space the planet was featureless. Seen from afar, it was merely
a round white ball--white from its cloud-banks and nothing else.

But on its surface, in its lowlands it was nightmare.

Especially was it nightmare--after some centuries--for the descendants
of the human beings from the space-liner _Icarus_, wrecked there some
forty-odd generations ago. Naturally, nobody anywhere else thought of
the _Icarus_ any more. It was not even remembered by the descendants of
its human cargo, who now inhabited the planet. The wreckage of the ship
was long since hidden under the seething, furiously striving fungi of
the boil. The human beings on the planet had forgotten not only the ship
but very nearly everything--how they came to this world, the use of
metals, the existence of fire, and even the fact that there was such a
thing as sunlight. They lived in the lowlands, deep under the
cloud-bank, amid surroundings which were riotous, swarming, frenzied
horror. They had become savages. They were less than savages. They had
forgotten their high destiny as men.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

Dawn came. Grayness appeared overhead and increased. That was all. The
sky was a blank, colorless pall, merely mottled where the clouds
clustered a little thicker or a little thinner, as clouds do. But the
landscape was variegated enough! Where the little group of people
huddled together, there was a wide valley. Its walls rose up and up into
the very clouds. The people had never climbed those hillsides.

They had not even traditions of what might lie above them, and their
lives had been much too occupied to allow of speculations on cosmology.
By day they were utterly absorbed in two problems which filled every
waking minute. One was the securing of food to eat, under the conditions
of the second problem, which was that of merely staying alive.

There was only one of their number who sometimes thought of other
matters, and he did so because he had become lost from his group of
humans once, and had found his way back to it. His name was Burl, and
his becoming lost was pure fantastic accident, and his utilization of a
fully inherited power to think was the result of extraordinary events.
But he still had not the actual habit of thinking. This morning he was
like his fellows.

All of them were soaked with wetness. During the night--every night--the
sky dripped slow, spaced, solemn water-drops during the whole of the
dark hours. This was customary. But normally the humans hid in the
mushroom-forests, sheltered by the toadstools which now grew to three
man-heights. They denned in small openings in the tangled mass of
parasitic growths which flourished in such thickets. But this last night
they had camped in the open. They had no proper habitations of their
own. Caves would have been desirable, but insects made use of caves, and
the descendants of insects introduced untold centuries before had shared
in the size-increase of _paramecium_ and yeasts and the few true plants
which had been able to hold their own. Mining-wasps were two yards long,
and bumble-bees were nearly as huge, and there were other armored
monstrosities which also preferred caves for their own purposes. And of
course the humans could not build habitations, because anything men
built to serve the purpose of a cave would instantly be preempted by
creatures who would automatically destroy any previous occupants.

The humans had no fixed dens at any time. Now they had not even shelter.
They lacked other things, also. They had no tools save salvaged scraps
of insect-armor--great sawtoothed mandibles or razor-pointed
leg-shells--which they used to pry apart the edible fungi on which they
lived, or to get at the morsels of meat left behind when the brainless
lords of this planet devoured each other. They had not even any useful
knowledge, except desperately accurate special knowledge of the manners
and customs of the insects they could not defy. And on this special
morning they concluded that they were doomed. They were going to be
killed. They stood shivering in the open, waiting for it to happen.

It was not exactly news. They had had warning days ago, but they could
do nothing about it. Their home valley, to be sure, would have made any
