The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Fantasy Fan, October 1933, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Fantasy Fan, October 1933
       The Fan's Own Magazine

Author: Various

Editor: Charles D. Hornig

Release Date: July 20, 2014 [EBook #46339]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FANTASY FAN, OCTOBER 1933 ***




Produced by Greg Weeks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






Transcriber's Note: Minor typographical errors have been corrected
without note. Irregularities and inconsistencies in the text have
been retained as printed.

Words printed in bold are marked with tildes: ~bold~.

The cover of this ebook was created by the transcriber and is hereby
placed in the public domain.




THE FANTASY FAN

THE FANS' OWN MAGAZINE

~Editor~: Charles D. Hornig
(Managing Editor: Wonder Stories)

Published                     10 cents a copy
Monthly                       $1.00 per year

137 West Grand Street, Elizabeth, New Jersey

Volume 1      October, 1933      Number 2




EDITORIAL


You will note several improvements in this issue of THE FANTASY FAN
over the first number. The most noticeable one, of course, is the fact
that there are almost twice as many pages as in the September copy.
But our improvements do not end there--not by a long shot. Not only
has the circulation been doubled, but we have a new policy. Starting
with this issue, we will present a story every month (maybe more than
one) by Clark Ashton Smith, H. P. Lovecraft, August W. Derleth, and
other top-notchers in the field of weird fiction. You science-fiction
fans are probably wondering by the import of the last sentence why we
will not print science-fiction. Well, here's the reason. In the
SCIENCE FICTION DIGEST we have a fan magazine for those
scientifictionally inclined, which also presents gems of this type
story by Arthur J. Burks, Ray Palmer, and others. We feel that the
weird fans should also have a magazine for themselves--hence THE
FANTASY FAN. But don't get discouraged, you science-fiction guzzlers,
we have dozens of excellent articles composed just for you. Although
THE FANTASY FAN will present no science-fiction stories, we certainly
will continue to give absorbing columns, articles and departments that
will make each issue well worth a dime to you. You won't want to miss
the rest of Schwartz's "How to Collect Fantasy Fiction," or Ackerman's
story of his A-1 collection, or the Club News or the Famous Fans
department, or the Boiling Point, or Science Fiction in English
Magazines by Tucker, or the super-excellent material we have on hand
besides--dozens of articles of humor, satire, information, absorbing
interest--the type of article that only the science fiction fan can
derive full enjoyment from. So, while THE FANTASY FAN will lean toward
the weird angle, it will be worth the while of every science fiction
fan to continue to be a reader. Furthermore--through years of
experience (well, a month, anyway), we have learned that a great many
weird fans--we could almost say a majority--are also readers of
science fiction and vice versa. After all, both science fiction and
weird tales are fantastic, aren't they? They both are based on the
highly improbable, and they both stimulate the imagination. It is a
rare fan that does not like both. The scientifically inclined reader
may not like weird tales; those that only want to be horrified and
terrorized may not like science fiction; but those who want their
imaginations stimulated like both.

Let us remind you again, and inform the new readers, that this is
primarily a magazine for the fans, of the fans, and by the fans--the
fan, the whole fan, and nothing but the fan. (We hope that by this
time you realize that we publish a FAN magazine). But all foolishness
aside, we want you to run the magazine. Tell us what you like and what
you don't like. As many letters as possible will be published in "Our
Readers Say" department. We will always abide by the wishes of the
majority, and very often act upon the opinions of a single reader--try
out his ideas to see how the rest of the readers like them. Make
believe that you are an associate editor--criticize us "to the hairy
limit"--or tell us how good you think we are (we are not modest). If
you feel as though you have the ability to compose suitable articles
for publication in THE FANTASY FAN, send them in for our
consideration, and if we find them acceptable, you will be paid for
them in copies of THE FANTASY FAN--in cash as soon as possible. THE
FANTASY FAN is still running on a deficit. Subscribe now, if you have
not already done so, and insure yourself of a bigger and better
magazine in the future.

The following departments: "This Month's Cash Contest"--"Penpals
Wanted"--and the Questionnaire have been discontinued because of lack
of support and enthusiasm on the part of our readers. The
"Conglamitorial," and "About Authors" and similar departments may be
left out once in awhile to make place for material of greater merit.

The feature of next month's issue will be "The Other Gods," by H. P.
Lovecraft--a picturesque and weird story well up to the standard of
Lovecraft's best, and far surpassing the general run of weird tale. We
are extremely fortunate in being able to secure such stories. The
November issue will also contain a poem by Clark Ashton Smith, the
continuation of all continued in this issue (including another one of
the "Annals of the Jinns" and will present many new and interesting
features.

Yours for spreading the gospel of weird and science fiction.

The Editor




OUR READERS SAY


"I have read the first issue of 'The Fantasy Fan' with much interest.
Good work! I like your departments, and hope you will be able to
expand them, particularly those devoted to information about fantastic
stories.

"'The Boiling Point' is going to be a great department. I was
interested by the article on 'Science Fiction in English Magazines' by
Bob Tucker. I predict that 'The Fantasy Fan' will be a success. With
all best wishes"--Clark Ashton Smith

"Vol. 1, No. 1, looks to me very much what the younger science fiction
devotee wants. Later on it might be a good idea to use matter of
interest to weird tales enthusiasts--articles on the classics of weird
literature, and information concerning weird magazines."--H. P.
Lovecraft

We'll wager Mr. Lovecraft is well satisfied with this issue. It
includes everything he asked for and then some. It is no longer for
the "younger science fiction enthusiast," but for all lovers of the
fantastic.

"I received the first issue of 'The Fantasy Fan' this morning and was
indeed pleased with it."--August W. Derleth
