Project Gutenberg's Five of Maxwell's Papers, by James Clerk Maxwell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Five of Maxwell's Papers

Author: James Clerk Maxwell

Posting Date: February 25, 2014 [EBook #4908]

Release Date: January, 2004

[This file was first posted on March 24, 2002]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FIVE OF MAXWELL'S PAPERS ***




Produced by Gordon Keener






This eBook includes 5 papers or speeches by James Clerk Maxwell.

The contents are:

   Foramen Centrale
   Theory of Compound Colours
   Poinsot's Theory
   Address to the Mathematical
   Introductory Lecture




On the Unequal Sensibility of the Foramen Centrale to Light of
different Colours.

James Clerk Maxwell


[From the _Report of the British Association_, 1856.]


When observing the spectrum formed by looking at a long ve rtical slit
through a simple prism, I noticed an elongated dark spot running up
and down in the blue, and following the motion of the eye as it moved
_up and down_ the spectrum, but refusing to pass out of the blue into
the other colours.  It was plain that the spot belonged both to the
eye and to the blue part of the spectrum.  The result to which I have
come is, that the appearance is due to the yellow spot on the retina,
commonly called the _Foramen Centrale_ of Soemmering.  The most
convenient method of observing the spot is by presenting to the eye in
not too rapid succession, blue and yellow glasses, or, still better,
allowing blue and yellow papers to revolve slowly before the eye.  In
this way the spot is seen in the blue.  It fades rapidly, but is
renewed every time the yellow comes in to relieve the effect of the
blue.  By using a Nicol's prism along with this apparatus, the brushes
of Haidinger are well seen in connexion with the spot, and the fact of
the brushes being the spot analysed by polarized light becomes
evident.  If we look steadily at an object behind a series of bright
bars which move in front of it, we shall see a curious bending of the
bars as they come up to the place of the yellow spot.  The part which
comes over the spot seems to start in advance of the rest of the bar,
and this would seem to indicate a greater rapidity of sensation at the
yellow spot than in the surrounding retina.  But I find the experiment
difficult, and I hope for better results from more accurate observers.




On the Theory of Compound Colours with reference to Mixtures of
Blue and Yellow Light.

James Clerk Maxwell


[From the _Report of the British Association_, 1856.]


When we mix together blue and yellow paint, we obtain green paint.
This fact is well known to all who have handled colours; and it is
universally admitted that blue and yellow make green.  Red, yellow,
and blue, being the primary colours among painters, green is regarded
as a secondary colour, arising from the mixture of blue and yellow.
Newton, however, found that the green of the spectrum was not the same
thing as the mixture of two colours of the spectrum, for such a
mixture could be separated by the prism, while the green of the
spectrum resisted further decomposition.  But still it was believed
that yellow and blue would make a green, though not that of the
spectrum.  As far as I am aware, the first experiment on the subject
is that of M. Plateau, who, before 1819, made a disc with alternate
sectors of prussian blue and gamboge, and observed that, when
spinning, the resultant tint was not green, but a neutral gray,
inclining sometimes to yellow or blue, but never to green.
Prof. J. D. Forbes of Edinburgh made similar experiments in 1849, with
the same result.  Prof. Helmholtz of Konigsberg, to whom we owe the
most complete investigation on visible colour, has given the true
explanation of this phenomenon.  The result of mixing two coloured
powders is not by any means the same as mixing the beams of light
which flow from each separately.  In the latter case we receive all
the light which comes either from the one powder or the other.  In the
former, much of the light coming from one powder falls on particles of
the other, and we receive only that portion which has escaped
absorption by one or other.  Thus the light coming from a mixture of
blue and yellow powder, consists partly of light coming directly from
blue particles or yellow particles, and partly of light acted on by
both blue and yellow particles.  This latter light is green, since the
blue stops the red, yellow, and orange, and the yellow stops the blue
and violet.  I have made experiments on the mixture of blue and yellow
light--by rapid rotation, by combined reflexion and transmission, by
viewing them out of focus, in stripes, at a great distance, by
throwing the colours of the spectrum on a screen, and by receiving
them into the eye directly; and I have arranged a portable apparatus
by which any one may see the result of this or any other mixture of
the colours of the spectrum.  In all these cases blue and yellow do
not make green.  I have also made experiments on the mixture of
coloured powders.  Those which I used principally were "mineral blue"
(from copper) and "chrome-yellow."  Other blue and yellow pigments gave
curious results, but it was more difficult to make the mixtures, and
the greens were less uniform in tint.  The mixtures of these colours
were made by weight, and were painted on discs of paper, which were
afterwards treated in the manner described in my paper "On Colour as
perceived by the Eye," in the _Transactions of the Royal Society of
Edinburgh_, Vol. XXI. Part 2.  The visible effect of the colour is
estimated in terms of the standard-coloured papers:--vermilion (V),
ultramarine (U), and emerald-green (E).  The accuracy of the results,
and their significance, can be best understood by referring to the
paper before mentioned.  I shall denote mineral blue by B, and
chrome-yellow by Y; and B3 Y5 means a mixture of three parts blue and
five parts yellow.

       Given Colour.     Standard Colours.          Coefficient
                          V.    U.    E.           of brightness.

         B8    , 100  =   2    36     7   ............   45
		 
         B7  Y1, 100  =   1    18    17   ............   37
		 
         B6  Y2, 100  =   4    11    34   ............   49
		 
         B5  Y3, 100  =   9     5    40   ............   54
		 
         B4  Y4, 100  =  15     1    40   ............   56
		 
         B3  Y5, 100  =  22   - 2    44   ............   64
		 
         B2  Y6, 100  =  35   -10    51   ............   76
		 
         B1  Y7, 100  =  64   -19    64   ............  109
		 
             Y8, 100  = 180   -27   124   ............  277

The columns V, U, E give the proportions of the standard colours which
are equivalent to 100 of the given colour; and the sum of V, U, E
gives a coefficient, which gives a general idea of the brightness.  It
will be seen that the first admixture of yellow _diminishes_ the
brightness of the blue.  The negative values of U indicate that a
mixture of V, U, and E cannot be made equivalent to the given colour.
The experiments from which these results were taken had the negative
values transferred to the other side of the equation.  They were all
made by means of the colour-top, and were verified by repetition at
different times.  It may be necessary to remark, in conclusion, with
reference to the mode of registering visible colours in terms of three
arbitrary standard colours, that it proceeds upon that theory of three
primary elements in the sensation of colour, which treats the
investigation of the laws of visible colour as a branch of human
physiology, incapable of being deduced from the laws of light itself,
as set forth in physical optics.  It takes advantage of the methods of
optics to study vision itself; and its appeal is not to physical
principles, but to our consciousness of our own sensations.




On an Instrument to illustrate Poinsot's Theory of Rotation.

James Clerk Maxwell


[From the _Report of the British Association_, 1856.]

