The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Man Obsessed, by Alan Edward Nourse

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: A Man Obsessed

Author: Alan Edward Nourse

Release Date: July 26, 2015 [EBook #49531]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A MAN OBSESSED ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                           _A MAN OBSESSED_

                           By ALAN E. NOURSE


                            ACE BOOKS, INC.
                23 West 47th Street, New York 36, N. Y.


                            A MAN OBSESSED

                  Copyright, 1955, by Ace Books, Inc.

                          All Rights Reserved


                           Printed in U.S.A.

       *       *       *       *       *


HE HUNTED HORROR THROUGH A MANIAC WORLD!


Jeffrey Meyer had a killing on his mind. It meant nothing to him that
his towering Twenty-first Century world was going mad. He shouldered
aside the rising tide of narcotics-mania, the gambling fever, the
insatiable lust for the irrational. Jeff had his own all-consuming
obsession--Paul Conroe must die!

After a five-year frenzied chase, Jeff had his victim cornered; he'd
driven him into the last hideaway of the world's most desperate
men--the sealed vaults of the human-vivisectionists. And Jeff knew
that to reach his final horrible objective, he must offer himself also
as a guinea pig for the secret experiments of the world's most feared
physicians!

Alan E. Nourse's new novel A MAN OBSESSED has the impact of Orwell's
_1984_ and the imaginative vigor of Huxley's _Brave New World_.

       *       *       *       *       *


About the author:


Born in Des Moines, Iowa, and currently studying for his doctorate in
medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Alan E. Nourse has managed
in between to make himself a high rating as a science-fiction author.
His stories have appeared in every leading fantasy magazine and many
anthologies. A MAN OBSESSED, his latest work, will be his third novel
to see book publication. Concerning it, he says;

"The idea was drawn from my experience in minor grade medical
guinea-pigging which I as a medical student have done from time to
time. The Hoffman Medical Center, originally conceived as a likely
development in the future of medical treatment and research, is not
modeled on any existing organization. Medical mercenary work does,
however, exist at the present time for testing new drugs, studying
physiological effects, and in some cases testing rather dangerous
procedures. Cash is paid for participation, and certain groups of
experiments have become very popular among medical students as a
source of very easy, if slightly risky, income."




CHAPTER ONE


Jeffrey Meyer sat back in his chair and waited. He could hardly breathe
in the stifling air of the place. His hand clenched his glass until
the knuckles were white, and his lip curled slightly as he watched the
crowd around him. His whole body was tense. His legs, knotted tightly
under the seat, were ready to move in an instant, and his eyes roved
from the front to the back of the place. They were pale gray eyes that
were never still--moving, watching, waiting. He had waited for so long,
waited and hunted with bitter patience. But now he knew the long wait
was drawing to a close. He knew that Conroe was coming and the trap was
set.

For the thousandth time that evening, a shiver of chilly pleasure
passed through him at the thought. He squirmed in eagerness, hardly
daring to breathe. With his free hand he caressed the cool plastic
handle of the gun that was close to his side, and a tight smile
appeared on his thin lips. Conroe was coming ... at last ... at
last.... And tonight he would kill Conroe.

The place was a madhouse around him. In the front of the room, by
the street door, was a long horseshoe bar. It was already crowded
by the early revelers. A screechie in the corner blatted out the
tinny, nervous music that had recently become so popular, and a loud,
hysterical burst of feminine laughter echoed to the back of the room.

Jeff Meyer rubbed his eyes, smarting from the bluish haze filling the
long, low-ceilinged room. The unhealthy laughter broke out again, and
someone burst into a bellow of song, half giggle, half noise.

At the adjoining table an alky-siky stirred, muttered something
unintelligible and returned his nose sadly to his glass. Jeff's eyes
flicked over the man with distaste. The scrawny neck, the sagging
jaw, the idiotic, almost unearthly expression of intent listening on
the vapid face: a typical picture of the type. Jeff watched him for a
moment in disgust, then moved his eyes on, still watching as a flicker
of apprehension passed through his mind.

A girl, quite naked except for the tray slung at her waist, strolled
by his table, wagging her hips and turning on her heaviest personality
smile.

"Drive a nail, mister?"

"Beat it."

The smile cooled slightly on the girl's lips. "Just askin'," she
whined. "You don't have to get--"

"Beat it!" Jeff shot her a venomous look, trying frantically to keep
his attention from straying from the front of the room. It would be too
much to slip up now, more than he could stand to make a mistake like
the last time.

The trap was perfect. It _couldn't_ fail this time. Each step of the
way had been carefully sketched, plotted through long sleepless nights
of conference and planning. They couldn't have hunted a man like
Conroe all these years without learning something about him--about his
personality, about the things he liked and disliked, the things he did,
the places he frequented, the friends he made.

Last time, after Jeff's own blundering error had allowed him to slip
through the net at the last frantic minute, there seemed to be no hope.
Everything seemed all the more hopeless when the man had disappeared as
completely as if he were dead. But then they had found the girl--the
key to his hiding place. She had formed the top link in the long,
meticulous chain which had been drawn tighter each day, drawing Paul
Conroe at last closer and closer to the hands of the man who was going
to kill him. And now the trap was set; there could be no slip this
time. There might never be another chance.

The street door opened sharply, and a short, bull-necked man with sandy
hair walked in. He was followed by two other men in neat business
suits. The first man stepped quickly to the bar, shouldering his way
through the crowd, and stood sipping beer for several minutes. He
glanced closely at the people around the bar and the surrounding tables
before he walked toward the back and seated himself next to Meyer.
Looking at Jeff with an indefinable expression, he finished his beer at
a gulp and set the glass down on the table top with a snap.

"What's up?" Jeff said hoarsely.

"Something's funny." The sandy-haired man's voice was a smooth bass,
and a frown appeared on his pink forehead. "He should have been here
by now. He left the hotel over in Camden-town an hour ago, private
three-wheeler, and he headed for here."

Jeff leaned forward, his face going white. "You've got somebody on him?"

"Yes, yes, of course." The man's voice was sharp, and there were tired
lines around his eyes. "Take it easy, Jeff. You wouldn't be able to get
him if he did come in--the way you are. He'd spot you in two seconds."

Jeff's hand trembled as he gripped his glass, and he settled tensely
back in his chair. "It can't go wrong, Ted. It's got to come off."

"It should. The girl is here and she got word from him last night."

"Can she be trusted?"

The sandy-haired man shrugged. "Don't be silly. In this game, nobody
can be trusted. If she's scared enough, she'll play along--okay? We've
done our best to scare her. We've scared the hell out of her. Maybe
she's more scared of Conroe--I don't know. But it looks cold to me. On
a platter. So get a grip on yourself."

"It's got to come off." Jeff growled the words savagely, and drained
his glass at a gulp. The sandy-haired man blinked, his pale little
eyes curious. He leaned back thoughtfully. "Suppose it doesn't, Jeff?
Suppose something goes wrong? Then what?"

Jeff's heavy hand caught the man's wrist in a grip that was like a
vise. "You don't talk like that," he grated. "Your men I don't mind,
but not you--understand? It can't go wrong. That's all there is to it.
No if's, no maybe's. You got that now?"

Ted rubbed his wrist, his face red. "All right," he muttered. "So it
can't go wrong. So I shouldn't talk, I shouldn't ask questions. But if
it does go wrong, you're going to be dead. Do you know that? Because
you're killing yourself with this--" He sighed, staring at Meyer.
"What's it worth, Jeff? This constant tearing yourself apart? You've
been obsessed with it for years. I know, I've been working with you and
watching you for the last five of them--five long years of hunting. And
for what? To get a man and kill him. That's all. What's it worth?"

Jeff took a deep breath and took a pack of cigarettes from his jacket.
"Drive a nail," he said, offering the pack. "And don't worry about me.
Worry about Conroe. He's the one who'll be dead."

Ted shrugged and took the smoke. "Okay. But if this blows up, I'm
through. Because this is all I can take."

"Nothing will blow up. I'll get him. If I don't get him now, I'll get
him the next time, or the next, or the next. With or without you, I'll
get him." Jeff took a trembling breath, his gray eyes cold under heavy
black brows. "But there hadn't better be any next time."

He sat back in his chair, his face falling into the lines so familiar
to Ted Bahr. Jeff Meyer had been a handsome man, before the long years
of hate had done their work on his face. He was a huge, powerfully
built man, heavy-shouldered, with a strong neck and straight nose, and
a shock of jet black hair, neatly clipped. Only his face showed the
bitterness of the past five years--years filled with anger and hatred,
and a growing savagery which had driven the man almost to the breaking
point.

The lines about his eyes and mouth were cruel--heavy lines that had
been carved deeply and indelibly into the strong face, giving it a
harsh, almost brutal cast in the dim light of the bistro. He breathed
regularly and slowly as he sat, but his pale eyes were ice-hard as they
moved slowly across the little show floor. They took in every face,
every movement in the growing throng.

He was out of place and he knew it. He had no use for the giddy,
half-hysterical people who crowded these smoke-filled holes night after
night. They came in droves from the heart of the city to drink the
watery gin and puff frantically on the contraband cigarettes as they
tried desperately to drive off the steam and pressure of their daily
lives.

Meyer hated the smell and stuffiness of the place; he hated the loud
screams of laughter, the idiotic giggles; he hated the blubbering
alky-sikys who crowded the bars with their whisky and their strange,
unearthly dream-worlds. Above all, he hated the horrible, resounding
artificiality, the brassiness and clanging noise of the crowd. His skin
crawled. He knew that he couldn't possibly disappear into such a crowd,
that he was as obvious, sitting there, as if he had been painted with
red polka dots. And he knew that if Conroe spotted him a second before
he spotted Conroe--He eased back in the chair and fought for control of
his trembling hands.

The lights dimmed suddenly and a huge red spotlight caught the curtain
at the back of the show floor. Jeff heard Bahr catch his breath for a
moment, then let out a small, uneasy sigh. The crowd hushed as the girl
parted the curtains and stepped out onto the middle of the floor, to a
fanfare of tinny music. Jeff's eyes widened as they followed her to the
center of the red light.

"That's her."

Jeff glanced sharply at Bahr. "The girl? She's the one?"

Bahr nodded. "Conroe knows how to pick them. He's supposed to meet her
later. This is her first show for the evening. Then she has another at
ten and another at two. He's supposed to take her home." He glanced
around the room carefully. "Watch yourself," he muttered, and silently
slipped away from the table.

The girl was nervous. Jeff sat close enough to see the fear in her
face as she whirled around the floor. The music had shifted into a
slow throbbing undertone, as she started to dance. She moved slowly,
circling the floor. Her hair was long and black, flowing around her
shoulders, and her body moved with carefully calculated grace to the
music. But there was fear in her face as she whirled, and her eyes
sought the faces on the fringe of the circle.

The music quickened imperceptibly and Jeff felt a chill run up his
spine. The upper part of the shimmering gown slipped from the girl's
shoulders, and slowly the tempo of the dance began to change from the
stately rhythm it had a moment before. The throb of the music became
hypnotic, moving faster and faster. Jeff's hands trembled as he tried
to draw his eyes away from the undulating figure. There had been
nothing to mark the change, but suddenly the dance had become obscene
as the music rose--so viciously obscene that Jeff nearly gagged.

He felt the tension in the crowd around him. He heard their breathing
rise, felt the desperate eagerness in their hard, bright eyes as they
watched. The nervousness had left the girl's face. She had forgotten
her fear, and a little smile appeared on her face as her body moved in
abandon to the quickening beat.

Slowly she moved toward the tables, and the spotlight followed her,
playing tricks with her hair and gown, concealing and revealing,
twisting and swaying.... Jeff felt his body freeze. He fought to move,
fought to take his eyes from the writhing figure as she drew closer and
closer--

And then she was among the people, moving from table to table, never
slowing her motion, graceful as a cat, twisting and twirling in the
flickering red light. In and out she moved until she reached Jeff's
table, her face inscrutable--a peacefully smiling mask. With amazing
grace she leaped up on the table top and gave Jeff's glass a kick that
sent it spinning onto the floor with a crash. And then the red light
hit him full in the face--

"Get out of the light!"

Like a cat he threw his chair back and struck the girl, knocking her
from the table. Someone screamed and the light swung to the girl, then
back to him. The table went over. He rolled out of the light, twisting
and fighting through the stunned and screaming crowd. His gun was in
his hand, and he frantically searched the shouting room with his eyes.

"Get him! There he goes!"

He heard Bahr's voice roar from the side of the room. Jeff swung
sharply to the sound of the voice. He saw the tall, slender figure
crouched with his back to the bar, eyes wide with fear and desperation.
There was no mistaking the face, the hollow cheeks and the high
forehead, the graying hair. It was the face he had seen in his dreams,
the twisted lips, the evil, ghoulish face of the man he had hunted to
the ends of the earth. For a fraction of a second he saw Paul Conroe,
crouched at bay, and then the figure was gone, twisting through the
crowd toward the door--

"Stop him!" Jeff swung savagely into the crowd, screaming at Bahr
across the room. "He's heading for the street! Get him!" The gun kicked
sharply against his hand as he fired at the moving head. Rising for
an instant, it disappeared again into the sea of heads. A scream rose
at the shot. Women dropped to the floor, glasses crashed, tables went
over. Someone clawed ineffectually for Jeff's leg. Then, abruptly, the
lights went out and there was another scream.

"The door, the door--Don't let him get out--"

Jeff plunged to the side of the room, wrenched open the emergency exit
and plunged down the dark, narrow walkway to the street. He heard shots
as he ran. Turning the corner of the building, he saw the tall figure
running pell-mell down the wet street.

"There he goes! Get him!"

Ted Bahr hung from the door. He gasped as he held his side, his face
twisted in pain. "He hit me," he panted. "He's broken away--" A jet
car slid from the curb and whined down the street toward the fleeing
figure. "He can't make it--I've got men on every corner in cars.
They'll get him, drive him back--"

"But where's he going?" A sob of rage choked Jeff's voice. "She sold us
out, the bitch. She fingered me when she saw him come in--" His whole
body trembled and the words tumbled out, almost incoherent. "But he
must know the streets are blocked. Where's he running?"

"You think I'm a mind reader? I don't know. There are no open buildings
in the whole block but this place and the Hoffman Center. He can't
go anywhere else and he can't get out of the block. We've got every
escapeway sewed up tight. He'll have to come back here or be shot down
out there."

They watched the gloomy street, tears of rage in Jeff's eyes. His hands
shook uncontrollably and his shoulders sagged in exhaustion and defeat.
The tavern door had burst open and people were crowding out. Jeff and
Ted Bahr moved back into the shadows of the alleyway and waited and
listened.

"There's got to be a shot!" Jeff burst out. "He couldn't have slipped
through." He turned to Bahr frantically. "Could he have gone into the
Center?"

"On what pretense? They'd throw him to the Mercy Men--or the
booby hatch, one or the other. He'd know better than to try." The
sandy-haired man sank down on his haunches and gripped his side
tightly. "He'll be back or we'll hear the shooting. He couldn't have
slipped through."

A three-wheeled jet car slid in to the curb, and a man came up to them,
eyes wide. "Get him?"

Bahr scowled. "No sign. How about the other boys?"

The man blinked. "Not a whisper. He never reached the end of the block."

"Did you check with Klett and Barker?"

"They haven't seen a soul down here."

Bahr glanced at Jeff sharply. "How about the streets behind? Any chance
of a breakthrough there?"

The man's voice was matter-of-fact. "It's airtight. He couldn't get
through without somebody seeing him." He stepped back to the car and
spoke rapidly into the talker for a moment or two. "Nothing yet."

"Damn. How about Howie and the boys inside the place?"

"Nothing from them either."

Jeff's face darkened. "The Hoffman Center," he said slowly. "He got
into the Center, somehow. He must have."

"He'd have to have gilt-edged medical credentials to get in after
hours. They don't mess around over there. And what would it gain him?"

Jeff peered at Bahr in the darkness. "Maybe he wanted to be thrown to
the Mercy Men. Maybe he's figured that as a last resort, he'll go in
and volunteer, make a stab at the Big Cash."

Bahr stared at the big man in horror. "Look--Conroe may be desperate,
but he hasn't lost his mind. My God, man! He isn't crazy."

"But he's scared."

"Of course he's scared, but--"

"How scared?"

Bahr shrugged angrily. "He'd have to be on his last legs to take a
gamble like that."

"But they'd take him. They wouldn't ask any questions. They'd swallow
him up; _they'd hide him_, whether they knew it or not." Jeff's voice
rose in excitement. "Look. We've hunted him down for years. We've never
rested; we've never quit. He knows that and he knows why. He knows me.
He knows I'm not going to quit until I get him. And he knows I will
get him, sooner or later. I'm cutting too close; I'm undermining his
friends; I'm always moving closer. Everywhere he goes, everything he
does, I'm onto him. And he knows when I do get him, he's going to die.
What does that add up to?"

Bahr blinked in silence. Jeff's face hardened. "Well, I'll tell you
what it adds up to. A man can take just so much. He can slide and twist
and hide and keep moving just so long. Then he finds there aren't any
more hiding places. But there's one last place a man can go to hide--if
he's really at the end of his tether--and that's the Mercy Men. Because
there he could vanish as though he'd never existed."

Ted Bahr carefully lit a smoke. "If that's where he went, we're
through, Jeff. We'll never get him. We don't even need to worry about
trying. Because if he's gone there, he'll never come out again."

"Some of them do."

Bahr grunted. "One in a million, maybe. The odds are so heavy that
there's no sense thinking about it. If Paul Conroe has gone to the
Mercy Men, then he's dead. And that is that."

Jeff returned his weapon to his pocket sharply and walked out to the
car at the curb. "Keep your men where they are," he said to Bahr. "Keep
them there for the rest of the night. If he's found a loophole, I want
to know it. If he's hidden in the buildings, he'll have to come out
sometime. Get some men to search the roofs, and you and I can start on
the alleyways. If he's out there, we'll get him." He straightened his
shoulders and the sullen fire was back in his eyes--an angry, bitter
fire. "And if he's gone into the Center, we'll still get him."

Bahr's eyes were wide. "He'll never come out if he's gone where you
think, Jeff. We could wait weeks or months, even years, and we still
wouldn't know. Even if he did come out, we might never recognize him."

"I'll recognize him," Jeff snarled, looking down into Bahr's face. "I'm
going to kill him. I'm going to know that he's dead, because I'll see
him die. And I'll kill him if I have to follow him into the Center to
do it."




CHAPTER TWO


The news report blatted in Jeff Meyer's ear from the little car radio.
The words came through, but he hardly heard them as his eyes watched
the huge glass doors of the administration building of the Hoffman
Medical Center.

  ... no word has yet been received, but it is believed that the
  Eurasian governments may be in session several hours more in an
  attempt to stem the inflation. On the home front, the stock-market
  nosedive, which resulted from the new Senate taxation bill yesterday,
  leveled off when the Secretary of Corporative Business announced this
  morning that the government would abandon attempts to enforce the new
  law, at least for the time being. Secretary Barnes stated that further
  study of the bill would be undertaken when more pressing governmental
  problems had been cleared--

Jeff snapped off the switch with a snarl. The street passing the Center
was crowded. Lines of cars moved into and out of the traffic stream
from the huge Center parking tiers. The building rose high, tier
upon tier. Its walls gleamed white in the bright morning sunlight,
reflecting brilliant facets of golden light from thousands of polished
windows.

It was an immense building, sprawling across six perfectly landscaped
city blocks, tall trees and cool green terraces setting off the
glistening beauty of the architecture. The structure sent tower after
tower up from the dingy street below, and at the foot of the towers was
a buzz of furious activity. Supply trucks, carrying food and supplies
for the twenty-two thousand beds and the people in them, and for the
additional thirteen thousand people who worked day and night to keep
the huge hospital running, moved toward the unloading platforms.

The Hoffman Medical Center was an age-old dream which had finally come
true. Even those who had conceived it had not realized the tremendous
need it would fulfill. From its very inception, no expense had been
spared. The finest architects had thrown up the shimmering ward-towers,
turned toward the sun, to bring light to the sick and injured who
rested and healed within. Equipment unequaled anywhere in the world
had filled the Center's dressing and surgical rooms. The doctors,
nurses, researchers and technicians who staffed the institution had
been gathered from the world over. And all the world had conceded the
Hoffman Center its place as leader in the realm of medicine, ever since
