his throat, continued.

"And these same, gentlemen soldiers---Grant (then President, no less),
Sherman, Sheridan and Custer, next turned their expertise upon the
pesky Native Americans, who had the gall to defend their land, their
women and their children.  Wasn't it Sheridan who said, 'The only good
Indian is a dead Indian?'  Massacred and starved an entire population
into submission, innocents slaughtered without a second thought."

"Colonel....."

"But here, I'm boring you.  What did you want to discuss---literature,
fine art?"  He took another drink from the glass, hurting his throat
with too large a gulp, showing that he really was not a drinker, or not
a practiced one.

"Two things," said Brunner stiffly.  "First as an officer of the
bridge.  Then as a man."

"It sounds serious.  Well.  What is your report as my analysis officer?"

"Yes.  I only wanted to reinforce what I said earlier:  that the
enemy's strategy, ever since the main engagement began, makes no sense.
 He had attained a strong attacking position; his weaponry is at least
the equal of our own; and yet he attacks without design, and trades
forces with no apparent gain.  I know, from my studies (this last he
added almost as an apology), that battles are often chaotic.
Commanders become confused, lines of communication break down, soldiers
and officers panic.  But none of this, so far as I can see, has been
the case here.  For example, why accept the sacrifice of our carrier?"
He reddened, forced himself to continue.  "Just because we brought it
forward, hardly forced him to attack.  I wish I could believe that the
enemy is really that foolish.  But I can't.  They have spent years of
preparation, and nearly all their resources. . .for what?  Only to let
some impatient general throw it all away?  The only explanation I can
find is that they are trying to lull our sense of caution and weaken
our defense, for another fleet that is yet to come.  I know that by all
current technology this is impossible.  Yet I feel that it could
happen."

At the words 'current technology' Dubcek stirred uncomfortably.  The
young man had sensed his darkest fear.  He remained quiet for a moment,
mulling this over.

"You have done what I asked," he said finally, "and done it well.  Now.
 What do you have to say to me as a man?"

Now it was Brunner who could find no comfort in his chair.

"I wish to resign my commission," he said with an effort.  "I do not
think I was made to give orders."

"Do you hate me so much?"

Brunner winced.  "No, Colonel.  It is true, I hated you at first---"
He looked up, horrified at his own words.

"Come on.  Out with it.  It won't matter much if you resign."  Dubcek's
manner was unruffled, but the lieutenant thought he caught a gleam of
pain, or something, in his dark eyes.

"There was a moment when I hated you---when I first realized you had
sacrificed our carrier for theirs.  But I don't feel that way now."

"Then why?"

"I just can't do it.  I tried to put myself in your place. . .and I
can't.  This way of life, of thinking.....  I can't."

"You think I send men to their death without feeling."  It was not a
question.

"No."  But Brunner would say no more.

"No, but that was cruel of me.  Young men are so much more, SENSITIVE.
You think you could never send men to theirs, that you are not the
right kind of man---cold, calculating.  You think too much, feel too
much, is that it?"

"No.....  I don't know."

"Save war for lonely old men?"

Brunner looked hard at him, defiant.  This time he was sure.  There was
something quietly desperate in his commander's eyes.  It was fear.  Not
the fear of age or death, but that of a far greater hurt:  the pain of
life's final reckoning, of uselessness and barren seed.  "Can I tell
you something, 'as a man?'"  Dubcek turned his eyes away, poured the
bottle into the glass.

"Yes."  Brunner too looked away.

"I wasn't always old, or alone, with no other calling."  He breathed
heavily through his nose.  "But my wife died some years back, and we
had no children.  Some men can go on from such a thing:  find another
wife, start again.  But I am not one of them.  I had never loved
before.....  But that is beside the point."  He drank the glass again.

"I found myself alone, in the military, with no real skill other than
being a soldier, a good officer.  My father had been a working man.....
 So I put all my energies into advancing my career, trying to fill the
emptiness.  Telling myself."  He gave a short, disagreeable laugh.
"Telling myself that if I could only rise high enough through the
ranks, that I could SAVE lives.  I was going to make certain the old
war-mongers who ran the armies of the world did not subject innocent
people to the kind of loss I'd known.  I was going to see to it that no
task force was ever advanced needlessly, no ship ever mindlessly
sacrificed to gain a tactical advantage."  He stopped, as some other
emotion rose up in him.

"You say you hated me when you learned I had sacrificed a thousand men
and women.  What would you feel if we had lost, and left the colonies
unprotected?"  He rose in a rage, as Brunner stood and backed away.
"How would you judge me while some Belgian officer was raping your
pretty little wife?"

Brunner's eyes flashed murder at him, but he said nothing.

"Yes.  And how would you have liked me when the political executions
and imprisonments began?  Forget your romantic notions!  When it comes
to occupying armies, there are no morals left to judge."  He steadied
himself, took a breath.

"Behind us lie the three planets of our people, our home.  One hundred
million inhabitants.  Nothing else stands between them and us.  And
maybe our enemies don't even want them.  Perhaps they would be just as
happy to destroy the entire system, or even use radiation bombs:  empty
the inhabited planets of life without destroying the cities, the
beautiful landscape.  Do you think this is a fucking game?"

"You misunderstand.  I am not judging you."

"And you misunderstand," said Dubcek bluntly.  "Why do you think I take
an interest in you?  Why do you think you are here?"

"I don't KNOW!"

Dubcek waited.  "Shall I tell you?"

Brunner turned his head painfully, faced the older man.

"You are here because this battle will not end the war.  This war will
not be the last our people know.  Because if someone has to command and
send young people into battle, I want it to be someone who still has
some feeling left....  Because I respect you.....  I have no son."

Brunner squeezed his temples with his hands, unable to stop the tears.
"But I CAN'T."

"You can, and you must.....  I am not releasing you."  Dubcek stalked
out of the room.

The young lieutenant did not return to his post for several hours.  The
battle went on without him.

16)  P-KR4
P-KR4

17)  P x P
N x P

18)  KN-K2
R-R4

19) QR-N1
B-K3

20)  P-R3
P-Q4


Brunner reentered the battle room with his head down, walking stiffly
to the place where a subordinate stood manning his station.  The man
looked up, handed him the lightboard---showing how they had arrived at
the present disposition---and with a quick bow started to leave.

"Wait," said Brunner quietly.  The man turned.  After an awkward
silence.  "How are we doing?"  The man looked at him with mild
curiosity.

"As you see."

"That's not what I mean."  Their eyes met.  "Have we truly engaged the
enemy only when necessary."

"Yes, Lieutenant.  But he does have a battle to fight.  If I may say
it, the old man has done very well.  But here."  He pointed again.
"We'll know soon enough."  Brunner turned his gaze back to the globe,
and the man was gone.

Lieutenant Olaf Brunner would remember the rest of the battle as bits
and pieces of a vague, impossible dream.  Unable to bring himself to
look out the portal at his fighting comrades, he watched the moving
shapes as if entranced, as they swam amid the invisible sea of the
globe.  Masaryk's voice.

"Enemy first destroyer group to corridor two, column six."

Dubcek.  "Engage."

21)  N-N3
N x N

"Battle cruiser coming forward to intercept."

"Robot battery 5, attack enemy battery opposite."

22)  R x N
P x P


"He took the bait.  Second destroyer group moving forward."

"Mongoose forward to column two.  Starboard guns to standby alert."

23)  N x P
K-N2

"Still coming right at us, corridor one."

"Let him come.  Light cruiser, heading C-four."

24)  P-R5
B-B4

An unfamiliar voice.  "Colonel.  My instruments show a strange energy
field materializing before the enemy battle station, bearing 00 to 04,
F-six.  Apparently a highly charged, extremely dense mass of negative
ions."

Hearing this, Brunner's senses came suddenly, vividly to life.  Some
half remembered, theoretical principal of matter.....  As the fear
materialized in thought, he was filled with a dread such as he had
seldom experienced.

Looking up, he saw that Dubcek too was unnerved.  He turned toward the
speaker as calmly as he could and said, "Link up with the main ship's
computer.  Keep me posted."

25)  P-R6(ch)

Masaryk.  "Robot battery still coming forward, moving into range."

"What?" replied Dubcek absently.

"The enemy battery, moving into range and preparing to fire.  We've got
to move back."

"Yes.  Of course.  Mongoose to corridor one, column one."

K-R1

For some reason these coordinates seemed to Brunner the final
manifestation of an impending doom.  Riveting the globe with his eyes,
he understood the reason why.  The enemy was perfectly positioned.....

"Colonel," he said.  Dubcek glared at him, angry and agitated.
"Colonel, please."  The commander left his post and came toward him.

"What is it?"

"Sir, if that's some kind of star gate---"

"It CAN'T be.....  That is only a theory."

"But the American scientists are said to be coming close."

Dubcek did not wait to hear him out.  He started toward the chief
scientist.

At that moment a blinding silver halo split the sky, and through its
inner darkness passed a ship far greater than any yet seen in battle.
To his final, unyielding horror, Brunner saw the outline of an enormous
carrier take shape inside the globe, in perfect position for the kill.

26)   New queen appears, QB3.  Check.


BECAUSE WAR IS NO GAME, AND NO ONE PLAYS BY ANY RULES.

At their posts, Masaryk and Wessenberg were struck dumb.  Dubcek stood
still in the middle of the room.  The chief scientist had taken out his
ear-piece and thrown it to the floor.  All seemed incapable of
movement.  Finally Masaryk stirred, shook his head and cleared his
throat.

"Colonel.  A second enemy carrier has appeared.  Bearing 01 to 02,
F-six.  He's staring right down our throat."

Dubcek, shaken to the bone, somehow managed a short laugh.  He turned,
walked toward his executive officer.

"Configuration?"

"Commonwealth Super-carrier.  It's the Americans, Ivan."

Dubcek breathed out his final despair.

At that moment the communications officer turned toward him.  "Sir.
It's the Commonwealth commander with. . .terms for our surrender."

"Bastard," he muttered beneath his breath.  Then.  "Put him on the
screen.  And get me General Itjes with the Coalition reinforcements."
He quickly checked the time.  They were due to arrive in another hour.

The large main screen of the battle room came to life.  And there in
the midst of it, his face animated with tension, confidence and
self-satisfaction, stood, in military uniform, General Charles William
Hayes, Secretary of State for the United Commonwealth.

His fear submerged beneath a desperate, fey indifference, Dubcek turned
to Masaryk with a rueful expression.  "This just keeps getting
better.....  Yes, Mr. Hayes.  What are your terms?"

"I want the immediate surrender of all your forces, and a complete
shut-down of planetary defense systems.  In return I'll see that your
people, both military and civilian, are treated fairly and with
respect."

"Oh, I have no doubt of that.  Unfortunately, I do not have the
authority to negotiate such a complete capitulation.  I have contacted
both our President and the Assembly (a necessary lie), and also the
Coalition military representative.  You will have an answer soon
enough.  One question, though, if I may ask it."

"What is it?"

"How do you plan to run the occupational government?"  He looked at
Brunner as he said these words, turned back to Hayes.  "Who will be in
charge?"

"The Belgians and Swiss."

"While you carry the crusade elsewhere?"

Hayes' voice was blunt, brutal.  "You have five minutes."

"That should be sufficient.  Thank you, Mr. Secretary."  His face left
the screen, and Dubcek immediately went to work.

"Brunner, Wessenberg, Kinsky and Schmidt, get to the evacuation ships.
Gunnery and engineering high-officers to remain at their posts;
everyone else off.  First battleship and remaining cruiser to provide
cover for their retreat, then get out themselves---link up with the
reinforcements as soon as possible and put themselves under the command
of General Itjes.  Go on.  Move!"

Masaryk relayed the orders with grim satisfaction.  His commander was
going to fight.

As the others filed past him with blank, scared faces, Brunner remained
at his station.  Dubcek looked over at him.

"Get out, fool!"  But still he did not move.  The aging commander
strode quickly over to him.

"There is no time for this.  If you want to be brave then hold on to
your commission and fight them again."

"I don't want to leave---"

The voice of the communications officer broke him off.  "General Itjes,
sir.  I've also contacted the colonies:  all data being relayed."

"Good," said Dubcek.  "Put him on and get below."  He held out his hand
to Brunner.

"Goodbye, Olaf.  Go.  Now!"  His lieutenant turned and left the room.

Four officers remained in the chamber.  "Anyone else who wishes to go,
it must be now."  None stirred.  "Very well."  He nodded, turned to
Masaryk, then remembered General Itjes.

The chief scientist had moved to the communications board.  He put him
on the screen.  The lined and wizened face of the German General stood
before him.

"Yes, Ivan.  I understand you're in trouble.  Can you hold him off long
enough for us to get around his flank?"

"Don't bother trying, General.  He's got the ships and firepower to cut
us both to pieces.  The best thing you can do is guard the civilian
retreat from Premislyde and Goethe.  I'm afraid Athena must surrender."

Itjes sighed painfully.  "All right, then.  Agree to capitulate your
forces along with it, and stall on the rest for as long as you can."

"I'm afraid I can't do that, sir."

"Why not?"

"He is not about to be detained, and I am not about to let him win this
battle without the shedding of American blood."

"Ivan, this is no time---"

"This is bigger than both of us, General.  They must know at the very
beginning that they will be resisted every step of the way."
