there.

The countenance of our host seemed to brighten again, and, saluting us
with a profound obeisance, he said a few words to the attendants, who
advanced to the car, and sinking upon their knees proffered us their
charming tribute.

"Good!" exclaimed Gazen, testifying his delight and manifesting his
gratitude by an elaborate pantomime.

I am afraid his performance must have appeared slightly ludicrous to the
Venusians, for one or two of the younger girls had some difficulty in
keeping their gravity. On a hint from the Elder the young people retired
to their places, leaving their offerings upon the ground.

"They don't intend to starve us at all events," muttered Gazen to me, in
an undertone. "The very fragrance of these fruits entices a man to eat
them; but will they agree with our stomachs? Notwithstanding my
scientific curiosity, and my natural appetite, I am quite willing to let
you and Carmichael try them first."

Having found the value of gestures in our intercourse, the Elder leaned
his head on one hand, and pointed with the other to a large house at
the upper end of the square. His meaning was plain; but as we had
already made up our minds to stay in the car, at all events until we had
looked about us, Gazen signified as much by energetic but indescribable
actions, and further contrived to intimate that we were all thoroughly
tired and worn out with our voyage.

The Senior politely took the hint, and repeating his courteous salute,
withdrew from our presence, accompanied by his followers.

"I told you so!" cried Miss Carmichael, when Gazen and I re-entered the
car. "They are treating us like superior beings."

"It shows their good sense," replied Gazen, and even as he spoke a
strain of heavenly music rose from the assembled multitude, and
gradually died away as they departed to their homes.

We could not sufficiently admire the beauty and fragrance of the flowers
and fruit, or the exquisite workmanship of the vases they had brought.
What struck us most was the lovely iridescence which they all displayed
in different lights. The vases in particular seemed to be carved out of
living opals, yet each was large enough to contain several pints of
liquor. Miss Carmichael decorated the dinner-table with a selection from
the trays, but although we found the fruits and beverages delicious to
the taste, we prudently partook very sparingly of them.

After dinner we all went outside to enjoy the cool evening breeze, but
without actually leaving the car. It was hardly dusk, only a kind of
twilight or gloaming, and it did not seem to grow any darker. Yet
innumerable fire-flies, bright as glow-lamps, and of every hue, were
flashing like diamonds against the whispering foliage of the trees.

With the exception of an occasional group or a solitary who stopped
awhile to look at the car and then passed on, the square was deserted;
but the dwellings around it were lighted up, and being of a very open
construction, we could see into them, and hear the voices of the inmates
feasting and making merry. Needless to say that everything we observed
was interesting to us, for it was all strange; but we were so much
exhausted with excitement that we were fain to go to bed.

Next day the professor and I, obeying a common impulse of travellers,
got up early and went forth to survey our new quarters. It was a
splendid morning, the whole atmosphere steeped in sunshine, and musical
with the songs of birds. The big sun was peeping over the distant wall
of the crater, but we did not feel his rays uncomfortably hot. A sky of
the loveliest azure was streaked with thin white clouds, drawn across it
like muslin curtains, and a cooling breeze played gently upon the skin.
The dewy air, so spring-like, fresh and sweet, was a positive pleasure
to breathe, and we both felt the intoxication, the rapture of life, as
we had never felt it since our boyhood. The grass underfoot was green as
emerald, and soft as velvet; fountains were flashing in the sunshine,
statues gleaming amongst the flowering trees, and birds of brilliant
plumage glancing everywhere.

The square opened on the lake, and afforded us a magnificent view of the
island. It was conical in shape, and the peak, no doubt, of an old
volcanic vent. I should say it was at least a thousand feet in height;
the sides were a veritable "hanging garden," wild and luxuriant; and the
summit was crowned by a glittering mass of domes, minarets, and spires.
Numbers of people, old and young, were bathing along the beach, and
swimming, diving, and splashing each other in the water with innocent
glee. Large birds, resembling swans, double the size of ours, and of
pale blue, rose, yellow, and green, as well as white plumage, were
floating in and out, and some of the children were riding on their
backs. Fantastic boats, with carved and painted prows, might be seen
crossing the lake in all directions, some under sail, and others with
rowers, keeping stroke to the rhythm of their songs. The shores of the
lake, sloping quietly to the waterside, were covered more or less
thickly with the houses and gardens of the city, and far in the
distance, perhaps fifty, perhaps a hundred miles away, the view was
bounded by the dim and ruddy precipice of the crater wall.

Regaling our eyes on the beautiful prospect, and our lungs on the pure
atmosphere, we wandered along the beach, ever and anon pausing to admire
the strange forms and beautiful colouring of the shells and seaweeds, or
to pick up a rare pebble, then shie it away again, little thinking that
it might have been a ruby, sapphire, or topaz, worth a king's ransom on
the earth. At length the way was barred by the mouth of a broad river,
and after a refreshing plunge in the lake, we returned home to
breakfast.

During our absence Carmichael had been visited by our venerable host of
the evening, whose name was Dinus, and a young man called Otare, who
turned out to be his son. They had brought a fresh supply of dainties,
and what was still more important, some pictorial dictionaries and
drawings which would enable us to learn their language. As the structure
of it was simple, and the vocabulary not very copious, and as we also
enjoyed the tuition of the young man, who was devoted to our service,
and conducted us in most of our walks abroad, at the end of a fortnight
we could maintain a conversation with tolerable fluency.

In the meanwhile, and afterwards, we learned a good deal about the
country, and the manners and customs of its inhabitants. Womla, or
Woom-la, which means the "bowl" or hollow-land, is evidently the crater
of an extinct volcano of enormous dimensions, such as are believed to
exist upon the moon. It belongs to an archipelago of similar islands,
which are widely scattered over a vast ocean in this part of Venus, but
is, we were told, far distant from the nearest of them. The climate may
be described as a perpetual spring and summer, with a sky nearly always
serene, and of a beautiful azure blue, veiled with soft and fleecy
clouds.

Thanks to the lofty walls of the crater, which penetrate the clouds and
condense their moisture, the land is watered with many streams. These
flow into the central lake, which discharges into the surrounding ocean
by a rift or chasm in the mountain side. Moreover, there are frequent
showers, and heavy dews by night, to refresh the surface of the ground.
Thunderstorms occur on the tops of the mountain and in the open sea;
but very seldom within the enchanted girdle of the crater. The air is
remarkably pure, sweet, and exhilarating, owing doubtless to the high
percentage of oxygen it contains, and the absence of foreign matter,
such as microbes, dust, and obnoxious fumes. In fact, we all felt a
distinct improvement in our health and spirits, a kind of mental
intoxication which was really more than a rejuvenescence. Nor was the
heat very trying, even in the middle of the day, because although the
sun was twice as large as on the earth, he did not rise far above the
horizon, and cooling breezes blew from the chilled summit of the cliffs.
The vegetation seems to go on budding, flowering, and fruiting
perpetually, as in the Elysian Fields of Homer, where

    "Joys ever young, unmixed with pain or fear,
     Fill the wide circle of the eternal year:
     Stern winter smiles on that auspicious clime
     The fields are florid with unfading prime;
     From the bleak Pole no winds inclement blow,
     Mould the round hail, or flake the fleecy snow;
     But from the breezy deep the blessed inhale,
     The fragrant murmurs of the western gale."

The mysterious behaviour of the sun was a great puzzle to our
astronomer. I have said that he rose very little above the horizon, or
in other words the lip of the crater, as might be expected from our high
southern latitude; but we soon found that he always rose and sank at the
same place. In the morning he peeped above the cliffs, and in the
evening he dipped again behind them, leaving a twilight or gloaming (I
can scarcely call it dusk), which continued throughout the night. From
his fixity in azimuth, Gazen concluded that Schiaparelli, the famous
Italian observer, was right in supposing that Venus takes as long to
turn about her own axis as she does to go round the sun, and that as a
consequence she always presents the same side to her luminary. All that
we heard from the natives tended to confirm this view. They told us that
far away to the east and west of Womla there was a desert land, covered
with snow and ice, on which the sun never shone. We also gathered that
the sun rises to a greater and lesser height above the cliffs
alternately, thus producing a succession of warmer and cooler seasons; a
fact which agrees with Schiaparelli's observation that the axis of the
planet sways to and from the sun. Gazen was intensely delighted at this
discovery, partly for its own sake, but mainly, I think, because it
would afford him an opportunity of crushing the celebrated Pettifer
Possil, his professional antagonist, who, it seems, is bitterly opposed
to the doctrines of Schiaparelli. But why did the sun rise and set every
fifteen hours or thereabout, and so make what I have called a "day" and
"night"? Why did he not continue in the same spot, except for the slow
change caused by the nutation or nodding of Venus? Gazen was much
perplexed over this anomaly, and sought an explanation of it in the
refraction of the atmosphere above the cliffs producing an apparent but
not a real motion of the orb.

The territory of Womla may be divided into three zones, namely, a
central plain under cultivation, a belt of undulating hills, kept as a
park or pleasaunce, and a magnificent, nay, a sublime wilderness, next
to the crater wall.

The natural wealth of the country is very great. Some of its productions
resemble and others are different from those of the earth. We saw gold,
silver, copper, tin, and iron, as well as metals which were quite new to
us. Some of these had a purple, blue, or green colour, and emitted a
most agreeable fragrance. There are granites and porphyries, marbles and
petrifactions of the most exquisite grain or tints. Precious stones like
the diamond, ruby, sapphire, topaz, emerald, garnet, opal, turquoise,
and others familiar or unfamiliar to us, fairly abound, and can be
picked up on the shores of the lake. I presume that many of them have
been formed on a large scale in chasms of the rock by the volcanic fumes
of the crater.

What struck us most of all, however, was the prevalence of
phosphorescent minerals which absorbed the sunlight by day, and
glimmered feebly in the dusk. Professor Gazen seems to think that the
presence of snow and clouds, together with these phosphorescent bodies,
may help to account for the mysterious luminosity on the dark side of
Venus.

The vegetation is wonderfully rich, varied, and luxuriant. As a rule,
the foliage is thick and glossy; but while it is green to blackness in
some of the trees, it is parti-coloured or iridescent in others. Many of
the flowers, too, are iridescent, or change their hues from hour to
hour. The beauty and profusion of the flowers is beyond conception, and
some of the loveliest grow on what I should take for palms, ferns,
canes, and grasses. A distant forest or woodland rivals the splendid
plumage of some tropical bird. We heard of "singing flowers," including
a water-lily which bursts open with a musical note, and of many plants
which are sensitive to heat as well as touch, and if Gazen be correct,
to electricity and magnetism. We saw one in a house which was said to
require a change of scene from time to time else it would languish and
die.

The borders of the lakes and ponds teemed with corals, delicate
seaweeds, and lovely shells. Innumerable fishes of gay and brilliant
hues darted and burned in the water like broken rainbows.

Reptiles are not very common, at least, in the cultivated zone; but we
saw a few snakes, tortoises, and lizards, all brightly and harmoniously
marked. One of the snakes was phosphorescent, and one of the lizards
could sit up like a dog, or fly in the air like a swallow. The variety
and beauty of the birds, as well as the charm of their song, exceed all
description. Most of them have iridescent feathers, several are
wingless, and one at least has teeth. The insects are a match for the
birds in point of beauty, if not also in size and musical qualities.
Many of them are luminescent, and omit steady or flashing lights of
every tint all through the night.

There are few large quadrupeds in the country, and so far as we could
learn none of these are predaceous. We saw an animal resembling a deer
on one hand, and a tapir on the other, as well as a kind of toed horse
or hipparion, and a number of domestic pets all strange to us.

The people, according to their tradition, came originally from a
temperate land far across the ocean to the south-east, which is now a
dark and frozen desert. They are a remarkably fine race, probably of
mixed descent, for they found Womla inhabited, and their complexions
vary from a dazzling blonde to an olive-green brunette. They are nearly
all very handsome, both in face and figure, and I should say that many
of them more than realise our ideals of beauty. As a rule, the
countenances of the men are open, frank, and noble; those of the women
are sweet, smiling, and serene. Free of care and trouble, or unaffected
by it, mere existence is a pleasure to them, and not a few appear to
live in a kind of rapture, such as I have seen in the eyes of a young
artist on the earth while regarding a beautiful woman or a glorious
landscape. Their attitudes and movements are full of dignity and grace.
In fact, during my walks abroad, I frequently found myself admiring
their natural groups, and fancying myself in ancient Greece, as depicted
by our modern painters. Their style of beauty is not unlike that of the
old Hellenes, but I doubt whether the delicacy and bloom of their skins
has ever been matched on our planet except, perhaps, in a few favoured
persons.

From some experiments made by Gazen, it would appear that while their
senses of sight and touch are keener, their senses of hearing and also
of heat are rather blunter than ours.

Partly owing to the genial climate, their love of beauty, and their easy
existence, their dress is of a simple and graceful order. Many of their
light robes and shining veils are woven from silky fibres which grow on
the trees, and tinged with beautiful dyes. Bright, witty, and ingenious,
as well as guileless, chaste, and happy, I can only compare them to
grown-up children--but the children of a god-like race. Thanks to the
purity of their blood, and the gentleness of their dispositions,
together with their favourable circumstances, they live almost exempt
from disease, or pain, or crime, and finally die in peace at the good
old age of a hundred or a hundred and fifty years.

Their voices are so pleasing, and their language is so melodious that I
enjoyed hearing their talk before I understood a word of it. Moreover,
their delightful manners evince a rare delicacy of sentiment and
appreciation of the beautiful in life. We foreigners must have been
objects of the liveliest curiosity to them, yet they never showed it in
their conduct; they never stared at us, or stopped to enquire about us,
but courteously saluted us wherever we went, and left us to make
ourselves at home. We never saw an ugly or unbecoming gesture, and we
never heard a rude, unmannerly word all the time we stayed in Womla.

Some of their public buildings are magnificent; but most of their
private houses are pretty one-storied cottages, each more or less
isolated in a big garden, and beyond earshot of the rest. They are
elegant, not to say fanciful constructions of stone and timber,
generally of an oval shape, or at least with rounded outlines; but
sometimes rambling, and varying much in detail. Everyone seems to follow
his particular bent and taste in the fashion of his home. Many of them
have balconies or verandahs, and also terraces on the roof, where the
inmates can sit and enjoy the surrounding view. They are doorless, and
the outer walls are usually open so that one may see inside; but in
stormy weather they are closed by panels of wood, and a translucent
mineral resembling glass. They are divided into rooms by mats and
curtains, or partitions and screens of wood, which are sometimes
decorated with paintings of inimitable beauty. The ceilings are usually
of carved wood, and the floors inlaid with marbles, corals, and the
richer stones. There are no stuffy carpets on the floors, or hangings on
the walls to collect the dust. The light easy furniture is for the most
part made of precious or fragrant woods of divers colours--red, black,
yellow, blue, white, and green. At night the rooms are softly and
agreeably lighted by phosphorescent tablets, or lamps of glow-worms and
fire-flies in crystal vases.

The dishes and utensils not only serve but adorn the home. Most of the
