the straight line, as in the case of Venus and Mercury, showed
that the size of the mountains must be tremendous compared with
the mass of the body, some of them being obviously fifteen miles
high.  The intense blackness of the shadows, as on the moon,
convinced them there was no trace of atmosphere.

"There being no air," said Cortlandt, "it is safe to assume there
is no water, which helps to account for the great inequalities on
the body's surface, since the mountains will seem higher when
surrounded by dry ocean- bottom than they would if water came
halfway up their sides.  Undoubtedly, however, the main cause of
their height is the slight effect of gravitation on an asteroid,
and the fact that the shrinking of the interior, and consequent
folding of the crust in ridges, may have continued for a time
after there was no longer water on the surface to cut them down.

"The temperature and condition of a body," continued Cortlandt,
"seem to depend entirely on its size.  In the sun we have an
incandescent, gaseous star, though its spots and the colour of
its rays show that it is becoming aged, or, to be more accurate,
advanced in its evolutionary development.  Then comes a great
jump, for Jupiter has but about one fourteen-hundredth of the
mass of the sun, and we expect to find on it a firm crust, and
that the planet itself is at about the fourth or fifth  period of
development, described by Moses as days.  Saturn is doubtless
somewhat more advanced.  The earth we know has been habitable
many hundreds of thousands or millions of years, though three
fourths of its surface is still covered by water.  In Mars we see
a further step, three fourths of its surface being land.  In
Mercury, could we study it better, or in the larger satellites of
Jupiter or Saturn, we might find a stepping-stone from Mars to
the moon, perhaps with no water, but still having air, and being
habitable in all other respects.  In our own satellite we see a
world that has died, though its death from an astronomical point
of view is comparatively recent, while this little Pallas has
been dead longer, being probably chilled through and through.
From this I conclude that all bodies in the solar system had one
genesis, and were part of the same nebulous mass.  But this does
not include the other systems and nebulae; for, compared with
them, our sun, as we have seen, is itself advanced and small
beside such stars as Sirius having diameters of twelve million
miles."

As they left Pallas between themselves and the sun, it became a
crescent and finally disappeared.

Two days later they sighted another asteroid exactly ahead.  They
examined it closely, and concluded it must be Hilda, put down in
the astronomies as No. 153, and having almost the greatest mean
distance of any of these small bodies from the sun.

When they were so near that the disk was plainly visible to the
unaided eye, Hilda passed between them and Jupiter, eclipsing it.
To their surprise, the light was not instantly shut off, as when
the moon occults a star, but there was evident refraction.

"By George!" said Bearwarden, "here is an asteroid that HAS an
atmosphere."

There was no mistaking it.  They soon discovered a small ice-cap
at one pole, and then made out oceans and continents, with
mountains, forests, rivers, and green fields.  The sight lasted
but a few moments before they swept by, but they secured several
photographs, and carried a vivid impression in their minds.
Hilda appeared to be about two hundred miles in diameter.

"How do you account for that living world," Bearwarden asked
Cortlandt, "on your theory of size and longevity?"

"There are two explanations," replied Cortlandt, "if the theory,
as I still believe, is correct.  Hilda has either been brought to
this system from some other less matured, in the train of a
comet, and been captured by the immense power of "Jupiter, which
might account for the eccentricity of its orbit, or some accident
has happened to rejuvenate it here.  A collision with another
minor planet moving in an orbit that crossed its own, or with the
head of a large comet, would have reconverted it into a star,
perhaps after it had long been cold.  A comet may first have so
changed the course of one of two small bodies as to make them
collide.  This seems to me the most plausible theory.  Over a
hundred years ago the English astronomer, Chambers, wrote of
having found traces of atmosphere in some of these minor planets,
but it was generally thought he was mistaken.  One reason we know
so little about this great swarm of minor planets is, that till
recently none of them showed a disk to the telescope.  Inasmuch
as only their light was visible, they were indistinguishable from
stars, except by their slow motion.  A hundred years ago only
three hundred and fifty had been discovered; our photographic
star-charts have since then shown the number recorded to exceed
one thousand."


                           CHAPTER IV.

                      PREPARING TO ALIGHT.

That afternoon Ayrault brought out some statistical tables he had
compiled from a great number of books, and also a diagram of the
comparative sizes of the planets.  "I have been not a little
puzzled at the discrepancies between even the best authors," he
said, "scarcely any two being exactly alike, while every decade
has seen accepted theories radically changed."  Saying which, he
spread out the result of his labours (shown on the following
pages), which the three friends then studied.

-----------------------------------------------------------------

(1) Mean distance from sun in millions of miles
(2) Semimajor axis of orbit, earth's distance as 1
(3) Eccentricity of orbit
(4) Planets inclination of orbit to elliptic
(5) Light at perihelion
(6) Light at apehelion
(7) Heat, earth as 1

            (1)     (2)     (3)     (4)      (5)       (6)    (7)

Mercury... 36.0   0.387  0.2056    7@0'8"   10.58     4.59   6.67

Venus..... 67.2   0.723  0.0068  3@23'35"    1.94     1.91   1.91

The Earth. 92.9   1.000   0.068    0@0'0"    1.03    0.997   1.00

Mars......141.5   1.524  0.0933   1@51'2"    0.52    0.360   1.43

Asteroids 204.4 to  2.200 0.4 to   5@-35@  325.2  to 3.500   0.34

Jupiter.. 483.3   5.203  0.0483  1@18'41"    0.04    0.034  0.037

Saturn... 886.0   9.539  0.0561  2@29'40"   0.012   0.0099  0.011

Uranus.. 1781.9  19.183  0.0463  0@46'20"  0.0027   0.0025  0.003

Neptune. 2791.6  30.055  0.0090   1@47'2"  0.0011   0.0011  0.001
-----------------------------------------------------------------

(1) MOVEMENT IN ORBIT. Velocity compared with earth as 1.
(2) MOVEMENT IN ORBIT. Period of revolution in years and days.
(3) MOVEMENT IN ORBIT. Orbital velocity in miles per second.
(4) Mean diameter in miles
(5) Surface compared with earth as 1.
(6) Volume compared with earth as 1.
(7) Mass compared with earth as 1.

 Planets       (1)    (2)      (3)    (4)    (5)      (6)    (7)


Mercury.....  0.88  23 to 35   1.6   3,000   0.14    0.056   0.13

Venus.....0.224 1/2  21.9     1.17   7,700   0.94     0.92   0.78

The Earth...  1.00   18.5      1.0   7,918   1.00     1.00   1.00

Mars........  1.88   15.0     0.81   4,230   0.28    0.139  0.124

Asteroids...  3.29   ....      ....  From a few    to 6.56
                                     miles to 300

Jupiter..... 11.86    8.1     0.44  86,500  118.3  1309.00  316.0

Saturn...... 29.46    6.0     0.32   1,000    0.4    760.0   95.0

Uranus...... 84.02    4.2     0.23  31,900   16.3     65.0   14.7

Neptune.... 164.78    3.4     0.18  34,800   19.3     90.0   17.1

-----------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Length of day. hrs. min. sec.
(2) Length of seasons
(3) DENSITY Compared with earth as 1
(4) DENSITY Compared with water as 1
(5) FORCE OF GRAVITY AT SURFACE OF PLANET Compared with earth as
1.
(6) FORCE OF GRAVITY AT SURFACE OF PLANET Bodies fall in one
second.
(7) Inclination of axis.


Planets     (1)     (2)       (3)    (4)      (5)    (6)   (7)

Mercury. ........ .........   1.24   7.17    0.85   13.7  .....

Venus...  23 21 22 ........   0.92   5.21    0.83   13.4   53+

The Earth. ..... Spring, 93   1.00    5.67   1.00  16.09  23 1/2
                 Summer, 93
Terrestrial days Autumn, 90
                 Winter,89

Mars... 24 37 23 Spring, 191  0.96   2.54    0.38   6.2   27 1/2
                 Summer, 181
   Martian days  Autumn, 149
                 Winter, 147

Asteroids........................................................

Jupiter. 9 55 28  .........   0.22   1.29    2.55   40.98  1 1/2

Saturn..10 29 17  .........   0.13   0.63    1.15   18.53    27

Uranus.  .......  .........   0.18   1.41    0.91   14.6   102(?)

Neptune.........  .........   0.20      0    0.88   14.2   .....

-----------------------------------------------------------------

"You see," Ayrault explained, "on Jupiter we shall need our
apergetic outfits to enable us to make long marches, while on
Saturn they will not be necessary, the increase in our weight as
a result of that planet's size being considerably less than the
usual load carried by the Roman soldier."

"I do not imagine," said Cortlandt, "we should long be troubled
by gravitation without our apergetic outfits even on Jupiter,
for, though our weight will be more than doubled, we can take off
one quarter of the whole by remaining near the equator, their
rapid rotation having apparently been given providentially to all
the large planets.  Nature will adapt herself to this change, as
to all others, very readily.  Although the reclamation of the
vast areas of the North American Arctic Archipelago, Alaska,
Siberia, and Antarctic Wilkes Land, from the death-grip of the
ice in which they have been held will relieve the pressure of
population for another century, at the end of that time it will
surely be felt again; it is therefore a consolation to feel that
the mighty planets Jupiter and Saturn, which we are coming to
look upon as our heritage, will not crush the life out of any
human beings by their own weight that may alight upon them."

Before going to bed that evening they decided to be up early the
next day, to study Jupiter, which was already a brilliant object.

The following morning, on awakening, they went at once to their
observatory, and found that Jupiter's disk was plainly visible to
the naked eye, and before night it seemed as large as the full
moon.

They then prepared to check the Callisto's headlong speed, which
Jupiter's attraction was beginning to increase.  When about two
million miles from the great planet, which was considerably on
their left, they espied Callisto ahead and slightly on their
right, as Deepwaters had calculated it would be.  Applying a mild
repulsion to this--which was itself quite a world, with its
diameter of over three thousand miles, though evidently as cold
and dead as the earth's old moon--they retarded their forward
rush, knowing that the resulting motion towards Jupiter would be
helped by the giant's pull.  Wishing to be in good condition for
their landing, they divided the remainder of the night into
watches, two going to sleep at a time, the man on duty standing
by to control the course and to get photographic negatives, on
which, when they were developed, they found two crescent-shaped
continents, a speckled region, and a number of islands.  By 7 A.
M., according to Eastern standard time, they were but fifty
thousand miles from Jupiter's surface, the gigantic globe filling
nearly one side of the sky.  In preparation for a sally, they got
their guns and accoutrements ready, and then gave a parting
glance at the car.  Their charge of electricity for developing
the repulsion seemed scarcely touched, and they had still an
abundant supply of oxygen and provisions.  The barometer
registered twenty-nine inches, showing that they had not lost
much air in the numerous openings of the vestibule.  The pressure
was about what would be found at an altitude of a few hundred
feet, part of the rarefaction being no doubt due to the fact that
they did not close the windows until at a considerable height
above Van Cortlandt Park.

They saw they should alight in a longitude on which the sun had
just risen, the rocky tops of the great mountains shining like
helmets in its rays.  Soon they felt a sharp checking of their
forward motion, and saw, from the changed appearance of the stars
and the sun, that they had entered the atmosphere of their new
home.

Not even did Columbus, standing at the prow of the Santa Maria,
with the New World before him, feel the exultation and delight
experienced by these latter-day explorers of the twenty-first
century.  Their first adventures on landing the reader already
knows.



                           CHAPTER V.

                   EXPLORATION AND EXCITEMENT.

When they awoke, the flowers were singing with the volume of a
cathedral organ, the chant rising from all around them, and the
sun was already above the horizon.  Finding a deep natural
spring, in which the water was at about blood-heat, they prepared
for breakfast by taking a bath, and then found they had brought
nothing to eat.

"It was stupid of us not to think of it," said Bearwarden, "yet
it will be too much out of our way to return to the Callisto."

"We have two rifles and a gun," said Ayrault, "and have also
plenty of water, and wood for a fire.  All we need is game."

"The old excuse, that it has been already shot out, cannot hold
here," said Cortlandt.

"Seeing that we have neither wings nor pneumatic legs, and not
knowing the advantage given us by our rifles," added Bearwarden,
"it should not be shy either.  So far," he continued, "we have
seen nothing edible, though just now we should not be too
particular; but near a spring like this that kind must exist."

"The question is," said the professor, "whether the game like
warm water.  If we can follow this stream till it has been on the
surface for some time, or till it spreads out, we shall doubtless
find a huntsman's paradise."

"A bright idea," said Bearwarden.  "Let's have our guns ready,
and, as old Deepwaters would say, keep our weather eye open."

The stream flowed off in a southeasterly direction, so that by
following it they went towards the volcanoes.

"It is hard to realize," said the professor, "that those
mountains must be several hundred miles away, for the reason that
they are almost entirely above the horizon.  This apparent
flatness and wide range of vision is of course the result of
Jupiter's vast size.  With sufficiently keen sight, or aided by a
good glass, there is no reason why one should not see at least
five hundred miles, with but a slight elevation."

"It is surprising," said Ayrault, "that in what is evidently
Jupiter's Carboniferous period the atmosphere should be so clear.
Our idea has been that at that time on earth the air was heavy
and dense."

"So it was, and doubtless is here," replied Cortlandt; "but you
must remember that both those qualities would be given it by
carbonic-acid gas, which is entirely invisible and transparent.
No gas that would be likely to remain in the air would interfere
with sight; water vapour is the only thing that could; and though
the crust of this planet, even near the surface, is still hot,
the sun being so distant, the vapour would not be, raised much.
By avoiding low places near hot springs, we shall doubtless have
very nearly as clear an atmosphere as on earth.  What does
surprise me is the ease with which we breathe.  I can account for
it only by supposing that, the Carboniferous period being already
well advanced, most of the carbonic acid is already locked up in
the forests or in Jupiter's coal-beds."

"How, asked Bearwarden, "do you account for the 'great red spot'
that appeared here in 1878, lasted several years, and then
gradually faded?  It was taken as unmistakable evidence that
