bring up the rear, Corbett." Without another word, the burly spaceman
turned and moved off through the jungle.

Roger hung back to talk to Tom. "What do you think, Tom?"

Tom shook his head before answering. "He's right, Roger. We're on a job.
It's the same here in the jungle as it is in space. We know that
something is liable to happen to any one of us at any time. And the
mission always comes first."

Roger nodded. "Sure, that's the way it is in the book. But this is
real. That big hick might be hurt--or trapped. Maybe he needs our help!"

"I know how you feel, Roger," replied Tom. "I want to take off and hunt
for Astro myself, but Connel needs us. Don't forget that bunch of guys
in uniforms back at Sinclair's. Commander Walters and the others don't
hold conferences like that one back in Venusport for the fun of it. This
is serious."

Roger shrugged and started off after Connel, Tom following slowly
behind. Their march through the jungle was made in silence, each hoping
for a miracle. But as the sun grew higher and the deadline hour of noon
approached, they steeled themselves to the fact that they might never
see the Venusian cadet again. A short time later, when Tom was taking
his turn at cutting the trail through the brush, he broke through into a
clearing. He stopped and called out, "Major! Roger! Quick!"

Connel and the blond-haired cadet rushed forward, stopping beside Tom to
stare in amazement. Before them, a large area of the jungle was pounded
down and lying amidst the tangle of giant creepers and uprooted bushes
was the remains of a giant snake.

"By the rings of Saturn!" gasped Connel, walking forward to inspect the
clearing. Tom and Roger followed, breaking to the side, their rifles at
ready. The two boys had become jungle-wise quickly and knew that death
lurked behind the wall of green surrounding the cleared area.

"It must have been some fight!" Connel pointed to the tracks of the
tyrannosaurus. "The tyranno must have stumbled on the snake while it was
feeding," said Connel. "Otherwise it would have lit out for that tree
over there." He pointed to the giant teakwood that Astro had slept
under. The three spacemen saw the makeshift sleeping bag at the same
time.

"Major! Look!" cried Tom and raced to the base of the tree.

"It's Astro's, all right," said Connel, examining the woven bag. "I
wonder if he was here when those two things were going after each
other."

"Yes, sir," said Roger in a choked whisper, "he was." He pointed to the
ragged remains of Astro's jungle suit dangling on the near-by thornbush.
The blood was stiff on the material.

The three Earthmen stared at the suit, each too horrified to speak.

Connel's face was set in hard lines as he finally found his voice and
growled, "Our search is over. Let's get back to our job."

[Illustration]




CHAPTER 11


It was not until late the same afternoon that Astro, following the trail
of the tyrannosaurus, realized that the giant beast was seriously hurt.
At first the traces of blood on the ground and underbrush were slight,
but gradually the blood spots became more profuse and the trail was
covered with huge blotches of red. The Venusian cadet grew more
cautious. The tyrannosaurus would be ten times as dangerous now. And it
might be close by, lying in the jungle, licking its wounds.

As the sun began to sink in the western Venusian sky, Astro began to
think about the coming night. He would have to hole up. He couldn't
chance stumbling into the beast in the dark. But it would also mean
taking time to make another sleeping bag. Suddenly he saw a movement in
the brush to his left. He dropped to the ground and aimed the shock
rifle in that direction, eyes probing the green tangle for further
movement.

"Make one move and you'll die!" a harsh voice cut through the jungle.
Astro remained still, his eyes darting to left and right, trying to
locate the owner of the voice.

"Throw down your gun and stand up with your hands over your head!" came
another voice, this one immediately behind him.

[Illustration: _His eyes probed the jungle for further movement_]

A patrol! Astro swore at himself for blindly walking into a trap and
dropped his gun. He stood up and raised his hands over his head, turning
slowly.

"Don't turn around! Stand still!"

Astro stopped.

He could hear the rustle of movement in the underbrush behind him and
then someone called, "Circle around to the right. Spread out and see if
there are any others!"

Off to the side, he could hear the crashing of footsteps moving away in
the jungle.

"All right," continued the unknown voice, "drop that paralo-ray pistol
to the ground. But no smart tricks. We can see you and you can't see us,
so take it easy and do as we say."

Astro lowered his hands and unbuckled the gun belt, letting it fall to
the ground. There was a sudden burst of movement behind him and powerful
arms gripped his wrists. Within seconds his hands were tied quickly and
expertly, and he was spun around to face his captors.

There were ten men, all dressed in the same green uniforms and plastic
headgear he had seen at the Sinclair plantation. They stood in a
semicircle around him, their guns leveled at his naked chest. The leader
of the party nudged the nearest man and commented, "Never thought I'd
see any animal like this in the jungle!" The other men laughed
appreciatively.

"Who are you?" the leader demanded. "What are you doing here?"

"My name is Astro," replied the big cadet boldly. "I'm a Space Cadet,
_Polaris_ unit, Space Academy, U.S.A. I'm here in the jungle with the
rest of my unit hunting tyrannosaurus."

"Tyranno, eh?" queried the man. "How long have you been trailing this
one?"

"Just today. I saw him fight a big snake and lost my jungle gear in a
thicket where I was hiding. I was separated from my space buddies two
days ago."

"Say, Helia," suddenly called one of the other men, "he sounds like a
Venusian."

"Is that true?" asked the leader. "Are you from Venus?"

Astro nodded. "Venusport."

"Then why are you in Space Academy?"

"I want to be a spaceman."

"Why didn't you go to school on Venus, instead of Earth. We have good
space schools here."

"I want a commission in the Solar Guard. You can only get that through
the Academy," replied Astro stoutly.

"Solar Guard!" snorted the leader, and then turned to the nearest man,
speaking rapidly in a strange tongue.

For a moment the language confused Astro, then he recognized it as the
ancient Venusian dialect. He understood it and started to answer, but
then, on second thought, he decided not to reveal his knowledge of the
language.

The leader turned back to Astro and asked a question.

Astro shook his head and said, "If you're talking to me, you have to
speak English. I know that's the Venusian dialect you're speaking, but I
never learned it."

The leader's fist shot out and crashed against Astro's jaw. The big
cadet rocked back with the punch and then he lunged forward, straining
against his bonds.

"Why, you--!" he exploded angrily.

"That was for not being a true Venusian!" snapped the leader. "Every son
of Venus should understand his mother tongue!"

Astro bit his lip and fell silent.

The leader turned away, and shouting a command, started off through the
jungle. Astro knew that the patrol had been ordered to move out, but he
stood still, waiting for them to push him. They did. A hard jab in his
naked side with the butt of a gun sent him stumbling forward in the
center of the patrol.

Well, there was one consolation, he thought grimly. At least he wouldn't
have to spend the night out in the jungle alone again!

Astro had expected a long march, but to his surprise, he was pushed
along a well-worn jungle trail for only three hundred yards in from the
tyrannosaurus's track. Finally they stopped before a huge teakwood tree.
The leader pounded his rifle butt on the trunk three times.

Mystified, Astro watched a small section of the trunk open to reveal a
modern vacuum-tube elevator shaft. He was pushed inside with the men of
the patrol and the tree-trunk door was closed. The leader pushed a lever
and the car dropped so suddenly that Astro nearly lost his balance. He
judged that they must have fallen two hundred feet when the car stopped
and another door opened. He was pushed out into a high-vaulted tunnel
with cement walls.

"Hurry up!" snapped the leader.

The big cadet moved along the tunnel, followed by the patrol, turning
from one tunnel into another, all of them slanting downhill. Astro
guessed that he was being taken to some subterranean cave. He asked his
captors where they were taking him.

"Don't talk!" snapped one of the men at his side.

"This jungle will be swarming with Solar Guardsmen once they discover
I'm lost," said Astro. "Who are you and what are you holding me prisoner
for?" The big cadet decided it would be better to feign ignorance of the
existence of the rebel organization.

"Let the Solar Guard come!" snapped the leader. "They'll find something
they never expected."

"But what do you want with _me_?" asked the cadet.

"You'll know soon enough!"

They had been walking for nearly an hour and the tunnels still slanted
downward but more sharply now. Turning into a much larger tunnel than
any of the rest, Astro noticed a huge door on one side. Through its
crystal-covered ports he saw racks of illegal heat blasters and
paralo-ray guns. A man stepped out of the door, and raising his hand in
a form of salute, called out a few words in the Venusian tongue. Astro
recognized it as a greeting, "Long live Venusians!" and suppressed a
smile.

One by one, the men of the patrol handed over their rifles and ray guns,
while the man in the armory checked off their names. Then they all
removed their knee-length jungle boots and traded their plastic helmets
for others of the same design but of a lighter material. Each man turned
his back while switching helmets, obviously to avoid being recognized by
any of the others, since the new helmet was also frosted except for a
slit at eye level. Wearing the lighter headgear and common street shoes,
the men continued their march through the tunnel. They passed into a
still larger tunnel, and for the first time, Astro could see daylight.
As they drew nearer to the mouth of the tunnel, the cadet could see
outside, and the scene before him made him gasp for breath.

A full twenty miles long and fifteen miles wide, a canyon stretched
before him. And it seemed to the big cadet that every square inch of the
canyon floor was occupied by buildings and spaceships. Hundreds of
green-clad men were moving around the ships and buildings.

"By the craters of Luna!" gasped Astro as the patrol paused in the mouth
of the tunnel. "What--what is this?"

"The first city of Venus. True Venus. Built by Venusians with Venusian
materials only!" said the leader proudly. "There's the answer to your
Solar Guard!"

"I don't understand," said Astro. "What are you going to do?"

"You'll see." The man chuckled. "You'll see. Move on!"

As they trooped out of the tunnel and down into the canyon they passed
groups of men working on the many ships. The cadet recognized what they
were doing at once. The unmistakable outlines of gun ports were being
cut into the sides of several bulky space freighters. Elsewhere, the
steady pounding of metal and grinding of machinery told the cadet that
machine shops were going at full blast. He noticed a difference between
the men of the patrol and the workers. Neither spoke to the other. In
fact, Astro saw that it was rarely that a worker even glanced at them as
they passed by.

Up ahead, Astro saw a huge building, wide and sprawling but only a few
stories high. It was nearly dark now and lights began to wink on in the
many windows. He guessed that he was being taken to the building and was
not surprised when the leader pulled him by the arm, guiding him toward
a small side door. There was a curious look about the building and the
cadet couldn't figure out what it was. Glancing quickly at the wall as
he passed through the door, he nearly burst out laughing. The building
was made of wood! He guessed that the rebels were using materials at
hand rather than importing anything from outside planets. And since
Venus was largely a planet of jungles and vegetation, with few large
mineral deposits, wood would be the easiest thing to use.

The inside of the building was handsomely decorated and designed. He saw
walls covered with carvings, depicting old legends about the first
colonists. He shook his head. "Boy," he thought, "they sure go for the
Venusian stuff in a big way!"

"All right!" snapped the leader. "Stop here!"

Astro stood before a huge double door that had been polished to a
brilliant luster. The cadet waited for the leader to enter, but the
Nationalist stood perfectly still, eyes straight ahead. Suddenly the
doors swung open, revealing a huge chamber, at least a hundred and fifty
feet long. At the far end a man dressed in white with a green band
across his chest sat in a beautifully carved chair. Arrayed on either
side of him were fifty or more men dressed in various shades of green.
The man in white lifted his hand and the patrol leader stepped forward,
pushing Astro before him. They walked across the polished floor and
stopped ten feet away from the man in white, the patrol leader bowing
deeply. Astro glanced at the men standing at either side of the man in
white. The bulge of paralo-ray pistols was plainly visible beneath their
flowing robes.

The man in white lifted his hand in the salute Astro had seen before.
Then the patrol leader straightened up and began to speak rapidly in the
Venusian dialect. Translating easily, Astro heard him report his
capture. When he concluded, the man in white looked at Astro closely and
spoke three words. Astro shook his head.

"He does not speak our mother tongue, Lactu," volunteered the patrol
leader.

The man in white nodded. "How is it," he said in English, "that you are
a native-born Venusian and do not speak the language of your planet?"

"I was an orphan. I had very little formal education," said Astro. "And
as long as we're asking questions around here, how about my asking a
few? Who in space are you? What's the idea of holding me a prisoner?"

"One question at a time, please, brother Venusian," said the man in
white. "And when you address me, my name is Lactu."

"Lactu what?" asked Astro belligerently.

"Your own name should tell you that we on Venus only have one name."

"Never mind that rocket wash!" barked Astro. "When do I get out of
here?"

"You will never leave here as you came," said Lactu quietly.

"What does that mean?" demanded the cadet.

"You have discovered the existence of our base. Ordinarily you would
have been burned to a crisp and left in the jungle. Fortunately, you are
a Venusian by birth, and therefore have the right to join our
organization."

"What does that mean?"

"It means," said Lactu, "that you will take an oath to fight until death
if necessary to free the planet Venus and the Venusian citizens from the
slavery of the Solar Alliance and--"

"Awright, buster!" roared Astro. "I've had enough of that rocket wash! I
took an oath of allegiance to the Solar Guard and the Solar Alliance, to
uphold the cause of peace throughout the universe and defend the
liberties of the planets. Your idea is to destroy peace and make slaves
out of the people of Venus--like these dummies you've got here!" Astro
gestured contemptuously at the men standing on both sides of Lactu. "I
don't want any part of you, so start blasting!" continued the big cadet,
his voice booming out in the big room. "But make it good, 'cause I'm
tough!"

There was a murmur among the men and several put their hands on the
butts of their paralo-ray guns. Even the calm expression in Lactu's eyes
changed.

"You are not afraid of us, are you?" he asked in a low, almost surprised
tone of voice.

"You, nor anything that crawls in the jungle like you!" shouted Astro.
"If you're not happy with the way things are run on Venus, why don't
you take your beef to the Solar Alliance?"

"We prefer to do it our way!" snapped one of the men near Lactu. "And as
for you, a few lashes with a Venusian wet whip will teach you to keep a
civil tongue!"

Astro turned around slowly, looking at each of the men individually. "I
promise you," he said slowly, "the first man who lays a whip on me will
die."

"And who, pray, will do the killing?" snorted a short, stout figure in
