    structures, which he can readily do by carefully reading this
    volume.


THE HUB: a Journal devoted to the Carriage Building Trades. Published
monthly. Subscription price, $3.00 a year. New York city: The Hub
Publishing Company, 323 Pearl street.

    This journal is widely known for its accurate and extended
    information as to carriage building, trimming, lining, painting,
    etc.; and since its first issue it has maintained its
    reputation, and given the public an immense amount of
    instruction in a spirited and practical manner. The
    illustrations and typography are excellent, and every number
    shows how extended an area it serves as an authority on the
    important industry to which it is devoted.


ASSIGNATS AND MANDATS: the Money and the Finances of the French
Revolution of 1789. By Stephen D. Dillaye. Price, free by mail, 30
cents. Philadelphia, Pa.: Henry Carey Baird & Co., 810 Walnut street.

    Mr. Dillaye differs with the Hon. A.D. White, President of
    Cornell University, as to the relative merits of money and
    promises to pay money; and he begins with the assertion that the
    President's "object is to depreciate American credit, stability,
    and honor." Further perusal, to ascertain the meaning of this
    attack on a patriotic and useful member of society, shows us
    what Mr. Dillaye thinks he means. He talks of credit being the
    vital element of national power; and from this he argues that
    the more "credit" a nation has--that is, the deeper it is in
    debt--the more powerful it becomes. In short, he confuses credit
    as opposed to discredit with credit as opposed to cash--a
    grievous blunder, surely. A nation's credit is like a
    merchant's; it becomes greater only as his debts become smaller;
    and people trust a government for the same reason as they trust
    an individual, mainly because every previous obligation has been
    honorably observed. It is gratifying to know that persons of Mr.
    Dillaye's way of thinking are few and unimportant, and their
    number is diminishing daily.


CROTON WATER SUPPLY FOR THE CITY OF NEW YORK: an Address by George B.
Butler to the New York Municipal Society. New York city: Published by
Order of the Society, 87 Madison avenue.

    A review of the whole subject of our water supply, its sources
    and the area they drain, the geographical features of the
    district, and the works erected by the city. Mr. Butler
    maintains that the Croton valley, with proper storage
    reservoirs, can abundantly supply the whole city; and that no
    new aqueduct need be constructed in the present condition of the
    public debt.


EINE KURZE ALLGEMEINE EINLEITUNG ZU DEN AROMATISCHEN
NITROVERBINDUNGEN. Von Peter Townsend Austen. Leipzig, Germany:
Winter, Publisher.

    We are glad to see that an American is able to publish a very
    useful chemical treatise in Germany, the great head center of
    chemistry. Dr. Austen, one of our most distinguished young
    chemists in the field of original research, has produced a work
    which bears the marks of much patient thought and study. The
    book is dedicated to the renowned German chemist, Professor A.W.
    Hofmann.


OUR YOUNG FOLKS' MAGAZINE: a Monthly Journal of Instruction and
Amusement. Subscription price, $1.60 a year. Boston, Mass.: Post
Office Box 3090.

    A readable little periodical, well calculated to amuse the
    little ones for whom it is intended.


GLASS FOR THE STUDIO AND DARK ROOM. By Thomas Gaffield. Philadelphia,
Pa.: Benerman & Wilson.

    There is much useful information in this little pamphlet, and
    photographers especially should read it. The matter first
    appeared in the Philadelphia _Photographer_.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECENT AMERICAN AND FOREIGN PATENTS



       *       *       *       *       *




NEW AGRICULTURAL INVENTIONS.


IMPROVED GANG PLOW.

Ezra Peak, Montana, Kan.--This invention is so constructed that it may
be easily raised from and lowered to the ground, and adjusted to work
at any desired depth in the ground. It is claimed to be of lighter
draft than plows constructed in the usual way, also to be simple in
construction and inexpensive in manufacture. The wheels, the faces of
which are notched to give them a slight up-and-down movement as they
are drawn forward, slightly jar the plows, and thus cause them to be
easier drawn than when smooth wheels are used. The shaft can be
provided with a ratchet wheel and pawl to hold it in any position into
which it may be turned; and to it is attached a rope or chain, the
other end of which, is attached to the forward end of the frame, so
that by turning the shaft the plows may be raised from, lowered to,
and adjusted to work at any desired depth in the ground.


IMPROVED PLOW.

James Willis Hendley, Cedar Hill, N.C., assignor to David N. Bennett
and Samuel T. Wright, of same place.--The objects here are simplicity
and cheapness of construction, and such arrangement of parts as will
prevent the plow becoming clogged with weeds, etc. The mold-board is
welded to the land side, or cast in one piece with it, so that no
brace or other connection is required between the mold-board and
standard; secondly, the curved beam is attached to the heel of the
land-side and supported by a brace, which is bolted to the middle
portion of the latter, and arranged in such relation to the mold-board
that a space is left between them, into which the trash will fall, and
thus be drawn into the furrow and covered.


IMPROVED GRAIN DRILL.

George W. Osborn, Parkville, Mich.--This is an improved attachment for
seed drills, for gaging the depth at which the grain shall be
deposited in the earth. It consists in an adjustable spring gage bar
attached to the shank of each drill tooth, whereby the teeth may be
made to enter the ground a greater or less depth. It is claimed to
ensure the planting of seeds at equal depth in hard or soft ground,
and to diminish the draft.


IMPROVED HORSE HAY RAKE.

Joseph B. Wakeman and John L. Wager, Deposit, N.Y.--The construction
of this implement is such that a large space is afforded beneath the
rake head for the collection of hay. The pivots of said rake head back
are also brought back, so that the teeth may be readily raised to
discharge the collected hay. By an ingenious lever arrangement the
driver is enabled to hold the rake to its work by the pressure of his
foot, and also readily to discharge the hay gathered.


IMPROVED BEE HIVE.

George W. Akins, Bridgeton, Pa.--In this hive, holes are bored in the
sides of the compartment for ventilation, and windows are flared for
the purpose of inspecting the inside of the hive. A frame is used
whenever it is desired to have the honeycomb of any particular shape.
It consists of a form of tin or other suitable maternal, placed on a
frame or slide, and having the shape required in the comb. Bees will
build inside of the form, leaving about one fourth inch space between
the form and the comb. The tin sheet receives a portion of the refuse
matter, and can be readily taken out and cleaned. On the 1st of May
the bees are driven out into another hive and the frames examined.
Three frames are taken out and set in a new box, and three empty
frames are put in their place. The old queen must be put with the new
colony, and half of the bees must be put in each box and shut up, and
put on a stand. The hives are to be opened the next morning. At the
next natural swarming time the swarms can be again divided. The hive
cannot freeze, and it is proof against mice.


IMPROVED PLOW STOCK.

Robert Weber, New Ulm, Texas.--In this invention, by loosening a nut,
the point of draft attachment may be raised and lowered to cause the
plow to work deeper or shallower in the ground, or turned to one or
the other side, to cause the plow to take or leave land, and may be
secured in place when adjusted by again tightening the nut.


IMPROVED COMBINED HAY TEDDER AND SIDE RAKE.

John Huber and Henry Snell, Girard, Ill.--This machine may be used
simply for stirring up and turning the hay, or for turning the hay and
gathering it into windrows. The shaft of a reel revolves in bearings
attached to the side bars of the frame near their rear ends. To the
bars of the reel are attached spring teeth, which, as the machine is
drawn forward, take hold of the hay, carry it up and over the reel,
and drop it to the ground in the rear of the machine. A carrier takes
the hay from the teeth, when it has been brought to the top of the
reel, carries it over the shaft, and discharges it into a trough, down
which it slides, and is deposited in a windrow along one side of the
path of the machine.


IMPROVED GRUBBING MACHINE.

Ira Burley, Redwing, Minn.--This invention consists in the combination
of wheels and axle, tongue, adjusting bar, adjustable brace, uprights,
cross bar, two ropes, and four pulley blocks with each other. To the
forward end of the tongue is attached a loop or clevis, to receive an
iron pin, to be driven into the ground to keep the machine from moving
about while being used. To the pulley block is swiveled a hook, to be
hooked into a loop, attached to the forward end of a lever. The rear
end of the lever passes through a slot in the upper end of a fulcrum
post, and has a notch formed in its lower side to receive a bolt or
pin, attached to said post to serve as a fulcrum to said lever.
Several notches are formed in the lever to receive the fulcrum bolt,
to enable the position of the fulcrum post to be adjusted to regulate
the leverage, and as circumstances may require. To the lever is
attached a strong clevis, to receive the hook of the chain, that is
secured to the stump to be pulled.


IMPROVED SEED PLANTER.

Daniel J. Davis, Red Boiling Springs, Tenn.--In this invention two
wheels revolve upon the journals of the axle. Upon the end parts of
the axle are attached the rear ends of side bars, the forward ends of
which are bolted to the outer sides of the forward ends of the plow
beams. The forward ends of the beams are bolted to the ends of the
front bar, to the center of which is secured the forward end of the
central bar. To the beams are attached the plows for opening furrows
to receive the seed as it passes from the conductor spouts. The lower
ends of the spouts or tubes pass in through the sides of the plows, so
as to conduct the seed into the bottom of the furrows before they have
been partially filled by the falling in of the soil. The dropping
plate is concaved around its dropping holes, and is provided with a
plate that may be adjusted to cover one set of dropping holes to drop
the hills twice as far apart as when both sets of holes operate.


IMPROVED ANIMAL TRAP.

Thomas N. Hughes, Muddy Creek, Tenn.--This trap is for animals of all
kinds, as rats, mice, and larger animals, as foxes, minks, coons,
etc., that are allured by bait, and is automatically set again by the
animal caught, to be ready for the next animal attracted by the bait.
It is divided by a longitudinal partition into two main sections, in
which the working parts are disposed. The entrance at the end of one
section has a drop door, which is arranged back of the same, resting,
when closed, on side strips in inclined position, and being supported
on an upright arm, of a centrally pivoted treadle door, at the bottom
of the trap, when the trap is set. The treadle door is only required
to swing sufficiently on its pivots to release the drop door from the
arm, suitable seats at the under side of the trap, at both sides of
the treadle door, preventing the door from swinging farther than
necessary. The bait is placed, in a grated receptacle, near the
treadle door, and entices the animal to pass in, so as to close the
drop door when it arrives at the part of the treadle door near the
bait. The back end of this section is perforated or grated to admit
light, which attracts the frightened animal and induces him to pass
toward the light. The top part of the trap may be grated to admit air,
and the glass door at the end made to slide, to admit the taking out
of the animals for killing them.

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW MISCELLANEOUS INVENTIONS.


APPARATUS FOR THE HYDRATION OF CHLORINE GAS.

William Maynard, New York city.--This invention relates to an improved
construction of apparatus for the hydration of gases, and more
particularly chlorine gas for the manufacture of chlorine water for
use in the industrial arts of bleaching, etc. It consists mainly in a
case having an inlet for the water above, an inlet for the gas below,
and provided with an intermediate water percolating medium; combined
with a reservoir located below the level of the case and having a
water-sealed communication therewith, which reservoir receives the
hydrated gases, and which water seal prevents the heavy gas in the
case from passing out through the bottom inlet. The case for the
percolation of water and the absorption of the gas is made of conical
shape, with the largest diameter at the bottom, to produce the
greatest absorption of the heavy gas when first admitted; while
horizontal partitions, or shelves, in said case are provided with
upwardly projecting tubes which hold a permanent surface of water on
the said partition or shelves. The tubes permit, by their peculiar
shape, the water to pass down on one side and the gas up on the
opposite side of said tube, while their alternating arrangement in the
alternating shelves gives a zigzag and long continued passage to the
gas and water in moving in opposite directions through the case.


IMPROVED PROCESS OF PREPARING GAS FUEL.

Martin N. Diall, Terre Haute, Ind.--This inventor saturates wood by
immersing it in any hydrocarbon oil for from six to twelve hours, as
required by the nature of the wood, so that it may take up the
necessary quantity of oil for the required strength of gas. The wood
is then immersed in a bath of water, for taking up a quantity of water
outside the oil, and is then charged in the retorts, the same as coal,
and distilled in the same way. By this process the inventor claims
