"We just got our first good look at Tara. She's dead ahead. Major
Connel's going to contact Space Academy, and I'm going to maneuver into
our preliminary glide. Stand by for course changes."

"Make it an easy touchdown. I wanta get home, you know," replied Astro
good-naturedly.

"O.K.," said Tom. "Better bring her down to one-quarter space speed."

"Hyper or regular?" asked Astro.

"Regular!" yelled Tom. "You give me a quarter on hyper and we'll go
right through that planet!"

"One-quarter regular space speed," replied Astro.

Tom adjusted his controls for the speed reduction, while keeping his
eyes on the teleceiver screen. He watched the planet grow larger before
his eyes, and the terrain become more distinct. He could see two large
oceans, the green-blue of the water reflecting the sunlight of Alpha
Centauri brilliantly. Nearer and nearer the _Polaris_ plummeted, and Tom
could begin to distinguish the rough outline of mountain ranges along
the horizon line. He switched to a larger view of the planet on the
magnascope that revealed a splendor rivaling the beauty of his own
cherished Earth.

"We'll be entering the atmosphere in a minute, Alfie," yelled Tom into
the intercom. "Stand by to give range for touchdown."

"Radar deck, aye," reported Alfie. "Range at present five hundred
miles."

"Power deck, check in!" yelled Tom.

"Power deck, aye," returned Astro.

"All set below?" asked Tom.

"All set," said Astro.

"Reduce thrust to minimum!" shouted Tom.

Deep inside the powerful ship, the roar of the mighty atomic rocket
motors began to fade to a deep growling purr.

"Control deck to radar deck. Major Connel, sir?"

"What is it, Corbett?" asked Connel.

"We're ready for a touchdown. Do you want to take over the bridge?"

"Can't you do it, Corbett?" asked Connel.

"Yes, sir!" replied Tom.

"Then carry on," replied Connel. "I'm having some trouble trying to get
through to the Academy on the transmitter. Can't understand it." There
was a pause. "I have them now, Corbett! You carry on!" he shouted.

"Aye, aye, sir," said Tom. He turned his attention to the control panel,
checking the many dials and gauges with one sweeping glance, and then
concentrated on bringing the ship to a safe landing on the foreign
planet. His fingers tingled as he reached for the switches that would
bring the ship down on the first intergalactic world he had ever
visited. In a flash, the curly-haired cadet remembered childhood dreams
of doing just what he was doing at this moment, preparing to touch down
on a new world, millions of miles away from his home near New Chicago.

"Range one hundred miles," reported Alfie over the intercom.

"Power deck, reduce thrust to absolute minimum!" ordered Tom. "I want as
little sustaining power as you can give me without cutting out
altogether, Astro."

"Can do!" said Astro. The ship slowed even more, then suddenly picked up
speed again as the gravity of Tara began to tug at the space traveler.

"Stand by to fire braking rockets!" yelled Tom. He was all nerves now,
sensitive to the throbbing of the great ship's motors, eyes fastened to
the dials and meters on the control panel. There was no time to watch
the scanner view of the onrushing planet now. He had to touch down
blindly, using only his instruments. "Radar bridge, report!" snapped
Tom.

"Range one thousand feet," reported Alfie, his calm voice in striking
contrast to the nervous excitement in Tom's. "Seven hundred fifty--six
hundred--five fifty--"

"Fire braking rockets!" rasped Tom into the intercom.

The great ship bucked under the sudden thrust of the huge braking
rockets. The _Polaris_ held steady for a moment, then gradually, as the
pull of Tara began again, she settled back toward the dark-green
jungles beneath her.

"Two hundred and fifty feet," reported Alfie. "One hundred and
seventy-five--one fifty--" he droned.

"Ease her up, Astro," shouted Tom. "Easy! Ease her up, you Venusian
clunk, we're dropping too fast!"

Once again, from the heart of the _Polaris_, there came a roaring blast
of the powerful motors. The ship steadied once more and then slipped
back into her fall toward the new planet under more sure control.

"Fifty feet," reported Alfie. "Forty--thirty--twenty--"

There was a brief pause, as if everything had stopped and they were held
still by a giant hand, and then, suddenly, a rocking motion, a slight
bump and rumble. Tom knew they were down.

"_Touchdown!_" he yelled at the top of his voice. "Touchdown! We made
it--we made it!"

From the power deck, quiet except for the whining of the oxygen feed
pump, Astro's bellow could be heard vibrating through the passageways.

"_Yeeeeeeeeeeeeeooooooooooooowwwwwww!_"

Tom began shutting off the many circuits and switches and made a quick
last-minute check of the now dead ship. Satisfied, he glanced at the
great solar clock, noted the time in the log, and stepped to the ladder
leading to the radar bridge.

"Cadet Corbett reporting, sir," said Tom, saluting smartly. "I wish to
report, sir, that the _Polaris_ made touchdown on the planet Tara at
exactly seventeen fifty-nine, solar time!"

Connel, his great bulk bent over the tiny transmitter, was twirling the
dials, his head encased in a vacuum earphone helmet to ensure perfect
silence. He had acquired the knowledge of lip reading out of necessity
on the power decks of the old chemical burners thirty years before, and
while he couldn't hear what Tom had said, he knew what the report was.

"Very well, Corbett," he shouted, not being able to judge the volume of
his voice. "Good job! Can't seem to pick them up at the Academy again.
Had them once, then lost them. Am placing you in command of an
expedition for a quick look outside. Arm yourselves with paralo-ray guns
and rifles. Take a jet boat and under no circumstances are you to land.
Dismissed! Oh, yes, one more thing. Take Alfie Higgins along with you
and keep _your eye on him_. Report back in one hour!"

Tom felt a tingle of excitement run up his backbone as he heard the
tough skipper give him permission to explore the planet.

He saluted and turned away, Alfie trailing him down the ladder.

"Hey, Astrooooo!" yelled Tom. "Get number-one jet boat out of the hatch.
We're going for a look-see at this place!"

Tom went to the gun locker and took out three paralo-ray guns and
rifles. He made sure each of them was fully loaded and then handed them
to Alfie.

"Put these on the jet boat, Alfie. I'll be along in a minute."

Alfie took the guns and walked toward the jet-boat catapult deck. Tom
returned to the radar bridge and stood before Connel.

"Would you see if there is any news of Roger, sir, when you make contact
with the Academy?"

Connel read the cadet's lips and nodded his head. Tom turned and went
directly to the jet-boat deck. Astro and Alfie waited for him inside.

"Brought along three space suits, Tom," said Astro. "You can never tell
what we might run into."

"Good idea," said Tom.

The three cadets climbed into the jet boat, Tom taking the pilot's seat.
He pushed a release button, and a portion of the _Polaris'_ steel hull
slid back. Tom pressed another button, gripped the wheel of the small
space craft, and stepped on the acceleration pedal. The little red ship
shot out of the open hatch and zoomed over the giant trees.

Traveling at a slow speed, Tom made a wide arc over the forest, checking
his position against that of the _Polaris_ before losing sight of it. He
pulled the tiny ship up to one thousand feet, leveled off, set the
automatic pilot, and took his first close look at Tara, four and a half
light years from Earth.

From above, Tara seemed to be a quagmire of reptiles, dinosaurs, and
dense vegetation reaching as high as the gleaming towers of Venusport
and Atom City. Huge trees that spread their branches over an area of a
thousand feet soared skyward, limbs and trunks wrapped in jungle
creepers. Now and then Alfie would grasp Tom or Astro by the arm and
point a wavering finger at a moving animal below, then gasp and fall
back white-faced into his seat. While Tom was inclined to share Alfie's
reactions, Astro took it in stride, having been exposed to the dangers
of wild jungles on his own Venus.

The tiny jet boat raced out across the blue-green sea that swept up in
giant swells along the snow-white sandy beaches. It was a temptation to
set the small craft down and enjoy the pleasure of a swim after the many
days of cramped, tortured living on the _Polaris_. But Tom remembered
Connel's orders and also had a lot of respect for some of the things he
had seen swimming in the water.

"Better get back," said Tom. He flipped the audiophone switch in the jet
boat and spoke into a small mike.

"Jet boat one to _Polaris_. Jet boat one to _Polaris_. Cadet Corbett to
Major Connel."

There was a crackle of static and then Connel's voice, vibrant and
clear, filled the small cabin.

"Corbett!" he roared. "By the craters of Luna, I couldn't contact you.
Return to the _Polaris_ on the double!"

"Is there something wrong, sir?" asked Tom, apprehensive after seeing
the wildness of the jungle below him.

"Wrong?" blared Connel. "News from Earth--from the Academy! Roger's been
cleared of all charges."

"Cleared?" stammered Tom.

"Absolutely! When I sealed the radar bridge after the crash, a security
officer examined the settings on the scanners and transmitting
equipment. They showed that Roger _had_ been on duty at the time--that
he had been tracking the ship as he claimed."

"Then what was the reason for the crash?"

"Security isn't sure yet. An acceleration control lever is missing from
the wreckage. And it wasn't broken off as a result of the crash. Now
Loring and Mason are wanted for further questioning."

Tom looked at his unit-mate, Astro. The big Venusian had his head turned
to one side; he seemed to be staring out over the vast writhing jungle.

"Astro, did you hear?" asked Tom softly.

"Yeah," mumbled Astro in a small, choked voice. "Just don't ask me to
turn around."




CHAPTER 12


"How much longer before we reach the atmosphere of Tara, Manning?" asked
Loring.

Roger bent over the chart table and quickly measured the distance
between his present position and that of Tara.

"About two hours," he said, straightening up.

"Good!" said Loring. "Let me know soon as we get close."

"O.K.," replied the cadet.

"Hey, radar deck!" Mason's voice came over the intercom from the power
deck of the _Space Devil_. "Don't forget to let me know when I have to
cut down on thrust!"

"Take it easy, spaceboy," snapped Roger. "You'll know in plenty of
time!" He turned back to the radar scanner and continued the
never-ending sweep of space ahead.

After a week of checking and reconditioning the _Space Devil_ in the
wild Venusian jungles, Roger had become more and more disgusted with
himself. Being a wanted spaceman had had its disadvantages on Spaceman's
Row, but working in the steaming jungles, fighting deadly reptiles and
insects, with Loring and Mason on his neck every minute had soured his
appetite for adventure. Several times, when Roger had suggested a
certain part be replaced, Loring and he had argued violently, and Roger
had threatened to quit. Now, after the long tedious trip through space,
Roger's relationship with the others was more strained than ever. The
sure dependability of Tom on the control deck and Astro on the power
deck made the work of Loring and Mason sloppy by comparison. Once, when
Roger had been on radar watch, while the ship roared through the
asteroid belt, collision with a small asteroid had threatened. Roger
ordered a course change, but Mason, who had taken over the power deck,
had been asleep. Luckily, Shinny had been near by, had made the course
change, and saved the ship. Seething with anger, Roger had gone to the
power deck and given the shiftless spaceman a terrific beating.

Over and over, conflicts had arisen among them as they blasted through
deep space, and always, it seemed to Roger, he was in the middle of it.
The only satisfaction he could find in the hazardous venture was the
prospect of the five million credits. And even this had lost its
excitement in the last few days, as his nerves stretched to the breaking
point. Only the sly humor of Shinny had saved Roger from the monotony of
the long haul through space.

Roger absently flipped the scanner to its farthest range. He had been
observing the planet Tara for several hours and knew its shape fairly
well. But he suddenly jerked to attention. His hands trembled slightly
as he peered intently at the scope. Finally he slumped back. There was
no doubt about it. On the scanner was a jet boat in flight.

"Hey, Loring! Shinny! Mason! Get up here on the double!" he yelled into
the intercom.

"What's up?" demanded Loring.

"Get up here!" shouted Roger. "We're in for trouble--plenty of trouble!"

Presently the three spacemen were grouped around the scanner, staring at
the unmistakable outline of a jet boat.

"By the rings of Saturn," declared Loring, "it must be Connel and his
crew!"

"What're we going to do?" whined Mason.

Loring's face darkened. "Only one thing we can do now," he growled.

"What do you mean?" asked Roger.

"I mean that we're going to blast them!" Loring snarled. "Connel and
whoever else is with him!"

"But--but--" stammered Roger, "the _Polaris_ crew is down there!"

"Listen, Manning!" Loring turned to the cadet. "Have you forgotten that
you're wanted by the Solar Guard? You give that bunch down there a
chance and they'll make you a space crawler on prison rock!"

"Why--I--" stammered Roger. He knew what Loring had said was the truth.
If it was Connel, there would be no question what would happen to him.
He faced Loring. "What will you do to them?"

"One well-placed reactant bomb, and they'll never know a thing!" sneered
Loring.

"But you don't have any bombs aboard," said Roger.

"A little of the fuel and I can build one easily enough," replied
Loring. He turned to Mason. "Go below and suit up to go into the
reaction chamber," he ordered. "Get an extra lead suit out. I'll go in
and help you. And find something we can use for a trigger and a fuse."
He smiled at Roger. "It might be a little crude, but it'll be fancy
enough for what we want. I'm going to blast the _Polaris_ from here back
to your sweet little Space Academy!"

Mason and Loring left the radar bridge while Shinny and Roger watched
the white blip of the jet boat.

"That could be Tom and Astro in that jet boat," said Roger softly to
himself.

"I guess I'd better stand by the power deck while we maneuver," said
Shinny. "We wanta stay hidden until Loring and Mason get that thing
ready."

Roger nodded, and Shinny disappeared.

Maneuvering cautiously, Roger brought the _Space Devil_ around to the
night side of Tara opposite to the landing site of the _Polaris_.

Four hours later Loring and Mason came out of the reactant chamber
carrying a small lead box. They placed it gently on the deck and began
taking off their lead suits. Roger and Shinny stared at the box.

"There she is," said Loring. "Not much to look at, but there's enough
juice in there to blast the _Polaris_ into space junk!"

"Wait a minute, Loring!" said Roger. "There'll be no killing! No one
gets hurt!"

