
  In order to follow the development further, spores must be sown upon
  earth, as they do not develop normally in water beyond this stage.

  In studying plants grown on earth, they should be carefully removed
  and washed in a drop of water so as to remove, as far as possible,
  any adherent particles, and then may be mounted in water for
  microscopic examination.

  In most cases, after three or four cross-walls are formed, two walls
  arise in the end cell so inclined as to enclose a wedge-shaped cell
  (_a_) from which are cut off two series of segments by walls
  directed alternately right and left (Fig. 66, _D_, _E_, _a_), the
  apical cell growing to its original dimensions after each pair of
  segments is cut off. The segments divide by vertical walls in
  various directions so that the young plant rapidly assumes the form
  of a flat plate of cells attached to the ground by root hairs
  developed from the lower surfaces of the cells, and sometimes from
  the marginal ones. As the division walls are all vertical, the plant
  is nowhere more than one cell thick. The marginal cells of the young
  segments divide more rapidly than the inner ones, and soon project
  beyond the apical cell which thus comes to lie at the bottom of a
  cleft in the front of the plant which in consequence becomes
  heart-shaped (_E_, _F_). Sooner or later the apical cell ceases to
  form regular segments and becomes indistinguishable from the other
  cells.

  In the ostrich fern and lady fern the plants are dioecious. The male
  plants (Fig. 66, _J_) are very small, often barely visible to the
  naked eye, and when growing thickly form dense, moss-like patches.
  They are variable in form, some irregularly shaped, others simple
  rows of cells, and some have the heart shape of the larger plants.

The female plants (Fig. 66, _F_) are always comparatively large and
regularly heart-shaped, occasionally reaching a diameter of nearly or
quite one centimetre, so that they are easily recognizable without
microscopical examination.

  All the cells of the plant except the root hairs contain large and
  distinct chloroplasts much like those in the leaves of the moss, and
  like them usually to be found in process of division.

  The archegonia arise from cells of the lower surface, just behind
  the notch in front (Fig. 66, _F_, _ar._). Previous to their
  formation the cells at this point divide by walls parallel to the
  surface of the plant, so as to form several layers of cells, and
  from the lowest layer of cells the archegonia arise. They resemble
  those of the liverworts but are shorter, and the lower part is
  completely sunk within the tissues of the plant (Fig. 66, _G_, _I_).
  They arise as single surface cells, this first dividing into three
  by walls parallel to the outer surface. The lower cell undergoes one
  or two divisions, but undergoes no further change; the second cell
  (_C_, _o_), becomes the egg cell, and from it is cut off another
  cell (_c_), the canal cell of the neck; the uppermost of the three
  becomes the neck. There are four rows of neck cells, the two forward
  ones being longer than the others, so that the neck is bent
  backward. In the full-grown archegonium, there are two canal cells,
  the lower one (_H_, _b_) called the ventral canal cell, being
  smaller than the other.

  Shortly before the archegonium opens, the canal cells become
  disorganized in the same way as in the bryophytes, and the
  protoplasm of the central cell contracts to form the egg cell which
  shows a large, central nucleus, and in favorable cases, a clear
  space at the top called the "receptive spot," as it is here that the
  spermatozoid enters. When ripe, if placed in water, the neck cells
  become very much distended and finally open widely at the top, the
  upper ones not infrequently being detached, and the remains of the
  neck cells are forced out (Fig. 66, _I_).

  The antheridia (Fig. 66. _J_, _M_) arise as simple hemispherical
  cells, in which two walls are formed (_K_ I, II), the lower
  funnel-shaped, the upper hemispherical and meeting the lower one so
  as to enclose a central cell (shaded in the figure), from which the
  sperm cells arise. Finally, a ring-shaped wall (_L_ iii) is formed,
  cutting off a sort of cap cell, so that the antheridium at this
  stage consists of a central cell, surrounded by three other cells,
  the two lower ring-shaped, the upper disc-shaped. The central cell,
  which contains dense, glistening protoplasm, is destitute of
  chlorophyll, but the outer cells have a few small chloroplasts. The
  former divides repeatedly, until a mass of about thirty-two sperm
  cells is formed, each giving rise to a large spirally-coiled
  spermatozoid. When ripe, the mass of sperm cells crowds so upon the
  outer cells as to render them almost invisible, and as they ripen
  they separate by a partial dissolving of the division walls. When
  brought into water, the outer cells of the antheridium swell
  strongly, and the matter derived from the dissolved walls of the
  sperm cells also absorbs water, so that finally the pressure becomes
  so great that the wall of the antheridium breaks, and the sperm
  cells are forced out by the swelling up of the wall cells (_N_,
  _O_). After lying a few moments in the water, the wall of each sperm
  cell becomes completely dissolved, and the spermatozoids are
  released, and swim rapidly away with a twisting movement. They may
  be killed with a little iodine, when each is seen to be a somewhat
  flattened band, coiled several times. At the forward end, the coils
  are smaller, and there are numerous very long and delicate cilia. At
  the hinder end may generally be seen a delicate sac (_P_, _v_),
  containing a few small granules, some of which usually show the
  reaction of starch, turning blue when iodine is applied.

  In studying the development of the antheridia, it is only necessary
  to mount the plants in water and examine them directly; but the
  study of the archegonia requires careful longitudinal sections of
  the prothallium. To make these, the prothallium should be placed
  between small pieces of pith, and the razor must be very sharp. It
  may be necessary to use a little potash to make the sections
  transparent enough to see the structure, but this must be used
  cautiously on account of the great delicacy of the tissues.

  If a plant with ripe archegonia is placed in a drop of water, with
  the lower surface uppermost, and at the same time male plants are
  put with it, and the whole covered with a cover glass, the
  archegonia and antheridia will open simultaneously; and, if examined
  with the microscope, we shall see the spermatozoids collect about
  the open archegonia, to which they are attracted by the substance
  forced out when it opens. With a little patience, one or more may be
  seen to enter the open neck through which it forces itself, by a
  slow twisting movement, down to the egg cell. In order to make the
  experiment successful, the plants should be allowed to become a
  little dry, care being taken that no water is poured over them for a
  day or two beforehand.

  The first divisions of the fertilized egg cell resemble those in the
  moss embryo, except that the first wall is parallel with the
  archegonium axis, instead of at right angles to it. Very soon,
  however, the embryo becomes very different, four growing points
  being established instead of the single one found in the moss
  embryo. The two growing points on the side of the embryo nearest the
  archegonium neck grow faster than the others, one of these
  outstripping the other, and soon becoming recognizable as the first
  leaf of the embryo (Fig. 67, _A_, _L_). The other (_r_) is peculiar,
  in having its growing point covered by several layers of cells, cut
  off from its outer face, a peculiarity which we shall find is
  characteristic of the roots of all the higher plants, and, indeed,
  this is the first root of the young fern. Of the other two growing
  points, the one next the leaf grows slowly, forming a blunt cone
  (_st._), and is the apex of the stem. The other (_f_) has no
  definite form, and serves merely as an organ of absorption, by means
  of which nourishment is supplied to the embryo from the prothallium;
  it is known as the foot.

[Illustration: FIG. 67.--_A_, embryo of the ostrich fern just before
breaking through the prothallium, x 50. _st._ apex of stem. _l_, first
leaf. _r_, first root. _ar._ neck of the archegonium. _B_, young
plant, still attached to the prothallium (_pr._). _C_, underground
stem of the maiden-hair fern (_Adiantum_), with one young leaf, and
the base of an older one, x 1. _D_, three cross-sections of a leaf
stalk: i, nearest the base; iii, nearest the blade of the leaf,
showing the division of the fibro-vascular bundle, x 5. _E_, part of
the blade of the leaf, x 1/2. _F_, a single spore-bearing leaflet,
showing the edge folded over to cover the sporangia, x 1. _G_, part of
the fibro-vascular bundle of the leaf stalk (cross-section), x 50.
_x_, woody part of the bundle. _y_, bast. _sh._ bundle sheath. _H_, a
small portion of the same bundle, x 150. _I_, stony tissue from the
underground stem, x 150. _J_, sieve tube from the underground stem,
x 300.]

  Up to this point, all the cells of the embryo are much alike, and
  the embryo, like that of the bryophytes, is completely surrounded by
  the enlarged base of the archegonium (compare Fig. 67, _A_, with
  Fig. 55); but before the embryo breaks through the overlying cells a
  differentiation of the tissues begins. In the axis of each of the
  four divisions the cells divide lengthwise so as to form a
  cylindrical mass of narrow cells, not unlike those in the stem of a
  moss. Here, however, some of the cells undergo a further change; the
  walls thicken in places, and the cells lose their contents, forming
  a peculiar conducting tissue (tracheary tissue), found only in the
  two highest sub-kingdoms. The whole central cylinder is called a
  "fibro-vascular bundle," and in its perfect form, at least, is found
  in no plants below the ferns, which are also the first to develop
  true roots.

The young root and leaf now rapidly elongate, and burst through the
overlying cells, the former growing downward and becoming fastened in
the ground, the latter growing upward through the notch in the front
of the prothallium, and increasing rapidly in size (Fig. 67, _B_). The
leaf is more or less deeply cleft, and traversed by veins which are
continuations of the fibro-vascular bundle of the stalk, and
themselves fork once or twice. The surface of the leaf is covered with
a well-developed epidermis, and the cells occupying the space between
the veins contain numerous chloroplasts, so that the little plant is
now quite independent of the prothallium, which has hitherto supported
it. As soon as the fern is firmly established, the prothallium withers
away.

Comparing this now with the development of the sporogonium in the
bryophytes, it is evident that the young fern is the equivalent of the
sporogonium or spore fruit of the former, being, like it, the direct
product of the fertilized egg cell; and the prothallium represents the
moss or liverwort, upon which are borne the sexual organs. In the
fern, however, the sporogonium becomes entirely independent of the
sexual plant, and does not produce spores until it has reached a large
size, living many years. The sexual stage, on the other hand, is very
much reduced, as we have seen, being so small as to be ordinarily
completely overlooked; but its resemblance to the lower liverworts,
like _Riccia_, or the horned liverworts, is obvious. The terms
ooephyte (egg-bearing plant) and sporophyte (spore-bearing plant, or
sporogonium) are sometimes used to distinguish between the sexual
plant and the spore-bearing one produced from it.

The common maiden-hair fern (_Adiantum pedatum_) has been selected
here for studying the structure of the full-grown sporophyte, but
almost any other common fern will answer. The maiden-hair fern is
common in rich woods, and may be at once recognized by the form of its
leaves. These arise from a creeping, underground stem (Fig. 67, _C_),
which is covered with brownish scales, and each leaf consists of a
slender stalk, reddish brown or nearly black in color, which divides
into two equal branches at the top. Each of these main branches bears
a row of smaller ones on the outside, and these have a row of delicate
leaflets on each side (Fig. 67, _E_). The stem of the plant is
fastened to the ground by means of numerous stout roots. The youngest
of these, near the growing point of the stem, are unbranched, but the
older ones branch extensively (_C_).

On breaking the stem across, it is seen to be dark-colored, except in
the centre, which is traversed by a woody cylinder (fibro-vascular
bundle) of a lighter color. This is sometimes circular in sections,
sometimes horse-shoe shaped. Where the stem branches, the bundle of
the branch may be traced back to where it joins that of the main stem.

  A thin cross-section of the stem shows, when magnified, three
  regions. First, an outer row of cells, often absent in the older
  portions; this is the epidermis. Second, within the epidermis are
  several rows of cells similar to the epidermal cells, but somewhat
  larger, and like them having dark-brown walls. These merge gradually
  into larger cells, with thicker golden brown walls (Fig. 67, _I_).
  The latter, if sufficiently magnified, show distinct striation of
  the walls, which are often penetrated by deep narrow depressions or
  "pits." This thick-walled tissue is called "stony tissue"
  (schlerenchyma). All the cells contain numerous granules, which the
  iodine test shows to be starch. All of this second region lying
  between the epidermis and the fibro-vascular bundle is known as the
  ground tissue. The third region (fibro-vascular) is, as we have seen
  without the microscope, circular or horse-shoe shaped. It is sharply
  separated from the ground tissue by a row of small cells, called the
  "bundle sheath." The cross-section of the bundle of the leaf stalk
  resembles, almost exactly, that of the stem; and, as it is much
  easier to cut, it is to be preferred in studying the arrangement of
  the tissues of the bundle (Fig. 67, _G_). Within the bundle sheath
  (_sh._) there are two well-marked regions, a central band (_x_) of
  large empty cells, with somewhat angular outlines, and distinctly
  separated walls; and an outer portion (_y_) filling up the space
  between these central cells and the bundle sheath. The central
  tissue (_x_) is called the woody tissue (xylem); the outer, the bast
  (phloem). The latter is composed of smaller cells of variable form,
  and with softer walls than the wood cells.

  A longitudinal section of either the stem or leaf stalk shows that
  all the cells are decidedly elongated, especially those of the
  fibro-vascular bundle. The xylem (Fig. 68, _C_, _x_) is made up
  principally of large empty cells, with pointed ends, whose walls are
  marked with closely set, narrow, transverse pits, giving them the
  appearance of little ladders, whence they are called "scalariform,"
  or ladder-shaped markings. These empty cells are known as
  "tracheids," and tissue composed of such empty cells, "tracheary
  tissue." Besides the tracheids, there are a few small cells with
  oblique ends, and with some granular contents.

  The phloem is composed of cells similar to the latter, but there may
  also be found, especially in the stem, other larger ones (Fig. 67,
  _J_), whose walls are marked with shallow depressions, whose bottoms
  are finely pitted. These are the so-called "sieve tubes."

  For microscopical examination, either fresh or alcoholic material
  may be used, the sections being mounted in water. Potash will be
  found useful in rendering opaque sections transparent.

The leaves, when young, are coiled up (Fig. 67, _C_), owing to growth
in the earlier stages being greater on the lower than on the upper
side. As the leaf unfolds, the stalk straightens, and the upper
portion (blade) becomes flat.

The general structure of the leaf stalk may be understood by making a
series of cross-sections at different heights, and examining them with
a hand lens. The arrangement is essentially the same as in the stem.
The epidermis and immediately underlying ground tissue are
dark-colored, but the inner ground tissue is light-colored, and much
softer than the corresponding part of the stem; and some of the outer
cells show a greenish color, due to the presence of chlorophyll.

The section of the fibro-vascular bundle differs at different heights.
Near the base of the stalk (Fig. _D_ i) it is horseshoe-shaped; but,
if examined higher up, it is found to divide (II, III), one part going
to each of the main branches of the leaf. These secondary bundles
divide further, forming the veins of the leaflets.

The leaflets (_E_, _F_) are one-sided, the principal vein running
close to the lower edge, and the others branching from it, and forking
as they approach the upper margin, which is deeply lobed, the lobes
being again divided into teeth. The leaflets are very thin and
delicate, with extremely smooth surface, which sheds water perfectly.
If the plant is a large one, some of the leaves will probably bear
spores. The spore-bearing leaves are at once distinguished by having
the middle of each lobe of the leaflets folded over upon the lower
side (_F_). On lifting one of these flaps, numerous little rounded
bodies (spore cases) are seen, whitish when young, but becoming brown
as they ripen. If a leaf with ripe spore cases is placed upon a piece
of paper, as it dries the spores are discharged, covering the paper
with the spores, which look like fine brown powder.

[Illustration: FIG. 68.--_A_, vertical section of the leaf of the
maiden-hair fern, which has cut across a vein (_f.b._), x 150. _B_,
surface view of the epidermis from the lower surface of a leaf. _f_,
vein. _p_, breathing pore, x 150. _C_, longitudinal section of the
fibro-vascular bundle of the leaf stalk, showing tracheids with
ladder-shaped markings, x 150. _D_, longitudinal section through the
tip of a root, x 150. _a_, apical cell. _Pl._ young fibro-vascular
bundle. _Pb._ young ground tissue. _E_, cross-section of the root,
through the region of the apical cell (_a_), x 150. _F_, cross-section
through a full-grown root, x 25. _r_, root hairs. _G_, the
fibro-vascular bundle of the same, x 150.]

  A microscopical examination of the leaf stalk shows the tissues to
  be almost exactly like those of the stem, except the inner ground
  tissue, whose cells are thin-walled and colorless (soft tissue or
  "parenchyma") instead of stony tissue. The structure of the blade of
  the leaf, however, shows a number of peculiarities. Stripping off a
  little of the epidermis with a needle, or shaving off a thin slice
  with a razor, it may be examined in water, removing the air if
  necessary with alcohol. It is composed of a single layer of cells,
  of very irregular outline, except where it overlies a vein (Fig. 68,
  _B_, _f_). Here the cells are long and narrow, with heavy walls. The
  epidermal cells contain numerous chloroplasts, and on the under
  surface of the leaf breathing pores (_stomata_, sing. _stoma_), not
  unlike those on the capsules of some of the bryophytes. Each
  breathing pore consists of two special crescent-shaped epidermal
  cells (guard cells), enclosing a central opening or pore
  communicating with an air space below. They arise from cells of the
  young epidermis that divide by a longitudinal wall, that separates
  in the middle, leaving the space between.

[Illustration: FIG. 69.--_A_, mother cell of the sporangium of the
maiden-hair fern, x 300. _B_, young sporangium, surface view, x 150:
i, from the side; ii, from above. _C-E_, successive stages in the
development of the sporangium seen in optical section, x 150. _F_,
nearly ripe sporangium, x 50: i, from in front; ii, from the side.
_an._ ring. _st._ point of opening. _G_, group of four spores, x 150.
_H_, a single spore, x 300.]

  By holding a leaflet between two pieces of pith, and using a very
  sharp razor, cross-sections can be made. Such a section is shown in
  Fig. 68, _A_. The epidermis (_e_) bounds the upper and lower
  surfaces, and if a vein (_f.b._) is cut across its structure is
  found to be like that of the fibro-vascular bundle of the leaf
  stalk, but much simplified.

  The ground tissue of the leaf is composed of very loose, thin-walled
  cells, containing numerous chloroplasts. Between them are large and
  numerous intercellular spaces, filled with air, and communicating
  with the breathing pores. These are the principal assimilating cells
  of the plant; _i.e._ they are principally concerned in the
  absorption and decomposition of carbonic acid from the atmosphere,
  and the manufacture of starch.

  The spore cases, or sporangia (Fig. 69), are at first little papillae
  (_A_), arising from the epidermal cells, from which they are early
  cut off by a cross-wall. In the upper cell several walls next arise,
  forming a short stalk, composed of three rows of cells, and an upper
  nearly spherical cell--the sporangium proper. The latter now divides
  by four walls (_B_, _C_, i-iv), into a central tetrahedral cell, and
  four outer ones. The central cell, whose contents are much denser
  than the outer ones, divides again by walls parallel to those first
  formed, so that the young sporangium now consists of a central cell,
  surrounded by two outer layers of cells. From the central cell a
  group of cells is formed by further divisions (_D_), which finally
  become entirely separated from each other. The outer cells of the
  spore case divide only by walls, at right angles to their outer
  surface, so that the wall is never more than two cells thick. Later,
  the inner of these two layers becomes disorganized, so that the
  central mass of cells floats free in the cavity of the sporangium,
  which is now surrounded by but a single layer of cells (_E_).

  Each of the central cells divides into four spores, precisely as in
  the bryophytes. The young spores (_G_, _H_) are nearly colorless and
