By mid-afternoon, Jay had recovered consciousness. After struggling with
his bonds for a while, he lay quietly under the desk.

Just before evening, someone knocked at the door. "Minister Jay, may I
come in?"

"Not at the moment," Barrent said, in what he hoped was a fair imitation
of Jay's voice.

"I thought you'd be interested in the statistics of the Hunt," the man
said. "So far, Citizens have killed seventy-three Hunteds, with eighteen
left to go. That's quite an improvement over last year."

"Yes, it is," Barrent said.

"The percentage who hid in the sewer system was larger this year. A few
tried to bluff it out by staying in their homes. We're tracking down the
rest in the usual places."

"Excellent," said Barrent.

"None have made the break so far," the man said. "Strange that Hunteds
rarely think of it. But of course, it saves us from having to use the
machines."

Barrent wondered what the man was talking about. The break? Where was
there to break to? And how would machines be used?

"We're already selecting alternates for the Games," the man added. "I'd
like to have your approval of the list."

"Use your own judgment," Barrent said.

"Yes, sir," the man said. In a moment, Barrent heard his footsteps
moving down the hall. He decided that the man had become suspicious. The
conversation had lasted too long, he should have broken it off earlier.
Perhaps he should move to a different office.

Before he could do anything, there was a heavy pounding at the door.

"Yes?"

"Citizen's Search Committee," a bass voice answered. "Kindly open the
door. We have reason to believe that a Hunted is hiding in there."

"Nonsense," Barrent said. "You can't come in. This is a government
office."

"We can," the bass voice said. "No room, office, or building is closed
to a Citizen on Hunt Day. Are you opening up?"

Barrent had already moved to the window. He opened it, and heard behind
him the sound of men hammering at the door. He fired through the door
twice to give them something to think about; then he climbed out through
the window.

       *       *       *       *       *

The rooftops of Tetrahyde, Barrent saw at once, looked like a perfect
place for a Hunted; therefore they were the last place a Hunted should
be. The maze of closely connected roofs, chimneys, and spires seemed
made to order for a chase; but men were already on the roofs. They
shouted when they saw him.

Barrent broke into a sprint. Hunters were behind him, and others were
closing in from the sides. He leaped a five-foot gap between buildings,
managed to hold his balance on a steeply pitched roof, and scrambled
around the side.

Panic gave him speed. He was leaving the Hunters behind. If he could
keep up the pace for another ten minutes, he would have a substantial
lead. He might be able to leave the roofs and find a better place for
concealment.

Another five-foot gap between buildings came up. Barrent leaped it
without hesitation.

He landed well. But his right foot went completely through rotted
shingles, burying itself to the hip. He braced himself and pulled,
trying to extricate his leg, but he couldn't get a purchase on the
steep, crumbling roof.

"There he is!"

Barrent wrenched at the shingles with both hands. The Hunters were
almost within needlebeam distance. By the time he got his leg out, he
would be an easy target.

He had ripped a three-foot hole in the roof by the time the Hunters
appeared on the next building. Barrent pulled his leg free; then, seeing
no alternative, he jumped into the hole.

For a second he was in the air; then he landed feet-first on a table
which collapsed under him, spilling him to the floor. He got up and saw
that he was in a Hadji-class living room. An old woman sat in a rocking
chair less than three feet away. Her jaw was slack with terror; she kept
on rocking automatically.

Barrent heard the Hunters crossing to the roof. He went through the
kitchen and out the back door, under a tangle of clotheslines and
through a small hedge. Someone fired at him from a second-story window.
Looking up, he saw a young boy trying to aim a heavy heat beamer. His
father had probably forbidden him to hunt in the streets.

Barrent turned into a street, and sprinted until he reached an alley. It
looked familiar. He realized that he was in the Mutant Quarter, not far
from Myla's house.

He could hear the cries of the Hunters behind him. He reached Myla's
house, and found the door unlocked.

       *       *       *       *       *

They were all together--the one-eyed man, the bald old woman, and Myla.
They showed no surprise at his entrance.

"So they picked you in the Lottery," the old man said. "Well, it's what
we expected."

Barrent asked, "Did Myla skren it in the water?"

"There was no need to," the old man said. "It was quite predictable,
considering the sort of person you are. Bold but not ruthless. That's
your trouble, Barrent."

The old man had dropped the obligatory form of address for a Privileged
Citizen; and that, under the circumstances, was predictable, too.

"I've seen it happen year after year," the old man said. "You'd be
surprised how many promising young men like yourself end up in this
room, out of breath, holding a needlebeam as though it weighed a ton
with Hunters three minutes behind them. They expect us to help them, but
mutants like to stay out of trouble."

"Shut up, Dem," the old woman said.

"I guess we have to help you," Dem said. "Myla's decided on it for
reasons of her own." He grinned sardonically. "Her mother and I told her
she was wrong, but she insisted. And since she's the only one of us who
can skren, we must let her have her own way."

Myla said, "Even with us helping you, there's very little chance that
you'll live through the Hunt."

"If I'm killed," Barrent said, "how will your prediction come true?
Remember, you saw me looking at my own corpse, and it was in shiny
fragments."

"I remember," Myla said. "But your death won't affect the prediction. If
it doesn't happen to you in this lifetime, it will simply catch up to
you in a different incarnation."

Barrent was not comforted. He asked, "What should I do?"

The old man handed him an armful of rags. "Put these on, and I'll go to
work on your face. You, my friend, are going to become a mutant."

       *       *       *       *       *

In a short time, Barrent was back on the street. He was dressed in rags.
Beneath them he was holding his needlebeam, and in his free hand was a
begging cup. The old man had worked lavishly with a pinkish-yellow
plastic. Barrent's face was now monstrously swollen at the forehead, and
his nose was flat and spread out almost to the cheekbones. The shape of
his face had been altered, and the livid hunt-marks were hidden.

A detachment of Hunters raced past, barely giving him a glance. Barrent
began to feel more hopeful. He had gained valuable time. The last light
of Omega's watery sun was disappearing below the horizon. Night would
give him additional opportunities, and with any luck he could elude the
Hunters until dawn. After that were the Games, of course; but Barrent
wasn't planning on taking part in them. If his disguise was good enough
to protect him from an entire hunting city, there was no reason why he
should be captured for the Games.

Perhaps, after the holiday was over, he could appear again in Omegan
society. Quite possibly if he managed to survive the Hunt and altogether
escape the Games, he would be especially rewarded. Such a presumptuous
and successful breaking of the law would have to be rewarded....

He saw another group of Hunters coming toward him. There were five in
the group, and with them was Tem Rend, looking somber and proud in his
new Assassin's uniform.

"You!" one of the Hunters shouted. "Have you seen a Quarry pass this
way?"

"No, Citizen," Barrent said, bowing his head respectfully, his
needlebeam ready under his rags.

"Don't believe him," a man said. "These damned mutants never tell us a
thing."

"Come on, we'll find him," another man said. The group moved away, but
Tem Rend stayed behind.

"You sure you haven't seen one of the Hunted go by here?" Rend asked.

"Positive, Citizen," Barrent said, wondering if Rend had recognized him.
He didn't want to kill him; in fact, he wasn't sure he could, for Rend's
reflexes were uncannily fast. Right now, Rend's needlebeam was hanging
loosely from his hand, while Barrent's was already aimed. That
split-second advantage might cancel out Rend's superior speed and
accuracy. But if it came to conclusions, Barrent thought, it would
probably be a tie; in which case, they would more than likely kill each
other.

"Well," Rend said, "if you _do_ see any of the Hunted, tell them not to
disguise themselves as mutants."

"Why not?"

"That trick never works for long," Rend said evenly. "It gives a man
about an hour's grace. Then the informers spot him. Now if _I_ were
being hunted, I might use mutant's disguise. But I wouldn't just sit on
a curbstone with it. I'd make a break out of Tetrahyde."

"You would?"

"Most certainly. A few Hunteds every year escape into the mountains. The
officials won't talk about it, of course, and most citizens don't know.
But the Assassin's Guild keeps complete records of every trick, device,
and escape ever used. It's part of our business."

"That's very interesting," Barrent said. He knew that Rend had seen
through his disguise. Tem was being a good neighbor--though a bad
assassin.

"Of course," Rend said, "it isn't easy to get out of the city. And once
a man's out, that doesn't mean he's clear. There are Hunter patrols to
watch out for, and even worse than that--"

Rend stopped abruptly. A group of Hunters were coming toward them. Rend
nodded pleasantly and walked off.

After the Hunters had passed, Barrent got up and started walking. Rend
had given him good advice. Of course some men would escape from the
city. Life in Omega's barren mountains would be extremely difficult; but
any difficulty was better than death.

If he were able to get by the city gate, he would have to watch for the
hunting patrols. And Tem had mentioned something worse. Barrent
wondered what that was. Special mountain-trained Hunters, perhaps?
Omega's unstable climate? Deadly flora and fauna? He wished Rend had
been able to finish the sentence.

By nightfall he had reached the South Gate. Bent painfully over, he
hobbled toward the guard detachment that blocked his way out.




Chapter Seventeen


There was no trouble with the guards. Whole families of mutants were
streaming out of the city, seeking the protection of the mountains until
the frenzy of the Hunt was over. Barrent attached himself to one of
these groups, and soon he found himself a mile past Tetrahyde, in the
low foothills that curled in a semicircle around the city.

The mutants stopped here and made their camp. Barrent went on, and by
midnight he was starting up the rocky, windswept slope of one of the
higher mountains. He was hungry, but the cool, clear air was
exhilarating. He began to believe that he really would live through the
Hunt.

He heard a noisy group of Hunters making a sweep around the mountain. He
avoided them easily in the darkness, and continued climbing. Soon there
was no sound except the steady rush of wind across the cliffs. It was
perhaps two in the morning; only three more hours until dawn.

In the small hours of the morning it began to rain, lightly at first,
then in a cold torrent. This was predictable weather for Omega.
Predictable also were the towering thunderheads that formed over the
mountains, the rolling thunder, and the vivid yellow flashes of
lightning. Barrent found shelter in a shallow cave, and counted himself
lucky that the temperature had not yet plunged.

He sat in the cave, half-dozing, the remnants of his makeup running down
his face, keeping a sleepy watch over the slope of the mountain below
him. Then, in the brilliant illumination of a lightning flash, he saw
something moving up the slope, heading directly toward his cave.

He stood up, the needlebeam ready, and waited for another lightning
flash. It came, and now he could see the cold, wet gleam of metal, a
flashing of red and green lights, a pair of metal tentacles taking grips
on the rocks and small shrubs of the mountainside.

It was a machine similar to the one Barrent had fought in the cellars of
the Department of Justice. Now he knew what Rend had wanted to warn him
about. And he could see why few of the Hunted escaped, even if they got
beyond the city itself. This time, Max would not be operating at random
to make a more equal contest out of it. And there would be no exposed
fuse box.

As Max came within range, Barrent fired. The blast bounced harmlessly
off the machine's armored hide. Barrent left the shelter of his cave and
began to climb.

The machine came steadily behind him, up the treacherous wet face of the
mountain. Barrent tried to lose it on a plateau of jagged boulders, but
Max couldn't be shaken. Barrent realized that the machine must be
following a scent of some kind; probably it was keyed to follow the
indelible paint on Barrent's face.

On a steep face of the mountain, Barrent rolled boulders onto the
machine, hoping he could start an avalanche. Max dodged most of the
flying rocks, and let the rest bounce off him, with no visible effect.

At last Barrent was backed into a narrow, steep-sided angle of cliff. He
was unable to climb any higher. He waited. When the machine loomed over
him, he held the needlebeam against its metal hide and held down the
trigger.

Max shuddered for a moment under the impact of the needlebeam's full
charge. Then it brushed the weapon away and wrapped a tentacle around
Barrent's neck. The metal coils tightened. Barrent felt himself losing
consciousness. He had time to wonder whether the coils would strangle
him or break his neck.

Suddenly the pressure was gone. The machine had backed away a few feet.
Past it, Barrent could see the first gray light of dawn.

He had lived through the Hunt. The machine was not programmed to kill
him after dawn. But it wouldn't let him go. It kept him captive in the
narrow angle of the cliff until the Hunters came.

They brought Barrent back to Tetrahyde, where a wildly applauding crowd
gave him a hero's welcome. After a two-hour procession, Barrent and four
other survivors were taken to the office of the Awards Committee. The
Chairman made a short and moving speech about the skill and courage each
had shown in surviving the Hunt. He gave each of them the rank of Hadji,
and presented them with the tiny golden earrings which showed their
status.

