Koa spoke for the Planeteers. "We're the ones to say thanks, sir. If you
hadn't thought of stalling the cruiser, and if you hadn't stayed behind to
give us time, we'd have some casualties, and so would the Connies we
captured."

"There wasn't anything else I could do," Rip replied. "Come on, Koa. Let's
see what the cruiser is doing."

They stepped outside. The metal was already cold again. Things didn't stay
hot in the vacuum of space.

They didn't see the Connie until the fire of its exhaust suddenly blasted
above the horizon, then they ducked for cover. The cruiser had taken a
swing at the other side of the asteroid. They peered out again and saw it
making a turn to come back.

"He won't get us," Rip said confidently. "Our tough time will come when he
sends a fleet of snapper-boats."

"We'll get a few," Koa replied grimly. "Wait! What's he doing?"

The cruiser had started for the asteroid. Suddenly jets flamed from every
quarter of the ship. He was using all steering jets at once! Rip watched,
bewildered, as the great ship spun slowly, advanced, then settled to a
stop just at the horizon.

"He can't be launching boats already," he said worriedly. "What's he up
to?"

They ran forward a short distance until they could see below the cave's
horizon level. The cruiser released exhausts from both sides of the ship,
the outer ones the slightest bit stronger. Rip exclaimed, "Great Cosmos,
he's cuddling right up to the asteroid! Why?"

"Hiding," Koa said. "By Gemini! Come on, sir!"

Rip saw his meaning instantly and they raced to the side of the asteroid,
away from the ship. As they crossed into the dark half, Rip looked back.
He couldn't see the cruiser from here. But he looked out into space,
across the horizon, and knew that Koa's guess had been right. The
distinctive glow of a nuclear drive cruiser was clear among the stars.

The _Scorpius_ had returned!

"The Connie saw it," Rip said worriedly, "but didn't blast away. That
means he's intending to ambush the _Scorpius_. Koa, if he does, that means
war."

The big Hawaiian shook his head. "Sir, the Connie has guided missiles with
atomic warheads just like our ship does. If he can launch one from ambush
and hit our ship, that's the end of it. The _Scorpius_ will be nothing but
space junk. Commander O'Brine will never have time to get off a message,
because he'll be dead before he knows there is danger."

The logic of it sent chill fear down Rip's spine. The Connie could get the
_Scorpius_ with one nuclear blast and then clean up the asteroid at
leisure. The Federation would suspect, but it would be unable to prove
anything, because there would be no witnesses. If the Connie took time to
tow the remains of the _Scorpius_ deep into the asteroid belt, it likely
would never be found, no matter how the Federation searched.

They had to warn the ship. But how? Their helmet communicators wouldn't
reach it until it was right at the asteroid, and that would be too late.
They had no other radio. If only the radios in the snapper-boats were on a
Federation frequency ... hey! They could take one of the boats and
intercept the cruiser!

He was hurrying toward them before Koa understood what he was saying. He
tried to make his legs go faster, but they were unsteady. He knew he was
losing blood. He had lost plenty. He gritted his teeth and kept going.

The snapper-boats seemed miles away to Rip, but he plugged ahead until his
belt light picked them up. He took a long look, then turned away,
heartsick. The Connie's exhaust had charred them into wreckage.

"Now what?" he asked.

"I don't know, sir," Koa answered somberly.

They went back to the cave, not hurrying because Rip no longer had the
strength to hurry. Weakness and a deep desire to sleep almost overcame
him, and he knew that he was finished anyway. His wound must be too deep
to clot, which meant it would bleed until he bled to death. Whether he
warned the _Scorpius_ or not, his end was the same.

Back in the cave, he leaned against the wall and asked tiredly, "How is
Dominico?"

"I am fine, sir. My wound stopped bleeding."

"How is the Connie I got?"

"Unconscious, sir," Santos replied. "He must be bleeding badly, but we
can't tell. The one you landed on is all right now, but he may have a
broken rib or two."

Because his voice was weak, Rip had to turn up the volume on his
communicator to tell the Planeteers about the _Scorpius_. They were silent
when he finished, then Dowst spoke up.

"Looks like they have us, sir. But we'll take plenty of them with us
before we're finished."

"That's the spirit," Rip approved. He told them, "I won't last much
longer. When I get too weak, Koa will take over. Meanwhile, I want to get
outside. Bring the rocket launcher outside, too. Who's the gunner? Santos?
Stand by, then. We'll need you in case the Connie decides to send a few
snappers before it goes after the _Scorpius_."

The cruiser's glow was plain above the horizon, now. It was so close they
could make out its form against the background of stars. O'Brine was
decelerating and Rip was certain he was watching his screens for a sign of
the enemy. He would see nothing, because the enemy was in the shadow of
the asteroid. He would think the coast was clear, and come to a stop near
by while he asked why Rip had called for help. Failing to get a reply,
since the landing boat was wrecked, he would send a landing party, and the
Connie would attack while he was launching boats, off guard.

Rip watched the prediction come true. The nuclear cruiser slowed
gradually, its great bulk nearing the asteroid. O'Brine was operating as
expected.

Rip was having trouble keeping his vision from blurring. He leaned against
the rocket launcher and his glove caressed one of the sharp noses in the
rack.

He heard his own voice before the idea had even taken full form. "Santos!
Do you hear me? Santos! Get the _Scorpius_! Fire before it comes to a
stop. And don't miss!"

Santos started to protest, but Koa bellowed, "Do it. The lieutenant's
right. It's the only chance we've got to warn the ship. Get that scorpion,
Santos. Dead amidships!"

The Filipino corporal swung into action. His space gloves flew as he
cranked the launcher around, turned on the illuminated sight and bent low
over it. Rip stood behind the corporal. He saw the cruiser's shape stand
out in the glow of the sight, saw the sighting rings move as Santos
corrected for its speed.

The corporal fired. Fire flared back past his shoulder. The rocket flashed
away, its trail dwindling as it sped toward the great bulk above. It
reached brennschluss and there was darkness. Rip held his breath for long
seconds, then he gave a weak cry of victory.

A blossom of orange fire marked a perfect hit.





CHAPTER ELEVEN - HARD WORDS FOR O'BRINE


The _Scorpius_ could have taken direct hits with little or no major damage
from a hundred rockets of the kind Rip had used, but Commander O'Brine
took no chances. When the alarm bell signaled that the outer hull had been
hit, the commander acted instantly with a bellowed order.

The Planeteers on the asteroid blinked with the speed of the cruiser's
getaway. Fire flamed from the stern tubes for an instant and then there
was nothing but a fading glow where the _Scorpius_ had been.

Rip had a mental image of everything movable in the ship crashing against
bulkheads with the terrific acceleration.

And in the same moment, the Consops cruiser reacted. The Connie commander
was ready to fire guided missiles, when his target suddenly, mysteriously
blasted into space at optimum acceleration. There was only one reason the
Connie could imagine: his cruiser had been spotted. The ambush had failed.
It was one thing for the Connie to lie in ambush for a single, deadly
surprise blast at the Federation cruiser. It was quite another to face the
nuclear drive ship with its missile ports cleared for action. The Connie
knew he had lost.

Rip and the Planeteers saw the Consops ship suddenly flame away, then turn
and dive for low space below the asteroid belt in a direction opposite the
one the _Scorpius_ had taken. The helmet communicators rang with their
cheers.

The young officer clapped Santos on the shoulder and exclaimed weakly,
"Good shooting!"

The corporal turned anxiously to Koa. "The lieutenant's pretty weak. Can't
we do something?"

"Forget it," Rip said. There was nothing anyone could do. He was trapped
inside his space suit. There was nothing anyone could do for his wound
until he got into air.

Koa untied his safety line and moved to Rip's side. "Sir, this is
dangerous, but there's just as much danger without. I'm going to tie off
that arm."

Rip knew what Koa meant. He stood quietly as the big sergeant-major put
the line around his arm above the wound, then put his massive strength
into the task of pulling the line tight. The heavy fabric of the suit was
stiff, and the air pressure gave further resistance that had to be
overcome. Rip let most of the air out of the suit, then fought for breath
until the pain in his arm told him that Koa had succeeded. He inflated the
suit again and thanked the sergeant-major weakly.

The tight line stopped the bleeding, but it also cut off the air
circulation. Without the air, the heating system couldn't operate
efficiently. It was only a matter of time before the arm froze.

"Stand easy," Rip told his men. "Nothing to do now but wait. The
_Scorpius_ will be back." He set an example by leaning against the thorium
crystal in which the cave was located. It was a natural but meaningless
gesture. With no gravity pulling at them they could remain standing
indefinitely, sleeping upright.

Rip closed his eyes and relaxed. The pain in his arm was less now, and he
knew the cold was setting in. He was getting light-headed, and most of all
he wanted to sleep. Well, why not? He slumped a little inside the suit.

He awoke with Koa shaking him violently. Rip stood upright and shook his
head to clear his vision. "What is it?"

"Sir, the _Scorpius_ has returned."

Rip blinked as he stared out into space to where Koa was pointing. He had
trouble focusing his eyes at first, and then he saw the glow of the
cruiser.

"Good," he said. "They'll send a landing boat first thing."

"I hope so," Koa replied.

Rip wanted to ask why the big Planeteer doubted, but he was too tired to
phrase the question. He contented himself with watching the cruiser.

In a short time the _Scorpius_ was balanced with nose tubes counteracting
the thrust of stern tubes, ready to flash into space again at a second's
notice.

Rip watched, puzzled. The cruiser was miles away. Why didn't it come any
closer? Then, suddenly, it erupted a dozen fiery streaks.

"Snapper-boats," someone gasped.

Rip jerked fully awake. In the ruddy glow of the fighting rockets' tubes
he had seen that the cruiser's missile ports were yawning wide, ready to
spew forth deadly nuclear charges.

The snapper-boats flashed toward the asteroid in a group, sheered off, and
broke formation. They came back in pairs, streaking space with the sparks
of their exhausts.

"Into the cave," Koa shouted.

The Planeteers obeyed instantly. Koa took Rip's arm, to lead him inside,
but the young officer shook him off. "No, Koa. I'll take my chances out
here. I want to see what they're up to."

"Great Cosmos, sir! They'll go over this rock like Martian beetles. You'll
get it for sure."

"Get inside," Rip ordered. He gathered strength enough to make his voice
firm. "I'm staying here until I figure out some way to call them off. We
can't just stand here and let them blast us. They're our own men."

"Then I'm staying, too," Koa stated.

A pair of snapper-boats flashed overhead, and vanished below the horizon.
Two more swept past from another direction.

Rip watched, curious. What were they up to? Another pair quartered past
them at high speed, then two more. The dozen boats seemed to be
criss-crossing the asteroid in a definite pattern. Why?

A pair streaked past, and something sped downward from one of them,
trailing yellow flame. It exploded in a ball of molten fire that licked
across the asteroid in waves. Rip tensed, then saw that the chemical would
burn out before it reached them.

"Fire bomb," Koa muttered.

Rip nodded. He had recognized it. The Planeteers were trained in the use
of fire bombs, tanks of chemicals that burned even in an airless world.
They were equipped with simple jets for use in space.

The snapper-boats drew off, back toward the _Scorpius_. Rip watched,
searching for some reason for their actions. Then one of the boats pulled
away from the others. It returned to the asteroid with stern jet burning
fitfully.

"Is he landing?" Koa asked.

Rip didn't know. The snapper-boat was moving slowly enough to make a
landing.

Directly over the asteroid it changed direction, circled, and returned
over their heads. Rip could almost have picked it off with a pistol shot.
Santos could have blasted it into space dust with one rocket.

The snapper-boat changed direction, and for a fraction of a second stern
and side tubes "fought" each other, making the boat yaw wildly, then it
straightened out on a new course.

        [Illustration: "They're Using Fire Bombs," Muttered Koa.]

                "They're Using Fire Bombs," Muttered Koa.


Koa exclaimed, "That's a drone!"

Rip got it then. A pilotless snapper-boat! That's why its actions were a
little uneven. Only one thing could explain its deliberate slowness. It
was bait. The _Scorpius_ had sent piloted snapper-boats over the asteroid
at high speed, criss-crossing in order to cover the thorium world
completely, expecting to have the unknown rocketeer fire at them. Then a
fire bomb had been dropped as a further means of getting the asteroid to
fire. But no rockets had been fired from the asteroid, so the pilot in
control of the drone had sent it at low speed, a perfect target.

That meant O'Brine wasn't sure of what was going on. He must have seen the
blip on his screen as the Connie cruiser flamed off, Rip reasoned. But the
commander probably suspected that the Connies had overcome the Planeteers
and were in control of the asteroid. He had sent the snapper-boats to try
and draw fire in an attempt to find out more surely whether Planeteers or
Connies had the thorium rock.

"The _Scorpius_ doesn't know what's going on," Rip told his Planeteers.
"O'Brine didn't know the cruiser was waiting to ambush him, so the rocket
we fired made him think the Connies had taken us over."

He put himself in O'Brine's place. What would his next step be? The
snapper-boats hadn't drawn fire, even when a drone was sent over at low
speed. The next thing would be to send a piloted boat over slowly enough
to take a look.

Rip hoped O'Brine would hurry. There was no longer any feeling in his arm
below Koa's safety line. That meant the arm had frozen. He had to get
medical attention from the _Scorpius_ pretty soon.

He gritted his teeth. At least he was no longer losing blood. He wasn't
getting any weaker. But every now and then his vision fogged and he had to
shake his head to clear it.

The pilotless snapper-boat made another slow run, then put on speed and
flashed back to the group of boats near the cruiser. Another boat detached
itself from the squadron and moved toward the asteroid.

Rip wished for a communicator powerful enough to reach the _Scorpius_, but
knew it was useless to try with his helmet circuit. The carrier waves of
the snapper-boats were on the same frequency, and they would smother the
faint signal from his bubble.

But the boats might be able to hear if they got close enough! He had a
swift memory of the communications circuits. The pilots were plugged into
their boat communicators. If a boat got near enough, he could turn up his
bubble to full volume and yell. Not only would the boat pilot hear him,
but his voice would go through the pilot's circuit and be heard in the
