peering along the sand path which curved in toward the balcony and
vanished beneath it, below the point where Trigger stood.

It was sheer fright which immobilized her at first. Because there was
not anything really human about that small, squat, manshaped figure. A
dwarfish yellow demon he seemed, evil and menacing. The garden, she
realized suddenly, might be an illusion scene. Or else--

The thing moved in that instant. It became a blur of motion along the
curving path and disappeared under the balcony. After a second or so she
heard the sound of a door closing some distance away. The garden lay
still again.

Trigger stayed where she was, her knees shaking a little. The fright
appeared to have driven every trace of nausea out of her, and gradually
her heartbeat began to return to normal. She took three cautious steps
forward to the balcony railing, where the tip of a swaying green tree
branch was in reach.

She put her hand out hesitantly, felt the smooth vegetable texture of a
leaf, grasped it, pulled it away. She moved back to the door and
examined the leaf. It was a quite real leaf. Thin sap formed a bead of
amber moisture at the break in the stalk as she looked at it.

No illusion structure could be elaborated to that extent.

So she'd just had her first dive hallucination--and it had been a dilly!

Trigger dropped the leaf, pushed shakily at the balcony door, and
stepped back through the black-light screen into the reassuring murmur
of human voices in the gambling room.

An hour later, the ship's loudspeaker system went on. It announced that
the Dawn City would surface in fifteen minutes because of gravitic
disturbances, and proceed the rest of the way to Evalee in normal space,
arriving approximately five hours behind schedule. Rest cubicle
passengers would not be disturbed, unless this was specifically
requested by a qualified associate.

Trigger turned her attention back to her viewer, feeling rather
relieved. She hadn't experienced any further hallucinations, or other
indications of subspace distress; but the one she'd had would do her for
a while. The little viewer library she was in was otherwise deserted,
and she'd been going about her studies there just the least bit
nervously.

Subject of the studies were the Hub's principal games of chance. She'd
identified a few of those she'd been watching--and one of them did look
as if someone who went at it with an intelligent understanding of the
odds--

A part of Trigger kept tut-tutting and shaking its head at such reckless
notions. But another part pointed out that they couldn't be much worse
off financially than they were right now. So what if they arrived in
Manon dead-broke instead of practically? Besides, there was the problem
of remaining inconspicuous till they got there. On the Dawn City no one
whose wardrobe was limited to one Automatic Sales dress was going to
remain inconspicuous very long.

Trigger-in-toto went on calculating the odds for various possible play
combinations. She developed her first betting system, presently
discovered several holes in it, and began to develop another.

The loudspeaker system went on again. She was too absorbed to pay much
attention to it at first. Then she suddenly straightened up and
listened, frowning.

The man speaking now was the liner's First Security Officer. He was
being very polite and regretful. Under Section such and such, Number so
and so, of the Federation's Legal Code, a cabin by cabin search of the
passenger area of the Dawn City had become necessary. The persons of
passengers would not be searched. Passengers might, if they wished, be
present while their cabins were inspected; but this was not required.
Baggage need not be opened, providing its spyproofing was not activated.
Any information revealed by the search which did not pertain to a
violation of the Code Section and Number in question would not be
recorded and could not be introduced as future legal evidence under any
circumstances. Complaints regarding the search could be addressed to any
Planetary Moderator's office.

This wasn't good at all! Trigger stood up. The absence of luggage in her
cabin mightn't arouse more than passing interest in the searchers. Her
gun was a different matter. Discreet inquiries regarding a female
passenger who carried a double-barreled sporting Denton might be one of
the check methods used by the Scout Intelligence boys if they started
thinking of liners which recently had left Maccadon in connection with
Trigger's disappearance. There weren't likely to be more than two or
three guns of that type on board, and it was almost certain that she
would be the only woman who owned one.

She'd better go get the Denton immediately ... and then vanish again
into the public sections of the ship! Some Security officer with a good
memory and a habit of noticing faces might identify her otherwise from
the news viewer pictures taken on Manon.

And he just might start wondering then why she was traveling as Birna
Drellgannoth--and start to check.

She paused long enough to get the Legal Code article referred to into
the viewer.

Somebody on board appeared to have got himself murdered.

She reached the cabin too late. A couple of young Security men already
were going over it. Trigger said hello pleasantly. It was too bad, but
it wasn't their fault. They just had a job to do.

They smiled back at her, apologized for the intrusion and went on with
their business. She sat down and watched them. The Denton was there in
plain sight. Dropping it into her purse now would be more likely to fix
it in their memory than leaving it where it was.

The gadgets they were using were in concealing casings, and she couldn't
guess what they were looking for by the way they used them. It didn't
seem that either of them was trying to haul up an identifying memory
about her. They did look a little surprised when the second cabin closet
was opened and found to be as empty as the first; but no comments were
made about that. Two minutes after Trigger had come in, they were
finished and bowed themselves out of the cabin again. They turned then
toward the cabin occupied by the ancient retainers of the Askab of
Elfkund.

Trigger left her door open. This she wanted to hear, if she could.

She heard. The Elfkund door also stayed open, while the racket beyond it
grew shriller by the moment. Finally a ComWeb chimed. A feminine voice
spoke sternly. The Quavering outcries subsided. It looked as if Security
had been obliged to call on someone higher up in the Elfkund entourage
to come to its aid. Trigger closed her door grinning.

On the screen of her secluded library, she presently watched a great
port shuttle swing in from Evalee to meet the hovering Dawn City. It
would bring another five hundred or so passengers on board and take off
the few who had merely been making the short run from Maccadon to Evalee
in style. Solidopic operators were quite likely to be on the shuttle, so
she had decided to keep away from the entry area.

The transfer operation was carried out very expeditiously, probably to
make up for some of the time lost on the surface. When the shuttle
shoved off, the loudspeaker announced that normal space flight would be
maintained till after the stopover at Garth. Trigger wandered
thoughtfully back to her cabin. She closed the door behind her.

Then she saw the man sitting by the ComWeb cabinet. Her breath sucked
in. She crouched a little, ready to wheel and bolt.

"Take it easy, Trigger!" Major Quillan said. He was in civilian clothes,
of rather dudish cut.

Trigger swallowed. There was, too obviously, no place to bolt to. "How
did you find me?"

He shrugged. "Longish story. You're not under arrest."

"I'm not?"

"No," said Quillan. "When we get to Manon, the Commissioner will have a
suggestion to make to you."

"Suggestion?" Trigger said warily.

"I believe you're to take back your old Precol job in Manon, but as
cover for your participation in our little project. If you agree to it."

"What if I don't?"

He shrugged again. "It seems you'll be writing your own ticket from here
on out."

Trigger stared at him, wondering. "Why?"

Quillan grinned. "New instructions have been handed down," he said. "If
you're still curious, ask Whatzzit."

"Oh," Trigger said. "Then why are you here?"

"I," said Quillan, "am to make damn sure you get to Manon. I brought a
few people with me."

"Mihul, too?" Trigger asked, a shade diffidently.

"No. She's on Maccadon."

"Is she--how's she doing?"

"Doing all right," Quillan said. "She sends her regards and says a
little less heft on the next solar plexus you torpedo should be good
enough."

Trigger flushed. "She isn't sore, is she?"

"Not the way you mean," he considered. "Not many people have jumped
Mihul successfully. In her cockeyed way, she seemed pretty proud of her
student."

Trigger felt the flush deepen. "I got her off her guard," she said.

"Obviously," said Quillan. "In any ordinary argument she could pull your
legs off and tie you up with them. Still, that wasn't bad. Have you
talked to anybody since you came on board?"

"Just the room stewardess. And a couple of old ladies in the next
cabin."

"Yeah," he said. "Couple of old ladies. What did you talk about?"

Trigger recounted the conversation. He reflected, nodded and stood up.

"I put a couple of suitcases in that closet over there," he said. "Your
personal stuff is in them, de-tracered. Another thing--somebody checked
over your finances and came to the conclusion you're broke."

"Not exactly broke," said Trigger.

Quillan reached into a pocket, pulled out an envelope and laid it on the
cabinet. "Here's a little extra spending money then," he said. "The
balance of your Precol pay to date. I had it picked up on Evalee this
morning. Seven hundred twenty-eight FC."

"Thanks," Trigger said. "I can use some of that."

They stood looking at each other.

"Any questions?" he asked.

"Sure," Trigger said. "But you wouldn't answer them."

"Try me, doll," said Quillan. "But let's shift operations to the
fanciest cocktail lounge on this thing before you start. I feel like
relaxing a little. For just one girl, you've given us a fairly rough
time these last forty-eight hours!"

"I'm sorry," Trigger said.

"I'll bet," said Quillan.

Trigger glanced at the closet. If he'd brought everything along, there
was a dress in one of those suitcases that would have been a little too
daring for Maccadon. It should, therefore, be just about right for a
cocktail lounge on the Dawn City; and she hadn't had a chance to wear it
yet. "Give me ten minutes to change."

"Fine." Quillan started toward the door. "By the way, I'm your neighbor
now."

"The cabin at the end of the hall?" she asked startled.

"That's right." He smiled at her. "I'll be back in ten minutes."

Well, that was going to be cosy! Trigger found the dress, shook it out
and slipped into it, enormously puzzled but also enormously relieved.
That Whatzzit!

Freshening up her make-up, she wondered how he had induced the Elfkund
ladies to leave. Perhaps he'd managed to have a better cabin offered to
them. It must be convenient to have that kind of a pull.





12


"Well, we didn't just leave it up to them," Quillan said. "Ship's
Engineering spotted a radiation leak in their cabin. Slight but
definite. They got bundled out in a squawking hurry." He added, "They
did get a better cabin though."

"Might have been less trouble to get me to move," Trigger remarked.

"Might have been. I didn't know what mood you'd be in."

Trigger decided to let that ride. This cocktail lounge was a very
curious place. By the looks of it, there were thirty or forty people in
their immediate vicinity; but if one looked again in a couple of
minutes, there might be an entirely different thirty or forty people
around. Sitting in easy chairs or at tables, standing about in small
groups, talking, drinking, laughing, they drifted past slowly; overhead,
below, sometimes tilted at odd angles--fading from sight and presently
returning.

In actual fact she and Quillan were in a little room by themselves, and
with more than ordinary privacy via an audio block and a reconstruct
scrambler which Quillan had switched on at their entry. "I'll leave us
out of the viewer circuit," he remarked, "until you've finished your
questions."

"Viewer circuit?" she repeated.

Quillan waved a hand around. "That," he said. "There are more commercial
and industrial spies, political agents, top-class confidence men and
whatnot on board this ship than you'd probably believe. A good
percentage of them are pretty fair lip readers, and the things you want
to talk about are connected with the Federation's hottest current
secret. So while it's a downright crime not to put you on immediate
display in a place like this, we won't take the chance."

Trigger let that ride too. A group had materialized at an oblong table
eight feet away while Quillan was speaking. Everybody at the table
seemed fairly high, and two of the couples were embarrassingly amorous;
but she couldn't quite picture any of them as somebody's spies or
agents. She listened to the muted chatter. Some Hub dialect she didn't
know.

"None of those people can see or hear us then?" she asked.

"Not until we want them to. Viewer gives you as much privacy as you
like. Most of the crowd here just doesn't see much point to privacy.
Like those two."

Trigger followed his glance. At a tilted angle above them, a matched
pair of black-haired, black-gowned young sirens sat at a small table,
sipping their drinks, looking languidly around.

"Twins," Trigger said.

"No," said Quillan. "That's Blent and Company."

"Oh?"

"Blent's a lady of leisure and somewhat excessively narcissistic
tendencies," he explained. He gave the matched pair another brief study.
"Perhaps one can't really blame her. One of them's her facsimile.
Blent--whichever it is--is never without her face."

"Oh," Trigger said. She'd been studying the gowns. "That," she said, a
trifle enviously, "is why I'm not at all eager to go on display here."

"Eh?" said Quillan.

Trigger turned to regard herself in the wall mirror on the right, which,
she had noticed, remained carefully unobscured by drifting viewers and
viewees. A thoughtful touch on the lounge management's part.

"Until we walked in here," she explained, "I thought this was a pretty
sharp little outfit I'm wearing."

"Hmmm," Quillan said judiciously. He made a detailed appraisal of the
mirror image of the slim, green, backless, half-thigh-length sheath
which had looked so breath-taking and seductive in a Ceyce display
window. Trigger's eyes narrowed a little. The major had appraised the
dress in detail before.

"It's about as sharp a little outfit as you could get for around a
hundred and fifty credits," he remarked. "Most of the items the girls
are sporting here are personality conceptions. That starts at around ten
to twenty times as high. I wasn't talking about displaying the dress.
Now what were those questions?"

Trigger took a small sip of her drink, considering. She hadn't made up
her mind about Major Quillan, but until she could evaluate him more
definitely, it might be best to go by appearances. The appearances so
far indicated small sips in his company.

"How did you people find me so quickly?" she asked.

"Next time you want to sneak off a civilized planet," Quillan advised
her, "pick something like a small freighter. Or hire a small-boat to get
you out of the system and flag down a freighter for you. Plenty of tramp
captains will make a space stop to pick up a paying passenger. Liners we
can check."

"Sorry," Trigger said meekly. "I'm still new at this business."

"And thank God for that!" said Quillan. "If you have the time and the
money, it's also a good idea, of course, to zig a few times before you
zag towards where you're really heading. Actually, I suppose, the credit
for picking you up so fast should go to those collating computers."

