
CHAPTER VII

DuQuesne's Voyage


Far from our solar system a cigar-shaped space-car slackened its
terrific acceleration to a point at which human beings could walk, and
two men got up, exercised vigorously to restore the circulation to their
numbed bodies, and went into the galley to prepare their meal--the first
since leaving the Earth some eight hours or more before.

Because of the long and arduous journey he had decided upon, DuQuesne
had had to abandon his custom of working alone, and had studied all the
available men with great care before selecting his companion and relief
pilot. He finally had chosen "Baby Doll" Loring--so called because of
his curly yellow hair, his pink and white complexion, his guileless blue
eyes, his slight form of rather less than medium height. But never did
outward attributes more belie the inner man! The yellow curls covered a
brain agile, keen, and hard; the girlish complexion neither paled nor
reddened under stress; the wide blue eyes had glanced along the barrels
of so many lethal weapons, that in various localities the noose yawned
for him; the slender body was built of rawhide and whalebone, and
responded instantly to the dictates of that ruthless brain. Under the
protection of Steel he flourished, and in return for that protection he
performed, quietly and with neatness and despatch, such odd jobs as were
in his line, with which he was commissioned.

When they were seated at an excellent breakfast of ham and eggs,
buttered toast, and strong, aromatic coffee, DuQuesne broke the long
silence.

"Do you want to know where we are?"

"I'd say we were a long way from home, by the way this elevator of yours
has been climbing all night."

"We are a good many million miles from the Earth, and we are getting
farther away at a rate that would have to be measured in millions of
miles per second." DuQuesne, watching the other narrowly as he made
this startling announcement and remembering the effect of a similar one
upon Perkins, saw with approval that the coffee-cup in midair did not
pause or waver in its course. Loring noted the bouquet of his beverage
and took an appreciative sip before he replied.

"You certainly can make coffee, Doctor; and good coffee is nine-tenths
of a good breakfast. As to where we are--that's all right with me. I can
stand it if you can."

"Don't you want to know where we're going, and why?"

"I've been thinking about that. Before we started I didn't want to know
anything, because what a man doesn't know he can't be accused of
spilling in case of a leak. Now that we are on our way, though, maybe I
should know enough about things to act intelligently, if something
unforeseen should develop. If you'd rather keep it dark and give me
orders when necessary, that's all right with me, too. It's your party,
you know."

"I brought you along because one man can't stay on duty twenty-four
hours a day, continuously. Since you are in as deep as you can get, and
since this trip is dangerous, you should know everything there is to
know. You are one of the higher-ups now, anyway: and we understand each
other thoroughly, I believe?"

"I believe so."

Back in the bow control-room DuQuesne applied more power, but not enough
to render movement impossible.

"You don't have to drive her as hard all the way, then, as you did last
night?"

"No, I'm out of range of Seaton's instrument now, and we don't have to
kill ourselves. High acceleration is punishment for anyone and we must
keep ourselves fit. To begin with, I suppose that you are curious about
that object-compass?"

"That and other things."

"An object-compass is a needle of specially-treated copper, so activated
that it points always toward one certain object, after being once set
upon it. Seaton undoubtedly has one upon me; but, sensitive as they are,
they can't hold on a mass as small as a man at this distance. That was
why we left at midnight, after he had gone to bed--so that we'd be out
of range before he woke up. I wanted to lose him, as he might interfere
if he knew where I was going. Now I'll go back to the beginning and tell
you the whole story."

       *       *       *       *       *

Tersely, but vividly, he recounted the tale of the interstellar cruise,
the voyage of the _Skylark of Space_. When he had finished, Loring
smoked for a few minutes in silence.

"There's a lot of stuff there that's hard to understand all at once. Do
you mind if I ask a few foolish questions, to get things straightened
out in my mind?"

"Go ahead--ask as many as you want to. It is hard to understand a lot of
that Osnomian stuff--a man can't get it all at once."

"Osnome is so far away--how are you going to find it?"

"With one of the object-compasses I mentioned. I had planned on
navigating from notes I took on the trip back to the Earth, but it
wasn't necessary. They tried to keep me from finding out anything, but I
learned all about the compasses, built a few of them in their own shop,
and set one on Osnome. I had it, among other things, in my pocket when I
landed. In fact, the control of that explosive copper bullet is the only
thing they had that I wasn't able to get--and I'll get that on this
trip."

"What is that arenak armor they're wearing?"

"Arenak is a synthetic metal, almost perfectly transparent. It has
practically the same refractive index as air, therefore it is, to all
intents and purposes, invisible. It's about five hundred times as strong
as chrome-vanadium steel, and even when you've got it to the
yield-point, it doesn't break, but stretches out and snaps back, like
rubber, with the strength unimpaired. It's the most wonderful thing I
saw on the whole trip. They make complete suits of it. Of course they
aren't very comfortable, but since they are only a tenth of an inch they
can be worn."

"And a tenth of an inch of that stuff will stop a steel-nosed
machine-gun bullet?"

"Stop it! A tenth of an inch of arenak is harder to pierce than fifty
inches of our hardest, toughest armor steel. A sixteenth-inch
armor-piercing projectile couldn't get through it. It's hard to believe,
but nevertheless it's a fact. The only way to kill Seaton with a gun
would be to use one heavy enough so that the shock of the impact would
kill him--and it wouldn't surprise me a bit if he had his armor anchored
with an attractor against that very contingency. Even if he hasn't, you
can imagine the chance of getting action against him with a gun of that
size."

"Yes, I've heard that he is fast."

"That doesn't tell half of it. You know that I'm handy with a gun
myself?"

"You're faster than I am, and that's saying something. You're chain
lightning."

"Well, Seaton is at least that much faster than I am. You've never seen
him work--I have. On that Osnomian dock he shot twice before I started,
and shot twice to my once from then on. I must have been shooting a
quarter of a second after he had his side all cleaned up. To make it
worse I missed once with my left hand--he didn't. There's absolutely no
use tackling Richard Seaton without an Osnomian ray-generator or
something better; but, as you know, Brookings always has been and always
will be a fool. He won't believe anything new until after he has
actually been shown. Well, I imagine he will be shown plenty by this
evening."

"Well, I'll never tackle him with heat. How does he get that way?"

"He's naturally fast, and has practiced sleight-of-hand work ever since
he was a kid. He's one of the best amateur magicians in the country, and
I will say that his ability along that line has come in handy for him
more than once."

"I see where you're right in wanting to get something, since we have
only ordinary weapons and they have all that stuff. This trip is to get
a little something for ourselves, I take it?"

"Exactly, and you know enough now to understand what we are out here to
get for ourselves. You have guessed that we are headed for Osnome?"

"I suspected it. However, if you were going only to Osnome, you would
have gone alone; so I also suspect that that's only half of it. I have
no idea what it is, but you've got something else on your mind."

"You're right--I knew you were keen. When I was on Osnome I found out
something that only four other men--all--dead--ever knew. There is a
race of men far ahead of the Osnomians in science, particularly in
warfare. They live a long way beyond Osnome. It is my plan to steal an
Osnomian airship and mount all its ray screens, generators, guns, and
everything else, upon this ship, or else convert their vessel into a
space-ship. Instead of using their ordinary power, however, we will do
as Seaton did, and use intra-atomic power, which is practically
infinite. Then we'll have everything Seaton's got, but that isn't
enough. I want enough more than he's got to wipe him out. Therefore,
after we get a ship armed to suit us, we'll visit this strange planet
and either come to terms with them or else steal a ship from them. Then
we'll have their stuff and that of the Osnomians, as well as our own.
Seaton won't last long after that."

"Do you mind if I ask how you got that dope?"

"Not at all. Except when right with Seaton I could do pretty much as I
pleased, and I used to take long walks for exercise. The Osnomians tired
very easily, being so weak, and because of the light gravity of the
planet, I had to do a lot of work or walking to keep in any kind of
condition at all. I learned Kondalian quickly, and got so friendly with
the guards, that pretty soon they quit trying to keep me in sight, but
waited at the edge of the palace grounds until I came back and joined
them.

"Well, on one trip I was fifteen miles or so from the city when an
airship crashed down in a woods about half a mile from me. It was in an
uninhabited district and nobody else saw it. I went over to investigate,
thinking probably I could find out something useful. It had the whole
front end cut or broken off, and that made me curious, because no
imaginable fall will break an arenak hull. I walked in through the hole
and saw that it was one of their fighting tenders--a combination warship
and repair shop, with all of the stuff in it that I've been telling you
about. The generators were mostly burned out and the propelling and
lifting motors were out of commission. I prowled around, getting
acquainted with it, and found a lot of useful instruments and, best of
all, one of Dunark's new mechanical educators, with complete
instructions for its use. Also, I found three bodies, and thought I'd
try it out...."

"Just a minute. Only three bodies on a warship? And what good could a
mechanical educator do you if the men were all dead?"

"Three is all I found then, but there was another one. Three men and a
captain compose an Osnomian crew for any ordinary vessel. Everything is
automatic, you, know. As for the men being dead, that doesn't make any
difference--you can read their brains just the same, if they haven't
been dead too long. However, when I tried to read theirs, I found only
blanks--their brains had been destroyed so that nobody could read them.
That did look funny, so I ransacked the ship from truck to keelson, and
finally found another body, wearing an air-helmet, in a sort of closet
off the control room. I put the educator on it...."

"This is getting good. It sounds like a page of the old 'Arabian Nights'
that I used to read when I was a boy. You know, it really isn't
surprising that Brookings didn't believe a lot of this stuff."

"As I have said, a lot of it is hard to understand, but I'm going to
show it to you--all that, and more."

"Oh, I believe it, all right. After riding in this boat and looking out
of the windows, I'll believe anything. Reading a dead man's brain is
steep, though."

"I'll let you do it after we get there. I don't understand exactly how
it works, myself, but I know how to operate one. Well, I found out that
this man's brain was in good shape, and I got a shock when I read it.
Here's what he had been through. They had been flying very high on their
way to the front when their ship was seized by an invisible force and
thrown upward. He must have thought faster than the others, because he
put on an air-helmet and dived into this locker where he hid under a
pile of gear, fixing things so that he could see out through the
transparent arenak of the wall. No sooner was he hidden that the front
end of the ship went up in a blaze of light, in spite of their ray
screens going full blast. They were up so high by that time that when
the bow was burned off the other three fainted from lack of air. Then
their generators went out, and pretty soon two peculiar-looking
strangers entered. They were wearing vacuum suits and were very short
and stocky, giving the impression of enormous strength. They brought an
educator of their own with them and read the brains of the three men.
Then they dropped the ship a few thousand feet and revived the three
with a drink of something out of a flask."

"Must have been different from the kind handled by most booties I know,
then. The stuff we've been getting lately would make a man more
unconscious than ever."

"Some powerful drug, probably, but the Osnomian didn't know anything
about it. After the men were revived, the strangers, apparently from
sheer cruelty and love of torturing their victims, informed them in the
Osnomian language that they were from another world, on the far edge of
the Galaxy. They even told them, knowing that the Osnomians knew nothing
of astronomy, exactly where they were from. Then they went on to say
that they wanted the entire green system for themselves, and that in
something like two years of our time they were going to wipe out all the
present inhabitants of the system and take it over, as a base for
further operations. After that they amused themselves by describing
exactly the kinds of death and destruction they were going to use. They
described most of it in great detail. It's too involved to tell you
about now, but they've got rays, generators, and screens that even the
Osnomians never heard of. And of course they've got intra-atomic energy
the same as we have. After telling them all this and watching them
suffer, they put a machine on their heads and they dropped dead. That's
probably what disintegrated their brains. Then they looked the ship over
rather casually, as though they didn't see anything they were interested
in; crippled the motors; and went away. The vessel was then released,
and crashed. This man, of course, was killed by the fall. I buried the
men--I didn't want anybody else reading that brain--hid some of the
stuff I wanted most, and camouflaged the ship so that I'm fairly sure
that it's there yet. I decided then to make this trip."

"I see." Loring's mind was grappling with these new and strange facts.
"That news is staggering, Doctor. Think of it. Everybody thinks our own
world is everything there is!"

"Our world is simply a grain of dust in the Universe. Most people know
it, academically, but very few ever give the fact any actual
consideration. But now that you've had a little time to get used to the
idea of there being other worlds, and some of them as far ahead of us in
science as we are ahead of the monkeys, what do you think of it?"

"I agree with you, that we've got their stuff," said Loring. "However,
it occurs to me as a possibility that they may have so much stuff that
we won't be able to make the approach. However, if the Osnomian fittings
we're going to get are as good as you say they are, I think that two
such men as you and I can get at least a lunch while any other crew, no
matter who they are, are getting a square meal."

"I like your style, Loring. You and I will have the world eating out of
our hands shortly after we get back. As far as actual procedure over
there is concerned, of course, I haven't made any definite plans. We'll
have to size up the situation after we get there before we can know
exactly what we'll have to do. However, we are not coming back
empty-handed."

"You said something, Chief!" and the two men, so startlingly unlike
physically, but so alike inwardly, shook hands in token of their mutual
dedication to a single purpose.

       *       *       *       *       *

Loring was then instructed in the simple navigation of the ship of
space, and thereafter the two men took their regular shifts at the
controls. In due time they approached Osnome, and DuQuesne studied the
planet carefully through a telescope before he ventured down into the
atmosphere.

"This half of it used to be Mardonale. I suppose it's all Kondal now.
No, there's a war on down there yet--at least, there's a disturbance of
some kind, and on this planet that means war."

"What are you looking for, exactly?" asked Loring, who was also
examining the terrain with a telescope.

