
I might (pursues _Carneades_) remind You, that I formerly represented
it, as possible, That as there may be more Elements then five, or six;
so the Elements of one body may be Different from those of another;
whence it would follow, that from the Resolution of De-compound body
[Errata: bodies], there may result Mixts of an altogether new kind, by
the Coalition of Elements that never perhaps conven'd before. I might,
I say, mind You of this, and add divers things to this second
Consideration; but for fear of wanting time I willingly pretermit
them, to pass on to the third, which is this, That the Fire does not
alwayes barely resolve or take asunder, but may also after a new
manner mingle and compound together the parts (whether Elementary or
not) of the Body Dissipated by it.

This is so evident, sayes _Carneades_, in some obvious Examples, that
I cannot but wonder at their Supiness that have not taken notice of
it. For when Wood being burnt in a Chimney is dissipated by the Fire
into Smoke and Ashes, that smoke composes soot, which is so far from
being any one of the principles of the Wood, that (as I noted above)
you may by a further _Analysis_ separate five or six distinct
substances from it. And as for the remaining Ashes, the Chymists
themselves teach us, that by a further degree of fire they may be
indissolubly united into glass. 'Tis true, that the _Analysis_ which
the Chymists principally build upon is made, not in the open air, but
in close Vessels; but however, the Examples lately produc'd may invite
you shrewdly to suspect, That heat may as well compound as dissipate
the Parts of mixt Bodies: and not to tell you, that I have known a
Vitrification made even in close vessels, I must remind you that the
Flowers of Antimony, and those of Sulphur, are very mix'd Bodies,
though they ascend in close vessells: And that 'twas in stopt glasses
that I brought up the whole Body of Camphire. And whereas it may be
objected, that all these Examples are of Bodies forc'd up in a dry,
not a Fluid forme, as are the Liquors wont to be obtain'd by
distillation; I answer, That besides that 'tis possible, that a Body
may be chang'd from Consistent to Fluid, or from Fluid to Consistent,
without being otherwise much altered, as may appear by the Easiness
wherewith in Winter, without any Addition or Separation of Visible
Ingredients, the same substance may be quickly harden'd into brittle
Ice, and thaw'd again into Fluid Water; Besides this, I say it would
be consider'd, that common Quick-silver it self, which the Eminentest
Chymists confess to be a mixt Body, may be Driven over the Helme in
its Pristine forme of Quicksilver, and consequently, in that of a
Liquor. And certainly 'tis possible that very compounded Bodies may
concur to Constitute Liquors; Since, not to mention that I have found
it possible, by the help of a certain _Menstruum_, to distill Gold it
self through a Retort, even with a Moderate Fire: Let us but consider
what happens in Butter of Antimony. For if that be carefully
rectify'd, it may be reduc'd into a very clear Liquor; and yet if You
cast a quantity of fair water upon it, there will quickly precipitate
a Ponderous and Vomitive Calx, which made before a considerable part
of the Liquor, and yet is indeed (though some eminent Chymists would
have it Mercurial) an Antimonial Body carryed over and kept dissolv'd
by the Salts of the Sublimate, and consequently a compounded one; as
You may find if You will have the Curiosity to Examine this White
powder by a skilful Reduction. And that You may not think that Bodies
as compounded as flowers of Brimstone cannot be brought to Concurr to
Constitute Distill'd Liquors; And also That You may not imagine with
Divers Learned Men that pretend no small skill in Chymistry, that at
least no mixt Body can be brought over the Helme, but by corrosive
Salts, I am ready to shew You, when You please, among other wayes of
bringing over Flowers of Brimstone (perhaps I might add even Mineral
Sulphurs) some, wherein I employ none but Oleaginous bodies to make
Volatile Liquors, in which not only the colour, but (which is a much
surer mark) the smell and some Operations manifest that there is
brought over a Sulphur that makes part of the Liquor.

One thing more there is, _Eleutherius_, sayes _Carneades_, which is so
pertinent to my present purpose, that though I have touch'd upon it
before, I cannot but on this occasion take notice of it. And it is
this, That the Qualities or Accidents, upon whose account Chymists are
wont to call a portion of Matter by the name of Mercury or some other
of their Principles, are not such but that 'tis possible as Great (and
therefore why not the like?) may be produc'd by such changes of
Texture, and other Alterations, as the Fire may make in the small
Parts of a Body. I have already prov'd, when I discours'd of the
second General Consideration, by what happens to plants nourish'd only
with fair water, and Eggs hatch'd into Chickens, that by changing the
disposition of the component parts of a Body, Nature is able to effect
as great Changes in a parcell of Matter reputed similar, as those
requisite to Denominate one of the _Tria Prima_. And though _Helmont_
do somewhere wittily call the Fire the Destructor and the Artificial
Death of Things; And although another Eminent Chymist and Physitian be
pleas'd to build upon this, That Fire can never generate any thing but
Fire; Yet You will, I doubt not, be of another mind, If You consider
how many new sorts of mixt Bodies Chymists themselves have produc'd by
means of the Fire: And particularly, if You consider how that Noble
and Permanent Body, Glass, is not only manifestly produc'd by the
violent action of the Fire, but has never, for ought we know, been
produc'd any other way. And indeed it seems but an inconsiderate
Assertion of some _Helmontians_, that every sort of Body of a
Peculiar Denomination must be produc'd by some Seminal power; as I
think I could evince, if I thought it so necessary, as it is for me to
hasten to what I have further to discourse. Nor need it much move us,
that there are some who look upon whatsoever the Fire is employ'd to
produce, not as upon Natural but Artificial Bodies. For there is not
alwaies such a difference as many imagine betwixt the one and the
other: Nor is it so easy as they think, clearly to assigne that which
Properly, Constantly, and Sufficiently, Discriminates them. But not to
engage my self in so nice a Disquisition, it may now suffice to
observe, that a thing is commonly termed Artificial, when a parcel of
matter is by the Artificers hand, or Tools, or both, brought to such a
shape or Form, as he Design'd before-hand in his Mind: Whereas in many
of the Chymical Productions the effect would be produc'd whether the
Artificer intended it or no; and is oftentimes very much other then he
Intended or Look't for; and the Instruments employ'd, are not Tools
Artificially fashion'd and shaped, like those of Tradesmen, for this
or that particular Work; but, for the most part, Agents of Nature's
own providing, and whose chief Powers of Operation they receive from
their own Nature or Texture, not the Artificer. And indeed, the Fire
is as well a Natural Agent as Seed: And the Chymist that imployes it,
does but apply Natural Agents and Patients, who being thus brought
together, and acting according to their respective Natures, performe
the worke themselves; as Apples, Plums, or other fruit, are natural
Productions, though the Gardiner bring and fasten together the Sciens
of the Stock, and both Water, and do perhaps divers other wayes
Contribute to its bearing fruit. But, to proceed to what I was going
to say, You may observe with me, _Eleutherius_, that, as I told You
once before, Qualities sleight enough may serve to Denominate a
Chymical Principle. For, when they anatomize a compound Body by the
Fire, if they get a Substance inflamable, and that will not mingle
with Water, that they presently call Sulphur; what is sapid and
Dissoluble in Water, that must pass for Salt; Whatsoever is fix'd and
indissoluble in Water, that they name Earth. And I was going to add,
that, whatsoever Volatile substance they know not what to make of, not
to say, whatsoever they please, that they call Mercury. But that these
Qualities may either be produc'd, otherwise then by such as they call
Seminal Agents, or may belong to bodies of a compounded Nature, may be
shewn, among other Instances, in Glass made of ashes, where the
exceeding strongly-tasted _Alcalizate_ Salt joyning with the Earth
becomes insipid, and with it constitutes a Body, which though also
dry, fixt, and indissoluble in Water, is yet manifestly a mixt Body;
and made so by the Fire itself.

And I remmember to our present purpose, that _Helmont_,[15] amongst
other Medicines that he commends, has a short processe, wherein,
though the Directions for Practice are but obscurely intimated; yet I
have some reason not to Dis-believe the Process, without affirming or
denying any thing about the vertues of the remedy to be made by it.
_Quando_ (sayes he) _oleum cinnamomi &c. suo sali alkali miscetur
absque omni aqua, trium mensium artificiosa occultaque circulatione,
totum in salem volatilem commutatum est, vere essentiam sui simplicis
in nobis exprimit, & usque in prima nostri constitutivasese ingerit._
A not unlike Processe he delivers in another place; from whence, if we
suppose him to say true, I may argue, that since by the Fire there may
be produc'd a substance that is as well Saline and volatile as the
Salt of Harts-horn, blood, &c. which pass for Elementary; and since
that this Volatile Salt is really compounded of a Chymical Oyle and a
fixt Salt, the one made Volatile by the other, and both associated by
the fire, it may well be suspected that other Substances, emerging
upon the Dissipation of Bodies by the Fire, may be new sorts of Mixts,
and consist of Substances of differing natures; and particularly, I
have sometimes suspected, that since the Volatile Salts of Blood,
Harts-horn, &c. are figitive [Errata: fugitive] and endow'd with an
exceeding strong smell, either that Chymists do Erroneously ascribe
all odours to sulphurs, or that such Salts consist of some oyly parts
well incorporated with the Saline ones. And the like conjecture I have
also made concerning Spirit of Vinager, which, though the Chymists
think one of the Principles of that Body, and though being an Acid
Spirit it seems to be much less of kin then Volatile Salts to
sulphurs; yet, not to mention its piercing smell; which I know not
with what congruity the Chymist will deduce from Salt, I wonder they
have not taken notice of what their own _Tyrocinium Chymicum_ teach us
concerning the Destillation of _Saccharum Saturni_; out of which
_Beguinus_[16] assures Us, that he distill'd, besides a very fine
spirit, no lesse then two Oyles, the one blood-red and ponderous, but
the other swimming upon the top of the Spirit, and of a yellow colour;
of which he sayes that he kept then some by him, to verify what he
delivers. And though I remember not that I have had two distinct Oyles
from Sugar of Lead, yet that it will though distill'd without addition
yield some Oyle, disagrees not with my Experience. I know the Chymists
will be apt to pretend, that these Oyls are but the volatiliz'd
sulphur of the lead; and will perhaps argue it from what _Beguinus_
relates, that when the Distillation is ended, you'l find a _Caput
Mortuum_ extreamly black, and (as he speaks) _nullius momenti_, as if
the Body, or at least the chief part of the Metal it self were by the
distillation carried over the Helme. But since you know as well as I
that _Saccharum Saturni_ is a kind of Magistery, made only by
calcining of Lead _per se_, dissolving it in distill'd Vinager, and
crystalizing the solution; if I had leasure to tell You how Differing
a thing I did upon examination find the _Caput Mortuum_, so sleighted
by _Beguinus_, to be from what he represents it, I believe you would
think the conjecture propos'd less probable then one or other of these
three; either that this Oyle did formerly concur to constitute the
Spirit of Vinager, and so that what passes for a Chymical Principle
may yet be further resoluble into distinct substances; or that some
parts of the Spirit together with some parts of the Lead may
constitute a Chymical Oyle, which therefore though it pass for
Homogeneous, may be a very compounded Body: or at least that by the
action of the Distill'd Vinager and the Saturnine Calx one upon
another, part of the Liquor may be so alter'd as to be transmuted from
an Acid Spirit into an Oyle. And though the truth of either of the two
former conjectures would make the example I have reflected on more
pertinent to my present argument; yet you'l easily discern, the Third
and last Conjecture cannot be unserviceable to confirm some other
passages of my discourse.

[Footnote 15: Helmont pag. 412.]

[Footnote 16: Tyroc. Chym. L. 1. C. 4.]

To return then to what I was saying just before I mention'd
_Helmont's_ Experiment, I shall subjoyne, That Chymists must confess
also that in the perfectly Dephlegm'd spirit of Wine, or other
Fermented Liquors, that which they call the Sulphur of the Concrete
loses, by the Fermentation, the Property of Oyle, (which the Chymists
likewise take to be the true Sulphur of the Mixt) of being unminglable
with the Water. And if You will credit _Helmont_,[17] all [Errata: a
pound] of the purest Spirit of Wine may barely by the help of pure
Salt of Tartar (which is but the fixed Salt of Wine) be resolv'd or
Transmuted into scarce half an ounce of Salt, and as much Elementary
Water as amounts to the remaining part of the mention'd weight. And it
may (as I think I formerly also noted) be doubted, whether that Fixt
and Alcalizate Salt, which is so unanimously agreed on to be the
Saline Principle of incinerated Bodies, be not, as 'tis Alcalizate, a
Production of the Fire? For though the tast of Tartar, for Example,
seem to argue that it contains a Salt before it be burn'd, yet that
Salt being very Acid is of a quite Differing Tast from the Lixiviate
Salt of Calcin'd Tartar. And though it be not truly Objected against
the Chymists, that they obtain all Salts they make, by reducing the
Body they work on into Ashes with Violent Fires, (since Hartshorn,
Amber, Blood, and divers other Mixts yield a copious Salt before they
be burn'd to Ashes) yet this Volatile Salt Differs much, as we shall
see anon, from the Fixt Alcalizate Salt I speak of; which for ought I
remember is not producible by any known Way, without Incineration.
'Tis not unknown to Chymists, that Quicksilver may be Precipitated,
without Addition, into a dry Powder, that remains so in Water. And
some eminent _Spagyrists_, and even _Raimund Lully_ himself, teach,
that meerly by the Fire Quicksilver may in convenient Vessels be
reduc'd (at least in great part) into a thin Liquor like Water, and
minglable with it. So that by the bare Action of the Fire, 'tis
possible, that the parts of a mixt Body should be so dispos'd after
new and differing manners, that it may be sometimes of one
consistence, sometimes of another; And may in one State be dispos'd to
be mingl'd with Water, and in another not. I could also shew you, that
Bodies from which apart Chymists cannot obtain any thing that is
Combustible, may by being associated together, and by the help of the
Fire, afford an inflamable Substance. And that on the other side, 'tis
possible for a Body to be inflamable, from which it would very much
puzzle any ordinary Chymist; and perhaps any other, to separate an
inflamable Principle or Ingredient. Wherefore, since the Principles of
Chymists may receive their Denominations from Qualities, which it
often exceeds not the power of Art, nor alwayes that of the Fire to
produce; And since such Qualities may be found in Bodies that differ
so much in other Qualities from one another, that they need not be
allow'd to agree in that pure and simple Nature, which Principles, to
be so indeed, must have; it may justly be suspected, that many
Productions of the Fire that are shew'd us by Chymists, as the
Principles of the Concrete that afforded them, may be but a new kind
of Mixts. And to annex, on this Occasion, to these arguments taken
from the Nature of the thing, one of those which _Logicians_ call _ad
Hominem_, I shall desire You to take Notice, that though _Paracelsus_
Himself, and some that are so mistaken as to think he could not be so,
have ventur'd to teach, that not only the bodies here below, but the
Elements themselves, and all the other Parts of the Universe, are
compos'd of Salt, Sulphur and Mercury; yet the learned _Sennertus_,
and all the more wary Chymists, have rejected that conceit, and do
many of them confess, that the _Tria Prima_ are each of them made up
of the four Elements; and others of them make Earth and Water concur
with Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, to the Constitution of Mixt bodies. So
that one sort of these _Spagyrists_, notwithstanding the specious
Titles they give to the productions of the Fire, do in effect grant
what I contend for. And, of the other sort I may well demand, to what
Kind of Bodies the Phlegme and dead Earth, to be met with in Chymical
Resolutions, are to be referr'd? For either they must say, with
_Paracelsus_, but against their own Concessions as well as against
Experience, that these are also compos'd of the _Tria Prima_, whereof
they cannot separate any one from either of them; or else they must
confess that two of the vastest Bodies here below, Earth, and Water,
are neither of them compos'd of the _Tria Prima_; and that
consequently those three are not the Universal, and Adequate
Ingredients, neither of all Sublunary Bodies, nor even of all mixt
Bodies.

[Footnote 17: _Ostendi alias, quomodo lib. una aquae vitae combibita in
sale Tartari siccato, vix fiat semuncia salis, caeterum totum corpus
fiat aqua Elementalis. Helmont. in Aura vitali._]

I know that the chief of these Chymists represent, that though the
Distinct Substances into which they divide mixt bodies by the Fire,
are not pure and Homogeneous; yet since the four Elements into which
the _Aristotelians_ pretend to resolve the like bodies by the same
Agent, are not simple neither, as themselves acknowledge, 'tis as
allowable for the Chymists to call the one Principles, as for the
Peripateticks to call the other Elements; since in both cases the
Imposition of the name is grounded only upon the Predominancy of that
Element whose name is ascrib'd to it. Nor shall I deny, that this
Argument of the Chymists is no ill one against the _Aristotelians_.
But what Answer can it prove to me, who you know am disputing against
the _Aristotelian_ Elements, as the Chymicall Principles, and must not
look upon any body as a true Principle or Element, but as yet
compounded, which is not perfectly Homogeneous, but is further
Resoluble into any number of Distinct Substances how small soever. And
as for the Chymists calling a body Salt, or Sulphur, or Mercury, upon
pretence that the Principle of the same name is predominant in it,
That it self is an Acknowledgment of what I contend for; namely that
these productions of the Fire, are yet compounded bodies. And yet
whilst this is granted, it is affirm'd, but not prov'd, that the
reputed Salt, or Sulphur, or Mercury, consists mainly of one body that
deserves the name of a principle of the same Denomination. For how do
Chymists make it appear that there are any such primitive and simple
bodies in those we are speaking of; since 'tis upon the matter
confess'd by the answer lately made, that these are not such? And if
they pretend by Reason to evince what they affirm, what becomes of
their confident boasts, that the Chymists [Errata: Chymist] (whom they
therefore, after _Beguinus_, call a _Philosophus_ or _Opifex
Sensatus_) can convince our Eyes, by manifestly shewing in any mixt
body those simple substances he teaches them to be compos'd of? And
indeed, for the Chymists to have recourse in this case to other proofs
then Experiments, as it is to wave the grand Argument that has all
this while been given out for a Demonstrative One; so it releases me
from the obligation to prosecute a Dispute wherein I am not engag'd to
Examine any but Experimentall proofs. I know it may plausibly Enough
be Represented, in favour of the Chymists, that it being evident that
much the greater part of any thing they call Salt, or Sulphur, or
Mercury, is really such; it would be very rigid to deny those
Substances the names ascribed them, only because of some sleight
mixture of another Body; since not only the Peripateticks call
particular parcels of matter Elementary, though they acknowledge that
Elements are not to be anywhere found pure, at least here below; And
since especially there is a manifest Analogie and Resemblance betwixt
the bodies obtainable by Chymical Anatomies and the principles whose
names are given them; I have, I say, consider'd that these things may
be represented: But as for what is drawn from the Custome of the
Peripateticks, I have already told You, that though it may be employ'd
against Them, Yet it is not available against me who allow nothing to
be an Element that is not perfectly Homogeneous. And whereas it is
alledg'd, that the Predominant Principle ought to give a name to the
substance wherein it abounds; I answer, that that might much more
reasonably be said, if either we or the Chymists had seen Nature take
pure Salt, pure Sulphur, and pure Mercury, and compound of them every
sort of Mixt Bodies. But, since 'tis to experience that they appeal,
we must not take it for granted, that the Distill'd Oyle (for
instance) of a plant is mainly compos'd of the pure principle call'd
Sulphur, till they have given us an ocular proof, that there is in
that sort of Plants such an Homogeneous Sulphur. For as for the
specious argument, which is drawn from the Resemblance betwixt the
Productions of the Fire, and the Respective, either _Aristotelian_
Elements, or _Chymical_ Principles, by whose names they are call'd; it
will appear more plausible then cogent, if You will but recall to mind
the state of the controversie; which is not, whether or no there be
obtain'd from mixt Bodies certain substances that agree in outward
appearance, or in some Qualities with Quicksilver or Brimstone, or
some such obvious or copious Body; But whether or no all Bodies
confess'd to be perfectly mixt were compos'd of, and are resoluble
into a determinate number of primary unmixt Bodies. For, if you keep
the state of the question in your Eye, you'l easily discerne that
there is much of what should be Demonstrated, left unprov'd by those
Chymical Experiments we are Examining. But (not to repeat what I have
already discover'd more at large) I shall now take notice, that it
will not presently follow, that because a Production of the Fire has
some affinity with some of the greater Masses of matter here below,
that therefore they are both of the same Nature, and deserve the same
Name; for the Chymists are not content, that flame should be look't
upon as a parcel of the Element of Fire, though it be hot, dry, and
active, because it wants some other Qualities belonging to the nature
of Elementary fire. Nor will they let the Peripateticks call Ashes, or
Quicklime, Earth, notwithstanding the many likenesses between them;
because they are not tastlesse, as Elementary Earth ought to be: But
if you should ask me, what then it is, that all the Chymical Anatomies
of Bodies do prove, if they prove not that they consist of the three
Principles into which the fire resolves them? I answer, that their
Dissections may be granted to prove, that some mixt bodies (for in
many it will not hold) are by the fire, when they are included in
close Vessels, (for that Condition also is often requisite) dissolube
[Transcriber's Note: dissoluble] into several Substances differing in
some Qualities, but principally in Consistence. So that out of most of
them may be obtain'd a fixt substance partly saline, and partly
insipid, an unctuous Liquor, and another Liquor or more that without
being unctuous have a manifest taste. Now if Chymists will agree to
call the dry and sapid substance salt, the Unctous liquor Sulphur, and
the other Mercury, I shall not much quarrel with them for so doing:
But if they will tell me that Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, are simple
and primary bodies whereof each mixt body was actually compounded, and
which was really in it antecedently to the operation of the fire, they
must give me leave to doubt whether (whatever their other arguments
may do) their Experiments prove all this. And if they will also tell
me that the Substances their Anatomies are wont to afford them, are
pure and similar, as Principles ought to be, they must give me leave
to believe my own senses; and their own confessions, before their bare
Assertions. And that you may not (_Eleutherius_) think I deal so
rigidly with them, because I scruple to Take these Productions of the
Fire for such as the Chymists would have them pass for, upon the
account of their having some affinity with them; consider a little
with me, that in regard an Element or Principle ought to be perfectly
Similar and Homogeneous, there is no just cause why I should rather
give the body propos'd the Name of this or that Element or Principle,
because it has a resemblance to it in some obvious Quality, rather
then deny it that name upon the account of divers other Qualities,
wherein the propos'd Bodies are unlike; and if you do but consider
what sleight and easily producible qualities they are that suffice, as
I have already more then once observ'd, to Denominate a Chymical
Principle or an Element, you'l not, I hope, think my wariness to be
destitute either of Example, or else of Reason. For we see that the
Chymists will not allow the _Aristotelians_ that the Salt in Ashes
ought to be called Earth, though the Saline and Terrestrial part
symbolize in weight, in dryness, in fixness and fusibility, only
because the one is sapid and dissoluble in Water, and the other not:
Besides, we see that sapidness and volatility are wont to denominate
the Chymists Mercury or Spirit; and yet how many Bodies, think you,
may agree in those Qualities which may yet be of very differing
natures, and disagree in qualities either more numerous, or more
considerable, or both. For not only Spirit of Nitre, Aqua Fortis,
Spirit of Salt, Spirit of Oyle of Vitriol, Spirit of Allome, Spirit of
Vinager, and all Saline Liquors Distill'd from Animal Bodies, but all
the Acetous Spirits of Woods freed from their Vinager; All these, I
say, and many others must belong to the Chymists Mercury, though it
appear not why some of them should more be comprehended under one
denomination then the Chymists Sulphur, or Oyle should likewise be;
for their Distill'd Oyles are also Fluid, Volatile, and Tastable, as
well as their Mercury; Nor is it Necessary, that their Sulphur should
be Unctuous or Dissoluble in Water, since they generally referr Spirit
of Wine to Sulphurs, although that Spirit be not Unctuous, and will
freely mingle with Water. So that bare Inflamability must constitute
the Essence of the Chymists Sulphur; as uninflamablenesse joyned with
any taste is enough to intitle a Distill'd Liquor to be their Mercury.
Now since I can further observe to You, that Spirit of Nitre and
Spirit of Harts-horne being pour'd together will boile and hisse and
tosse up one another into the air, which the Chymists make signes of
great Antipathy in the Natures of Bodies (as indeed these Spirits
differ much both in Taste, Smell, and Operations;) Since I elsewhere
tell you of my having made two sorts of Oyle out of the same mans
blood, that would not mingle with one another; And since I might tell
You Divers Examples I have met with, of the Contrariety of Bodies
which according to the Chymists must be huddl'd up together under one
Denomination; I leave you to Judge whether such a multitude of
Substances as may agree in these sleight Qualities, and yet Disagree
in Others more Considerable, are more worthy to be call'd by the Name
