are real touchy when they're armed. They can arc over and flare back in
a real hurry if things get in their fields. That's why the safety
lens--and the iris."

"Sure." Don nodded. "Sure it is. And it keeps the beam tube nice and
unobstructed. Dry, too. As I said, they're pretty safe. Just like
pigeon hunters." He looked out at the field.

"Sort of funny how things can add up," he added. "Here's a guy who
makes all sorts of plans. He's got everything figured out and tied up
with a ribbon. He's got the whole Galactic Federation standing around,
just watching. Not a thing they can do to him legally. And he's got all
Oredan in his pocket--all but one family and a few odd yokels he
doesn't even worry about. So he's about to fix the family.

"Then someone else starts planning. And some little guy goes and slips
a little chunk of fast moving lead down a lens barrel that nobody even
thought of protecting. And everything goes wrong. All kinds of things
happen. Like investigating patrols ordered in by the Stellar Guard. And
conclaves." He grinned and looked at the sky to the west.

"So," he added, "a few little things add up. One family. One little
piece of lead. One house that didn't get blown up. One flight of----"
He let his voice trail off and looked at his watch.

"Wonder where those patrol ships are. They should be in plain sight by
this time, diving down the eastern slope."

He narrowed his eyes, searching the empty western sky.

                    *      *      *      *      *

Pete looked around the courtyard. Broken tiles littered the ground.
Here and there, lay bricks and bits of mortar. Some freak of backblast
had torn a shutter off the house and it lay brokenly a few feet from
him. He looked back toward the house.

One corner of the roof had been shattered and he could see broken roof
beams. A cornice from the wall had crashed into the house front and
bits of it lay strewn through a gaping hole in the living room wall.
Stucco littered the narrow border of shrubbery around the house,
whitening the green of the leaves.

And a twisted bit of metal caught his attention. Obviously, it was part
of a flier. He shook his head and looked at the sky over the western
mountains.

"Quite a blast," he said. "Look, Don, are you sure anything's coming to
back us up? A couple more of these and we'll be standing in an open
field."

Michaels reached up to stroke his face. "Right now, I'm not too sure
about anything," he admitted. "Except that next time they try to comb
us over, they'll take a few less chances." He frowned.

"Mr. Masterson was pretty certain about things, but----"

He spun around and walked toward the flier port.

"You know, I think we'd better play it safe," he went on. "Right now,
we've got clear air. That explosion put everything around here on the
ground, but hard. But that won't last. Stern's people will be flocking
around here in a few minutes to see what went on. We better not be
around when they arrive. Go get your father."

He pulled the flier door open.

"I'll have this thing warmed and ready to flit by the time you get back
up here. Make it fast, will you?"

Pete had already dived down an escape slot. As Don started through his
pre-flight routine, he reappeared. Jasu Waern followed him.

"What happened?" The older man looked around the littered courtyard,
then at the flier which Don had pushed out of its cover. His eyes
widened.

"But I thought they would use an inductor."

"They tried," Don told him. "Come on. Get in." He looked anxiously at
his instrument panel.

"Little risky," he muttered, "taking off so fast. Synchs and generators
haven't had time to stabilize. But it beats letting them get in range
for some more target practice."

He eased a lever toward him and watched the pointers on a dial as the
flier lifted. The red needle started to oscillate and he reached
quickly to adjust a knob. The oscillation stopped. He looked overside.

"Hm-m-m," he said, "so far, so good. Well, let's have at it."

He reached out and pulled a handle toward him, watching the needles.
They remained steady and he nodded and pulled another control toward
him, then gripped the control wheel.

The flier leaped into the air and surged toward the mountains.

Don sighed and made a minute adjustment on the synchro knob.

"Well, we haven't flipped yet," he said. "We'll stay on deck all the
way. Not such a good target that way. Take a look back there, Pete. See
anything in the air to the east?"

"Yeah." Pete had been looking back. "There's plenty back there. And
they're in a hurry."

Don jerked his head around, then glanced at the mountains before them.

"So are we. They built this thing to win races, not lose them. Hope
they knew what they were doing." He pulled a panel lever all the way
back and the flier surged forward, pressing them back into their seats.

"Hang on," he said. "Some of these corners are going to be tight."

The ship swung into a narrow valley between two hills, bucking and
twisting as Don worked the control back and forth. As a high cliff
loomed up in front of them, he pulled the flier up, then around in a
screaming turn. A second later, they almost touched the tips of trees
as they swung around the shoulder of a steep hill. The flier dropped
abruptly, seeking the floor of a gorge, then swung violently as it
followed a swift flowing stream.

Don guided it into a side gorge, then suddenly pulled up, to jump
through a notch in the surrounding hills. For an instant, the flier
paused, hovering in the air over a deep, wide valley, then it dropped
like a stooping falcon, sweeping sideways at the end of its drop, to
come to rest under an overhanging rock formation. The pilot snapped off
switches and leaned back.

"We've got a small-sized walk ahead of us," he said, "but it's through
some pretty dense growth and we'll be invisible from the air." He
grinned.

"The way I dove into that first canyon, anyone with detectors on me
would assume I was heading for the Doer--if he knew the country fairly
well. Hope that's the way they know it--just about that well."

He climbed out of the ship, holding the door open.

"Come on, Pete," he ordered, "give me a hand and we'll shove this thing
back in the cave so it won't be too easy to spot."

Jasu Waern climbed out after his son.

"I shall help, too," he said resignedly. "Which of the clans do we
join?"

Don put a shoulder against the side of the flier. "Kor-en," he said. "I
know them pretty well. Matter of fact, the Korenthal wanted to adopt me
at one time. Dad talked him out of it."

Waern nodded. "The Kor-en are known to us," he murmured. "Possibly----"
He added his weight to the pressure on the flier's side.

They pushed the machine far back into the cavern under the rock, then
camouflaged its smooth lines with brush and rubble. Finally, they
walked over the rough ground to a nearby thicket. Don paused, looking
up. Then he pointed.

"There they are," he said, "in a search pattern. Guess they got a
detector flash on us when we jumped the ridge." He shrugged. "Well,
they've got a tough hunt now. We'll detour through that line of trees
to keep out of the open."

He jerked his head, to point.

"There's a narrow break in the cliffs way over there. When we get
through that, we'll come into Korelanni."

                    *      *      *      *      *

Halfway through the narrow crevice, Don stopped and turned aside, to
enter a narrow alcove that had been carved out of the rock. Hanging
inside was a long tube of wood. Don rubbed his hands vigorously on the
moss which grew on the rocks, then stroked the tube.

A tone resonated from the chamber, growing louder as Don continued to
stroke the tube. After a few seconds, an answering note of different
pitch could be heard. Don nodded and stepped back into the path.

"It's all right," he said. "They'll meet us at the head of the path."
He smiled.

"This way, we don't have someone dropping rocks on our heads."

Pete looked up at the towering cliffs which almost joined overhead.

"You mean they've got guards up there?"

"Always," Don told him. "Day and night. Right now, they're at peace
with everybody, but they never let their guard down. We'll have a
reception committee waiting for us." He started striding up the steep
path.

At the head of the chasm, five men waited for them. In their hands,
they held sticks about two feet long. At the end of each stick was a
thong, with a flexible leather pad which could hold a fair sized stone.
Don bowed in the direction of one of the group.

"I know you, Korendwar," he said.

The other bowed. "Michaels," he said. "I know you. And these?"

Don looked at him, his thoughts going into overdrive. The form of
address was all wrong. Always before, he had been Donald, of the clan
Michaels--they abbreviated it to Michaelsdon. But what had gone wrong
now?

He tensed a little, then relaxed. At least, it was a friendly greeting.
One does not "know" an enemy. He extended a hand toward Jasu Waern.

"I bring the Waerntal, Jasu. And his son, Waernpeto," he said.

The other nodded. "The men of Kor-en know the Waernu," he said
noncommitally. "You want dealings with the Korental?"

Don nodded. "The Waerntal would discuss clan affairs with the
Korental." he said. "I but serve as guide."

"It is well. You and this clansman may rest by the wells." Korendwar
turned toward Jasu Waern, gesturing with his sling.

"I will conduct you to the Korental, your honor."

                    *      *      *      *      *

Pete leaned against a mossy bank and watched one of the village women
as she raised a clay pot from a well.

"Tell me, Don, why did you push my father forward to consult with the
Korental? Why didn't you go ahead and deal with him yourself? You said
you knew him. Father doesn't."

"That's just the point," smiled Don. "I do know him. And I know his
people, and his way of thinking." He waved a hand to indicate the
entire collection of huts.

"These people are about as formal as you can get, when business is at
hand. Did you notice the way I talked to Korendwar? Migosh, I've hunted
with that guy, rolled around in the dirt with him when we were kids,
know him about as well as you'd know a brother. But he was on guard.
And, friend, you don't get informal with a clansman when he's on guard.

"This is just like a little nation, and the Korental is just as surely
a ruler as any king of a huge country," he went on. "Even more so than
most."

He fixed his eyes on the council hut, across the narrow end of the
valley.

"Everyone in his clan is his child--symbolically, at least. He tells
them what to do. He tells them what to plant and when--and how much. He
tells them when to hunt, and where. Governs their lives down to some
pretty fine points. I mean, he's as absolute as an absolute monarch can
get.

"And if you want to get along with an absolute monarch, you treat him
on his terms." He glanced at his companion.

"Oh, I don't mean this guy's a tyrant or despot," he added quickly.
"These people are pretty proud. They wouldn't like a dictator--as such.
But the Korental doesn't need force to govern his people. They do
things his way because ... well, it's a matter of tradition. It's the
only honorable way to do things. See what I mean?"

Pete shook his head doubtfully and Don frowned.

"Pete, your family was originally a mountain clan. I should think you'd
know these customs better than I do."

Again, Pete shook his head. "I'm sorry," he said slowly, "but I don't.
You see, my father and my uncle thought it would be better if I learned
the customs and culture of your people and of the plainsmen. And they
thought I should be familiar with the ways of the great cities."

He looked across the village at the great tree which shaded the council
hut.

"You see," he continued, "my great uncle was king. And he had no
children. He was getting old and it was agreed that if he died
childless, his queen would then adopt me. And, of course, I would then
be head of the Onaru, and king of Oredan." He smiled wanly.

"The agreement was not made public, of course. And the queen no longer
lives. But signatures and agreement are recorded at Oreladar. And they
appear in the Book of the Waernu, against my name. References in the
Book of the Waernu are so arranged that I may be quickly removed, to be
placed in an already prepared place in the Book of the Onaru, if the
time should come. This and the fact that my mother was the daughter of
a brother of the king, places me in the line of kings of Oredan." He
shrugged.

"Especially since the king did, in fact, die childless.

"And this, in my father's eyes, meant that I should know of the plains,
of the cities, and of the galactics, since there, he said, lies the
power and wealth of the present day Oredan."

Don shrugged. "Wealth, maybe," he said quietly. "I'm not so sure about
the power. The pressure of History is a very real thing, and I seem to
remember noticing that every time some king has gotten into a jam with
one of the other kingdoms or with his own nobles, he's had to raise the
clans. And there have been times when that wasn't easy."

Pete nodded. "I know. The Onaru took the throne two hundred years ago,
simply because the clans withheld support from the Chalenu--the Old
Line."

"Yeah." Don picked idly at the bark of a tree. "And Stern's been trying
to get the clans into hot water ever since he took over."

Pete looked at him for a moment, then looked about the village.

There was no orderly arrangement of houses, as could be found in town.
