waved it impatiently aside and so I grasped it and started upward. The
terror of the ascent paradoxically was a welcome one, for it was the
common fear which comes to men on the battlefield or in the creaking
hours of the night, the natural dread of ordinary perils and not the
unmanning panic inspired by the awful unknown within the grass.

The helicopter shuddered and dipped, causing the unanchored ladder to
sway and twist until with each convulsive jerk I expected to be thrown
off. I bruised and burned my palms with the tightness of my grip, my
knees twitched and my face and back and chest were wet. But in spite of
all this, waves of thankfulness surged over me.

The roaring and rattling above grew louder and I made my way finally
into the open glassfronted cockpit, pulling myself in with the last bit
of my strength. For a long moment I lay huddled there, exhausted. My eye
took in every trifle, every bolthead, rivet, scratch, dent, indicator,
seam and panel, playing with them in my mind, making and rejecting
patterns. They were artificial, made on a blessed assemblyline--no
terrifying product of nature.

I wondered how so small a space could accommodate us all and was
devoutly grateful that I, at least, had achieved safety. Reminded of my
companions, I looked out and down. The grass walls towered upward almost
within reach; beyond the hole they so unexpectedly made in its surface
the weed stretched out levelly, peaceful and inviting. I shuddered and
peered down the reversed telescope where the ladder once more hung
temptingly before Slafe.

Again he waved it aside. Gootes appeared to argue with him for he shook
his head obstinately and went on using his camera. At length the
reporter seized him forcibly with a strength I had not known he
possessed and boosted him up the first rungs of the ladder. Slafe seemed
at last resigned to leave, but he pointed anxiously to his other cameras
and cans of film. Gootes nodded energetically and waved the photographer
upward.

I saw every detail of what happened then, emphasized and heightened as
though revealed through a slowmotion picture. I heard Slafe climb on
board and knew that in a few seconds now we would be free and away. I
saw the bright sun reflect itself dazzlingly upon the blades of the
grass, sloping imperceptibly away to merge with the city it squatted
upon in the distance.

The sun where we were was dazzling, I say, but in the hole where Gootes
was now tying Slafe's paraphernalia to the ladder, the shadow of the
walls darkened it into twilight. I squinted, telepathically urging him
to hurry; he seemed slow and fumbling. And then ...

And then the walls collapsed. Not slowly, not with warning, not
dramatically or with trumpets. They came together as silently and
naturally as two waves close a trough in the ocean, but without
disturbance or upheaval. They fell into an embrace, into a coalescence
as inevitable as the well they obliterated was fortuitous. They closed
like the jaws of a trap somehow above malevolence, leaving only the top
of the ladder projecting upward from the smooth and placid surface of
the weed.

Whether in some involuntary recoil the pilot pressed a wrong control or
whether the action of the grass itself snatched the ladder from the ship
I don't know; but that last bit attached to the machine was torn free
and fell upon the green. It was the only thing to mark the spot where
the bowl which had held us had been, and it lay, a brown and futile
tangle of rope and wood, a helpless speck of artifice on an
imperturbable mass of vegetation.


_24._ Mr Le ffacase removed the tube of the dictaphone from his lips as
I entered. "Weener, although a rigid adherence to fact compels me to
claim some acquaintance with general knowledge and a slight cognizance
of abnormal psychology, I must admit bafflement at the spectacle of your
mottled complexion once more in these rooms sacred to the perpetuation
of truth and the dissemination of enlightenment. Everyday you embezzle
good money from this paper under pretense of giving value received, and
each day your uselessness becomes more conspicuous. Almost anyone would
disapprove the divine choice in the matter of taking Gootes and leaving
you alive, and while I know the world suffered not the least hurt by his
translation to whatever baroque, noisy and entirely public hell is
reserved for reporters, at least he attempted to forge some ostensible
return for his paycheck."

"Mr Le ffacase," I began indignantly, but he cut me off.

"You unalloyed imbecile," he roared, "at least have the prudence if not
the intelligence or courtesy to be silent while your betters are
speaking. Gootes was a bloody knave, a lazy, slipshod, slack, tasteless,
absurd, fawning, thieving, conniving sloven, but even if he had the
energy to make the attempt and a mind to put to it, he could not, in ten
lifetimes, become the perfect, immaculate and prototypical idiot you
were born."

I don't know how long he would have continued in this insulting vein,
but he was interrupted by the concealed telephone. "What in the name of
the ten thousand dubious virgins do you mean by annoying me?" he
bellowed into the mouthpiece. "Yes. Yes. I know all about deadlines; I
was a newspaperman when you were vainly suckling canine dugs. Are you
ambitious to replace me? Go get with child a mandrakeroot, you, you
journalist! I will meet the _Intelligencer_'s deadline as I did before
your father got the first tepidly lustful idea in his nulliparous head
and as I shall after you have followed your useless testes to a worthy
desuetude."

He replaced the receiver and picked up the mouthpiece of the dictaphone
again, paying no further attention to me. He enunciated clearly and
precisely, speaking in an even monotone, pausing not at all, as if
reading from some prepared script, though his eyes were fixed upon a
vacant spot where wall and ceiling joined.

"In the death today of Jacson Gootes the _Daily Intelligencer_ lost a
son. It is an old and good custom on these solemn occasions to pause and
remember the dead.

"Jacson Gootes was a reporter of exceptional probity, of clear
understanding, of indefatigable effort, and of great native ability. His
serious and straightforward approach to an occupation which to him was a
labor of love was balanced by a sunny yet thoughtful humor, a
combination making his company something to be sought. Beloved of his
fellow workers, no one mourns his loss more sincerely than the editor
through whose hands passed all those brilliant contributions, now
finally marked, as all newspaper copy is, -30-.

"But though the _Intelligencer_ has suffered a personal and deeply felt
bereavement, American journalism has given another warrior on the
battlefield. Not by compulsion nor arbitrary selection, but of his own
free will, he who serves the public through the press is a soldier. And
as a soldier he is ready at the proper time to go forward and give up
his life if need be.

"No member of a sturdy army was more worthy of a gallant end than Jacson
Gootes. He died, not in some burst of audacity such as may occasionally
actuate men to astonishing feats, but doggedly and calmly in the line of
duty. More than a mere hero, he was a good newspaperman. W.R.L."

There were tears under my eyelids as the editor concluded his eulogy.
Under that gruff and even overbearing exterior must beat a warm and
tender heart. You can't go by appearances, I always say, and I felt I
would never again be hurt by whatever hasty words he chose to hurl at
me.

"Wake up, you moonstruck simpleton, and stop beaming at some private
vision. The time has passed for you to live on the bounty of the
_Intelligencer_ like the bloody mendicant you are. You have outlived
your usefulness as the man who started all this fuss; it is no longer
good publicity; the matter has become too serious.

"No, Weener, from now on, beneath your unearned byline the public will
know you only as the first to set foot upon this terra incognita, this
verdant isle which flourishes senselessly where only yesterday Hollywood
nourished senselessly. So rest no more upon your accidental laurels, but
transform yourself into what nature never intended, a useful member of
the community. I will make a newspaperman of you, Weener, if I have to
beat into your head an entire typefont, from fourpoint up to and
including those rare boldfaced letters we keep in the cellar to announce
on our final page one the end of the world.

"You will cover the grass as before and you will bring or send or cause
in some other manner to be transmitted to me copy without a single
adjective or adverb, containing nothing more lethal than verbs, nouns,
prepositions and conjunctions, stating facts and only facts, clearly
and distinctly in the least possible number of words compatible with the
usages of English grammar. You will do this daily and conscientiously,
Weener, on pain of instant dismemberment, to say nothing of crucifixion
and the death of a thousand cuts."

"The _Weekly Ruminant_ and the _Honeycomb_ have found little pieces of
mine, written without special instructions, suitable for their columns,"
I mentioned defensively.

He threw himself back in his chair and stared at me with such
concentrated fury I thought he would burst the diamond stud loose from
his shirtband. "The _Weekly Ruminant_," he informed me, "was founded by
a parsimonious whoremaster whose sanctimonious rantings in public were
equaled only by his private impieties. It was brought to greatness--if
inflated circulation be a synonym--by a veritable journalistic pimp who
pandered to the public taste for literary virgins by bribing them to
commit their perverse acts in full view. It is now carried on by a
spectral corporation, losing circulation at the same rate a haemophilic
loses blood.

"As for the _Honeycomb_, it is enough to say that careful research
proves its most absorbing reading to be the 'throw away your truss' ads.
Is it not natural, Weener, that two such journals of taste and
enlightenment should appreciate your efforts? Unfortunately the _Daily
Intelligencer_ demands accounts written in intelligible English above
the level of fourthgrade grammarschool."

I would have been shocked beyond measure at his libelous smirching of
honored names and hurt as well by his slighting reference to myself had
I not known from the revealing editorial he had dictated what a
sympathetic and kindly nature was really his and how he might, beneath
this cynical pose, have an admiration great as mine for the characters
he had just slandered.

"You will be the new Peter Schlemihl, Weener; from now on you will go
forth without a ghost and any revision essential to your puny assault
upon the Republic of Letters will be done by me and God help you if I
find much to do, for my life is passing and I must have time to read
the immortal Hobbes before I die."

In spite of all he'd said I couldnt help but believe Mr Le ffacase
realized my true worth--or why did he confer on me what was practically
a promotion? I was therefore emboldened to suggest the cancellation of
the unjust paycut, but this innocent remark called forth such a
vituperative stream of epithet I really thought the apoplexy Gootes had
predicted was about to strike and I hurried from his presence lest I be
blamed for bringing it on.


_25._ A little reading brought me uptodate on the state of the grass as
a necessary background for my new responsibility. It was now shaped like
a great, irregular crescent with one tip at Newhall, broadening out to
bury the San Fernando Road; stretching over the Santa Monica Mountains
from Beverly Glen to the Los Angeles River. Its fattest part was what
had once been Hollywood, Beverly Hills and the socalled Wilshire
district. The right arm of the semicircle, more slender than the left,
curled crookedly eastward along Venice Boulevard, in places only a few
blocks wide. It severed the downtown district from the manufacturing
area, crossing the river near the Ninth Street bridge and swallowing the
great Searsroebuck store like a capsule. The office of the _Daily
Intelligencer_, like the Civic Center, was unthreatened and able to
function, but we were without water and gas, though the electric
service, subject to annoying interruptions, was still available.

Already arrangements were being completed to move the paper to Pomona,
where the mayor and councilmanic offices also intended to continue. For
there was no hiding the fact that the city was being surrendered to the
weed. Eastward and southward the homeless and the alarmed journeyed
carrying the tale of a city besieged and gutted in little more than the
time it would have taken a human army to fight the necessary
preliminaries and bring up its big guns.

On trains and buses, by bicycles and on foot, the exodus moved. Those
who could afford it left their ravished homes swiftly behind by air and
to these fortunate ones the way north was not closed, as it was to the
earthbound, by the weed's overrunning of the highways. Usedcardealers
sold out their stocks at inflated figures and a ceilingprice had to be
put on the gasoline supplied to those retreating from the grass.

Though only a fragment of the city had been lost, all industry had come
to a practical standstill. Workers did not care to leave homes which
might be grassbound by nightfall; employers could not manufacture
without backlog of materials, for a dwindling market, and without
transportation for their products. Services were so crippled as to be
barely existent and with the failure of the watersupply, epidemics, mild
at first, broke out and the diseases were carried and spread by the
refugees.

Cattlemen, uncertain there would be either stockyards or working
butchers, held back their shipments. Truckfarmers found it simpler and
more profitable to supply local depots catering at fantastic prices to
the needs of the fugitives, than to depend on railroads which were
already overstrained and might consign their highly perishable goods to
rot on a siding. Los Angeles began to starve. Housewives rushed
frantically to clean out the grocer's shelves, but this was living off
their own fat and even the most farsighted of hoarders could provide for
no more than a few weeks of future.

So even those not directly evicted or frightened by its proximity began
moving away from the grass. But they still had possessions and they
wanted to take them along, all of them, down to the obsolescent console
radio in grandma's room, the busted mantelclock--a weddingpresent from
Aunt Minnie--in the garage and the bridgelamp without a shade which had
so long rested in the mopcloset. All of this taxed an already
overstrained transportation system. Since it was entirely a oneway
traffic, charges were naturally doubled and even then shippers were
reluctant to risk the return of their equipment to the threatened zone.
The greed to take along every last bit of impedimenta dwindled under the
impact of necessity; possessions were scrutinized for what would be
least missed, then for what could be got along without; for the
absolutely essential, and finally for things so dear it was not worth
going if they were left behind. This last category proved surprisingly
small, compact enough to be squeezed into the family car--"Junior can
sit on the box of fishingtackle--it's flat--and hold the birdcage on his
lap"--as it made ready to join the procession crawling along the clogged
highways.

_Time_, reporting the progress of the weed, said in part: "Death, as it
must to all, came last week to cult-harboring, movie-producing Los
Angeles. The metropolis of the southwest (pop. 3,012,910) died
gracelessly, undignifiedly, as its blood oozed slowly away. A shell
remained: downtown district, suburbs, beaches, sprawling South and East
sides, but the spirit, heart, brain, lungs and liver were gone;
swallowed up, Jonah-wise by the advance of the terrifying Bermuda grass
(TIME Aug. 10). Still at his post was sunk-eyed W. (for William) R. (for
Rufus) Le ffacase (pronounced L'Fass-uh-say), prolix, wide-read editor
of the Los Angeles _Intelligencer_. Till the last press stopped the
_Intelligencer_ would continue to disseminate the news. Among those
remaining was Le ffacase's acereporter, Jacson C. (for Crayman) Gootes,
28. Gootes' permanent beat: the heart of the menacing grass where he met
his death."

Under Religion, _Time_ had another note about the weed. "Harassed
Angelinos, distracted & terrified by encroaching _Cynodon dactylon_
(TIME Aug. 10) now smothering their city (see National Affairs) were
further distracted when turning on their radios (those still working)
last week. The nasal, portentous boom of the evangelist calling himself
Brother Paul (real name: Algernon Knight Mood) announced the 2nd Advent.
It was taking place in the heart of the choking grass. What brought
death and disaster to the country's 3rd city offered hope and bliss to
followers of Brother Paul. 'Sell all you have,' advised the
radiopreacher, 'fly to your Savior who is gathering His true disciples
at this moment in the very center of the grass. Do not fear, for He will
sustain and comfort you in the thicket through which the unsaved cannot
pass.' At last report countless followers had been forcibly restrained
from self-immolation in the _Cynodon dactylon_, unnumbered others gone
joyfully to their beatification. Not yet reported as joining his Savior:
Brother Paul."

Under People: "Admitted to the Relief rolls of San Diego County this
week were Adam Dinkman & wife, whose front lawn (TIME Aug. 3) was the
starting point of the plaguing grass. Said Mrs. Dinkman, 'The government
ought to pay....' Said Adam Dinkman, '... it's a terrible thing....'"

I resolved to send the Dinkmans some money as soon as I could possibly
afford it. I made a note to this effect in a pocket memorandumbook,
feeling the glow of worthy sacrifice, and then went out and got in my
car. It was all right to digest facts and figures about the weed from
the printed page, but it was necessary to see again its physical
presence before writing anything for so critical an editor as W R Le
ffacase.

I drove through the Second Street tunnel and out Beverly Boulevard.
There, several miles from the most advanced runners of the grass, the
certainty of its coming lay like a smothering blanket upon the
unnaturally silent district. There was no traffic on my side of the
street and only a few lastminute straggling jalopies, loaded down with
shameless bedding and bundles, coughed their way frantically eastward.

Those few shops still unaccountably open were bare of goods and the idle
proprietors walked periodically to the front to scan the western sky to
assure themselves the grass was not yet in sight. But most of the stores
were closed, their windows broken, their signs already tarnished and
decrepit with the age which seems to come so swiftly upon a defunct
business. The sidewalks were littered with rubbish, diagonally flattened
papers, broken boxes, odd shoes. Garbagecans, instead of standing
decorously in alleys or shamefacedly along the curb, sprawled in
lascivious abandon over the pavements, their contents strewn widely.
Dogs and cats, deserted by fond owners, snarled and fought over choicer
tidbits. I had not realized how many people in the city kept pets until
the time came to leave them behind.

At Vermont Avenue I came upon what I was sure was a new nucleus, a lawn
green and tall set between others withered and yellow, but I did not
even bother reporting this to the police for I knew that before long the
main body would take it to its bosom. And now, looking westward, I could
see the grass itself, a half mile away at Normandie. It rose high in the
air, dwarfing the buildings in its path, blotting out the mountains
behind, and giving the illusion of rushing straight at me.

I turned the car north, not with the idea of further observation, but
because standing still in the face of that towering palisade seemed
somehow to invite immediate destruction. I drove slowly and thoughtfully
and then at Melrose the grass came in sight again, creeping down from
Los Feliz. I turned back toward the Civic Center. It would not be more
than a couple of days at most, now, before even downtown was gone.


_26._ During my drive several walkers loaded with awkward bundles raised
imploring thumbs for a ride, but knowing to what lengths desperation
will drive people and not wishing to be robbed of my car, I had pressed
my foot down and driven on. But now as I went along Temple near Rampart
a beautiful woman, incongruously--for it was in the middle of a hot
October--dressed in a fur coat, and with each gloved hand grasping the
handle of a suitcase, stepped in front of me and I had to jam on the
brakes to avoid running over her.

The car stopped, radiator almost touching her, but she made no attempt
to move. A small hat with a tiny fringe of veil concealed her eyes, but
her sullen mouth looked furiously at me as rigidly clutching her luggage
she barred my path. Fearing some trap, I turned off the ignition and
unobtrusively slid the keys into a sidepocket before getting out and
going to her.

"Excuse me, miss. Can I help you?"

She threw her head back and her eyes, brown and glistening, appraised me
through heavily painted lashes. I stood there stiffly, uncomfortable
under her gaze till I suddenly remembered my hat and lifted it with an
awkward bow. This seemed to satisfy her, for still without speaking she
nodded and thrust the two suitcases at me. Not knowing what else to do,
I took them from her and she promptly, after smoothing her gloves,
walked toward the passenger's side of the car.

"You want me to take you somewhere, miss?" I inquired quite
superfluously.

She bent her head the merest fraction and then rested her fingers on the
doorhandle, waiting for me to open it for her. I ran as fast as I could
with the bags--they were beautifully matched expensive luggage--to put
them in the turtle and then had to make myself still more ridiculous by
running back for the forgotten key resting in the sidepocket. When I had
finally stowed away the baggage and opened the door for her she got in
with the barest of condescending nods for my efforts and sat staring
ahead.

I drove very slowly, nipping off little glances of her profile as we
moved along. Her cheeks were smooth as a chinadoll's, her nose the
chiseled replica of some lovely antique marble, her mouth a living study
of rounded lines; never had I been so close to such an alluring woman.
We reached the Civic Center and I automatically headed for the
_Intelligencer_ building. But I could not bear to part company so
quickly and so I turned left instead, out Macy Street.

Now we found ourselves caught in the traffic snailing eastward. In low
gear I drove a block, then stopped and waited till a clear ten feet
ahead permitted another painfully slow forward motion. Still my
passenger had no word to say but kept staring ahead though she could see
nothing before her except the trunkladen rearend of a tottery ford long
past its majority.

"You," I stumbled, "I--that is, I mean wasnt there somewhere in
particular you wanted to go?"

She nodded, still without looking at me, and for the first time spoke.

Her voice was deep and had the timbre of some old bronze bell. "Yuma,"
she said.

"Yuma, Arizona?" I asked stupidly.

Again she nodded faintly. In a panic I reckoned the contents of my
wallet. About forty dollars, I thought--no, thirty. Would that take us
to Yuma? Barely, perhaps, and I should have to wire the _Intelligencer_
for money to return. Besides, in the present condition of the roads the
journey would be a matter of days and I knew she would accept nothing
but the very best. How could I do it? Should I return to the
_Intelligencer_ office and try to get an advance on next week's salary?
I had heard from more than one disgruntled reporter that it was an
impossibility. Good heavens, I thought, I shall lose her.

Whatever happened I must take her as far as I could; I must not let her
go before I was absolutely forced to. This resolution made, my first
thought was to cut the time, for poking along in this packed mass I was
burning gasoline without getting anywhere. Taking advantage of my
knowledge of the sideroads, I turned off at the first chance and was
able to resume a normal speed as I avoided towns and main highways.

Still she continued silent, until at length, passing orangegroves heavy
with coppery fruit, I ventured to speak myself. "My name is Albert
Weener. Bert."

The right rear tire kicked up some dust as I nervously edged off the
road. Somewhere overhead a plane ripped through the hot silk of the sky.

"Uh ... what ... uh ... won't you tell me yours?"

Still facing ahead, she replied, "It isnt necessary."

After a few more miles I ventured again. "You live--were living in Los
Angeles?"

She shook her head impatiently.

Well, I thought, really...! Then: poor thing, she's probably terribly
upset. Home and family lost perhaps. Money gone. Destitute. Going East,
swallowing pride, make a new start with the help of unsympathetic
relatives. She has only me to depend on--I must not fail her. Break the
ice, whatever attitude her natural pride dictates, offer your services.

"I'm on the _Daily Intelligencer_," I said. "I'm the man who first
walked on top of the grass."

Ten miles later I inquired, "Wouldnt you be more comfortable with that
heavy fur coat off? I can put it in the back with your luggage and it
