
Auguste shuddered inwardly at the thought that there was in the world a
man who would not be satisfied until he was dead. He could not live with
that kind of fear. He asked the White Bear, his spirit guide, to give
him courage.

He tried to push the fear out of his mind. He stood up to go back to the
room where he had slept. He would clean and repack the things he was
taking, he decided. He would get busy getting ready and not give himself
time to think about being afraid.

But nightfall seemed a long way off.

At nine o'clock in the evening by the Seth Thomas clock in Frank's
printing shop, which he reset every day at sunset, it was dark enough
and the town was quiet enough for Auguste to leave. He held Nicole's
ample body tight and kissed her, shook hands with the boys and kissed
the girls. His grandfather had drifted off to sleep again, but the old
man had kissed him on both cheeks, and they had said their good-byes in
the afternoon.

The road down the bluff from the town to the bottomland was empty. Most
people in Victor went to bed soon after sunset, and those who didn't
would be up in the taproom of the trading post inn.

Auguste did see candlelight flickering in a one-room log cabin they
passed. A silhouette appeared in the window just as he looked in. A man
reached out and slammed the shutters closed.

"Bad luck we should pass that house just as he came to the window,"
Frank said. "One of Raoul's men. But he's more than likely still half
drunk."

Frank and Auguste followed the road past fields of corn ready for
harvesting, their way lighted by the nearly full moon.

Up ahead the wooded sides of the bluff came down to the water's edge.
Frank led Auguste out on a shrub-covered spit.

Not until he was nearly on top of the bateau did Auguste see it. Frank
had pulled it up out of the water, covered it with branches, and tied it
to the roots of a tree that had toppled into the water, undercut by the
river.

With sinking heart Auguste saw that though the riverboat was small, it
would be heavier and harder to row than a canoe. Well, Frank had done
his best, and now he would have to do _his_ best.

His heart leaped with fear as he heard hoofbeats.

Horsemen, coming down the road from Victor.

Frank stopped working on the boat and lifted his head. "Damn! That skunk
must have seen you after all."

The pounding was coming rapidly closer. Auguste's heart was beating as
fast as the oncoming hooves. He saw the horsemen by moonlight--_five_ of
them, racing through the high corn.

Frank and Auguste pushed the little boat into the water bow first,
pointed stern resting on the shore. Auguste put his pack in the stern
and the rifle and ammunition in the bow, where they were more likely to
stay dry. The current pulled the bow downstream, the flat bottom
grinding in the mud.

Auguste saw a flash and heard a loud boom. Something whistled through
the bare branches of a bush beside him.

He leaped into the boat.

"Here. Beef and biscuit." Frank tossed a bag to Auguste, who set it on
the seat beside him. Frank pushed the bateau's stern free.

"Now row for your life!"

Pulling as hard and fast as he could, Auguste steered diagonally into
the Mississippi, trying to get beyond pistol range without spending all
his strength fighting the current.

"Hopkins, goddamn it, I'll kill _you_ if he gets away!"

Raoul's voice. Auguste wished he had time to load his rifle and shoot
back, but if he stopped rowing they were sure to get him.

Five bright red flashes and five shots roared out one after the other
from shore.

_If one of those men is Eli Greenglove I'm dead for sure._

Auguste heard a sharp rap on the side of the boat and splashes in the
water on his left. He felt naked sitting up in the boat pulling
frantically on the oars. He could stop rowing and lie down using the
side of the boat as a shield, but then he would remain within range,
drifting south along the riverbank, and Raoul and his men could follow
him and shoot at him at their leisure. He gritted his teeth and kept
rowing, his shoulder muscles feeling as if they were about to tear loose
from his bones.

He heard a ball whiz past his head. They must have stopped riding to
reload and take better aim.

Another ball smashed into the boat just ahead of the wooden oarlock.

His body was coated with the cold sweat of fear. There was nothing he
could do but sit here, a target in the moonlight, and pull on the oars
with all his strength. If he missed one stroke it might be his death.

_Earthmaker, do not let Raoul take revenge on Frank._

Pistol balls splashed water into the boat.




11

Redbird's Wickiup


White Bear rowed upstream on the Ioway River past stands of weeping
willow whose yellowing fronds drooped into the dark green water. Even
though the current was at its weakest now, his arms and shoulders felt
as if they'd been beaten with clubs. If only Frank had been able to find
a canoe for him instead of this heavy bateau that he'd had to push
across the Great River and now up the Ioway.

His heart fluttered in his chest like a trapped bird as he sensed
himself coming closer to the British Band's winter hunting camp. He had
thought he would be happy at this homecoming, but he was terrified.

How would they receive him? After six years they must think he had
forgotten all about them. Would they despise him? Maybe they would just
make fun of him.

And in what state would he find the British Band? They'd had to get
through the summer without the crops they always raised. Had any friends
been shot by white snipers during the siege of Saukenuk? How many,
weakened by hunger, might be ill or dead? Would his mother be alive?

And what of Redbird?

He had already met, just by chance, one member of the band, Three
Horses, who had been fishing in the shallows on the Ioway shore of the
Great River. And Three Horses had certainly been happy to see him. He'd
jumped on his pony and had said he would ride back to the camp with the
news that White Bear was back. He was so excited that he did not wait
for White Bear to ask any questions about how his people had fared.

So they would all be waiting for him by the time he got there. The
thought frightened him all the more.

Ahead, a row of bark and dugout canoes lay bottoms up on a dirt
embankment.

He saw a flash of red in the trees near the canoes. For a moment he
thought, with a joyous leap of his heart, that it might be Redbird. Then
a man wearing a deep red blanket stepped out of the woods. He stood over
the beached canoes with his arms folded.

Wolf Paw.

His eyes were like splinters of coal, and the black circles he had
painted around them gave him a terrifying aspect. The crest of red-dyed
deer hair that sprouted from his shaven skull seemed strange and savage
to White Bear after six years away from the Sauk.

White Bear rowed in close to the riverbank, uncertain how to greet Wolf
Paw. The brave said nothing, did nothing. A maple branch swayed in the
wind. Red leaves fell, and sunlight flashed from a steel-headed tomahawk
that Wolf Paw was holding.

White Bear's belly knotted.

He skidded the boat to a halt on the bank a short distance downriver
from Wolf Paw. He climbed out the front end, pulled the boat up on the
bank, unloaded it and turned it over.

Wolf Paw watched in silence as White Bear slung his pack and bags on his
back, picked up his rifle and rested it on his shoulder. Looking at Wolf
Paw's red crest and blanket and buckskin trousers, White Bear realized
how strange he himself must seem to Wolf Paw in the green clawhammer
jacket he had worn to his father's funeral.

Now they were face to face.

_I will wait for him to move, if I have to stand here till sunset and
all through the night. He chose this strange way of meeting me. Let him
show me what is in his mind._

He heard the boughs creaking in the wind around him. River water rippled
over the stones along the bank. He heard a redbird whistling in the
distance.

Wolf Paw drew a deep breath, opened his mouth and let out a war whoop.

"_Whoowhoowhoowhoo!_"

White Bear's heart gave a great thump, and he fell back a step. He heard
rage in the whoop, and the frustration. Wolf Paw was angry at him. Why?
Maybe just for coming back.

Wolf Paw held the tomahawk high. Corded muscles and dark veins stood out
in his rigid arm. Two feathers dyed red danced just under the steel
head. He repeated his war whoop, and then his lips drew back from
clenched white teeth.

He whirled and plunged into the woods, leaving White Bear shaken and
open-mouthed. He stood still, listening to Wolf Paw crashing through the
trees and shrubs, kicking piles of leaves, until the noise died away in
the distance. No Sauk ran noisily through the woods like that, unless
driven by some madness.

White Bear sighed. Oddly, he felt less frightened than he had before he
met Wolf Paw. Before, he had not known what to expect. Now he felt ready
for anything.

He strode into the woods following Three Horses' directions. As he
walked he began to hear the sounds of people's voices and dogs barking.
Gradually they drew nearer, until at last he broke through the trees
into a clearing.

The sight made his eyes brim with tears.

A hundred or more women in brown, fringed skirts were facing him, and as
he came forward they rushed to form a ring around him. His vision
blurred as he recognized faces he had not seen in six years.

Beyond the women he could see the camp of the British Band. In his joy
it seemed to him that the wickiups were bathed in a golden light. Rings
of gray domes began near the trees where he stood and spread into the
tall yellow prairie grass. Before the wickiups he could see what the
women had been working at, tasks abandoned for the moment, clothing
being mended, skins stretched, meat and fish cleaned and set on frames
to dry.

"White Bear is here!" cried one woman, and he recognized Water Flows
Fast, plump wife of Three Horses.

Three Horses, a short man with broad shoulders, stood beside his wife.
His nose was flat and spread out. White Bear did not remember it that
way. Something must have happened to Three Horses while he was gone.

_Much has happened to them while I was gone._

"I told you White Bear had come back," Three Horses said over and over
again.

White Bear breathed in the familiar smells of campfire smoke and
roasting meat, of leather and freshly cut wood and tobacco smoke. His
delighted eyes took in quillwork and beadwork and paint, blankets and
ribbons, bodies clad in fringed buckskin, warm brown faces, dark,
friendly eyes.

Murmuring greetings, he searched the crowd for specially loved faces.

"Where is Owl Carver?" he asked. After such a long time the Sauk
language came awkwardly to his lips.

Three Horses said, "Owl Carver visits the camps of the Fox and the
Kickapoo, to invite them to Black Hawk's council."

_What is Black Hawk planning now?_

White Bear did not like the sound of the news, but there would be time
to think about it later.

"Where is Sun Woman, my mother?"

Water Flows Fast spoke up. "She has gone to gather medicine plants." She
looked as cheerful as, he remembered, she always had, but her eyes
penetrated him.

"Will no one find her and tell her that I am here?"

Water Flows Fast said, "Redbird should go and tell Sun Woman. Redbird
lives with Sun Woman now."

_Redbird!_

He felt almost dizzy at the sound of her name, a name he had not heard
spoken aloud in six years.

As soon as Water Flows Fast spoke, she started to giggle, putting her
hands over her mouth. Many of the other women in the group giggled too.
White Bear wanted to hide his burning face. He had forgotten how painful
it could be to be made fun of by those who knew him so well.

But joy blazed up in his chest. Redbird living with Sun Woman? He wanted
to whoop with happiness, even as Wolf Paw had whooped with rage. That
could only mean that she had not taken a husband.

Then he took a deep breath and stiffened his body to hide his feelings.
He looked at the laughing faces all around him, especially the bright,
curious eyes of Water Flows Fast. If they saw how excited he was, they
would laugh at him all the more.

Trying to keep his voice steady, he asked, "Where is my mother's
wickiup?"

With a knowing smile--but what was it that she knew?--Water Flows Fast
beckoned to the wickiup of Sun Woman--and Redbird. "Come. I will take
you."

She turned, her fringed skirt swinging. The women parted to make way for
her. Shouldering his rifle, White Bear followed. Three Horses walked
beside him. White Bear heard the whisper of many moccasins and the
murmur of many voices behind him.

Water Flows Fast marched up to a wickiup near the center of the camp.
The dark, rounded shelter of sheets of elm bark and tree limbs was
small, just big enough for two people, three at the most.

White Bear's heart was beating like a dance drum. The buffalo-hide flap
was pulled down over the door, showing that if anyone was within they
wanted privacy.

"The wickiup of Sun Woman," said Water Flows Fast. "And of Redbird." She
looked at him expectantly.

"There is no one here," said White Bear.

This brought shouts of laughter from the women around him. He wished
they would all go away.

"I saw Redbird go in there," said Water Flows Fast, "and I did not see
her come out."

White Bear's discomfort increased as he watched her face redden and her
cheeks puff out. It seemed that mirth would make her burst.

Every beat of his heart seemed to shake his whole body. He looked around
slowly, trying to calm himself. Even if Redbird had waited for him, his
sudden return must have shocked her. She needed time to prepare herself
to meet him. And, like him, she did not want all these women watching
their meeting and laughing. He would simply have to wait until Redbird
was ready to greet him.

A rack of crisscrossed wooden sticks for drying skins stood by the
closed doorway. Slowly, deliberately, he walked over to the rack, leaned
his rifle against it, and laid down his pack and bags.

Then, turning his back on the wickiup, he sat down cross-legged on the
ground.

Water Flows Fast looked at him, open-mouthed.

"Thank you for showing me the way," he said. Hiding his embarrassment,
he made himself smile at the hundred or more women gathered to watch
him.

"What are you going to do?" Water Flows Fast asked.

"I am going to rest and thank Earthmaker for seeing me here safely."

"White Bear is a man of sense," said Three Horses, smiling his approval.

"Is that all?" Water Flows Fast asked.

"I am going to wait for Sun Woman, my mother."

"Is _that_ all?"

"That _is_ all," said White Bear.

Three Horses, who was no taller than his wife, gripped her plump upper
arm firmly. "Let White Bear alone."

"But--" Water Flows Fast started to protest, and her husband jerked her
arm.

"We will leave this man in peace," he said.

Her lower lip jutting out, Water Flows Fast let Three Horses pull her
away through the crowd.

White Bear sat with his eyes downcast to discourage people from talking
to him. Gradually the rest of the crowd dispersed.

The back of his neck bristled. He knew Redbird was in the wickiup behind
him. Sooner or later she must come out.

To have her so close after all this time, to know she was there and to
hear nothing but that terrible silence, and yet to sit with his back to
that buffalo-hide curtain, all this was a torment for him. The urge to
jump up and tear the curtain away pressed against his resolve to hold
himself still. He thought he might explode like a barrel of gunpowder.

He forced himself to breathe slowly and pretend that he was hidden in
shrubbery with a bow and arrow, watching for a deer.

After a time--he could not tell how much time--a face was peering into
his. Dark and square. The brown eyes brimmed with tears.

His eyes opened wider. Sun Woman was kneeling before him.

"My son." She reached out to him, and he scrambled to embrace her. When
her strong arms held him he felt like a little boy again.

He sat back to look at her dear face, wet with tears. Resting beside her
on the ground was the familiar basket with blue cloth cover that she
used to gather herbs.

He looked around for the sun. It was low and red on the western horizon.
It had been high when he sat down here. He must have gone on a spirit
walk.

"I knew it would be like this," Sun Woman said. "It would come one day
when I least expected it--my son would be back again."

He sighed deeply. "To see my mother makes my heart as big as the
prairie."

They sat facing each other and she gripped his shoulders. "You are a man
now, a very handsome man." She ran her hand along his cheek, and his
whole face felt warm. He kept his gaze fixed on her eyes.

She said, "You have learned much. You have been hurt. Your face is
scarred." She followed the line of the scar with her thumb, leaning
forward to peer still more closely at him. "I see sadness in you. Your
father is dead. That is why you have come back."

She sat back and closed her eyes for a silent moment. Then she began a
song for the dead.

    "Earthmaker, show him the way.
    Lead him over the bridge of stars and sunbeams,
    Along the westward Trail of Souls.
    Take his soul into your heart."

After she had finished the song, Sun Woman wiped the tears from her face
with her blunt fingers. She reached out and stroked his cheeks as well.
He had not realized that he was crying.

But grieving for Pierre reminded him to reach into his medicine bag.

"I have a gift for you, Mother." He took out the flat silver case with
its velvet neck cord, opened it and showed her the pair of spectacles
Marchette had brought to him from Victoire. "Do you know these?"

"Your father wore circles of glass like these. To see the marks on the
talking paper."

"Yes. These are the same ones." He closed the case and pressed it into
her hand. "Now you have something that was close to Star Arrow."

She said, "He was with me for five summers only, but in spirit, ever
since. Now I will feel even closer to him." She slipped the ribbon over
her head and dropped the case down the front of her doeskin dress.

He saw the tracks of more tears on her smooth brown cheeks in the fading
light. This time she did not wipe them away.

"Tell me all that has happened to you," she said.

As White Bear talked, he deliberately made his voice loud enough to
carry, so that Redbird, in the wickiup, might hear.

When he was through telling his story, he felt weighed down by guilt.

"I fled, Mother, even though I promised my father I would care for the
land. And smoked tobacco with him to seal the promise. Should I have
stayed?"

She put her hand on his shoulder and squeezed. "You kept your promise as
far as you were able. That is all the calumet requires. Your father
would not want you to die fighting for that land. It is better that you
come back here and be a Sauk again."

White Bear looked down, unable to meet Sun Woman's eyes. Feeling an ache
deep in the center of his body, remembering the great stone and log
house, the blizzard of blossoms in the orchards, the fields of green
corn and golden wheat, the herds that darkened the hillsides, he wanted
to clutch his chest where it felt as if it had been torn open. He could
not so easily forget Victoire.

_When I was at Victoire I yearned to go back to my people. Now I am with
my people and I miss Victoire. Will my heart never be at peace?_

Nancy had wanted him so desperately before they parted; Redbird would
not even let him see her.

White Bear saw that once again women had started to gather nearby, among
them the round-faced Water Flows Fast. And now White Bear saw another
familiar face he had not seen earlier, Redbird's mother, Wind Bends
Grass. She glowered at him as she always had, her fists on her broad
hips.

_O Earthmaker! Why would Redbird not come out and speak to him?_

A dozen cawing crows flew over the camp. Laughing at him.

He heard a movement behind him, a rustling of the buffalo-hide curtain.
He dared not look around.

A voice at his back said, "Go away, White Bear!"

A cool, sweet flow poured from his heart like a mountain spring at the
sound of Redbird's voice. He unfolded his legs, stiff from hours of
sitting, and pushed himself to his feet. He turned.

Weakness washed over him; he thought he might fall to the ground.
Redbird stood before him, her cheeks flushed, her slanting eyes
sparkling with anger. Her face was thinner than he remembered, her lips
fuller. She still wore a fringe of her hair over her forehead.

Standing silent and open-mouthed, he felt he must look utterly foolish.

"Go away," Redbird said again. "We do not want you here."

"To see you is a sunrise in my heart, Redbird."

"To see you is a foul day in my stomach!"

Reeling back from her anger, White Bear saw a little boy standing in the
doorway behind her.

He was bare-chested, brown-skinned. He wore a loincloth of red flannel
and fringed buckskin leggings. He was shifting uncomfortably from one
moccasined foot to the other and clutching at himself under the
loincloth.

Now White Bear understood why Redbird had finally come out. She and the
boy must have been inside the wickiup all the time he was sitting out
here, and the boy was about to burst.

It would have been funny, except that a much more important discovery
struck White Bear.

He looked closer at the boy's urgent eyes. Blue eyes.

White Bear's own eyes were brown, but Pierre's were blue. Could eye
color be passed in the blood from grandfather to grandson? Around his
eyes, in the narrow shape of his head, his long chin coming to a sharp
point, White Bear could see that this boy was a de Marion.

_This is our son! Redbird's and mine!_

Joy blazed up in his body like a fire that warms but does not hurt.

He asked, "What is his name, Redbird?"

She glanced over her shoulder at the boy. "What are you standing there
for? You have to go. Go!" The boy ran off toward the woods. White Bear
watched him. He ran well, even though he was very young and most
uncomfortable.

White Bear wanted to reach out and take Redbird into his arms.

She turned back to him, her fists clenched at her sides, her nostrils
flaring in fury.

"_Now_ you want to know what his name is. Now, five winters after he was
born."

He turned to Sun Woman. "Does she have a husband?"

Sun Woman raised her eyebrows. "There were many braves who wished to
marry her. Wolf Paw was most insistent. He offered Owl Carver ten
horses. Little Stabbing Chief of the Fox sought her. There were others,
besides."

Wolf Paw had wanted to marry her. That must have been the meaning of
that strange encounter outside the camp. Wolf Paw probably wanted to
kill him.

"Please, Sun Woman, do not talk to this man about me," Redbird said.
"You are his mother, and a mother to me. But you cannot make peace
between us."

"True," said Sun Woman, picking up her basket of herbs and bark. "Only
you can do that, daughter."

She turned to White Bear. "If Redbird does not welcome you into this
wickiup I share with her and Eagle Feather, I cannot invite you inside."

With that Sun Woman turned abruptly and trudged off toward the river.

_Eagle Feather!_

Redbird threw an exasperated look after Sun Woman.

Redbird's anger made White Bear feel as if one of the long knives'
cannonballs had crushed his chest. Perhaps if he could put his arms
around her she would remember how she had loved him. He took a step
toward her, reaching for her.

She stepped back quickly, bent down and picked up a rock. "Go away.
Now!"

_How graceful all her movements are._

The rock was gray and somewhat larger than her fist. It had sharp,
irregular edges and looked as if it had been used to chip arrowheads.

He said, "You would not be this angry at me if you did not want me back.
Why did you refuse every man who asked for you?"

Her face twisted with rage, she threw the rock.

For an instant he was blinded as it hit his cheek, stunning him, and his
head snapped back.

He felt a pounding pain in the back of his skull as his vision cleared.
The ache from being hit with a rifle butt had come back.

He heard gasps of dismay from some of the watching women, laughter from
others.

Wind Bends Grass called out scornfully, "I am ashamed to call this fool
my daughter. I cast her out of my lodge because she would accept no
suitors. At last comes the one who ruined her for all the others, and
she drives him away with a rock. I think we should throw rocks at her."

The crowd's laughter was louder, although White Bear saw that Wind Bends
Grass did not mean to be funny.

His left cheekbone throbbed, the cheek Raoul's knife had scarred, and he
felt a trickle of blood. But he would not let himself lift his hand to
wipe it away.

Redbird's hand went up to her own face, as if the rock had hit her. Her
slanting eyes widened with a look of horror.

She whirled and ducked through her dark doorway.

"Go in there after her, White Bear!" one of the women called.

He would not do that. He would not go into her wickiup until she invited
him. And in spite of the heaviness in his heart, in spite of the ache in
his cheekbone and the pounding in his head, he believed that sooner or
later invite him she would.

He turned his back on the empty doorway and sat down again.

The blue-eyed, brown-skinned boy was standing before him. A golden glow
filled White Bear's chest.

"You are hurt," said the boy.

"It is nothing, Eagle Feather. A man must endure pain without
complaint."

"Did my mother do that to you?"

"She wanted to punish me for staying away from you and her for so long.
My name is White Bear."

"I know what your name is."

When he heard that, he was sure that he would win her back.

The boy darted around him.

Resting his hands on his knees, White Bear closed his eyes and let his
mind dwell on a vast white-furred shape. Owl Carver had said that when a
man wished to send his spirit on a journey in the other world, he need
only think of his other self.

He saw the huge golden eyes, the massive, long-muzzled head, the
towering body.

Soon he and the Bear spirit were walking together toward the sun.

       *       *       *       *       *

Redbird did not understand herself. She hated White Bear, but when she
saw blood running down his face, she had hated herself. She sat in
darkness, biting her lips to keep from screaming.

She crept to the doorway and pushed the curtain open a crack. She could
see him sitting again with his back to her, his shoulders broad in his
green pale eyes' coat.

She drew back into the wickiup and saw the small steel knife she used
to cut up food gleaming near the embers of her fire. She picked it up
and held its edge against her feverish cheek.

The last light of day fell on her as the doorway curtain rose. Startled,
she almost cut herself. She whirled to see Eagle Feather staring at her.
She threw the knife down on the straw-covered floor.

Eagle Feather gave her a questioning look but said nothing.

She drew him down beside her and started telling him the story of why
the leaves change colors and fall to the ground in autumn.

It was dark outside when Sun Woman came back from the river, where she
had been washing the plants she had gathered. Redbird was afraid Sun
Woman would ask her to forgive White Bear, but the older woman said
nothing.

They passed what seemed like an ordinary evening, talking and telling
stories and singing. But Redbird could not forget that figure sitting
like a tree stump just beyond the buffalo-hide curtain.

Much later she went out, and by the light from tonight's full Moon of
Falling Leaves, looked into White Bear's face. It was motionless, as if
carved from wood.

He did not seem to see her. He must be on a spirit journey. Hot with
rage, she kicked at his knee. What right had he to go on a spirit
journey leaving his body to haunt her wickiup?

The impact of her moccasined foot shook him slightly, but it was like
kicking a bundle of pelts.

Redbird's breath came out in a cloud, lit by the full moon. She gathered
up some twigs, brought them into the wickiup and added them to the fire.
Sun Woman went out carrying a blanket. Redbird saw her draping it over
her son's shoulders.

_He does not need that_, Redbird thought, remembering how White Bear had
come back, seemingly frozen, from his vision quest in the Moon of Ice.

Tightly wrapped in her own blankets with Eagle Feather curled up in the
shelter of her body, Redbird lay awake, thinking that she had never in
her life slept with a man. That was White Bear's fault, and she ground
her teeth in the dark as she thought of the wrongs he had done her.

_He left me in the Moon of First Buds, and he returns in the Moon of
Falling Leaves--six summers later._

One afternoon they had been lovers. And then he had gone to live with
the pale eyes. For nine moons she had carried his son and then given
birth to him. He had not been here to give the baby a birth name. Owl
Carver, the baby's grandfather, had to do that, embarrassed at the
necessity, complaining that the people were laughing at their family.
She knew Star Arrow had required that no messages pass between White
Bear and the tribe. But if White Bear really loved her, could he not
have broken that rule--even if he had smoked the calumet with Star
Arrow--at least once? For six summers White Bear had been as silent, as
absent, as if he were dead.

_Even the dead sometimes send a sign._

The next day the sky was cloudy, and the air warmer than last night. All
morning long women walked past Redbird's wickiup, looking curiously at
the man who sat there motionless. Like Redbird herself, they had never
before seen a man while his spirit had gone to walk the bridge of stars.
When men went on spirit journeys they always retired to the forest or to
caves.

In the afternoon He Who Sits in Grease, a Fox brave, came to Redbird as
she and Sun Woman sat before their doorway plaiting baskets, a short
distance from White Bear. The brave was carrying a stout bustard with
feathers striped brown, black and white. He hunkered down facing her and
laid the bird before her.

His thick lips worked nervously. "This is for White Bear," he said.
"When he wakes up. It is the fattest of the three that I killed this
morning. Tell him that He Who Sits in Grease gives him this gift. I want
him to ask Earthmaker to make the animals come to me more willingly when
I hunt them."

Before Redbird could protest, the brave stood up and backed away, his
eyes timidly averted from the figure outside the doorway.

_He thinks White Bear is holy!_ The thought made her more angry at White
Bear than ever. She wanted to kick him again, but women were watching
from a distance, and she knew they would make fun of her.

"Get _up_," she said softly to White Bear. "Go _away_," she said,
grinding her teeth.

She wished Owl Carver would come back from visiting the other camps to
put a stop to White Bear's torturing her like this.

_But he might force me to accept White Bear as my man._

Amazingly, she felt a lift in her heart at this thought. She herself
could never forgive White Bear, but if Owl Carver, her father and the
shaman of the British Band, ordered her to, the decision would be made
for her.

Then, at least, this torment would end.

Sun Woman silently picked up the bustard, sat down and began plucking
the feathers, piling them in a basket to use for adornments and bedding.

To escape from being rubbed raw by White Bear's presence, Redbird went
out into the woods along the Ioway River, as Sun Woman had done
yesterday, to gather herbs. The medicine plants were at their most
powerful now, because they had been gaining strength all summer long.

Late in the day the sky darkened rapidly. The purple-gray clouds seemed
to hang so low that she could reach up and touch them. She heard the
first drops pattering on the branches above her. As the rain started to
fall faster, it drummed on her head and shoulders. Sighing at having to
give up this comforting work, she put a lid on her basket, stood up and
started back for the camp.

Her doeskin shirt and skirt kept the rain off her body, but her hair was
soaked and her face was streaming by the time she got back to the
wickiup. She would build up the fire and dry herself off. Its heat would
feel so good. She hoped Eagle Feather and Sun Woman were already inside.

She stopped before the silent, sitting figure outside the wickiup. The
brown blanket was pulled up over his head. Sun Woman must have done
that. The blanket was sodden with rain, and he looked like a rock
growing out of the ground.

The beating of rain filled her ears.

She squatted down and looked into his face. Water ran in rivulets down
from the blanket into his half-closed eyes. He did not even blink.

She shivered. The cold rain was coming down so hard she could not see
most of the camp. A lump blocked her throat.

"Come inside," she said. She had to raise her voice to hear it over the
drumming of the rain.

White Bear neither spoke nor moved.

"Come in. It is raining. It is cold. You will die out here." She
realized she was screaming at him.

"Oh!" she cried helplessly.

She sat on the ground, looking into the rain-slick, light-complexioned
face with the strong nose and the long jaw that she had loved long ago,
the face she had thought about so many times and had seen so often in
dreams. A black crust of blood had dried over the place where her rock
had gashed his cheek. On the same cheek a raised white line ran from
just under his eye to the corner of his mouth.

To try to wake a man on a spirit journey could be dangerous for him.

But her hands seemed to have a will of their own. She had to touch him.
She reached out, clutching his shoulders through the sopping blanket,
heedless of the rain pouring down her own face, running under the collar
of her doeskin shirt down her back and chest. She shook him.

"Get up! Come in out of the rain!"

His body felt lifeless when she shook him. But did she see a flicker in
his eyes?

"Please, White Bear, please!"

