tree. It is the same power that enables the fertilized ovum to develop
into an animal. It creates and recreates cells almost instantly;
accordingly, it is the perfect substitute for sleep. Stretch out, enjoy
its power; and while you rest, eat these nourishing tablets."

Northwood lay on a cot, and Dr. Mundson turned the Life Ray on him. For
a few minutes a delicious drowsiness fell upon him, producing a spell of
perfect peace which the cells of his being seemed to drink in. For
another delirious, fleeting space, every inch of him vibrated with a
thrilling sensation of freshness. He took a deep, ecstatic breath and
opened his eyes.

"Enough," said Dr. Mundson, switching off the Ray. "After three minutes
of rejuvenation, you are commencing again with perfect cells. All
ravages from disease and wear have been corrected."

Northwood leaped up joyously. His handsome eyes sparkled, his skin
glowed. "I feel great! Never felt so good since I was a kid."

A pleased grin spread over the scientist's homely face. "See what my
discovery will mean to the world! In the future we shall all go to the
laboratory for recuperation and nourishment. We'll have almost
twenty-four hours a day for work and play."

       *       *       *       *       *

He stretched out on the bed contentedly. "Some day, when my work is
nearly done, I shall permit the Life Ray to cure my hump."

"Why not now?"

Dr. Mundson sighed. "If I were perfect, I should cease to be so
overwhelmingly conscious of the importance of perfection." He settled
back to enjoyment of the Life Ray.

A few minutes later, he jumped up, alert as a boy. "_Ach!_ That's fine.
Now I'll show you how the Life Ray speeds up development and produces
four generations of humans a year."

With restored energy, Northwood began thinking of Athalia. As he
followed Dr. Mundson down a long corridor, he yearned to see her again,
to be certain that she was safe. Once he imagined he felt a gentle,
soft-fleshed touch against his hand, and was disappointed not to see her
walking by his side. Was she with him, unseen? The thought was sweet.

Before Dr. Mundson opened the massive bronze door at the end of the
corridor, he said:

"Don't be surprised or shocked over anything you see here, John
Northwood. This is the Baby Laboratory."

They entered a room which seemed no different from a hospital ward. On
little white beds lay naked children of various sizes, perfect,
solemn-eyed youngsters and older children as beautiful as animated
statues. Above each bed was a small Life Ray projector. A white-capped
nurse went from bed to bed.

"They are recuperating from the daily educational period," said the
scientist. "After a few minutes of this they will go into the growing
room, which I shall have to show you through a window. Should you and I
enter, we might be changed in a most extraordinary manner." He laughed
mischievously. "But, look, Northwood!"

       *       *       *       *       *

He slid back a panel in the wall, and Northwood peered in through a
thick pane of clear glass. The room was really an immense outdoor arena,
its only carpet the fine-bladed grass, its roof the blue sky cut in the
middle by an enormous disc from which shot the aurora of trapped
sunshine which made a golden umbrella over the valley. Through openings
in the bottom of the disc poured a fine rain of rays which fell
constantly upon groups of children, youths and young girls, all clad in
the merest scraps of clothing. Some were dancing, others were playing
games, but all seemed as supremely happy as the birds and butterflies
which fluttered about the shrubs and flowers edging the arena.

"I don't expect you to believe," said Dr. Mundson, "that the oldest
young man in there is three months old. You cannot see visible changes
in a body which grows as slowly as the human being, whose normal period
of development is twenty years or more. But I can give you visible proof
of how fast growth takes place under the full power of the Life Ray.
Plant life, which, even when left to nature, often develops from seed to
flower within a few weeks or months, can be seen making its miraculous
changes under the Life Ray. Watch those gorgeous purple flowers over
which the butterflies are hovering."

Northwood followed his pointing finger. Near the glass window through
which they looked grew an enormous bank of resplendent violet colored
flowers, which literally enshrouded the entire bush with their royal
glory. At first glance it seemed as though a violent wind were
snatching at flower and bush, but closer inspection proved that the
agitation was part of the plant itself. And then he saw that the
movements were the result of perpetual composition and growth.

       *       *       *       *       *

He fastened his eyes on one huge bud. He saw it swell, burst, spread out
its passionate purple velvet, lift the broad flower face to the light
for a joyous minute. A few seconds later a butterfly lighted airily to
sample its nectar and to brush the pollen from its yellow dusted wings.
Scarcely had the winged visitor flown away than the purple petals began
to wither and fall away, leaving the seed pod on the stem. The visible
change went on in this seed pod. It turned rapidly brown, dried out, and
then sent the released seeds in a shower to the rich black earth below.
Scarcely had the seeds touched the ground than they sent up tiny green
shoots that grew larger each moment. Within ten minutes there was a new
plant a foot high. Within half an hour, the plant budded, blossomed, and
cast forth its own seed.

"You understand?" asked the scientist. "Development is going on as
rapidly among the children. Before the first year has passed, the
youngest baby will have grandchildren; that is, if the baby tests out
fit to pass its seed down to the new generation. I know it sounds
absurd. Yet you saw the plant."

"But Doctor," Northwood rubbed his jaw thoughtfully, "Nature's forces of
destruction, of tearing down, are as powerful as her creative powers.
You have discovered the ultimate in creation and upbuilding. But
perhaps--oh, Lord, it is too awful to think!"

"Speak, Northwood!" The scientist's voice was impatient.

"It is nothing!" The pale young man attempted a smile. "I was only
imagining some of the horror that could be thrust on the world if a
supermind like Adam's should discover Nature's secret of death and
destruction and speed it up as you have sped the life force."

"_Ach Gott!_" Dr. Mundson's face was white. "He has his own laboratory,
where he works every day. Don't talk so loud. He might be listening. And
I believe he can do anything he sets out to accomplish."

Close to Northwood's ear fell a faint, triumphant whisper: "Yes, he can
do anything. How did you guess, worm?"

It was Adam's voice.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Now come and see the Leyden jar mothers," said Dr. Mundson. "We do not
wait for the child to be born to start our work."

He took Northwood to a laboratory crowded with strange apparatus, where
young men and women worked. Northwood knew instantly that these people,
although unusually handsome and strong, were not of Adam's generation.
None of them had the look of newness which marked those who had grown up
under the Life Ray.

"They are the perfect couples whom I combed the world to find," said the
scientist. "From their eugenic marriages sprang the first children that
passed through the laboratory. I had hoped," he hesitated and looked
sideways at Northwood, "I had dreamed of having the children of you and
Athalia to help strengthen the New Race."

A wave of sudden disgust passed over Northwood.

"Thanks," he said tartly. "When I marry Athalia, I intend to have an
old-fashioned home and a Black Age family. I don't relish having my
children turned into--experiments."

"But wait until you see all the wonders of the laboratory! That is why I
am showing you all this."

Northwood drew his handkerchief and mopped his brow. "It sickens me,
Doctor! The more I see, the more pity I have for Adam--and the less I
blame him for his rebellion and his desire to kill and to rule. Heavens!
What a terrible thing you have done, experimenting with human life."

"Nonsense! Can you say that all life--all matter--is not the result of
scientific experiment? Can you?" His black gaze made Northwood
uncomfortable. "Buck up, young friend, for now I am going to show you a
marvelous improvement on Nature's bungling ways--the Leyden jar mother."
He raised his voice and called, "Lilith!"

The woman whom they had met on the field came forward.

"May we take a peep at Lona's twins?" asked the scientist. "They are
about ready to go to the growing dome, are they not?"

"In five more minutes," said the woman. "Come see."

       *       *       *       *       *

She lifted one of the black velvet curtains that lined an entire side of
the laboratory and thereby disclosed a globular jar of glass and metal,
connected by wires to a dynamo. Above the jar was a Life Ray projector.
Lilith slid aside a metal portion of the jar, disclosing through the
glass underneath the squirming, kicking body of a baby, resting on a bed
of soft, spongy substance, to which it was connected by the navel cord.

"The Leyden jar mother," said Dr. Mundson. "It is the dream of us
scientists realized. The human mother's body does nothing but nourish
and protect her unborn child, a job which science can do better. And so,
in New Eden, we take the young embryo and place it in the Leyden jar
mother, where the Life Ray, electricity, and chemical food shortens the
period of gestation to a few days."

At that moment a bell under the Leyden jar began to ring. Dr. Mundson
uncovered the jar and lifted out the child, a beautiful, perfectly
formed boy, who began to cry lustily.

"Here is one baby who'll never be kissed," he said. "He'll be nourished
chemically, and, at the end of the week, will no longer be a baby. If
you are patient, you can actually see the processes of development
taking place under the Life Ray, for babies develop very fast."

Northwood buried his face in his hands. "Lord! This is awful. No
childhood; no mother to mould his mind! No parents to watch over him, to
give him their tender care!"

"Awful, fiddlesticks! Come see how children get their education, how
they learn to use their hands and feet so they need not pass through the
awkwardness of childhood."

       *       *       *       *       *

He led Northwood to a magnificent building whose facade of white marble
was as simply beautiful as a Greek temple. The side walls, built almost
entirely of glass, permitted the synthetic sunshine to sweep from end to
end. They first entered a library, where youths and young girls poured
over books of all kinds. Their manner of reading mystified Northwood.
With a single sweep of the eye, they seemed to devour a page, and then
turned to the next. He stepped closer to peer over the shoulder of a
beautiful girl. She was reading "Euclid's Elements of Geometry," in
Latin, and she turned the pages as swiftly as the other girl occupying
her table, who was devouring "Paradise Lost."

Dr. Mundson whispered to him: "If you do not believe that Ruth here is
getting her Euclid, which she probably never saw before to-day, examine
her from the book; that is, if you are a good enough Latin scholar."

Ruth stopped her reading to talk to him, and, in a few minutes, had
completely dumbfounded him with her pedantic replies, which fell from
lips as luscious and unformed as an infant's.

"Now," said Dr. Mundson, "test Rachael on her Milton. As far as she has
read, she should not misquote a line, and her comments will probably
prove her scholarly appreciation of Milton."

Word for word, Rachael was able to give him "Paradise Lost" from memory,
except the last four pages, which she had not read. Then, taking the
book from him, she swept her eyes over these pages, returned the book to
him, and quoted copiously and correctly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. Mundson gloated triumphantly over his astonishment. "There, my
friend. Could you now be satisfied with old-fashioned children who spend
long, expensive years in getting an education? Of course, your children
will not have the perfect brains of these, yet, developed under the Life
Ray, they should have splendid mentality.

"These children, through selective breeding, have brains that make
everlasting records instantly. A page in a book, once seen, is indelibly
retained by them, and understood. The same is true of a lecture, of an
explanation given by a teacher, of even idle conversation. Any man or
woman in this room should be able to repeat the most trivial
conversation days old."

"But what of the arts, Dr. Mundson? Surely even your supermen and women
cannot instantly learn to paint a masterpiece or to guide their fingers
and their brains through the intricacies of a difficult musical
composition."

"No?" His dark eyes glowed. "Come see!"

Before they entered another wing of the building, they heard a violin
being played masterfully.

Dr. Mundson paused at the door.

"So that you may understand what you shall see, let me remind you that
the nerve impulses and the coordinating means in the human body are
purely electrical. The world has not yet accepted my theory, but it
will. Under superman's system of education, the instantaneous records
made on the brain give immediate skill to the acting parts of the body.
Accordingly, musicians are made over night."

He threw open the door. Under a Life Ray projector, a beautiful,
Juno-esque woman was playing a violin. Facing her, and with eyes
fastened to hers, stood a young man, whose arms and slender fingers
mimicked every motion she made. Presently she stopped playing and handed
the violin to him. In her own masterly manner, he repeated the score she
had played.

"That is Eve," whispered Dr. Mundson. "I had selected her as Adam's
wife. But he does not want her, the most brilliant woman of the New
Race."

Northwood gave the woman an appraising look. "Who wants a perfect woman?
I don't blame Adam for preferring Athalia. But how is she teaching her
pupil?"

"Through thought vibration, which these perfect people have developed
until they can record permanently the radioactive waves of the brains of
others."

Eve turned, caught Northwood's eyes in her magnetic blue gaze, and
smiled as only a goddess can smile upon a mortal she has marked as her
own. She came toward him with outflung hands.

"So you have come!" Her vibrant contralto voice, like Adam's, held the
birdlike, broken tremulo of a young child's. "I have been waiting for
you, John Northwood."

       *       *       *       *       *

Her eyes, as blue and icy as Adam's, lingered long on him, until he
flinched from their steely magnetism. She slipped her arm through his
and drew him gently but firmly from the room, while Dr. Mundson stood
gaping after them.

They were on a flagged terrace arched with roses of gigantic size, which
sent forth billows of sensuous fragrance. Eve led him to a white marble
seat piled with silk cushions, on which she reclined her superb body,
while she regarded him from narrowed lids.

"I saw your picture that he televisioned to Athalia," she said. "What a
botch Dr. Mundson has made of his mating." Her laugh rippled like
falling water. "I want you, John Northwood!"

Northwood started and blushed furiously. Smile dimples broke around her
red, humid lips.

"Ah, you're old-fashioned!"

Her large, beautiful hand, fleshed more tenderly than any woman's hand
he had ever seen, went out to him appealingly. "I can bring you amorous
delight that your Athalia never could offer in her few years of youth.
And I'll never grow old, John Northwood."

She came closer until he could feel the fragrant warmth of her tawny,
ribbon bound hair pulse against his face. In sudden panic he drew back.

"But I am pledged to Athalia!" tumbled from him. "It is all a dreadful
mistake, Eve. You and Adam were created for each other."

"Hush!" The lightning that flashed from her blue eyes changed her from
seductress to angry goddess. "Created for each other! Who wants a
made-to-measure lover?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The luscious lips trembled slightly, and into the vivid eyes crept a
suspicion of moisture. Eternal Eve's weapons! Northwood's handsome face
relaxed with pity.

"I want you, John Northwood," she continued shamelessly. "Our love will
be sublime." She leaned heavily against him, and her lips were like a
blood red flower pressed against white satin. "Come, beloved, kiss me!"

Northwood gasped and turned his head. "Don't, Eve!"

"But a kiss from me will set you apart from all your generation, John
Northwood, and you shall understand what no man of the Black Age could
possibly fathom."

Her hair had partly fallen from its ribbon bandage and poured its
fragrant gold against his shoulder.

"For God's sake, don't tempt me!" he groaned. "What do you mean?"

"That mental and physical and spiritual contact with me will temporarily
give you, a three-dimension creature, the power of the new sense, which
your race will not have for fifty thousand years."

White-lipped and trembling, he demanded: "Explain!"

Eve smiled. "Have you not guessed that Adam has developed an additional
sense? You've seen him vanish. He and I have the sixth sense of Time
Perception--the new sense which enables us to penetrate what you of the
Black Age call the Fourth Dimension. Even you whose mentalities are
framed by three dimensions have this sixth sense instinct. Your very
religion is based on it, for you believe that in another life you shall
step into Time, or, as you call it, eternity." She leaned closer so that
her hair brushed his cheek. "What is eternity, John Northwood? Is it not
keeping forever ahead of the Destroyer? The future is eternal, for it is
never reached. Adam and I, through our new sense which comprehends Time
and Space, can vanish by stepping a few seconds into the future, the
Fourth Dimension of Space. Death can never reach us, not even accidental
death, unless that which causes death could also slip into the future,
which is not yet possible."

"But if the Fourth Dimension is future Time, why can one in the third
dimension feel the touch of an unseen presence in the Fourth
Dimension--hear his voice, even?"

"Thought vibration. The touch is not really felt nor the voice heard:
they are only imagined. The radioactive waves of the brain of even you
Black Age people are swift enough to bridge Space and Time. And it is
the mind that carries us beyond the third dimension."

       *       *       *       *       *

Her red mouth reached closer to him, her blue eyes touched hidden forces
that slept in remote cells of his being. "You are going into Eternal
Time, John Northwood, Eternity without beginning or end. You understand?
You feel it? Comprehend it? Now for the contact--kiss me!"

Northwood had seen Athalia vanish under Adam's kiss. Suddenly, in one
mad burst of understanding, he leaned over to his magnificent temptress.

For a split second he felt the sweet pressure of baby-soft lips, and
then the atoms of his body seemed to fly asunder. Black chaos held him
for a frightful moment before he felt sanity return.

He was back on the terrace again, with Eve by his side. They were
standing now. The world about him looked the same, yet there was a
subtle change in everything.

Eve laughed softly. "It is puzzling, isn't it? You're seeing everything
as in a mirror. What was left before is now right. Only you and I are
real. All else is but a vision, a dream. For now you and I are existing
one minute in future time, or, more simply, we are in the Fourth
Dimension. To everything in the third dimension, we are invisible. Let
me show you that Dr. Mundson cannot see you."

They went back to the room beyond the terrace. Dr. Mundson was not
present.

"There he goes down the jungle path," said Eve, looking out a window.
She laughed. "Poor old fellow. The children of his genius are worrying
him."

       *       *       *       *       *

They were standing in the recess formed by a bay window. Eve picked up
his hand and laid it against her face, giving him the full, blasting
glory of her smiling blue eyes.

Northwood, looking away miserably, uttered a low cry. Coming over the
