the southerly. It follows of course from this, that when it is summer in
the northern hemisphere it is winter in the southern, and _vice versa_
(see Fig. 13, p. 176).

[Illustration: FIG. 13.--Summer and Winter.]

The fact that, in consequence of this slant of the earth's axis, the sun
is for part of the year on the north side of the equator and part of the
year on the south side, leads to a very peculiar result. The path of the
moon around the earth is nearly on the same plane with the earth's path
around the sun. The moon, therefore, always keeps to the same regions of
the sky as the sun. The slant of the earth's axis thus regularly
displaces the position of both the sun and the moon to the north and
south sides of the equator respectively in the manner we have been
describing. Were the earth, however, a perfect sphere, such change of
position would not produce any effect. We have shown, however, that the
earth is not a perfect sphere, but that it is bulged out all round the
equator. The result is that this bulged-out portion swings slowly under
the pulls of solar and lunar gravitation, in response to the
displacements of the sun and moon to the north and to the south of it.
This slow swing of the equatorial regions results, of course, in a
certain slow change of the direction of the earth's axis, so that the
north pole does not go on pointing continually to the same region of the
sky. The change in the direction of the axis is, however, so extremely
slight, that it shows up only after the lapse of ages. The north pole of
the heavens, that is, the region of the sky towards which the north pole
of the earth's axis points, displaces therefore extremely slowly,
tracing out a wide circle, and arriving back again to the same position
in the sky only after a period of about 25,000 years. At present the
north pole of the heavens is quite close to a bright star in the tail of
the constellation of the Little Bear, which is consequently known as the
Pole Star; but in early Greek times it was at least ten times as far
away from this star as it is now. After some 12,000 years the pole will
point to the constellation of Lyra, and Vega, the most brilliant star in
that constellation, will then be considered as the pole star. This slow
twisting of the earth's axis is technically known as _Precession_, or
the _Precession of the Equinoxes_ (see Plate XIX., p. 292).

The slow displacement of the celestial pole appears to have attracted
the attention of men in very early times, but it was not until the
second century B.C. that precession was established as a fact by the
celebrated Greek astronomer, Hipparchus. For the ancients this strange
cyclical movement had a mystic significance; and they looked towards the
end of the period as the end, so to speak, of a "dispensation," after
which the life of the universe would begin anew:--

"Magnus ab integro saeclorum nascitur ordo.
Jam redit et Virgo, redeunt Saturnia regna;
   .      .      .      .      .      .
Alter erit tum Tiphys, et altera quae vehat Argo
Delectos heroas; erunt etiam altera bella,
Atque iterum ad Trojam magnus mittetur Achilles."

We have seen that the orbit of the earth is an ellipse, and that the sun
is situated at what is called the _focus_, a point not in the middle of
the ellipse, but rather towards one of its ends. Therefore, during the
course of the year the distance of the earth from the sun varies. The
sun, in consequence of this, is about 3,000,000 miles _nearer_ to us in
our northern _winter_ than it is in our northern summer, a statement
which sounds somewhat paradoxical. This variation in distance, large as
it appears in figures, can, however, not be productive of much
alteration in the amount of solar heat which we receive, for during the
first week in January, when the distance is least, the sun only looks
about _one-eighteenth_ broader than at the commencement of July, when
the distance is greatest. The great disparity in temperature between
winter and summer depends, as we have seen, upon causes of quite another
kind, and varies between such wide limits that the effects of this
slight alteration in the distance of the sun from the earth may be
neglected for practical purposes.

The Tides are caused by the gravitational pull of the sun and moon upon
the water of the earth's surface. Of the two, the moon, being so much
the nearer, exerts the stronger pull, and therefore may be regarded as
the chief cause of the tides. This pull always draws that portion of the
water, which happens to be right underneath the moon at the time, into a
heap; and there is also a _second_ heaping of water at the same moment
_at the contrary side of the earth_, the reasons for which can be shown
mathematically, but cannot be conveniently dealt with here.

As the earth rotates on its axis each portion of its surface passes
beneath the moon, and is swelled up by this pull; the watery portions
being, however, the only ones to yield visibly. A similar swelling up,
as we have seen, takes place at the point exactly away from the moon.
Thus each portion of our globe is borne by the rotation through two
"tide-areas" every day, and this is the reason why there are two tides
during every twenty-four hours.

The crest of the watery swelling is known as high tide. The journey of
the moon around the earth takes about a month, and this brings her past
each place in turn by about fifty minutes later each day, which is the
reason why high tide is usually about twenty-five minutes later each
time.

The moon is, however, not the sole cause of the tides, but the sun, as
we have said, has a part in the matter also. When it is new moon the
gravitational attractions of both sun and moon are clearly acting
together from precisely the same direction, and, therefore, the tide
will be pulled up higher than at other times. At full moon, too, the
same thing happens; for, although the bodies are now acting from
opposite directions, they do not neutralise each other's pulls as one
might imagine, since the sun, in the same manner as the moon, produces a
tide both under it and also at the opposite side of the earth. Thus both
these tides are actually increased in height. The exceptionally high
tides which we experience at new and full moons are known as _Spring
Tides_, in contradistinction to the minimum high tides, which are known
as _Neap Tides_.

The ancients appear to have had some idea of the cause of the tides. It
is said that as early as 1000 B.C. the Chinese noticed that the moon
exerted an influence upon the waters of the sea. The Greeks and Romans,
too, had noticed the same thing; and Caesar tells us that when he was
embarking his troops for Britain the tide was high _because_ the moon
was full. Pliny went even further than this, in recognising a similar
connection between the waters and the sun.

From casual observation one is inclined to suppose that the high tide
always rises many feet. But that this is not the case is evidenced by
the fact that the tides in the midst of the great oceans are only from
three to four feet high. However, in the seas and straits around our
Isles, for instance, the tides rise very many feet indeed, but this is
merely owing to the extra heaping up which the large volumes of water
undergo in forcing their passage through narrow channels.

As the earth, in rotating, is continually passing through these
tide-areas, one might expect that the friction thus set up would tend to
slow down the rotation itself. Such a slowing down, or "tidal drag," as
it is called, is indeed continually going on; but the effects produced
are so exceedingly minute that it will take many millions of years to
make the rotation appreciably slower, and so to lengthen the day.

Recently it has been proved that the axis of the earth is subject to a
very small displacement, or rather, "wobbling," in the course of a
period of somewhat over a year. As a consequence of this, the pole
shifts its place through a circle of, roughly, a few yards in width
during the time in question. This movement is, perhaps, the combined
result of two causes. One of these is the change of place during the
year of large masses of material upon our earth; such as occurs, for
instance, when ice and snow melt, or when atmospheric and ocean
currents transport from place to place great bodies of air and water.
The other cause is supposed to be the fact that the earth is not
absolutely rigid, and so yields to certain strains upon it. In the
course of investigation of this latter point the interesting conclusion
has been reached by the famous American astronomer, Professor Simon
Newcomb, that our globe as a whole is _a little more rigid than steel_.

We will bring this chapter to a close by alluding briefly to two strange
appearances which are sometimes seen in our night skies. These are known
respectively as the Zodiacal Light and the Gegenschein.

The _Zodiacal Light_ is a faint cone-shaped illumination which is seen
to extend upwards from the western horizon after evening twilight has
ended, and from the eastern horizon before morning twilight has begun.
It appears to rise into the sky from about the position where the sun
would be at that time. The proper season of the year for observing it
during the evening is in the spring, while in autumn it is best seen in
the early morning. In our latitudes its light is not strong enough to
render it visible when the moon is full, but in the tropics it is
reported to be very bright, and easily seen in full moonlight. One
theory regards it as the reflection of light from swarms of meteors
revolving round the sun; another supposes it to be a very rarefied
extension of the corona.

The _Gegenschein_ (German for "counter-glow") is a faint oval patch of
light, seen in the sky exactly opposite to the place of the sun. It is
usually treated of in connection with the zodiacal light, and one theory
regards it similarly as of meteoric origin. Another theory,
however--that of Mr. Evershed--considers it a sort of _tail_ to the
earth (like a comet's tail) composed of hydrogen and helium--the two
_lightest_ gases we know--driven off from our planet in the direction
contrary to the sun.


[13] Every one knows the simple experiment in which a coin lying at the
bottom of an empty basin, and hidden from the eye by its side, becomes
visible when a certain quantity of water has been poured in. This is an
example of refraction. The rays of light coming from the coin ought
_not_ to reach the eye, on account of the basin's side being in the way;
yet by the action of the water they are _refracted_, or bent over its
edge, in such a manner that they do.




CHAPTER XVI

THE MOON


What we call the moon's "phases" are merely the various ways in which we
see the sun shining upon her surface during the course of her monthly
revolutions around the earth (see Fig. 14, p. 184). When she passes in
the neighbourhood of the sun all his light falls upon that side which is
turned away from us, and so the side which is turned towards us is
unillumined, and therefore invisible. When in this position the moon is
spoken of as _new_.

As she continues her motion around the earth, she draws gradually to the
east of the sun's place in the sky. The sunlight then comes somewhat
from the side; and so we see a small portion of the right side of the
lunar disc illuminated. This is the phase known as the _crescent_ moon.

As she moves on in her orbit more and more of her illuminated surface is
brought into view; and so the crescent of light becomes broader and
broader, until we get what is called half-moon, or _first quarter_, when
we see exactly one-half of her surface lit up by the sun's rays. As she
draws still further round yet more of her illuminated surface is brought
into view, until three-quarters of the disc appear lighted up. She is
then said to be _gibbous_.

Eventually she moves round so that she faces the sun completely, and
the whole of her disc appears illuminated. She is then spoken of as
_full_. When in this position it is clear that she is on the contrary
side of the earth to the sun, and therefore rises about the same time
that he is setting. She is now, in fact, at her furthest from the sun.

[Illustration: Direction from which the sun's rays are coming.

Various positions and illumination of the mooon by the sun during her
revolution around the earth.

The corresponding positions as viewed from the earth, showing the
consequent phases.

FIG. 14.--Orbit and Phases of the Moon.]

After this, the motion of the moon in her orbit carries her on back
again in the direction of the sun. She thus goes through her phases as
before, only these of course are _in the reverse order_. The full phase
is seen to give place to the gibbous, and this in turn to the half-moon
and to the crescent; after which her motion carries her into the
neighbourhood of the sun, and she is once more new, and lost to our
sight in the solar glare. Following this she draws away to the east of
the sun again, and the old order of phases repeat themselves as before.

The early Babylonians imagined that the moon had a bright and a dark
side, and that her phases were caused by the bright side coming more and
more into view during her movement around the sky. The Greeks, notably
Aristotle, set to work to examine the question from a mathematical
standpoint, and came to the conclusion that the crescent and other
appearances were such as would necessarily result if the moon were a
dark body of spherical shape illumined merely by the light of the sun.

Although the true explanation of the moon's phases has thus been known
for centuries, it is unfortunately not unusual to see
pictures--advertisement posters, for instance--in which stars appear
_within_ the horns of a crescent moon! Can it be that there are to-day
educated persons who believe that the moon is a thing which _grows_ to a
certain size and then wastes away again; who, in fact, do not know that
the entire body of the moon is there all the while?

When the moon shows a very thin crescent, we are able dimly to see her
still dark portion standing out against the sky. This appearance is
popularly known as the "old moon in the new moon's arms." The dark part
of her surface must, indeed, be to some degree illumined, or we should
not be able to see it at all. Whence then comes the light which
illumines it, since it clearly cannot come from the sun? The riddle is
easily solved, if we consider what kind of view of our earth an observer
situated on this darkened part of the moon would at that moment get. He
would, as a matter of fact, just then see nearly the whole disc of the
earth brightly lit up by sunlight. The lunar landscape all around would,
therefore, be bathed in what to _him_ would be "earthlight," which of
course takes the place there of what _we_ call moonlight. If, then, we
recollect how much greater in size the earth is than the moon, it should
not surprise us that this earthlight will be many times brighter than
moonlight. It is considered, indeed, to be some twenty times brighter.
It is thus not at all astonishing that we can see the dark portion of
the moon illumined merely by sunlight reflected upon it from our earth.

The ancients were greatly exercised in their minds to account for this
"earthlight," or "earthshine," as it is also called. Posidonius (135-51
B.C.) tried to explain it by supposing that the moon was partially
transparent, and that some sunlight consequently filtered through from
the other side. It was not, however, until the fifteenth century that
the correct solution was arrived at.

[Illustration: One side of the moon only is ever presented to the
earth. This side is here indicated by the letters S.F.E. (side facing
earth).

By placing the above positions in a row, we can see at once that the
moon makes one complete rotation on her axis in exactly the same time as
she revolves around the earth.

FIG. 15.--The Rotation of the Moon on her Axis.]

Perhaps the most remarkable thing which one notices about the moon is
that she always turns the same side towards us, and so we never see her
other side. One might be led from this to jump to the conclusion that
she does not rotate upon an axis, as do the other bodies which we see;
but, paradoxical as it may appear, the fact that she turns one face
always towards the earth, is actually a proof that she _does_ rotate
upon an axis. The rotation, however, takes place with such slowness,
that she turns round but once during the time in which she revolves
around the earth (see Fig. 15). In order to understand the matter
clearly, let the reader place an object in the centre of a room and walk
around it once, _keeping his face turned towards it the whole time_,
While he is doing this, it is evident that he will face every one of the
four walls of the room in succession. Now in order to face each of the
four walls of a room in succession one would be obliged _to turn oneself
entirely round_. Therefore, during the act of walking round an object
with his face turned directly towards it, a person at the same time
turns his body once entirely round.

In the long, long past the moon must have turned round much faster than
this. Her rate of rotation has no doubt been slowed down by the action
of some force. It will be recollected how, in the course of the previous
chapter, we found that the tides were tending, though exceedingly
gradually, to slow down the rotation of the earth upon its axis. But, on
account of the earth's much greater mass, the force of gravitation
exercised by it upon the surface of the moon is, of course, much more
powerful than that which the moon exercises upon the surface of the
earth. The tendency to tidal action on the moon itself must, therefore,
be much in excess of anything which we here experience. It is, in
consequence, probable that such a tidal drag, extending over a very long
period of time, has resulted in slowing down the moon's rotation to its
present rate.

The fact that we never see but one side of the moon has given rise from
time to time to fantastic speculations with regard to the other side.
Some, indeed, have wished to imagine that our satellite is shaped like
an egg, the more pointed end being directed away from us. We are here,
of course, faced with a riddle, which is all the more tantalising from
its appearing for ever insoluble to men, chained as they are to the
earth. However, it seems going too far to suppose that any abnormal
conditions necessarily exist at the other side of the moon. As a matter
of fact, indeed, small portions of that side are brought into our view
from time to time in consequence of slight irregularities in the moon's
movement; and these portions differ in no way from those which we
ordinarily see. On the whole, we obtain a view of about 60 per cent. of
the entire lunar surface; that is to say, a good deal more than
one-half.

The actual diameter of the moon is about 2163 miles, which is somewhat
more than one-quarter the diameter of the earth. For a satellite,
therefore, she seems very large compared with her primary, the earth;
when we consider that Jupiter's greatest satellite, although nearly
twice as broad as our moon, has a diameter only one twenty-fifth that of
Jupiter. Furthermore, the moon moves around the earth comparatively
slowly, making only about thirteen revolutions during the entire year.
Seen from space, therefore, she would not give the impression of a
circling body, as other satellites do. Her revolutions are, indeed,
relatively so very slow that she would appear rather like a smaller
planet accompanying the earth in its orbit. In view of all this, some
astronomers are inclined to regard the earth and moon rather as a
"double planet" than as a system of planet and satellite.

When the moon is full she attracts more attention perhaps than in any of
her other phases. The moon, in order to be full, must needs be in that
region of the heavens exactly opposite to the sun. The sun _appears_ to
go once entirely round the sky in the course of a year, and the moon
performs the same journey in the space of about a month. The moon, when
full, having got half-way round this journey, occupies, therefore, that
region of the sky which the sun itself will occupy half a year later.
Thus in winter the full moon will be found roughly to occupy the sun's
summer position in the sky, and in summer the sun's winter position. It
therefore follows that the full moon in winter time is high up in the
heavens, while in summer time it is low down. We thus get the greatest
amount of full moonlight when it is the most needed.

The great French astronomer, Laplace, being struck by the fact that the
"lesser light" did not rule the night to anything like the same extent
that the "greater light" ruled the day, set to work to examine the
conditions under which it might have been made to do so. The result of
his speculations showed that if the moon were removed to such a distance
that she took a year instead of a month to revolve around the earth; and
if she were started off in her orbit at full moon, she would always
continue to remain full--a great advantage for us. Whewell, however,
pointed out that in order to get the moon to move with the requisite
degree of slowness, she would have to revolve so far from the earth that
she would only look one-sixteenth as large as she does at present, which
rather militates against the advantage Laplace had in mind! Finally,
however, it was shown by M. Liouville, in 1845, that the position of a
_perennial full moon_, such as Laplace dreamed of, would be
unstable--that is to say, the body in question could not for long remain
undisturbed in the situation suggested (see Fig. 16, p. 191).

[Illustration: Various positions of Laplace's "Moon" with regard to the
earth and sun during the course of a year.

The same positions of Laplace's "Moon," arranged around the earth, show
that it would make only one revolution in a year.

FIG. 16.--Laplace's "Perennial Full Moon."]

There is a well-known phenomenon called _harvest moon_, concerning the
nature of which there seems to be much popular confusion. An idea in
fact appears to prevail among a good many people that the moon is a
harvest moon when, at rising, it looks bigger and redder than usual.
Such an appearance has, however, nothing at all to say to the matter;
for the moon always _looks_ larger when low down in the sky, and,
furthermore, it usually looks red in the later months of the year, when
there is more mist and fog about than there is in summer. What
astronomers actually term the harvest moon is, indeed, something
entirely different from this. About the month of September the slant at
which the full moon comes up from below the horizon happens to be such
that, during several evenings together, she _rises almost at the same
hour_, instead of some fifty minutes later, as is usually the case. As
the harvest is being gathered in about that time, it has come to be
popularly considered that this is a provision of nature, according to
which the sunlight is, during several evenings, replaced without delay
by more or less full-moonlight, in order that harvesters may continue
their work straight on into the night, and not be obliged to break off
after sunset to wait until the moon rises. The same phenomenon is almost
exactly repeated a month later, but by reason of the pursuits then
carried on it is known as the "hunter's moon."

In this connection should be mentioned that curious phenomenon above
alluded to, and which seems to attract universal notice, namely, that
the moon _looks much larger when near the horizon_--at its rising, for
instance, than when higher up in the sky. This seeming enlargement is,
however, by no means confined to the moon. That the sun also looks much
larger when low down in the sky than when high up, seems to strike even
the most casual watcher of a sunset. The same kind of effect will,
indeed, be noted if close attention be paid to the stars themselves. A
constellation, for instance, appears more spread out when low down in
the sky than when high up. This enlargement of celestial objects when in
the neighbourhood of the horizon is, however, only _apparent_ and not
real. It must be entirely an _illusion_; for the most careful
measurements of the discs of the sun and of the moon fail to show that
the bodies are any larger when near the horizon than when high up in the
sky. In fact, if there be any difference in measurements with regard to
the moon, it will be found to be the other way round; for her disc, when
carefully measured, is actually the slightest degree _greater_ when
_high_ in the sky, than when low down. The reason for this is that, on
account of the rotundity of the earth's surface, she is a trifle nearer
the observer when overhead of him.

This apparent enlargement of celestial objects, when low down in the
sky, is granted on all sides to be an illusion; but although the
question has been discussed with animation time out of mind, none of the
explanations proposed can be said to have received unreserved
acceptance. The one which usually figures in text-books is that we
unconsciously compare the sun and moon, when low down in the sky, with
the terrestrial objects in the same field of view, and are therefore
inclined to exaggerate the size of these orbs. Some persons, on the
other hand, imagine the illusion to have its source in the structure of
the human eye; while others, again, put it down to the atmosphere,
maintaining that the celestial objects in question _loom_ large in the
thickened air near the horizon, in the same way that they do when viewed
through fog or mist.

The writer[14] ventures, however, to think that the illusion has its
origin in our notion of the shape of the celestial vault. One would be
inclined, indeed, to suppose that this vault ought to appear to us as
the half of a hollow sphere; but he maintains that it does not so
appear, as a consequence of the manner in which the eyes of men are set
quite close together in their heads. If one looks, for instance, high up
in the sky, the horizon cannot come within the field of view, and so
there is nothing to make one think that the expanse then gazed upon is
other than quite _flat_--let us say like the ceiling of a room. But, as
the eyes are lowered, a portion of the _encircling_ horizon comes
gradually into the field of view, and the region of the sky then gazed
