they might use their guns on us."

"Listen, Manning," Scorio rasped hoarsely, "just name your price to let
us loose. We'll do anything you want."

Manning drew his mouth down. "I can't think of a thing. We just don't
seem to have any use for you."

"Then what in hell," the gangster asked shakily, "are you going to do
with us?"

"You know," said Manning, "I may be a bit old-fashioned along some
lines. Maybe I am. I just don't like the idea of killing people for
money. I don't like people stealing things other people have worked hard
to get. I don't like thieves and murderers and thugs corrupting city
governments, taking tribute on every man, woman and child in our big
cities."

"But look here, Manning," pleaded Scorio, "we'd be good citizens if we
just had a chance."

Manning's face hardened. "You sent these men here to kill us tonight,
didn't you?"

"Well, not exactly. Stutsman kind of wanted you killed, but I told the
boys just to get the stuff in the safe and never mind killing you. I
said to them that you were pretty good eggs and I didn't like to bump
you off, see?"

"I see," said Manning.

He turned his back on Scorio and started to walk away. The gangster
chief came half-way out of his chair, and as he did so, Russ reached out
a single finger and tapped a key. Scorio screamed and beat with his
fists against the wall of force that had suddenly formed about him. That
single tap on the great keyboard had sprung a trap, had been the one
factor necessary to bring into being a force shell already spun and
waiting for him.

Manning did not even turn around at Scorio's scream. He slowly paced his
way down the line of standing gangsters. He stopped in front of Pete and
looked at him.

"Pete," he said, "you've sprung a good many prisons, haven't you?"

"There ain't a jug in the System that can hold me," Pete boasted, "and
that's a fact."

"I believe there's one that could," Greg told him. "One that no man has
ever escaped from, or ever will."

"What's that?" demanded Pete.

"The Vulcan Fleet," said Greg.

Pete looked into the eyes of the man before him and read the purpose in
those eyes. "Don't send me there! Send me any place but there!"

Greg turned to Russ and nodded. Russ's fingers played their tune of doom
upon the keyboard. His thumb depressed a lever. With a roar five
gigantic material energy engines screamed with thrumming power.

Pete disappeared.

The engines roared with thunderous throats, a roar that seemed to drown
the laboratory in solid waves of sound. A curious refractive effect
developed about the straining hulks as space near them bent under their
lashing power.

Months ago Russ and Greg had learned a better way of transmitting power
than by metal bars or through conducting beams. Beams of such power as
were developing now would have smashed atoms to protons and electrons.
Through a window in the side of the near engine, Greg could see the iron
ingot used as fuel dwindling under the sucking force.

       *       *       *       *       *

The droning died and only a hum remained.

"He's in a prison now he'll never get out of," said Greg calmly. "I
wonder what they'll think when they find him, dressed in civilian
clothes and carrying a heat gun. They'll clap him into a photo-cell and
keep him there until they investigate. When they find out who he is, he
won't get out--he has enough unfinished prison sentences to last a
century or two."

For Pete was on one of the Vulcan Fleet ships, the hell-ships of the
prison fleet. There were confined only the most vicious and the most
depraved of the Solar System's criminals. He would be forced to work
under the flaming whip-lashes of a Sun that hurled such intense
radiations that mere spacesuits were no protection at all. The workers
on the Vulcan Fleet ships wore suits that were in reality photo-cells
which converted the deadly radiations into electric power. For electric
power can be disposed of where heat cannot.

Quailing inside his force shell, Scorio saw his men go, one by one. Saw
them lifted and whisked away, out through the depths of space by the
magic touch upon the keyboards. With terror-widened eyes he watched
Russ set up the equations, saw him trip the activating lever, saw the
men disappear, listened to the thunderous rumbling of the mighty
engines.

Chizzy went to the Outpost, the harsh prison on Neptune's satellite. Reg
went to Titan, clear across the Solar System, where men in the infamous
penal colony labored in the frigid wastes of that moon of Saturn. Max
went to Vesta, the asteroid prison, which long had been the target of
reformers, who claimed that on it 50 per cent of the prisoners died of
boredom and fear.

Max was gone and only Scorio remained.

"Stutsman's the one who got us into this," wailed the gangster. "He's
the man you want to get. Not me. Not the boys. Stutsman."

"I promise you," said Greg, "that we'll take care of Stutsman."

"And Chambers, too," chattered Scorio. "But you can't touch Chambers.
You wouldn't dare."

"We're not worrying about Chambers," Greg told him. "We're not worrying
about anyone. You're the one who had better start doing some."

Scorio cringed.

"Let me tell you about a place on Venus," said Greg. "It's in the center
of a big swamp that stretches for hundreds of miles in every direction.
It's a sort of mountain rising out of the swamp. And the swamp is filled
with beasts and reptiles of every kind. Ravenous things, lusting for
blood. But they don't climb the mountain. A man, if he stayed on the
mountain, would be safe. There's food there. Roots and berries and
fruits and even small animals one could kill. A man might go hungry for
a while, but soon he'd find the things to eat.

"But he'd be alone. No one ever goes near that mountain. I am the only
man who ever set foot on it. Perhaps no one ever will again. At night
you hear the screaming and the crying of the things down in swamp, but
you mustn't pay any attention to them."

       *       *       *       *       *

Scorio's eyes widened, staring. "You won't send me _there_!"

"You'll find my campfires," Greg told him, "if the rain hasn't washed
them away. It rains a lot. So much and so drearily that you'll want to
leave that mountain and walk down into the swamp, of your own free will,
and let the monsters finish you."

Scorio sat dully. He did not move. Horror glazed his eyes.

Greg signed to Russ. Russ, pipe clenched between his teeth, reached out
his fingers for the keys. The engines droned.

Manning walked slowly to a television control, sat down in the chair
and flipped over a lever. A face stared out of the screen. It was
strangely filled with anger and a sort of half-fear.

"You watched it, didn't you, Stutsman?" Greg asked.

Stutsman nodded. "I watched. You can't get away with it, Manning. You
can't take the law into your own hands that way."

"You and Chambers have been taking the law into your hands for years,"
said Greg. "All I did tonight was clear the Earth of some vermin. Every
one of those men was guilty of murder ... and worse."

"What did you gain by it?" asked Stutsman.

Greg gave a bitter laugh. "I convinced you, Stutsman," he said, "that it
isn't so easy to kill me. I think it'll be some time before you try
again. Better luck next time."

He flipped the switch and turned about in the chair.

Russ jerked his thumb at the skylight. "Might as well finish the ship
now."

Greg nodded.

An instant later there was a fierce, intolerably blue-white light that
lit the mountains for many miles. For just an instant it flared,
exploding into millions of brilliant, harmless sparks that died into
darkness before they touched the ground. The gangster ship was destroyed
beyond all tracing, disintegrated. The metal and quartz of which it was
made were simply gone.

Russ brought his glance back from the skylight, looked at his friend.
"Stutsman will do everything he can to wipe us out. By tomorrow morning
the Interplanetary machine will be rolling. With only one purpose--to
crush us."

"That's right," Greg agreed, "but we're ready for them now. Our ship
left the Belgium factories several hours ago. The _Comet_ towed it out
in space and it's waiting for us now. In a few hours the _Comet_ will be
here to pick us up."

"War in space," said Russ, musingly. "That's what it will be."

"Chambers and his gang won't fight according to any rules. There'll be
no holds barred, no more feeble attempts like the one they tried
tonight. From now on we need a base that simply can't be located."

"The ship," said Russ.




_CHAPTER FOURTEEN_


The _Invincible_ hung in space, an empty, airless hull, the largest
thing afloat.

Chartered freighters, leaving their ports from distant parts of the
Earth, had converged upon her hours before, had unloaded crated
apparatus, storing it in the yawning hull. Then they had departed.

Now the sturdy little space-yacht, _Comet_, was towing the great ship
out into space, 500,000 miles beyond the orbit of the Moon. Slowly the
hull was being taken farther and farther away from possible discovery.

Work on the installation of the apparatus had started almost as soon as
the _Comet_ had first tugged at the ponderous mass. Leaving only a
skeleton crew in charge of the _Comet_, the rest of the selected crew
had begun the assembly of the mighty machines which would transform the
_Invincible_ into a thing of unimaginable power and speed.

The doors were closed and sealed and the air, already stored in the
ship's tanks, was released. The slight acceleration of the _Comet's_
towing served to create artificial weight for easier work, but not
enough to handicap the shifting of the heavier pieces of apparatus. An
electric cable was run back from the little yacht and the _Invincible_
took her first breath of life.

The work advanced rapidly, for every man was more than a mere engineer
or spacebuster. They were a selected crew, the men who had helped to
make the name of Gregory Manning famous throughout the Solar System.

First the engines were installed, then the two groups of five massive
power plants and the single smaller engine as an auxiliary supply plant
for the light, heat, air.

The accumulators of the _Comet_ were drained in a single tremendous
surge and the auxiliary generator started. It in turn awoke to life the
other power plants, to leave them sleeping, idling, but ready for
instant use to develop power such as man never before had dreamed of
holding and molding to his will.

Then, with the gigantic tools these engines supplied ... tools of pure
force and strange space fields ... the work was rapidly completed. The
power boards were set in place, welded in position by a sudden furious
blast of white hot metal and as equally sudden freezing, to be followed
by careful heating and recooling till the beryl-steel reached its
maximum strength. Over the hull swarmed spacesuited men, using that
strange new power, heat-treating the stubborn metal in a manner never
before possible.

The generators were charging the atoms of the ship's beryl-steel hide
with the same hazy force that had trapped and held the gangster ship in
a mighty vise. Thus charged, no material thing could penetrate them. The
greatest meteor would be crushed to drifting dust without so much as
scarring that wall of mighty force ... meteors traveling with a speed
and penetrative power that no gun-hurled projectile could ever hope to
attain.

Riding under her own power, driven by the concentration of gravitational
lines, impregnable to all known forces, containing within her hull the
secrets of many strange devices, the _Invincible_ wheeled in space.

       *       *       *       *       *

Russell Page lounged in a chair before the control manual of the
tele-transport machine. He puffed placidly at his pipe and looked out
through the great sweep of the vision panel. Out there was the black of
space and the glint of stars, the soft glow of distant Jupiter.

Greg Manning was hunched over the navigation controls, sharp eyes
watching the panorama of space.

Russ looked at him and grinned. On Greg's face there was a smile, but
about his eyes were lines of alert watchfulness and thought. Greg
Manning was in his proper role at the controls of a ship such as the
_Invincible_, a man who never stepped backward from danger, whose spirit
hungered for the vast stretches of void that lay between the worlds.

Russ leaned back, blowing smoke toward the high-arched control room
ceiling.

They had burned their bridges behind them. The laboratory back in the
mountains was destroyed. Locked against any possible attack by a sphere
of force until the tele-transport had lifted from it certain items of
equipment, it had been melted into a mass of molten metal that formed a
pool upon the mountain top, that ran in gushing, fiery ribbons down the
mountain side, flowing in gleaming curtains over precipices. It would
have been easier to have merely disintegrated in one bursting flash of
energy, but that would have torn apart the entire mountain range,
overwhelmed and toppled cities hundreds of miles away, dealt Earth a
staggering blow.

A skeleton crew had taken the _Comet_ back to Earth and landed it on
Greg's estate. Once again the tele-transport had reached out, wrapped
its fingers around the men who stepped from the little ship. In less
than the flash of a strobe light, they had been snatched back to the
_Invincible_, through a million miles of space, through the very walls
of the ship itself. One second they had been on Earth, the next second
they were in the control room of the _Invincible_, grinning, saluting
Greg Manning, trotting back to their quarters in the engine rooms.

       *       *       *       *       *

Russ stared out at space, puffed at his pipe, considering.

A thousand years ago men had held what they called tournaments. Armored
knights rode out into the jousting grounds and broke their lances to
prove which was the better man. Today there was to be another
tournament. This ship was to be their charger, and the gauntlet had been
flung to Spencer Chambers and Interplanetary Power. And all of space was
to be the jousting grounds.

This was war. War without trappings, without fanfare, but bitter war
upon which depended the future of the Solar System. A war to break the
grip of steel that Interplanetary accumulators had gained upon the
planets, to shatter the grim dream of empire held by one man, a war for
the right to give to the people of the worlds a source of power that
would forever unshackle them.

Back in those days, a thousand years ago, men had built a system of
government that historians called the feudal system. By this system
certain men were called lords or barons and other titles. They held the
power of life and death over the men "under" them.

This was what Spencer Chambers was trying to do with the Solar
System ... what he would do if someone did not stop him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Russ bit viciously on his pipe-stem.

The Earth, the Solar System, never could revert to that ancient way of
government. The proud people spawned on the Earth, swarming outward to
the other planets, must never have to bow their heads as minions to an
overlord.

The thrum of power was beating in his brain, the droning, humming power
from the engine rooms that would blast, once and forever, the last
threat of dictatorship upon any world. The power that would free a
people, that would help them on and up and outward to the great destiny
that was theirs.

And this had come because, wondering, groping, curiously, he had sought
to heat a slender thread of imperm wire within Force Field 348, because
another man had listened and had made available his fortune to continue
the experiments. Blind luck and human curiosity ... perhaps even the
madness of a human dream ... and from those things had come this great
ship, this mighty power, these many bulking pieces of equipment that
would perform wonders never guessed at less than a year ago.

Greg Manning swiveled his chair. "Well, Russ, we're ready to begin.
Let's get Wrail first."

Russ nodded silently, his mind still half full of fleeting thought.
Absent-mindedly he knocked out his pipe and pocketed it, swung around to
the manual of the televisor. His fingers reached out and tapped a
pattern.

Callisto appeared within the screen, leaped upward at them. Then the
surface of the frozen little world seemed to rotate swiftly and a dome
appeared.

The televisor dived through the dome, sped through the city, straight
for a penthouse apartment.
