fifty gravities of acceleration. One ... two--three-four-five; the last
three as close together as they could fly without setting off their
proximity fuzes.

Communications and mathematics and the electronic brains of calculating
machines had done all that they could do; the rest was up to human
skill, to the perfection of co-ordination and the speed of reaction of
human mind, nerve, and muscle.

Kinnison's glance darted from plate to panel to computer-tape to meter
to galvanometer and back to plate; his left hand moved in tiny arcs the
knobs whose rotation varied the intensities of two mutually
perpendicular components of his torpedoes' drives. He listened
attentively to the reports of triangulating observers, now giving him
data covering his own missiles, as well as the target object. The
fingers of his right hand punched almost constantly the keys of his
computer; he corrected almost constantly his torpedoes' course.

"Up a hair," he decided. "Left about a point."

The target moved away from its predicted path.

Down two--left three--down a hair--_Right_! The thing was almost through
Zone Two; was blasting into Zone One.

He thought for a second that his first torp was going to connect. It
almost did--only a last-instant, full-powered side thrust enabled the
target to evade it. Two numbers flashed white upon his plate; his actual
error, exact to the foot of distance and to the degree on the clock,
measured and transmitted back to his board by instruments in his
torpedo.

Working with instantaneous and exact data, and because the enemy had so
little time in which to act, Kinnison's second projectile made a very
near miss indeed. His third was a graze; so close that its proximity
fuze functioned, detonating the cyclonite-packed war-head. Kinnison knew
that his third went off, because the error-figures vanished, almost in
the instant of their coming into being, as its detecting and
transmitting instruments were destroyed. That one detonation might have
been enough; but Kinnison had had one glimpse of his error--how small it
was!--and had a fraction of a second of time. Hence Four and Five
slammed home; dead center. Whatever that target had been, it was no
longer a threat.

"Kinnison, in," he reported briefly to Fire Control, and took over from
Harper the direction of the activities of Sector A.

The battle went on. Kinnison sent Harper and Drummond out time after
time. He himself was given three more targets. The first wave of the
enemy--what was left of it--passed. Sector A went into action, again at
extreme range, upon the second. Its remains, too, plunged downward and
onward toward the distant ground.

The third wave was really tough. Not that it was actually any worse than
the first two had been, but the CR10685 was no longer getting the data
which her Technos ought to have to do a good job; and every man aboard
her knew why. Some enemy stuff had got through, of course; and the
observatories, both on the ground and above it--the eye of the whole
American Defense--had suffered heavily.

Nevertheless, Kinnison and his fellows were not too perturbed. Such a
condition was not entirely unexpected. They were now veterans; they had
been tried and had not been found wanting. They had come unscathed
through a bath of fire the like of which the world had never before
known. Give them any kind of computation at all--or no computation at
all except old CR10685's own radar and their own torps, of which they
still had plenty--and they could and would take care of anything that
could be thrown at them.

The third wave passed. Targets became fewer and fewer. Action slowed
down ... stopped.

The Technos, even the Sector Chiefs, knew nothing whatever of the
progress of the battle as a whole. They did not know where their rocket
was, or whether it was going north, east, south, or west. They knew when
it was going up or down only by the "seats of their pants." They did not
even know the nature of the targets they destroyed, since upon their
plates all targets looked alike--small, bright, greenish-yellow spots.
Hence:

"Give us the dope, Pete, if we've got a minute to spare," Kinnison
begged of his Fire Control Officer. "You know more than we do--give!"

"It's coming in now," came the prompt reply. "Six of those targets that
did such fancy dodging were atomics, aimed at the Lines. Five were
dirigibles, with our number on 'em. You fellows did a swell job. Very
little of their stuff got through--not enough, they say, to do much
damage to a country as big as the U.S.A. On the other hand, they stopped
scarcely any of ours--they apparently didn't have anything to compare
with you Technos.

"But all hell seems to be busting loose, all over the world. Our east
and west coasts are both being attacked, they say; but are holding.
Operation Daisy and Operation Fairfield are clicking, just like we did.
Europe, they say, is going to hell--everybody is taking pot-shots at
everybody else. One report says that the South American nations are
bombing each other ... Asia, too ... nothing definite; as straight dope
comes in I'll relay it to you.

"We came through in very good shape, considering ... losses less than
anticipated, only seven percent. The First Line--as you know
already--took a God-awful shellacking; in fact, the Churchill-Belcher
section was practically wiped out, which was what lost us about all of
our Observation.... We are now just about over the southern end of
Hudson Bay, heading down and south to join in making a vertical Fleet
Formation ... no more waves coming, but they say to expect attacks from
low-flying combat rockets--there goes the alert! On your toes,
fellows--but there isn't a thing on Sector A's screen...."

There wasn't. Since the CR10685 was diving downward and southward, there
wouldn't be. Nevertheless, some observer aboard that rocket saw that
atomic missile coming. Some Fire Control Officer yelled orders; some
Technos did their best--and failed.

And such is the violence of nuclear fission; so utterly incomprehensible
is its speed, that Theodore K. Kinnison died without realizing that
anything whatever was happening to his ship or to him.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Gharlane of Eddore looked upon ruined Earth, his handiwork, and found
it good. Knowing that it would be many of hundreds of Tellurian years
before that planet would again require his personal attention, he went
elsewhere; to Rigel Four, to Palain Seven, and to the solar system of
Velantia, where he found that his creatures the Overlords were not
progressing according to schedule. He spent quite a little time there,
then searched minutely and fruitlessly for evidence of inimical activity
within the Innermost Circle._

_And upon far Arisia a momentous decision was made: the time had come to
curb sharply the hitherto unhampered Eddorians._

"_We are ready, then, to war openly upon them?" Eukonidor asked,
somewhat doubtfully. "Again to cleanse the planet Tellus of dangerous
radioactives and of too-noxious forms of life is of course a simple
matter. From our protected areas in North America a strong but
democratic government can spread to cover the world. That government can
be extended easily enough to include Mars and Venus. But Gharlane, who
is to operate as Roger, who has already planted, in the Adepts of North
Polar Jupiter, the seeds of the Jovian Wars...._"

"_Your visualization is sound, youth. Think on._"

"_Those interplanetary wars are of course inevitable, and will serve to
strengthen and to unify the government of the Inner Planets ... provided
that Gharlane does not interfere.... Oh, I see. Gharlane will not at
first know; since a zone of compulsion will be held upon him. When he or
some Eddorian fusion perceives that compulsion and breaks it--at some
such time of high stress as the Nevian incident--it will be too late.
Our fusions will be operating. Roger will be allowed to perform only
such acts as will be for Civilization's eventual good. Nevia was
selected as Prime Operator because of its location in a small region of
the galaxy which is almost devoid of solid iron and because of its
watery nature; its aquatic forms of life being precisely those in which
the Eddorians are least interested. They will be given partial
neutralization of inertia; they will be able to attain velocities a few
times greater than that of light. That covers the situation, I think?_"

"_Very good, Eukonidor," the Elders approved. "A concise and accurate
summation._"

_Hundreds of Tellurian years passed. The aftermath. Reconstruction.
Advancement. One world--two worlds--three worlds--united, harmonious,
friendly. The Jovian Wars. A solid, unshakeable union._

_Nor did any Eddorian know that such fantastically rapid progress was
being made. Indeed, Gharlane knew, as he drove his immense ship of space
toward Sol, that he would find Tellus inhabited by peoples little above
savagery._

_And it should be noted in passing that not once, throughout all those
centuries, did a man named Kinnison marry a girl with red-bronze-auburn
hair and gold-flecked, tawny eyes._




BOOK THREE

TRIPLANETARY




CHAPTER 7

PIRATES OF SPACE


Apparently motionless to her passengers and crew, the Interplanetary
liner _Hyperion_ bored serenely onward through space at normal
acceleration. In the railed-off sanctum in one corner of the control
room a bell tinkled, a smothered whirr was heard, and Captain Bradley
frowned as he studied the brief message upon the tape of the recorder--a
message flashed to his desk from the operator's panel. He beckoned, and
the second officer, whose watch it now was, read aloud:

"Reports of scout patrols still negative."

"Still negative." The officer scowled in thought. "They've already
searched beyond the widest possible location of wreckage, too. Two
unexplained disappearances inside a month--first the _Dione_, then the
_Rhea_--and not a plate nor a lifeboat recovered. Looks bad, sir. One
might be an accident; two might possibly be a coincidence...." His voice
died away.

"But at three it would get to be a habit," the captain finished the
thought. "And whatever happened, happened quick. Neither of them had
time to say a word--their location recorders simply went dead. But of
course they didn't have our detector screens nor our armament. According
to the observatories we're in clear ether, but I wouldn't trust them
from Tellus to Luna. You have given the new orders, of course?"

"Yes, sir. Detectors full out, all three courses of defensive screen on
the trips, projectors manned, suits on the hooks. Every object detected
to be investigated immediately--if vessels, they are to be warned to
stay beyond extreme range. Anything entering the fourth zone is to be
rayed."

"Right--we are going through!"

"But no known type of vessel could have made away with them without
detection," the second officer argued. "I wonder if there isn't
something in those wild rumors we've been hearing lately?"

"Bah! Of course not!" snorted the captain. "Pirates in ships faster than
light--sub-ethereal rays--nullification of gravity mass without
inertia--ridiculous! Proved impossible, over and over again. No, sir, if
pirates are operating in space--and it looks very much like it--they
won't get far against a good big battery full of kilowatt-hours behind
three courses of heavy screen, and good gunners behind multiplex
projectors. They're good enough for anybody. Pirates, Neptunians,
angels, or devils--in ships or on broomsticks--if they tackle the
_Hyperion_ we'll burn them out of the ether!"

Leaving the captain's desk, the watch officer resumed his tour of duty.
The six great lookout plates into which the alert observers peered were
blank, their far-flung ultra-sensitive detector screens encountering no
obstacle--the ether was empty for thousands upon thousands of
kilometers. The signal lamps upon the pilot's panel were dark, its
warning bells were silent. A brilliant point of white light in the
center of the pilot's closely ruled micrometer grating, exactly upon the
cross-hairs of his directors, showed that the immense vessel was
precisely upon the calculated course, as laid down by the automatic
integrating course plotters. Everything was quiet and in order.

"All's well, sir," he reported briefly to Captain Bradley--but all was
not well.

Danger--more serious by far in that it was not external--was even then,
all unsuspected, gnawing at the great ship's vitals. In a locked and
shielded compartment, deep down in the interior of the liner, was the
great air purifier. Now a man leaned against the primary duct--the aorta
through which flowed the stream of pure air supplying the entire vessel.
This man, grotesque in full panoply of space armor, leaned against the
duct, and as he leaned a drill bit deeper and deeper into the steel wall
of the pipe. Soon it broke through, and the slight rush of air was stopped
by the insertion of a tightly fitting rubber tube. The tube terminated in
a heavy rubber balloon, which surrounded a frail glass bulb. The man stood
tense, one hand holding before his silica-and-steel-helmeted head a large
pocket chronometer, the other lightly grasping the balloon. A sneering
grin was upon his face as he waited the exact second of action--the
carefully predetermined instant when his right hand, closing, would
shatter the fragile flask and force its contents into the primary air
stream of the _Hyperion_!

       *       *       *       *       *

Far above, in the main saloon, the regular evening dance was in full
swing. The ship's orchestra crashed into silence, there was a patter of
applause, and Clio Marsden, radiant belle of the voyage, led her partner
out onto the promenade and up to one of the observation plates.

"Oh, we can't see the Earth any more!" she exclaimed. "Which way do you
turn this, Mr. Costigan?"

"Like this," and Conway Costigan, burly young First Officer of the
liner, turned the dials. "There--this plate is looking back, or down, at
Tellus; this other one is looking ahead."

Earth was a brilliantly shining crescent far beneath the flying vessel.
Above her, ruddy Mars and silvery Jupiter blazed in splendor ineffable
against a background of utterly indescribable blackness--a background
thickly besprinkled with dimensionless points of dazzling brilliance
which were the stars.

"Oh, isn't it wonderful!" breathed the girl, awed. "Of course, I suppose
that it's old stuff to you, but I'm a ground-gripper, you know, and I
could look at it forever, I think. That's why I want to come out here
after every dance. You know, I...."

Her voice broke off suddenly, with a queer, rasping catch, as she seized
his arm in a frantic clutch and as quickly went limp. He stared at her
sharply, and understood instantly the message written in her eyes--eyes
now enlarged, staring, hard, brilliant, and full of soul-searing terror
as she slumped down, helpless but for his support. In the act of
exhaling as he was, lungs almost entirely empty, yet he held his breath
until he had seized the microphone from his belt and had snapped the
lever to "emergency."

"Control room!" he gasped then, and every speaker throughout the great
cruiser of the void blared out the warning as he forced his already
evacuated lungs to absolute emptiness. "Vee-Two Gas! Get tight!"

Writhing and twisting in his fierce struggle to keep his lungs from
gulping in a draft of that noxious atmosphere, and with the unconscious
form of the girl draped limply over his left arm, Costigan leaped toward
the portal of the nearest lifeboat. Orchestra instruments crashed to the
floor and dancing couples fell and sprawled inertly while the tortured
First Officer swung the door of the lifeboat open and dashed across the
tiny room to the air-valves. Throwing them wide open, he put his mouth
to the orifice and let his laboring lungs gasp their eager fill of the
cold blast roaring from the tanks. Then, air-hunger partially assuaged,
he again held his breath, broke open the emergency locker, donned one of
the space-suits always kept there, and opened its valves wide in order
to flush out of his uniform any lingering trace of the lethal gas.

He then leaped back to his companion. Shutting off the air, he released
a stream of pure oxygen, held her face in it, and made shift to force
some of it into her lungs by compressing and releasing her chest against
his own body. Soon she drew a spasmodic breath, choking and coughing,
and he again changed the gaseous stream to one of pure air, speaking
urgently as she showed signs of returning consciousness.

"Stand up!" he snapped. "Hang onto this brace and keep your face in this
air-stream until I get a suit around you! Got me?"

She nodded weakly, and, assured that she could hold herself at the
valve, it was the work of only a minute to encase her in one of the
protective coverings. Then, as she sat upon a bench, recovering her
strength, he flipped on the lifeboat's visiphone projector and shot its
invisible beam up into the control room, where he saw space-armored
figures furiously busy at the panels.

"Dirty work at the cross-roads!" he blazed to his captain, man to
man--formality disregarded, as it so often was in the Triplanetary
service. "There's skulduggery afoot somewhere in our primary air! Maybe
that's the way they got those other two ships--pirates! Might have been
a timed bomb--don't see how anybody could have stowed away down there
through the inspections, and nobody but Franklin can neutralize the
shield of the air room--but I'm going to look around, anyway. Then I'll
join you fellows up there."

"What was it?" the shaken girl asked. "I think that I remember your
saying 'Vee-Two gas.' That's forbidden! Anyway, I owe you my life,
Conway, and I'll never forget it--never. Thanks--but the others--how
about all the rest of us?"

"It was Vee-Two, and it is forbidden," Costigan replied grimly, eyes
fast upon the flashing plate, whose point of projection was now deep in
the bowels of the vessel. "The penalty for using it or having it is
death on sight. Gangsters and pirates use it, since they have nothing to
lose, being on the death list already. As for your life, I haven't saved
it yet--you may wish I'd let it ride before we get done. The others are
too far gone for oxygen--couldn't have brought even you around in a few
more seconds, quick as I got to you. But there's a sure antidote--we all
carry it in a lock-box in our armor--and we all know how to use it,
because crooks all use Vee-Two and so we're always expecting it. But
since the air will be pure again in half an hour we'll be able to revive
the others easily enough if we can get by with whatever is going to
happen next. There's the bird that did it, right in the air-room. It's
the Chief Engineer's suit, but that isn't Franklin that's in it. Some
