you _all_ out of the ship? You"--he pointed at Harkness--"and
you"--this time it was Chet--"go out now. You can die in your damned
gas that you expected would kill me! But, you fools, you
imbeciles--Mam'selle, she stays with me!" The struggling girl was
helpless in the great arm that drew her close.

Harkness' mad rage gave place to a dead stillness. From bloodless lips
in a chalk-white face he spat out one sentence:

"Take your filthy hands off her--now--or I'll--"

Schwartzmann's one free hand still held the pistol. He raised it with
deadly deliberation; it came level with Harkness' unflinching eyes.

"Yes?" said Schwartzmann. "You will do--what?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Chet saw the deadly tableau. He knew with a conviction that gripped
his heart that here was the end. Walt would die and he would be next.
Diane would be left defenseless.... The flashing thought that followed
came to him as sharply as the crack of any pistol. It seemed to burst
inside his brain, to lift him with some dynamic power of its own and
project him into action.

He threw himself sideways from under the pilot's hand, out from
beneath the heavy metal bar--and he whirled, as he leaped, to face the
man. One lean, brown hand clenched to a fist that started a long
swing from somewhere near his knees; it shot upward to crash beneath
the pilot's out-thrust jaw and lift him from the floor. Max had aimed
the bar in a downward sweep where Chet's head had been the moment
before; and now man and bar went down together. In the same instant
Chet threw himself upon the weapon and leaped backward to his feet.

One frozen second, while, to Chet, the figures seemed as motionless as
if carved from stone--two men beside the half-opened port--Harkness in
convulsive writhing between two others--the figure of Diane, strained,
tense and helpless in Schwartzmann's grasp--and Schwartzmann, whose
aim had been disturbed, steadying the pistol deliberately upon
Harkness--

"Wait!" Chet's voice tore through the confusion. He knew he must grip
Schwartzmann's attention--hold that trigger finger that was tensed to
send a detonite bullet on its way. "Wait, damn you! I'll answer your
question. I'll tell you what we'll do!"

In that second he had swung the metal bar high; now he brought it
crashing down in front of him. Schwartzmann flinched, half turned as
if to fire at Chet, and saw the blow was not for him.

With a splintering crash, the bar went through an obstruction. There
was sound of glass that slivered to a million mangled bits--the sharp
tang of metal broken off--a crash and clatter--then silence, save for
one bit of glass that fell belatedly to the floor, its tiny jingling
crash ringing loud in the deathly stillness of the room....

It had been the control-room, this place of metal walls and of
shining, polished instruments, and it could be called that no longer.
For, battered to useless wreckage, there lay on a metal table a cage
that had once been formed of curving bars. Among the fragments a metal
ball that had guided the great ship still rocked idly from its fall,
until it, too, was still.

It was a room where nothing moved--where no person so much as
breathed....

Then came the Master Pilot's voice, and it was speaking with quiet
finality.

"And that," he said, "is your answer. Our ship has made its last
flight."

His eyes held steadily upon the blanched face of Herr Schwartzmann,
whose limp arms released the body of Diane; the pistol hung weakly at
the man's side. And the pilot's voice went on, so quiet, so hushed--so
curiously toneless in that silent room.

"What was it that you said?--that Harkness and I would be staying
here? Well, you were right when you said that, Schwartzmann; but it's
a hard sentence, that--imprisonment for life."

Chet paused now, to smile deliberately, grimly at the dark face so
bleached and bloodless, before he repeated:

"Imprisonment for life!--and you didn't know that you were sentencing
yourself. For you're staying too, Schwartzmann, you contemptible,
thieving dog! You're staying with us--here--on the Dark Moon!"

(_To be continued._)




If The Sun Died

_By R. F. Starzl_

[Illustration: Crack! Again Mich'l's fist caught him.]


[Sidenote: Tens of millenniums after the Death of the Sun there comes
a young man who dares to open the Frozen Gate of Subterranea.]

By our system of time we would have called it around 65,000 A. D., but
in this cavern world, miles below the long-forgotten surface of the
earth, it was 49,889. Since the Death of the Sun. That legendary sun
was but a dim racial memory, but the 24-hour day, based on its
illusory travel across the sky, was still maintained by uranium
clocks, by which the myriads who dwelt in the galleries and maze of
the under-world warrens regulated their lives.

In the office of the nation's central electro-plant sat a young man.
He was unoccupied at the moment. He was an example of the marvelously
slow process of evolution, for, to all outward appearances he differed
little from a Twentieth Century man. Keen intelligence sat on his
fine-cut, kindly young face. In general build he was lighter, more
refined than a man of the past. Yet even the long, delicately colored
robe of mineral silk which he wore could not detract from his obvious
virility and strength.

His face flashed in a smile when a girl suddenly appeared in the
middle of the room, materializing, so it seemed, out of nowhere. She
resembled him to some extent, except that she was exquisitely
feminine, dark-haired, with a skin of warm ivory, while he was blond
and ruddy. Her tinkling, silvery voice was troubled as she asked:

"Have I your leave to stay, Mich'l Ares?"

The look of adoration he gave her was answer enough, but he answered
with the conventional formula, "It is given." He rose to his feet,
walked right through the seemingly solid vision and made an adjustment
on a bank of dials. Then he walked through the apparition again and,
standing beside his chair, looked at her inquiringly.

"You haven't forgotten, Mich'l, this is the day of the Referendum?"

Mich'l smiled slightly. It would be a day of confusion in Subterranea
if he should forget. As chief of the technies he was in direct charge
of the tabulating machines that would, a few seconds after the vote,
give the result in the matter of the opening of the Frozen Gate. But
the girl's concern sobered him instantly. On the decision of the
people at noon depended the life work of her father, Senator Mane. And
it was now nine o'clock.

"I am sure they will order the Gate opened," he said instantly. "All
the technies are agreed that your father is right, that the Great
Cold was only another, more severe ice age--not the death of the Sun.
The technies--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Just as the girl had seemingly materialized, a young man now stood
beside her. In appearance he was a picture of pride, power, arrogance,
and definite danger. His hawk-like, patrician features were smiling.
This olive-skinned, dark young rival of Mich'l was Lane Mollon, son of
Senator Mollon, ruthless administration leader and bitter opponent of
Senator Mane's Exodus faction.

Lane looked at Mich'l insolently.

"Have I your leave to stay, Mich'l Ares?" he asked.

"It is given," said Mich'l without enthusiasm.

"I'm not calling on you of my own will, Mich'l," the apparition of
young Mollon said contemptuously, "but Nida had the telucid turned on
as I stepped into the room."

"It's as well for you that you're not here personally," Mich'l replied
promptly. "The last time we met I believe I was obliged to knock you
down."

Lane Mollon flushed, with a sidelong glance at Nida. The girl gave
Mich'l a frightened look.

Lane interpreted her concern rightly.

"Ordinarily it's not safe to try anything like that with me. I could
have you executed in half an hour. But I don't have to call on the
State to punish you. Nida, you'll admit I'm taking no unfair advantage
of him?"

"Oh, I do, Lane, but--"

Lane reached out his hand to the dial, invisible to Mich'l, which
operated the telucid apparatus, and immediately the apparitions
vanished. Mich'l looked at his own telucid, its great unwinking eye
set in the wall. But he did not project his own illusory body to the
girl's home. He was a technie--one of the pitifully few trained men
and women who kept the intricate automatic machinery working. On them
rested the immense, stupid civilization of the caverns, and there was
work to do. Mich'l felt that on this morning of her father's greatest
trial Nida would pay scant attention to Lane.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mich'l was testing some of the controls when Gobet Hanlon came in.
Gobet was also a technie, and Mich'l's special friend. Like Mich'l, he
wore the light robe that was universal among the civilians in the
equable climate of the caverns. He walked with the light, springy step
that was somehow characteristic of the specialized class to which he
belonged, as distinguished from the languid gait of the pampered, lazy
populace. Attached to his girdle of flat chain links was a tiny
computing machine about as large as the palm of a man's hand. For
Gobet did most of the mathematical work.

"You'll want me at the tabulating section?" Gobet stated inquiringly.

"It may be well," Mich'l smiled. "For the first time in centuries, I
believe, the general public is going to vote."

"Flos Entine wants to come along."

Mich'l's smile changed to a grin. He knew the pretty, willful little
sweetheart of Gobet's. If she wanted to be at the tabulating plant she
would be there.

"In fact," Gobet confessed somewhat sheepishly, "she is in the car."

The car was waiting in the gallery. It had no visible support, but
hovered a few inches above the floor above one of two parallel
aluminum alloy strips that stretched, like the trolley tracks of the
ancients, throughout all the galleries. The ancients well knew that
aluminum is repelled by magnetism, but the race had lived in the
caverns for centuries before evolving an alloy that possessed this
repulsive power to a degree strong enough to support a considerable
weight.

Under Mich'l's guidance the car moved forward silently, through
interminable busy streets with arched roofs, lined on either side with
doors that led to homes, theaters and food distributing automats.
Occasionally they passed public gardens, purely ornamental, in which a
few specimens of vegetation were preserved. They passed multitudes of
people, most of them handsome with a pampered, hot-house prettiness,
but betraying the peculiar lassitude which had been sapping the
energies of this once dynamic race for millennia. Yet to-day they
showed almost eagerness. The name of Leo Mane, prophet of deliverance,
was on every tongue. And what was the Sun like? Like the great
vita-lights that were prescribed by law and evaded by everyone, except
possibly the technies? Those technies--they seemed to delight in work!
Curious glances fell on the gliding car. Some work in connection with
the Referendum? What must one do to vote? Oh, the telucid!

       *       *       *       *       *

Arriving at Administration Circle, the car entered a vast excavation
half a mile in diameter, possibly a thousand feet high at the dome.
Here were the entrances to some of the principal Government warrens.
Here also centered the streets, like radiating spokes of a wheel, on
which many of the officials lived. Here the emanation bulbs were more
frequent than in the galleries, so that the light was almost glaring.
Guards of soldier-police, the stolid, well-fed, specialized class
produced by centuries of a static civilization, were everywhere. Not
in the memory of their grandparents had they done any fighting, but in
their short, brightly colored tunics, flaring trousers and little
kepis they looked very smart. Their only weapon was a small tube
capable of projecting a lethal light-ray.

Mich'l led his party to the audience hall. It was only a few hundred
feet in diameter. At one end was the speaker's rostrum. Senator Mane
was already there. He was tall, purposeful, but withal tired and
wistful looking. His graying hair was cut at the nape of his neck,
sweeping back from his swelling temples in a manner really suggestive
of a mane. His large, luminous eyes lit up.

"Is it nearly time?"

"Yes, Senator," Mich'l said. "The nation will soon assemble."

"You have met Senator Mollon?"

"I have had the pleasure," Mich'l acknowledged with polite irony,
"since Senator Mollon gives me practically all my orders."

Mollon acknowledged the tribute with a quick smile, without rising
from his chair. He, too, was different from the average Subterranean
in that he was forceful and aggressive, like Senator Mane. He was
still youngish looking, of powerful, blocky build. His dark hair was
carefully parted in the middle and brushed down sleekly. The Twentieth
Century had known his prototype, the successful, powerful, utterly
unscrupulous politician; and in a different sphere, that type of
extra-Governmental ruler which the ancients called "gangster." It was
casually discussed in Subterranea that certain of the state
soldier-police were responsible for the mysterious assassinations that
had so conveniently removed most of the effective resistance to
Mollon's progress in the Senate. The once potent body had not held a
session in ten years: didn't dare to, a cynical and indifferent public
said. And a strange reluctance on the part of qualified men to accept
the Presidential nomination had left that office unfilled for the past
three years. Mollon, as party dictator, performed the duties of
President provisionally.

       *       *       *       *       *

Flos, mischievous as usual, rounded her great blue eyes and gazed at
Mollon with an expression of rapt admiration.

"Oh, Senator," she thrilled, "I think it's wonderful of you to give
Senator Mane an opportunity to debate with you. You are so kind!"

Mollon failed to detect any mockery, luckily for Flos. He looked at
her with half-closed eyes.

"The public must be satisfied," he rumbled. "Senator Mane has aroused
in them great hopes. A small matter might be adjusted, but only a
Referendum will satisfy them in this."

"But Senator, the race is going to ruin. If we could get into the Sun
again--wouldn't you want that?"

"I don't believe there is a 'Sun'," Mollon replied; then, with the
candor of one who is perfectly sure of himself, added:

"If Mane were right, I still couldn't permit the Frozen Gate to be
opened. I can control the people for their own good, here; it might
not be possible Outside."

A deep musical note sounded. Suddenly the myriad inhabitants of
Subterranea seemed to be milling around in the room. Actually their
bodies were in their dwelling cells, but their telucid images filled
the hall. By a simple adjustment of the power circuit, their images,
instead of being life size, were made only about an inch high,
permitting the accommodation of the entire nation in the hall. Their
millions of tiny voices, mingling, made a sighing sound.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mane rose and stepped forward, raising his hand.

"Citizens of Subterranea," he began in powerful, resonant tones, and
then went on to put into his address all the fervor of a lifetime of
endeavor. He told them of those times in the dim past when the human
race still dwelt on the surface of the earth. Of the Sun that poured
out inexhaustible floods of life and light; of the green things that
were grown, not only to look at, but for food for all living things
before food was made synthetically out of mined chemicals. Of the
world overrun by a teeming, happy, dynamic civilization.

"Then something happened. The Sun seemed to give less light, less
heat. Perhaps we ran into a cloud of cosmic dust that intercepted the
Sun's rays. Perhaps the cause was to be found in some change in the
Sun's internal structure. But the effects could not be doubted. Ice
began to come down from the poles. Ice barriers higher than the
highest towers covered the world, wiping out all life but the most
energetic.

