Almost as though it had been in wait, thick liquid gurgling sounded
behind them. Like a wounded thing it emerged from behind the broken
highway, bulging up into the light which shone on the ripples in its
shriveled membrane.

"Run it!" bawled Urson, and they took off down the street. In the
moonlight, the ruined piers spread along the waterfront to either side
of them, some even slanting into the silvered water.

Turning once, they saw it bloat the entrance of the street, fill it, and
then pour across the broken stones, slipping across the rubble of the
smashed wharf.

When Geo hit water, he was aware of two things immediately as the hands
reached for his body. First, the thong was yanked from around his neck.
Second, pain seared his arm as if the bones and ligaments were suddenly
replaced by white-hot cords of steel, and every vein and capillary had
become part of a webbing of red fire.

It was a long time before consciousness. Once he was lifted. And when he
opened his eyes, the white moon was moving incredibly fast above him
toward the dark shapes of leaves. Was he being carried? And his arm
hurt. There was more drowsy half consciousness, and once a great deal of
pain. When he opened his mouth to scream, however, darkness flowed in,
swathed his tongue, and he swallowed the darkness down into his body and
into his head, and called it sleep--

       *       *       *       *       *

_A spool of copper wire unrolled over the black tile floor. Scoop it up
quick. Damn, let me get out of here. I run past the black columns,
glimpsing the cavernous room, and the black statue at the other end,
huge, and rising into shadows. Men in dark robes are walking around.
(Not only could they see, this time; they could hear the thinking.) Just
don't feel up to praying this afternoon. I am before the door, and above
it, a black disk with three white eyes on it. Through the door, up black
stone steps. Wonder if anyone will be up there now. Just my luck I'll
find the Old Man himself. Another door with a black circle above it.
Push it open slowly, cool on my hands. A man is standing inside, looking
into a large screen of glass. Figures moving on it. Can't make them out,
he's in the way. Oh, there's another one._

_"I don't know whether to call it success or failure," one says._

_"The jewels are ... safe or lost?"_

_"What do you call it?" the first one asks. "I don't know any more." He
sighs. "I don't think I've taken my eyes off this thing for more than
two hours since they got to the beach. Every mile they've come closer
has made my blood run colder."_

_"What do we report to Hama Incarnate?"_

_"It would be silly to say anything now. We just don't know."_

_"Well," says the other, "at least we can do something with the City of
New Hope since they got rid of that super-amoeba."_

_"Are you sure they really got it?"_

_"After the burning it received over that naked atom pile? It was all it
could do to get to the waterfront. It's just about fried up and blown
away already."_

_"And how safe would you call them?" the other asks._

_"Right now? I wouldn't call them anything."_

_Something glitters on the table by the door. Yes, there it is. In the
pile of strange equipment is a U-shaped scrap of metal. Just what I
need. Hot damn, adhesive tape too. Quick, there, before they see. Fine.
Now, let the door close, real slow. Ooops. It clicked. Now come on, look
innocent, in case they come out. I hope the Old Man isn't watching.
Guess they're not coming. And down the stairs again, the black stone
walls moving past. Out another door, into the garden, dark flowers,
purple, deep red, some with blue in them, and big stone urns. Some
priests are coming down the path. Ooops again, there's old Dunderhead.
He'll want me inside praying. Duck down behind that urn. Here we go.
What'll I do if he catches me? Really sir, I have nothing under my choir
robe. Peek out._

_Very, very small sigh of relief, now. Can't afford to be too loud
around here. They're gone. Let's examine the loot. The black stone urn
has one handle above. It's about eight feet tall. One, two, three: jump,
and ... hold ... on ... and ... pull. And try to get to the top. There
we go. Cold stone between my toes. And over the edge, where it's filled
with dirt. Pant. Pant. Pant._

_Should be just over here, if I remember right. Dig, dig, dig. Damp
earth feels good in your hands. Ow! my finger. There it is. A brown
paper bag under granules of black earth. Lift it out. Is it all there?
Open it up, peer in. Down at the bottom, beyond the folds of the edges
where the top had been twisted tightly together, are the tiny scraps of
copper, a few long pieces of dark metal, a piece of board, some brads.
To this my grubby little hand adds the spool of copper wire and the
U-shaped scrap of metal. Now, slip it into my robe and--once you get up
here, how the hell do you get down? I always forget. Turn around, climb
over the edge, like this, and let yourself down. Damn, my robe's caught
on the handle._

_And drop._

_Skinned my shin again. Some day I'll learn._

_Now let's see if we can figure this thing out. Gotta crouch down and
get to work. Here we go. Open the bag, and turn the contents out in the
lap of the dark-colored robe, grubby hands poking._

_The U-shaped metal, the copper wire, fine. Hold the end of the wire to
the metal, and maneuver the spool around the end of the wire to the
metal, and maneuver the spool around the end of the rod. Around. And
around. And around. Here we go round the mulberry bush, the mulberry
bush, the mulberry bush. Here we go round the mulberry bush; I'll have
me a coil by the morning._

_Suddenly a harsh voice in the distance: "And what do you think you're
doing?"_

_Dunderhead rides again. "Nothing, sir," as metal and scraps and wires
fly frantically into the paper bag._

_The voice: "All novices under twenty must report to afternoon services
without fail!"_

_"Yes, sir. Coming right along, sir." Paper bag jammed equally
frantically into the folds of my robe. Not a moment's peace. Not a
moment's! Through the garden with lowered eyes, past a dour-looking
priest with a small paunch. There are mirrors along the vestibule, huge
slabs of glass that rise thirty feet, reflecting the blue and yellow
light back and forth from the colored windows of the temple. In the
mirror I see pass: a dour-looking priest, proceeded by a smaller figure
with short red hair and a spray of freckles over a flattish nose. And as
we pass into prayer, there is the maddening, almost inaudible jingling
of metal scraps, muffled by the dark robe._

       *       *       *       *       *

Geo woke up, and almost everything was white.




CHAPTER VIII


The pale woman with the tiny eyes rose from over him. Her hair dropped
like white silk threads over her shoulders. "You are awake?" she asked.
"Do you understand me?"

"Am I at--at Hama's temple?" he asked, the remnants of the dream still
blowing in at the edges of his mind, like shredding cloth. "My friends,
where are they?"

The woman laughed. "Your friends are all right. You came out the worst."
Another laugh. "You ask if this is Hama's temple? But you can see, can
you not? You have eyes. Don't you recognize the color of the White
Goddess Argo?"

Geo looked around the room. It was white marble, and there was no direct
source of light. The walls simply glowed.

"My friends...." Geo said again.

"They are fine. We were able to completely restore their flesh to
health. They must have exposed their hands to the direct beam of the
radiation for only a few seconds. But the whole first half of your arm
had apparently lain in the deadly rays for some minutes. You were not as
lucky as they."

Another thought rushed Geo's mind now. "The jewels ..." he started to
say, but instead of sounding the words, he reached to his throat with
both hands. One fell on his naked chest. And there was something very
wrong with the other. He sat up in the bed quickly, and looked down. "My
arm," he said.

Swathed in white bandages, the limb ended some foot and a half short of
where it should have.

"My arm...?" he asked again, with a child's bewilderment. "What happened
to my arm?"

"I tried to tell you," the woman said, softly. "We had to amputate half
of your arm. If we had not, you would have died."

"My arm," Geo said again, and lay back in the bed.

"It is difficult," the woman said. "It is only a little consolation, I
know, but we are blind here. What burned your arm away, took our sight
from us when it was much stronger, generations ago. We learned how to
battle many of its effects, and had we not rescued you from the river,
all of you would have died. You are men who know the religion of Argo,
and adhere to it. This another of your party has told us. Be thankful
then that you have come under the wing of the Mother Goddess again, for
this is a hostile country." She paused. "Do you wish to talk?"

Geo shook his head.

"I hear the sheets rustle," the woman said, smiling, "which means you
either shook or nodded your head. I know from my study of the old
customs that one means 'yes' and the other 'no.' But you must have
patience with us who cannot see. We are not used to your people. Do you
wish to talk?" she repeated.

"Oh," said Geo. "No. No, I don't."

"Very well," the woman said. She rose, still smiling. "I will return
later." She walked to a wall in which a door slipped open, and then it
closed again, behind her.

He lay still on the bed for a long time. Then he turned over on his
stomach. Once he brought the stump under his chest and held the clean
bandages in his other hand. Very quickly he let go, and stretched the
limb sideways, as far as possible away from him. That didn't work
either, so he moved it back down to his side, and let it lay by him
under the white sheet.

After a long while, he got up, sat on the edge of the bed, and looked
around the room. It was completely bare, with neither windows nor
visible doors. He went to the spot through which she had exited, but
could find not seam or crack. His tunic, he saw, had been washed,
pressed, and laid on the foot of the bed. He slipped it over his head,
fumbling with only one arm. Getting the belt together started out to be
a problem, but he hooked the buckle around one finger and maneuvered the
strap through with the other. He adjusted his leather purse, now empty,
on his side. Then he saw that the sword was gone.

An unreal feeling, white like the walls of the room, was beginning to
fill him up like a pale mixture of milk and water. He walked around the
edge of the room once more, looking for some break.

There was a sound behind him and the tiny-eyed woman in her white robe
stood in a triangular doorway. "You're dressed," she smiled. "Good. Are
you too tired to come with me? You will eat and see your friends if you
feel well enough. Or, I can have the food brought."

"I'll come," Geo said.

She turned, and he followed her into a hall of the same luminous
substance. Her heels touched the back of her white robe with each step,
but she was silent. His own bare feet on the cool stones seemed louder
than those of the blind woman before him. Suddenly he was in a larger
room, with benches. It was a chapel, obviously of Argo because of the
altar at the far end, but its detail was strange. Everything was
arranged with the white simplicity that one would expect of a people to
whom visual adornment meant nothing. He sat down on a bench as the woman
said, "Wait here." She disappeared down another hall.

Suddenly the woman returned from the other hallway, followed by Snake.
Geo and the four-armed boy looked at each other, silently, as the woman
disappeared again. A wish, like a living thing, suddenly writhed into a
knot in Geo's stomach, that the boy would say something. He himself
could not.

Again she returned, this time with Urson. The big man stepped into the
chapel, saw Geo, and exclaimed, "Friend, what happened?" He came to him
quickly and placed his warm hands on Geo's shoulders. "What ..." he
began, and shook his head.

Geo grinned suddenly, and patted his stump with his good hand. "I guess
jelly-belly got something from me after all."

Urson held his own forearm next to Geo's and compared them. There was
paleness in both. "I guess none of us got out completely all right. I
woke up once while they were taking the scabs off. It was pretty bad,
and I went to sleep again fast."

Iimmi came in now. "Well, I was wondering ..." He stopped, and let out
a low whistle. "I guess it really got you, brother." His own arms looked
as though they had been dipped in bleach up to the mid forearms.

"How did this happen?" Urson asked.

"When we were back doing our tightrope act on those damn girders,"
explained Iimmi, "our bodies were in the shadow of the girders and the
rays only got to our arms. I've got something you'll be interested in
too, Geo."

"Just tell me where the hell we are," Urson said.

"We're in a monastery sacred to Argo," Iimmi told him. "It's across the
river from the City of New Hope, which is where we were."

"That name sounds familiar; in the ..." began Urson. Snake gave him a
quick glance, and he stopped, and then frowned.

"We knew of your presence in the City of New Hope," explained the blind
Priestess, "and we found you by the riverside after you swam across. You
managed to cling to life long enough for us to get you back to the
monastery and apply what art we could to sooth the burns from the deadly
fire."

Geo suddenly saw that there was no jewel around Iimmi's neck either. He
could almost feel the hands ripping it from his neck in the water. Iimmi
must have made the same discovery, because his pale hand raised to his
own chest.

The Priestess beckoned and started down another hall, and again they
followed. They arrived at an even larger room, this one set with white
marble benches and long white tables. "This is the main dining room of
the monastery," their guide explained. "One table has been set up for
you. You will not eat with the other priestesses, of course."

"Why not?" asked Iimmi.

Surprise flowed across the blind face. "You are men," she told them,
matter of factly. Then she led them to a table where wine, meat, and
bowls piled with strange fruit were placed. As they sat down, she
disappeared once more.

Geo reached for a knife. For a moment there was silence at the table as
the nub of the arm jutted over food. "I guess I just have to learn," he
said after the pause.

Halfway through the meal, Urson said, "What about the jewels? Did the
Priestess take them from you?"

"They came off in the water," said Iimmi.

Geo nodded corroboration.

"Well, now we really have a problem," said Urson. "Here we are, at a
temple of Argo's where we could return the jewels and maybe even get
back to the Priestess on the ship, and out of the silly mess, and the
jewels are gone."

"I guess that also means our river friends are working for Hama," said
Geo.

"Well," Iimmi said, "Hama's got his jewel then, and we're out of the
way. Perhaps he delivered us into Argo's hands as a reward for bringing
them this far?"

"Since we would have died anyway," said Geo, "I guess he was doing us a
favor."

"And you know what that means," Iimmi said, looking at Snake now.

"Huh?" asked Urson. Then he said, "Oh, let the boy speak for himself.
All right, Four Arms, are you or are you not a spy for Hama?"

A pained expression came over Snake's face, and he shook his head not in
denial but bewilderment. Suddenly he got up from the table, and ran from
the room. Urson looked at the others. "Now don't tell me I hurt his
feelings by asking."

"You didn't," said Iimmi, "but I may have. I keep on forgetting that he
can read minds."

"What do you mean?" Urson asked.

"Just when you asked him that, a lot of things came together in my mind
that would be pretty vicious for him if any of it were true."

"Huh?" asked Urson.
