_Euclid_. When reminded that this treatise was a mixture of
Euclid and Simson, Cayley suggested striking out Simson's
additions and keeping strictly to the original treatise.

                                                     --CAJORI, F.

                         _History of Elementary Mathematics (New
                         York, 1910), p. 285._


=937.= Tait once urged the advantage of Quaternions on Cayley
(who never used them), saying: "You know Quaternions are just
like a pocket-map." "That may be," replied Cayley, "but you've
got to take it out of your pocket, and unfold it, before it's of
any use." And he dismissed the subject with a smile.

                                                --THOMPSON, S. P.

                         _Life of Lord Kelvin (London, 1910), p.
                         1137._


=938.= As he [Clifford] spoke he appeared not to be working out a
question, but simply telling what he saw. Without any diagram or
symbolic aid he described the geometrical conditions on which the
solution depended, and they seemed to stand out visibly in space.
There were no longer consequences to be deduced, but real and
evident facts which only required to be seen.... So whole and
complete was his vision that for the time the only strange thing
was that anybody should fail to see it in the same way. When one
endeavored to call it up again, and not till then, it became
clear that the magic of genius had been at work, and that the
common sight had been raised to that higher perception by the
power that makes and transforms ideas, the conquering and
masterful quality of the human mind which Goethe called in one
word _das Daemonische_.--POLLOCK, F.

                         _Clifford's Lectures and Essays (New
                         York, 1901), Vol. 1, Introduction, pp.
                         5-6._


=939.= Much of his [Clifford's] best work was actually spoken
before it was written. He gave most of his public lectures with
no visible preparation beyond very short notes, and the outline
seemed to be filled in without effort or hesitation. Afterwards
he would revise the lecture from a shorthand writer's report, or
sometimes write down from memory almost exactly what he had said.
It fell out now and then, however, that neither of these things
was done; in such cases there is now no record of the lecture at
all.--POLLOCK, F.

                         _Clifford's Lectures and Essays (New
                         York, 1901), Vol. 1, Introduction, p.
                         10._


=940.= I cannot find anything showing early aptitude for
acquiring languages; but that he [Clifford] had it and was fond
of exercising it in later life is certain. One practical reason
for it was the desire of being able to read mathematical papers
in foreign journals; but this would not account for his taking up
Spanish, of which he acquired a competent knowledge in the course
of a tour to the Pyrenees. When he was at Algiers in 1876 he
began Arabic, and made progress enough to follow in a general way
a course of lessons given in that language. He read modern Greek
fluently, and at one time he was furious about Sanskrit. He even
spent some time on hieroglyphics. A new language is a riddle
before it is conquered, a power in the hand afterwards: to
Clifford every riddle was a challenge, and every chance of new
power a divine opportunity to be seized. Hence he was likewise
interested in the various modes of conveying and expressing
language invented for special purposes, such as the Morse
alphabet and shorthand.... I have forgotten to mention his
command of French and German, the former of which he knew very
well, and the latter quite sufficiently;....--POLLOCK, F.

                         _Clifford's Lectures and Essays (New
                         York, 1901), Vol. 1, Introduction, pp.
                         11-12._


=941.= The most remarkable thing was his [Clifford's] great
strength as compared with his weight, as shown in some exercises.
At one time he could pull up on the bar with either hand, which
is well known to be one of the greatest feats of strength. His
nerve at dangerous heights was extraordinary. I am appalled now
to think that he climbed up and sat on the cross bars of the
weathercock on a church tower, and when by way of doing something
worse I went up and hung by my toes to the bars he did the same.

                         _Quoted from a letter by one of
                         Clifford's friends to Pollock, F.:
                         Clifford's Lectures and Essays (New
                         York, 1901), Vol. 1, Introduction, p.
                         8._


=942.= [Comte] may truly be said to have created the philosophy
of higher mathematics.--MILL, J. S.

                         _System of Logic (New York, 1846), p.
                         369._


=943.= These specimens, which I could easily multiply, may
suffice to justify a profound distrust of Auguste Comte, wherever
he may venture to speak as a mathematician. But his vast
_general_ ability, and that personal intimacy with the great
Fourier, which I most willingly take his own word for having
enjoyed, must always give an interest to his _views_ on any
subject of pure or applied mathematics.--HAMILTON, W. R.

                         _Graves' Life of W. R. Hamilton (New
                         York, 1882-1889), Vol. 3, p. 475._


=944.= The manner of Demoivre's death has a certain interest for
psychologists. Shortly before it, he declared that it was
necessary for him to sleep some ten minutes or a quarter of an
hour longer each day than the preceding one: the day after he had
thus reached a total of something over twenty-three hours he
slept up to the limit of twenty-four hours, and then died in his
sleep.--BALL, W. W. R.

                         _History of Mathematics (London, 1911),
                         p. 394._


=945.= De Morgan was explaining to an actuary what was the chance
that a certain proportion of some group of people would at the
end of a given time be alive; and quoted the actuarial formula,
involving [pi], which, in answer to a question, he explained
stood for the ratio of the circumference of a circle to its
diameter. His acquaintance, who had so far listened to the
explanation with interest, interrupted him and exclaimed, "My
dear friend, that must be a delusion, what can a circle have to
do with the number of people alive at a given time?"

                                                 --BALL, W. W. R.

                         _Mathematical Recreations and Problems
                         (London, 1896), p. 180; See also De
                         Morgan's Budget of Paradoxes (London,
                         1872), p. 172._


=946.= A few days afterwards, I went to him [the same actuary
referred to in 945] and very gravely told him that I had discovered
the law of human mortality in the Carlisle Table, of which he
thought very highly. I told him that the law was involved in this
circumstance. Take the table of the expectation of life, choose
any age, take its expectation and make the nearest integer a new
age, do the same with that, and so on; begin at what age you like,
you are sure to end at the place where the age past is equal, or
most nearly equal, to the expectation to come. "You don't mean
that this always happens?"--"Try it." He did try, again and again;
and found it as I said. "This is, indeed, a curious thing; this
_is_ a discovery!" I might have sent him about trumpeting the law
of life: but I contented myself with informing him that the same
thing would happen with any table whatsoever in which the first
column goes up and the second goes down;....--DE MORGAN, A.

                         _Budget of Paradoxes (London, 1872), p.
                         172._


=947.= [De Morgan relates that some person had made up 800
anagrams on his name, of which he had seen about 650. Commenting
on these he says:]

Two of these I have joined in the title-page:

             [Ut agendo surgamus arguendo gustamus.]

A few of the others are personal remarks.

                     Great gun! do us a sum!

is a sneer at my pursuit; but,

                                    /   n
                                    |  u
                     Go! great sum! | a  du
                                    /

is more dignified....

                      Adsum, nugator, suge!

is addressed to a student who continues talking after the lecture
has commenced: ....

                       Graduatus sum! nego

applies to one who declined to subscribe for an M. A. degree.

                                           --DE MORGAN, AUGUSTUS.

                         _Budget of Paradoxes (London, 1872), p.
                         82._


=948.= Descartes is the completest type which history presents of
the purely mathematical type of mind--that in which the
tendencies produced by mathematical cultivation reign unbalanced
and supreme.--MILL, J. S.

                         _An Examination of Sir W. Hamilton's
                         Philosophy (London, 1878), p. 626._


=949.= To _Descartes_, the great philosopher of the 17th century,
is due the undying credit of having removed the bann which until
then rested upon geometry. The _analytical geometry_, as
Descartes' method was called, soon led to an abundance of new
theorems and principles, which far transcended everything that
ever could have been reached upon the path pursued by the
ancients.--HANKEL, H.

                         _Die Entwickelung der Mathematik in den
                         letzten Jahrhunderten (Tuebingen, 1884),
                         p. 10._


=950.= [The application of algebra has] far more than any of his
metaphysical speculations, immortalized the name of Descartes,
and constitutes the greatest single step ever made in the
progress of the exact sciences.--MILL, J. S.

                         _An Examination of Sir W. Hamilton's
                         Philosophy (London, 1878), p. 617._


=951.= ... [Greek: kai phasin hoti Ptolemaios ereto pote auton
[Eukleiden], ei tis estin peri geometrian hodos syntomotera tes
stoicheioseos; hode apekrinato me einai basiliken atrapon epi
geometrian].

[ ... they say that Ptolemy once asked him (Euclid) whether there
was in geometry no shorter way than that of the elements, and he
replied, "There is no royal road to geometry."]--PROCLUS.

                         _(Edition Friedlein, 1873), Prol. II,
                         39._


=952.= Someone who had begun to read geometry with Euclid, when
he had learned the first proposition, asked Euclid, "But what
shall I get by learning these things?" whereupon Euclid called
his slave and said, "Give him three-pence, since he must make
gain out of what he learns."--STOBAEUS.

                         _(Edition Wachsmuth, 1884), Ecl. II._


=953.= The sacred writings excepted, no Greek has been so much
read and so variously translated as Euclid.[5]--DE MORGAN, A.

                         _Smith's Dictionary of Greek and Roman
                         Biology and Mythology (London, 1902),
                         Article, "Eucleides."_

    [5]  Riccardi's Bibliografia Euclidea (Bologna,
         1887), lists nearly two thousand editions.


=954.= The thirteen books of Euclid must have been a tremendous
advance, probably even greater than that contained in the
"Principia" of Newton.--DE MORGAN, A.

                         _Smith's Dictionary of Greek and Roman
                         Biography and Mythology (London, 1902),
                         Article, "Eucleides."_


=955.= To suppose that so perfect a system as that of Euclid's
Elements was produced by one man, without any preceding model or
materials, would be to suppose that Euclid was more than man. We
ascribe to him as much as the weakness of human understanding
will permit, if we suppose that the inventions in geometry, which
had been made in a tract of preceding ages, were by him not only
carried much further, but digested into so admirable a system,
that his work obscured all that went before it, and made them be
forgot and lost.--REID, THOMAS.

                         _Essay on the Powers of the Human Mind
                         (Edinburgh, 1812), Vol. 2, p. 368._


=956.= It is the invaluable merit of the great Basle mathematician
Leonhard _Euler_, to have freed the analytical calculus from all
geometrical bonds, and thus to have established _analysis_ as an
independent science, which from his time on has maintained an
unchallenged leadership in the field of mathematics.--HANKEL, H.

                         _Die Entwickelung der Mathematik in den
                         letzten Jahrhunderten (Tuebingen, 1884),
                         p. 12._


=957.= We may safely say, that the whole form of modern
mathematical thinking was created by Euler. It is only with the
greatest difficulty that one is able to follow the writings of
any author immediately preceding Euler, because it was not yet
known how to let the formulas speak for themselves. This art
Euler was the first one to teach.--RUDIO, F.

                         _Quoted by Ahrens W.: Scherz und Ernst
                         in der Mathematik (Leipzig, 1904), p.
                         251._


=958.= The general knowledge of our author [Leonhard Euler] was
more extensive than could well be expected, in one who had
pursued, with such unremitting ardor, mathematics and astronomy as
his favorite studies. He had made a very considerable progress in
medical, botanical, and chemical science. What was still more
extraordinary, he was an excellent scholar, and possessed in a
high degree what is generally called erudition. He had attentively
read the most eminent writers of ancient Rome; the civil and
literary history of all ages and all nations was familiar to him;
and foreigners, who were only acquainted with his works, were
astonished to find in the conversation of a man, whose long life
seemed solely occupied in mathematical and physical researches and
discoveries, such an extensive acquaintance with the most
interesting branches of literature. In this respect, no doubt, he
was much indebted to an uncommon memory, which seemed to retain
every idea that was conveyed to it, either from reading or from
meditation.--HUTTON, CHARLES.

                         _Philosophical and Mathematical
                         Dictionary (London, 1815), pp. 493-494._


=959.= Euler could repeat the Aeneid from the beginning to the
end, and he could even tell the first and last lines in every
page of the edition which he used. In one of his works there is a
learned memoir on a question in mechanics, of which, as he
himself informs us, a verse of Aeneid[6] gave him the first idea.

                                               --BREWSTER, DAVID.

                         _Letters of Euler (New York, 1872), Vol.
                         1, p. 24._

    [6]  The line referred to is:
           "The anchor drops, the rushing keel is staid."


=960.= Most of his [Euler's] memoirs are contained in the
transactions of the Academy of Sciences at St. Petersburg, and in
those of the Academy at Berlin. From 1728 to 1783 a large portion
of the Petropolitan transactions were filled by his writings. He
had engaged to furnish the Petersburg Academy with memoirs in
sufficient number to enrich its acts for twenty years--a promise
more than fulfilled, for down to 1818 [Euler died in 1793] the
volumes usually contained one or more papers of his. It has been
said that an edition of Euler's complete works would fill 16,000
quarto pages.--CAJORI, F.

                         _History of Mathematics (New York,
                         1897), pp. 253-254._


=961.= Euler who could have been called almost without metaphor,
and certainly without hyperbole, analysis incarnate.--ARAGO.

                         _Oeuvres, t. 2 (1854), p. 433._


=962.= Euler calculated without any apparent effort, just as men
breathe, as eagles sustain themselves in the air.--ARAGO.

                         _Oeuvres, t. 2 (1854), p. 133._


=963.= Two of his [Euler's] pupils having computed to the 17th
term, a complicated converging series, their results differed one
unit in the fiftieth cipher; and an appeal being made to Euler,
he went over the calculation in his mind, and his decision was
found correct.--BREWSTER, DAVID.

                         _Letters of Euler (New York, 1872), Vol.
                         2, p. 22._


=964.= In 1735 the solving of an astronomical problem, proposed
by the Academy, for which several eminent mathematicians had
demanded several months' time, was achieved in three days by
Euler with aid of improved methods of his own.... With still
superior methods this same problem was solved by the illustrious
Gauss in one hour.--CAJORI, F.

                         _History of Mathematics (New York,
                         1897), p. 248._


=965.= Euler's _Tentamen novae theorae musicae_ had no great
success, as it contained too much geometry for musicians, and too
much music for geometers.--FUSS, N.

                         _Quoted by Brewster: Letters of Euler
                         (New York, 1872), Vol. 1, p. 26._


=966.= Euler was a believer in God, downright and
straight-forward. The following story is told by Thiebault, in
his _Souvenirs de vingt ans de sejour a Berlin_, .... Thiebault
says that he has no personal knowledge of the truth of the story,
but that it was believed throughout the whole of the north of
Europe. Diderot paid a visit to the Russian Court at the
invitation of the Empress. He conversed very freely, and gave the
younger members of the Court circle a good deal of lively
atheism. The Empress was much amused, but some of her counsellors
suggested that it might be desirable to check these expositions
of doctrine. The Empress did not like to put a direct muzzle on
her guest's tongue, so the following plot was contrived. Diderot
was informed that a learned mathematician was in possession of an
algebraical demonstration of the existence of God, and would give
it him before all the Court, if he desired to hear it. Diderot
gladly consented: though the name of the mathematician is not
given, it was Euler. He advanced toward Diderot, and said
gravely, and in a tone of perfect conviction:

                  a + b^n
      _Monsieur_, ------- = x, _donc Dieu existe; repondez!_
                     n

Diderot, to whom algebra was Hebrew, was embarrassed and
disconcerted; while peals of laughter rose on all sides. He asked
permission to return to France at once, which was granted.

                                                  --DE MORGAN, A.

                         _Budget of Paradoxes (London, 1872), p.
                         251._


=967.= Fermat died with the belief that he had found a
long-sought-for law of prime numbers in the formula 2^2^n + 1 = a
prime, but he admitted that he was unable to prove it rigorously.
The law is not true, as was pointed out by Euler in the example
2^2^5 + 1 = 4,294,967,297 = 6,700,417 times 641. The American
lightning calculator _Zerah Colburn_, when a boy, readily found
the factors but was unable to explain the method by which he made
his marvellous mental computation.--CAJORI, F.

                         _History of Mathematics (New York,
                         1897), p. 180._


=968.= I crave the liberty to conceal my name, not to suppress
it. I have composed the letters of it written in Latin in this
sentence--

         In Mathesi a sole fundes.[7]
                                             --FLAMSTEED, J.

                         _Macclesfield: Correspondence of
                         Scientific Men (Oxford, 1841), Vol. 2,
                         p. 90._

    [7]  Johannes Flamsteedius.


=969.= _To the Memory of Fourier_

        Fourier! with solemn and profound delight,
        Joy born of awe, but kindling momently
        To an intense and thrilling ecstacy,
        I gaze upon thy glory and grow bright:
        As if irradiate with beholden light;
        As if the immortal that remains of thee
        Attuned me to thy spirit's harmony,
        Breathing serene resolve and tranquil might.
        Revealed appear thy silent thoughts of youth,
        As if to consciousness, and all that view
        Prophetic, of the heritage of truth
        To thy majestic years of manhood due:
        Darkness and error fleeing far away,
        And the pure mind enthroned in perfect day.
                                           --HAMILTON, W. R.

                         _Graves' Life of W. R. Hamilton, (New
                         York, 1882), Vol. 1, p. 596._


=970.= Astronomy and Pure Mathematics are the magnetic poles
toward which the compass of my mind ever turns.--GAUSS TO BOLYAI.

                         _Briefwechsel (Schmidt-Stakel), (1899),
                         p. 55._


=971.= [Gauss calculated the elements of the planet Ceres] and his
analysis proved him to be the first of theoretical astronomers no
less than the greatest of "arithmeticians."--BALL, W. W. R.

                         _History of Mathematics (London, 1901),
                         p. 458._


=972.= The mathematical giant [Gauss], who from his lofty heights
embraces in one view the stars and the abysses....--BOLYAI, W.

                         _Kurzer Grundriss eines Versuchs (Maros
                         Vasarhely, 1851), p. 44._


=973.= Almost everything, which the mathematics of our century
has brought forth in the way of original scientific ideas,
attaches to the name of Gauss.--KRONECKER, L.

                         _Zahlentheorie, Teil 1 (Leipzig, 1901),
                         p. 43._


=974.= I am giving this winter two courses of lectures to three
students, of which one is only moderately prepared, the other
less than moderately, and the third lacks both preparation and
ability. Such are the onera of a mathematical profession.

                                         --GAUSS TO BESSEL, 1810.

                         _Gauss-Bessel Briefwechsel (1880), p.
                         107._


=975.= Gauss once said "Mathematics is the queen of the sciences
and number-theory the queen of mathematics." If this be true
we may add that the Disquisitiones is the Magna Charta of
number-theory. The advantage which science gained by Gauss'
long-lingering method of publication is this: What he put into
print is as true and important today as when first published; his
publications are statutes, superior to other human statutes in
this, that nowhere and never has a single error been detected in
them. This justifies and makes intelligible the pride with which
Gauss said in the evening of his life of the first larger work of
his youth: "The Disquisitiones arithmeticae belong to history."

                                                     --CANTOR, M.

                         _Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie, Bd. 8
                         (1878), p. 435._


=976.= Here I am at the limit which God and nature has assigned
to my individuality. I am compelled to depend upon word, language
and image in the most precise sense, and am wholly unable to
operate in any manner whatever with symbols and numbers which are
easily intelligible to the most highly gifted minds.--GOETHE.

                         _Letter to Naumann (1826); Vogel:
                         Goethe's Selbstzeugnisse (Leipzig,
                         1903), p. 56._


=977.= Dirichlet was not satisfied to study Gauss'
"Disquisitiones arithmeticae" once or several times, but
continued throughout life to keep in close touch with the wealth
of deep mathematical thoughts which it contains by perusing it
again and again. For this reason the book was never placed on the
shelf but had an abiding place on the table at which he
worked.... Dirichlet was the first one, who not only fully
understood this work, but made it also accessible to others.

                                                  --KUMMER, E. E.

                         _Dirichlet: Werke, Bd. 2, p. 315._


=978.= [The famous attack of Sir William Hamilton on the tendency
of mathematical studies] affords the most express evidence of
those fatal _lacunae_ in the circle of his knowledge, which
unfitted him for taking a comprehensive or even an accurate view
of the processes of the human mind in the establishment of
truth. If there is any pre-requisite which all must see to be
indispensable in one who attempts to give laws to the human
intellect, it is a thorough acquaintance with the modes by which
human intellect has proceeded, in the case where, by universal
acknowledgment, grounded on subsequent direct verification, it
has succeeded in ascertaining the greatest number of important
and recondite truths. This requisite Sir W. Hamilton had not, in
any tolerable degree, fulfilled. Even of pure mathematics he
apparently knew little but the rudiments. Of mathematics as
applied to investigating the laws of physical nature; of the mode
in which the properties of number, extension, and figure, are
made instrumental to the ascertainment of truths other than
arithmetical or geometrical--it is too much to say that he had
even a superficial knowledge: there is not a line in his works
which shows him to have had any knowledge at all.--MILL, J. S.

                         _Examination of Sir William Hamilton's
                         Philosophy (London, 1878), p. 607._


=979.= Helmholtz--the physiologist who learned physics for the
sake of his physiology, and mathematics for the sake of his
physics, and is now in the first rank of all three.

                                                --CLIFFORD, W. K.

                         _Aims and Instruments of Scientific
                         Thought; Lectures and Essays, Vol. 1
                         (London, 1901), p. 165._


=980.= It is said of Jacobi, that he attracted the particular
attention and friendship of Boeckh, the director of the philological
seminary at Berlin, by the great talent he displayed for philology,
and only at the end of two years' study at the University, and
after a severe mental struggle, was able to make his final choice
in favor of mathematics.--SYLVESTER, J. J.

                         _Collected Mathematical Papers, Vol. 2
                         (Cambridge, 1908), p. 651._


=981.= When Dr. Johnson felt, or fancied he felt, his fancy
disordered, his constant recurrence was to the study of
arithmetic.--BOSWELL, J.

                         _Life of Johnson (Harper's Edition,
                         1871), Vol. 2, p. 264._


=982.= Endowed with two qualities, which seemed incompatible with
each other, a volcanic imagination and a pertinacity of intellect
which the most tedious numerical calculations could not daunt,
Kepler conjectured that the movements of the celestial bodies
must be connected together by simple laws, or, to use his own
expression, by harmonic laws. These laws he undertook to
discover. A thousand fruitless attempts, errors of calculation
inseparable from a colossal undertaking, did not prevent him a
single instant from advancing resolutely toward the goal of which
he imagined he had obtained a glimpse. Twenty-two years were
employed by him in this investigation, and still he was not weary
of it! What, in reality, are twenty-two years of labor to him who
is about to become the legislator of worlds; who shall inscribe
his name in ineffaceable characters upon the frontispiece of an
immortal code; who shall be able to exclaim in dithyrambic
language, and without incurring the reproach of anyone, "The die
is cast; I have written my book; it will be read either in the
present age or by posterity, it matters not which; it may well
await a reader, since God has waited six thousand years for an
interpreter of his words."--ARAGO.

                         _Eulogy on Laplace: [Baden Powell]
                         Smithsonian Report, 1874, p. 132._


=983.= The great masters of modern analysis are Lagrange,
Laplace, and Gauss, who were contemporaries. It is interesting
to note the marked contrast in their styles. Lagrange is perfect
both in form and matter, he is careful to explain his procedure,
and though his arguments are general they are easy to follow.
Laplace on the other hand explains nothing, is indifferent to
style, and, if satisfied that his results are correct, is content
to leave them either with no proof or with a faulty one. Gauss is
as exact and elegant as Lagrange, but even more difficult to
follow than Laplace, for he removes every trace of the analysis
by which he reached his results, and studies to give a proof
which while rigorous shall be as concise and synthetical as
possible.--BALL, W. W. R.

                         _History of Mathematics (London, 1901),
                         p. 463._


=984.= Lagrange, in one of the later years of his life, imagined
that he had overcome the difficulty [of the parallel axiom]. He
went so far as to write a paper, which he took with him to the
Institute, and began to read it. But in the first paragraph
something struck him which he had not observed: he muttered _Il
faut que j'y songe encore_, and put the paper in his pocket.

                                                  --DE MORGAN, A.

                         _Budget of Paradoxes (London, 1872), p.
                         173._


=985.= I never come across one of Laplace's "_Thus it plainly
appears_" without feeling sure that I have hours of hard work
before me to fill up the chasm and find out and show _how_ it
plainly appears.--BOWDITCH, N.

                         _Quoted by Cajori: Teaching and History
                         of Mathematics in the U. S. (Washington,
                         1896), p. 104._


=986.= Biot, who assisted Laplace in revising it [The Mecanique
Celeste] for the press, says that Laplace himself was frequently
unable to recover the details in the chain of reasoning, and if
satisfied that the conclusions were correct, he was content to
insert the constantly recurring formula, "_Il est aise a voir._"

                                                 --BALL, W. W. R.

                         _History of Mathematics (London, 1901),
                         p 427._


=987.= It would be difficult to name a man more remarkable for
the greatness and the universality of his intellectual powers
than Leibnitz.--MILL, J. S.

                         _System of Logic, Bk. 2, chap. 5, sect.
                         6._


=988.= The influence of his [Leibnitz's] genius in forming that
peculiar taste both in pure and in mixed mathematics which has
prevailed in France, as well as in Germany, for a century past,
