tentacles, except sixteen, were inflected after 50 m., each gland
(assuming that the leaf bore 160 tentacles) could have absorbed only
1/691200 of a grain (.0000937 mg.), and this appears to be about the
least quantity of the nitrate which suffices to induce the inflection
of a single tentacle.

As negative results are important in confirming the foregoing positive
ones, eight leaves were immersed as before, each in thirty minims of a
solution of one part to 175,000 of water (1 gr.  to 400 oz.), so that
each received only 1/6400 of a grain (.0101 mg.). This minute quantity
produced a slight effect on only four of the eight leaves. One had
fifty-six tentacles inflected after 2 hrs. 13 m.; a second, twenty-six
inflected, or sub-inflected, after [page 153] 38 m.; a third, eighteen
inflected, after 1 hr.; and a fourth, ten inflected, after 35 m. The
four other leaves were not in the least affected. Of the eight
corresponding leaves in water, one had, after 2 hrs. 10 m., nine
tentacles, and four others from one to four long-headed tentacles,
inflected; the remaining three being unaffected. Hence, the 1/6400 of a
grain given to a sensitive leaf during warm weather perhaps produces a
slight effect; but we must bear in mind that occasionally water causes
as great an amount of inflection as occurred in this last experiment.]

Summary of the Results with Nitrate of Ammonia.--The glands of the
disc, when excited by a half-minim drop (.0296 ml.), containing 1/2400
of a grain of the nitrate (.027 mg.), transmit a motor impulse to the
exterior tentacles, causing them to bend inwards. A minute drop,
containing 1/28800 of a grain (.00225 mg.), if held for a few seconds
in contact with a gland, causes the tentacle bearing this gland to be
inflected. If a leaf is left immersed for a few hours, and sometimes
for only a few minutes, in a solution of such strength that each gland
can absorb only the (1/691200 of a grain (.0000937 mg.), this small
amount is enough to excite each tentacle into movement, and it becomes
closely inflected.

                     PHOSPHATE OF AMMONIA.

This salt is more powerful than the nitrate, even in a greater degree
than the nitrate is more powerful than the carbonate. This is shown by
weaker solutions of the phosphate acting when dropped on the discs, or
applied to the glands of the exterior tentacles, or when leaves are
immersed. The difference in the power of these three salts, as tried in
three different ways, supports the results presently to be [page 154]
given, which are so surprising that their credibility requires every
kind of support. In 1872 I experimented on twelve immersed leaves,
giving each only ten minims of a solution; but this was a bad method,
for so small a quantity hardly covered them. None of these experiments
will, therefore, be given, though they indicate that excessively minute
doses are efficient.  When I read over my notes, in 1873, I entirely
disbelieved them, and determined to make another set of experiments
with scrupulous care, on the same plan as those made with the nitrate;
namely by placing leaves in watch-glasses, and pouring over each thirty
minims of the solution under trial, treating at the same time and in
the same manner other leaves with the distilled water used in making
the solutions. During 1873, seventy-one leaves were thus tried in
solutions of various strengths, and the same number in water.
Notwithstanding the care taken and the number of the trials made, when
in the following year I looked merely at the results, without reading
over my observations, I again thought that there must have been some
error, and thirty-five fresh trials were made with the weakest
solution; but the results were as plainly marked as before. Altogether,
106 carefully selected leaves were tried, both in water and in
solutions of the phosphate. Hence, after the most anxious
consideration, I can entertain no doubt of the substantial accuracy of
my results.

[Before giving my experiments, it may be well to premise that
crystallised phosphate of ammonia, such as I used, contains 35.33 per
cent. of water of crystallisation; so that in all the following trials
the efficient elements formed only 64.67 per cent. of the salt used.

Extremely minute particles of the dry phosphate were placed [page 155]
with the point of a needle on the secretion surrounding several glands.
These poured forth much secretion, were blackened, and ultimately died;
but the tentacles moved only slightly.  The dose, small as it was,
evidently was too great, and the result was the same as with particles
of the carbonate of ammonia.

Half-minims of a solution of one part to 437 of water were placed on
the discs of three leaves and acted most energetically, causing the
tentacles of one to be inflected in 15 m., and the blades of all three
to be much curved inwards in 2 hrs. 15 m. Similar drops of a solution
of one part to 1312 of water, (1 gr. to 3 oz.) were then placed on the
discs of five leaves, so that each received the 1/2880 of a grain
(.0225 mg.). After 8 hrs. the tentacles of four of them were
considerably inflected, and after 24 hrs. the blades of three. After 48
hrs. all five were almost fully re-expanded. I may mention with respect
to one of these leaves, that a drop of water had been left during the
previous 24 hrs. on its disc, but produced no effect; and that this was
hardly dry when the solution was added.

Similar drops of a solution of one part to 1750 of water (1 gr. to 4
oz.) were next placed on the discs of six leaves; so that each received
1/3840 of a grain (.0169 mg.); after 8 hrs. three of them had many
tentacles and their blades inflected; two others had only a few
tentacles slightly inflected, and the sixth was not at all affected.
After 24 hrs. most of the leaves had a few more tentacles inflected,
but one had begun to re-expand. We thus see that with the more
sensitive leaves the 1/3840 of a grain, absorbed by the central glands,
is enough to make many of the exterior tentacles and the blades bend,
whereas the 1/1920 of a grain of the carbonate similarly given produced
no effect; and 1/2880 of a grain of the nitrate was only just
sufficient to produce a well-marked effect.

A minute drop, about equal to 1/20 of a minim, of a solution of one
part of the phosphate to 875 of water, was applied to the secretion on
three glands, each of which thus received only 1/57600 of a grain
(.00112 mg.), and all three tentacles became inflected. Similar drops
of a solution of one part to 1312 of water (1 gr. to 3 oz.) were now
tried on three leaves; a drop being applied to four glands on the same
leaf. On the first leaf, three of the tentacles became slightly
inflected in 6 m., and re-expanded after 8 hrs. 45 m. On the second,
two tentacles became sub-inflected in 12 m. And on the third all four
tentacles were decidedly inflected in 12 m.; they remained so for 8
hrs. 30 m., but by the next morning were fully re-expanded.  [page 156]
In this latter case each gland could have received only the 1/115200
(or .000563 mg.) of a grain. Lastly, similar drops of a solution of one
part to 1750 of water (1 gr. to 4 oz.) were tried on five leaves; a
drop being applied to four glands on the same leaf. The tentacles on
three of these leaves were not in the least affected; on the fourth
leaf, two became inflected; whilst on the fifth, which happened to be a
very sensitive one, all four tentacles were plainly inflected in 6 hrs.
15m.; but only one remained inflected after 24 hrs. I should, however,
state that in this case an unusually large drop adhered to the head of
the pin. Each of these glands could have received very little more than
1/153600 of a grain (or .000423); but this small quantity sufficed to
cause inflection. We must bear in mind that these drops were applied to
the viscid secretion for only from 10 to 15 seconds, and we have good
reason to believe that all the phosphate in the solution would not be
diffused and absorbed in this time. We have seen under the same
circumstances that the absorption by a gland of 1/19200 of a grain of
the carbonate, and of 1/57600 of a grain of the nitrate, did not cause
the tentacle bearing the gland in question to be inflected; so that
here again the phosphate is much more powerful than the other two
salts.

We will now turn to the 106 experiments with immersed leaves. Having
ascertained by repeated trials that moderately strong solutions were
highly efficient, I commenced with sixteen leaves, each placed in
thirty minims of a solution of one part to 43,750 of water (1 gr.  to
100 oz.); so that each received 1/1600 of a grain, or .04058 mg. Of
these leaves, eleven had nearly all or a great number of their
tentacles inflected in 1 hr., and the twelfth leaf in 3 hrs. One of the
eleven had every single tentacle closely inflected in 50 m. Two leaves
out of the sixteen were only moderately affected, yet more so than any
of those simultaneously immersed in water; and the remaining two, which
were pale leaves, were hardly at all affected. Of the sixteen
corresponding leaves in water, one had nine tentacles, another six, and
two others two tentacles inflected, in the course of 5 hrs. So that the
contrast in appearance between the two lots was extremely great.

Eighteen leaves were immersed, each in thirty minims of a solution of
one part to 87,500 of water (1 gr. to 200 oz.), so that each received
1/3200 of a grain (.0202 mg.). Fourteen of these were strongly
inflected within 2 hrs., and some of them within 15 m.; three out of
the eighteen were only slightly affected, having twenty-one, nineteen,
and twelve tentacles in- [page 157] flected; and one was not at all
acted on. By an accident only fifteen, instead of eighteen, leaves were
immersed at the same time in water; these were observed for 24 hrs.;
one had six, another four, and a third two, of their outer tentacles
inflected; the remainder being quite unaffected.

The next experiment was tried under very favourable circumstances, for
the day (July 8) was very warm, and I happened to have unusually fine
leaves. Five were immersed as before in a solution of one part to
131,250 of water (1 gr. to 300 oz.), so that each received 1/4800 of a
grain, or .0135 mg. After an immersion of 25 m. all five leaves were
much inflected. After 1 hr. 25 m. one leaf had all but eight tentacles
inflected; the second, all but three; the third, all but five; the
fourth; all but twenty-three; the fifth, on the other hand, never had
more than twenty-four inflected. Of the corresponding five leaves in
water, one had seven, a second two, a third ten, a fourth one, and a
fifth none inflected. Let it be observed what a contrast is presented
between these latter leaves and those in the solution. I counted the
glands on the second leaf in the solution, and the number was 217;
assuming that the three tentacles which did not become inflected
absorbed nothing, we find that each of the 214 remaining glands could
have absorbed only 1/l027200 of a grain, or .0000631 mg. The third leaf
bore 236 glands, and subtracting the five which did not become
inflected, each of the remaining 231 glands could have absorbed only
1/1108800 of a grain (or .0000584 mg.), and this amount sufficed to
cause the tentacles to bend.

Twelve leaves were tried as before in a solution of one part to 175,000
of water (1 gr. to 400 oz.), so that each leaf received 1/6400 of a
grain (.0101 mg.). My plants were not at the time in a good state, and
many of the leaves were young and pale. Nevertheless, two of them had
all their tentacles, except three or four, closely inflected in under 1
hr. Seven were considerably affected, some within 1 hr., and others not
until 3 hrs., 4 hrs. 30 m., and 8 hrs.  had elapsed; and this slow
action may be attributed to the leaves being young and pale. Of these
nine leaves, four had their blades well inflected, and a fifth slightly
so. The three remaining leaves were not affected. With respect to the
twelve corresponding leaves in water, not one had its blade inflected;
after from 1 to 2 hrs. one had thirteen of its outer tentacles
inflected; a second six, and four others either one or two inflected.
After 8 hrs. the outer tentacles did not become more inflected; whereas
this occurred with the leaves in the solution. I record in my notes
that [page 158] after the 8 hrs. it was impossible to compare the two
lots, and doubt for an instant the power of the solution.

Two of the above leaves in the solution had all their tentacles, except
three and four, inflected within an hour. I counted their glands, and,
on the same principle as before, each gland on one leaf could have
absorbed only 1/1164800, and on the other leaf only 1/1472000, of a
grain of the phosphate.

Twenty leaves were immersed in the usual manner, each in thirty minims
of a solution of one part to 218,750 of water (1 gr. to 500 oz.). So
many leaves were tried because I was then under the false impression
that it was incredible that any weaker solution could produce an
effect. Each leaf received 1/8000 of a grain, or .0081 mg. The first
eight leaves which I tried both in the solution and in water were
either young and pale or too old; and the weather was not hot. They
were hardly at all affected; nevertheless, it would be unfair to
exclude them. I then waited until I got eight pairs of fine leaves, and
the weather was favourable; the temperature of the room where the
leaves were immersed varying from 75o to 81o (23o.8 to 27o.2 Cent.) In
another trial with four pairs (included in the above twenty pairs), the
temperature in my room was rather low, about 60o (15o.5 Cent.); but the
plants had been kept for several days in a very warm greenhouse and
thus rendered extremely sensitive. Special precautions were taken for
this set of experiments; a chemist weighed for me a grain in an
excellent balance; and fresh water, given me by Prof. Frankland, was
carefully measured.  The leaves were selected from a large number of
plants in the following manner: the four finest were immersed in water,
and the next four finest in the solution, and so on till the twenty
pairs were complete. The water specimens were thus a little favoured,
but they did not undergo more inflection than in the previous cases,
comparatively with those in the solution.

Of the twenty leaves in the solution, eleven became inflected within 40
m.; eight of them plainly and three rather doubtfully; but the latter
had at least twenty of their outer tentacles inflected. Owing to the
weakness of the solution, inflection occurred, except in No. 1, much
more slowly than in the previous trials. The condition of the eleven
leaves which were considerably inflected will now be given at stated
intervals, always reckoning from the time of immersion:--

(1) After only 8 m. a large number of tentacles inflected, and after 17
m. all but fifteen; after 2 hrs. all but eight in- [page 159] flected,
or plainly sub-inflected. After 4 hrs. the tentacles began to
re-expand, and such prompt re-expansion is unusual; after 7 hrs. 30 m.
they were almost fully re-expanded.

(2) After 39 m. a large number of tentacles inflected; after 2 hrs. 18
m. all but twenty-five inflected; after 4 hrs. 17 m. all but sixteen
inflected. The leaf remained in this state for many hours.

(3) After 12 m. a considerable amount of inflection; after 4 hrs. all
the tentacles inflected except those of the two outer rows, and the
leaf remained in this state for some time; after 23 hrs. began to
re-expand.

(4) After 40 m. much inflection; after 4 hrs. 13 m. fully half the
tentacles inflected; after 23 hrs. still slightly inflected.

(5) After 40 m. much inflection; after 4 hrs. 22 m. fully half the
tentacles inflected; after 23 hrs. still slightly inflected.

(6) After 40 m. some inflection; after 2 hrs. 18 m. about twenty-eight
outer tentacles inflected; after 5 hrs. 20 m. about a third of the
tentacles inflected; after 8 hrs. much re-expanded.

(7) After 20 m. some inflection; after 2 hrs. a considerable number of
tentacles inflected; after 7 hrs. 45 m. began to re-expand.

(8) After 38 m. twenty-eight tentacles inflected; after 3 hrs. 45 m.
thirty-three inflected, with most of the submarginal tentacles
sub-inflected; continued so for two days, and then partially
re-expanded.

(9) After 38 m. forty-two tentacles inflected; after 3 hrs. 12 m.
sixty-six inflected or sub-inflected; after 6 hrs. 40 m. all but
twenty-four inflected or sub-inflected; after 9 hrs. 40 m. all but
seventeen inflected; after 24 hrs. all but four inflected or
sub-inflected, only a few being closely inflected; after 27 hrs. 40 m.
the blade inflected. The leaf remained in this state for two days, and
then began to re-expand.

(10) After 38 m. twenty-one tentacles inflected; after 3 hrs. 12 m.
forty-six tentacles inflected or sub-inflected; after 6 hrs. 40 m. all
but seventeen inflected, though none closely; after 24 hrs. every
tentacle slightly curved inwards; after 27 hrs. 40 m. blade strongly
inflected, and so continued for two days, and then the tentacles and
blade very slowly re-expanded.

(11) This fine dark red and rather old leaf, though not very large,
bore an extraordinary number of tentacles (viz. 252), and behaved in an
anomalous manner. After 6 hrs. 40 m. only the short tentacles round the
outer part of the disc were inflected, forming a ring, as so often
occurs in from 8 to 24 hrs. With leaves both in water and the weaker
solutions. But after 9 hrs.  [page 160] 40 m. all the outer tentacles
except twenty-five were inflected; as was the blade in a strongly
marked manner. After 24 hrs. every tentacle except one was closely
inflected, and the blade was completely doubled over. Thus the leaf
remained for two days, when it began to re-expand. I may add that the
three latter leaves (Nos. 9, 10, and 11) were still somewhat inflected
after three days. The tentacles in but few of these eleven leaves
became closelyinflected within so short a time as in the previous
experiments with stronger solutions.

We will now turn to the twenty corresponding leaves in water. Nine had
none of their outer tentacles inflected; nine others had from one to
three inflected; and these re-expanded after 8 hrs. The remaining two
leaves were moderately affected; one having six tentacles inflected in
34 m.; the other twenty-three inflected in 2 hrs. 12 m.; and both thus
remained for 24 hrs.  None of these leaves had their blades inflected.
So that the contrast between the twenty leaves in water and the twenty
in the solution was very great, both within the first hour and after
from 8 to 12 hrs. had elapsed.

Of the leaves in the solution, the glands on leaf No. 1, which in 2
hrs. had all its tentacles except eight inflected, were counted and
found to be 202. Subtracting the eight, each gland could have received
only the 1/1552000 grain (.0000411 mg.) of the phosphate. Leaf No. 9
had 213 tentacles, all of which, with the exception of four, were
inflected after 24 hrs., but none of them closely; the blade was also
inflected; each gland could have received only the 1/1672000 of a
grain, or .0000387 mg. Lastly, leaf No. 11, which had after 24 hrs. all
its tentacles, except one, closely inflected, as well as the blade,
bore the unusually large number of 252 tentacles; and on the same
principle as before, each gland could have absorbed only the 1/2008000
of a grain, or .0000322 mg.

With respect to the following experiments, I must premise that the
leaves, both those placed in the solutions and in water, were taken
from plants which had been kept in a very warm greenhouse during the
winter. They were thus rendered extremely sensitive, as was shown by
water exciting them much more than in the previous experiments. Before
giving my observations, it may be well to remind the reader that,
judging from thirty-one fine leaves, the average number of tentacles is
192, and that the outer or exterior ones, the movements of which are
alone significant, are to the short ones on the disc in the proportion
of about sixteen to nine.  [page 161]

Four leaves were immersed as before, each in thirty minims of a
solution of one part to 328,125 of water (1 gr. to 750 oz.). Each leaf
thus received 1/12000 of a grain (.0054 mg.) of the salt; and all four
were greatly inflected.

(1) After 1 hr. all the outer tentacles but one inflected, and the
blade greatly so; after 7 hrs.  began to re-expand.

(2) After 1 hr. all the outer tentacles but eight inflected; after 12
hrs. all re-expanded.

(3) After 1 hr. much inflection; after 2 hrs. 30 m. all the tentacles
but thirty-six inflected; after 6 hrs. all but twenty-two inflected;
after 12 hrs. partly re-expanded.

(4) After 1 hr. all the tentacles but thirty-two inflected; after 2
hrs. 30 m. all but twenty-one inflected; after 6 hrs. almost
re-expanded.

Of the four corresponding leaves in water:--

(1) After 1 hr. forty-five tentacles inflected; but after 7 hrs. so
many had re-expanded that only ten remained much inflected.

(2) After 1 hr. seven tentacles inflected; these were almost
re-expanded in 6 hrs.

(3) and (4) Not affected, except that, as usual, after 11 hrs. the
short tentacles on the borders of the disc formed a ring.

There can, therefore, be no doubt about the efficiency of the above
solution; and it follows as before that each gland of No. 1 could have
absorbed only 1/2412000 of a grain (.0000268 mg.) and of No. 2 only
1/2460000 of a grain (.0000263 mg.) of the phosphate.

Seven leaves were immersed, each in thirty minims of a solution of one
part to 437,500 of water (1 gr. to 1000 oz.). Each leaf thus received
1/16000 of a grain (.00405 mg.). The day was warm, and the leaves were
very fine, so that all circumstances were favourable.

(1) After 30 m. all the outer tentacles except five inflected, and most
of them closely; after 1 hr. blade slightly inflected; after 9 hrs. 30
m. began to re-expand.

(2) After 33 m. all the outer tentacles but twenty-five inflected, and
blade slightly so; after 1 hr. 30 m. blade strongly inflected and
remained so for 24 hrs.; but some of the tentacles had then
re-expanded.

(3) After 1 hr. all but twelve tentacles inflected; after 2 hrs. 30 m.
all but nine inflected; and of the inflected tentacles all excepting
four closely; blade slightly inflected. After 8 hrs. blade quite
doubled up, and now all the tentacles excepting [page 162] eight
closely inflected. The leaf remained in this state for two days.

(4) After 2 hrs. 20 m. only fifty-nine tentacles inflected; but after 5
hrs. all the tentacles closely inflected excepting two which were not
affected, and eleven which were only sub-inflected; after 7 hrs. blade
considerably inflected; after 12 hrs. much re-expansion.

(5) After 4 hrs. all the tentacles but fourteen inflected; after 9 hrs.
30 m. beginning to re-expand.

(6) After 1 hr. thirty-six tentacles inflected; after 5 hrs. all but
fifty-four inflected; after 12 hrs. considerable re-expansion.

(7) After 4 hrs. 30 m. only thirty-five tentacles inflected or
sub-inflected, and this small amount of inflection never increased.

Now for the seven corresponding leaves in water:--

(1) After 4 hrs. thirty-eight tentacles inflected; but after 7 hrs.
these, with the exception of six, re-expanded.

(2) After 4 hrs. 20 m. twenty inflected; these after 9 hrs. partially
re-expanded.

(3) After 4 hrs. five inflected, which began to re-expand after 7 hrs.

(4) After 24 hrs. one inflected.

(5), (6) and (7) Not at all affected, though observed for 24 hrs.,
excepting the short tentacles on the borders of the disc, which as
usual formed a ring.

A comparison of the leaves in the solution, especially of the first
five or even six on the list, with those in the water, after 1 hr. or
after 4 hrs., and in a still more marked degree after 7 hrs. or 8 hrs.,
could not leave the least doubt that the solution had produced a great
effect.  This was shown not only by the vastly greater number of
inflected tentacles, but by the degree or closeness of their
inflection, and by that of their blades. Yet each gland on leaf No.  1
(which bore 255 glands, all of which, excepting five, were inflected in
30 m.) could not have received more than one-four-millionth of a grain
(.0000162 mg.) of the salt. Again, each gland on leaf No. 3 (which bore
233 glands, all of which, except nine, were inflected in 2 hrs.  30 m.)
could have received at most only the 1/3584000 of a grain, or .0000181
mg.

Four leaves were immersed as before in a solution of one part to
656,250 of water (1 gr. to 1500 oz.); but on this occasion I happened
to select leaves which were very little sensitive, as on other
occasions I chanced to select unusually sensitive leaves. The leaves
were not more affected after 12 hrs. than [page 163] the four
corresponding ones in water; but after 24 hrs. they were slightly more
inflected.  Such evidence, however, is not at all trustworthy.

Twelve leaves were immersed, each in thirty minims of a solution of one
part to 1,312,500 of water (1 gr. to 3000 oz.); so that each leaf
received 1/48000 of a grain (.00135 mg.). The leaves were not in very
good condition; four of them were too old and of a dark red colour;
four were too pale, yet one of these latter acted well; the four
others, as far as could be told by the eye, seemed in excellent
condition. The result was as follows:--

(1) This was a pale leaf; after 40 m. about thirty-eight tentacles
inflected; after 3 hrs. 30 m.  the blade and many of the outer
tentacles inflected; after 10 hrs. 15 m. all the tentacles but
seventeen inflected, and the blade quite doubled up; after 24 hrs. all
the tentacles but ten more or less inflected. Most of them were closely
inflected, but twenty-five were only sub-inflected.

(2) After 1 hr. 40 m. twenty-five tentacles inflected; after 6 hrs. all
but twenty-one inflected; after 10 hrs. all but sixteen more or less
inflected; after 24 hrs. re-expanded.

(3) After 1 hr. 40 m. thirty-five inflected; after 6 hrs. "a large
number" (to quote my own memorandum) inflected, but from want of time
they were not counted; after 24 hrs.  re-expanded.

(4) After 1 hr. 40 m. about thirty inflected; after 6 hrs. "a large
number all round the leaf" inflected, but they were not counted; after
10 hrs. began to re-expand.

(5) to (12) These were not more inflected than leaves often are in
water, having respectively 16, 8, 10, 8, 4, 9, 14, and 0 tentacles
inflected. Two of these leaves, however, were remarkable from having
their blades slightly inflected after 6 hrs.

With respect to the twelve corresponding leaves in water, (1) had,
after 1 hr. 35 m., fifty tentacles inflected, but after 11 hrs. only
twenty-two remained so, and these formed a group, with the blade at
this point slightly inflected. It appeared as if this leaf had been in
some manner accidentally excited, for instance by a particle of animal
matter which was dissolved by the water. (2) After 1 hr. 45 m.
thirty-two tentacles inflected, but after 5 hrs. 30 m. only twenty-five
inflected, and these after 10 hrs. all re-expanded; (3) after 1 hr.
twenty-five inflected, which after 10 hrs. 20 m. were all re-expanded;
(4) and (5) after 1 hr. 35 m. six and seven tentacles inflected, which
re-expanded after 11 hrs.; (6), (7) and (8) from one to three
inflected, which [page 164] soon re-expanded; (9), (10), (11) and (12)
none inflected, though observed for twenty-four hours.

Comparing the states of the twelve leaves in water with those in the
solution, there could be no doubt that in the latter a larger number of
tentacles were inflected, and these to a greater degree; but the
evidence was by no means so clear as in the former experiments with
stronger solutions. It deserves attention that the inflection of four
of the leaves in the solution went on increasing during the first 6
hrs., and with some of them for a longer time; whereas in the water the
inflection of the three leaves which were the most affected, as well as
of all the others, began to decrease during this same interval. It is
also remarkable that the blades of three of the leaves in the solution
were slightly inflected, and this is a most rare event with leaves in
water, though it occurred to a slight extent in one (No. 1), which
seemed to have been in some manner accidentally excited. All this shows
that the solution produced some effect, though less and at a much
slower rate than in the previous cases. The small effect produced may,
however, be accounted for in large part by the majority of the leaves
having been in a poor condition.

Of the leaves in the solution, No. 1 bore 200 glands and received
1/48000 of a grain of the salt. Subtracting the seventeen tentacles
which were not inflected, each gland could have absorbed only the
1/8784000 of a grain (.00000738 mg.). This amount caused the tentacle
bearing each gland to be greatly inflected. The blade was also
inflected.

Lastly, eight leaves were immersed, each in thirty minims of a solution
of one part of the phosphate to 21,875,000 of water (1 gr. to 5000
oz.). Each leaf thus received 1/80000 of a grain of the salt, or .00081
mg. I took especial pains in selecting the finest leaves from the
hot-house for immersion, both in the solution and the water, and almost
all proved extremely sensitive. Beginning as before with those in the
solution:--

(1) After 2 hrs. 30 m. all the tentacles but twenty-two inflected, but
some only sub-inflected; the blade much inflected; after 6 hrs. 30 m.
all but thirteen inflected, with the blade immensely inflected; and
remained so for 48 hrs.

(2) No change for the first 12 hrs., but after 24 hrs. all the
tentacles inflected, excepting those of the outermost row, of which
only eleven were inflected. The inflection continued to increase, and
after 48 hrs. all the tentacles except three were inflected, [page 165]
and most of them rather closely, four or five being only
sub-inflected.

(3) No change for the first 12 hrs.; but after 24 hrs. all the
tentacles excepting those of the outermost row were sub-inflected, with
the blade inflected. After 36 hrs. blade strongly inflected, with all
the tentacles, except three, inflected or sub-inflected. After 48 hrs.
in the same state.

(4) to (8) These leaves, after 2 hrs. 30 m., had respectively 32, 17,
7, 4, and 0 tentacles inflected, most of which, after a few hours,
re-expanded, with the exception of No. 4, which retained its thirty-two
tentacles inflected for 48 hrs.
