go out for a moonlight walk you may have to come home in the
dark."

"Den I ain't goin'; an' when I do I'll take a lantern."

Mr. Roumann told the boys much more of interest about Mars, and
then, taking them to the engine-room, he showed them something
about adjusting the motors and other machinery, though he did not
disclose the secret of the power.

"Now we'll go to the pilot house, and I'll show you some things
there," he concluded.

They found Professor Henderson at the wheel.

"Is everything all right?" asked the German.

"I think so," answered the scientist.  "This airship doesn't
behave exactly as the ones I constructed before, but it seems to
be moving along at good speed."

"Yes, we have increased our rate of progress," stated Mr.
Roumann.  "We are now going nearly fifty-five miles a second.  At
that rate we shall be beyond the atmosphere sooner than I
expected."

The remainder of that day they kept on shooting forward toward
Mars, nothing occurring to mark the passage of time, save the
monotonous ticking of various clocks.  There was nothing to be
seen, save the glare of sunlight outside.

"Aren't we ever going to meet with world, or a wandering star, or
something?" asked Jack rather discontentedly.

"There's no telling when we may pass near one," said Mr. Roumann.

"S'posin' we hit one?" asked Washington, his eyes becoming large
with fear.

"There's not much danger.  My instruments will warn me when we
approach any of the heavenly bodies, and we can steer clear of
them.  The only things we have to fear will be comets, and their
orbits are so irregular that there is no telling when we may get
in the path of one."

"What will happen when we do?" asked Mark.

Mr. Roumann shrugged his shoulders.

"We'll do our best to get out of the way," he said.

"And if we can't?"

"Well--I guess that will be the end of us."

This was a new danger, and one the boys had not thought of
before.  But the German scientist did not seem to attach much
importance to the matter.

They traveled on for two days, nothing of moment occurring.  The
Annihilator, true to its name, fairly ate up space, though they
were still far from Mars.

It was on the morning of the third day.  The two boys and
Professor Henderson were in the pilot house, and Mr. Roumann was
in the engine-room, adjusting the Etherium motor, for he expected
to shortly put it in operation.  Suddenly Jack, who was looking
at one of the instruments on the front wall, uttered a cry.

"What's the matter?" asked Mark.

"We're approaching something!" was the answer.  "Some sort of
heavenly body.  Look at that indicator!"

The hand or pointer on a peculiar dial was moving violently to
and fro.

"Call Mr. Roumann," suggested the professor.  "I don't know just
what to do."

Mr. Roumann hurried into the pilot house, gave a quick glance at
the indicator, and exclaimed:

"We are nearing a planetoid, or, as some call them, an asteroid!"

"Is there any danger?" asked Mark.

"No.  Fortunately the instrument gave us timely warning.  I shall
simply steer to avoid it.  It is a small, unnamed planet flying
around in space.  There are many of them."

"Can we go close enough to it to see it?" asked Jack, who was a
curious lad.

"I think so.  I'll try it, anyhow."

Mr. Roumann made some adjustments to the levers and wheels
controlling the motor, and, by turning on a little more power on
one side of the projectile, caused it to swerve to one side.  A
few minutes later he called out:

"Look from the window!"

The boys gazed out.  They saw that they were rushing past a dark
mass, that looked as if it was composed of heaped up, black
rocks, piled in fantastic masses, with great chasms here, and
towering peaks there.  It seemed to be several miles in diameter,
and looked like a great ball.

"A small, dead world," remarked Mr. Henderson.  "I suppose our
planet will be like that some time."

"I hope not by the time we get back to it," commented Jack.  "I
wonder if we will ever get back to earth again?"

It was the first time he had expressed any doubt on this score.

"There's the last of the dead planet!" Mark cried.

They looked to see the black mass vanish into space.

"Yes, and we have reached the end of the atmosphere!" suddenly
cried Mr. Roumann as he glanced at a dial.  "Now we will begin to
travel through ether."

He adjusted some levers, turned two wheels, threw over electric
switches, and there came a perceptible jar to the projectile.

"What was that?" asked Jack.

"I have disconnected the atmospheric motor," explained the German,
"and the Etherium one is now working.  We are shooting along
through ether at the rate of one hundred miles a second."




CHAPTER XVII

A BREAKDOWN


After the first trembling, due to the increase of speed, the
sensation of traveling at one hundred miles a second was no
different from that when they had been speeding through the
atmosphere at fifty miles a second.

"We'll soon be on Mars now," observed Jack.

"Oh, we'll have to keep going for several days yet," declared Mr.
Roumann.  "But I believe we shall eventually reach there.  The
Etherium motor is working better than I dared to hope.  It is
perfect!"

As they were constantly in the glare of the sun, there was no
night for those aboard the Annihilator, and they had to select an
arbitrary time for going to bed.  When any one wanted to retire,
he went to the bunk-room, which was kept dark, and there
slumbered.

For two days the Etherium motor kept sending the projectile
through space.  The adventurers divided their time in looking
after the machinery, taking scientific observations or reading
the books with which the small library was stocked. Occasionally
Jack or Mark would play the electric piano, getting much
enjoyment from the music.

"If folks on earth heard these tunes up in the air, I wonder what
they'd think?" asked Jack.

"Humph!  I guess we're too far off for them to hear anything that
goes on inside this projectile," said Mark.  "Why, we're nearly
seventeen millions of miles above the earth now."

"Good land a' massy!  Don't say dat!" cried Washington, who was
setting the table for dinner.

"Why not?  It's a fact," declared Mark.

"I knows it is, but don't keep dwellin' on it.  Jest s'posin' we
should fall.  Mah gracious!  Sebenteen million miles!  Why, dat's
a terrible ways to drop--it suah am!"

"You're right," assented Jack.  "But hurry up dinner, Washington.
I'm hungry."

The two boys were in the midst of the meal when they felt a
curious sensation.  Jack jumped up from the table.

"Do you notice anything queer?" he asked Mark.

"Yes.  It seems as if we were falling down!"

"Exactly what I thought.  I wonder if anything could have
happened?"

 The Annihilator was certainly falling through space, and no
longer shooting forward.  This was evident, as the motion was
slower than when the projectile was urged on by the mysterious
force.

"Let's go tell Mr. Roumann and Professor Henderson," suggested
Mark.

They started toward the pilot house, but met the two scientists
rushing back toward the engine-room.

"Has anything happened?" asked Jack.

"Yes," answered the German.  "The Etherium motor has stopped
working!"

"And are we falling?" asked Mark.

"Yes, in a sense," answered Mr. Henderson, as the other inventor
hurried on.  "The gravitation of the earth no longer attracts us,
but we are not heading in a straight line for Mars.  We may be
falling into some other planet, or the sun."

Then he, too, went to the engine-room, and the boys followed.
They found the place strangely quiet, since the throbbing and
humming of the main motor had ceased.  The dynamos that kept the
light aglow and the air and other pumps were in motion, however.

"What's the matter?" asked Mr. Henderson.

"There's been a breakdown," was the reply of the German.  "And it
looks to me as if some one had been tampering with the motor."

"Tampering with the motor?"

"Yes.  Some of the plates have been smashed.  I believe there is
some one concealed on board--some enemy of mine--who hopes to
destroy us."

"What can we do?" asked Jack.

"Nothing, until the motor is repaired," replied the German
scientist.

"But we are falling--"

"Yes, I know.  But we can't fall with anything like the speed
with which we were traveling, and though we may go downward,
comparatively speaking, for a day or so, we can quickly regain
our former place as soon as the motor is running again."

"But can you fix it?"

"Yes, I have some spare plates.  But I wish you boys would make a
search through the projectile."

"What for?" asked Mark.

"For the person who smashed the plates.  I believe some one is
concealed here who seeks to kill, us.  We must find him."

"And I think I know who it is!" exclaimed Jack.

"Who?" asked Mr. Henderson.

"The crazy machinist.  I believe he sneaked here through that
open port leading into the storeroom."

"That's it!" cried Mr. Roumann.  "He must have done this.  See if
you can't find him."

"Come on, Mark," said Jack.  "We'll look for the rascal."

"And I'll help," added old Andy.  "I'm pretty good on the trail.
Maybe I can locate him."

"Do so, then," advised the German.  "The professor and I will
repair the motor."




CHAPTER XVIII

A VAIN SEARCH


The boys, with the old hunter, immediately began a search.
Washington was needed to aid the two scientific men, who quickly
prepared to substitute new plates for the smashed ones.  The
broken plates looked as if they had been struck with a sledge
hammer.

Once the adventurers got used to the different motion of the
projectile, which was now falling in some unknown direction of
its own weight and not forced onward by the power of the motor,
they did not notice anything strange.

"Let's begin at the pilot house and work back," proposed Andy.
"If that crazy machinist did the damage, it would be natural for
him to want to get as far away as he could from the engine-room.
That place would be the pilot house."

So they searched there, but there was no sign of any one.
Indeed, it would have been a pretty small person who could have
concealed himself in the prow of the projectile, occupied as it
was with all sorts of mechanism.

"Well, he isn't here, that's certain," declared Andy, who had
brought his gun along.  "Now for the bunk-room."

There they had no better luck.  They peered under the berths,
above them, and even turned back the sheets and blankets to look
for the intruder.  He was not to be found.

Nor was he in the living-room, which was looked over from top to
bottom, and every corner examined.

"If he's any place, it must be in the storeroom," declared Jack.

"Unless he's outside the projectile," suggested Mark.

"He couldn't live for a minute in a place without atmosphere,"
was Jack's opinion.  "No, he's in here somewhere, and we must
find him."

But it was more easily said than done.  The storeroom contained
many things, piled together, and it would have been easy for a
person to conceal himself among them.  The boys and the old
hunter looked in every possible place, as they supposed, even
taking down many boxes and barrels to peer behind them, but they
did not find the man they sought.

"I don't believe he's  here," said Jack as he paused in the hunt.

"Say, do you know, I have an idea," said Mark.  "Maybe that motor
broke itself."

"How could it do that?"

"Well, it might have got to going too fast, and the power may
have broken the plates.  Anyhow, we didn't hear any person in the
engine-room, and there doesn't seem to be any one here."

"That's so."

"I'll make an affidavit that there ain't a person on this airship
but ourselves," declared Andy.

"Let's ask Mr. Roumann if it's possible that the motor smashed
itself," proposed Jack, and, having no further place to search,
they went back to where the two scientists and Washington were
busily engaged.

"Yes," replied Mr. Roumann, after Jack had stated his question.
"It's possible for that to have happened, but not very probable.
I think some person is hiding on board here, and that he did it."

"But we can't find any one."

"That may be.  He is well concealed.  Well you can't do anything
more.  Suppose you two boys turn in and help us?"

Jack and Mark were glad to get busy, and for several hours they
