
_Preferred Habitat--_Thickets, fence-rows, woodland borders.

_Flowering Season_--May.

_Distribution_--Newfoundland and Manitoba southward to the Gulf
of Mexico.

  "The fair maid who, the first of May,
  Goes to the fields at break of day
  And washes in dew from the hawthorn tree
  Will ever after handsome be."

Here is a popular recipe omitted from that volume of heart-to-heart
talks entitled "How to Be Pretty Though Plain!"

The sombre-thoughted Scotchman, looking for trouble, tersely observes:

  "Mony haws,
  Mony snaws."

But in delicious, blossoming May, when the joy of living fairly
intoxicates one, and every bird's throat is swelling with happy music,
who but a Calvinist would croak dismal prophecies? In Ireland, old
crones tell marvellous tales about the hawthorns, and the banshees which
have a predilection for them.


Five-finger; Common Cinquefoil

_Potentilla canadensis_

_Flowers_--Yellow, 1/4 to 1/2 in. across, growing singly on long
peduncles from the leaf axils. Five petals longer than the 5 acute calyx
lobes with 5 linear bracts between them; about 20 stamens; pistils
numerous, forming a head. _Stem:_ Spreading over ground by slender
runners or ascending. _Leaves:_ 5-fingered, the digitate, saw-edged
leaflets (rarely 3 or 4) spreading from a common point, petioled; some
in a tuft at base.

_Preferred Habitat_--Dry fields, roadsides, hills, banks.

_Flowering Season_--April-August.

_Distribution_--Quebec to Georgia, and westward beyond the Mississippi.

Every one crossing dry fields in the eastern United States and Canada at
least must have trod on a carpet of cinquefoil (_cinque_ = five,
_feuilles_ = leaves), and have noticed the bright little blossoms among
the pretty foliage, possibly mistaking the plant for its cousin, the
trefoliate barren strawberry. Both have flowers like miniature wild
yellow roses. During the Middle Ages, when misdirected zeal credited
almost any plant with healing virtues for every ill that flesh is heir
to, the cinquefoils were considered most potent remedies, hence their
generic name.


High Bush Blackberry; Bramble

_Rubus villosus_

_Flowers_--White, 1 in. or less across, in terminal raceme-like
clusters. Calyx deeply 5-parted, persistent; 5 large petals; stamens and
carpels numerous, the latter inserted on a pulpy receptacle. _Stem:_ 3
to 10 ft. high, woody, furrowed, curved, armed with stout, recurved
prickles. _Leaves:_ Compounded of 3 to 5 ovate, saw-edged leaflets, the
end one stalked, all hairy beneath. _Fruit:_ Firmly attached to the
receptacle; nearly black, oblong juicy berries 1 in. long or less,
hanging in clusters. Ripe, July-August.

_Preferred Habitat_--Dry soil, thickets, fence-rows, old fields,
waysides. Low altitudes.

_Flowering Season_--May-June.

_Distribution_--New England to Florida, and far westward.

  "There was a man of our town,
     And he was wondrous wise,
   He jumped into a bramble bush"--

If we must have poetical associations for every flower, Mother Goose
furnishes several.

But for the practical mind this plant's chief interest lies in the fact
that from its wild varieties the famous Lawton and Kittatinny
blackberries have been derived. The late Peter Henderson used to tell
how the former came to be introduced. A certain Mr. Secor found an
unusually fine blackberry growing wild in a hedge at New Rochelle, New
York, and removed it to his garden, where it increased apace. But not
even for a gift could he induce a neighbor to relieve him of the
superfluous bushes, so little esteemed were blackberries in his day.
However, a shrewd lawyer named Lawton at length took hold of it,
exhibited the fruit, advertised it cleverly, and succeeded in pocketing
a snug little fortune from the sale of the prolific plants. Another fine
variety of the common wild blackberry, which was discovered by a
clergyman at the edge of the woods on the Kittatinny Mountains in New
Jersey, has produced fruit under skilled cultivation that still remains
the best of its class. When clusters of blossoms and fruit in various
stages of green, red, and black hang on the same bush, few ornaments in
Nature's garden are more decorative.



Purple-flowering or Virginia Raspberry

_Rubus odoratus_


_Flowers_--Royal purple or bluish pink, showy, fragrant, 1 to 2 in.
broad, loosely clustered at top of stem. Calyx sticky-hairy, deeply
5-parted, with long, pointed tips; corolla of 5 rounded petals; stamens
and pistils very numerous. _Stem_: 3 to 5 ft. high, erect, branched,
shrubby, bristly, not prickly. _Leaves_: Alternate, petioled, 3 to 5
lobed, middle lobe largest, and all pointed; saw-edged lower leaves
immense. _Fruit_: A depressed red berry, scarcely edible.

_Preferred Habitat_--Rocky woods, dells, shady roadsides.

_Flowering Season_--June-August.

_Distribution_--Northern Canada south to Georgia, westward to Michigan
and Tennessee.

To be an unappreciated, unloved relative of the exquisite wild rose,
with which this flower is so often likened, must be a similar
misfortune to being the untalented son of a great man, or the unhappy
author of a successful first book never equalled in later attempts. But
where the bright blossoms of the Virginia raspberry burst forth above
the roadside tangle and shady woodland dells, even those who despise
magenta see beauty in them where abundant green tones all discordant
notes into harmony. Purple, as we of to-day understand the color, the
flower is not; but rather the purple of ancient Orientals. On cool,
cloudy days the petals are a deep rose that fades into bluish pink when
the sun is hot.


Wild Roses

_Rosa_

Just as many members of the lily tribe show a preference for the rule of
three in the arrangements of their floral parts, so the wild roses cling
to the quinary method of some primitive ancestor, a favorite one also
with the buttercup and many of its kin, the geraniums, mallows, and
various others. Most of our fruit trees and bushes are near relatives of
the rose. Five petals and five sepals, then, we always find on roses in
a state of nature; and although the progressive gardener of to-day has
nowhere shown his skill more than in the development of a multitude of
petals from stamens in the magnificent roses of fashionable society, the
most highly cultivated darling of the greenhouses quickly reverts to the
original wild type, setting his work of years at naught, if once it
regain its natural liberties through neglect.

To protect its foliage from being eaten by hungry cattle, the rose goes
armed into the battle of life with curved, sharp prickles, not true
thorns or modified branches, but merely surface appliances which peel
off with the bark. To destroy crawling pilferers of pollen, several
species coat their calices, at least, with fine hairs or sticky gum; and
to insure wide distribution of offspring, the seeds are packed in the
attractive, bright red calyx tube or hip, a favorite food of many birds,
which drop them miles away.

In literature, ancient and modern, sacred and profane, no flower figures
so conspicuously as the rose. To the Romans it was most significant when
placed over the door of a public or private banquet hall. Each who
passed beneath it bound himself thereby not to disclose anything said or
done within; hence the expression _sub rosa_, common to this day.

The Smoother, Early, or Meadow Rose (_R. blanda_), found blooming in
June and July in moist, rocky places from Newfoundland to New Jersey and
a thousand miles westward, has slightly fragrant flowers, at first pink,
later pure white. Their styles are separate, not cohering in a column
nor projecting as in the climbing rose. This is a leafy, low bush mostly
less than three feet high; it is either entirely unarmed, or else
provided with only a few weak prickles; the stipules are rather broad,
and the leaf is compounded of from five to seven oval, blunt, and pale
green leaflets, often hoary below.

       *       *       *       *       *

In swamps and low, wet ground from Quebec to Florida and westward to the
Mississippi, the Swamp Rose (_R. carolina_) blooms late in May and on to
midsummer. The bush may grow taller than a man, or perhaps only a foot
high. It is armed with stout, hooked, rather distant prickles, and few
or no bristles. The leaflets, from five to nine, but usually seven, to a
leaf, are smooth, pale, or perhaps hairy beneath to protect the pores
from filling with moisture arising from the wet ground. Long, sharp
calyx lobes, which drop off before the cup swells in fruit into a round,
glandular, hairy red hip, are conspicuous among the clustered pink
flowers and buds.

How fragrant are the pages of Chaucer, Spenser, and Shakespeare with the
Eglantine! This delicious plant, known here as Sweetbrier (_R.
rubiginosa_), emits its very aromatic odor from russet glands on the
under, downy side of the small leaflets, always a certain means of
identification. From eastern Canada to Virginia and Tennessee the plant
has happily escaped from man's gardens back to Nature's.

In spite of its American Indian name, the lovely white Cherokee Rose
(_R. Sinica_), that runs wild in the South, climbing, rambling, and
rioting with a truly Oriental abandon and luxuriance, did indeed come
from China. Would that our northern thickets and roadsides might be
decked with its pure flowers and almost equally beautiful dark, glossy,
evergreen leaves!




PULSE FAMILY _(Leguminosae)_


Wild or American Senna

_Cassia marylandica_

_Flowers_--Yellow, about 3/4 in. broad, numerous, in short axillary
clusters on the upper part of plant. Calyx of 5 oblong lobes; 5 petals,
3 forming an upper lip, 2 a lower one; 10 stamens of 3 different kinds;
1 pistil. _Stem:_ 3 to 8 ft. high, little branched. _Leaves:_
Alternately pinnately compounded of 6 to 10 pairs of oblong leaflets.
_Fruit:_ A narrow, flat curving pod, 3 to 4 in. long.

_Preferred Habitat_--Alluvial or moist, rich soil, swamps, roadsides.

_Flowering Season_--July-August.

_Distribution_--New England, westward to Nebraska, south to the
Gulf States.

Whoever has seen certain Long Island roadsides bordered with wild
senna, the brilliant flower clusters contrasted with the deep green of
the beautiful foliage, knows that no effect produced by art along the
drives of public park or private garden can match these country lanes
in simple charm.

While leaves of certain African and East Indian species of senna are
most valued for their medicinal properties, those of this plant are
largely collected in the Middle and Southern states as a substitute.
Caterpillars of several sulphur butterflies, which live exclusively on
cassia foliage, appear to feel no evil effects from overdoses.


Wild Indigo; Yellow or Indigo Broom; Horsefly Weed

_Baptisia tinctoria_

_Flowers_--Bright yellow, papilionaceous, about 1/2 in. long, on short
pedicels, in numerous but few flowered terminal racemes. Calyx light
green, 4 or 5-toothed; corolla of 5 oblong petals, the standard erect,
the keel enclosing 10 incurved stamens and 1 pistil. _Stem:_ Smooth,
branched, 2 to 4 ft. high. _Leaves:_ Compounded of 3 ovate leaflets.
_Fruit:_ A many-seeded round or egg-shaped pod tipped with the
awl-shaped style.

_Preferred Habitat_--Dry, sandy soil.

_Flowering Season_--June-September.

_Distribution_--Maine and Minnesota to the Gulf states.

Dark grayish green, clover-like leaves, and small, bright yellow flowers
growing in loose clusters at the ends of the branches of a bushy little
plant, are so commonly met with they need little description. A
relative, the true indigo-bearer, a native of Asia, once commonly grown
in the Southern states when slavery made competition with Oriental labor
possible, has locally escaped and become naturalized. But the false
species, although, as Doctor Gray says, it yields "a poor sort of
indigo," yields a most valuable medicine employed by the homoeopathists
in malarial fevers. The plant turns black in drying. As in the case of
other papilionaceous blossoms, bees are the visitors best adapted to
fertilize the flowers. When we see the little, sleepy, dusky-winged
butterfly (_Thanaos brizo_) around the plant we may know she is there
only to lay eggs, that the larvae and caterpillars may find their
favorite food at hand on waking into life.


Wild Lupine; Old Maid's Bonnets; Wild Pea; Sun Dial

_Lupinus perennis_

_Flowers_--Vivid blue, very rarely pink or white, butterfly-shaped;
corolla consisting of standard, wings, and keel; about 1/2 in. long,
borne in a long raceme at end of stem; calyx 2-lipped, deeply toothed.
_Stem:_ Erect, branching, leafy, 1 to 2 ft. high. _Leaves:_ Palmate,
compounded of from 7 to 11 (usually 8) leaflets. _Fruit:_ A broad,
flat, very hairy pod, 1-1/2 in. long, and containing 4 or 5 seeds.

_Preferred Habitat_--Dry, sandy places, banks, and hillsides.

_Flowering Season_--May-June.

_Distribution_--United States east of Mississippi, and eastern Canada.

Farmers once thought that this plant preyed upon the fertility of their
soil, as we see in the derivation of its name, from _lupus_, a wolf;
whereas the lupine contents itself with sterile waste land no one should
grudge it--steep, gravelly banks, railroad tracks, exposed sunny hills,
where even it must often burn out under fierce sunshine did not its root
penetrate to surprising depths. It spreads far and wide in thrifty
colonies, reflecting the vivid color of June skies, until, as Thoreau
says, "the earth is blued with it."

The lupine is another of those interesting plants which go to sleep at
night. Some members of the genus erect one half of the leaf and droop
the other half until it becomes a vertical instead of the horizontal
star it is by day. Frequently the leaflets rotate as much as 90 degrees
on their own axes. Some lupines fold their leaflets, not at night only,
but during the day also there is more or less movement in the leaves.
Sun dial, a popular name for the wild lupine, has reference to this
peculiarity. The leaf of our species shuts downward around its stem
umbrella fashion, or the leaflets are erected to prevent the chilling
which comes to horizontal surfaces by radiation, some scientists think.
"That the sleep movements of leaves are in some manner of high
importance to the plants which exhibit them," says Darwin, "few will
dispute who have observed how complex they sometimes are."


Common Red, Purple, Meadow, or Honeysuckle Clover

_Trifolium pratense_

_Flowers_--Magenta, pink, or rarely whitish, sweet-scented, the tubular
corollas set in dense round, oval, or egg-shaped heads about 1 in. long,
and seated in a sparingly hairy calyx. _Stem:_ 6 in. to 2 ft. high,
branching, reclining, or erect, more or less hairy. _Leaves:_ On long
petioles, commonly compounded of 3, but sometimes of 4 to 11 oval or
oblong leaflets, marked with white crescent, often dark-spotted near
centre; stipules egg-shaped, sharply pointed, strongly veined, more than
1/2 in. long.

_Preferred Habitat_--Fields, meadows, roadsides.

_Flowering Season_--April-November.

_Distribution_--Common throughout Canada and United States.
