

PRECIPITATION OF MAGNESIUM AMMONIUM PHOSPHATE

PROCEDURE.--Dissolve the precipitate of phosphomolybdate upon the
filter by pouring through it dilute aqueous ammonia (one volume of
dilute ammonia (sp. gr. 0.96) and three volumes of water, which
should be carefully measured), and receive the solution in the beaker
containing the bulk of the precipitate. The total volume of nitrate
and washings should not much exceed 100 cc. Acidify the solution with
dilute hydrochloric acid, and heat it nearly to boiling. Calculate the
volume of magnesium ammonium chloride solution ("magnesia mixture")
required to precipitate the phosphoric acid, assuming 40 per cent
P_{2}O_{5} in the apatite. Measure out about 5 cc. in excess of this
amount, and pour it into the acid solution. Then add slowly dilute
ammonium hydroxide (1 volume of strong ammonia (sp. gr. 0.90) and 9
volumes of water), stirring constantly until a precipitate forms. Then
add a volume of filtered, concentrated ammonia (sp. gr. 0.90) equal to
one third of the volume of liquid in the beaker (Note 1). Allow the
whole to cool. The precipitated magnesium ammonium phosphate should
then be definitely crystalline in appearance (Note 2). (If it is
desired to hasten the precipitation, the solution may be cooled, first
in cold and then in ice-water, and stirred !constantly! for half an
hour, when precipitation will usually be complete.)

Decant the clear liquid through a filter, and transfer the precipitate
to the filter, using as wash-water a mixture of one volume of
concentrated ammonia and three volumes of water. It is not necessary
to clean the beaker completely or to wash the precipitate thoroughly
at this point, as it is necessary to purify it by reprecipitation.

[Note 1: Magnesium ammonium phosphate is not a wholly insoluble
substance, even under the most favorable analytical conditions. It
is least soluble in a liquid containing one fourth of its volume of
concentrated aqueous ammonia (sp. gr. 0.90) and this proportion should
be carefully maintained as prescribed in the procedure. On account of
this slight solubility the volume of solutions should be kept as small
as possible and the amount of wash-water limited to that absolutely
required.

A large excess of the magnesium solution tends both to throw out
magnesium hydroxide (shown by a persistently flocculent precipitate)
and to cause the phosphate to carry down molybdic acid. The tendency
of the magnesium precipitate to carry down molybdic acid is also
increased if the solution is too concentrated. The volume should not
be less than 90 cc., nor more than 125 cc., at the time of the first
precipitation with the magnesia mixture.]

[Note 2: The magnesium ammonium phosphate should be perfectly
crystalline, and will be so if the directions are followed. The slow
addition of the reagent is essential, and the stirring not less so.
Stirring promotes the separation of the precipitate and the formation
of larger crystals, and may therefore be substituted for digestion in
the cold. The stirring-rod must not be allowed to scratch the glass,
as the crystals adhere to such scratches and are removed with
difficulty.]


REPRECIPITATION AND IGNITION OF MAGNESIUM AMMONIUM PHOSPHATE

A single precipitation of the magnesium compound in the presence of
molybdenum compounds rarely yields a pure product. The molybdenum can
be removed by solution of the precipitate in acid and precipitation
of the molybdenum by sulphureted hydrogen, after which the magnesium
precipitate may be again thrown down. It is usually more satisfactory
to dissolve the magnesium precipitate and reprecipitate the phosphate
as magnesium ammonium phosphate as described below.

PROCEDURE.--Dissolve the precipitate from the filter in a little
dilute hydrochloric acid (sp. gr. 1.12), allowing the acid solution to
run into the beaker in which the original precipitation was made (Note
1). Wash the filter with water until the wash-water shows no test for
chlorides, but avoid an unnecessary amount of wash-water. Add to
the solution 2 cc. (not more) of magnesia mixture, and then dilute
ammonium hydroxide solution (sp. gr. 0.96), drop by drop, with
constant stirring, until the liquid smells distinctly of ammonia. Stir
for a few moments and then add a volume of strong ammonia (sp. gr.
0.90), equal to one third of the volume of the solution. Allow the
solution to stand for some hours, and then filter off the magnesium
ammonium phosphate, which should be distinctly crystalline in
character. Wash the precipitate with dilute ammonia water, as
prescribed above, until, finally, 3 cc. of the washings, after
acidifying with nitric acid, show no evidence of chlorides. Test both
filtrates for complete precipitation by adding a few cubic centimeters
of magnesia mixture and allowing them to stand for some time.

Transfer the moist precipitate to a weighed porcelain or platinum
crucible and ignite, using great care to raise the temperature slowly
while drying the filter in the crucible, and to insure the ready
access of oxygen during the combustion of the filter paper, thus
guarding against a possible reduction of the phosphate, which would
result in disastrous consequences both to the crucible, if of
platinum, and the analysis. Do not raise the temperature above
moderate redness until the precipitate is white. (Keep this precaution
well in mind.) Ignite finally at the highest temperature of the
Tirrill burner, and repeat the heating until the weight is constant.
If the ignited precipitate is persistently discolored by particles of
unburned carbon, moisten the mass with a drop or two of concentrated
nitric acid and heat cautiously, finally igniting strongly. The
acid will dissolve magnesium pyrophosphate from the surface of the
particles of carbon, which will then burn away. Nitric acid also aids
as an oxidizing agent in supplying oxygen for the combustion of the
carbon.

From the weight of magnesium pyrophosphate (Mg_{2}P_{2}O_{7})
obtained, calculate the phosphoric anhydride (P_{2}O_{5}) in the
sample of apatite.

[Note 1: The ionic change involved in the precipitation of the
magnesium compound is

PO_{4}^{---} + NH_{4}^{+} + Mg^{++} --> [MgNH_{4}PO_{4}].

The magnesium ammonium phosphate is readily dissolved by acids, even
those which are no stronger than acetic acid. This is accounted for
by the fact that two of the ions into which phosphoric acid may
dissociate, the HPO_{4}^{--} or H_{2}PO_{4}^{-} ions, exhibit the
characteristics of very weak acids, in that they show almost no
tendency to dissociate further into H^{+} and PO_{4}^{--} ions.
Consequently the ionic changes which occur when the magnesium ammonium
phosphate is brought into contact with an acid may be typified by the
reaction:

H^{+} + Mg^{++} + NH_{4}^{+} + PO_{4}^{---} --> Mg^{++} + NH_{4}^{+} +
HPO_{4}^{--};

that is, the PO_{4}^{--} ions and the H^{+} ions lose their identity
in the formation of the new ion, HPO_{4}^{--}, and this continues
until the magnesium ammonium phosphate is entirely dissolved.]

[Note 2: During ignition the magnesium ammonium phosphate loses
ammonia and water and is converted into magnesium pyrophosphate:

2MgNH_{4}PO_{4} --> Mg_{2}P_{2}O_{7} + 2NH_{3} + H_{2}O.

The precautions mentioned on pages 111 and 123 must be observed with
great care during the ignition of this precipitate. The danger here
lies in a possible reduction of the phosphate by the carbon of the
filter paper, or by the ammonia evolved, which may act as a reducing
agent. The phosphorus then attacks and injures a platinum crucible,
and the determination is valueless.]




ANALYSIS OF LIMESTONE


Limestones vary widely in composition from a nearly pure marble
through the dolomitic limestones, containing varying amounts of
magnesium, to the impure varieties, which contain also ferrous and
manganous carbonates and siliceous compounds in variable proportions.
Many other minerals may be inclosed in limestones in small quantities,
and an exact qualitative analysis will often show the presence of
sulphides or sulphates, phosphates, and titanates, and the alkali or
even the heavy metals. No attempt is made in the following procedures
to provide a complete quantitative scheme which would take into
account all of these constituents. Such a scheme for a complete
analysis of a limestone may be found in Bulletin No. 700 of the United
States Geological Survey. It is assumed that, for these practice
determinations, a limestone is selected which contains only the more
common constituents first enumerated above.


DETERMINATION OF MOISTURE

The determination of the amount of moisture in minerals or ores is
often of great importance. Ores which have been exposed to the weather
during shipment may have absorbed enough moisture to appreciably
affect the results of analysis. Since it is essential that the seller
and buyer should make their analyses upon comparable material, it is
customary for each analyst to determine the moisture in the sample
examined, and then to calculate the percentages of the various
constituents with reference to a sample dried in the air, or at a
temperature a little above 100 deg.C., which, unless the ore has undergone
chemical change because of the wetting, should be the same before and
after shipment.

PROCEDURE.--Spread 25 grams of the powdered sample on a weighed
watch-glass; weigh to the nearest 10 milligrams only and heat at
105 deg.C.; weigh at intervals of an hour, after cooling in a desiccator,
until the loss of weight after an hour's heating does not exceed
10 milligrams. It should be noted that a variation in weight of 10
milligrams in a total weight of 25 grams is no greater relatively than
a variation of 0.1 milligram when the sample taken weighs 0.25 gram

DETERMINATION OF THE INSOLUBLE MATTER AND SILICA

PROCEDURE.--Weigh out two portions of the original powdered sample
(not the dried sample), of about 5 grams each, into 250 cc.
casseroles, and cover each with a watch-glass (Note 1). Pour over the
powder 25 cc. of water, and then add 50 cc. of dilute hydrochloric
acid (sp. gr. 1.12) in small portions, warming gently, until nothing
further appears to dissolve (Note 2). Evaporate to dryness on the
water bath. Pour over the residue a mixture of 5 cc. of water and
5 cc. of concentrated hydrochloric acid (sp. gr. 1.2) and again
evaporate to dryness, and finally heat for at least an hour at
a temperature of 110 deg.C. Pour over this residue 50 cc. of dilute
hydrochloric acid (one volume acid (sp. gr. 1.12) to five volumes
water), and boil for about five minutes; then filter and wash twice
with the dilute hydrochloric acid, and then with hot water until
free from chlorides. Transfer the filter and contents to a porcelain
crucible, dry carefully over a low flame, and ignite to constant
weight. The residue represents the insoluble matter and the silica
from any soluble silicates (Note 3).

Calculate the combined percentage of these in the limestone.

[Note 1: The relatively large weight (5 grams) taken for analysis
insures greater accuracy in the determination of the ingredients which
are present in small proportions, and is also more likely to be a
representative sample of the material analyzed.]

[Note 2: It is plain that the amount of the insoluble residue and also
its character will often depend upon the strength of acid used for
solution of the limestone. It cannot, therefore, be regarded as
representing any well-defined constituent, and its determination is
essentially empirical.]

[Note 3: It is probable that some of the silicates present are wholly
or partly decomposed by the acid, and the soluble silicic acid must
be converted by evaporation to dryness, and heating, into white,
insoluble silica. This change is not complete after one evaporation.
The heating at a temperature somewhat higher than that of the water
bath for a short time tends to leave the silica in the form of a
powder, which promotes subsequent filtration. The siliceous residue
is washed first with dilute acid to prevent hydrolytic changes, which
would result in the formation of appreciable quantities of insoluble
basic iron or aluminium salts on the filter when washing with hot
water.

If it is desired to determine the percentage of silica separately, the
ignited residue should be mixed in a platinum crucible with about six
times its weight of anhydrous sodium carbonate, and the procedure
given on page 151 should be followed. The filtrate from the silica is
then added to the main filtrate from the insoluble residue.]




DETERMINATION OF FERRIC OXIDE AND ALUMINIUM OXIDE (WITH MANGANESE)


PROCEDURE.--To the filtrate from the insoluble residue add ammonium
hydroxide until the solution just smells distinctly of ammonia, but do
not add an excess. Then add 5 cc. of saturated bromine water (Note 1),
and boil for five minutes. If the smell of ammonia has disappeared,
again add ammonium hydroxide in slight excess, and 3 cc. of bromine
water, and heat again for a few minutes. Finally add 10 cc. of
ammonium chloride solution and keep the solution warm until it barely
smells of ammonia; then filter promptly (Note 2). Wash the filter
twice with hot water, then (after replacing the receiving beaker) pour
through it 25 cc. of hot, dilute hydrochloric acid (one volume dilute
HCl [sp. gr. 1.12] to five volumes water). A brown residue insoluble
in the acid may be allowed to remain on the filter. Wash the filter
five times with hot water, add to the filtrate ammonium hydroxide
and bromine water as described above, and repeat the precipitation.
Collect the precipitate on the filter already used, wash it free from
chlorides with hot water, and ignite and weigh as described for ferric
hydroxide on page 110. The residue after ignition consists of ferric
oxide, alumina, and mangano-manganic oxide (Mn_{3}O_{4}), if manganese
is present. These are commonly determined together (Note 3).

Calculate the percentage of the combined oxides in the limestone.

[Note 1: The addition of bromine water to the ammoniacal solutions
serves to oxidize any ferrous hydroxide to ferric hydroxide and to
precipitate manganese as MnO(OH)_{2}. The solution must contain not
more than a bare excess of hydroxyl ions (ammonium hydroxide) when it
is filtered, on account of the tendency of the aluminium hydroxide to
redissolve.

The solution should not be strongly ammoniacal when the bromine is
added, as strong ammonia reacts with the bromine, with the evolution
of nitrogen.]

[Note 2: The precipitate produced by ammonium hydroxide and bromine
should be filtered off promptly, since the alkaline solution absorbs
carbon dioxide from the air, with consequent partial precipitation
of the calcium as carbonate. This is possible even under the most
favorable conditions, and for this reason the iron precipitate is
redissolved and again precipitated to free it from calcium. When the
precipitate is small, this reprecipitation may be omitted.]

[Note 3: In the absence of significant amounts of manganese the iron
and aluminium may be separately determined by fusion of the mixed
ignited precipitate, after weighing, with about ten times its weight
of acid potassium sulphate, solution of the cold fused mass in water,
and volumetric determination of the iron, as described on page 66.
The aluminium is then determined by difference, after subtracting the
weight of ferric oxide corresponding to the amount of iron found.

If a separate determination of the iron, aluminium, and manganese
is desired, the mixed precipitate may be dissolved in acid before
ignition, and the separation effected by special methods (see, for
example, Fay, !Quantitative Analyses!, First Edition, pp. 15-19 and
23-27).]




DETERMINATION OF CALCIUM


PROCEDURE.--To the combined filtrates from the double precipitation of
the hydroxides just described, add 5 cc. of dilute ammonium hydroxide
(sp. gr. 0.96), and transfer the liquid to a 500 cc. graduated flask,
washing out the beaker carefully. Cool to laboratory temperature, and
fill the flask with distilled water until the lowest point of the
meniscus is exactly level with the mark on the neck of the flask.
Carefully remove any drops of water which are on the inside of the
neck of the flask above the graduation by means of a strip of filter
paper, make the solution uniform by pouring it out into a dry beaker
and back into the flask several times. Measure off one fifth of this
solution as follows (Note 1): Pour into a 100 cc. graduated flask
about 10 cc. of the solution, shake the liquid thoroughly over the
inner surface of the small flask, and pour it out. Repeat the same
operation. Fill the 100 cc. flask until the lowest point of the
meniscus is exactly level with the mark on its neck, remove any drops
of solution from the upper part of the neck with filter paper, and
pour the solution into a beaker (400-500 cc.). Wash out the flask with
small quantities of water until it is clean, adding these to the 100
cc. of solution. When the duplicate portion of 100 cc. is measured out
from the solution, remember that the flask must be rinsed out twice
with that solution, as prescribed above, before the measurement is
made. (A 100 cc. pipette may be used to measure out the aliquot
portions, if preferred.)

Dilute each of the measured portions to 250 cc. with distilled water,
heat the whole to boiling, and add ammonium oxalate solution slowly
in moderate excess, stirring well. Boil for two minutes; allow the
precipitated calcium oxalate to settle for a half-hour, and decant
through a filter. Test the filtrate for complete precipitation by
adding a few cubic centimeters of the precipitant, allowing it to
stand for fifteen minutes. If no precipitate forms, make the solution
slightly acid with hydrochloric acid (Note 2); see that it is properly
labeled and reserve it to be combined with the filtrate from the
second calcium oxalate precipitation (Notes 3 and 4).

Redissolve the calcium oxalate in the beaker with warm hydrochloric
acid, pouring the acid through the filter. Wash the filter five times
with water, and finally pour through it aqueous ammonia. Dilute the
solution to 250 cc., bring to boiling, and add 1 cc. ammonium oxalate
solution (Note 5) and ammonia in slight excess; boil for two minutes,
and set aside for a half-hour. Filter off the calcium oxalate upon the
filter first used, and wash free from chlorides. The filtrate should
be made barely acid with hydrochloric acid and combined with the
filtrate from the first precipitation. Begin at once the evaporation
of the solutions for the determination of magnesium as described
below.

The precipitate of calcium oxalate may be converted into calcium oxide
by ignition without previous drying. After burning the filter, it may
be ignited for three quarters of an hour in a platinum crucible at
the highest heat of the Bunsen or Tirrill burner, and finally for ten
minutes at the blast lamp (Note 6). Repeat the heating over the blast
lamp until the weight is constant. As the calcium oxide absorbs
moisture from the air, it must (after cooling) be weighed as rapidly
as possible.

The precipitate may, if preferred, be placed in a weighted porcelain
crucible. After burning off the filter and heating for ten minutes the
calcium precipitate may be converted into calcium sulphate by placing
2 cc. of dilute sulphuric acid in the crucible (cold), heating the
covered crucible very cautiously over a low flame to drive off the
excess of acid, and finally at redness to constant weight (Note 7).

From the weight of the oxide or sulphate, calculate the percentage of
the calcium (Ca) in the limestone, remembering that only one fifth of
the total solution is used for this determination.

[Note 1: If the calcium were precipitated from the entire solution,
the quantity of the precipitate would be greater than could be
properly treated. The solution is, therefore, diluted to a definite
volume (500 cc.), and exactly one fifth (100 cc.) is measured off in a
graduated flask or by means of a pipette.]

[Note 2: The filtrate from the calcium oxalate should be made slightly
acid immediately after filtration, in order to avoid the solvent
action of the alkaline liquid upon the glass.]

[Note 3: The accurate quantitative separation of calcium and magnesium
as oxalates requires considerable care. The calcium precipitate
usually carries down with it some magnesium, and this can best
be removed by redissolving the precipitate after filtration, and
reprecipitation in the presence of only the small amount of magnesium
which was included in the first precipitate. When, however, the
proportion of magnesium is not very large, the second precipitation of
the calcium can usually be avoided by precipitating it from a rather
dilute solution (800 cc. or so) and in the presence of a considerable
excess of the precipitant, that is, rather more than enough to convert
both the magnesium and calcium into oxalates.]

[Note 4: The ionic changes involved in the precipitation of calcium
as oxalate are exceedingly simple, and the principles discussed in
connection with the barium sulphate precipitation on page 113 also
apply here. The reaction is

C_{2}O_{4}^{--} + Ca^{++} --> [CaC_{2}O_{4}].

Calcium oxalate is nearly insoluble in water, and only very slightly
soluble in acetic acid, but is readily dissolved by the strong mineral
acids. This behavior with acids is explained by the fact that oxalic
acid is a stronger acid than acetic acid; when, therefore, the oxalate
is brought into contact with the latter there is almost no tendency to
diminish the concentration of C_{2}O_{4}^{--} ions by the formation of
an acid less dissociated than the acetic acid itself, and practically
no solvent action ensues. When a strong mineral acid is present,
however, the ionization of the oxalic acid is much reduced by the high
concentration of the H^{+} ions from the strong acid, the formation
of the undissociated acid lessens the concentration of the
C_{2}O_{4}^{--} ions in solution, more of the oxalate passes into
solution to re-establish equilibrium, and this process repeats itself
until all is dissolved.

The oxalate is immediately reprecipitated from such a solution on the
addition of OH^{-} ions, which, by uniting with the H^{+} ions of the
acids (both the mineral acid and the oxalic acid) to form water, leave
the Ca^{++} and C_{2}O_{4}^{--} ions in the solution to recombine to
form [CaC_{2}O_{4}], which is precipitated in the absence of the
H^{+} ions. It is well at this point to add a small excess of
C_{2}O_{4}^{--} ions in the form of ammonium oxalate to decrease the
solubility of the precipitate.

The oxalate precipitate consists mainly of CaC_{2}O_{4}.H_{2}O when
thrown down.]

