longitudinal frames. They had parted in the middle for a distance of 8
ft., while some of the butts had been opened so that gashes 2 in. or 3
in. wide appeared between them. The coal had been pulverized and
scattered in all directions, and other internal damage inflicted.
Nevertheless, the watertight bulkheads remained intact, and by confining
the influx of water to a single compartment so much buoyancy was
preserved that, though the ship heeled over to starboard and was maimed,
she remained afloat, and might have continued to fight her guns,
provided always that no injury had been sustained by her machinery, a
point which these experiments do not touch. Crippled, however, as she
was, it was thought at the time (and the probability was strengthened by
subsequent examination of the ship in dock) that the coal, instead of
being a protection to the double bottom, had in reality proved a source
of weakness by receiving the energy of the explosion from the outer
plating and communicating it to the inner plating, and so distributing
it throughout the submerged portions of the hulk.

The question was sufficiently important to demand an experimental
solution; hence the _raison d'etre_ of the present demonstration. The
double bottom, which is about 21/2 ft. deep, was consequently kept empty,
and the torpedo placed in immediate contact with it in such a manner
that, being overhung by the contour of the hull, the ship would feel the
full force of the upward as well as the lateral energy of the charge. On
other accounts the importance of the experiment was obvious, for,
although it had been ascertained that torpedo nets were capable of
protecting a battle ship from the bursts of the heaviest locomotive and
outrigger charges, it might happen, of course, that the nets would be
rent or displaced by shell fire or swept away by a grazing ram or even
attacked by a double torpedo, the second passing through the gashes made
by the explosion of the first in any case. It was, therefore, of urgent
necessity that the effect of a torpedo bursting in immediate contact
with a ship's bottom should be practically and clearly determined. The
charge on June 13 was fired just before 5 p.m. in the wake of the
boilers, and it was soon perceived that something of a fatal character
had taken place from the appearance of coal dust sweeping up through the
hold. The report had not the dull boom to which the spectators had
become accustomed. Instead of this, the gun cotton exploded with a
sharp, angry, whistling noise, while the manner in which the mud was
churned up showed that the force of the rebound was terrific. The ship
lifted bodily near the stern, after which it was seen to leisurely heel
over to starboard some eight or ten degrees, and finally repose, though
not until the tide fell, upon the mud. The old hulk had been mortally
wounded at last.

A complete knowledge of the disaster which has overtaken her (says the
correspondent of the London _Times_, to which we are indebted for the
above particulars) will not be obtained until a careful investigation
has been made of the hull in dock. But, from a hasty exploration which
was conducted on board, it was evident that the shot had not only
dislocated the inner plating of the double bottom, but had penetrated
the bunker compartment, stored as it was with coal, that the watertight
doors and compartments had ceased to operate, and that water was flowing
into the hull through a hundred crevices. To such an extent was this the
case that, though a strong working party was at hand ready for any
emergency, it was deemed useless to attempt to free the ship of water
until her gashes had been temporarily closed from outside. When this has
been done, she will be pumped out and brought into dock for careful
examination. From what has been said, it will be seen that while the
explosion of 95 lb. of gun cotton in actual contact last November simply
crippled the Resistance, the explosion of a like charge at the same
spot, and under approximately the same conditions, has in this instance
not simply disabled, but really sunk the ship.

       *       *       *       *       *




AN ENGLISH CAR COUPLING.


The new automatic railway coupling illustrated below is the invention of
Mr. Richard Hill, and has been practically developed by Mr. B.H.
Thwaite, of Liverpool. It will be seen that the system is somewhat
similar to the parallel motion when in action.

The catch and peculiarly shaped hooks slide over the cross and catch
bars. These latter turn horizontally on a central pivot attached to the
jaw end of the drawbar. The cross catch bars adjust themselves to the
direction of the line of pull in the drawbar. The cranking of the
drawbar allows for the deflection of the buffer springs.

The arrangement of uncoupling, or throwing hooks out of gear, is
extremely simple and effective. The cranked part of the rod passing
across the end of the wagon, and with handles at each end workable from
the 6 ft. way, is attached to the catch hooks by means of a light chain.
On throwing the handle over, and against the end of the wagon, the crank
moves over and below the center, lifting up the catch into a position
out of range of action, and from this position it cannot fall except it
is released by the shunter. A shackle and links hang from the end of the
drawbar for attachment to ordinary wagons.

After a long and costly series of experiments the form of coupling shown
in illustration was adopted. Part of the experimental couplings used
were made by the Hadfield Steel Foundry Company, but the couplings used
at a recent trial at Gloucester were forged by the Gloucester Wagon
Company.

[Illustration: AN ENGLISH CAR COUPLING.]

The trial couplings were applied to old and worn-out coal wagons,
varying in relative heights and widths of buffers, and the tests were:

1. Coupling and uncoupling, and passing coupled round curves of less
than two chains radius. 2. Coupling under rapid transit movement and
violent shock. 3. Coupling under slow movement, the wagons being shunted
together by two shunters. 4. Wagons brought violently together while the
coupling hooks were lifted out of action, to test the rigidity of the
hooks in this position. 5. Tested in competition with the ordinary
coupling stock.

The trial was a success. The new automatic coupling satisfactorily
underwent the various conditions, and it was proved that: 1. It can be
lifted out of action with one hand and quite easily. 2. It can be
coupled and uncoupled six times as fast as with the pole hook in the
daytime. At night this advantage would be considerably increased.

The coupling is strong as well as elastic in its parts, and adjusts
itself to the various conditions of traction.--_Engineering_.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Continued from SUPPLEMENT, No. 597, page 9539.]




MAGAZINE RIFLES.


_Chaffee-Reece Magazine Rifle_.--We do not insert a drawing of this
arm--one of the three selected by the American board--as it belongs to
the same class and is similar in general construction to the Hotchkiss.
There is, however, an important difference in the magazine, which has no
spiral spring, but is furnished instead with an ingenious system of
ratchet bars. One of these carries forward the cartridge a distance
equal to its own length at each reciprocal motion of the bolt, while a
second bar has no longitudinal motion, but prevents the cartridges from
moving to the rear in the magazine tube after they have been moved
forward by the other bar. The magazine is loaded through an aperture in
the butt plate, the opening of the spring cover of which causes the two
ratchet bars to be depressed, so that the magazine can be filled by
passing the cartridges along a smooth middle bar. The act of closing the
spring cover again brings the two ratchet bars into play.

[Illustration: FIG. 9.--KROPATSCHEK MAGAZINE GUN]

By means of a cut-off the ratchet bars can be prevented from acting, and
the piece used as a single loader.

_Kropatschek Magazine Rifle_.--This rifle, which is the small arm of the
French navy, has a bolt-action rifle resembling the Gras (see Fig. 9).

The magazine is a brass tube underneath the barrel, as in the
Winchester, Vetterli, Mauser, and other rifles of class 1. It contains
six cartridges, while a seventh can be placed in the trough or carrier,
T.

When the breech is opened by pulling back the bolt, a projection on the
latter strikes the carrier at N, causing its front extremity to raise
the cartridge into the position shown in the section. This movement is
accelerated by the spring, A, acting against a knife-edge projection on
the trough, T; in the upper position of the trough, the spring acts upon
one face of the angle, and upon the other face when in the lower
position.

On closing the breech, the bolt pushes the cartridge into the chamber,
and when the handle is locked down to the right, a part of the bolt
presses against a stud, and thus depresses the trough to be ready to
receive another cartridge from the magazine.

The magazine can be cut off and the rifle used as a single loader by
pushing forward a thumb-piece on the right side of the shoe. The effect
of this is that, on turning down the handle to lock the bolt, the latter
does not act on the stud to depress the carrier, so that no fresh
cartridges are fed up from the magazine.

[Illustration: FIG. 10.--LEE MAGAZINE GUN]

There is a projection, Z, on the fore part of the carrier, which keeps
the next cartridge from leaving the magazine while the trough is in the
upper or loading position. A supplementary cartridge stop, R, pivoted at
P and having a spring, L, underneath it, acts in conjunction with Z in
retaining the cartridges in the magazine, and especially in preventing
more than one at a time from passing out into the carrier when the
latter is depressed; it also retains the cartridges in the magazine tube
while the latter is being filled.

_Lee Magazine Rifle_.--This arm (see Fig. 10), which occupied the place
of honor in the report of the American "Board on Magazine Guns,"
embodied two new principles of considerable importance, viz., the
central position of the magazine, and having it detachable with ease, so
that two or more magazines can be carried by the soldier.

The breech action of the Lee does not materially differ in design from
other bolt rifles, except that the bolt is in two pieces only--the body,
or bolt proper, and the hammer or cocking-piece. The firing pin, or
striker, is screwed into the hammer; the spiral main spring, which
surrounds the striker, is contained in a hollow in the body. The handle
is placed at the rear end of the bolt, and bent down toward the stock,
so as to allow the trigger to be reached without wholly quitting hold of
the bolt. The extractor is so connected with the bolt head as not to
share the rotation of the latter when the handle is turned down into the
locking position. When the handle is turned up to unlock the bolt, the
hammer is cammed slightly to the rear, by means of oblique bearings on
the bolt and hammer, so as to withdraw the point of the striker within
the face of the bolt. This oblique cam action also gives great power to
the extractor at first starting the empty cartridge case out of the
chamber.

The magazine, M, is simply a sheet iron or steel box of a size to hold
five cartridges, but there seems no reason why it should not be of
larger dimensions. It is detachable from the rifle, and is inserted from
underneath into a slot or mortise in the stock and in the shoe, in front
of the trigger guard. A magazine catch, C, just above the trigger guard,
engages in a notch, N, in the rear of the magazine, the projection, L,
first entering a recess prepared for it in the shoe. There is a magazine
spring, D, at the bottom of the magazine box which pushes the cartridges
up into the shoe. The point of the top cartridge is pushed into the
projection, L, and this keeps the lower cartridges in their places in
the box while the latter is detached; when the magazine is inserted in
the rifle, the withdrawal of the bolt causes the top cartridge to be
slightly drawn back, so that it is now free to be fed up into the shoe
by the magazine spring, D.

There is a later pattern of magazine, which has its front face quite
plain, with no projection, L, as the magazine catch was found sufficient
to hold the box in its place. To prevent the cartridges being pressed
out of the magazine before the latter is inserted in the rifle, there is
a strong spring placed vertically in one side of this box, the curved
upper end of which bears upon the top cartridge; when the magazine is in
its place in the shoe, this side spring is so acted upon that it ceases
to hold down the cartridges in the box.

To use the rifle as a single loader, formerly the magazine had to be
detached, when a spring plate in the shoe, which is pushed aside by the
insertion of the magazine, starts back into its place and nearly fills
the magazine slot, so as to prevent cartridges falling through to the
ground when fed into the chamber by hand. The later pattern, however,
has two notches on the magazine for the catch, C, to engage in. When the
magazine is inserted in the slot only as far as the upper notch, the
rifle can be used only as a single loader, but on pressing the box home
to the second notch, the magazine immediately comes into play.

The magazine can be released from the slot by an upward pressure on the
lower projecting end of the magazine catch, C, which is covered by the
trigger guard.

_Improved Lee_.--This rifle is precisely similar in principle to the
Lee, the chief difference being that the magazine is permanently fixed
in its slot underneath the shoe, and in front of the trigger guard. The
cartridges are inserted from above. There is a stop by means of which
the cartridges can be prevented rising up into the shoe, and which forms
a sort of false bottom to the slot in the latter, so that the arm can be
used as a single loader.

_Lee-Burton_.--The bolt action is the same as the Lee, but the box
magazine is attached to the right side of the shoe, instead of being
underneath, as in that rifle. When the magazine is raised to its higher
position, the cartridges pass successively into the shoe by the action
of gravity alone, and are thus pressed home into the chamber by the
closing of the bolt.

[Illustration: FIG. 11.]

A number of the Lee-Burton and improved Lee rifles are now being
manufactured for issue to the troops, in order to undergo experimental
trials on an extended scale.

Several other magazine rifles have the box central magazine, but placed
in different positions as regards the shoe and the axis of the bore. In
the original pattern of the Jarman (Sweden and Norway), the magazine is
affixed to the upper part of the shoe, inclined at a considerable angle
to the right hand (see vertical cross section, Fig. 11). Here the
operation of gravity obviates the necessity of a magazine spring, but
the magazine was found to be very much in the way and liable to be
injured. It has therefore been replaced by a magazine underneath the
barrel, as in the Kropatschek and other rifles.--_Engineering_.

(_To be continued_.)

       *       *       *       *       *




PRESERVATIVE LIQUID.


For a few weeks' preservation of organic objects in their original form,
dimensions, and color, Prof. Grawitz recommends a mixture composed of 21/2
ounces of chloride of sodium, 23/4 drachms of saltpeter, and 1 pint of
water, to which is to be added 3 per cent. of boric acid.--_Annales des
Travaux Publics_.

       *       *       *       *       *




KENT'S TORSION BALANCE.


The United States Torsion Balance Company, of New York, has recently
brought before the public a new form of balance which presents so many
ingenious and excellent features that we illustrate it below, on the
present page. The instrument in its simplest form is shown in Fig. 1. It
consists of a beam, A, which is firmly attached to a wire or band, B, at
right angles to it, and which wire is tightly stretched by any
convenient means. Then, since the wire and beam are both horizontal in
their normal position, and since the center of gravity of the beam is
immediately above or below the middle line of the wire, the torsional
resistance of the latter tends to keep the beam horizontal and to limit
its sensitiveness. When the beam is deflected out of its horizontal
position and the wire thereby twisted, the resistance to twisting
increases with the arc of rotation. To counteract this resistance and to
render the beam sensitive to a very slight excess of load at either end,
a poise, D, is attached to the beam by a standard, C, which poise
carries the center of gravity of the structure above the axis of
rotation. This high center of gravity tends to make the beam "top
heavy," or in unstable equilibrium. By properly proportioning the poise
and its distance above the wire to the resistance of the wire, the
top-heaviness may be made to exactly neutralize the torsional
resistance, and when this is done the beam is infinitely sensitive.

[Illustration: KENT'S TORSION BALANCE. Fig 1.]

The moment of the weight or its tendency to fall increases directly as
the sine of the arc of rotation, while the torsional resistance
increases as the arc, and for small angles the sine and the arc are
practically equal.

When arranged as in Fig. 1, the scale is balanced only when the center
of gravity of the structure is vertically above the middle line of the
wire, and the support of the scale must be leveled in the direction of
the beam, so as to cause the center of gravity to take this normal
position. After the scale is thus leveled, if from any cause whatever,
such as shifting the scale on a table, or shifting the table itself, the
scale support is thrown out of level, the center of gravity of the poise
and beam is shifted from the vertical line above the support, and its
moment immediately becomes greater than the torsional resistance, and
the beam tips out of balance, and cannot be used as a correct scale
until the support is again leveled.

[Illustration: KENT'S TORSION BALANCE. Fig 2.]

In spite of all the foregoing facts, it was reserved for the
"Encyclopedia Britannica," in its ninth edition, to use the following as
the result of its condensed wisdom:

"In the torsion balance proper, the wire is stretched out horizontally,
and supports a beam so fixed that the wire passes through the center of
gravity. Hence the elasticity of the wire plays the same part as the
weight of the beam does in the common balance. An instrument of this
sort was invented by Ritchie, for the measurement of very small weights,
and for this purpose it may offer certain advantages; but clearly if it
were ever to be used for measuring larger weights, the beam would have
to be supported by knife edges and bearing, and in regard to such
applications therefore (as in serious gravimetric work), it has no
_raison d'etre."_

[Illustration: KENT'S TORSION BALANCE. Fig 3.]

This would seem to settle the whole case, for if the encyclopedia says
it has no reason to be, then, like the edict of the Mikado, it is as
good as dead, and if that is the case, "Why not say so?" On the
contrary, the torsion balance seems very much alive. But as it is not
very generally known, perhaps the early history of this form of balance,
briefly sketched, may prove of interest.

One of the first forms of the torsion balance which met the disapproval
of the "Encyclopedia Britannica" was attended with the difficulty that
the pivoted wires were attached directly to the bifurcated ends of the
beam, and could not be tensioned without bending these ends unless the
beam was made so heavy as to interfere with its employment in delicate
weighing.

[Illustration: KENT'S TORSION BALANCE. Fig 4.]

The next step was the substitution of light forms stiffened by the wires
being tensioned over them. This was the invention of Professor Roeder,
recently deceased. The next step was the common counter scale, and then
that form of letter scale in which one of the bands acts as a fulcrum
and the other as a pivot.

After Professor Roeder's death, Dr. Alfred Springer, of Cincinnati,
continued perfecting this invention, and with marked success--scales not
intended for anything but the weighing of the ordinary articles of a
grocery store working so accurately that up to 50 lb. two grains would
turn the balance.

As will be noted, this balance dispenses entirely with knife edges, and
this statement carries with it the gist of its entire merit. There is no
friction, and the elegance of the work and the nice adjustments of the
parts struck the writer at once.

[Illustration: KENT'S TORSION BALANCE. Fig 5.]

The prescription scale and the proportional scale (see Fig. 4) are
particularly interesting. The former is sensitive to 1/64 of a grain,
and the latter, invented by Mr. Kent, is a most ingenious method for
weighing, by which, in a small compass (101/2 in. by 41/4 in. by 33/4 in.), we
have a balance capable of weighing 3 lb. avoirdupois by thirty-seconds
of an ounce.

For ordinary balances on the torsion system, in which extreme
sensitiveness is not needed, the trouble caused by change of level of
the scale is insignificant; but it becomes a matter of importance in
more sensitive scales, such as fine analytical balances in places where
it is impossible to keep the table or support of the scale level, for
instance on shipboard.

To counteract this effect of the change of level, Dr. Alfred Springer
devised the system which is shown in its most elementary form in Fig. 2.
An additional beam, E, with wire, F, and poise, H, on support, C, were
added to the balance, and connected to it by a jointed connecting piece,
J. The moment of the structure, E C H, about its center of rotation was
made equal to the moment of A C D about the center. The wires, B and F,
are attached at their ends to supports which are both rigidly connected
to the same base or foundation. If this base, the normal position of
which is horizontal, is tipped slightly, the weights, C and H, will both
tend to fall in the same direction. But suppose the right hand end of
the base is raised, causing both of the weights to tip to the left of
the vertical, D, tending to fall over, the left tends to raise the right
hand end of the beam, and the connecting piece, J H, also tending to
fall to the left, tends to lower the left hand end of E and the piece,
J. The moments of the structure, E C H, and A B D being equal, and one
tending to raise J and the other to lower it, the effect will be zero,
and J will remain in its normal position.

It is not at all necessary, however, to have the weights and dimensions
of the structure, E C H, equal to those of A B D. All that is necessary
is that the components of the weight of each part of the structure which
act vertically on J shall be equal and opposite. For, if the left end of
