   5.  tallemat.
   6.  arveneloerit.
   7.  arveneloerit-aypak    = 5 + 2.
   8.  arveneloerit-illaak   = 5 + 3.
   9.  arveneloerit-tcitamat = 5 + 4.
  10.  krolit.


  SAHAPTIN (NEZ PERCES).[296]

   1.  naks.
   2.  lapit.
   3.  mitat.
   4.  pi-lapt  = 2 x 2.
   5.  pachat.
   6.  oi-laks  = [5] + 1.
   7.  oi-napt  = [5] + 2.
   8.  oi-matat = [5] + 3.
   9.  koits.
  10.  putimpt.


  GREENLAND.[297]

   1.  atauseq.
   2.  machdluq.
   3.  pinasut.
   4.  sisamat
   5.  tadlimat.
   6.  achfineq-atauseq  = other hand 1.
   7.  achfineq-machdluq = other hand 2.
   8.  achfineq-pinasut  = other hand 3.
   9.  achfineq-sisamat  = other hand 4.
  10.  qulit.
  11.  achqaneq-atauseq  = first foot 1.
  12.  achqaneq-machdluq = first foot 2.
  13.  achqaneq-pinasut  = first foot 3.
  14.  achqaneq-sisamat  = first foot 4.
  15.  achfechsaneq?
  16.  achfechsaneq-atauseq  = other foot 1.
  17.  achfechsaneq-machdlup = other foot 2.
  18.  achfechsaneq-pinasut  = other foot 3.
  19.  achfechsaneq-sisamat  = other foot 4.
  20.  inuk navdlucho    = a man ended.

Up to this point the Greenlander's scale is almost purely quinary. Like
those of which mention was made at the beginning of this chapter, it
persists in progressing by fives until it reaches 20, when it announces a
new base, which shows that the system will from now on be vigesimal. This
scale is one of the most interesting of which we have any record, and will
be noticed again in the next chapter. In many respects it is like the scale
of the Point Barrow Eskimo, which was given early in Chapter III. The
Eskimo languages are characteristically quinary-vigesimal in their number
systems, but few of them present such perfect examples of that method of
counting as do the two just mentioned.


  CHIPPEWAY.[298]

   1.  bejig.
   2.  nij.
   3.  nisswi.
   4.  niwin.
   5.  nanun.
   6.  ningotwasswi = 1 again?
   7.  nijwasswi    = 2 again?
   8.  nishwasswi   = 3 again?
   9.  jangasswi    = 4 again?
  10.  midasswi     = 5 again.


  MASSACHUSETTS.[299]

   1.  nequt.
   2.  neese.
   3.  nish.
   4.  yaw.
   5.  napanna     = on one side, _i.e._ 1 hand.
   6.  nequttatash = 1 added.
   7.  nesausuk    = 2 again?
   8.  shawosuk    = 3 again?
   9.  pashoogun   = it comes near, _i.e._ to 10.
  10.  puik.


  OJIBWA OF CHEGOIMEGON.[300]

   1.  bashik.
   2.  neensh.
   3.  niswe.
   4.  newin.
   5.  nanun.
   6.  ningodwaswe = 1 again?
   7.  nishwaswe   = 2 again?
   8.  shouswe     = 3 again?
   9.  shangaswe   = 4 again?
  10.  medaswe     = 5 again?


  OTTAWA.

   1.  ningotchau.
   2.  ninjwa.
   3.  niswa.
   4.  niwin.
   5.  nanau.
   6.  ningotwaswi = 1 again?
   7.  ninjwaswi   = 2 again?
   8.  nichwaswi   = 3 again?
   9.  shang.
  10.  kwetch.


  DELAWARE.

   1.  n'gutti.
   2.  niskha.
   3.  nakha.
   4.  newa.
   5.  nalan [akin to palenach, hand].
   6.  guttash  = 1 on the other side.
   7.  nishash  = 2 on the other side.
   8.  khaash   = 3 on the other side.
   9.  peshgonk = coming near.
  10.  tellen   = no more.


  SHAWNOE.

   1.  negote.
   2.  neshwa.
   3.  nithuie.
   4.  newe.
   5.  nialinwe     = gone.
   6.  negotewathwe = 1 further.
   7.  neshwathwe   = 2 further.
   8.  sashekswa    = 3 further?
   9.  chakatswe [akin to chagisse, "used up"].
  10.  metathwe     = no further.


  MICMAC.[301]

   1.  naiookt.
   2.  tahboo.
   3.  seest.
   4.  naioo.
   5.  nahn.
   6.  usoo-cum.
   7.  eloo-igunuk.
   8.  oo-gumoolchin.
   9.  pescoonaduk.
  10.  mtlin.

One peculiarity of the Micmac numerals is most noteworthy. The numerals are
real verbs, instead of adjectives, or, as is sometimes the case, nouns.
They are conjugated through all the variations of mood, tense, person, and
number. The forms given above are not those that would be used in counting,
but are for specific use, being varied according to the thought it was
intended to express. For example, _naiooktaich_ = there is 1, is present
tense; _naiooktaichcus_, there was 1, is imperfect; and _encoodaichdedou_,
there will be 1, is future. The variation in person is shown by the
following inflection:


  PRESENT TENSE.

  1st pers.  tahboosee-ek       = there are 2 of us.
  2d pers.   tahboosee-yok      = there are 2 of you.
  3d pers.   tahboo-sijik       = there are 2 of them.


  IMPERFECT TENSE.

  1st pers.  tahboosee-egup     = there were 2 of us.
  2d pers.   tahboosee-yogup    = there were 2 of you.
  3d pers.   tahboosee-sibunik  = there were 2 of them.


  FUTURE TENSE.

  3d pers.   tahboosee-dak      = there will be 2 of them, etc.

The negative form is also comprehended in the list of possible variations.
Thus, _tahboo-seekw_, there are not 2 of them; _mah tahboo-seekw_, there
will not be 2 of them; and so on, through all the changes which the
conjugation of the verb permits.


  OLD ALGONQUIN.

   1.  peygik.
   2.  ninsh.
   3.  nisswey.
   4.  neyoo.
   5.  nahran = gone.
   6.  ningootwassoo = 1 on the other side.
   7.  ninshwassoo   = 2 on the other side.
   8.  nisswasso     = 3 on the other side.
   9.  shangassoo [akin to chagisse, "used up"].
  10.  mitassoo      = no further.


  OMAHA.

   1.  meeachchee.
   2.  nomba.
   3.  rabeenee.
   4.  tooba.
   5.  satta       = hand, _i.e._ all the fingers turned down.
   6.  shappai     = 1 more.
   7.  painumba    = fingers 2.
   8.  pairabeenee = fingers 3.
   9.  shonka      = only 1 finger (remains).
  10.  kraibaira   = unbent.[302]


  CHOCTAW.

   1.  achofee.
   2.  tuklo.
   3.  tuchina.
   4.  ushta.
   5.  tahlape = the first hand ends.
   6.  hanali.
   7.  untuklo   = again 2.
   8.  untuchina = again 3.
   9.  chokali   = soon the end; _i.e._ next the last.
  10.  pokoli.


  CADDOE.

   1.  kouanigh.
   2.  behit.
   3.  daho.
   4.  hehweh.
   5.  dihsehkon.
   6.  dunkeh.
   7.  bisekah     = 5 + 2.
   8.  dousehka    = 5 + 3.
   9.  hehwehsehka = 4 + hand.
  10.  behnehaugh.


  CHIPPEWAY.

   1.  payshik.
   2.  neesh.
   3.  neeswoy.
   4.  neon.
   5.  naman = gone.
   6.  nequtwosswoy  = 1 on the other side.
   7.  neeshswosswoy = 2 on the other side.
   8.  swoswoy       = 3 on the other side?
   9.  shangosswoy [akin to chagissi, "used up"].
  10.  metosswoy     = no further.


  ADAIZE.

   1.  nancas.
   2.  nass.
   3.  colle.
   4.  tacache.
   5.  seppacan.
   6.  pacanancus = 5 + 1.
   7.  pacaness   = 5 + 2.
   8.  pacalcon   = 5 + 3.
   9.  sickinish  = hands minus?
  10.  neusne.


  PAWNEE.

   1.  askoo.
   2.  peetkoo.
   3.  touweet.
   4.  shkeetiksh.
   5.  sheeooksh    = hands half.
   6.  sheekshabish = 5 + 1.
   7.  peetkoosheeshabish = 2 + 5.
   8.  touweetshabish = 3 + 5.
   9.  looksheereewa  = 10 - 1.
  10.  looksheeree    = 2d 5?


  MINSI.

   1.  gutti.
   2.  niskha.
   3.  nakba.
   4.  newa.
   5.  nulan    = gone?
   6.  guttash  = 1 added.
   7.  nishoash = 2 added.
   8.  khaash   = 3 added.
   9.  noweli.
  10.  wimbat.


  KONLISCHEN.

   1.  tlek.
   2.  tech.
   3.  nezk.
   4.  taakun.
   5.  kejetschin.
   6.  klet uschu    = 5 + 1.
   7.  tachate uschu = 5 + 2.
   8.  nesket uschu  = 5 + 3.
   9.  kuschok       = 10 - 1?
  10.  tschinkat.


  TLINGIT.[303]

   1.  tlek.
   2.  deq.
   3.  natsk.
   4.  dak'on = 2d 2.
   5.  kedjin = hand.
   6.  tle durcu    = other 1.
   7.  daqa durcu   = other 2.
   8.  natska durcu = other 3.
   9.  gocuk.
  10.  djinkat = both hands.


  RAPID, OR FALL, INDIANS.

   1.  karci.
   2.  neece.
   3.  narce.
   4.  nean.
   5.  yautune.
   6.  neteartuce  = 1 over?
   7.  nesartuce   = 2 over?
   8.  narswartuce = 3 over?
   9.  anharbetwartuce = 4 over?
  10.  mettartuce  = no further?


  HEILTSUK.[304]

   1.  men.
   2.  matl.
   3.  yutq.
   4.  mu.
   5.  sky'a.
   6.  katla.
   7.  matlaaus = other 2?
   8.  yutquaus = other 3?
   9.  mamene   = 10 - 1.
  10.  aiky'as.


  NOOTKA.[305]

   1.  nup.
   2.  atla.
   3.  katstsa.
   4.  mo.
   5.  sutca.
   6.  nopo       = other 1?
   7.  atlpo      = other 2?
   8.  atlakutl   = 10 - 2.
   9.  ts'owakutl = 10 - 1.
  10.  haiu.


  TSIMSHIAN.[306]

   1.  gyak.
   2.  tepqat.
   3.  guant.
   4.  tqalpq.
   5.  kctonc (from _anon_, hand).
   6.  kalt     = 2d 1.
   7.  t'epqalt = 2d 2.
   8.  guandalt = 2d 3?
   9.  kctemac.
  10.  gy'ap.


  BILQULA.[306]

   1.  (s)maotl.
   2.  tlnos.
   3.  asmost.
   4.  mos.
   5.  tsech.
   6.  tqotl    = 2d 1?
   7.  nustlnos = 2d 2?
   8.  k'etlnos = 2 x 4.
   9.  k'esman.
  10.  tskchlakcht.


  MOLELE.[307]

   1.  mangu.
   2.  lapku.
   3.  mutka.
   4.  pipa.
   5.  pika.
   6.  napitka  = 1 + 5.
   7.  lapitka  = 2 + 5.
   8.  mutpitka = 3 + 5.
   9.  laginstshiatkus.
  10.  nawitspu.


  WAIILATPU.[308]

   1.  na.
   2.  leplin.
   3.  matnin.
   4.  piping.
   5.  tawit.
   6.  noina  = [5] + 1.
   7.  noilip = [5] + 2.
   8.  noimat = [5] + 3.
   9.  tanauiaishimshim.
  10.  ningitelp.


  LUTUAMI.[307]

   1.  natshik.
   2.  lapit.
   3.  ntani.
   4.  wonip.
   5.  tonapni.
   6.  nakskishuptane  = 1 + 5.
   7.  tapkishuptane   = 2 + 5.
   8.  ndanekishuptane = 3 + 5.
   9.  natskaiakish    = 10 - 1.
  10.  taunip.


  SASTE (SHASTA).[309]

   1.  tshiamu.
   2.  hoka.
   3.  hatski.
   4.  irahaia.
   5.  etsha.
