the iron joist being rebated so as to receive and support intervening
slabs, the heading joints of which are laid to break with those of the
slabs supported by the joists. For double floors the iron joists are
made with a double flange on their lower edge, and are fitted to iron
girders, which cross in the opposite direction. This provision secures
the covering of the cross girders on their undersides by the ceiling
slabs. The concrete having been deposited upon the slabs, its upper
surface may be finished off in any of the usual ways, while the ceiling
may be treated in any of the ways described for the walls. This system
does not exclude the ordinary methods of constructing floors and roofs,
although it supplies a fireproof system. Where required, bricks, stone,
and, in fact, any other building material, may be used in conjunction
with the slabs.

The system of building construction is intended, as in the case with all
concrete, to supersede brickwork and masonry in the various uses to
which they have been applied, and, at the same time, to offer a more
perfect system of building in concrete. Hitherto slab concrete work has
never been erected in a perfectly finished state (i.e., with mouldings,
etc., complete), but has either been left in a rough state or without
ornament, or else has been constructed so as never to be capable of
receiving good ornamental treatment. Hitherto the great difficulty in
constructing concrete walls of concrete and other slabs has been to
prevent the slabs from being forced outward or from toppling over by the
pressure of the plastic filling-in material from the time of its
deposition between the slabs until it has become hard enough to form,
with the slabs, a solid wall. Besides the system of forming the slabs of
L (vertical or horizontal) section, or with a kind of internal buttress
and shoring them up from the outside, or of supporting the slabs upon
framing fixed against the faces of the wall, several devices have been
used to obviate this difficulty.

In the first place, temporary ties, or gauges, connecting the slabs
forming the two faces of the wall, have been used, and as soon as the
plastic filling-in material has set or become hard (but not before),
these have been removed. Secondly, permanent ties or cramps have been
used, and, as their name implies, have been allowed to remain in the
wall and to be entirely buried in the plastic filling-in material. These
permanent transverse ties or cramps have been of two kinds: those which
were affixed as soon as the slabs were placed in position, and those
which were made to form part of the manufactured slab, as, for instance,
slabs of Z or H horizontal section. Thirdly, a small layer of the
plastic filling-in material itself has been made to act as a transverse
tie by depositing it, when plastic, between the slabs forming the two
parallel faces of each course, allowing it (before filling in the
remaining part) to set and to thus connect together the slabs forming
each face of the wall, a suitable hold on the slabs, in some cases,
being given to the tie by a portion of the slab being undercut in some
way, as by being dovetailed, etc. As the slabs in this latter system
generally have wide bases, they may also be bedded or jointed in cement,
and, provided temporary ties be placed across their upper edges to
connect the slabs forming each face of the wall together, the space
between the faces of the wall may then be filled in with the plastic
concrete.

All these devices, however, are not of permanent utility; they are only
temporarily required (i.e., up to the time that the beton has become
hard and formed a permanent traverse tie between the two faces of the
wall), for it is manifest that the ultimate object of all slab concrete
construction is: (a) To retain and to mould the plastic concrete used in
forming the wall; (b) to key or fix the slabs to the mass which they
themselves have moulded; and (c) to form a facing to the wall. When
these objects shall have been accomplished, there is no further need of
any tie whatever beyond that which naturally obtains in a concrete wall.
In West's system, however, where the slabs are keyed course to course,
any kind of transverse tie to be used during the process of
construction, except that used in the starting course, is entirely
dispensed with, and the courses of slabs above depend solely upon the
courses of slabs below them for their stability and rigidity up to the
time that the plastic filling-in has been deposited and become hard
between both faces of the wall.

[Illustration: CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION]

There is, however, a more decided difference between West's system and
those previously in use, for it is marked by the fact that the slabs
composing the shell of the whole structure in many cases may be built up
before the filling-in is deposited between the slabs, and in none of the
other cases can this be done. In fact, only in the first two cases
before mentioned can more than one course of slabs be laid before
filling-in of some kind must be done. Compared with the ordinary method
of building in concrete, this system avoids: 1. The charge for use and
waste of wood casings; 2. finishing the face of the work (both inside
and outside) after the structure is raised, and, therefore, the
bursting-off of the finished face; and 3. the difficulties encountered
in working mouldings and other ornaments on the face of the work by the
ordinary plasterer's methods. It also provides a face of any of the
usual colors that may be obtained in concrete, besides a facing of any
other material, such as marble, etc., and produces better and more
durable work, at the same time showing a saving in cost, especially in
the better classes of work; all of which is effected with less plant
than ordinarily required. For engineering work, such as sea walls, the
hexagonal slabs, made of greater thickness than those employed for
ordinary walling, will answer admirably, especially if the grooves be
made proportionately larger. By the use of these slabs the work may be
built up with great rapidity. For small domestic work, such as the
dwellings of artisans, these slabs; which are of such a form as to
render them easy of transport, may be supplied to the workmen themselves
in order that they may erect their own dwellings, as, on account of the
simplicity of this system and the absence of need of plant, any
intelligent mechanic can do the work.

Any arrangement of independent scaffolding may be employed for this
system, but that invented specially for the purpose by Mr. Frank West,
as shown in Fig. 26 of our engravings, is to be preferred. It not only
supplies the necessary scaffold, but also the necessary arrangements for
hoisting the slabs, as well as for raising the liquid concrete and
depositing it behind the slabs. It is really an independent scaffold,
and may be used wherever a light tramway of contractor's rails can be
laid, which in crowded thoroughfares would of necessity be upon a
staging erected over the footway. The under frame is carried upon two
bogie frames running upon the contractor's rail, by which means it is
enabled to turn sharp curves, a guide plate inside the inner rail being
provided at the curves for this purpose. The scaffold itself consists of
a climbing platform made to travel up or down by means of four posts
which have racks attached to their faces, and which are fixed to the
under frame and securely braced to resist racking strains. A worm
gearing, actuated by a wheel on the upper side of the scaffold, causes
the scaffold to ascend or descend. A railgrip, made to act at the curves
as well as on the straight portions of the rail by being attached to a
radial arm fixed to the under frame, assists the stability of the
scaffold where required, but the gauge of the rails is altered to render
the scaffold more or less stable according to its height. Combined with
the same machine, and traveling up and down one of the same posts used
for the scaffold, is an improved crane. Its action depends upon the
proposition in geometry that if the length of the base of a triangle be
altered, its angles, and therefore its altitude, are altered. A portion
of the vertical post up and down which the crane climbs forms the base
of a triangle, and a portion of the jib, together with the stay, forms
the remaining two sides. Hence, by causing the foot of one or the other
to travel upward, by means of the worm gearing, the upper end of the jib
is either elevated or depressed.

The concrete elevator, which is also combined with the scaffold,
consists of a series of buckets carried upon two parallel endless chains
passing over two pairs of wheels. On the under frame is fixed a hopper,
into which is thrown, either by hand or from a concrete mixer running
upon the rails, the material to be hoisted, and from which it gravitates
into a narrow channel, through which pass the buckets (attached to the
chain) with a shovel-like action. The buckets, a motor being applied to
one pair of wheels, thus automatically fill themselves, and on arriving
at top are made to tip their contents, and jar themselves, automatically
into a hopper by means of a small pinion, keyed to the shaft by which
they are attached to the endless chain, becoming engaged in a small rack
fixed for that purpose. From the upper hopper the material is taken away
to the required destination by means of a worm working in a tube. For
varying heights, extra lengths of chain and buckets are inserted and
secured by a bolt passed through each end link, and secured by a nut. By
using this scaffold, a saving in plant, cartage, and labor is effected.
The elevator may also be used for raising any other material besides
concrete.

Such is the new system of concrete construction and scaffolding of
Messrs. West, which appears to be based on sound and reasonable
principles, and to have been thoughtfully and carefully worked out, and
which moreover gives promise of success in the future. We may add in
conclusion that specimens of the work and a model of a scaffold
are shown by Messrs. West at their stand in the Inventions
Exhibition.--_Iron_.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: ALBANY BUILDINGS SOUTHPORT. E.W. JOHNSON, ARCHITECT.]

       *       *       *       *       *




THE BLUE PRINT PROCESS.

R.W. JONES.


1. Cover a flat board, the size of the drawing to be copied, with two or
three thicknesses of common blanket or its equivalent.

2. Upon this place the prepared paper, sensitive side uppermost.

3. Press the tracing firmly and smoothly upon this paper, by means of a
plate of clear glass, laid over both and clamped to the board.

4. Expose the whole--in a clear sunlight--from 4 to 6 minutes. In a
winter's sun, from 6 to 10 minutes. In a clear sky, from 20 to 30
minutes.

5. Remove the prepared paper and pour clear water on it for one or two
minutes, saturating it thoroughly, and hang up to dry.

The sensitive paper may be readily prepared, the only requisite quality
in the _paper_ itself being its ability to stand washing.

Cover the surface evenly with the following solution, using such a brush
as is generally employed for the letter-press: 1 part soluble citrate of
iron (or citrate of iron and ammonia), 1 part red prussiate of potash,
and dissolve in 10 parts of water.

The solution must be kept carefully protected from light, and better
results are obtained by not mixing the ingredients until immediately
required. After being coated with the solution, the paper must be laid
away to dry in a dark place, and must be shielded entirely from light
until used. When dry, the paper is of a yellow and bronze color. After
exposure the surface becomes darker, with the lines of the tracing still
darker. Upon washing, the characteristic blue tint appears, with the
lines of the tracing in vivid contrast. Excellent results have been
obtained from glass negatives by this process.--_Proc. Eng. Club,
Phila._

       *       *       *       *       *




REPRODUCTION OF DRAWINGS IN BLUE LINES ON WHITE GROUND.

A.H. HAIG.


The following process for making photographic copies of drawings in blue
lines on white background was invented by H. Pellet, and is based on the
property of perchloride of iron of being converted into protochloride on
exposure to light. Prussiate of potash when brought into contact with
the perchloride of iron immediately turns the latter blue, but it does
not affect the protochloride.

A bath is first prepared consisting of ten parts perchloride of iron,
five parts oxalic or some other vegetable acid, and one hundred parts
water. Should the paper to be used not be sufficiently sized, dextrine,
gelatine, isinglass, or some similar substance must be added to the
solution. The paper is sensitized by dipping in this solution and then
dried in the dark, and may be kept for some length of time. To take a
copy of a drawing made on cloth or transparent paper, it is laid on a
sheet of the sensitive paper, and exposed to light in a printing frame
or under a sheet of glass. The length of exposure varies with the state
of the weather from 15 to 30 seconds in summer to from 40 to 70 seconds
in winter, in full sunlight. In the shade, in clear weather, 2 to 6
minutes, and in cloudy weather, 15 to 40 minutes may be necessary. The
printing may also be done by electric light. The print is now immersed
in a bath consisting of 15 to 18 parts of prussiate of potash per 100
parts of water. Those parts protected from the light by the lines of the
drawing immediately turn blue, while the rest of the paper, where the
coating has been converted into protochloride by the effects of light,
will remain white. Next, the image is freely washed in water, and then
passed through a bath consisting of 8 to 10 parts of hydrochloric acid
to 100 parts of water, for the purpose of removing protoxide of iron
salt.

It is now again washed well in clean water and finally dried, when the
drawing will appear in blue on a white background.--_Proc. Eng. Club,
Phila._

       *       *       *       *       *

[PROCEEDINGS OF THE ENGINEERS' CLUB OF PHILADELPHIA.]




RELATIVE COSTS OF FLUID AND SOLID FUELS.

[Footnote: Read June 20, 1885.]

By JAMES BEATTY, JR., Member of the Club.


During the past twenty-five years there have been numerous efforts to
introduce fluid fuels as substitutes for coal, for the evaporation of
water in boilers, metallurgical operations, and, on a small scale, for
domestic purposes.

The advantages claimed for these fuels are: Reduction in the number of
stokers, one man being able to do the work of four using solid fuel.
Reduction in weight, amounting to one-half with the better classes.
Reduction in bulk; for petroleum amounting to about thirty-six per
cent., and with the gases, depending on the amount of compression. Ease
of kindling and extinguishing fires, and of regulation of temperature.
Almost perfect combustion and cleanliness.

Siemens used gas, distilled from coal and burnt in his well known
regenerative furnace.

Deville experimented with petroleum on two locomotives running on the
Paris and Strassburg Railroad.

Selwyn experimented with creosote in a small steam yacht, and under the
boilers of steamship Oberlin.

Holland experimented with water-gas in the furnace of a locomotive
running on the Long Island Railroad.

Isherwood experimented with petroleum under the boilers of United States
steamers.

Three railroads in Russia are using naphtha in their locomotives, and
steamers on the Volga are using the same fuel.

Wurtz experimented with crude petroleum in a reheating furnace at Jersey
City.

Dowson, Strong, Lowe, and others have devised systems for the production
of water gas.

These experiments, in general, have produced excellent results when
considered merely in the light of heat production, but, in advocating
their systems, the inventors seem to have overlooked the all-important
item of cost.

It is the object of this paper to show the impracticability of such
systems when considered from a commercial standpoint, so long as the
supply of coal lasts, and prices keep within reasonable limits.

In many cases, authors on the subject have given purely theoretical
results, without allowing for losses in the furnace.

The fuels to be considered are anthracite and bituminous coals, crude
petroleum, and coal, generator and water gases.

The average compositions of these fuels (considering only the heating
agents), as deduced from the analysis of eminent chemists, are:

PERCENTAGE BY WEIGHT.

  ________________________________________________________
                    |  C |  H  | O | CO |CH_{4}|C_{2}H_{4}
                    +----+-----+---+----+------+----------
  Anthracite        |87.7| 3.3 |3.2|    |      |
  Bituminous        |80.8| 5.0 |8.2|    |      |
  Petroleum         |84.8|13.1 |1.5|    |      |
  Coal gas          |    | 6.5 |   |14.3| 52.4 |  14.8
  Generator gas     |    | 1.98|   |35.5|  1.46|
  Water gas         |    | 6.3 |0.6|87.8|  1.2 |
  ------------------+----+-----+---+----+------+----------

We will employ the formula of Dulong--

  h = 14,500 C + 62,000 (H - O/8)

to compute the theoretical heating powers of these fuels. In the case of
methane, CH_{4}, the formula is not true, but the error is not great
enough to seriously affect the result. This gives for the combustion of
one pound of:

  Anthracite              14,500 Br. Heat Units.
  Bituminous              14,200 "    "     "
  Petroleum               20,300 "    "     "
  Coal gas                20,200 "    "     "
  Generator gas            3,100 "    "     "
  Water gas                8,500 "    "     "

Reducing the above to terms of pounds of water evaporated from 212 deg. F.,
we have:

POUNDS OF WATER EVAPORATED FROM 212 deg. F.

  Anthracite                               15.023
  Bituminous                               14.69
  Petroleum                                21.00
  Coal gas                                 20.87
  Generator gas                             3.21
  Water gas                                 8.7

The results of experiments show the efficiency of fluid-burning furnaces
to be about ninety per cent., while with coal sixty per cent. may be
taken as a good figure. The great difference in the efficiencies is due
to the fact that fluid fuels require for combustion very little air
above the theoretical quantity, while with the solid fuels fully twice
the theoretical quantity must be admitted to dilute the products of
combustion.

Correcting our previous results for these efficiencies, we have:

POUNDS OF WATER ACTUALLY EVAPORATED FROM 212 deg. F., PER POUND OF FUEL.

  Anthracite                               9.0
  Bituminous                               8.8
  Petroleum                               18.9
  Coal gas                                18.8
  Generator gas                            2.9
  Water gas                                7.8

These figures agree closely with the results of experiments.

We will now consider the subject of cost.

The following cities have been selected, as manufacturing centers,
termini of railroads, or fueling ports for steamers.

In the case of petroleum, as it is rarely shipped in the crude state, an
approximation is made by adding to the cost at the nearest shipping port
the freight charged on refined petroleum, and ten per cent. to cover
duties and other charges.

Owing to the difficulty of obtaining prices, in some of the cities,
there may be some errors.

                                COSTS. MARCH, 1884.

                   Anthracite        Bituminous        Coal gas
                   per ton of        per ton of        per 1,000
                   2,240 lb.         2,240 lb.         cubic feet.

  New York          $4 00             $4 25             $1 75
  Chicago            5 00              3 50              1 25
  New Orleans        6 00              3 50              3 00
  San Francisco     12 00              7 50              3 00
  London             5 00              3 00              0 75
  Port Natal        12 50             11 00
  Sydney            12 00              7 00
  Valpariso         11 50              7 50

                  Generator         Crude               Water gas
                  gas per 1,000     Petroleum per       per 1,000
                  cubic feet.       bbl. of 42 gal.     cubic feet.

  New York         $0 45             $1 80               $0 50
  Chicago             45              2 00                  50
  New Orleans         45              2 50                  60
  San Francisco       55              2 00                  60
  London              43              2 70                  45
  Port Natal        Ap-               4 00                Ap-
  Sydney            proxi-            4 50                proxi-
  Valparaiso        mation.           3 00                mation.

In calculating the following table the specific gravity of coal gas is
taken at 0.4; generator gas at 0.44; water gas at 0.48; petroleum, 0.8.

                POUNDS OF FUEL FOR $1.00.   MARCH, 1884.

                Anthracite. Bituminous. Petroleum. Coal Water Generator
                                                   gas  gas.  gas.

  New York         560         527        156       18   74      76
  Chicago          448         640        142       24   74      76
  New Orleans      374         640        114       10   74      76
  San Francisco    187         299        142       10   62      62
  London           448         747        104       40   82      79
  Port Natal       179         204         71            Ap-     Ap-
  Sydney           187         320         63            proxi-  proxi-
  Valparaiso       195         299         94            mate.   mate.

