the floor, one upside down. He stooped to set them straight.

"It do beat all," Lucy said frankly as she put her burden down on a
chair, "how dat chile do mak' a mess. Now yo', Mistuh Val, jest put
eberythin' jest so. But Miss 'Chanda leave eberythin' which way afore
Sunday! Looka dat now." She pointed to the half-open door of the closet.
A slip lay on the floor. Ricky must have been in a hurry; that was a
little too untidy even for her.

A sudden suspicion sent Val into the closet to investigate. Ricky's
wardrobe was not so extensive that he did not know every dress and
article in it very well. It did not take him more than a moment to see
what was missing.

"Did Ricky go riding?" Val asked. "Her habit is gone."

"She ain' gone 'cross de bayo' fo' de hoss," answered Lucy, reaching for
the curtain rod. "An' anyway, Sam done took dat critter down de road fo'
to be shoed."

"Then where--" But Val knew his Ricky only too well.

She had a certain stubborn will of her own. Sometimes opposition merely
drove her into doing the forbidden thing. And the swamp had been
forbidden. But could even Ricky be such a fool? Certain memories of the
past testified that she could. But how? Unless she had taken Sam's
boat--

Without a word of explanation to Lucy, he dashed out of the room and
downstairs at his best pace. As he left the house Val broke into a
stumbling run. There was just a chance that she had not yet left the
plantation.

But the bayou levee was deserted. And the post where Sam's boat was
usually moored was bare of rope; the boat was gone. Of course Sam Two
might have taken it across the stream to the farm.

That hope was extinguished as the small brown boy came out of the bushes
along the stream side.

"Sam, have you seen Miss 'Chanda?" Val demanded.

"Yessuh."

"Where?" Carrying on a conversation with Sam Two was like prying
diamonds out of a rock. He possessed a rooted distaste for talking.

"Heah, suh."

"When?"

"Jest a li'l bitty 'go."

"Where did she go?"

Sam pointed downstream.

"Did she take the boat?"

"Yessuh." And then for the first time since Val had known him Sam
volunteered a piece of information. "She done say she a-goin' in de
swamp."

Val leaned back against the hole of one of the willows. Then she had
done it! And what could he do? If he had any idea of her path, he could
follow her while Sam aroused Rupert and the house.

"If I only knew where--" he mused aloud.

"She a-goin' to see dat swamper Jeems," Sam continued. "Heh, heh," a
sudden cackle of laughter rippled across his lips. "Dat ole swamper
think he so sma't. Think no one fin' he house--"

"Sam!" Val rounded upon him. "Do you know where Jeems lives?"

"Yessuh." He twisted the one shoulder-strap of his overalls and Val
guessed that his knowledge was something he was either ashamed of or
afraid to tell.

"Can you take me there?"

He shook his head. "Ah ain' a-goin' in dere, Ah ain'!"

"But, Sam, you've got to! Miss 'Chanda is in there. She may be lost.
We've got to find her!" Val insisted.

Sam's thin shoulders shook and he slid backward as if to avoid the white
boy's reach. "Ah ain' a-goin' in dere," he repeated stubbornly. "Effen
yo'all wants to go in dere--Looky, Mistuh Val, Ah tells yo'all de way
an' yo'all goes." He brightened at this solution. "Yo'all kin take
pappy's othah boat; it am downstream dere, behin' dem willows. Den
yo'all goes down to de secon' big pile o' willows. Behin' dem is a li'l
bitty bayo' goin' back. Yo'all goes up dat 'til yo'all comes to a fur
rack. Den dat Jeems got de way marked on de trees."

With that he turned and ran as if all the terrors of the night were on
his trail. There was nothing for Val to do but to follow his directions.
And the longer he lingered before setting out the bigger lead Ricky was
getting.

He found the canoe behind the willows as Sam had said. Awkwardly he
pushed off, hoping that Lucy would pry the whole story out of her son
and put Rupert on their track as soon as possible.

The second clump of willows was something of a landmark, a huge matted
mass of sucker and branch, the lower tips of the long, frond-like twigs
sweeping the murky water. A snake swimming with its head just above the
surface wriggled to the bank as Val cut into the small hidden stream Sam
had told him of.

Vines and water plants had almost choked this, but there was a passage
through the center. And one tough spike of vegetation which snapped back
into his face bore a deep cut from which the sap was still oozing. The
small stinging flies and mosquitoes followed and hung over him like a
fog of discomfort. His skin was swollen and rough, irritated and
itching. And in this green-covered way the heat seemed almost solid.
Drops of moisture dripped from forehead and chin, and his hair was
plastered tight to his skull.

Frogs leaped from the bank into the water at the sound of his coming. In
the shallows near the bank, crawfish scuttled under water-logged leaves
and stones at this disturbance of their world. Twice the bayou widened
out into a sort of pool where the trees grew out of the muddy water and
all sorts of lilies and bulb plants blossomed in riotous confusion.

Once a muskrat waddled into the protection of the bushes. And Val saw
something like a small cat drinking at a pool. But that faint shadow
disappeared noiselessly almost before the water trickled from his
upraised paddle.

Clumps of wild rice were the meeting grounds for flocks of screaming
birds. A snow-white egret waded solemnly across a mud-rimmed pocket. And
once a snake, more dangerous than the swimmer Val had first encountered,
betrayed its presence by the flicker of its tongue.

The smell of the steaming mud, the decaying vegetation, and the nameless
evils hidden deeper in this water-rotted land was an added torment. The
boy shook a large red ant from its grip in the flesh of his hand and
wiped the streaming perspiration from his face.

It was then that the canoe floated almost of its own volition into a
dead and distorted strip of country. Black water which gave off an evil
odor covered almost half an acre of ground. From this arose the twisted,
gaunt gray skeletons of dead oaks. To complete the drear picture a row
of rusty-black vultures sat along the broad naked limb of the nearest of
these hulks, their red-raw heads upraised as they croaked and sidled up
and down.

[Illustration: _The canoe floated almost of its own volition into a dead
and distorted strip of country._]

But the bayou Val was following merely skirted this region, and in a few
moments he was again within the shelter of flower-grown banks. Then he
came upon a structure which must have been the fur rack Sam Two had
alluded to, for here was their other boat moored to a convenient willow.

Val fastened the canoe beside it. The turf seemed springy, though here
and there it gave way to patches of dark mud. It was on one of these
that Ricky had left her mark in the clean-cut outline of the sole of her
riding-boot.

With a last desperate slap at a mosquito Val headed inland, following
with ease that trail of footprints. Ricky was suffering, too, for her
rashness he noted with satisfaction when he discovered a long curly hair
fast in the grip of a thorny branch he scraped under.

But the path was not a bad one. And the farther he went the more solid
and the dryer it became. Once he passed through a small clearing,
man-made, where three or four cotton bushes huddled together forlornly
in company with a luxuriant melon patch.

And the melon patch was separated by only a few feet of underbrush from
Jeems' domain. In the middle of a clearing was a sturdy platform,
reinforced with upright posts and standing about four feet from the
surface of the ground. On this was a small cabin constructed of slabs of
bark-covered wood. As a dwelling it might be crude, but it had an air of
scrupulous neatness. A short distance to one side of the platform was a
well-built chicken-run, now inhabited by five hens and a ragged-tailed
cock.

The door of the cabin was shut and there were no signs of life save the
chickens. But as Val lowered himself painfully onto the second step of
the ladder-like stairs leading up to the cabin, he thought he heard
someone moving around. Glancing up, he saw Ricky staring down at him,
open-mouthed.

"Hello," she called, for one of the few times in her life really
astounded.

"Hello," Val answered shortly and shifted his weight to try to relieve
the ache in his knee. "Nice day, isn't it?"




CHAPTER XI

RALESTONES TO THE RESCUE!


"Val! What are you doing here?" she demanded.

"Following you. Good grief, girl," he exploded, "haven't you any better
sense than to come into the swamp this way?"

Ricky's mouth lost its laughing curve and her eyes seemed to narrow. She
was, by all the signs, distinctly annoyed.

"It's perfectly safe. I knew what I was doing."

"Yes? Well, I will enjoy hearing Rupert's remarks on that subject when
he catches up with us," snapped her brother.

"Val!" She lost something of her defiant attitude. He guessed that for
all her boasted independence his sister was slightly afraid of Mr.
Rupert Ralestone. "Val, he isn't coming, too, is he?"

"He is if he got my message." Val stretched his leg cautiously. The
cramp was slowly leaving the muscles and he felt as if he could stand
the remaining ache without wincing. "I sent Sam Two back to tell Rupert
where his family had eloped to. Frankly, Ricky, this wasn't such a smart
trick. You know what Charity said about the swamps. Even the little I've
seen of them has given me ideas."

"But there was nothing to it at all," she protested. "Jeems told me just
how to get here and I only followed directions."

Val chose to ignore this, being hot, tired, and in no mood for one of
those long arguments such as Ricky enjoyed. "By the way, where is
Jeems?" He looked about him as if he expected the swamper to materialize
out of thin air.

Ricky sat down on the edge of the platform and dangled her booted feet.
"Don't know. But he'll be here sooner or later. And I don't feel like
going back through the swamp just yet. The flies are awful. And did you
see those dreadful vultures on that dead tree? What a place! But the
flowers are wonderful and I saw a real live alligator, even if it was a
small one." She rubbed her scarf across her forehead. "Whew! It seems
hotter here than it does at home."

"This outing was all your idea," Val reminded her. "And we'd better be
getting back before Rupert calls out the Marines or the State Troopers
or something to track us down."

Ricky pouted. "Not going until I'm ready. And you can't drag me if I dig
my heels in."

"I have no desire to be embroiled in such an undignified struggle as you
suggest," he told her loftily. "But neither do I yearn to spend the day
here. I'm hungry. I wonder if our absent host possesses a larder?"

"If he does, you can't raid it," Ricky answered. "The door's locked, and
that lock," she pointed to the bright disk of brass on the solid cabin
door, "is a good one. I've already tried a hairpin on it," she added
shamelessly.

They sat awhile in silence. A wandering breeze had found its way into
the clearing, and with it came the fragrance of flowers blossoming under
the sun. The chicken family were pursuing a worm with more energy than
Val decided he would have cared to expend in that heat, and a heavily
laden bee rested on the lip of a sunflower to brush its legs. Val's
eyelids drooped and he found himself thinking dreamily of a hammock
under the trees, a pillow, and long hours of lazy dozing. At the same
time a corner of his brain was sending forth nagging messages that they
should be up and off, back to their own proper world. But he simply did
not have the will power to get up and go.

"Nice place," he murmured, looking about with more approbation than he
would have granted the clearing some ten minutes earlier.

"Yes," answered Ricky. "It would be nice to live here."

Val was beginning to say something about "no bathtubs" when a sound
aroused them from their lethargy. Someone was coming down the path.
Ricky's hand fell upon her brother's shoulder.

"Quick! Up here and behind the house," she urged him.

Not knowing just why he obeyed, Val scrambled up on the tiny platform
and scuttled around behind the cabin. Why they should hide thus from
Jeems who had given Ricky directions for reaching the place and had
asked her to come, was more than he could understand. But he had a
faint, uneasy feeling of mistrust, as if they had been caught off guard
at a critical moment.

"This the place, Red?" The clipped words sounded clear above the murmurs
of life from swamp and woods.

"Yeah. Bum-lookin' joint, ain't it? These guys ain't got no brains; they
like to live like this." The contempt of the second speaker was only
surpassed by the stridency of his voice.

"What about this boy?" asked the first.

"Dumb kid. Don't know yet who his friends is." There was a satisfied
grunt as the speaker sat down on the step Val had so lately vacated.
Ricky pressed closer to her brother.

"What about the cabin?"

"He ain't here. And it's locked, see? Yuh'd think he kept the crown
jewels there." The tickling scent of a cigarette drifted back to the two
in hiding. "Beats me how he slipped away this morning without Pitts
catching on. For two cents I'd spring that lock of his--"

"Isn't worth the trouble," replied the other decisively. "These trappers
have no money except at the end of the fur season, and then most of them
are in debt to the storekeepers."

"Then why--"

"I sometimes wonder," the voice was coldly cutting, "why I continue to
employ you, Red. What profit would I find in a cabin like this? I want
what he knows, not what he has."

Having thus reduced his henchman to silence, the speaker went on
smoothly, as if he were thinking aloud. "With Simpson doing so well in
town, we're close to the finish. This swamper must tell us--" His voice
trailed away. Except for the creaking of wood when the sitter shifted
his position, there was no other sound.

Then Red must have grown restless, for someone stamped up to the
platform and rattled the chain on the cabin door aggressively. Val
flattened back against the wall. What if the fellow took it into his
head to walk around?

"Gonna wait here all day?" demanded Red.

"As it is necessary for me to have a word with him, we will. This waste
of time is the product of Pitts' stupidity. I shall remember that. It is
entirely needless to use force except as a last resource. Now that this
swamper's suspicions are aroused, we may have trouble."

"Yeah? Well, we can handle that. But how do yuh know that this guy has
the stuff?"

"I can at least believe the evidence of my own eyes," the other replied
with bored contempt. "I came down river alone the night of the storm and
saw him on the levee. He has a way of getting into the house all right.
I saw him in there. And he doesn't go through any of the doors, either.
I must know how he does it."

"All right, Boss. And what if you do get in? What are we supposed to be
lookin' for?"

"What those bright boys up there found a few days ago. That clerk told
us that they'd discovered whatever the girl was talking about in the
office that day. And we've got to get that before Simpson comes into
court with his suit. I'm not going to lose fifty grand." The last
sentence ended abruptly as if the speaker had snapped his teeth shut
upon a word like a dog upon its quarry.

"What does this guy Jeems go to the house for?" asked Red.

"Who knows? He seems to be hunting something too. But that's not our
worry. If it's necessary, we can play ghost also. I've got to get into
that house. If I can do it the way this Jeems does, without having to
break in--so much the better. We don't want the police ambling around
here just now."

Val stiffened. It didn't require a Sherlock Holmes to get the kernel of
truth out of the conversation he had overheard. "Night of the storm,"
"play ghost," were enough. So Jeems had been the ghost. And the swamper
knew a secret way into the house!

"Wait," Ricky's lips formed the words by his ear as Val stirred
restlessly. "Someone else is coming."

"I don't like the set-up in town," Red was saying peevishly. "That
smooth mouthpiece is asking too darn many questions. He's always asking
Simpson about things in the past. If you hadn't got Sim that family
history to study, he'd been behind bars a dozen times by now."

"And he had better study it," commented the other dryly, "because he is
going to be word perfect before the case comes to court, if it ever
does. There are not going to be any slip-ups in this deal."

"'Nother thing I don't like," broke in the other, "is this Waverly guy.
I don't like his face."

"No? Well, doubtless he would change it if you asked him to. And I do
not think it is wise of you to be too critical of plans which were made
by deeper thinkers than yourself. Sometimes, Red, you weary me."

There was no reply to that harsh judgment. And now Val could hear what
Ricky had heard earlier--a faint swish as of a paddle through water.
Again Ricky's lips shaped words he could barely hear.

"Spur of bayou runs along here in back. Someone coming up from there."

"Jeems?"

"Maybe."

"We'd better--" Val motioned toward the front of the cabin. Ricky shook
her head. Jeems was to be allowed to meet the intruders unwarned.

"This swamper may be tough," ventured Red.

"We've met hard cases before," answered the other significantly.
