into the task of pulling the line tight.

The heavy fabric of the suit was stiff, and the air pressure gave further
resistance that had to be overcome. Rip let most of the air out of the
suit, then fought for breath until the pain in his arm told him that Koa
had succeeded. He inflated the suit again and thanked the sergeant major
weakly.

The tight line stopped the bleeding, but it also cut off the air
circulation. Without the air, the heating system couldn't operate
efficiently. It was only a matter of time before the arm froze.

"Stand easy," Rip told his men. "Nothing to do now but wait. The
_Scorpius_ will be back." He set an example by leaning against the
thorium crystal in which the cave was located. It was a natural but
rather meaningless gesture. With virtually no gravity pulling at them,
they could remain standing almost indefinitely, sleeping upright.

Rip closed his eyes and relaxed. The pain in his arm was less now, and he
knew the cold was setting in. He was getting lightheaded, and, most of
all, he wanted to sleep. Well, why not? He slumped a little inside the
suit.

He awoke with Koa shaking him violently. Rip stood upright and shook his
head to clear his vision. "What is it?"

"Sir, the _Scorpius_ has returned."

Rip blinked as he stared out into space to where Koa was pointing. He had
trouble focusing his eyes at first, and then he saw the glow of the
cruiser.

"Good," he said. "They'll send a landing boat first thing."

"I hope so," Koa replied.

Rip wanted to ask why the big Planeteer was dubious, but he was too tired
to phrase the question. He contented himself with watching the cruiser.

In a short time the _Scorpius_ was balanced, with nose tubes
counteracting the thrust of stern tubes, ready to flash into space again
at a second's notice.

Rip watched, puzzled. The cruiser was miles away. Why didn't it come any
closer? Then suddenly it erupted a dozen fiery streaks.

"Snapper-boats!" someone gasped.

Rip jerked fully awake. In the ruddy glow of the fighting rockets' tubes,
he had seen that the cruiser's missile ports were yawning wide, ready to
spew forth their deadly nuclear charges in an instant.

The snapper-boats flashed toward the asteroid in a group, sheered off,
and broke formation. They came back in pairs, streaking space with the
sparks of their exhausts.

"Into the cave," Koa shouted.

The Planeteers obeyed instantly. Koa took Rip's arm to lead him inside,
but the young officer shook him off. "No, Koa. I'll take my chances out
here. I want to see what they're up to."

"Great Cosmos, sir! They'll go over this rock like Martian beetles.
You'll get it, for sure."

"Get inside," Rip ordered. He gathered strength enough to make his voice
firm. "I'm staying here until I figure out some way to call them off. We
can't just stand here and let them blast us. They're our own men."

"Then I'm staying, too," Koa stated.

A pair of snapper-boats flashed overhead and vanished below the horizon.
Two more swept past from another direction.

Rip watched, curious. What were they up to? Another pair quartered past
them at high speed, then two more. The boats seemed to be crisscrossing
the asteroid in a definite pattern.

A pair streaked past, and something sped downward from one of them,
trailing yellow flame. It exploded in a ball of molten fire that licked
across the asteroid in waves. Rip tensed, then saw that the chemical
would burn out before it reached them.

"Fire bomb," Koa muttered.

Rip nodded. He had recognized it. The Planeteers were trained in the use
of fire bombs, tanks of chemicals that burned even in an airless world.
They were equipped with simple jets for use in space.

The snapper-boats drew off, back toward the _Scorpius_. Rip watched,
searching for some reason for their actions. Then one of the boats
pulled away from the others. It returned to the asteroid, with stern jet
burning fitfully.

"Is he landing?" Koa asked.

Rip didn't know. The snapper-boat was moving slowly enough to make a
landing.

Directly above the asteroid it changed direction, circled, and returned
over their heads. Rip could almost have picked it off with a pistol shot.
Santos could have blasted it into space dust with one rocket.

The snapper-boat changed direction, and for a fraction of a second stern
and side tubes "fought" each other, making the boat yaw wildly. Then it
straightened out on a new course.

Koa exclaimed, "That's a drone!"

Rip got it then. A pilotless snapper-boat! That's why its actions were a
little uneven. Only one thing could explain its deliberate slowness. It
was bait. The _Scorpius_ had sent piloted snapper-boats over the asteroid
at high speed, crisscrossing in order to cover the thorium world
completely, expecting to have the unknown rocketeer fire at them. Then a
fire bomb had been dropped as a further means of getting the asteroid to
fire. But no rockets had been fired from the asteroid, so the pilot in
control of the drone had sent it at low speed, a perfect target.

That meant O'Brine wasn't sure of what was going on. He must have seen
the blip on his screen as the Connie cruiser flamed off, Kip reasoned.
But the commander probably suspected that the Connies had overcome
the Planeteers and were in control of the asteroid. He had sent the
snapper-boats to try to draw fire, in an attempt to find out more surely
whether Planeteers or Connies had the thorium rock.

"The _Scorpius_ doesn't know what's going on," Rip told his Planeteers.
"O'Brine didn't know the cruiser was waiting to ambush him, so the rocket
we fired made him think the Connies had taken us over."

He put himself in O'Brine's place. What would his next step be? The
snapper-boats hadn't drawn fire, even when a drone was sent over at low
speed. The next thing would be to send a piloted boat over slowly enough
to take a look.

Rip hoped O'Brine would hurry. There was no longer any feeling in his arm
below Koa's safety line. That meant the arm had frozen. He had to get
medical attention from the _Scorpius_ pretty soon.

He gritted his teeth. At least he was no longer losing blood. He wasn't
getting any weaker. But every now and then his vision fogged, and he had
to shake his head to clear it.

The pilotless snapper-boat made another slow run, then put on speed
and flashed back to the group of boats near the cruiser. Another boat
detached itself from the squadron and moved toward the asteroid.

Rip wished for a communicator powerful enough to reach the _Scorpius_,
but he knew it was useless to try with his helmet circuit. The carrier
waves of the snapper-boats were on the same frequency, and they would
smother the faint signal from his bubble.

But the boats might be able to hear if they got close enough! He had a
swift memory of the communications circuits. The pilots were plugged into
their boat communicators. If a boat got near enough, he could turn up his
bubble to full volume and yell. Not only would the boat pilot hear him,
but also his voice would go through the pilot's circuit and be heard in
the ship!

Rip grabbed Koa's arm. "Let's move away from the cave a little farther."

The two of them stepped away from the cave and stood in full view as the
snapper-boat moved cautiously down toward the asteroid. Rip planned what
he would say. "Commander O'Brine, this is Foster!"

No, that wouldn't do. Connies would know that Kevin O'Brine commanded the
_Scorpius_, and if they had taken over the Planeteers on the asteroid,
they would also have learned Rip's name. He had to say something that
would immediately identify him beyond the shadow of a doubt.

The snapper-boat was closing in slowly. Rip knew the pilot and gunner
must be tense, frightened, ready to blast with their guns at the first
wrong move on the asteroid. He groped with his good arm and turned up his
helmet communicator to full volume.

The fighting rocket drew closer, cut in its nose tube, and hovered only a
few hundred feet above the Planeteers.

Rip summoned enough strength to make his voice sharp and clear. His words
sped through space into the bubble of the pilot, echoed in the helmet,
were picked up by the pilot's microphone, and then were hurled through
the snapper-boat circuit and through space to the cruiser's control room.

O'Brine stiffened as the speaker threw Rip's voice at him, amplified and
hollow-sounding from reverberations in the snapper-boat pilot's helmet.

"_O'Brine is so ugly he won't look at his face in a clean blast tube!
That no-good Irishman wouldn't know what to do with an asteroid if he had
one!_"

The commander turned purple with rage. He bellowed, "Foster!"

A junior space officer hid a grin and murmured, "Looks like the
Planeteers still have the asteroid."

O'Brine bent over the communicator and yelled, "Deputy commander! Launch
landing boats. Get those Planeteers and bring them here under armed
guard. Ram it!"

The snapper-boat pilot through whose circuit Rip had yelled turned to
look wide-eyed at his gunner. "Did you hear that? Throw a light down on
the asteroid. It must have come from there."

The gunner threw a switch, and a searchlight port opened in the boat's
belly. Its beam searched downward, swept past, then steadied on two
space-suited figures.

"It worked," Rip said tiredly. He closed his eyes to guard them against
the brilliant glare, then waved his good arm.

Santos called from the cave entrance. "Sir, landing boats are being
launched!"

"Bring out the prisoners," Rip ordered. "Line them up. Planeteers fall in
behind them."

The landing boats, with snapper-boats in watchful attendance, blasted
down to the surface of the asteroid. Spacemen jumped out, awkward at
first on the no-weight surface. An officer glided to meet Rip, and he had
a pistol in his hand.

"It's all right," Rip told him. "The Connies are our prisoners. You won't
need guns."

The spaceman snapped, "You're under arrest."

Rip stared incredulously. "What for?"

"The commander's orders. Don't give me any arguments. Just get aboard."

"I can't argue with a loaded gun," Rip said wearily. He called to his
men. "We're under arrest. I don't know why. Don't try to resist. Do as
the spacemen order."

Rip got aboard the nearest landing boat, his head spinning. O'Brine had
made a mistake of some kind.

The landing boats, loaded with Planeteers and Connies, lifted from the
asteroid to the cruiser. They slid smoothly into the air locks and
settled. The massive lock doors slid closed and lights flickered on. Rip
waited, trying to keep consciousness from slipping away.

The lock gauges registered normal air, and the inner valves slid open.
Commander O'Brine stepped through, his square jaw outthrust and his face
flushed with anger. He bellowed, "Where's Foster?"

His voice was so loud that Rip heard him even through the bubble. He
stepped out of the boat and faced the irate commander.

O'Brine ordered, "Get him out of that suit."

Two spacemen jumped forward. One twisted Rip's bubble free and lifted it
off. The heavy air of the ship hit him with physical force.

O'Brine grated, "You're under arrest, Foster, for firing on the
_Scorpius_, for insubordination, and for conduct unbecoming an officer.
Get out of that suit and get flaming. It's the space pot for you."

Rip had to grin. He couldn't help it. He started to reply, but the heavy
air of the cruiser, so much richer and denser than that of the suits, was
too much. He fell, unconscious.

There was no gravity to pull him to the floor, but the action of his
relaxing muscles swung him slowly until he lay facedown in the air a
few feet above the floor.

Commander O'Brine stared for a moment, then took the unconscious
Planeteer and swung him upright. His quick eyes took in the patch
on the arm, the safety line tied tightly. He roared, "Quick! Get him
to the wound ward!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Rip came back to consciousness on the operating table. The wound in his
arm had been neatly repaired, and below the wound, where his arm had
frozen, a plastic temperature bag was slowly bringing the cold flesh back
to normal. On his other side, a pulsing pressure pump forced new blood
from the ship's supplies into his veins.

A senior space officer, with the golden lancet of the medical service on
his tunic, bent over him. "How do you feel?"

Rip's voice surprised him. It was as full and strong as ever. "I feel
wonderful. Can I get up?"

"When we get enough blood into you, and your arm is fully restored."

Commander O'Brine appeared in the door frame. "Can he talk?"

"Yes. He's fine, sir."

O'Brine glared down at Rip. "Can you give me a good reason why I
shouldn't have you treated for space madness and then toss you in the
space pot until we reach Earth?"

"Best reason in the galaxy," Rip said cheerfully. "But before we talk
about it, I want to know how my men are. One got cut, and another had his
bubble cracked. Also, one of the Connies got badly cut, another had some
broken bones, and a third one bled into high vack when Koa cracked his
bubble."

The doctor answered Rip's question. "Your men are all right. We put the
one with the cracked bubble into high compression for a while, just to
relieve his pain a little. The other one didn't bleed much. He's back in
the squad room right now. Two of the prisoners are patched up, but the
third one is in the other operating room. I don't know whether we can
save him or not. We're trying."

O'Brine nodded. "Thanks, Doctor. Now, Foster, start talking. You fired
on this ship, scored a hit, and broke the air seal. No casualties,
fortunately. But by forcing us to accelerate at optimum speed, you caused
so much breakage of ship's stores that we'll have to put into Marsport
for new stocks. And on top of all that, you insulted me within the
hearing of every man on the ship. I don't mind being insulted by
Planeteers. I'm used to it. But when it's done over the communications
system, it's bad for discipline."

Rip tried to keep a straight face. He said mildly, "Sir, I'm surprised
you even give me a chance to explain."

"I wouldn't have," O'Brine said frankly. "I would have shot off a special
message to Earth, relieving you of command and asking for Discipline
Board action. But when I saw those Connie prisoners, I knew there was
more to this than just a young space pup going vack-wacky."

"There was, Commander." Rip recited the events of the past few hours
while the Irishman listened with growing amazement. "I had to convince
you in a hurry that we still held the asteroid, so I used some insulting
phrases that would let you know, without any doubt, who was talking. And
you did know, didn't you, sir?"

O'Brine flushed. For a long moment his glance locked with Rip's, then he
roared with laughter.

Rip grinned his relief. "My apologies, sir."

"Accepted," O'Brine chuckled. "I'm rather sorry I don't have an excuse
for dumping you in the space pot, though, Foster. Your explanation is
acceptable, but I have a suspicion that you enjoyed calling me names."

"I might have," Rip admitted, "but I wasn't in very good shape. The only
thing I could think of was getting into air so I could have my arm
treated. Commander, we've moved the asteroid. Now we have to correct
