underhatch of the boat, which was now the side door. Abe shoved
through, and I shoved in after him. Newsman's conditioned reflex; get
to where the story is. I even caught myself saying, "Press," as I
shoved past Abdullah Monnahan.

"What happened?" I asked, as soon as I was inside. I saw Joe Kivelson
getting up from the radio and making place for Abe. "Who did you
contact?"

"The Mahatma; _Helldiver_," he said. "Signal's faint, but plain;
they're trying to make a directional fix on us. There are about a
dozen ships out looking for us: _Helldiver_, _Pequod_, _Bulldog_,
_Dirty Gertie_..." He went on naming them.

"How did they find out?" I wanted to know. "Somebody pick up our
Mayday while we were cruising submerged?"

Abe Clifford was swearing into the radio. "No, of course not. We don't
know where in Nifflheim we are. All the instruments in the boat were
smashed."

"Well, can't you shoot the stars, Abe?" The voice--I thought it was
Feinberg's--was almost as inaudible as a cat's sneeze.

"Sure we can. If you're in range of this makeshift set, the position
we'd get would be practically the same as yours," Abe told him. "Look,
there's a floodlight pointed straight up. Can you see that?"

"In all this moonlight? We could be half a mile away and not see it."

"We've been firing with a 7-mm," the navigator said.

"I know; I heard it. On the radio. Have you got any rockets? Maybe if
you shot one of them up we could see it."

"Hey, that's an idea! Hans, have we another rocket with an explosive
head?"

Cronje said we had, and he and another man got it out and carried it
from the boat. I repeated my question to Joe Kivelson.

"No. Your Dad tried to call the _Javelin_ by screen; that must have
been after we abandoned ship. He didn't get an answer, and put out a
general call. Nip Spazoni was nearest, and he cruised around and
picked up the locator signal and found the wreck, with the boat berth
blown open and the boat gone. Then everybody started looking for us."

Feinberg was saying that he'd call the other ships and alert them. If
the _Helldiver_ was the only ship we could contact by radio, the odds
were that if they couldn't see the rocket from Feinberg's ship, nobody
else could. The same idea must have occurred to Abe Clifford.

"You say you're all along the coast. Are the other ships west or east
of you?"

"West, as far as I know."

"Then we must be way east of you. Where are you now?"

"About five hundred miles east of Sancerre Bay."

That meant we must be at least a thousand miles east of the bay. I
could see how that happened. Both times the boat had surfaced, it had
gone straight up, lift and drive operating together. There is a
constant wind away from the sunlight zone at high level, heated air
that has been lifted, and there is a wind at a lower level out of the
dark zone, coming in to replace it. We'd gotten completely above the
latter and into the former.

There was some yelling outside, and then I could hear Hans Cronje:

"Rocket's ready for vertical launching. Ten seconds, nine, eight,
seven, six, five, four, three, two, one; rocket off!"

There was a whoosh outside. Clifford, at the radio, repeated: "Rocket
off!" Then it banged, high overhead. "Did you see it? he asked.

"Didn't see a thing," Feinberg told him.

"Hey, I know what they would see!" Tom Kivelson burst out. "Say we go
up and set the woods on fire?"

"Hey, that's an idea. Listen, Mahatma; we have a big forest of
flowerpot trees up on a plateau above us. Say we set that on fire.
Think you could see it?"

"I don't see why not, even in this moonlight. Wait a minute, till I
call the other ships."

Tom was getting into warm outer garments. Cesario got out the arc
torch, and he and Tom and I raced out through the hut and outdoors.
We hastened up the path that had been tramped and dragged to the
waterfall, got the lifters off the logs, and used them to help
ourselves up over the rocks beside the waterfall.

We hadn't bothered doing anything with the slashings, except to get
them out of our way, while we were working. Now we gathered them into
piles among the trees, placing them to take advantage of what little
wind was still blowing, and touched them off with the arc torch. Soon
we had the branches of the trees burning, and then the soft outer wood
of the trunks. It actually began to get uncomfortably hot, although
the temperature was now down around minus 90 deg. Fahrenheit.

Cesario was using the torch. After he got all the slashings on fire,
he started setting fire to the trees themselves, going all around them
and getting the soft outer wood burning. As soon as he had one tree
lit, he would run on to another.

"This guy's a real pyromaniac," Tom said to me, wiping his face on the
sleeve of his father's parka which he was wearing over his own.

"Sure I am," Cesario took time out to reply. "You know who I was about
fifty reincarnations ago? Nero, burning Rome." Theosophists never
hesitated to make fun of their religion, that way. The way they see
it, a thing isn't much good if it can't stand being made fun of. "And
look at the job I did on Moscow, a little later."

"Sure; I remember that. I was Napoleon then. What I'd have done to you
if I'd caught you, too."

"Yes, and I know what he was in another reincarnation," Tom added.
"Mrs. O'Leary's cow!"

Whether or not Cesario really had had any past astral experience, he
made a good job of firebugging on this forest. We waited around for a
while, far enough back for the heat to be just comfortable and
pleasant, until we were sure that it was burning well on both sides of
the frozen stream. It even made the double moonlight dim, and it was
sending up huge clouds of fire-reddened smoke, and where the fire
didn't light the smoke, it was black in the moonlight. There wouldn't
be any excuse for anybody not seeing that. Finally, we started back to
camp.

As soon as we got within earshot, we could hear the excitement.
Everybody was jumping and yelling. "They see it! They see it!"

The boat was full of voices, too, from the radio:

"_Pequod_ to _Dirty Gertie_, we see it, too, just off our port bow...
Yes, _Bulldog_, we see your running lights; we're right behind you...
_Slasher_ to _Pequod_: we can't see you at all. Fire a flare,
please..."

I pushed in to the radio. "This is Walter Boyd, _Times_ representative
with the _Javelin_ castaways," I said. "Has anybody a portable
audiovisual pickup that I can use to get some pictures in to my paper
with?"

That started general laughter among the operators on the ships that
were coming in.

"We have one, Walt," Oscar Fujisawa's voice told me. "I'm coming in
ahead in the _Pequod_ scout boat; I'll bring it with me."

"Thanks, Oscar," I said. Then I asked him: "Did you see Bish Ware
before you left port?"

"I should say I did!" Oscar told me. "You can thank Bish Ware that
we're out looking for you now. Tell you about it as soon as we get
in."




14

THE RESCUE


The scout boat from the _Pequod_ came in about thirty minutes later,
from up the ravine where the forest fire was sending up flame and
smoke. It passed over the boat and the hut beside it and the crowd of
us outside, and I could see Oscar in the machine gunner's seat aiming
a portable audiovisual telecast camera. After he got a view of us,
cheering and waving our arms, the boat came back and let down. We ran
to it, all of us except the man with the broken leg and a couple who
didn't have enough clothes to leave the fire, and as the boat opened I
could hear Oscar saying:

"Now I am turning you over to Walter Boyd, the _Times_ correspondent
with the _Javelin_ castaways."

He gave me the camera when he got out, followed by his gunner, and I
got a view of them, and of the boat lifting and starting west to guide
the ships in. Then I shut it off and said to him:

"What's this about Bish Ware? You said he was the one who started the
search."

"That's right," Oscar said. "About thirty hours after you left port,
he picked up some things that made him think the _Javelin_ had been
sabotaged. He went to your father, and he contacted me--Mohandas
Feinberg and I still had our ships in port--and started calling the
_Javelin_ by screen. When he couldn't get response, your father put
out a general call to all hunter-ships. Nip Spazoni reported boarding
the _Javelin_, and then went searching the area where he thought you'd
been hunting, picked up your locator signal, and found the _Javelin_
on the bottom with her bow blown out and the boat berth open and the
boat gone. We all figured you'd head south with the boat, and that's
where we went to look."

"Well, Bish Ware; he was dead drunk, last I heard of him," Joe
Kivelson said.

"Aah, just an act," Oscar said. "That was to fool the city cops, and
anybody else who needed fooling. It worked so well that he was able to
crash a party Steve Ravick was throwing at Hunters' Hall, after the
meeting. That was where he picked up some hints that Ravick had a spy
in the _Javelin_ crew. He spent the next twenty or so hours following
that up, and heard about your man Devis straining his back. He found
out what Devis did on the _Javelin_, and that gave him the idea that
whatever the sabotage was, it would be something to the engines. What
did happen, by the way?"

A couple of us told him, interrupting one another. He nodded.

"That was what Nip Spazoni thought when he looked at the ship. Well,
after that he talked to your father and to me, and then your father
began calling and we heard from Nip."

You could see that it absolutely hurt Joe Kivelson to have to owe his
life to Bish Ware.

"Well, it's lucky anybody listened to him," he grudged. "I wouldn't
have."

"No, I guess maybe you wouldn't," Oscar told him, not very cordially.
"I think he did a mighty sharp piece of detective work, myself."

I nodded, and then, all of a sudden, another idea, under _Bish Ware,
Reformation of_, hit me. Detective work; that was it. We could use a
good private detective agency in Port Sandor. Maybe I could talk him
into opening one. He could make a go of it. He had all kinds of
contacts, he was handy with a gun, and if he recruited a couple of
tough but honest citizens who were also handy with guns and built up a
protective and investigative organization, it would fill a long-felt
need and at the same time give him something beside Baldur honey-rum
to take his mind off whatever he was drinking to keep from thinking
about. If he only stayed sober half the time, that would be a fifty
per cent success.

Ramon Llewellyn was wanting to know whether anybody'd done anything
about Al Devis.

"We didn't have time to bother with any Al Devises," Oscar said. "As
soon as Bish figured out what had happened aboard the _Javelin_, we
knew you'd need help and need it fast. He's keeping an eye on Al for
us till we get back."

"That's if he doesn't get any drunker and forget," Joe said.

Everybody, even Tom, looked at him in angry reproach.

"We better find out what he drinks and buy you a jug of it, Joe,"
Oscar's gunner told him.

The _Helldiver_, which had been closest to us when our signal had
been picked up, was the first ship in. She let down into the ravine,
after some maneuvering around, and Mohandas Feinberg and half a dozen
of his crew got off with an improvised stretcher on a lifter and a lot
of blankets. We got our broken-leg case aboard, and Abdullah Monnahan,
and the man with the broken wrist. There were more ships coming, so
the rest of us waited. Joe Kivelson should have gone on the
_Helldiver_, to have his broken arm looked at, but a captain's always
the last man off, so he stayed.

Oscar said he'd take Tom and Joe, and Glenn Murell and me, on the
_Pequod_. I was glad of that. Oscar and his mate and his navigator are
all bachelors, and they use the _Pequod_ to throw parties on when
they're not hunting, so it is more comfortably fitted than the usual
hunter-ship. Joe decided not to try to take anything away from the
boat. He was going to do something about raising the _Javelin_, and
the salvage ship could stop here and pick everything up.

"Well, one thing," Oscar told him. "Bring that machine gun, and what
small arms you have. I think things are going to get sort of rough in
Port Sandor, in the next twenty or so hours."

I was beginning to think so, myself. The men who had gotten off the
_Helldiver_, and the ones who got off Corkscrew Finnegan's _Dirty
Gertie_ and Nip Spazoni's _Bulldog_ were all talking about what was
going to have to be done about Steve Ravick. Bombing _Javelin_ would
have been a good move for Ravick, if it had worked. It hadn't, though,
and now it was likely to be the thing that would finish him for good.

It wasn't going to be any picnic, either. He had his gang of
hoodlums, and he could count on Morton Hallstock's twenty or thirty
city police; they'd put up a fight, and a hard one. And they were all
together, and the hunter fleet was coming in one ship at a time. I
wondered if the Ravick-Hallstock gang would try to stop them at the
water front, or concentrate at Hunters' Hall or the Municipal Building
to stand siege. I knew one thing, though. However things turned out,
there was going to be an awful lot of shooting in Port Sandor before
it was over.

Finally, everybody had been gotten onto one ship or another but Oscar
and his gunner and the Kivelsons and Murell and myself. Then the
_Pequod_, which had been circling around at five thousand feet, let
down and we went aboard. The conning tower was twice as long as usual
on a hunter-ship, and furnished with a lot of easy chairs and a couple
of couches. There was a big combination view and communication screen,
and I hurried to that and called the _Times_.

Dad came on, as soon as I finished punching the wave-length
combination. He was in his shirt sleeves, and he was wearing a gun. I
guess we made kind of a show of ourselves, but, after all, he'd come
within an ace of being all out of family, and I'd come within an ace
of being all out, period. After we got through with the happy reunion,
I asked him what was the situation in Port Sandor. He shook his head.

"Not good, Walt. The word's gotten around that there was a bomb
planted aboard the _Javelin_, and everybody's taking just one guess
who did it. We haven't expressed any opinions one way or another,
yet. We've been waiting for confirmation."

"Set for recording," I said. "I'll give you the story as far as we
know it."

He nodded, reached one hand forward out of the picture, and then
nodded again. I began with our killing the monster and going down to
the bottom after the cutting-up, and the explosion. I told him what we
had seen after leaving the ship and circling around it in the boat.

"The condition of the hull looked very much like the effect of a
charge of high explosive exploding in the engine room," I finished.

"We got some views of it, transmitted in by Captain Spazoni, of the
_Bulldog_," he said. "Captain Courtland, of the Spaceport Police, has
expressed the opinion that it could hardly be anything but a small
demolition bomb. Would you say accident can be ruled out?"

"I would. There was nobody in the engine room at the time; we were
resting on the bottom, and all hands were in the wardroom."

"That's good enough," Dad said. "We'll run it as 'very convincing and
almost conclusive' evidence of sabotage." He'd shut off the recorder
for that. "Can I get the story of how you abandoned ship and landed,
now?"

His hand moved forward, and the recorder went on again. I gave a brief
account of our experiences in the boat, the landing and wreck, and our
camp, and the firewood cutting, and how we had repaired the radio. Joe
Kivelson talked for a while, and so did Tom and Glenn Murell. I was
going to say something when they finished, and I sat down on one of
the couches. I distinctly remember leaning back and relaxing.

The next thing I knew, Oscar Fujisawa's mate was shaking me awake.

"We're in sight of Port Sandor," he was telling me.

I mumbled something, and then sat up and found that I had been lying
down and that somebody had thrown a blanket over me. Tom Kivelson was
still asleep under a blanket on the other couch, across from me. The
