At the end of the ceremony, the Chairman wished each of the new Hadjis
an easy death in the Games.




Chapter Eighteen


Guards led Barrent from the office of the Awards Committee. He was
brought past a row of dungeons under the Arena, and locked into a cell.
The guards told him to be patient; the Games had already begun, and his
turn would come soon.

There were nine men crammed into a cell which had been built to hold
three. Most of them sat or sprawled in complete and silent apathy,
already resigned to their deaths. But one of them was definitely not
resigned. He pushed his way to the front of the cell as Barrent entered.

"Joe!"

The little credit thief grinned at him. "A sad place to meet, Will."

"What happened to you?"

"Politics," Joe said. "It's a dangerous business on Omega, especially
during the time of the Games. I thought I was safe. But ..." He shrugged
his shoulders. "I was selected for the Games this morning."

"Is there any chance of getting out of it?"

"There's a chance," Joe said. "I told your girl about you, so perhaps
her friends can do something. As for me, I'm expecting a reprieve."

"Is that possible?" Barrent asked.

"Anything is possible. It's better not to hope for it, though."

"What are the Games like?" Barrent asked.

"They're the sort of thing you'd expect," Joe said. "Man-to-man combats,
battles against various types of Omegan flora and fauna, needlebeam and
heatgun duels. It's all copied from an old Earth festival, I'm told."

"And if anyone survives," Barrent said, "they're beyond the law."

"That's right."

"But what does it mean to be beyond the law?"

"I don't know," Joe said. "Nobody seems to know much about that. All I
could find out is, survivors of the Games are taken by The Black One.
It's not supposed to be pleasant."

"I can understand that. Very little on Omega _is_ pleasant."

"It isn't a bad place," Joe said. "You just haven't the proper spirit
of--"

He was interrupted by the arrival of a detachment of guards. It was time
for the occupants of Barrent's cell to enter the Arena.

"No reprieve," Barrent said.

"Well, that's how it goes," Joe said.

They were marched out under heavy guard and lined up at the iron door
that separated the cell block from the main Arena. Just before the
captain of the guards opened the door, a fat, well-dressed man came
hurrying down a side corridor waving a paper.

"What's this?" the captain of the guards asked.

"A writ of recognizance," the fat man said, handing his paper to
the captain. "On the other side, you'll find a cease-and-desist
order." He pulled more papers out of his pockets. "And here is a
bankruptcy-transferral notice, a chattel mortgage, a writ of habeas
corpus, and a salary attachment."

The captain pushed back his helmet and scratched his narrow forehead. "I
can never understand what you lawyers are talking about. What does it
mean?"

"It releases him," the fat man said, pointing to Joe.

The captain took the papers, gave them a single puzzled glance, and
handed them to an aide. "All right," he said, "take him with you. But it
wasn't like this in the old days. _Nothing_ stopped the orderly
progression of the Games."

Grinning triumphantly, Joe stepped through the ranks of guards and
joined the fat lawyer. He asked him, "Do you have any papers for Will
Barrent?"

"None," the lawyer said. "His case is in different hands. I'm afraid it
might not be completely processed until after the Games are over."

"But I'll probably be dead then," Barrent said.

"That, I can assure you, won't stop the papers from being properly
served," the fat lawyer said proudly. "Dead or alive, you will retain
all your rights."

The captain of the guards said, "All right, let's go."

"Luck," Joe called out. And then the line of prisoners had passed
through the iron door into the glaring light of the Arena.

       *       *       *       *       *

Barrent lived through the hand-to-hand duels in which a quarter of the
prisoners were killed. After that, men armed with swords were matched
against the deadlier Omegan fauna. The beasts they fought included the
hintolyte and the hintosced--big-jawed, heavily armored monsters whose
natural habitat was the desert region far to the south of Tetrahyde.
Fifteen men later, these beasts were dead. Barrent was matched with a
Saunus, a flying black reptile from the western mountains. For a while
he was hard-pressed by this ugly, poison-toothed creature. But in time
he figured out a solution. He stopped trying to jab the Saunus's
leathery hide and concentrated on severing its broad fan of
tailfeathers. When he had succeeded, the Saunus's flying balance was
thrown badly off. The reptile crashed into the high wall that separated
the combatants from the spectators, and it was relatively easy to
administer the final stroke through the Saunus's single huge eye. The
vast and enthusiastic crowd in the stadium gave Barrent a lengthy round
of applause.

He moved back to the reserve pen and watched other men struggle against
the trichomotreds, incredibly fast little creatures the size of rats,
with the dispositions of rabid wolverines. It took five teams of
prisoners. After a brief interlude of hand-to-hand duelling, the Arena
was cleared again.

Now the hard-shelled criatin amphibians lumbered in. Although sluggish
in disposition, the criatins were completely protected beneath several
inches of shell. Their narrow whiplash tails, which also served them as
antennae, were invariably fatal to any man who approached them. Barrent
had to fight one of these after it had dispatched four of his fellow
prisoners.

He had watched the earlier combats carefully, and had detected the one
place where the criatin antennae could not reach. Barrent waited for his
chance and jumped for the center of the criatin's broad back.

When the shell split into a gigantic mouth--for this was the criatin
method of feeding--Barrent jammed his sword into the opening. The
criatin expired with gratifying promptness, and the crowd signified its
approval by showering the Arena with cushions.

The victory left Barrent standing alone on the blood-stained sand. The
rest of the prisoners were either dead or too badly maimed to fight.
Barrent waited, wondering what beast the Games Committee had chosen
next.

A single tendril shot up through the sand, and then another. Within
seconds, a short, thick tree was growing in the Arena, sending out more
roots and tendrils, and pulling all flesh, living or dead, into five
small feeding-mouths which circled the base of the trunk. This was the
carrion tree, indigenous to the northeastern swamps and imported with
great difficulty. It was said to be highly vulnerable to fire; but
Barrent had no fire available.

Using his sword two-handed, Barrent lopped off vines; others grew in
their place. He worked with frantic speed to keep the vines from
surrounding him. His arms were becoming tired, and the tree regenerated
faster than he could cut it down. There seemed no way of destroying it.

His only hope lay in the tree's slow movements. These were fast enough,
but nothing compared with human musculature. Barrent ducked out of a
corner in which the creeping vines were trapping him. Another sword was
lying twenty yards away, half-buried in the sand. Barrent reached it,
and heard warning shouts from the crowd. He felt a vine close around his
ankles.

He hacked at it, and other vines coiled around his waist. He dug his
heels into the sand and clashed the swords together, trying to produce a
spark.

On his first try, the sword in his right hand broke in half.

Barrent picked up the halves and kept on trying as the vines dragged him
closer to the feeding mouths. A shower of sparks flew from the clanging
steel. One of them touched a vine.

With incredible suddenness the vine burst into flame. The flame spurted
down the length of the vine to the main tree system. The five mouths
moaned as the fire leaped toward them.

If matters had been left to continue, Barrent would have been burned to
death, for the Arena was nearly filled with the highly combustible
vines. But the flames were endangering the wooden walls of the Arena.
The Tetrahyde guard detachment put the fire out in time to save both
Barrent and the spectators.

Swaying with exhaustion, Barrent stood in the center of the Arena,
wondering what would be used next against him. But nothing happened.
After a moment, a signal was made from the President's box, and the
crowd roared in applause.

The Games were over. Barrent had survived.

Still no one left his seat. The audience was waiting to see the final
disposition of Barrent, who had passed beyond the law.

He heard a low, reverent gasp from the crowd. Turning quickly, Barrent
saw a fiery dot of light appear in mid-air. It swelled, threw out
streamers of light, and gathered them in again. It grew rapidly, too
brilliant to look upon. And Barrent remembered Uncle Ingemar saying to
him, "Sometimes, The Black One rewards us by appearing in the awful
beauty of his fiery flesh. Yes, Nephew, I have actually been privileged
to see him. Two years ago he appeared at the Games, and he also appeared
the year before that...."

The dot became a red and yellow globe about twenty feet in diameter, its
lowest curve not quite touching the ground. It grew again. The center of
the globe became thinner; a waist appeared, and above the waist the
globe turned an impenetrable black. It was two globes now, one
brilliant, one dark, joined by a narrow waist. As Barrent watched, the
dark globe lengthened and changed into the unforgettable horn-headed
shape of The Dark One.

Barrent tried to run, but the huge black-headed figure swept forward and
engulfed him. He was trapped in a blinding swirl of radiance, with
darkness above it. The light bored into his head, and he tried to
scream. Then he passed out.




Chapter Nineteen


Barrent recovered consciousness in a dim, high-ceilinged room. He was
lying on a bed. Two people were standing near by. They seemed to be
arguing.

"There simply isn't any more time to wait," a man was saying. "You fail
to appreciate the urgency of the situation."

"The doctor said he needs at least another three days of rest." It was a
woman's voice. After a moment, Barrent realized that Moera was speaking.

"He can have three days."

"And he needs time for indoctrination."

"You told me he was bright. The indoctrination shouldn't take long."

"It might take weeks."

"Impossible. The ship lands in six days."

"Eylan," Moera said, "you're trying to move too fast. We can't do it
this time. On the next Landing Day we will be much better prepared--"

"The situation will be out of hand by then," the man said. "I'm sorry,
Moera, we have to use Barrent immediately, or not use him at all."

Barrent said, "Use me for what? Where am I? Who are you?"

The man turned to the bed. In the faint light, Barrent saw a very tall,
thin, stooped old man with a wispy moustache.

"I'm glad you're awake," he said. "My name is Swen Eylan. I'm in command
of Group Two."

"What's Group Two?" Barrent asked. "How did you get me out of the Arena?
Are you agents of The Black One?"

Eylan grinned. "Not exactly agents. We'll explain everything to you
shortly. First, I think you'd better have something to eat and drink."

       *       *       *       *       *

A nurse brought in a tray. While Barrent ate, Eylan pulled up a chair
and told Barrent about The Black One.

"Our Group," Eylan said, "can't claim to have started the religion of
Evil. That appears to have sprung up spontaneously on Omega. But since
it was there, we have made occasional use of it. The priests have been
remarkably cooperative. After all, the worshipers of Evil set a high
positive value upon corruption. Therefore, in the eyes of an Omegan
priest, the appearance of a fraudulent Black One is not anathema. Quite
the contrary, for in the orthodox worship of Evil, a great deal of
emphasis is put upon false images--especially if they are big, fiery,
impressive images like the one which rescued you from the Arena."

"How did you produce that?" Barrent asked.

"It has to do with friction surfaces and planes of force," Eylan said.
"You'd have to ask our engineers for more details."

"Why did you rescue me?" Barrent asked.

Eylan glanced at Moera, who shrugged her shoulders. Looking
uncomfortable, Eylan said, "We'd like to use you for an important job.
But before I tell you about it, I think you should know something about
our organization. Certainly you must have some curiosity about us."

"A great deal," Barrent said. "Are you some kind of criminal elite?"

"We're an elite," Eylan said, "but we don't consider ourselves criminal.
Two entirely different types of people have been sent to Omega. There
are the true criminals guilty of murder, arson, armed robbery, and the
like. Those are the people you lived among. And there are the people
guilty of deviational crimes such as political unreliability, scientific
unorthodoxy, and irreligious attitudes. These people compose our
organization, which, for the purposes of identification, we call Group
Two. As far as we can remember and reconstruct, our crimes were largely
a matter of holding different opinions from those which prevailed upon
Earth. We were nonconformists. We probably constituted an unstable
element, and a threat to the entrenched powers. Therefore we were
deported to Omega."

"And you separated yourselves from the other deportees," Barrent said.

"Yes, necessarily. For one thing, the true criminals of Group One are
not readily controllable. We couldn't lead them, nor could we allow
ourselves to be led by them. But more important than that, we had a job
to do that could only be performed in secrecy. We had no idea what
devices the guardships employed to watch the surface of Omega. To keep
our security intact, we went underground--literally. The room you're in
now is about two hundred feet below the surface. We stay out of sight,
except for special agents like Moera, who separate the political and
social prisoners who belong in Group Two from the others."

"You didn't separate me," Barrent said.

"Of course not. You were allegedly guilty of murder, which put you in
Group One. However, your behavior was not typical of Group One. You
seemed like good potential material for us, so we helped you from time
to time. But we had to be sure of you before taking you into the Group.
Your repudiation of the murder charge was strongly in your favor. Also,
we questioned Illiardi after you had located him. There seemed no reason
to doubt that he performed the murder you were charged with. Even more
strongly in your favor were your high survival qualities, which had
