inside was all converted."

"How long will it take?" Conn asked.

"If we can find plutonium, and if we can find robots to do the work
inside, and if there's been no structural damage, and if we keep at
it--a couple of days."

"All right; let's get at it. I don't know where we'll find shipyards
like these anywhere else, and if we do, things'll probably be as bad
there. We came here to fix things up and start them, didn't we?"




XIV


It didn't take as long as Mohammed Matsui expected. They found the
fissionables magazine, and in it plenty of plutonium, each
subcritical slug in a five-hundred-pound collapsium canister. There
were repair-robots, and they only had to replace the cartridges in the
power units of three of them. They sent them inside the
collapsium-shielded death-to-people area--transmitter robots, to relay
what the others picked up through receptors wire-connected with the
outside; foremen-robots, globes a yard in diameter covered with horns
and spikes like old-fashioned ocean-navy mines; worker-robots, in a
variety of shapes, but mostly looking like many-clawed crabs.

Neither the converter nor the reactor had sustained any damage while
the fissionables were burning out. So the robots began tearing out
reactor-elements, and removing plutonium slugs no longer capable of
sustaining chain reaction but still dangerously radioactive. Nuclear
reactors had become simpler and easier to service since the First Day
of the Year Zero, when Enrico Fermi put the first one into operation,
but the principles remained the same. Work was less back-breaking and
muscle-straining, but it called for intense concentration on screens
and meters and buttons that was no less exhausting.

The air around them began to grow foul. Finally, the air-analyzer
squawked and flashed red lights to signal that the oxygen had dropped
below the safety margin. They had no mobile fan equipment, or time to
hunt any; they put on their fishbowl helmets and went back to work.
After twelve hours, with a few short breaks, they had the reactors
going. Jerry Rivas and a couple of others took a heavy-duty lifter and
went looking for conversion mass; they brought back a couple of tons
of scrap-iron and fed it to the converters. A few seconds after it was
in, the pilot lights began coming on all over the panels. They took
two more hours to get the oxygen-separator and the ventilator fans
going, and for good measure they started the water pumps and the
heating system. Then they all went outside to the ship to sleep. The
sun was just coming up.

It was sunset when they rose and returned to the building. The
airlocks opened at a touch on the operating handles. Inside, the air
was fresh and sweet, the temperature was a pleasantly uniform 75
degrees Fahrenheit, the fans were humming softly, and there was
running hot and cold water everywhere.

Jerry Rivas, Anse Dawes, and the three tramp freighter fo'c'sle hands
took lifters and equipment and went off foraging. The rest of them
went to the communications center to get the telecast station, the
radio beacon, and the inside-screen system into operation. There were
a good many things that had to be turned on manually, and more things
that had been left on, forty years ago, and now had to be repowered or
replaced. They worked at it most of the night; before morning, almost
everything was working, and they were sending a signal across
twenty-eight million miles to Storisende, on Poictesme.

It was late evening, Storisende time, but Rodney Maxwell, who must
have been camping beside his own screen, came on at once, which is to
say five and a half minutes later.

"Well, I see you got in somewhere. Where are you, and how is
everything?"

Then he picked up a cigar out of an ashtray in front of him and lit
it, waiting.

"Port Carpenter; we're in the main administration building," Conn told
him. He talked for a while about what they had found and done since
their arrival. "Have you an extra viewscreen, fitted for recording?"
he asked.

Five and a half minutes later, his father nodded. "Yes, right here."
He leaned forward and away from the communication screen in front of
him. "I have it on." He gave the wave-length combination. "Ready to
receive."

"This is about all we have, now. Views we took coming in, from the
ship and a scout-boat." He started transmitting them. "We haven't sent
in any claims yet. I wasn't sure whether I should make them for
Alpha-Interplanetary, or Litchfield Exploration & Salvage."

"Don't bother sending in anything to the Claims Office," his father
said. "Send anything you want to claim in here to me, and I'll have
Sterber, Flynn & Chen-Wong file them. They'll be made for a new
company we're organizing."

"What? Another one?"

His father nodded, grinning. "Koshchei Exploitation & Development;
we've made application already. We can't claim exclusive rights to the
whole planet, like the old interstellar exploration companies did
before the War, but since you're the only people on the planet, we can
come pretty close to it by detail." He was looking to one side, at the
other screen. "Great Ghu, Conn! This place of yours all together
beats everything I ever dug, Force Command and Barathrum Spaceport
included. How big would you say it is? More than ten miles in radius?"

"About five or six. Ten or twelve miles across."

"That's all right, then. We'll just claim the building you're in, now,
and the usual ten-mile radius, the same as at Force Command. We'll
claim the place as soon as the company's chartered; in the meantime,
send in everything else you can get views of."

They set up a regular radio-and-screen watch after that. Charley
Gatworth and Piet Ludvyckson, both of whom were studying astrogation
in hopes of qualifying as space officers after they had a real
spaceship, elected themselves to that duty; it gave them plenty of
time for study. Jerry Rivas and Anse Dawes, with whomever they could
find to help them, were making a systematic search. They looked first
of all for foodstuffs, and found enough in the storerooms of three
restaurants on the executive level to feed their own party in gourmet
style for a year, and enough in the main storerooms to provision an
army. They even found refrigerators and freeze-bins full of meat and
vegetables fresh after forty years. That surprised everybody, for the
power units had gone dead long ago. Then it was noticed that they were
covered with collapsium. Anything that would stop cosmic rays was a
hundred percent efficient as a heat insulator.

Coming in, the first day, Conn had seen an almost completed hypership
bulking above the domes and roofs of Port Carpenter in the distance.
He saw it again on screen from a pickup atop the central tower. As
soon as the party was comfortably settled in the executive apartments
on the upper levels, he and Yves Jacquemont and Mack Vibart and Schalk
Retief, the construction engineer, found an aircar in one of the
hangars and went to have a closer look at her.

She had all her collapsium on, except for a hundred-foot circle at the
top and a number of rectangular openings around the sides. Yves
Jacquemont said that would be where the airlocks would go.

"They always put them on last. But don't be surprised at anything you
find or don't find inside. As soon as the skeleton's up they put the
armor on, and then build the rest of the ship out from the middle. It
might be slower getting material in through the airlock openings, but
it holds things together while they're working."

They put on the car's lights, lifted to the top, and let down through
the upper opening. It was like entering a huge globular spider's web,
globe within globe of interlaced girders and struts and braces,
extending from the center to the outer shell. Even the spider was
home--a three-hundred-foot ball of collapsium, looking tiny at the
very middle.

"Why, this isn't a ship!" Vibart cried in disgust. "This is just the
outside of a ship. They haven't done a thing inside."

"Oh, yes, they have," Jacquemont contradicted, aiming a spotlight
toward the shimmering ball in the middle. "They have all the engines
in--Abbott lift-and-drive, Dillingham hyperdrives, pseudograv, power
reactors, converters, everything. They wouldn't have put on the
shielding if they hadn't. They did that as soon as they had the
outside armor on."

"Wonder why they didn't finish her, if they got that far," Retief
said.

"They didn't need her. They'd had it; they wanted to go home."

"Well, we're not going to finish her, not with any fifteen men,"
Retief said. "One man has only two hands, two feet and one brain; he
can only handle so much robo-equipment at a time."

"I never expected we'd build a ship ourselves," Conn said. "We came to
look the place over and get a few claims staked. When we've done that,
we'll go back and get a real gang together."

"I don't know where you'll find them," Jacquemont commented. "We'll
need a couple of hundred, and they ought all to be graduate engineers.
We can't do this job with farm-tramps."

"You made some good shipyard men out of farm-tramps on Barathrum."

"And what'll you do for supervisors?"

"You're one. General superintendent. Mack, you and Schalk are a couple
of others. You just keep a day ahead of your men in learning the job,
you'll do all right."

Vibart turned to Jacquemont. "You know, Yves, he'll do it," he said.
"He doesn't know how impossible this is, and when we try to tell him,
he won't believe us. You can't stop a guy like that. All right, Conn;
deal me in."

"I won't let anybody be any crazier than I am," Jacquemont declared,
and then looked around the vastness of the empty ship with its
lacework of steel. "All you need is about ten million square feet of
decks and bulkheads, an air-and-water system, hydroponic tanks and
carniculture vats, astrogation and robo-pilot equipment, about which I
know very little, a hyperspace pilot system, about which I know
nothing at all.... Conn, why don't you just build a new Merlin? It
would be simpler."

"I don't want a new Merlin. I'm not even interested in the original
Merlin. This is what I want, right here."

He told his father, by screen, about the ship. "I believe we can
finish her, but not with the gang that's here. We'll need a couple of
hundred men. Now, with the supplies we've found, we can stay here
indefinitely. Should we do more exploring and claim some more of these
places, or should we come home right away and start recruiting, and
then come back with a large party, start work on the ship, and explore
and make further claims as we have time?" he asked.

"Better come back as soon as possible. Just explore Port Carpenter,
find out what's going to be needed to finish the ship and what
facilities you have to produce it, and get things cleaned up a little
so that you can start work as soon as you have people to do it. I'm
organizing another company--don't laugh, now; I've only started
promotioneering--which I think we will call Trisystem & Interstellar
Spacelines. Get me all the views you can of the ship herself and of
the steel mills and that sort of thing that will produce material for
finishing her; I want to use them in promotion. By the way, has she a
name?"

"Only a shipyard construction number."

"Then suppose you call her _Ouroboros_, after Genji Gartner's old
ship, the one that discovered the Trisystem."

"_Ouroboros II_; that's fine. Will do."

"Good. I'll have Sterber, Flynn & Chen-Wong make application for a
charter right away. We'll have to make Alpha-Interplanetary one of the
stockholding companies, and also Koschchei Exploitation & Development,
and, of course, Litchfield Exploration & Salvage...."

It was a pity there really wasn't a Merlin. If this kept on nothing
else would be able to figure out who owned how much stock in what.

They found the on-the-job engineering office for the ship in a small
dome half a mile from the construction dock. Yves Jacquemont and Mack
Vibart and Schalk Retief moved in and buried themselves to the ears in
specifications and blueprints. The others formed into parties of three
or four, and began looking about production facilities for material.
There was a steel mill a mile from the construction site; it was
almost fully robotic. Iron ore went in at one end, and finished sheet
steel and girders and deck plates came out at the other, and a dozen
men could handle the whole thing. There was a collapsium plant; there
were machine-shops and forging-shops. Every time they finished
inspecting one, Yves Jacquemont would have a list of half a dozen more
plants that he wanted found and examined yesterday morning at the
latest.

Some of them were in a frightful mess; work had been suspended and
everybody had gone away leaving everything as it was. Some were in
perfect order, ready to go into operation again as soon as power was
put on. It had depended, apparently, upon the personal character of
whoever had been in charge in the end. The nuclear-electric power unit
plant was in the latter class. The man in charge of it evidently
hadn't believed in leaving messes behind, even if he didn't expect to
come back.

It was built in the shape of a T. One side of the cross-stroke
contained the cartridge-case plant, where presses formed sheet-steel
cylinders, some as small as a round of pistol ammunition and some the
size of ten-gallon kegs. They moved toward the center on a production
line, finally reaching a matter-collapser where they were plated with
collapsium. From the other side, radioactive isotopes, mostly
reactor-waste, came in through evacuated and collapsium-shielded
chambers, were sorted, and finally, where the cross-arm of the T
joined the downstroke, packed in the collapsium cases. The production
line continued at right angles down the long building in which the
apparatus which converted nuclear energy to electric current was
assembled and packed; at the end, the finished power cartridges came
off, big ones for heavy machines and tiny ones for things like hand
tools and pocket lighters and razors. There were stacks of them, in
all sizes, loaded on skids and ready to move out. Except for the
minute and unavoidable leakage of current, they were as good as the
day they were assembled, and would be for another century.

Like almost everything else, the power-cartridge plant was airtight
and had its own oxygen-generator. The air-analyzer reported the oxygen
insufficient to support life. That was understandable; there were a
lot of furnaces which had evidently been hot when the power was cut
off; they had burned up the oxygen before cooling. They put on their
oxygen equipment when they got out of the car.

"I'll go back and have a look at the power plant," Matsui said. "If
it's like the rest of this place, it'll be ready to go as soon as the
reactors are started. I wish everybody here had left things like
this."

"Well, we'll have to check everything to make sure nothing was left on
when the main power was cut," Conn said. "Don't do anything back there
till we give you the go-ahead."

Matsui nodded and set off on foot along the broad aisle in the middle.
Conn looked around in the dim light that filtered through the dusty
glass overhead. On either side of the central aisle were two
production lines; between each pair, at intervals, stood massive
machines which evidently fabricated parts for the power cartridges.
Over them, and over the machines directly involved in production,
were receptor aerials, all oriented toward a stubby tower, twenty
feet thick and fifty in height, topped by a hemispherical dome.

"That'll be the control tower for all the machinery in here," he
decided. "Anse, suppose you and I go take a look at it."

"We'll take a look at the machines," Rivas said. "Clyde, you and I can
work back on the right and then come down on the other side. You know
anything about this stuff?"

"Me? Nifflheim, no," Nichols said. "I know a robo-control when I see
one, and I know whether it's set to receive or not."

There was a self-powered lift inside the control tower. Conn and Anse
rode it to the top and got out, Anse snapping on his flashlight. It
was dark in the dome at the top; instead of windows there were
viewscreens all around it. Five men had worked here; at least, there
were four chairs at four intricate control panels, one for each of the
four production lines, and a fifth chair in front of a number of
communication screens. There was a heavy-duty power unit, turned off.
Conn threw the switch. Lights came on inside, and the outside
viewscreens lit.

They were examining the control-panels when Conn's belt radio buzzed.
He plugged it in on his helmet. It was Mohammed Matsui.

"There's one big power plant back here," the engineer said. "Right in
the middle. It only powers what's in front of it. There must be
another one in either wing, for the isotope plant and the
cartridge-case plant. I'll go look at them. But the power's been cut
off from the machines in the main building. There's four big switches,
one for each production line--"

He was interrupted by a shout, almost a shriek, from somewhere. It
sounded like Jerry Rivas. A moment later, Rivas was clamoring:

"Conn! What did you turn on? Turn it off, right away!"

Anse jumped to the switch, pulling it with one hand and getting on his
flashlight with the other. The lights went out and the screens went
dark.

"It's off."

"The dickens it is!" Rivas disputed. "There are a couple of big
supervisor-robots circling around, and a flock of workers...."

At the same time, Clyde Nichols began cursing. Or maybe he was
praying; it was hard to be certain.

"But we pulled the switch. It was only the lights and viewscreens in
here, anyhow."

"It didn't do any good. Pull another one."

Matsui, back at the power plant, was wanting to know what was wrong.
Captain Nichols stopped cursing--or praying?--and said, "Mutiny,
that's what! The robots have turned on us!"

He knew what had happened, or was almost sure he did. A radio impulse
had gone out, somehow, from the control tower. Something they hadn't
checked, that had been left on. There was just enough current-leakage
from the units in the robots to keep the receptors active for forty
years. The supervisor-robots had gone active, and they had activated
the rest. Once on, cutting the current from the control tower wouldn't
turn them off again.

"Put the switch in again, Anse; the damage is done and you won't make
it any worse."

When the screens came on, he looked around from one to another. The
two supervisors, big ovoid things like the small round ones they had
used in repairing the power reactors the first day, were circling
aimlessly near the roof, one clockwise and the other counterclockwise,
dodging obstructions and getting politely out of each other's way. At
lower altitude, a dozen assorted worker-robots were moving about, and
more were emerging from cells at the end of the building. Sweepers,
with rotary brooms and rakes, crablike all-purpose handling robots, a
couple of vacuum-cleaning robots, each with a flexible funnel-tipped
proboscis and a bulging dust-sack. One tiling, a sort of special job
designed to get into otherwise inaccessible places, had a twenty-foot,
many-jointed, claw-tipped arm in front. It passed by and slightly over
the tower, saw Clyde Nichols, and swooped toward him. With a howl,
Nichols dived under one of the large machines between two production
lines. A pistol went off a couple of times. That would be Jerry Rivas.
Nobody else bothered with a gun on Koshchei, but he carried one as
some people carry umbrellas, whether he expected to need it or not and
because he would feel lost without it.

That he took in at one glance. Then he was looking at the control
panels. The switches and buttons were all marked for machine-control
in different steps of power-unit production. That was all for the big
stuff, powered centrally. There weren't any controls for lifters or
conveyers or other mobile equipment. Evidently they were handled out
in the shop, from mobile control-vehicles. He did find, on the
communication-screen panel, a lot of things that had been left on. He
snapped them off, one after another, snapping them on when a screen
went dark. There were fifteen or twenty robots, some rather large, in
the air or moving on the floor by now.

"We can't do anything here," he told Anse. "These are the
shop-cleaning robots. They were the last things used here when the
place closed down, and the two supervisors were probably controlled
from a vehicle, and it's anybody's guess where that is now. When you
threw that switch, it sent out an impulse that activated them. They're
running their instruction-tapes, and putting the others through all
their tricks."

Three more shots went off. Jerry Rivas was shouting: "Hey, whattaya
know! I killed one of the buggers!"
