his legs. One hand grated painfully against stone. Hardly knowing what
he did, but fighting for his life, Shann caught at that rock and drew
his head out of water. Coughing and gasping, half drowned, he was weak
with the panic of his close brush with death.

For a long moment he could only cling to the rock which had saved him,
retching and dazed, as the water washed about his body, a current
tugging at his trailing legs. There was light of a sort here, patches of
green which glowed with the same subdued light as the bushes of the
outer world, for he was no longer under the night sky. A rock-roof was
but inches over his head; he must be in some cave or tunnel under the
surface of the sea. Again a gust of panic shook him as he felt trapped.

The water continued to pull at Shann, and in his weakened condition it
was a temptation to yield to that pull; the more he fought it the more
he was exhausted. At last the Terran turned on his back, trying to float
with the stream, sure he could no longer battle it.

Luckily those few inches of space above the surface of the water
continued, and he had air to breathe. But the fear of that ending, of
being swept under the surface, chewed at his nerves. And his bodily
danger burned away the last of the spell which had held him, brought him
into this place, wherever it might be.

Was it only his heightened imagination, or had the current grown
swifter? Shann tried to gauge the speed of his passage by the way the
patches of green light slipped by. Now he turned and began to swim
slowly, feeling as if his arms were leaden weights, his ribs a cage to
bind his aching lungs.

Another patch of light ... larger ... spreading across the roof over
head. Then, he was out! Out of the tunnel into a cavern so vast that its
arching roof was like a skydome far above his head. But here the patches
of light were brighter, and they were arranged in odd groups which had a
familiar look to them.

Only, better than freedom overhead, there was a shore not too distant.
Shann swam for that haven, summoning up the last rags of his strength,
knowing that if he could not reach it very soon he was finished. Somehow
he made it and lay gasping, his cheek resting on sand finer than any of
the outer world, his fingers digging into it for purchase to drag his
body on. But when he collapsed, his legs were still awash in water.

No footfall could be heard on that sand. But he knew that he was no
longer alone. He braced his hands and with painful effort levered up his
body. Somehow he made it to his knees, but he could not stand. Instead
he half tumbled back, so that he faced them from a sitting position.

_Them_--there were three of them--the dragon-headed ones with their
slender, jewel-set bodies glittering even in this subdued light, their
yellow eyes fastened on him with a remoteness which did not approach any
human emotion, save perhaps that of a cold and limited wonder. But
behind them came a fourth, one he knew by the patterns on her body.

Shann clasped his hands about his knees to still the trembling of his
body, and eyed them back with all the defiance he could muster. Nor did
he doubt that he had been brought here, his body as captive to their
will, as had been that of their spy or messenger in his crude snare on
the island.

"Well, you have me," he said hoarsely. "Now what?"

His words boomed weirdly out over the water, were echoed from the dim
outer reaches of the cavern. There was no answer. They merely stood
watching him. Shann stiffened, determined to hold to his defiance and
to that identity which he now knew was his weapon against the powers
they used.

The one who had somehow drawn him there moved at last, circling around
the other three with a suggestion of diffidence in her manner. Shann
jerked back his head as her hand stretched to touch his face. And then,
guessing that she sought her peculiar form of communication, he
submitted to her finger tips, though now his skin crawled under that
light but firm pressure and he shrank from the contract.

There were no sensations this time. To his amazement a concrete inquiry
shaped itself in his brain, as clear as if the question had been asked
aloud: "Who are you?"

"Shann...." he began vocally, and then turned words into thoughts.
"Shann Lantee, Terran, man." He made his answer the same which had kept
him from succumbing to their complete domination.

"Name--Shann Lantee, man--yes." The other accepted those, "Terran?" That
was a question.

Did these people have any notion of space travel? Could they understand
the concept of another world holding intelligent beings?

"I come from another world...." He tried to make a clean-cut picture in
his mind--a globe in space, a ship blasting free....

"Look!" The fingers still rested between his eyebrows, but with her
other hand the Warlockian was pointing up to the dome of the cavern.

Shann followed her order. He studied those patches of light which had
seemed so vaguely familiar at his first sighting, studying them closely
to know them for what they were. A star map! A map of the heavens as
they could be seen from the outer crust of Warlock.

"Yes, I come from the stars," he answered, booming with his voice.

The fingers dropped from his forehead; the scaled head swung around to
exchange glances, which were perhaps some unheard communication with
the other three. Then the hand was extended again.

"Come!"

Fingers fell from his head to his right wrist, closing there with
surprising strength; and some of that strength together with a new
energy flowed from them into him, so that he found and kept his feet as
the other drew him up.




12. THE VEIL OF ILLUSION


Perhaps his status was that of a prisoner, but Shann was too tired to
press for an explanation. He was content to be left alone in the unusual
circular, but roofless, room of the structure to which they had brought
him. There was a thick mat-like pallet in one corner, short for the
length of his body, but softer than any bed he had rested on since he
had left the Terran camp before the coming of the Throgs. Above him
glimmered those patches of light symbolizing the lost stars. He blinked
at them until they all ran together in bands like the jeweled coils on
Warlockian bodies; then he slept--dreamlessly.

The Terran awoke with all his senses alert; some silent alarm might have
triggered that instant awareness of himself and his surroundings. There
had been no change in the star pattern still overhead; no one had
entered the round chamber. Shann rolled over on his mat bed, conscious
that all his aches had vanished. Just as his mind was clearly active, so
did his body also respond effortlessly to his demands. He was not aware
of any hunger or thirst, though a considerable length of time must have
passed since he had made his mysteriously contrived exit from the outer
world.

In spite of the humidity of the air, his ragged garments had dried on
his body. Shann got to his feet, trying to order the sorry remnants of
his uniform, eager to be on the move. Though to where and for what
purpose he could not have answered.

The door through which he had entered remained closed, refusing to
yield to his push. Shann stepped back, eyeing the distance to the top of
the partition between the roofless rooms. The walls were smooth with the
gloss of a sea shell's interior, but the exuberant confidence which had
been with him since his awakening refused to accept such a minor
obstacle.

He made two test leaps, both times his fingers striking the wall well
below the top of the partition. Shann gathered himself together as might
a cat and tried the third time, putting into that effort every last
ounce of strength, determination and will. He made it, though his arms
jerked as the weight of his body hung from his hands. Then a scramble, a
knee hooked over the top, and he was perched on the wall, able to study
the rest of the building.

In shape, the structure was unlike anything he had seen on his home
world or reproduced in any of the tri-dee records of Survey accessible
to him. The rooms were either circular or oval, each separated from the
next by a short passage, so that the overall impression was that of ten
strings of beads radiating from a central knot of one large chamber, all
with the uniform nacre walls and a limited amount of furnishings.

As he balanced on the narrow perch, Shann could sight no other movement
in the nearest line of rooms, those connected by corridors with his own.
He got to his feet to walk the tightrope of the upper walls toward that
inner chamber which was the heart of the Warlockian--palace? town?
apartment dwelling? At least it was the only structure on the island,
for he could see the outer rim of that smooth soft sand ringing it
about. The island itself was curiously symmetrical, a perfect oval, too
perfect to be a natural outcrop of sand and rock.

There was no day or night here in the cavern. The light from the roof
patches remained constantly the same, and that flow was abetted within
the building by a soft radiation from the walls. Shann reached the next
room in line, hunkering down to see within it. To all appearances the
chamber was exactly the same as the one he had just left; there were the
same unadorned walls, a thick mat bed against the far side, and no
indication whether it was in use or had not been entered for days.

He was on the next section of corridor wall when he caught that faint
taint in the air, the very familiar scent of wolverines. Now it provided
Shann with a guide as well as a promise of allies.

The next bead-room gave him what he wanted. Below him Taggi and Togi
paced back and forth. They had already torn to bits the sleeping mat
which had been the chamber's single furnishing, and their temper was
none too certain. As Shann squatted well above their range of vision,
Taggi reared against the opposite wall, his claws finding no hold on the
smooth coating of its surface. They were as competently imprisoned as if
they had been dropped into a huge fishbowl, and they were not taking to
it kindly.

How had the animals been brought here? Down that water tunnel by the
same unknown method he himself had been transported until that almost
disastrous awakening in the center of the flood? The Terran did not
doubt that the doors of the room were as securely fastened as those of
his own further down the corridor. For the moment the wolverines were
safe; he could not free them. And he was growing increasingly certain
that if he found any of his native jailers, it would be at the center of
that wheel of rooms and corridors.

Shann made no attempt to attract the animals' attention, but kept on
along his tightrope path. He passed two more rooms, both empty, both
differing in no way from those he had already inspected; and then he
came to the central chamber, four times as big as any of the rest and
with a much brighter wall light.

The Terran crouched, one hand on the surface of the partition top as an
additional balance, the other gripping his stunner. For some reason his
captors had not disarmed him. Perhaps they believed they had no
necessity to fear his off-world weapon.

"Have you grown wings?"

The words formed in his brain, bringing with them a sense of calm
amusement to reduce all his bold exploration to the level of a child's
first staggering steps. Shann fought his first answering flare of pure
irritation. To lose even a fraction of control was to open a door for
them. He remained where he was as if he had never "heard" that question,
surveying the room below with all the impassiveness he could summon.

Here the walls were no smooth barrier, but honeycombed with niches in a
regular pattern. And in each of the niches rested a polished skull, a
nonhuman skull. Only the outlines of those ranked bones were familiar;
for just so had looked the great purple-red rock where the wheeling
flyers issued from the eye sockets. A rock island had been fashioned
into a skull--by design or nature?

And upon closer observation the Terran could see that there was a
difference among these ranked skulls, a mutation of coloring from row to
row, a softening of outline, perhaps by the wearing of time.

There was also a table of dull black, rising from the flooring on legs
which were not more than a very few inches high, so that from his
present perch the board appeared to rest on the pavement itself. Behind
the table in a row, as shopkeepers might await a customer, three of the
Warlockians, seated cross-legged on mats, their hands folded primly
before them. And at the side a fourth, the one whom he had trapped on
the island.

Not one of those spiked heads rose to view him. But they knew that he
was there; perhaps they had known the very instant he had left the room
or cell in which they had shut him. And they were so very sure of
themselves.... Once again Shann subdued a spark of anger. That same
patience with its core of stubborn determination which had brought him
to Warlock backed his moves now. The Terran swung down, landing lightly
on his feet, facing the three behind the table, towering well over them
as he stood erect, yet gaining no sense of satisfaction from that merely
physical fact.

"You have come." The words sounded as if they might be a part of some
polite formula. So he replied in kind and aloud.

"I have come." Without waiting for their bidding, he dropped into the
same cross-legged pose, fronting them now on a more equal level across
their dead black table.

"And why have you come, star voyager?" That thought seemed to be a
concentrated effort from all three rather than any individual
questioning.

"And why did you bring me?" He hesitated, trying to think of some polite
form of address. Those he knew which were appropriate to their sex on
other worlds seemed incongruous when applied to the bizarre figures now
facing him. "Wise ones," he finally chose.

Those unblinking yellow eyes conveyed no emotion; certainly his human
gaze could detect no change of expression on their nonhuman faces.

"You are a male."

"I am," he agreed, not seeing just what that fact had to do with either
diplomatic fencing or his experiences of the immediate past.

"Where then is your thoughtguider?"

Shann puzzled over that conception, guessed at its meaning.

"I am my own thoughtguider," he returned stoutly, with all the
conviction he could manage to put into that reply.

Again he met a yellow-green stare, but he sensed a change in them. Some
of their complacency had ebbed; his reply had been as a stone dropped
into a quiet pool, sending ripples out afar to disturb the customary
mirror surface of smooth serenity.

"The star-born one speaks the truth!" That came from the Warlockian who
had been his first contact.

"It would appear that he does." The agreement was measured, and Shann
knew that he was meant to "overhear" that.

"It would seem, Readers-of-the-rods"--the middle one of the triumvirate
at the table spoke now--"that all living things do not follow our
pattern of life. But that is possible. A male who thinks for himself ...
unguided, who dreams perhaps! Or who can understand the truth of
dreaming! Strange indeed must be his people. Sharers-of-my-visions, let
us consult the Old Ones concerning this." For the first time one of
those crested heads moved, the gaze shifted from Shann to the ranks of
the skulls, pausing at one.

Shann, ready for any wonder, did not betray his amazement when the ivory
inhabitant of that particular niche moved, lifted from its small
compartment, and drifted buoyantly through the air to settle at the
right-hand corner of the table. Only when it had safely grounded did the
eyes of the Warlockian move to another niche on the other side of the
curving room, this time bringing up from close to floor level a
time-darkened skull to occupy the left corner of the table.

There was a third shifting from the weird storehouse, a last skull to
place between the other two. And now the youngest native arose from her
mat to bring a bowl of green crystal. One of her seniors took it in both
hands, making a gesture of offering it to all three skulls, and then
gazed over its rim at the Terran.

"We shall cast the rods, man-who-thinks-without-a-guide. Perhaps then we
shall see how strong _your_ dreams are--to be bent to your using, or to
break you for your impudence."

Her hands swayed the bowl from side to side, and there was an answering
whisper from its interior as if the contents slid loosely there. Then
one of her companions reached forward and gave a quick tap to the bottom
of that container, spilling out upon the table a shower of brightly
colored slivers each an inch or so long.

Shann, staring at the display in bewilderment, saw that in spite of the
seeming carelessness of that toss the small needles had spread out on
the blank surface to form a design in arrangement and color. And he
wondered how that skillful trick had been accomplished.

All three of the Warlockians bent their heads to study the grouping of
the tiny sticks, their young subordinate leaning forward also, her
eagerness less well controlled than her elders'. And now it was as if a
curtain had fallen between the Terran and the aliens, all sense of
communication which had been with him since he had entered the
skull-lined chamber was summarily cut off.

A hand moved, making the jeweled pattern--braceleting wrist and
extending up the arm--flash subdued fire. Fingers swept the sticks back
into the bowl; four pairs of yellow eyes raised to regard Shann once
more, but the blanket of their withdrawal still held.

The youngest Warlockian took the bowl from the elder who held it, stood
for a long moment with it resting between her palms, fixing Shann with
an unreadable stare. Then she came toward him. One of those at the table
put out a restraining hand.

This time Shann did _not_ master his start as he heard the first audible
voice which had not been his own. The skull at the left hand on the
table, by its yellowed color the oldest of those summoned from the
niches, was moving, moving because its jaws gaped and then snapped,
emitting a faint bleat which might have been a word or two.

She who would have halted the young Warlockian's advance, withdrew her
hand. Then her fingers curled in an unmistakable beckoning gesture.
Shann came to the table, but he could not quite force himself near that
chattering skull, even though it had stopped its jig of speech.

The bowl of sticks was offered to him. Still no message from mind to
mind, but he could guess at what they wanted of him. The crystal
substance was not cool to the touch as he had expected; rather it was
warm, as living flesh might feel. And the colored sticks filled about
