
       *       *       *       *       *

But that brilliant mirror was not as vulnerable as Stevens had supposed.
The plane of force struck and clung, but could not penetrate it. Broken
up into myriads of scintillating crystals of light, intersecting,
multi-colored rays, and cascading flares of sparkling energy, the beam
was reflected, thrown back, hurled away on all sides into space in
coruscating, blinding torrents. And neither was the monster globe
inoffensive. The straining watchers saw a port open suddenly, emit a
flame-erupting something, and close as rapidly as it had opened. That
something was a projectile, its propelling rockets fiercely aflame; as
smoothly brilliant as its mother-ship and seemingly as impervious to the
lethal beams of the common foe. Detected almost instantly as it was, it
received the full power of the savage attack. The hitherto irresistible
plane of force beat upon it; ultra-violet, infra-red, and heat rays
enveloped it; there were hurled against it all the forces known to the
scientific minds within that fiendishly destructive sphere.

Finally, only a scant few hundreds of yards from its goal, the
protective mirror was punctured and the freight of high explosive let
go, with a silent, but nevertheless terrific, detonation. But now
another torpedo was on its way, and another, and another; boring on
ruthlessly toward the smaller sphere. Fighting simultaneously three
torpedos and the giant globe, the enemy began dodging, darting hither
and thither with a stupendous acceleration; but the tiny pursuers could
not be shaken off. At every dodge and turn, steering rockets burst into
furious activity and the projectiles rushed ever nearer. Knowing that
she had at last encountered a superior force, the sphere turned in
mad flight; but, prodigious as was her acceleration, the torpedoes
were faster and all three of them struck her at once. There ensued
an explosion veritably space-racking in its intensity; a flash of
incandescent brilliance that seemed to fill all space, subsiding into
a vast volume of tenuous gas which, feebly glowing, flowed about and
attached itself to Cantrell's Comet. And in the space where had been
the enemy sphere, there was nothing.

A slow-creeping pale blue rod of tangible force reached out from the
great sphere, touched the wreckage of the _Forlorn Hope_, and pulled;
gently, but with enormous power.

"Tractor beams again!" exclaimed Stevens, still at the plate.
"Everybody's got 'em but us, it seems."

"And we can't fight a bit any more, can we?"

"Not a chance--bows and arrows wouldn't do us much good. However, we may
not need 'em. Since they fought that other crew, and haven't blown us
up, they aren't active enemies of ours, and may be friendly. I haven't
any idea who or what they are, since even our communicator ray can't get
through that mirror, but it looks as though our best bet is to act
peaceable and see if we can't talk to them in some way. Right?"

"Right." They stepped out into the airlock, from which they saw that
the great sphere had halted only a few yards from them, and that an
indistinct figure stood in an open door, waving to them an unmistakable
invitation to enter the strange vessel.

"Shall we, Steve?"

"Might as well. They've got us foul, and can take us if they want us.
Anyway, we'll need at least a week to fix us up any kind of driving
power, so we can't run--and we probably couldn't get away from those
folks if we had all our power. They haven't blown us up, and they could
have done it easily enough. Besides, they act friendly, so we'd better
meet them half way. Dive!"

Floating toward the open doorway, they were met by another rod of force,
brought gently into the airlock, and supported upright beside the being
who had invited them to visit him. Apparently an empty space-suit stood
there; a peculiarly-fitted suit of some partially transparent, flexible,
glass-like material; towering fully a foot over the head of the tall
Terrestrial. Closer inspection, however, revealed that there was
something inside that suit--a shadowy, weirdly-transparent being,
staring at them with large, black eyes. The door clanged shut behind
them; they heard the faint hiss of inrushing air, and the inner door
opened; but their enveloping suits remained stretched almost as tightly
as ever. They felt the floor lurch beneath their feet, and a little
weight was granted them as the space-ship got under way. Stevens waved
his arms vigorously at the stranger, pointing backward toward where he
supposed their own craft to be. The latter waved an arm reassuringly,
pressed a contact, and a section of the wall suddenly became
transparent. Through it Stevens saw with satisfaction that the _Forlorn
Hope_ was not being abandoned; in the grip of powerful tractor beams,
every fragment of the wreckage was following close behind them in their
flight through space.

       *       *       *       *       *

Stevens and Nadia followed their guide along a corridor, through several
doors, and into a large room, which at first glance seemed empty, but
in which several of the peculiarly transparent people of the craft were
lying about upon cushions. They were undoubtedly human--but what humans!
Tall and reedy they were, with enormous barrel chests, topped by heads
which, though really large, appeared insignificant because of the
prodigious chests and because of the huge, sail-like, flapping ears.
Their skins were a strikingly, livid, pale blue, absolutely devoid of
hair; and their lidless eyes, without a sign of iris, were chillingly
horrible in their stark contrast of enormous, glaring black pupil and
ghastly, transparent blue eyeball.

As the two Terrestrials entered the room, the beings struggled to their
feet and hurried laboriously away. Soon one of them returned, dressed in
an insulating suit, and carrying three sets of head harnesses, connected
by multiplex cables to a large box which he placed upon the floor.
He handed the headsets to the first officer, who in turn placed two of
them at the feet of the Terrestrials, indicating to them that they were
to follow his example in placing them upon their heads, outside the
helmets. They did so, and even through the almost perfect insulation,
and in spite of the powerful heaters of their suits, they felt a touch
of frightful cold. The stranger turned a dial, and the two wanderers
from Earth were instantly in full mental communication with Barkovis,
the commander of a space-ship of Titan, the sixth satellite of Saturn!

"Well, I'll be ... say, what is this, anyway?" Steve exclaimed
involuntarily, and Nadia smiled as Barkovis answered with a thought,
clearer than any spoken words.

"It is a thought-exchanger. I do not know its fundamental mechanism,
since we did not invent it and since I have had little time to study
it. The apparatus, practically as you see it here, was discovered but a
short time ago, in a small, rocket-propelled space-ship which we found
some distance outside of the orbit of Jupiter. Its source of power had
been destroyed by the cold of outer space, but re-powering it was, of
course, a small matter. The crew of the vessel were all dead. They
were, however, of human stock, and of a type adapted for life upon
a satellite. I deduce, from your compact structure, your enormous
atmospheric pressure, and your, to us, unbelievably high body
temperature, that you must be planet-dwellers. I suppose that you
are natives of Jupiter?"

"Not quite." Stevens had in a measure recovered from his stunned
surprise. "We are from Tellus, the third planet," and he revealed
rapidly the events leading up to their present situation, concluding:
"The people in the other sphere were, we believe, natives of Jupiter or
of one of the satellites. We know nothing of them, since we could not
look through their screens. You rescued us from them; do you not know
them?"

"No. Our visirays also were stopped by their screens of force--screens
entirely foreign to our science. This is the first time that any
vessel from our Saturnian system has ever succeeded in reaching the
neighborhood of Jupiter. We came in peace, but they attacked us at sight
and we were obliged to destroy them. Now we must hurry back to Titan,
for two reasons. First, because we are already at the extreme limit
of our power range and Jupiter is getting further and further away
from Saturn. Second because our mirrors, which we had thought perfect
reflectors of all frequencies possible of generation, are not perfect.
Enough of those forces came through the mirrors to volatilize half our
crew, and in a few minutes more none of us would have been left alive.
Why, in some places our very atmosphere became almost hot enough to melt
water! If another of those vessels should attack us, in all probability
we should all be lost. Therefore we are leaving as rapidly as is
possible."

"You are taking the pieces of our ship along--we do not want to encumber
you."

"It is no encumbrance, since we have ample supplies of power. In fact,
we are now employing the highest acceleration we Titanians can endure
for any length of time."

Stevens pondered long, forgetting that his thoughts were plain as print
to the Titanian commander. Thank Heaven these strangers had sense enough
to be friendly--all intelligent races should be friends, for mutual
advancement. But it was a mighty long stretch to Saturn and this
acceleration wasn't so much. How long would it take to get there? Could
they get back? Wouldn't they save time by casting themselves adrift,
making the repairs most urgently needed, and going back to Ganymede
under their own power? But would they have enough power left in the
wreck to get even that far? And how about the big tube? He was
interrupted by an insistent thought from Barkovis.

"You will save time, Stevens, by coming with us to Titan. There we shall
aid you in repairing your vessel and in completing your transmitting
tube, in which we shall be deeply interested. Our power plants shall
supply you with energy for your return journey until you are close
enough to Jupiter to recover your own beam. You are tired. I would
suggest that you rest--that you sleep long and peacefully."

"You seem to be handling the _Forlorn Hope_ without any trouble--the
pieces aren't grinding at all. We'd better live there, hadn't we?"

"Yes that would be best, for all of us. You could not live a minute here
without your suits; and, efficiently insulated as those suits are, yet
your incandescent body temperature makes our rooms unbearably hot--so
hot that any of us must wear a space-suit while in the same room with
you, to avoid being burned to death."

"The incandescently hot" Terrestrials were wafted into the open airlock
of their lifeboat upon a wand of force, and soon had prepared a long
overdue supper, over which Stevens cast his infectious, boyish grin at
Nadia.

"Sweetheart, you are undoubtedly a 'warm number,' and you have often
remarked that I 'burn you up.' Nevertheless I think that we were both
considerably surprised to discover that we are both hot enough actually
to consume persons unfortunate enough to be confined in the same room
with us!"

"You're funny, Steve--like a crutch," she rebuked him, but smiled back,
an elusive dimple playing in one lovely brown cheek. "Looking right
through anybody is too ghastly for words, but I think they're perfectly
all x, anyway, in spite of their being so hideous and so cold-blooded!"




CHAPTER VI

A Frigid Civilization


"Hi, Percival Van Schravendyck Stevens!" Nadia strode purposely into
Stevens' room and seized him by the shoulder. "Are you going to sleep
all the way to Saturn? You answered me when I pounded on the partition
with a hammer, but I don't believe that you woke up at all. Get up,
you--breakfast will be all spoiled directly!"

"Huh?" Stevens opened one sluggish eye; then, as the full force of the
insult penetrated his consciousness, he came wide awake. "Lay off those
names, ace, or you'll find yourself walking back home!" he threatened.

"All x by me!" she retorted. "I might as well go home if you're going
to sleep _all_ the time!" and she widened her expressive eyes at him
impishly as she danced blithely back into the control room. As she went
out she slammed his door with a resounding clang, and Stevens pried
himself out of his bunk one joint at a time, dressed, and made himself
presentable.

"Gosh!" he yawned mightily as he joined the girl at breakfast. "I don't
know when I've had such a gorgeous sleep. How do you get by on so
little?"

"I don't. I sleep a lot, but I do it every night, instead of working for
four days and nights on end and then trying to make up all those four
nights' sleep at once. I'm going to break you of that, too, Steve, if
it's the last thing I ever do."

"There might be certain advantages in it, at that," he conceded, "but
sometimes you've got to do work when it's got to be done, instead of
just between sleeps. However, I'll try to do better. Certainly it is
a wonderful relief to get out of that mess, isn't it?"

"I'll say it is! But I wish that those folks were more like people.
They're nice, I think, really, but they're so ... so ... well, so
ghastly that it simply gives me the blue shivers just to look at one
of them!"

"They're pretty gruesome, no fooling," he agreed, "but you get used to
things like that. I just about threw a fit the first time I ever saw
a Martian, and the Venerians are even worse in some ways--they're so
clammy and dead-looking--but now I've got real friends on both planets.
One thing, though, gives me the pip. I read a story a while ago--the
latest best-seller thing of Thornton's named 'Interstellar Slush' or
some such tr...."

"Cleophora--An Interstellar Romance," she corrected him. "I thought it
was wonderful!"

"I didn't. It's fundamentally unsound. Look at our nearest neighbors,
who probably came from the same original stock we did. A Tellurian
can admire, respect, or like a Venerian, yes. But for _loving_ one of
them--wow! Beauty is purely relative, you know. For instance, I think
that you are the most perfectly beautiful thing I ever saw; but no
Venerian would think so. Far from it. Any Martian that hadn't seen many
of us would have to go rest his eyes after taking one good look at
you. Considering what love means, it doesn't stand to reason that any
Tellurian woman could possibly fall in love with any man not of her own
breed. Any writer is wrong who indulges in interplanetary love affairs
and mad passions. They simply don't exist. They _can't_ exist--they're
against all human instincts."

"Inter-planetary--in this solar system--yes. But the Dacrovos were just
like us, only nicer."

"That's what gives me the pip. If our own cousins of the same solar
system are so repulsive to us, how would we be affected by entirely
alien forms of intelligence?"

"May be you're right, of course--but you may be wrong, too," she
insisted. "The Universe is big enough, so that people like the Dacrovos
may possibly exist in it somewhere. May be the Big Three will discover a
means of interstellar travel--then I'll get to see them myself, perhaps."

"Yes, and _if_ we do, and _if_ you ever see any such people, I'll bet
that the sight of them will make your hair curl right up into a ball,
too! But about Barkovis--remember how diplomatic the thoughts were that
he sent us? He described our structure as being 'compact,' but I got the
undertone of his real thoughts, as well. Didn't you?"

"Yes, now that you mention it, I did. He really thought that we were
white-hot, under-sized, overpowered, warty, hairy, hideously opaque and
generally repulsive little monstrosities--thoroughly unpleasant and
distasteful. But he was friendly, just the same. Heavens, Steve! Do you
suppose that he read our real thoughts, too?"

"Sure he did; but he is intelligent enough to make allowances, the same
as we are doing. He isn't any more insulted than we are. He knows that
such feelings are ingrained and cannot be changed."

       *       *       *       *       *

Breakfast over, they experienced a new sensation. For the first time in
months they had nothing to do! Used as they were to being surrounded by
pressing tasks, they enjoyed their holiday immensely for a few hours.
Sitting idly at the communicator plate, they scanned the sparkling
heavens with keen interest. Beneath them Jupiter was a brilliant
crescent not far from the sun in appearance, which latter had already
grown perceptibly smaller and less bright. Above them, and to their
right, Saturn shone refulgently, his spectacular rings plainly visible.
All about them were the glories of the firmament, which never fail to
awe the most seasoned observer. But idleness soon became irksome to
those two active spirits, and Stevens prowled restlessly about their
narrow quarters.

"I'm going to go to work before I go dippy," he soon declared. "They've
got lots of power, and we can rig up a transmitter unit to send it over
here to our receptor. Then I can start welding the old _Hope_ together
without waiting until we get to Titan to start it. Think I'll signal
Barkovis to come over, and see what he thinks about it."

The Titanian commander approved the idea, and the transmitting field was
quickly installed. Nadia insisted that she, too, needed to work, and
that she was altogether too good a mechanic to waste; therefore the two
again labored mightily together, day after day. But the girl limited
rigidly their hours of work to those of the working day; and evening
after evening Barkovis visited with them for hours. Dressed in his heavy
space-suit and supported by a tractor beam well out of range of what
seemed to him terrific heat radiated by the bodies of the Terrestrials,
he floated along unconcernedly; while over the multiplex cable of the
thought-exchanger he conversed with the man and woman seated just inside
