they kidnapped me to make me give them back. They haven't dared kill me
so far for fear the evidence will show up after my death--which it will.
However, I will be legally dead before long, and then they know the
whole thing will come out, so they have brought me out here to make me
talk or kill me. Talking won't do me any good now, though, and I don't
believe it ever would have. They would have killed me after they got the
stuff back, anyway. So you see I, at least, will never get back to the
earth alive."

"Cheer up--we'll all get back safely."

"No, we won't. You don't know that man Perkins--if that is his name. I
never heard him called any real name before. He is simply
unspeakable--vile--hideous--everything that is base. He was my jailer,
and I utterly loathe and despise him. He is mean and underhanded and
tricky--he reminds me of a slimy, poisonous snake. He will kill me: I
know it."

"But how about Doctor DuQuesne? Surely he isn't that kind of man? He
wouldn't let him."

"I've never met him before, but from what I heard of him in the office,
he's even worse than Perkins, but in an entirely different way. There's
nothing small or mean about him, and I don't believe he would go out of
his way to hurt anyone, as Perkins would. But he is absolutely cold and
hard, a perfect fiend. Where his interests are concerned, there's
nothing under the sun, good or bad, that he won't do. But I'm glad that
Perkins had me instead of 'The Doctor,' as they call him. Perkins raises
such a bitter personal feeling, that anybody would rather die than give
up to him in anything. DuQuesne, however, would have tortured me
impersonally and scientifically--cold and self-contained all the while
and using the most efficient methods, and I am sure he would have got it
out of me some way. He always gets what he goes after."

"Oh, come, Miss Spencer!" Dorothy interrupted the half-hysterical girl.
"You're too hard on him. Didn't you see him knock Perkins down when he
came after me?"

"Well, maybe he has a few gentlemanly instincts, which he uses when he
doesn't lose anything by it. More likely he merely intended to rebuke
him for a useless action. He is a firm Pragmatist--anything that is
useful is all right, anything that is useless is a crime. More probably
yet, he wants you left alive. Of course that is his real reason. He went
to the trouble of kidnapping you, so naturally he won't let Perkins or
anybody else kill you until he is through with you. Otherwise he would
have let Perkins do anything he wanted to with you, without lifting a
finger."

"I can't quite believe that," Dorothy replied, though a cold chill
struck at her heart as she remembered the inhuman crime attributed to
this man, and she quailed at the thought of being in his charge,
countless millions of miles from earth, a thought only partly
counteracted by the fact that she was now armed. "He has treated us with
every consideration so far, let's hope for the best. Anyway, I'm sure
that we'll get back safely."

"Why so sure? Have you something up your sleeve?"

"No--or yes, in a way I have, though nothing very definite. I'm Dorothy
Vaneman, and I am engaged to the man who discovered the thing that makes
this space-car go...."

"That's why they kidnapped you, then--to make him give up all his rights
to it. It's like them."

"Yes, I think that's why they did it. But they won't keep me long. Dick
Seaton will find me, I know. I feel it."

"But that's exactly what they want!" cried Margaret excitedly. "In my
spying around I heard a little about this very thing--the name Seaton
brings it to my mind. His car is broken in some way, so that it will
kill him the first time he tries to run it."

"That's where they underestimated Dick and his partner. You have heard
of Martin Crane, of course?"

"I think I heard his name mentioned in the office, together with
Seaton's, but that's all."

"Well, besides other things, Martin is quite a wonderful mechanic, and
he found out that our Skylark was spoiled. So they built another one, a
lot bigger, and I am sure that they are following us, right now."

"But how can they possibly follow us, when we are going so fast and are
so far away?" queried the other girl, once more despondent.

"I don't quite know, but I do know that Dick will find a way. He's
simply wonderful. He knows more now than that Doctor DuQuesne will ever
learn in all his life, and he will find us in a few days. I feel it in
my bones. Besides, I picked Perkins' pockets of these two pistols. Can
you shoot an automatic?"

"Yes," replied the other girl, as she seized one of the guns, assured
herself that its magazine was full, and slipped it into her pocket. "I
used to practise a lot with my father's. This makes me feel a whole lot
better. And call me Peggy, won't you? It will seem good to hear my name
again. After what I've been through lately, even this trip will be a
vacation for me."

"Well, then, cheer up, Peggy dear, we're going to be great friends.
Let's go get us all something to eat. I'm simply starved, and I know you
are, too."

       *       *       *       *       *

The presence of the pistol in her pocket and Dorothy's unwavering faith
in her lover, lifted the stranger out of the mood of despair into which
the long imprisonment, the brutal treatment, and the present situation
had plunged her, and she was almost cheerful as they drew themselves
along the hand-rail leading to the tiny galley.

"I simply can't get used to the idea of nothing having any weight--look
here!" laughed Dorothy, as she took a boiled ham out of the refrigerator
and hung it upon an imaginary hook in the air, where it remained
motionless. "Doesn't it make you feel funny?"

"It is a queer sensation. I feel light, like a toy balloon, and I feel
awfully weird inside. If we have no weight, why does it hurt so when we
bump into anything? And when you throw anything, like the Doctor did
Perkins, why does it hit as hard as ever?"

"It's mass or inertia or something like that. A thing has it everywhere,
whether it weighs anything or not. Dick explained it all to me. I
understood it when he told me about it, but I'm afraid it didn't sink in
very deep. Did you ever study physics?"

"I had a year of it in college, but it was more or less of a joke. I
went to a girls' school, and all we had to do in physics was to get the
credit; we didn't have to learn it."

"Me too. Next time I go to school I'm going to Yale or Harvard or some
such place, and I'll learn so much mathematics and science that I'll
have to wear a bandeau to keep my massive intellect in place."

During this conversation they had prepared a substantial luncheon and
had arranged it daintily upon two large trays, in spite of the
difficulty caused by the fact that nothing would remain in place by its
own weight. The feast prepared, Dorothy took her tray from the table as
carefully as she could, and saw the sandwiches and bottles start to
float toward the ceiling. Hastily inverting the tray above the escaping
viands, she pushed them back down upon the table. In doing so she lifted
herself clear from the floor, as she had forgotten to hold herself down.

"What'll we do, anyway?" she wailed when she had recovered her position.
"Everything wants to fly all over the place!"

"Put another tray on top of it and hold them together," suggested
Margaret. "I wish we had a birdcage. Then we could open the door and
grab a sandwich as it flies out."

By covering the trays the girls finally carried the luncheon out into
the main compartment, where they gave DuQuesne and Perkins one of the
trays and all fell to eating hungrily. DuQuesne paused with a glint of
amusement in his one sound eye as he saw Dorothy trying to pour ginger
ale out of a bottle.

"It can't be done, Miss Vaneman. You'll have to drink it through a
straw. That will work, since our air pressure is normal. Be careful not
to choke on it, though; your swallowing will have to be all muscular out
here. Gravity won't help you. Or wait a bit--I have the control board
fixed and it will be a matter of only a few minutes to put in another
bar and get enough acceleration to take the place of gravity."

He placed one of the extra power bars in the chamber and pushed the
speed lever into the first notch, and there was a lurch of the whole
vessel as it swung around the bar so that the floor was once more
perpendicular to it. He took a couple of steps, returned, and advanced
the lever another notch.

"There that's about the same as gravity. Now we can act like human
beings and eat in comfort."

"That's a wonderful relief, Doctor!" cried Dorothy. "Are we going back
toward the earth?"

"Not yet. I reversed the bar, but we will have to use up all of this one
before we can even start back. Until this bar is gone we will merely be
slowing down."

       *       *       *       *       *

As the meal progressed, Dorothy noticed that DuQuesne's left arm seemed
almost helpless, and that he ate with great difficulty because of his
terribly bruised face. As soon as they had removed the trays she went
into her room, where she had seen a small medicine chest, and brought
out a couple of bottles.

"Lie down here, Doctor DuQuesne," she commanded. "I'm going to apply a
little first-aid to the injured. Arnica and iodine are all I can find,
but they'll help a little."

"I'm all right," began the scientist, but at her imperious gesture he
submitted, and she bathed his battered features with the healing lotion
and painted the worst bruises with iodine.

"I see your arm is lame. Where does it hurt?"

"Shoulder's the worst. I rammed it through the board when we started
out."

He opened his shirt at the throat and bared his shoulder, and Dorothy
gasped--as much at the size and power of the muscles displayed, as at
the extent and severity of the man's injuries. Stepping into the
gallery, she brought out hot water and towels and gently bathed away the
clotted blood that had been forced through the skin.

"Massage it a little with the arnica as I move the arm," he directed
coolly, and she did so, pityingly. He did not wince and made no sign of
pain, but she saw beads of perspiration appear upon his face, and
wondered at his fortitude.

"That's fine," he said gratefully as she finished, and a peculiar
expression came over his face. "It feels one hundred per cent better
already. But why do you do it? I should think you would feel like
crowning me with that basin instead of playing nurse."

"Efficiency," she replied with a smile. "I'm taking a leaf out of your
own book. You are our chief engineer, you know, and it won't do to have
you laid up."

"That's a logical explanation, but it doesn't go far enough," he
rejoined, still studying her intently. She did not reply, but turned to
Perkins.

"How are you, Mr. Perkins? Do you require medical attention?"

"No," growled Perkins from the seat in which he had crouched immediately
after eating. "Keep away from me, or I'll cut your heart out!"

"Shut up!" snapped DuQuesne. "Remember what I said?"

"I haven't done anything," snarled the other.

"I said I would throw you out if you made another break," DuQuesne
informed him evenly, "and I meant it. If you can't talk decently, keep
still. Understand that you are to keep off Miss Vaneman, words and
actions. I am in charge of her, and I will put up with no interference
whatever. This is your last warning."

"How about Spencer, then?"

"I have nothing to say about her, she's not mine," responded DuQuesne
with a shrug.

An evil light appeared in Perkins' eyes and he took out a wicked-looking
knife and began to strop it carefully upon the leather of the seat,
glaring at his victim the while.

"Well, _I_ have something to say...." blazed Dorothy, but she was
silenced by a gesture from Margaret, who calmly took the pistol from her
pocket, jerked the slide back, throwing a cartridge into the chamber,
and held the weapon up on one finger, admiring it from all sides.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Don't worry about his knife. He has been sharpening it for my benefit
for the last month. He doesn't mean anything by it."

At this unexpected show of resistance, Perkins stared at her for an
instant, then glanced at his coat.

"Yes, this was yours, once. You needn't bother about picking up your
coat, they're both gone. You might be tempted to throw that knife, so
drop it on the floor and kick it over to me before I count three.

"One." The heavy pistol steadied into line with his chest and her finger
tightened on the trigger.

"Two." He obeyed and she picked up the knife. He turned to DuQuesne, who
had watched the scene unmoved, a faint smile upon his saturnine face.

"Doctor!" he cried, shaking with fear. "Why don't you shoot her or take
that gun away from her? Surely you don't want to see me murdered?"

"Why not?" replied DuQuesne calmly. "It is nothing to me whether she
kills you or you kill her. You brought it on yourself by your own
carelessness. Any man with brains doesn't leave guns lying around within
reach of prisoners, and a blind man could have seen Miss Vaneman getting
your hardware."

"You saw her take them and didn't warn me?" croaked Perkins.

"Why should I warn you? If you can't take care of your own prisoner she
earns her liberty, as far as I am concerned. I never did like your
style, Perkins, especially your methods of handling--or rather
mishandling--women. You could have made her give up the stuff she
recovered from that ass Brookings inside of an hour, and wouldn't have
had to kill her afterward, either."

"How?" sneered the other. "If you are so good at that kind of thing, why
didn't you try it on Seaton and Crane?"

"There are seven different methods to use on a woman like Miss Spencer,
each of which will produce the desired result. The reason I did not try
them on either Seaton or Crane is that they would have failed. Your
method of indirect action is probably the only one that will succeed.
That is why I adopted it."

"Well, what are you going to do about it?" shrieked Perkins. "Are you
going to sit there and lecture all day?"

"I am going to do nothing whatever," answered the scientist coldly. "If
you had any brains you would see that you are in no danger. Miss Spencer
will undoubtedly kill you if you attack her--not otherwise. That is an
Anglo-Saxon weakness."

"Did you see me take the pistols?" queried Dorothy.

"Certainly. I'm not blind. You have one of them in your right coat
pocket now."

"Then why didn't you, or don't you, try to take it away from me?" she
asked in wonder.

"If I had objected to your having them, you would never have got them.
If I didn't want you to have a gun now, I would take it away from you.
You know that, don't you?" and his black eyes stared into her violet
ones with such calm certainty of his ability that she felt her heart
sink.

"Yes," she admitted finally, "I believe you could--that is, unless I
were angry enough to shoot you."

"That wouldn't help you. I can shoot faster and straighter than you can,
and would shoot it out of your hand. However, I have no objection to
your having the gun, since it is no part of my plan to offer you any
further indignity of any kind. Even if you had the necessary coldness of
nerve or cruelty of disposition--of which I have one, Perkins the other,
and you neither--you wouldn't shoot me now, because you can't get back
to the earth without me. After we get back I will take the guns away
from both of you if I think it desirable. In the meantime, play with
them all you please."

"Has Perkins any more knives or guns or things in his room?" demanded
Dorothy.

"How should I know?" indifferently; then, as both girls started for
Perkins' room he ordered brusquely:

"Sit down, Miss Vaneman. Let them fight it out. Perkins has his orders
to lay off you--you lay off him. I'm not taking any chances of getting
you hurt, that's one reason I wanted you armed. If he gets gay, shoot
him; otherwise, hands off completely."

Dorothy threw up her head in defiance, but meeting his cold stare she
