"They've got some spherical space-ships, like Seaton's. I know they had
one, and they've probably built more of them since that time. Their
airships can't touch us, but those ball-shaped cruisers would be pure
poison for us, the way we are fixed now. Can you see any of them?"

"Not yet. Too far away to make out details. They're certainly having a
hot time down there, though, in that one spot."

They dropped lower, toward the stronghold which was being so stubbornly
defended by the inhabitants of the third planet of the fourteenth sun,
and so savagely attacked by the Kondalian forces.

"There, we can see what they're doing now," and DuQuesne anchored the
vessel with an attractor. "I want to see if they've got many of those
space-ships in action, and you will want to see what war is like, when
it is fought by people, who have been making war steadily for ten
thousand years."

Poised at the limit of clear visibility, the two men studied the
incessant battle being waged beneath them. They saw not one, but fully a
thousand of the globular craft high in the air and grouped in a great
circle around an immense fortification upon the ground below. They saw
no airships in the line of battle, but noticed that many such vessels
were flying to and from the front, apparently carrying supplies. The
fortress was an immense dome of some glassy, transparent material,
partially covered with slag, through which they saw that the central
space was occupied by orderly groups of barracks, and that round the
circumference were arranged gigantic generators, projectors, and other
machinery at whose purposes they could not even guess. From the base of
the dome a twenty-mile-wide apron of the same glassy substance spread
over the ground, and above this apron and around the dome were thrown
the mighty defensive ray-screens, visible now and then in scintillating
violet splendor as one of the copper-driven Kondalian projectors sought
in vain for an opening. But the Earth-men saw with surprise that the
main attack was not being directed at the dome; that only an occasional
ray was thrown against it in order to make the defenders keep their
screens up continuously. The edge of the apron was bearing the brunt of
that vicious and never-ceasing attack, and most concerned the desperate
defense.

For miles beyond that edge, and as deep under it as frightful rays and
enormous charges of explosive copper could penetrate, the ground was one
seething, flaming volcano of molten and incandescent lava; lava
constantly being volatilized by the unimaginable heat of those rays and
being hurled for miles in all directions by the inconceivable power of
those explosive copper projectiles--the heaviest projectiles that could
be used without endangering the planet itself--being directed under the
exposed edge of that unbreakable apron, which was in actuality anchored
to the solid core of the planet itself; lava flowing into and filling up
the vast craters caused by the explosions. The attack seemed fiercest at
certain points, perhaps a quarter of a mile apart around the circle, and
after a time the watchers perceived that at those points, under the edge
of the apron, in that indescribable inferno of boiling lava, destructive
rays, and disintegrating copper, there were enemy machines at work.
These machines were strengthening the protecting apron and extending it,
very slowly, but ever wider and ever deeper as the ground under it and
before it was volatilized or hurled away by the awful forces of the
Kondalian attack. So much destruction had already been wrought that the
edge of the apron and its molten moat were already fully a mile below
the normal level of that cratered, torn, and tortured plain.

Now and then one of the mechanical moles would cease its labors,
overcome by the concentrated fury of destruction centered upon it. Its
shattered remnants would be withdrawn and shortly, repaired or replaced,
it would be back at work. But it was not the defenders who had suffered
most heavily. The fortress was literally ringed about with the shattered
remnants of airships, and the riddled hulls of more than a few of those
mighty globular cruisers of the void bore mute testimony to the
deadliness and efficiency of the warfare of the invaders.

Even as they watched, one of the spheres, unable for some reason to
maintain its screens or overcome by the awful forces playing upon it,
flared from white into and through the violet and was hurled upward as
though shot from the mouth of some Brobdingnagian howitzer. A door
opened, and from its flaming interior four figures leaped out into the
air, followed by a puff of orange-colored smoke. At the first sign of
trouble, the ship next it in line leaped in front of it and the four
figures floated gently to the ground, supported by friendly attractors
and protected from enemy rays by the bulk and by the screens of the
rescuing vessel. Two great airships soared upward from back of the lines
and hauled the disabled vessel to the ground by means of their powerful
attractors. The two observers saw with amazement that after brief
attention from an ant-like ground-crew, the original four men climbed
back into their warship and she again shot into the fray, apparently as
good as ever.

"What do you know about that!" exclaimed DuQuesne. "That gives me an
idea, Loring. They must get to them that way fairly often, to judge by
the teamwork they use when it does happen. How about waiting until they
disable another one like that, and then grabbing it while its in the
air, deserted and unable to fight back? One of those ships is worth a
thousand of this one, even if we had everything known to the Osnomians."

"That's a real idea--those boats certainly are brutes for punishment,"
agreed Loring, and as both men again settled down to watch the battle,
he went on: "So this is war out this way? You're right. Seaton, with
half this stuff, could whip the combined armies and navies of the world.
I don't blame Brookings much, though, at that--nobody could believe half
of this unless they could actually see it, as we are doing."

"I can't understand it," DuQuesne frowned as he considered the
situation. "The attackers are Kondalians, all right--those ships are
developments of the _Skylark_--but I don't get that fort at all. Wonder
if it can be the strangers already? Don't think so--they aren't due for
a couple of years yet, and I don't think the Kondalians could stand
against them a minute. It must be what is left of Mardonale, although I
never heard of anything like that. Probably it is some new invention
they dug up at the last minute. That's it, I guess," and his brow
cleared. "It couldn't be anything else."

       *       *       *       *       *

They waited long for the incident to be repeated, and finally their
patience was rewarded. When the next vessel was disabled and hurled
upward by the concentration of enemy forces, DuQuesne darted down,
seized it with his most powerful attractor, and whisked it away into
space at such a velocity that to the eyes of the Kordalians it simply
disappeared. He took the disabled warship far out into space and allowed
it to cool off for a long time before deciding that it was safe to board
it. Through the transparent walls they could see no sign of life, and
DuQuesne donned a vacuum suit and stepped into the airlock. As Loring
held the steel vessel close to the stranger, DuQuesne leaped lightly
through the open door into the interior. Shutting the door, he opened an
auxiliary air-tank, adjusting the gauge to one atmosphere as he did so.
The pressure normal, he divested himself of the suit and made a thorough
examination of the vessel. He then signaled Loring to follow him, and
soon both ships were over Kondal, so high as to be invisible from the
ground. Plunging the vessel like a bullet towards the grove in which he
had left the Kondalian airship, he slowed abruptly just in time to make
a safe landing. As he stepped out upon Osnomian soil, Loring landed the
Earthly ship hardly less skillfully.

"This saves us a lot of trouble, Loring. This is undoubtedly one of the
finest space-ships of the Universe, and just about ready for anything."

"How did they get to it?"

"One of the screen generators apparently weakened a trifle, probably
from weeks of continuous use. That let some of the rays come through;
everything got hot, and the crew had to jump or roast. Nothing is hurt,
though, as the ship was thrown up and out of range before the arenak
melted at all. The copper repellers are gone, of course, and most of the
bars that were in use are melted down, but there was enough of the main
bar left to drive the ship and we can replace the melted stuff easily
enough. Nothing else was hurt, as there's absolutely nothing in the
structure of these vessels that can be burned. Even the insulation in
the coils and generators has a melting-point higher than that of
porcelain. And not all the copper was melted, either. Some of these
storerooms are lined with two feet of insulation and are piled full of
bars and explosive ammunition."

"What was the smoke we saw, then?"

"That was their food-supply. It's cooked to an ash, and their water was
all boiled away through the safety-valves. Those rays certainly can put
out a lot of heat in a second or two!"

"Can the two of us put on those copper repeller-bands? This ship must be
seventy-five feet in diameter."

"Yes, it's a lot bigger than the _Skylark_ was. It's one of their latest
models, or it wouldn't have been on the front line. As to banding on the
repellers--that's easy. That airship is half full of metal-working
machinery that can do everything but talk. I know how to use most of it,
from seeing it in use, and we can figure out the rest."

In that unfrequented spot there was little danger of detection from the
air. And none whatsoever of detection from the ground--of ground-travel
upon Osnome there is none. Nevertheless, the two men camouflaged the
vessels so that they were visible only to keen and direct scrutiny, and
drove their task through to completion on the shortest possible time.
The copper repellers were banded on, and much additional machinery was
installed in the already well-equipped shop. This done, they transferred
to their warship food, water, bedding, instruments, and everything else
they needed or wanted from their own ship and from the disabled
Kondalian airship. They made a last tour of inspection to be sure they
had overlooked nothing useful, then embarked.

"Think anybody will find those ships? They could get a good line on what
we've done."

"Probably, eventually, Loring, so we'd better destroy them. We'd better
take a short hop first, though, to test everything out. Since you're not
familiar with the controls of a ship of this type, you need practise.
Shoot us up around that moon over there and bring us back to this spot."

"She's a sweet-handling boat--easy like a bicycle," declared Loring as
he brought the vessel lightly to a landing upon their return. "We can
burn the old one up now. We'll never need her again, any more than a
snake needs his last year's skin."

"She's good, all right. Those two hulks must be put out of existence,
but we shouldn't do it here. The rays would set the woods afire, and the
metal would condense all around. We don't want to leave any tracks, so
we'd better pull them out into space to destroy them. We could turn them
loose, and as you've never worked a ray, it'll be good practice for you.
Also, I want you to see for yourself just what our best armour-plate
amounts to compared with arenak."

When they towed the two vessels far out into space, Loring put into
practise the instruction he had received from DuQuesne concerning the
complex armament of their vessel. He swung the beam-projector upon the
Kondalian airship, pressed the connectors of the softener ray, the heat
ray, and the induction ray, and threw the master switch. Almost
instantly the entire hull became blinding white, but it was several
seconds before the extremely refractory material began to volatilize.
Though the metal was less than an inch think, it retained its shape and
strength stubbornly, and only slowly did it disappear in flaming,
flaring gusts of incandescent gas.

"There, you've seen what an inch of arenak is like," said DuQuesne when
the destruction was complete. "Now shine it on that sixty-inch
chrome-vanadium armor hull of our old bus and see what happens."

Loring did so. As the beam touched it, the steel disappeared in one
flare of radiance--as he swung the projector in one flashing arc from
the stem to the stern there was nothing left. Loring, swinging the beam,
whistled in amazement.

"Wow! What a difference! And this ship of ours has a skin of arenak six
feet thick!"

"Yes. Now you understand why I didn't want to argue with anybody out
here as long as we were in our steel ship."

"I understand, all right; but I can't understand the power of these
rays. Suppose I had had all twenty of them on instead of only three?"

"In that case, I think that we could have whipped even the short, thick
strangers."

"You and me both. But say, every ship's got to have a name. This new one
of ours is such a sweet, harmless, inoffensive little thing, we'd better
name her the _Violet_, hadn't we?"

       *       *       *       *       *

DuQuesne started the _Violet_ off in the direction of the solar system
occupied by the warlike strangers, but he did not hurry. He and Loring
practiced incessantly for days at the controls, darting here and there,
putting on terrific acceleration until the indicators showed a velocity
of hundreds of thousand of miles per second, then reversing the
acceleration until the velocity was zero. They studied the controls and
alarm system until each knew perfectly every instrument, every tiny
light, and the tone of each bell. They practiced with the rays, singly
and in combination, with the visiplates, and with the many levers and
dials, until each was so familiar with the complex installation that his
handling of every control had become automatic. Not until then did
DuQuesne give the word to start out in earnest toward their goal, at an
unthinkable distance.

They had not been under way long when an alarm bell sounded its warning
and a brilliant green light began flashing upon the board.

"Hm ... m," DuQuesne frowned as he reversed the bar. "Outside
intra-atomic energy detector. Somebody's using power out here.
Direction, about dead ahead--straight down. Let's see if we can see
anything."

He swung number six, the telescopic visiplate, into connection. After
what seemed to them a long time they saw a sudden sharp flash,
apparently an immense distance ahead, and simultaneously three more
alarm bells rang and three colored lights flashed briefly.

"Somebody got quite a jolt then. Three rays in action at once for three
or four seconds," reported DuQuesne, as he applied still more negative
acceleration.

"I'd like to know what this is all about!" he exclaimed after a time, as
they saw a subdued glow, which lasted a minute or two. As the warning
light was flashing more and more slowly and with diminishing intensity,
the _Violet_ was once more put upon her course. As she proceeded,
however, the warnings of the liberation of intra-atomic energy grew
stronger and stronger, and both men scanned their path intensely for a
sight of the source of the disturbance, while their velocity was cut to
only a few hundred miles an hour. Suddenly the indicator swerved and
pointed behind them, showing that they had passed the object, whatever
it was. DuQuesne instantly applied power and snapped on a small
searchlight.

"If it's so small that we couldn't see it when we passed it, it's
nothing to be afraid of. We'll be able to find it with a light."

After some search, they saw an object floating in space-apparently a
vacuum suit!

"Shall one of us get in the airlock, or shall we bring it in with an
attractor?" asked Loring.

"An attractor, by all means. Two or three of them, in fact, to
spread-eagle whatever it is. Never take any chances. It's probably an
Osnomian, but you never can tell. It may be one of those other people.
We know they were around here a few weeks ago, and they're the only ones
I know of that have intra-atomic power besides us and the Osnomians."

"That's no Osnomian," he continued, as the stranger was drawn into the
airlock. "He's big enough around for four Osnomians, and very short.
We'll take no chances at all with that fellow."

The captive was brought into the control room pinioned head, hand, and
foot with attractors and repellers, before DuQuesne approached him. He
then read the temperature and pressure of the stranger's air-supply, and
allowed the surplus air to escape slowly before removing the stranger's
suit and revealing one of the Fenachrone--eyes closed, unconscious or
dead.

DuQuesne leaped for the educator and handed Loring a headset.

"Put this on quick. He may be only unconscious, and we might not be able
to get a thing from him if he were awake."

Loring donned the headset, still staring at the monstrous form with
amazement, not unmixed with awe, while DuQuesne, paying no attention to
anything except the knowledge he was seeking, manipulated the controls
of the instrument. His first quest was for the weapons and armament of
the vessel. In this he was disappointed, as he learned that the stranger
was one of the navigating engineers, and as such, had no detailed
knowledge of the matters of prime importance to the inquisitor. He did
have a complete knowledge of the marvelous Fenachrone propulsion system,
however, and this DuQuesne carefully transferred to his own brain. He
then rapidly explored other regions of that fearsome organ of thought.

As the gigantic and inhuman brain was spread before them, DuQuesne and
Loring read not only the language, customs, and culture of the
Fenachrone, but all their plans for the future, as well as the events of
the past. Plainly in his mind they perceived how he had been cast adrift
in the emptiness of the void. They saw the Fenachrone cruiser lying in
wait for the two globular vessels. Looking through an extraordinarily
powerful telescope with the eyes of their prisoner, they saw them
approach, all unsuspecting. DuQuesne recognized all five persons in the
