ever dreamed of.

The Dionysians had practiced for months, and almost everything was
represented. There were violinists prancing along, violists and a crew
of long-haired gentlemen and ladies playing the viol da gamba and the
viol d'amore; there were guitarists plunking madly away, banjo players
strumming and ukelele addicts picking at their strings, somehow all
chorusing together. In a special pair of floats there were bass players,
bass fiddle players and cellists, jammed tightly together and somehow
managing to draw enormous sounds and scratches out of the big
instruments. And behind them came the main band of musicians.

The woodwinds followed: piccolo players piping, flutists fluting, oboe
players, red-cheeked and glassy-eyed, concentrating on making the most
piercing possible sounds, men playing English horns, clarinets, bass
clarinets, bassoons and contra-bassoons, along with men playing serpents
and, behind them, a dancing group fingering ocarinas and adding their
bit to the general tumult, and two women tootling madly away on
hoarse-sounding zootibars.

And then, near the center of the musicians, were the brass: trumpets and
trumpets-a-piston, trombones and valve trombones and Fulk horns, all
blatting away to split the sky with maddening sound, Sousaphones and
saxophones and French horns and bass horns and hunting horns, and tubas
along in their own little cart, six round-cheeked men lost in the curves
of the great instruments, valiantly blowing away as they rolled by into
the woods of the park, making the city itself resound with tremendous
noise and shattering cadence. And behind them was the battery.

Kettle drums, bass drums, xylophones, Chinese gongs, vibraphones, snare
drums and high-hat cymbals paraded by in carts, banged and stroked and
tinkled enthusiastically by crew after crew of maddened tympanists. And
then came the others, on foot: tambourines and wood blocks and parade
cymbals and castanets. At the tail of this portion of the Procession
came a single old man wearing spectacles and riding in a small cart
drawn by a donkey. He had white hair and he was playing on a series of
water-glasses filled to various levels. His ear was cocked toward the
glasses with painstaking care. He was entirely inaudible in the general
din, but he looked happy and satisfied; he was doing his bit.

After him followed a group of entirely naked men and women playing
sackbuts, and another group playing recorders. Bringing up the rear, as
the Procession curved, was a magnificent aggregation of men and women
yowling away on bagpipes of all shapes and sizes. All of the men wore
sporrans and nothing more; the women wore nothing at all. The music that
emanated from this group was enough to unhinge the mind.

And then came the keyboard instruments, into the middle of which the
five theremin-players had been stuck for no reason at all. The strange
howls of this unearthly instrument filtered through the sound of pianos,
harpsichords, psalters, clavichords, virginals and three gigantic
electric organs pumping at full strength.

And bringing up the very rear of the Procession was a special decorated
cart, full of color and holding a lone man with long white hair, wearing
a rusty black suit and playing away, with great attention and care, on
the largest steam calliope Forrester had ever met. Jets of steam fizzed
out of the top, and music bawled from the interior of the massive thing
as it went by, trailing the Procession into the woods, and the entire
aggregation swung into a single song, hundred upon hundreds of musicians
and singers all coming down hard on the opening strains of the Hymn to
Dionysus:

    "_Mine eyes have seen the glory of the Lord who rules the wine--
    He has trampled out the vintage of the grapes upon the vine!_"

The twelve Priests picked up the palanquin and Forrester adjusted his
weight so they wouldn't find it too heavy. It was impossible to think in
the mass of noise and music that went on and on, as the Procession wound
uptown through the paths of Central Park, and the musicians banged and
scraped and blew and pounded and stroked and plucked, and the great Hymn
rose into the air, filling the entire city with the bawled chorus as
even the twelve Priests joined in, adding to the ear-splitting din:

    "_Glory, Glory, Dionysus!
    Glory, Glory, Dionysus!
    Glory, Glory, Dionysus!
    While his wine goes flowing on!_"

Forrester had always been disturbed by what he thought might have been a
double meaning in that last line, but it didn't disturb him now. Nothing
seemed to disturb him as the Procession wound on, and he was laughing
uproariously and winking and nodding at his worshippers as they sang and
played all around him, and the hours went by. Halfway there, he fished
in the air and brought down the small golden disks with the picture of
Dionysus on them that were a regular feature of the Processional, and
flung them happily into the crowd ahead.

Only one was allowed per person, so there was not much scrambling, but
some of the coins pattered down on the various instruments, and one
landed in the old gentleman's middle-C water glass and had to be fished
out before he could go on with the Hymn.

Carousing and noisy, the Procession finally reached the huge stand at
the far end of the park, and the music stopped. On the stand was a whole
new group of musicians: harpists, lyrists, players of the flageolet and
dulcimer, two men sweating over glockenspiels, a group equipped with
zithers and citharas and sitars, three women playing nose-flutes, two
men with shofars, and a tall, blond man playing a clarino trumpet. As
the Procession ground to a halt, this new band struck up the Hymn again,
played it through twice, and then stopped.

Seven girls filed out onto the platform in front of the musicians. One
was there representing every year since the last Sabbatical Bacchanal.
Forrester, riding high on the palanquin, beamed down at them, roaring
with happy laughter. They were all for him. Having been carried to one
end of the park in triumph, he was now to march back at the head of his
people, surrounded by seven of the most beautiful girls in New York.

Their final selection had been left, he knew, to a brewery which had
experience in these matters. And the girls certainly looked like the
pick of anybody's crop. Forrester beamed at them again, stood up in the
palanquin and spread his arms wide.

Then he sprang. In a flying leap, he went high into the air and did a
full somersault, landing on his toes on the stage, twenty-five feet
away. The girls were kneeling in a circle around him.

"Come, my doves!" he bellowed. "Come, my pigeons!" His Godlike golden
baritone carried for blocks.

He grabbed the two nearest girls by their hands and helped them to their
feet. They blushed and lowered their eyes.

"Come, all of you!" Forrester shouted. "We are about to begin the
revels!"

The girls rose and Forrester gestured them in closer. Then, surrounded
by all seven, he threw back his head again.

"A revel to make history!" he roared. "A revel beyond the imagination of
man! A revel fit for your God!"

The crowd cheered wildly. Forrester picked up one of the girls, tossed
her into the air and caught her easily as she descended. He set her on
her feet and put his hands solidly on his hips.

"My cup!" he shouted. "Fill you my cup!"

Behind the stage was a corps of Priests guarding a mountainous golden
hogshead of wine, adjudged the finest wine produced during the year.

"We shall have drink!" Forrester shouted. "We shall let the revels roar
on!"

Two priests came forward, staggering under the weight of a gigantic
crystal goblet containing fully two gallons of the clear purple liquid.
They bore it to Forrester with great pomp, and before them came a dozen
players on the gahoon and the contra-gahoon, making Forrester's ears
ring with deafening fanfares.

Forrester took the great goblet in one hand and held it with ease. Then
he lifted it into the air with a wordless shout, filled his lungs and
laughed. He put the goblet to his lips and drained it in a single long
motion. A mighty hurrah shook the trees and rocks of the park.

Forrester waved the goblet. "Again. Fill you my cup once more!" He
embraced the seven girls with one sweeping gesture of his arms. "My
little beauties must have drink! Fill you the cup!"

He passed it back to the Priests carefully. They received it and went
back to where the others were waiting to fill it. Then they staggered
forward again and Forrester picked up the brimming goblet. He held it
for the girls, each of whom tried to outdrink the others. But it was
still more than half-full when they were finished.

Forrester raised it again. The crowd shouted. "Observe your God!"
Forrester roared. "Observe his powers!" He threw his head back and
emptied the goblet. Then, holding it in one hand, he faced the
assemblage and delivered himself of one Godlike belch.

The crowd shrieked its approval. Forrester had the goblet filled once
more and put three of the girls in charge of it. Then he came down the
steps from the platform and began the long march back to the
Temple-on-the-Green.

The shouting, carousing revelers followed him joyfully. Halfway back,
one of them stumbled forward and caught at the trailing edge of his
robe. There was an immediate crackle and burst of static electricity,
and the stumbler fell back yelping and shaking his arms. The Myrmidons
came and took him away.

Dionysus couldn't be touched by anyone except those authorized to do
so--the seven girls and the Priests. But Forrester barely noticed the
accident; he was too happy on top of his world, laughing and hugging the
girls close to him.

Behind him, the Priests at the golden hogshead, now set free to taste
the wine themselves, had lost no time. They were dipping in busily with
their own goblets--a good deal smaller than the two-gallon crystal one
for Dionysus himself. There was not even any need for libations; enough
ran over the brimming edges of the goblets to take care of that detail,
and the Priests were soon well on the way to becoming sozzled.

The musicians, now joined by the corps which had waited on the uptown
stage, struck up a new tune, and drowned out even the shouting crowds as
they cheered their God. After a little while, the crowds began to sing
along with the magnificent noise:

    "_Dionysus wrapped his hand around the goblet,
    Around the goblet--around the goblet--
    Dionysus wrapped his hand around the goblet,
    And we'll all get--stinking drunk!_"

It was by no means an official hymn, but Forrester didn't mind; it was
sung with such a great deal of honest enthusiasm. He himself did not
join in the singing; he was otherwise occupied. With his arms around two
of the girls, drinking now and then from the great goblet three more
were holding, and winking and laughing at the extra two, he made his
joyous way down the petal-strewn paths of Central Park.

The Procession wound down through the paths, over bridges and under
tunnels, singing and playing and marching and dancing madly, while
Forrester, at its head, caroused as merrily as any four of them. They
reached a bridge crossing a little stream and Forrester sprang at it
with a great somersaulting leap that carried the two girls he was
holding right along with him. He set them down at the slope of the
bridge, laughing and giggling and the other girls, with the Procession
behind them, soon caught up. Forrester let go of one of the girls,
grabbed the goblet with his free hand and swung it in a magnificent
gesture.

"Forward!" he cried.

The Procession surged over the bridge, Forrester at its head. He grabbed
the girl again, handing the goblet back to his corps of three carriers,
and bowed and grinned at his worshippers behind him, surging forward,
and at some others standing under the bridge, ankle-deep, shin-deep,
even knee-deep in the rushing water, craning their necks upward to get a
really good view of their God as he passed over. There were over a
hundred of them there.

Forrester didn't see a hundred of them.

He saw one of them first, and then two more. And time seemed to stop
with a grinding halt. Forrester wanted to run and hide. He clutched the
girls closer to him with one instinctive gesture, and then realized he'd
made the wrong move. But it was too late. He was lost, he told himself
dolefully. The sun had gone out, the wine had lost its power and the
celebration had degenerated to a succession of ugly noises.

The first face he saw belonged to Gerda Symes.

In that timeless instant, Forrester felt that he could see every detail
of the soft, small face, the dark hair, the slim, curved figure. She was
smiling up at him, but her face looked a little bewildered, as if she
were smiling only because it was the thing to do. Forrester wondered,
panic-stricken, how she, an Athenan, had managed to get entry to a
Dionysian revel--but his wonder only lasted for a second. Then he saw
the second and third faces, and he knew.

The second face belonged to an absolute stranger. He looked like an
oafish clod, even viewed objectively, and Forrester was making no
efforts in that direction. He had one arm around Gerda's waist and he
was grinning up at her, and, sideways, at Forrester with a look that
made them co-conspirators in what was certainly planned to be Gerda's
seduction. Forrester didn't like the idea. As a matter of fact, he hated
it more than he could possibly say.

But all he could do was trust to Gerda's own doubtless sterling good
sense. She couldn't possibly prefer a lout like her current escort to
good old Bill Forrester, could she?

On the other hand, she thought Bill Forrester was dead. She'd had to
think that; when he became Dionysus the Lesser, he couldn't just
disappear. He had to die officially--and, as far as Gerda knew, the
death wasn't just an official formality.

With Bill Forrester dead, then, had she turned to the oaf for comfort?
He didn't look very comforting, Forrester thought. He looked like a
damned outrage on the face of the Earth. Forrester disliked him on first
sight, and knew perfectly well that any future sights would only
increase the dislike.

It was the third face, though that explained everything.

The third face was as unmistakable as Gerda's, though in an entirely
different way. It was fleshy and pasty, and it belonged, of course, to
Gerda's lovable brother Ed. Forrester saw everything in one flash of
understanding.

Ed Symes obviously had enough pull to get his sister invited to the
Bacchanal. And from the looks of Gerda, he hadn't let the matter rest
there. She was holding a half-filled plastic mug of wine in one hand--a
mug with the picture of Dionysus stamped on it, which for some reason
increased Forrester's outrage--and she was trying her best to look as if
she were reveling.

From the looks of her, Ed had managed to get her about eight inches this
side of half-pickled. And from the horribly cheerful look on Ed's
countenance, he wasn't about to stop at the half-pickled mark, either.

Of course, from Ed's point of view--and Forrester told himself sternly
that he had to be fair about this whole thing--from Ed's point of view
there was nothing wrong in what was happening. He wanted to cheer Gerda
up (undoubtedly the news of the Forrester demise had been quite a shock
to her, poor girl), and what better way than to introduce her to his own
religion, the best of all possible religions? The Autumn Bacchanal must
have looked like the perfect time and place for that introduction, and
Gerda's escort, a friend of Ed's--somehow Forrester had to think of him
as Ed's friend; it was clearly not possible that he was Gerda's--had
been brought along to help cheer the girl up and show her the advantages
of worshipping Dionysus.

Unfortunately, the advantages hadn't turned out to be all that had been
expected of them. Because now Gerda had seen Forrester alive and--

Wait a minute, Forrester told himself.

Gerda hadn't seen William Forrester at all.

She had seen just what she expected to see; Dionysus, God of Wine. There
was no reason for him to shrink from her, or try to hide. Just because
he was walking along with seven beautiful girls, drinking about sixteen
times the consumption of any normal right-thinking fish, and carousing
like the most unprincipled of men, he didn't have to be ashamed of
himself.

He was only doing his job.

And Gerda did not know that he wasn't Dionysus.

