water, or exercising a little patience.

A good supply of emery and water should be kept between the disc and
the iron;  a little putty may be arranged round the point of contact
on the iron to form a temporary trough.  In any case the resulting
emery mud should on no account be thrown away, but should be carefully
kept for further use.  The process is complete when the glass is
perfectly round and of the required diameter as tested by callipers.

Sec. 55.  The next step is to rough out the lens, and this may easily be
done by rotating it more slowly, i.e.  with a surface speed of ten
feet per minute, and turning the glass with a hard file, as explained
in Sec. 42.  If it is desired to employ the slide rest, it is quicker and
better to use a diamond tool--an instrument quite readily made, and
of great service for turning emery wheels and the like,--a thing, in
fact, which no workshop should be without.  A bit of diamond bort, or
even a clear though off-colour stone, may be employed.

An ordinary lathe tool is prepared by drawing down the tool steel to a
long cone, resembling the ordinary practice in preparing a boring
tool.  The apex of the cone must be cut off till it is only slightly
larger than the greatest transverse diameter of the diamond splinter.
The latter may have almost any shape--a triangular point, one side of
a three-sided prism is very convenient.  A hole is drilled in the
steel (which must have been well softened), only just large enough to
allow the diamond to enter--if the splinter is thicker in the middle
than at either end, so much the better--the diamond is fastened in
position by squeezing the soft steel walls tightly down upon it.
Personally I prefer to use a tool holder, and in this case generally
mount the diamond in a bit of brass rod of the proper diameter;  and
instead of pinching in the sides of the cavity, I tin them, and set
the diamond in position with a drop of soft solder.

Fig.  47.

In purchasing diamond bort, a good plan is to buy fragments that have
been employed in diamond drilling, and have become too small to reset;
in this case some idea as to the hardness of the bits may be obtained.
Full details as to diamond tool-making are given in books on
watch-making, and in Holtzapffell's great work on Mechanical
Manipulation;  but the above notes are all that are really
necessary--it is, in fact, a very simple matter. The only advantage of
using a diamond tool for glass turning is that one does not need to be
always taking it out of the rest to sharpen it, which generally happens
with hard steel, especially if the work is turned a little too fast.

I recommend, therefore, that the student should boldly go to work
"free hand" with a hard file;  but if he prefer the more formal
method, or distrust his skill (which he should not do), then let him
use a diamond point, even if he has the trouble of making it.  When
using a diamond it is not necessary to employ a lubricant, but there
is some advantage in doing so.

The surface of the lens can be roughly shaped by turning to a template
or pattern made by cutting a circular arc (of the same radius as the
required surface) out of a bit of sheet zinc.  Another very handy way
of making templates of great accuracy is to use a beam compass
(constructed from a light wooden bar) with a glazier's diamond instead
of a pencil.  A bit of thin sheet glass is cut across with this
compass to the proper curvature--which can be done with considerable
accuracy and the two halves of the plate, after breaking along the
cut, are ground together with a view to avoiding slight local
irregularities, by means of a little fine emery and water laid between
the edges.  In this process the glass is conveniently supported on a
clean board or slate, and the bits are rubbed backwards and forwards
against each other.

Sec. 56.  It is not very easy for a beginner to turn a bit of
anything--iron, wood, or glass--with great accuracy to fit a template,
and consequently time may be saved by the following procedure, applied as
soon as the figure of the template is roughly obtained.  A disc of
lead or iron, of the same diameter as the glass, and of approximately
the proper curvature, is prepared by turning, and is armed with a
handle projecting coaxially from the back of the disc.  The glass
revolving with moderate speed on the lathe, the lead tool, supplied
with coarse emery and water, is held against it, care being taken to
rotate the tool by the handle, and also to move it backwards and
forwards across the disc, through a distance, say, up to half an inch;
if it is allowed to overhang too much the edges of the glass disc will
be overground.  By the use of such a tool the glass can readily be
brought up to the template.

The only thing that remains, so far as the description of this part of
the process goes, is to give a note or two as to the best way of
making the lead tools, and for this purpose the main narrative of
processes must be interrupted.  The easiest way is to make a set of
discs to begin with.  For this purpose take the mandrel out of the
lathe, and place it nose downwards in the centre of an iron ring of
proper diameter on a flat and level iron plate.

The discs are made by pouring lead round the screw-nose of the
mandrel.  This method, of course, leaves them with a hole in the
centre;  but this can be stopped up by placing the hot disc (from
which the mandrel has been unscrewed) on a hot plate, and pouring in a
sufficiency of very hot lead; or, better still, the mandrel can be
supported vertically at any desired distance above the plate while the
casting is being poured.  Lead discs prepared in this way are easily
turned so as to form very convenient chucks for brass work, and for
use in the case now being treated, they are easily turned to a
template, using woodturners' tools, which work better if oiled, and
must be set to cut, not scrape.

If the operator does not mind the trouble of cutting a screw, or if he
has a jaw chuck, the lead may be replaced by iron with some advantage.

The following is a neat way of making concave tools.  It is an
application of the principle of having the cutting tool as long as the
radius of curvature, and allowing it to move about the centre of
curvature.  Place the disc of iron or lead on the lathe mandrel or in
the chuck, and set the slide rest so that it is free to slide up or
down the lathe bed.  Take a bar of tool steel and cut it a little
longer than the radius of curvature required.  Forge and finish one
end of the bar into a pointed turning tool of the ordinary kind.
Measure the radius of curvature from the point of the tool along the
bar, and bore a hole, whose centre is at this point, through the bar
from the upper to the lower face.  I regard the upper face as the one
whose horizontal plane contains the cutting point when the tool is in
use.  Clamp a temporary back centre to the lathe bed, and let it carry
a pin in the vertical plane through the lathe centres, and let this
pin exactly fit the hole in the bar.

Fig. 48.

Place the "radius" tool in position for cutting, and let it be lightly
held in the slide rest nearly at the cutting point, the centre of
rotation of the pedestal (or its equivalent) passing through the
central line of the bar.  Then adjust the temporary back rest, so that
the tool will take a cut.  In the sketch the tool is shown swinging
about the back centre instead of about a pin--there is little to
choose between the methods unless economy of tool steel is an object.
The tool must now be fed across the work.  The pedestal must of course
be free to rotate, and the slide rest to slip up and down the bed.  In
this way a better concave grinding tool can be made than would be made
by a beginner by turning to a template--though an expert turner would
probably carry out the latter operation so as to obtain an' accuracy
of the same order, and would certainly do it in much less time than
would be required in setting up the special arrangements here
described.

On the other hand, if several surfaces have to be prepared, as in the
making of an achromatic lens, the quickest way would be by the use of
the radius tool, bored of course to work at the several radii
required.  I have tried both methods, and my choice would depend
partly on the lathe at my disposal, and partly on the number of
grinding tools that had to be prepared.

Having obtained a concave tool of any given radius, it is easily
copied--negatively, so as to make a convex tool in the following
manner.  Adjust the concave tool already made on the back rest, so
that if it rotated about the line of centres, it would rotate about
its axis of figure.

Arrangements for this can easily be made, but of course they will
depend on the detailed structure of the lathe.  Use the slide rest as
before, i.e.  let it grasp an ordinary turning tool lightly, the
pedestal being fixed, but the rest free to slide up or down the lathe
bed.  Push the back rest up till the butt of the turning tool (ground
to a rounded point) rests against the concave grinding tool.  If the
diameter of the convex tool required be very small compared with the
radius of curvature of the surface (the most usual case), it is only
necessary to feed the cutting tool across to "copy" the concave
surface sufficiently nearly.

Fig. 49.

There seems no reason, however, why these methods should not be
applied at once to the glass disc by means of a diamond point, and the
rough grinding thus entirely avoided.  I am informed that this has
been done by Sir Henry Bessemer, but that the method was found to
present no great advantage in practice.  A reader with a taste for
mechanical experimenting might try radius bar tools with small
carborundum wheels rapidly driven instead of a diamond.

Enough has now been said to enable any one to prepare rough convex or
concave grinding tools of iron or lead, and of the same diameter as
the glass to be ground.

The general effect of the process of roughing the rotating lens
surface is to alter the radius of curvature of both tool and glass;
hence it is necessary to have for each grinding tool another to fit
it, and enable it to be kept (by working the two together) at a
constant figure.  After a little practice it will be found possible to
bring the glass exactly up to the required curvature as tested by
template or spherometer.  The art of the process consists in altering
the shape of the grinding tool so as to take off the glass where
required, as described in Sec. 53, and from this point of view lead has
some advantages;  (opinions vary as to the relative advantages of lead
and iron tools for this purpose, however).  The subsidiary grinding
tool is not actually needed for this preliminary operation, but it has
to be made some time with a view to further procedure, and
occasionally is of service here.

Sec. 57.  'The glass disc must be ground approximately to the proper
curvature on each side before any fine grinding is commenced.  It is
precisely for this purpose that the previous turning of the disc is
recommended, for it is easy to unmount and recentre a round object,
but not so easy if the object have an indefinite shape.  Using a
cement which is plastic before it sets, the disc may be easily taken
off the chuck and centred by a little handicraft, i.e.  by rotating
the lathe slowly and pushing the disc into such a position that it
rotates about its axis.  The grinding of the second surface is
accomplished exactly as in the former case;  of course on reversing
the glass the chuck has to be slightly turned up to fit the convex or
concave surface.

Sec. 58.  There is, however, one point of interest and importance--attention
to which will save a good deal of useless labour afterwards.
The glass must be ground in such a manner that the thickness at the
edge is the same all round.  In other words, the axes of figure of the
two surfaces must coincide.  This will be the case if the recentering
has been accurately performed, and therefore no pains should be spared
to see that it is exactly carried out.  Any simple form of vernier
gauge (such as Brown and Sharpe's vernier callipers) will serve to
allow of a sufficiently accurate measurement of the edge thickness of
the lens.  If any difference of thickness is observed as the gauge
moves round the edge, one or other of the surfaces must be reground.
Of course the latitude of error which may be permitted depends so much
on the final arrangements for a special finishing process called the
"centering of the lens"--which will be described--that it is
difficult to fix a limit, but perhaps one-thousandth of an inch may be
mentioned as a suitable amount for a 2-inch disc.  For rough work, of
course; more margin may be admitted.

Sec. 59.  In a large shop I imagine that lenses of only two inches
diameter would be ground in nests;  or, in other words, a number would
be worked at a time, and centering, even of a rough kind, would be
left to the last;  but this process will be treated hereafter.  At
present I shall assume that only one lens will be made at a time.
Consequently we now enter on the stage of fine grinding by hand.  A
leaden pedestal, for the sake of stability, must be provided on which
to mount the lens, so that the surface to be operated on may be nearly
horizontal (Fig.  50).  Before this can be done, however, fresh
grinding tools (two for each surface) must be properly prepared.
After trying several plans I unhesitatingly recommend that all
fine-grinding surfaces should be made of glass.  This is easily done
by taking two discs of lead, or iron, or slate, cut to a one-tenth
inch smaller radius of curvature (in the case of a convex tool, and
the opposite in the other case) than the lens surface (Fig.  51, A).
On these, square bits of sheet glass, one-tenth of an inch thick, are
to be cemented, so as to leave channels of about one-eighth of an inch
between each bit of glass (Fig.  52, B).  The "mastic"    cement
formerly described may be employed for this purpose.

Fig.  50.

The bits of glass ought first to have  their edges dressed smooth on
the grind-stone.  A convex and concave glass surface having been thus
roughly prepared, they must be mounted in turn in the lathe, and
brought to the proper curvature by grinding with the tools formerly
employed and tested by the template or spherometer.  It is well to
control this process by means of a spherometer, so that the desired
radius may be approximately reached.  The two glass-grinding tools
are then ground together by hand (see Sec. 53 and Sec. 61), the spherometer
being employed from time to time to check the progress of the work.
In general, if large circular sweeps are taken, greatly overhanging
the side of the glass surface to be figured, both the upper and lower
surfaces will be more ground at the edges, while in the opposite
event the centre will be chiefly affected.

Fig.  51.

A spherometer capable of measuring a 2-inch surface may be procured,
having a screw of, say, 50 threads to the inch, and a micrometer
surface divided into 200 parts, each part easily capable of
subdivision--into tenths or even twentieths.  To get the full
advantage of the spherometer it must screw exceedingly freely (i.e.
must be well oiled with clock oil), and must not be fingered except at
the milled head.  If one of the legs is held by the fingers the
expansion is sufficient to throw the instrument quite out of
adjustment.  The glass-grinding tools being brought to the proper
figure, the next process is to transfer the same to the lens, and this
is done by similar means, the fellow tool being used to correct the
one employed in grinding the lens surface.  Before the grade of emery
is changed all three surfaces must agree, as nearly, at least, as the
spherometer will show.

In order to prevent confusion the following summary of the steps
already taken may be given.  The discs of glass are first ground or
turned so as to be truly circular.  Four "tools" are made for each
surface--a rough pair of iron or lead, and a finishing pair of iron,
lead, or slate faced by glass squares.  For a small lens the iron or
lead backing may be used, for a large one the slate.  The rough tools
are used to give an approximate figure both to the lens and to the
finishing tools.

The final adjustment is attained by grinding one of the glass-faced
tools alternately upon the lens and upon the fellow glass-faced tool.
The spherometer is accepted at all stages of the process as the final
arbiter as to curvature.  Some hints on the form of strokes used in
grinding will be given later on (see Sec. 61).  It suffices to state here
that the object throughout is to secure uniformity by allowing both
the work and the tool to rotate, and exercising no pressure by the
fingers.  The tool backing may weigh from one to two pounds for a
2-inch lens.

Sec. 60.  The tools and lens being all of the same curvature, the state
of the surface is gradually improved by grinding with finer and finer
emery.  The best way of grading the emery is by washing it with clean
water, and allowing the emery (at first stirred up with the water) to
settle out.  The longer the time required for this part of the process
the finer will be the emery deposited.  An ordinary bedroom jug is a
very good utensil to employ during this process; a large glass jug is
even better.  The following grades will be found sufficient, though I
daresay every operative's practice differs a little on this point.

1st grade: Flour emery, with the grit washed out, i.e. allowed to
stand for 2" (sec.) before being poured off.

2nd grade: Stand 5" (secs.), settle in 1' (min.)

3rd grade: Stand 1', settle in 10'.

4th grade: Stand 10', settle in 60'.

It is generally advisable to repeat the washing process with each
grade.  Thus, selecting grade 2 for illustration, the liquor for grade
3 must be poured off without allowing any of the sediment to pass over
with it.  If any sediment at all passes, one has no security against
its containing perhaps the largest particle in the jug.  As soon as
the liquor for No.  3 has been decanted, jug No.  2 is filled up again
with clean water (filtered if necessary), and after standing 5" is
decanted into jug No.  2b, the sediment is returned to jug No.  1, and
the liquor, after standing 1', is transferred to jug No.  3.

The greatest care is necessary at each step of the operation to
prevent "sediment" passing over with liquor.  There is a little danger
from the tendency which even comparatively large particles of emery
have to float, in consequence of their refusing to get wet, and the
emery worked up on the side of the jug is also a source of danger,
therefore wipe the jug round inside before decanting.

In order to get a uniform grade stop the currents of water in the jug,
which may work up coarse particles, by holding a thin bit of wood in
the rotating liquid for a moment, and then gently withdrawing it in
its own plane.  These precautions are particularly necessary in the
case of grades Nos.  2, 3, and 4, especially No.  4, for if a single
coarse particle gets on the tool when the work has progressed up to
this point it will probably necessitate a return to grinding by means
of No.  2, and involve many hours' work.

The surface of the lens will require to be ground continuously with
each grade till it has the uniform state of roughness corresponding to
the grade in question.  Two hours for each grade is about the usual
time required in working such a lens as is here contemplated.

The coarser grades of emery may be obtained by washing ordinary flour
of emery, but the finer ones have to be got from emery which has been
used in the previous processes.  It is not a good plan to wash the
finer grades of emery out of the proceeds of very rough grinding say
with anything coarser than flour of emery--as there is a danger of
thereby contaminating the finer grades with comparatively coarse glass
