
       *       *       *       *       *


ALGEBRA FOR BEGINNERS

By DAVID EUGENE SMITH,

Professor of Mathematics in Teachers College, Columbia University

       *       *       *       *       *

12mo, cloth, 154 pages, 50 cents

       *       *       *       *       *

This work is intended to serve as an introduction to the study of algebra,
and is adapted to the needs of the seventh or eighth school year. It is
arranged in harmony with the leading courses of study that include algebra
in the curriculum of the grades.

The relation of algebra to arithmetic is emphasized, the subject is treated
topically, and each important point is touched at least twice. The book
begins by showing the uses of algebra, employing such practical
applications as are within the pupil's range of knowledge. When an interest
has thus been awakened in the subject, the fundamental operations are
presented with the simple explanations necessary to make the student
independent of dogmatic rules. Throughout the book abundant oral and
written drill exercises are provided. The work includes linear equations
with two unknown quantities, and easy quadratics.

The leading features may be summarized as follows: (1) an arrangement in
harmony with existing courses of study; (2) a presentation designed to
awaken the interest of the pupils; (3) a topical arrangement for each half
year, every important topic being repeated; (4) simplicity of explanations;
(5) development of the relation of algebra to arithmetic both in theory and
in applications; (6) emphasis laid on the importance of oral as well as
written algebra.

       *       *       *       *       *


GINN & COMPANY PUBLISHERS

       *       *       *       *       *


BOOKS FOR TEACHERS

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                             List price
  Allen: Civics and Health                                      $1.25
  Brigham: Geographic Influences in American History             1.25
  Channing and Hart: Guide to the Study of American History      2.00
  Hall: Aspects of Child Life and Education                      1.50
  Hodge: Nature Study and Life                                   1.50
  Johnson: Education by Plays and Games                           .90
  Johnson: What to Do at Recess                                   .25
  Kern: Among Country Schools                                    1.25
  Mace: Method in History                                        1.00
  MacVicar: The Principles of Education                           .60
  Moral Training in the Public Schools                           1.25
  Prince: Courses of Studies and Methods of Teaching              .75
  Scott: Social Education                                        1.25
  Tompkins: Philosophy of School Management                       .75
  Tompkins: Philosophy of Teaching                                .75
  Wiltse: Place of the Story in Early Education, and Other Essays.
     A Manual for Teachers                                        .50

FOR CLASS RECORDS

  Comings: Complete Record--Attendance and Scholarship
      Graded-School Edition                                       .30
      High-School Edition                                         .30
  Ginn and Company: Teacher's Class Books
      No. I                                                       .30
      No. II                                                      .40
      Twenty Weeks' Class Book                                    .30

       *       *       *       *       *


GINN AND COMPANY Publishers

       *       *       *       *       *


TEXTBOOKS ON MATHEMATICS

FOR HIGHER SCHOOLS AND COLLEGES

                                                                   List
                                                                     price
  Bailey and Woods: Analytic Geometry                                $2.00
  Beman and Smith: Academic Algebra                                   1.12
  Beman and Smith: Higher Arithmetic                                   .80
  Beman and Smith: New Plane and Solid Geometry                       1.25
  Breckenridge, Mersereau, and Moore: Shop Problems in Mathematics    1.00
  Byerly: Differential Calculus                                       2.00
  Byerly: Integral Calculus (Second Edition. Revised and Enlarged)    2.00
  Eisenhart: Differential Geometry of Curves and Surfaces             4.50
  Faunce: Descriptive Geometry                                        1.25
  Fine: College Algebra                                               1.50
  Granville: Plane and Spherical Trigonometry and Tables              1.25
  Granville: Plane and Spherical Trigonometry Without Tables          1.00
  Granville: Plane Trigonometry and Tables                            1.00
  Granville: Logarithmic Tables                                        .50
  Granville and Smith: Elements of Differential and Integral Calculus 2.50
  Hardy: Analytic Geometry                                            1.50
  Hardy: Elements of the Calculus                                     1.50
  Hawkes: Advanced Algebra                                            1.40
  Hawkes, Luby, and Touton: First Course in Algebra                   1.00
  Hedrick: Goursat's Mathematical Analysis.  Vol. I                   4.00
  Hedrick and Kellogg: Applications of the Calculus to Mechanics      1.25
  Hooper and Wells: Electrical Problems                               1.25
  Lester: Integrals of Mechanics                                       .80
  Peirce, B. O.: Newtonian Potential Function (Third, Revised, and
      Enlarged Edition)                                               2.50
  Peirce, J. M.: Elements of Logarithms                                .50
  Peirce, J. M.: Mathematical Tables                                   .40
  Pierpont: Theory of Functions of Real Variables.   Vol. I           4.50
  Shepard: Problems in the Strength of Materials                      1.25
  Slocum and Hancock: Textbook on the Strength of Materials           3.00
  Smith and Gale: Elements of Analytic Geometry                       2.00
  Smith and Gale: Introduction to Analytic Geometry                   1.25
  Smith and Longley: Theoretical Mechanics                            2.50
  Taylor: Elements of the Calculus (Revised and Enlarged Edition)     2.00
  Taylor: Plane and Spherical Trigonometry                            1.00
  Taylor: Plane Trigonometry                                           .75
  Taylor and Puryear: Elements of Plane and Spherical Trigonometry    1.25
  Wentworth: Advanced Arithmetic                                      1.00
  Wentworth: Analytic Geometry                                        1.25
  Wentworth: College Algebra (Revised Edition)                        1.50
  Wentworth: Elementary Algebra                                       1.12
  Wentworth: Higher Algebra                                           1.40
  Wentworth: New School Algebra                                       1.12
  Wentworth: Plane and Solid Geometry (Revised Edition)               1.25
  Wentworth: Plane Geometry (Revised Edition); Solid Geometry
      (Revised Edition), each                                          .75
  Wentworth: Trigonometries (Second Revised Editions)
        (For list, see Descriptive Catalogue)
  Woods and Bailey: A Course In Mathematics
    Volume I                                                          2.25
    Volume II                                                         2.25

       *       *       *       *       *


GINN AND COMPANY PUBLISHERS

       *       *       *       *       *


Notes

al-Mekk[=i] on a treatise on [.g]ob[=a]r arithmetic (explained later)
called _Al-murshidah_, found by Woepcke in Paris (_Propagation_, p. 66),
there is mentioned the fact that there are "nine Indian figures" and "a
second kind of Indian figures ... although these are the figures of the
[.g]ob[=a]r writing." So in a commentary by [H.]osein ibn Mo[h.]ammed
al-Ma[h.]all[=i] (died in 1756) on the _Mokhta[s.]ar f[=i]`ilm
el-[h.]is[=a]b_ (Extract from Arithmetic) by `Abdalq[=a]dir ibn `Al[=i]
al-Sakh[=a]w[=i] (died c. 1000) it is related that "the preface treats of
the forms of the figures of Hindu signs, such as were established by the
Hindu nation." [Woepcke, _Propagation_, p. 63.]]

which, of course, are interpolations. An interesting example of a forgery
in ecclesiastical matters is in the charter said to have been given by St.
Patrick, granting indulgences to the benefactors of Glastonbury, dated "In
nomine domini nostri Jhesu Christi Ego Patricius humilis servunculus Dei
anno incarnationis ejusdem ccccxxx." Now if the Benedictines are right in
saying that Dionysius Exiguus, a Scythian monk, first arranged the
Christian chronology c. 532 A.D., this can hardly be other than spurious.
See Arbuthnot, loc. cit., p. 38.

[1] "_Discipulus._ Quis primus invenit numerum apud Hebraeos et AEgyptios?
_Magister._ Abraham primus invenit numerum apud Hebraeos, deinde Moses; et
Abraham tradidit istam scientiam numeri ad AEgyptios, et docuit eos: deinde
Josephus." [Bede, _De computo dialogus_ (doubtfully assigned to him),
_Opera omnia_, Paris, 1862, Vol. I, p. 650.]

"Alii referunt ad Phoenices inventores arithmeticae, propter eandem
commerciorum caussam: Alii ad Indos: Ioannes de Sacrobosco, cujus
sepulchrum est Lutetiae in comitio Maturinensi, refert ad Arabes." [Ramus,
_Arithmeticae libri dvo_, Basel, 1569, p. 112.]

Similar notes are given by Peletarius in his commentary on the arithmetic
of Gemma Frisius (1563 ed., fol. 77), and in his own work (1570 Lyons ed.,
p. 14): "La valeur des Figures commence au coste dextre tirant vers le
coste senestre: au rebours de notre maniere d'escrire par ce que la
premiere prattique est venue des Chaldees: ou des Pheniciens, qui ont ete
les premiers traffiquers de marchandise."

[2] Maximus Planudes (c. 1330) states that "the nine symbols come from the
Indians." [Waeschke's German translation, Halle, 1878, p. 3.] Willichius
speaks of the "Zyphrae Indicae," in his _Arithmeticae libri tres_ (Strasburg,
1540, p. 93), and Cataneo of "le noue figure de gli Indi," in his _Le
pratiche delle dve prime mathematiche_ (Venice, 1546, fol. 1). Woepcke is
not correct, therefore, in saying ("Memoire sur la propagation des chiffres
indiens," hereafter referred to as _Propagation_ [_Journal Asiatique_, Vol.
I (6), 1863, p. 34]) that Wallis (_A Treatise on Algebra, both historical
and practical_, London, 1685, p. 13, and _De algebra tractatus_, Latin
edition in his _Opera omnia_, 1693, Vol. II, p. 10) was one of the first to
give the Hindu origin.

[3] From the 1558 edition of _The Grovnd of Artes_, fol. C, 5. Similarly
Bishop Tonstall writes: "Qui a Chaldeis primum in finitimos, deinde in
omnes pene gentes fluxit.... Numerandi artem a Chaldeis esse profectam: qui
dum scribunt, a dextra incipiunt, et in leuam progrediuntur." [_De arte
supputandi_, London, 1522, fol. B, 3.] Gemma Frisius, the great continental
rival of Recorde, had the same idea: "Primum autem appellamus dexterum
locum, eo quod haec ars vel a Chaldaeis, vel ab Hebraeis ortum habere
credatur, qui etiam eo ordine scribunt"; but this refers more evidently to
the Arabic numerals. [_Arithmeticae practicae methodvs facilis_, Antwerp,
1540, fol. 4 of the 1563 ed.] Sacrobosco (c. 1225) mentions the same thing.
Even the modern Jewish writers claim that one of their scholars,
M[=a]sh[=a]ll[=a]h (c. 800), introduced them to the Mohammedan world. [C.
Levias, _The Jewish Encyclopedia_, New York, 1905, Vol. IX, p. 348.]

[4] "... & que esto fu trouato di fare da gli Arabi con diece figure." [_La
prima parte del general trattato di nvmeri, et misvre_, Venice, 1556, fol.
9 of the 1592 edition.]

[5] "Vom welchen Arabischen auch disz Kunst entsprungen ist." [_Ain nerv
geordnet Rechenbiechlin_, Augsburg, 1514, fol. 13 of the 1531 edition. The
printer used the letters _rv_ for _w_ in "new" in the first edition, as he
had no _w_ of the proper font.]

[6] Among them Glareanus: "Characteres simplices sunt nouem significatiui,
ab Indis usque, siue Chaldaeis asciti .1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9. Est item unus .0
circulus, qui nihil significat." [_De VI. Arithmeticae practicae
speciebvs_, Paris, 1539, fol. 9 of the 1543 edition.]

[7] "Barbarische oder gemeine Ziffern." [Anonymous, _Das Einmahl Eins cum
notis variorum_, Dresden, 1703, p. 3.] So Vossius (_De universae matheseos
natura et constitutione liber_, Amsterdam, 1650, p. 34) calls them
"Barbaras numeri notas." The word at that time was possibly synonymous with
Arabic.

[8] His full name was `Ab[=u] `Abdall[=a]h Mo[h.]ammed ibn M[=u]s[=a]
al-Khow[=a]razm[=i]. He was born in Khow[=a]rezm, "the lowlands," the
country about the present Khiva and bordering on the Oxus, and lived at
Bagdad under the caliph al-M[=a]m[=u]n. He died probably between 220 and
230 of the Mohammedan era, that is, between 835 and 845 A.D., although some
put the date as early as 812. The best account of this great scholar may be
found in an article by C. Nallino, "Al-[H)]uw[=a]rizm[=i]" in the _Atti
della R. Accad. dei Lincei_, Rome, 1896. See also _Verhandlungen des 5.
Congresses der Orientalisten_, Berlin, 1882, Vol. II, p. 19; W. Spitta-Bey
in the _Zeitschrift der deutschen Morgenlaend. Gesellschaft_, Vol. XXXIII,
p. 224; Steinschneider in the _Zeitschrift der deutschen Morgenlaend.
Gesellschaft_, Vol. L, p. 214; Treutlein in the _Abhandlungen zur
Geschichte der Mathematik_, Vol. I, p. 5; Suter, "Die Mathematiker und
Astronomen der Araber und ihre Werke," _Abhandlungen zur Geschichte der
Mathematik_, Vol. X, Leipzig, 1900, p. 10, and "Nachtraege," in Vol. XIV, p.
158; Cantor, _Geschichte der Mathematik_, Vol. I, 3d ed., pp. 712-733 etc.;
F. Woepcke in _Propagation_, p. 489. So recently has he become known that
Heilbronner, writing in 1742, merely mentions him as "Ben-Musa, inter
Arabes celebris Geometra, scripsit de figuris planis & sphericis."
[_Historia matheseos universae_, Leipzig, 1742, p. 438.]

In this work most of the Arabic names will be transliterated substantially
as laid down by Suter in his work _Die Mathematiker_ etc., except where
this violates English pronunciation. The scheme of pronunciation of
oriental names is set forth in the preface.

[9] Our word _algebra_ is from the title of one of his works, Al-jabr
wa'l-muq[=a]balah, Completion and Comparison. The work was translated into
English by F. Rosen, London, 1831, and treated in _L'Algebre
d'al-Kh[=a]rizmi et les methodes indienne et grecque_, Leon Rodet, Paris,
1878, extract from the _Journal Asiatique_. For the derivation of the word
_algebra_, see Cossali, _Scritti Inediti_, pp. 381-383, Rome, 1857;
Leonardo's _Liber Abbaci_ (1202), p. 410, Rome, 1857; both published by B.
Boncompagni. "Almuchabala" also was used as a name for algebra.

[10] This learned scholar, teacher of O'Creat who wrote the _Helceph_
("_Prologus N. Ocreati in Helceph ad Adelardum Batensem magistrum suum_"),
studied in Toledo, learned Arabic, traveled as far east as Egypt, and
brought from the Levant numerous manuscripts for study and translation. See
Henry in the _Abhandlungen zur Geschichte der Mathematik_, Vol. III, p.
131; Woepcke in _Propagation_, p. 518.

[11] The title is _Algoritmi de numero Indorum_. That he did not make this
translation is asserted by Enestroem in the _Bibliotheca Mathematica_, Vol.
I (3), p. 520.

[12] Thus he speaks "de numero indorum per .IX. literas," and proceeds:
"Dixit algoritmi: Cum uidissem yndos constituisse .IX. literas in uniuerso
numero suo, propter dispositionem suam quam posuerunt, uolui patefacere de
opera quod fit per eas aliquid quod esset leuius discentibus, si deus
uoluerit." [Boncompagni, _Trattati d'Aritmetica_,  Rome, 1857.] Discussed
by F. Woepcke, _Sur l'introduction de l'arithmetique indienne en Occident_,
Rome, 1859.

[13] Thus in a commentary by `Al[=i] ibn Ab[=i] Bekr ibn al-Jam[=a]l
al-An[s.][=a]r[=i

[14] See also Woepcke, _Propagation_, p. 505. The origin is discussed at
much length by G. R. Kaye, "Notes on Indian Mathematics.--Arithmetical
Notation," _Journ. and Proc. of the Asiatic Soc. of Bengal_, Vol. III,
1907, p. 489.

[15] _Alberuni's India_, Arabic version, London, 1887; English translation,
ibid., 1888.

[16] _Chronology of Ancient Nations_, London, 1879. Arabic and English
versions, by C. E. Sachau.

[17] _India_, Vol. I, chap. xvi.

[18] The Hindu name for the symbols of the decimal place system.

[19] Sachau's English edition of the _Chronology_, p. 64.

[20] _Litterature arabe_, Cl. Huart, Paris, 1902.

[21] Huart, _History of Arabic Literature_, English ed., New York, 1903, p.
182 seq.

[22] Al-Mas`[=u]d[=i]'s _Meadows of Gold_, translated in part by Aloys
Sprenger, London, 1841; _Les prairies d'or_, trad. par C. Barbier de
Meynard et Pavet de Courteille, Vols. I to IX, Paris, 1861-1877.

[23] _Les prairies d'or_, Vol. VIII, p. 289 seq.

[24] _Essays_, Vol. II, p. 428.

[25] Loc. cit., p. 504.

[26] _Materiaux pour servir a l'histoire comparee des sciences
mathematiques chez les Grecs et les Orientaux_, 2 vols., Paris, 1845-1849,
pp. 438-439.

[27] He made an exception, however, in favor of the numerals, loc. cit.,
Vol. II, p. 503.

[28] _Bibliotheca Arabico-Hispana Escurialensis_, Madrid, 1760-1770, pp.
426-427.

[29] The author, Ibn al-Qif[t.][=i], flourished A.D. 1198 [Colebrooke, loc.
cit., note Vol. II, p. 510].

[30] "Liber Artis Logisticae a Mohamado Ben Musa _Alkhuarezmita_ exornatus,
qui ceteros omnes brevitate methodi ac facilitate praestat, Indorum que in
praeclarissimis inventis ingenium & acumen ostendit." [Casiri, loc. cit.,
p. 427.]

[31] Macoudi, _Le livre de l'avertissement et de la revision_. Translation
by B. Carra de Vaux, Paris, 1896.

[32] Verifying the hypothesis of Woepcke, _Propagation_, that the Sindhind
