
"My _what_?" It was obvious that Queen Elizabeth was Not Amused.

"Your nap, dear," Lady Barbara said.

"Don't call me dear," Her Majesty snapped.

"I'm sorry, Your Majesty," Barbara murmured. "But really--"

"My dear girl," Her Majesty said, "I am not a child. I am your
sovereign. Do try to have a little respect. Why, I remember when
Shakespeare used to say to me--but that's no matter, not now."

"About those telepaths--" Boyd began.

"Telepaths," Her Majesty said. "Ah, yes. We must all stick together.
In the hospital, you know, we had a little joke--the patients for
Insulin Shock Therapy used to say: 'If we don't stick together, we'll
all be stuck separately.' Do you see, Sir Thomas?"

"But," Sir Kenneth Malone said, trying desperately to return to the
point. _"Six?"_ He had counted them up in his mind. Burris had
mentioned one found in St. Elizabeths, and two more picked up later.
With Queen Elizabeth, and now William Logan, that made five.

Unless the Queen was counting him in. There didn't seem any good
reason why not.

"Oh, no," Her Majesty said with a little trill of laughter, "not you,
Sir Kenneth. I meant Mr. Miles."

Sir Thomas Boyd asked: "Mr. Miles?"

"That's right," Her Majesty said. "His name is Barry Miles, and your
FBI men found him an hour ago in New Orleans. They're bringing him to
Yucca Flats to meet the rest of us; isn't that nice?"

Lady Barbara cleared her throat.

"It really isn't necessary for you to try to get my attention, dear,"
the Queen said. "After all, I do know what you're thinking."

Lady Barbara blinked. "I still want to suggest, respectfully, about
that nap--" she began.

"My dear girl," the Queen said, with the faintest trace of impatience,
"I do not feel the least bit tired, and this is such an exciting day
that I just don't want to miss any of it. Besides, I've already told
you I don't want a nap. It isn't polite to be insistent to your
Queen--no matter how strongly you feel about a matter. I'm sure you'll
learn to understand that, dear."

Lady Barbara opened her mouth, shut it again, and opened it once more.
"My goodness," she said.

"That's the idea," Her Majesty said approvingly. "Think before you
speak--and then don't speak. It really isn't necessary, since I know
what you're thinking."

Malone said grimly: "About this new telepath--this Barry Miles. Did
they find him--"

"In a nut-house?" Her Majesty said sweetly. "Why, of course, Sir
Kenneth. You were quite right when you thought that telepaths went
insane because they had a sense they couldn't effectively use, and
because no one believed them. How would you feel, if nobody believed
you could see?"

"Strange," Malone admitted.

"There," Her Majesty said. "You see? Telepaths do go insane--it's sort
of an occupational disease. Of course, not all of them are insane."

"Not all of them?" Malone felt the faint stirrings of hope. Perhaps
they would turn up a telepath yet who was completely sane and
rational.

"There's me, of course," Her Majesty said.

Lady Barbara gulped audibly. Boyd said nothing, but gripped the wheel
of the car more tightly.

And Malone thought to himself: _That's right. There's Queen
Elizabeth--who says she isn't crazy._

And then he thought of one more sane telepath. But the knowledge
didn't make him feel any better.

It was, of course, the spy.

How many more are going to turn up? Malone wondered.

"Oh, that's about all of us," the Queen said. "There is one more, but
she's in a hospital in Honolulu, and your men won't find her until
tomorrow."

Boyd turned. "Do you mean you can foretell the future, too?" he asked
in a strained voice.

Lady Barbara screamed: "Keep your eyes on the wheel and your hands on
the road!"

"What?" Boyd said.

There was a terrific blast of noise, and a truck went by in the
opposite direction. The driver, a big, ugly man with no hair on his
head, leaned out to curse at the quartet, but his mouth remained open.
He stared at the four Elizabethans and said nothing at all as he
whizzed by.

"What was that?" Boyd asked faintly.

"That," Malone snapped, "was a truck. And it was due entirely to the
mercy of God that we didn't hit it. Barbara's right. Keep your eyes on
the wheel and your hands on the road." He paused and thought that
over. Then he said: "Does that mean anything at all?"

"Lady Barbara was confused by the excitement," the Queen said calmly.

"It's all right now, dear."

Lady Barbara blinked across the seat. "I was--afraid," she said.

"It's all right," the Queen said. "I'll take care of you."

"This," Malone announced to no one in particular, "is ridiculous."

Boyd swept the car around a curve and concentrated grimly on the road.
After a second the Queen said: "Since you're still thinking about the
question, I'll answer you."

"What question?" Malone said, thoroughly baffled.

"Sir Thomas asked me if I could foretell the future," the Queen said
equably. "Of course I can't. That's silly. Just because I'm immortal
and I'm a telepath, don't go hog-wild."

"Then how did you know the FBI agents were going to find the girl in
Honolulu tomorrow?" Boyd said.

"Because," the Queen said, "they're thinking about looking in the
hospital tomorrow, and when they look they'll certainly find her."

Boyd said: "Oh," and was silent.

But Malone had a grim question. "Why didn't you tell me about these
other telepaths before?" he said. "You could have saved us a lot of
work."

"Oh, heavens to Betsy, Sir Kenneth," Her Majesty exclaimed. "How could
I? After all, the proper precautions had to be taken first, didn't
they? I told you all the others were crazy--_really_ crazy, I mean.
And they just wouldn't be safe without the proper precautions."

"Perhaps you ought to go back to the hospital, too," Barbara said, and
added: "Your Majesty," just in time.

"But if I did, dear," Her Majesty said, "you'd lose your chance to
become a Duchess, and that wouldn't be at all nice. Besides, I'm
having so much _fun_!" She trilled a laugh again. "Riding around like
this is just wonderful!" she said.

_And you're important for national security_, Malone said to himself.

"That's right, Sir Kenneth," the Queen said. "The country needs me,
and I'm happy to serve. That is the job of a sovereign."

"Fine," Malone said, hoping it was.

"Well, then," said Her Majesty, "that settles that. We have a whole
night ahead of us, Sir Kenneth. What do you say we make a night of
it?"

"Knight who?" Malone said. He felt confused again. It seemed as if he
was always feeling confused lately.

"Don't be silly, Sir Kenneth," Her Majesty said. "There are times and
times."

"Sure," Malone said at random. _And time and a half_, he thought.
_Possibly for overtime._ "What is Your Majesty thinking of?" he asked
with trepidation.

"I want to take a tour of Las Vegas," Her Majesty said primly.

Lady Barbara shook her head. "I'm afraid that's not possible, Your
Majesty," she said.

"And why not, pray?" Her Majesty said. "No. I can see what you're
thinking. It's not safe to let me go wandering around in a strange
city, and particularly if that city is Las Vegas. Well, dear, I can
assure you that it's perfectly safe."

"We've got work to do," Boyd contributed.

Malone said nothing. He stared bleakly at the hood ornament on the
car.

"I have made my wishes known," the Queen said.

Lady Barbara said: "But--"

Boyd, however, knew when to give in. "Yes, Your Majesty," he said.

She smiled graciously at him, and answered Lady Barbara only by a
slight lift of her regal eyebrow.

Malone had been thinking about something else. When he was sure he had
a firm grip on himself he turned. "Your Majesty, tell me something,"
he said. "You can read my mind, right?"

"Well, of course, Sir Kenneth," Her Majesty said. "I thought I'd
proved that to you. And, as for what you're about to ask--"

"No," Malone said. "Please. Let me ask the questions before you answer
them. It's less confusing that way. I'll cheerfully admit that it
shouldn't be--but it is. Please?"

"Certainly, Sir Kenneth, if you wish," the Queen said. She folded her
hands in her lap and waited quietly.

"Okay," Malone said. "Now, if you can read my mind, then you must know
that I don't _really_ believe that you are Queen Elizabeth of England.
The First, I mean."

"Mr. Malone," Barbara Wilson said suddenly. "I--"

"It's all right, child," the Queen said. "He doesn't disturb me. And I
do wish you'd call him Sir Kenneth. That's his title, you know."

"Now that's what I mean," Malone said. "Why do you want us to _act_ as
if we believe you, when you know we don't?"

"Because that's the way people do act," the Queen said calmly. "Very
few people really believe that their so-called superiors _are_
superior. Almost none of them do, in fact."

"Now wait a minute," Boyd began.

"No, no, it's quite true," the Queen said, "and, unpleasant as it may
be, we must learn to face the truth. That's the path of sanity." Lady
Barbara made a strangled noise but Her Majesty continued, unruffled.
"Nearly everybody suffers from the silly delusion that he's possibly
equal to, but very probably superior to, everybody else--my goodness,
where would we be if that were true?"

Malone felt that a comment was called for, and he made one. "Who
knows?" he said.

"All the things people do toward their superiors," the Queen said,
"are done for social reasons. For instance, Sir Kenneth: you don't
realize fully how you feel about Mr. Burris."

"He's a hell of a fine guy," Malone said. "I work for him. He's a good
Director of the FBI."

"Of course," the Queen said. "But you believe you could do the job
just as well, or perhaps a little better."

"I do not," Malone said angrily.

Her Majesty reserved a dignified silence.

After a while Malone said: "And what if I do?"

"Why, nothing," Her Majesty said. "You don't think Mr. Burris is any
smarter or better than you are--but you treat him as if you did. All I
am insisting on is the same treatment."

"But if we don't believe--" Boyd began.

"Bless you," Her Majesty said, "I can't help the way you _think_, but,
as Queen, I do have some control over the way you _act_."

Malone thought it over. "You have a point there," he said at last.

Barbara said: "But--"

"Yes, Sir Kenneth," the Queen said, "I do." She seemed to be ignoring
Lady Barbara. Perhaps, Malone thought, she was still angry over the
nap affair. "It's not that," the Queen said.

"Not what?" Boyd said, thoroughly confused.

"Not the naps," the Queen said.

"What naps?" Boyd said. Malone said: "I was thinking--"

"Good," Boyd said. "Keep it up. I'm driving. Everything's going to
hell around me, but I'm driving."

A red light appeared ahead. Boyd jammed on the brakes with somewhat
more than the necessary force, and Malone was thrown forward with a
grunt. Behind him there were two ladylike squeals.

Malone struggled upright. "Barbara?" he called. "Are you all right--"
Then he remembered the Queen.

"It's all right," Her Majesty said. "I can understand your concern for
Lady Barbara." She smiled at Malone as he turned.

Malone gaped at her. Of course she knew what he thought about Barbara;
she'd been reading his mind. And, apparently, she was on his side.
That was good, even though it made him slightly nervous to think
about.

"Now," the Queen said suddenly, "what about tonight?"

"Tonight?"

