
But the spaceport would respond to calls, certainly. Bors considered
these circumstances. A large cargo-ship loaded with foodstuffs
requisitioned to be sent to Mekin. A population which had been
rebellious before--witness the battleship aground to overawe
resistance--and now was rioting.

Bors called for the extra members of his crew. He uncomfortably outlined
the action he had in mind. There was one part that he disliked. He had
to stay on board ship. The important action, as he saw it, would take
place elsewhere. It was so obviously painful for him to outline a course
of action in which other men must take risks he couldn't share, that his
men regarded him with pleased affection which he did not guess at. In
the end he asked for twenty volunteers, and got fifty.

He swung the _Isis_ around to the night side of the planet. Its two port
blisters opened and two boats floated free in the orbit Bors had
established. The ship moved on ahead.

Just at sunup where the spaceport stood, a voice growled down from outer
space.

"_Calling ground!_" it said contemptuously. "_Calling ground! This is
the last ship left of the fleet of Kandar. We're pirates now and we're
looking for trouble! There's a battleship down there. Come up and fight
or we blast you in your spaceport! Just to prove we can do it--watch!_"

Bors said, "Fire one," and a missile went off toward the planet. It was
fused to detonate at the very tip of the fringes of the planet's
atmosphere.

It did. There was light more brilliant than a thousand suns. The long
low shadows of sunrise vanished. The new-rising sun turned dim by
comparison.

The voice from space spoke with intolerable levity. "_Come up with your
missiles ready! We'll give you ten thousand miles of height. And if you
try to duck out in overdrive...._"

The voice was explicit about what it would do to the Mekinese-occupied
areas of Garen if the battleship fled.

It came up to fight. It could do nothing else.




Chapter 8


The trick, of course, was in the timing, and the secret was that Bors
knew what he was doing, while those who opposed him did not. Bors had
declared himself a pirate on Tralee, and here off Garen he'd claimed the
same status. But no Mekinese, as yet, knew why he'd outlawed himself,
nor his purpose in challenging a line battleship to fight. It seemed
like the raving, hysterical hatred of men with no motive but hate. But
it wasn't. The _Isis_ could have sent down a missile with a
limited-yield warhead if its only purpose had been to kill or to
destroy. He could have blasted the warship without warning and it was
unlikely that it was alert enough to send up counter-missiles in its own
defense. But he'd have had to smash everything else in the spaceport at
the same time.

Therefore he'd left his two space-boats in low orbit on the night side
of the planet. In thirty minutes or so they'd arrive near the spaceport,
where there was a large cargo-ship loaded with foodstuffs, for Mekin.
Bors wanted that cargo.

So when the Mekinese battlewagon came lumbering up to space, with her
missile-tubes armed and bristling, Bors withdrew the _Isis_. It was not
flight. It was a move designed to make sure that when the fight began
there would be no stray missiles falling on the planet.

       *       *       *       *       *

Unseen, the _Isis's_ space-boats floated in darkness. They carried ten
men each, equipped with small arms and light bombs. They listened to
such bits of broadcast information as came from the night beneath them.
Boat Number One picked up a news broadcast, and when it was finished,
the petty officer in command pulled free the tape that had recorded it
and tucked it in his pocket. There were items of interest on it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Isis_ came to a stop in space. The battleship rose and rose. It did
not drive toward the _Isis_. There was a maximum distance beyond which
space-combat was impractical; beyond which missiles became mere blind
projectiles moving almost at random and destroying each other without
regard to planetary loyalties. There was also a minimum distance, below
which missiles were again mere projectiles and could not greatly modify
the courses on which they were launched.

But there was a wide area in between, in which combat was practical. The
Mekinese battleship reached a height where it could maneuver on
solar-system drive without rockets. It might, of course, flick into
overdrive and be gone thousands of millions of miles within seconds. But
that would be flight. It would not return accurately to the scene of the
fight. So overdrive could not be used as a battle tactic. It could be
used only for escape.

       *       *       *       *       *

Near the planet, where the two space-boats floated, the dawnline
appeared at the world's edge. The space-boats swung about, facing
backward, and applied power for deceleration. They dropped into the
atmosphere and bounced out again, and in again--more deeply--and then
swung once more to face along their course. They began a long, shallow,
screaming descent from the farthest limits of the planet's atmosphere.

       *       *       *       *       *

Out where the sun of Garen was a disk of intolerable brilliance and
heat, the battleship bumbled on its way. It would seem that its
commander scornfully accepted the _Isis's_ terms of combat and moved
contemptuously to the position where his weapons would be most deadly.
His ship's launching-tubes were at the ready. It should be able to pour
out a cloud of missiles. In fact, a sardonic voice came from the
battleship.

"_Calling pirate_," said the voice.

"Yes," said Bors.

"_If you wish to surrender--_"

"We don't," said Bors.

"_I was about to say_," said the sardonic voice, "_that it is now too
late._"

The radar-screen showed tiny specks darting out from that larger speck
which was the battleship. They came hurtling toward the _Isis_. Bors
counted them. A ship of the _Isis's_ class mounted eighteen
launching-tubes. She should be able to fire eighteen missiles at a time.
The Mekinese ship had fired nineteen. If the _Isis_ opened fire, by all
the previous rules of space-combat, she would need to use one missile to
counter every one of the battleship's, there would still be one left
over to destroy the _Isis_--unless she fired a second spread of
missiles, which was virtually impossible before she would be hit.

It was mockery by the skipper of the battleship. He was doubtless much
amused at the idea of toying with this small, insolent vessel. But Bors
did not try to match him missile for missile. He said evenly,

"Fire one. Fire two. Fire three. Fire four."

He stopped at four. His four missiles went curving wildly, in the
general direction, only, of the enemy.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the planet Garen two shrieking objects came furiously to ground. Men
leaped swiftly out of them and trotted toward a small town, a
settlement, a group of houses hardly larger than a village. One man
delayed by each grounded space-boat, and then ran to overtake the
others. Local inhabitants appeared, to stare and to wonder. The two
landing-parties, ten men in each, did not pause. They swarmed into the
village's single street. There were ground-cars at the street-sides. The
men of the landing-parties established themselves briskly. One of them
seized a staring civilian by the arm.

"To hell with Mekin," he said conversationally. "Where's the
communicator office?"

"Wha--what--?"

"To hell with Mekin," repeated the man from the _Isis_, impatiently.
"Where's the communicator office?"

The civilian, trembling suddenly, pointed. Some of the landing-party
rushed to it. Four went in. There were the reports of blast-rifles.
Smoke and the smell of burnt insulation drifted out. Others of the
magically arrived men went methodically down the street, examining each
ground-car in turn. One of them cupped his hands and bellowed for the
information of alarmed citizens:

"Attention, please! We're from the pirate ship _Isis_. You have nothing
to fear from us. We're survivors of Mekin's invasion of Kandar. You will
please co-operate with us, and no harm will come to you. Your
ground-cars will be disabled so you can't report us. You will not be
punished for this! Repeat: you will not be punished!"

He repeated the announcement. Others of the swiftly-moving
landing-parties drove the chosen ground-cars away from the streets. The
remaining cars received a blaster-bolt apiece. In seven minutes and
thirty seconds from the landing of the small space-craft, a motley
assortment of cars roared out of the village, heading for the capital
city of Garen. As the last car cleared the houses, there was a monstrous
explosion. One of the space-boats flew to bits. Before the cars had
vanished, there was a second explosion. Another space-boat vanished in
flame and debris. The landing-party had no way to return to space. The
inhabitants of the village had no way to report their coming except in
person and by traveling some considerable distance on foot. They were
singularly slow in making that report. The men of the space-boats had
said they were pirates. The people of Garen felt no animosity toward
pirates. They only hated Mekinese.

       *       *       *       *       *

Out in space, missiles hurtled away from the small ship _Isis_. They did
not plunge directly at the battleship. They swung crazily in wide arcs.
The already-launched Mekinese missiles swerved to intercept them. They
failed. More missiles erupted from the battleship, aimed to intercept.
They also failed. The battleship began to fling out every missile it
possessed, in a frantic effort to knock out the _Isis's_ erratic
missiles, which neither instruments nor eyes were able to follow
accurately enough to establish a pattern of destination.

       *       *       *       *       *

Half a dozen ground-cars roared through the streets of the capital city
of Garen. They did not seem to be crowded. One man or at most, two,
could be seen in each car, but they drove as a unit, one close behind
another, at a furious pace. When they needed a clear way, the first
sounded its warning-note and the others joined in as a chorus. Half a
dozen sirens blaring together have an authoritative, emergency sound.
The way was cleared when that imperative clarion demanded it.

They swerved under the landing-grid. They raced and bounced across the
clear surface which was the spaceport. There stood a giant, rotund
cargo-ship, pointing skyward. There were ground-trucks still supplying
cargo for its nearly filled-up holds.

The six ground-cars braked, making clouds of dust. And suddenly there
was not one or two men in each, but an astonishing number. They knew
exactly what they were about. Five of them plunged into the ship. Others
drove off the ground-trucks. Uniformed men ran from the side of the
spaceport toward the ship, yelling. One ground-car started up again,
rushed to the control-building, swerved sharply as a crash into it
seemed inevitable, and dumped something out on the ground. It raced back
to the other cars about the cargo-ship. The hold-doors were closing.

The object dumped by the control-building went off. It was a
chemical-explosive bomb, but its power was adequate. The wall of the
building caved in. Flames leaped crazily out of the collapsed heap. The
landing-field would be out of operation.

The last car skidded to a stop. The two men in it ran for the
boarding-stair of the cargo-boat. There was nobody of their party
outside now. The landing-stair withdrew after them.

Then monstrous, incredible masses of flame and steam burst from the
bottom of the rotund space-ship. It lifted, slowly at first, but then
more and more swiftly. It climbed to the sky. It became a speck, and
then a mote at the crawling end of a trail of opaque white
emergency-rocket fumes. Then it vanished.

       *       *       *       *       *

Far out in space, there was an explosion brighter than the sun, and then
a second and a third. There was a cloud of incandescent metal vapor.
Presently a missile found its target-seeking microwaves reflected by the
ionized metal steam. It plunged into collision with that glowing stuff.
It exploded. Two or three more exploded, like the first. Others burned
harmlessly.

A voice said, "_Cargo-ship reporting. Clear of ground. Everything going
well. No casualties._"

"Report again when in clear space," said Bors.

He waited. Several long minutes later a second report came.

"_Cargo-ship reporting. In clear space._"

"Very good work!" said Bors. "You know where to go now. Go ahead!"

"_Yes, sir_," said the voice from space. Then it asked apologetically,
"_You got the battleship, sir?_"

The voice from space sounded as if the man who spoke were grinning.

"_We'll celebrate that, sir! Good to have served with you, sir._"

Bors swung the _Isis_ and drove on solar-system drive to get well away
from Garen. He watched the blip which was the captured ship as it seemed
to hesitate a very, very long time. It was aiming, of course, for
Glamis, that totally useless solar system around a planet where the
fleet of Kandar orbited in bitter frustration.

Bors got up from his seat to loosen his muscles. He had sat absolutely
tense and effectively motionless for a very long time. He ached. But he
felt a sour sort of satisfaction. For a ship of the _Isis's_ class to
have challenged a battleship to combat, to have deliberately and
insultingly waited for it to choose its own battle-distance, and then to
let it launch its missiles first.... It was no ambush! Bors did not
feel ashamed of this fight. He'd acted according to the instincts of a
fighting man who gives his enemy the chance to use what weapons the
enemy has chosen, and then defeats him.

His second-in-command said, "Sir, the cargo-boat blip is gone. It should
be in overdrive now, sir, heading for Glamis."

"Then we'll follow it," said Bors. Suddenly he realized how his
second-in-command must feel. The landing-party'd seen action--for which
Bors envied them--and he'd felt ashamed because he stayed in the ship in
what he considered safety while they risked their lives. But his
second-in-command had had no share in the achievement at all. Bors had
handled all controls and given all orders, even the routine ones, since
before Tralee.

"I think," said Bors, "I'll have a cup of coffee. Will you take over and
head for Glamis?"

He left the control-room, to let his subordinate handle things for a
time. He'd seated himself in the mess-room when the voice of his
second-in-command came through the speakers.

"_Going into overdrive_," said the voice. "_All steady. Five, four,
three, two--_"

Bors prepared to wince. He put down his coffee cup and held himself
ready for the sickening sensation.

Suddenly there was the rasping, snaring crackling of a high-voltage
spark. There were shouts. There were explosions and the reek of
overheated metal and smoldering insulation. Then the compartment-doors
closed.

When Bors had examined the damage, and the emergency-purifiers had taken
the smoke and smell out of the air, his second-in-command looked
suicidally gloomy.

"It's bad business," said Bors wryly. "Very bad business! But I should
have mentioned it to you. I didn't think of it. I wouldn't have thought
of it if I'd been doing the overdrive business myself."

The second-in-command said bitterly;

"But I knew you'd tried the new low-power overdrive! I knew it!"

"I left it switched in," said Bors, "because I thought we might use it
in the fight with the battleship. But we didn't."

