West, to sink at night into the purple of the sunset.

And then the stars, grand lighthouses of the Heavens, in their turn
incandesce. They too rise in the East, ascend the vault of Heaven, and
then descend to the West, and vanish. All the orbs, Sun, Moon, planets,
stars, appear to revolve round us in twenty-four hours.

This journey of the orbs around us is only an illusion of the senses.

Whether the Earth be at rest, and the sky animated with a rotary
movement round her, or whether, on the contrary, the stars are fixed,
and the Earth in motion, in either case, for us appearances are the
same. If the Earth turns, carrying all that pertains to it in its
motion--the seas, the atmosphere, the clouds, and ourselves,--we are
unable to perceive it, because all the objects that surround us keep
their respective positions among themselves. Hence we must resort to
logic, and reason out the two hypotheses.

For the accomplishment of this rapid journey of the Sun and stars around
the Earth, it would be necessary that all the orbs of the sky should be
in some way attached to a vault, or to circles, as was formerly
supposed. This conception is childish. The peoples of antiquity had no
notion of the size of the universe, and their error is almost excusable.
The distance separating Heaven from the Infernal Regions has been
measured, according to Hesiod, by Vulcan's anvil, which fell from the
skies to the Earth in nine days and nine nights, and it would have
taken as long again to continue its journey from the surface of the
Earth to the bowels of Hades.

To-day we have a more exact notion of the grandeur of the Universe. We
know that millions and trillions of miles separate the stars from one
another. And by representing these distances, we can form some idea of
the difficulty there would be in admitting the rotation of the universe
round the Earth.

The distance from here to the Sun is 149,000,000 kilometers (93,000,000
miles). In order to turn in twenty-four hours round the Earth, that orb
would have to fly through Space at a velocity of more than 10,000
kilometers (6,200 miles) a second.

Yes! the Sun, splendid orb, source of our existence and of that of all
the planets, a colossal globe, over a million times more voluminous than
the Earth, and 324 thousand times heavier, would have to accomplish this
immense revolution in order to turn round the minute point that is our
lilliputian world!

This in itself would suffice to convince us of the want of logic in such
an argument. But the Sun is not alone in the Heavens. We should have to
suppose that all the planets and all the stars were engaged in the same
fantastic motions.

Jupiter is about five times as far off as the Sun; his velocity would
have to be 53,000 kilometers (32,860 miles) per second.

Neptune, thirty times farther off, would have to execute 320,000
kilometers (198,000 miles) per second.

The nearest star, [alpha] of the Centaur, situated at a distance 275,000
times that of the Sun, would have to run, to fly through space, at a
rate of 2,941,000,000 kilometers (1,823,420,000 miles) per second.

All the other stars are incomparably farther off, at infinity.

And this fantastic rotation would all be accomplished round a minute
point!

To put the problem in this way is to solve it. Unless we deny the
astronomic measures, and the most convincing geometric operations, the
Earth's diurnal motion of rotation is a certainty.

To suppose that the stars revolve round the Earth is to suppose, as one
author humorously suggests, that in order to roast a pheasant the
chimney, the kitchen, the house, and all the countryside must needs turn
round it.

If the Earth turns in twenty-four hours upon itself, a point upon the
equator would simply travel at a rate of 465 meters (1,525 feet) per
second. This speed, while considerable in comparison with the movements
observed upon the surface of our planet, is as nothing compared with
the fantastic rapidity at which the Sun and stars would have to move, in
order to rotate round our globe.

Thus we have to choose between these two hypotheses: either to make the
entire Heavens turn round us in twenty-four hours, or to suppose our
globe to be animated by a motion of rotation upon itself. For us, the
impression is the same, and as we are insensible to the motion of the
Earth, its immobility would seem almost natural to us. So that, in last
resort, here as in many other instances, the decision must be made by
simple common sense. Science long ago made its choice. Moreover, all the
progress of Astronomy has confirmed the rotary movement of the Earth in
twenty-four hours, and its movement of revolution round the Sun in a
year; while at the same time a great number of other motions have been
discovered for our wandering planet.

The learned philosophers of antiquity divined the double movement of our
planet. The disciples of Pythagoras taught it more than two thousand
years ago, and the ancient authors quote among others Nicetas of
Syracuse, and Aristarchus of Samos, as being among the first to promote
the doctrine of the Earth's movement. But at that remote period no one
had any idea of the real distances of the stars, and the argument did
not seem to be based on any adequate evidence. Ptolemy, after a long
discussion of the diurnal motion of our planet, refutes it, giving as
his principal reason that if the Earth turned, the objects that were not
fixed to its surface would appear to move in a contrary direction, and
that a body shot into the air would fall back to the West of its
starting-point, the Earth having turned meantime from West to East. This
objection has no weight, because the Earth controls not only all the
objects fixed to the soil, but also the atmosphere, and the clouds that
surround it like a light veil, and all that exists upon its surface. The
atmosphere, the clouds, the waters of the ocean, things and beings, all
are adherent to it and make one body with it, participating in its
movement, as sometimes happens to ourselves in the compartment of a
train, or the car of an aerostat. When, for instance, we drop an object
out of such a car, this object, animated with the acquired velocity,
does not fall to a point below the aerostat, but follows the balloon, as
though it were gliding along a thread. The author has made this
experiment more than once in aerial journeys.

Thus, the hypothesis of the Earth's motion has become a certainty. But
in addition to reasoning, direct proof is not wanting.

1. The spheroidal shape of the Earth, slightly flattened at the poles
and swollen at the equator, has been produced by the rotary motion, by
the centrifugal force that it engenders.

2. In virtue of this centrifugal force, which is at its maximum at the
equator, objects lose a little of their weight in proportion as they are
farther removed from the polar regions where centrifugal force is almost
_nil_.

3. In virtue of this same centrifugal force, the length of the pendulum
in seconds is shorter at the equator than in Paris, and the difference
is one of 3 millimeters.

4. A weight abandoned to itself and falling from a certain height,
should follow the vertical if the Earth were motionless. Experiment,
frequently repeated, shows a slight deviation to the East, of the
plumb-line that marks the vertical. We more especially observed this at
the Pantheon during the recent experiments.

5. The magnificent experiment of Foucault at the Pantheon, just renewed
under the auspices of the Astronomical Society of France, demonstrates
the rotary motion of the Earth to all beholders. A sufficiently heavy
ball (28 kilograms, about 60 pounds) is suspended from the dome of the
edifice by an excessively fine steel thread. When the pendulum is in
motion, a point attached to the bottom of the ball marks its passage
upon two little heaps of sand arranged some yards away from the center.
At each oscillation this point cuts the sand, and the furrow gets
gradually longer to the right hand of an observer placed at the center
of the pendulum. The plane of the oscillations remains fixed, but the
Earth revolves beneath, from West to East. The fundamental principle of
this experiment is that the plane in which any pendulum is made to
oscillate remains invariable even when the point of suspension is
turned. This demonstration enables us in some measure to see the Earth
turning under our feet.

The annual displacements of the stars are again confirmatory of the
Earth's motion round the Sun. During the course of the year, the stars
that are least remote from our solar province appear to describe minute
ellipses, in perspective, in the Heavens. These small apparent
variations in the position of the nearest stars reproduce the annual
rotation of the Earth round the Sun, in perspective.

We could adduce further observations in favor of this double movement,
but the proofs just given are sufficiently convincing to leave no doubt
in the mind of the reader.

Nor are these two the only motions by which our globe is rocked in
space. To its diurnal rotation and its annual rotation we may add
another series of _ten more motions_: some very slow, fulfilling
themselves in thousands of years, others, more rapid, being constantly
renewed. It is, however, impossible in these restricted pages to enter
into the detail reserved for more complete works. We must not forget
that our present aim is to sum up the essentials of astronomical
knowledge as simply as possible, and to offer our readers only the "best
of the picking."

       *       *       *       *       *

The two principal motions of which we have just spoken give us the
measure of time, the day of twenty-four hours, and the year of 365-1/4
days.

The Earth turning upon itself in twenty-four hours from West to East,
presents all its parts in succession to the Sun fixed in space.
Illuminated countries have the day, those opposite, in the shadow of the
Earth, are plunged into night. The countries carried by the Earth toward
the Sun have morning, those borne toward his shadow, evening. Those
which receive the rays of the day-star directly have noon; those which
are just opposite have midnight.

The rotation of our planet in this way gives us the measure of time; it
has been divided arbitrarily into twenty-four periods called hours; each
hour into sixty minutes; each minute into sixty seconds.

In consequence, each country turns in twenty-four hours round the axis
of the Earth. The difference in hours between the different regions of
the globe is therefore regulated by the difference of geographical
position. The countries situated to the West are behind us; the Sun only
gets there after it has shone upon our meridian. When it is midday in
Paris, it is only 11.51 A.M. in London; 11.36 A.M. in Madrid; 11.14 A.M.
at Lisbon; 11.12 A.M. at Mogador; 7.06 A.M. at Quebec; 6.55 A.M. at New
York; 5.14 A.M. in Mexico; and so on. The countries situated to the East
are, on the contrary, ahead of us. When it is noon in Paris, it is
already 56 minutes after midday at Vienna; 1.25 P.M. at Athens; 2.21
P.M. at Moscow; 3.16 P.M. at Teheran; 4.42 P.M. at Bombay; and so on. We
are here speaking of real times, and not of the conventional times.

[Illustration: FIG. 60.--Motion of the Earth round the Sun.]

If we could make the tour of the world in twenty-four hours, starting
at midday from some place to go round the globe, and traveling westward
with the Sun, we should have him always over our heads. In traveling
round the world from West to East, one goes in front of the Sun, and
gains by one day; in taking the opposite direction, from East to West,
one loses a day.

In reality, the exact duration of the Earth's diurnal rotation is
twenty-three hours, fifty-six minutes, four seconds. That is the
sidereal day. But, while turning upon itself, the Earth circulates upon
its orbit, and at the end of a diurnal rotation it is still obliged to
turn during three minutes, fifty-six seconds in order to present exactly
the same meridian to the fixed Sun which, in consequence of the rotary
period of our planet, is a little behind. The solar day is thus one of
twenty-four hours. There are 366 rotations in the year.

And now let us come back to the consequences of the Earth's motion. In
the first place our planet does not turn vertically nor on its side, but
is tipped or inclined a certain quantity: 23 deg. 27'.

Now, throughout its annual journey round the Sun, the inclination
remains the same. That is what produces the seasons and climates. The
countries which have a larger circle to travel over in the hemisphere of
the solar illumination have the longer days, those which have a smaller
circle, shorter days. At the equator there is constantly, and all
through the year, a twelve-hour day, and a night of twelve hours.

[Illustration: FIG. 61.--Inclination of the Earth.]

In summer, the pole dips toward the Sun, and the rays of the orb of day
cover the corresponding hemisphere with their light. Six months later
this same hemisphere is in winter, and the opposite hemisphere is in its
turn presented to the Sun. June 21 is the summer solstice for the
northern hemisphere, and is at the same time winter for the southern
pole. Six months later, on December 21, we have winter, while the
southern hemisphere is completely exposed to the Sun. Between these two
epochs, when the radiant orb shines exactly upon the equator, that is on
March 21, we have the spring equinox, that delicious flowering season
when all nature is enchanting and enchanted; on September 21 we have the
autumn equinox, melancholy, but not devoid of charm.

The terrestrial sphere has been divided into different zones, with which
the different climates are in relation:

1. The tropical zone, which extends 23 deg. 27' from one part to the other
of the equator. This is the hottest region. It is limited by the circle
of the tropics.

2. The temperate zones, which extend from 23 deg. 27' to 66 deg. 23' of
latitude, and where the Sun sets every day.

3. The glacial zones, drawn round the poles, at 66 deg. 33' latitude, where
the Sun remains constantly above or below the horizon for several days,
or even several months. These glacial zones are limited by the polar
circles.

We must add that the _axis_ of the Earth is a straight line that is
supposed to pass through the center of the globe and come out at two
diametrically opposite points called the _poles_. The diurnal rotation
of the Earth is effected round this axis.

The name _equator_ is given to a great circle situated between the two
poles, at equal distance, which divides the globe into two hemispheres.
The equator is divided into 360 parts or degrees, by other circles that
go from one pole to the other. These are the _longitudes_ or meridians
(see Fig. 62). The distance between the equator and the pole is divided
into larger or smaller circles, which have received the name of
_latitudes_, 90 degrees are reckoned on the one side and the other of
the equator, in the direction of the North and South poles,
respectively. The longitudes are reckoned from some point either to East
or West: the latitudes are reckoned North and South, from the equator.
In going from East to West, or inversely, the longitude changes, but in
passing from North to South of any spot, it is the latitude that alters.

[Illustration: FIG. 62.--The divisions of the globe. Longitudes and
latitudes.]

The circles of latitude are smaller in proportion as one approaches the
poles. The circumference of the world is 40,076,600 meters at the
equator. At the latitude of Paris (48 deg. 50') it is only 26,431,900
meters. A point situated at the equator has more ground to travel over
in order to accomplish its rotation in twenty-four hours than a point
nearer the pole.

We have already stated that this velocity of rotation is 465 meters per
second at the equator. At the latitude of Paris it is not more than 305
meters. At the poles it is _nil_.

The longitudes, or meridians, are great circles of equal length,
dividing the Earth into quarters, like the parts of an orange or a
melon. These circumvent the globe, and measure some 40,000,000
(40,008,032) meters. We may remember in passing that the length of the
meter has been determined as, by definition, the ten-millionth part of
the quarter of a celestial meridian.

Thus, while rotating upon itself, the Earth spins round the Sun, along a
vast orbit traced at 149,000,000 kilometers (93,000,000 miles) from the
central focus, a sensibly elliptical orbit, as we have already pointed
out. It is a little nearer the Sun on January 1st than on July 1st, at
its perihelion (_peri_, near, _helios_, Sun), than at its aphelion
(_apo_, far, _helios_, Sun). The difference = 6,000,000 kilometers
(3,720,000 miles), and its velocity is a little greater at perihelion
than at aphelion.

This second motion produces the _year_. It is accomplished in three
hundred and sixty-five days, six hours, nine minutes, nine seconds.
Such is the complete revolution of our planet round the orb of day. It
has received the name of sidereal year. But this is not how we calculate
the year in practical life. The civil year, known also as the tropical
year, is not equivalent to the Earth's revolution, because a very slow
gyratory motion, called "the precession of the equinoxes," the cycle of
which occupies 25,765 years, drags the spring equinox back some twenty
minutes in each year.

The civil year is, accordingly, three hundred and sixty-five days, five
hours, forty-eight minutes, forty-six seconds.

In order to simplify the calendar, this accumulating fraction of five
hours, forty-eight minutes, forty-six seconds (about a quarter day) is
added every four years to a bissextile year (leap-year), and thus we
have uneven years of three hundred and sixty-five, and three hundred and
sixty-six days. Every year of which the figure is divisible by four is a
leap-year. By adding a quarter day to each year, there is a surplus of
eleven minutes, fourteen seconds. These are subtracted every hundred
years by not taking as bissextile those secular years of which the
radical is not divisible by four. The year 1600 was leap-year: 1700,
1800, and 1900 were not; 2000 will be. The agreement between the
calendar and nature has thus been fairly perfect, since the
establishment of the Gregorian Calendar in 1582.

Since the terrestrial orbit measures not less than 930,000,000
kilometers (576,600,000 miles), which must be traversed in a year, the
Earth flies through Space at 2,544,000 kilometers (1,577,280 miles) a
day, or 106,000 kilometers (65,720 miles) an hour, or 29,500 meters (18
miles) per second on an average, a little faster at perihelion, a little
slower at aphelion. This giddy course, a thousand times more rapid than
the speed of an express-train, is effected without commotion, shock, or
noise. Reasoning alone enables us to divine the prodigious movement that
carries us along in the vast fields of the Infinite, in mid-heaven.

Returning to the calendar, it must be remarked in conclusion, that the
human race has not exhibited great sense in fixing the New Year on
January 1. No more disagreeable season could have been selected. And
further, as the ancient Roman names of the months have been preserved,
which in the time of Romulus began with March, the "seventh" month,
"September," is our ninth month; October (the eighth) is the tenth;
November (the ninth) has become the eleventh; and December (the tenth)
has taken the place of the twelfth. Verily, we are not hard to please!

These months, again, are unequal, as every one knows. Witness the
simple expedient of remembering the long and short months, by closing
the left hand and counting the knobs and hollows of the fist, the former
corresponding to the long months, the latter to the short: first knob =
January; first hollow, February; second knob, March; and so on.[12]

[Illustration: FIG. 63.--To find the long and short months.]

Should not the real renewal of the year coincide with the awakening of
Nature, with the spring on the terrestrial hemisphere occupied by the
greater portion of Humanity, with the date of March 21st? Should not the
months be equalized, and their names modified? Why should we not follow
the beautiful evolution dictated by the Sun and by the movement of our
planet? But our poor Earth may roll on a long time yet before its
inhabitants will become reasonable.




CHAPTER IX

THE MOON


It is the delightful hour when all Nature pauses in the tranquil calm of
the silent night.

The Sun has cast his farewell gleams upon the weary Earth. All sound is
hushed. And soon the stars will shine out one by one in the bosom of the
somber firmament. Opposite to the sunset, in the east, the Full Moon
rises slowly, as it were calling our thoughts toward the mysteries of
eternity, while her limpid night spreads over space like a dew from
Heaven.

In the odorous woods, the trees are silhouetted strangely upon the sky,
seeming to stretch their knotted arms toward this celestial beauty. On
the river, smooth as a mirror, wherein the pale Phoebe reflects her
splendor, the maidens go to seek the floating image of their future
spouse. And in response to their prayers, she rends the veil of cloud
that hides her from their eyes, and pours the reflection of her gentle
beams upon the sleeping waters.

From all time the Moon has had the privilege of charming the gaze, and
attracting the particular attention of mortals. What thoughts have not
been wafted to her pale, yet luminous disk? Orb of mystery and of
solitude, brooding over our silent nights, this celestial luminary is at
once sad and splendid in her glacial purity, and her limpid rays provoke
a reverie full of charm and melancholy. Mute witness of terrestrial
destinies, her nocturnal flame watches over our planet, following it in
its course as a faithful satellite.

The human eye first uplifted to the Heavens was struck, above all, with
the brilliancy of this solitary globe, straying among the stars. The
Moon first suggested an easy division of time into months and weeks, and
the first astronomical observations were limited to the study of her
phases.

Daughter of the Earth, the Moon was born at the limits of the
terrestrial nebula, when our world was still no more than a vast gaseous
sphere, and was detached from her at some critical period of colossal
