
"Hullo, Herr Professor!  Hullo, young fella!" he shouted as he came
toward us.

He roared with amusement when he saw the oxygen cylinders upon the
porter's trolly behind us.  "So you've got them too!" he cried.  "Mine is
in the van.  Whatever can the old dear be after?"

"Have you seen his letter in the Times?" I asked.

"What was it?"

"Stuff and nonsense!" said Summerlee harshly.

"Well, it's at the bottom of this oxygen business, or I am mistaken,"
said I.

"Stuff and nonsense!" cried Summerlee again with quite unnecessary
violence.  We had all got into a first-class smoker, and he had already
lit the short and charred old briar pipe which seemed to singe the end of
his long, aggressive nose.

"Friend Challenger is a clever man," said he with great vehemence.  "No
one can deny it.  It's a fool that denies it.  Look at his hat.  There's
a sixty-ounce brain inside it--a big engine, running smooth, and turning
out clean work.  Show me the engine-house and I'll tell you the size of
the engine.  But he is a born charlatan--you've heard me tell him so to
his face--a born charlatan, with a kind of dramatic trick of jumping into
the limelight.  Things are quiet, so friend Challenger sees a chance to
set the public talking about him.  You don't imagine that he seriously
believes all this nonsense about a change in the ether and a danger to
the human race?  Was ever such a cock-and-bull story in this life?"

He sat like an old white raven, croaking and shaking with sardonic
laughter.

A wave of anger passed through me as I listened to Summerlee.  It was
disgraceful that he should speak thus of the leader who had been the
source of all our fame and given us such an experience as no men have
ever enjoyed.  I had opened my mouth to utter some hot retort, when Lord
John got before me.

"You had a scrap once before with old man Challenger," said he sternly,
"and you were down and out inside ten seconds.  It seems to me, Professor
Summerlee, he's beyond your class, and the best you can do with him is to
walk wide and leave him alone."

"Besides," said I, "he has been a good friend to every one of us.
Whatever his faults may be, he is as straight as a line, and I don't
believe he ever speaks evil of his comrades behind their backs."

"Well said, young fellah-my-lad," said Lord John Roxton.  Then, with a
kindly smile, he slapped Professor Summerlee upon his shoulder.  "Come,
Herr Professor, we're not going to quarrel at this time of day.  We've
seen too much together.  But keep off the grass when you get near
Challenger, for this young fellah and I have a bit of a weakness for the
old dear."

But Summerlee was in no humour for compromise.  His face was screwed up
in rigid disapproval, and thick curls of angry smoke rolled up from his
pipe.

"As to you, Lord John Roxton," he creaked, "your opinion upon a matter of
science is of as much value in my eyes as my views upon a new type of
shot-gun would be in yours.  I have my own judgment, sir, and I use it in
my own way.  Because it has misled me once, is that any reason why I
should accept without criticism anything, however far-fetched, which this
man may care to put forward?  Are we to have a Pope of science, with
infallible decrees laid down _ex cathedra_, and accepted without question
by the poor humble public?  I tell you, sir, that I have a brain of my
own and that I should feel myself to be a snob and a slave if I did not
use it.  If it pleases you to believe this rigmarole about ether and
Fraunhofer's lines upon the spectrum, do so by all means, but do not ask
one who is older and wiser than yourself to share in your folly.  Is it
not evident that if the ether were affected to the degree which he
maintains, and if it were obnoxious to human health, the result of it
would already be apparent upon ourselves?" Here he laughed with
uproarious triumph over his own argument.  "Yes, sir, we should already
be very far from our normal selves, and instead of sitting quietly
discussing scientific problems in a railway train we should be showing
actual symptoms of the poison which was working within us.  Where do we
see any signs of this poisonous cosmic disturbance?  Answer me that, sir!
Answer me that!  Come, come, no evasion!  I pin you to an answer!"

I felt more and more angry.  There was something very irritating and
aggressive in Summerlee's demeanour.

"I think that if you knew more about the facts you might be less positive
in your opinion," said I.

Summerlee took his pipe from his mouth and fixed me with a stony stare.

"Pray what do you mean, sir, by that somewhat impertinent observation?"

"I mean that when I was leaving the office the news editor told me that a
telegram had come in confirming the general illness of the Sumatra
natives, and adding that the lights had not been lit in the Straits of
Sunda."

"Really, there should be some limits to human folly!" cried Summerlee in
a positive fury.  "Is it possible that you do not realize that ether, if
for a moment we adopt Challenger's preposterous supposition, is a
universal substance which is the same here as at the other side of the
world?  Do you for an instant suppose that there is an English ether and
a Sumatran ether?  Perhaps you imagine that the ether of Kent is in some
way superior to the ether of Surrey, through which this train is now
bearing us.  There really are no bounds to the credulity and ignorance of
the average layman.  Is it conceivable that the ether in Sumatra should
be so deadly as to cause total insensibility at the very time when the
ether here has had no appreciable effect upon us whatever?  Personally, I
can truly say that I never felt stronger in body or better balanced in
mind in my life."

"That may be.  I don't profess to be a scientific man," said I, "though I
have heard somewhere that the science of one generation is usually the
fallacy of the next.  But it does not take much common sense to see that,
as we seem to know so little about ether, it might be affected by some
local conditions in various parts of the world and might show an effect
over there which would only develop later with us."

"With 'might' and 'may' you can prove anything," cried Summerlee
furiously.  "Pigs may fly.  Yes, sir, pigs _may_ fly--but they don't.  It
is not worth arguing with you.  Challenger has filled you with his
nonsense and you are both incapable of reason.  I had as soon lay
arguments before those railway cushions."

"I must say, Professor Summerlee, that your manners do not seem to have
improved since I last had the pleasure of meeting you," said Lord John
severely.

"You lordlings are not accustomed to hear the truth," Summerlee answered
with a bitter smile.  "It comes as a bit of a shock, does it not, when
someone makes you realize that your title leaves you none the less a very
ignorant man?"

"Upon my word, sir," said Lord John, very stern and rigid, "if you were a
younger man you would not dare to speak to me in so offensive a fashion."

Summerlee thrust out his chin, with its little wagging tuft of goatee
beard.

"I would have you know, sir, that, young or old, there has never been a
time in my life when I was afraid to speak my mind to an ignorant
coxcomb--yes, sir, an ignorant coxcomb, if you had as many titles as
slaves could invent and fools could adopt."

For a moment Lord John's eyes blazed, and then, with a tremendous effort,
he mastered his anger and leaned back in his seat with arms folded and a
bitter smile upon his face.  To me all this was dreadful and deplorable.
Like a wave, the memory of the past swept over me, the good comradeship,
the happy, adventurous days--all that we had suffered and worked for and
won.  That it should have come to this--to insults and abuse!  Suddenly I
was sobbing--sobbing in loud, gulping, uncontrollable sobs which refused
to be concealed.  My companions looked at me in surprise.  I covered my
face with my hands.

"It's all right," said I.  "Only--only it _is_ such a pity!"

"You're ill, young fellah, that's what's amiss with you," said Lord John.
"I thought you were queer from the first."

"Your habits, sir, have not mended in these three years," said Summerlee,
shaking his head.  "I also did not fail to observe your strange manner
the moment we met.  You need not waste your sympathy, Lord John.  These
tears are purely alcoholic.  The man has been drinking.  By the way, Lord
John, I called you a coxcomb just now, which was perhaps unduly severe.
But the word reminds me of a small accomplishment, trivial but amusing,
which I used to possess.  You know me as the austere man of science.  Can
you believe that I once had a well-deserved reputation in several
nurseries as a farmyard imitator?  Perhaps I can help you to pass the
time in a pleasant way.  Would it amuse you to hear me crow like a cock?"

"No, sir," said Lord John, who was still greatly offended, "it would
_not_ amuse me."

"My imitation of the clucking hen who had just laid an egg was also
considered rather above the average.  Might I venture?"

"No, sir, no--certainly not."

But in spite of this earnest prohibition, Professor Summerlee laid down
his pipe and for the rest of our journey he entertained--or failed to
entertain--us by a succession of bird and animal cries which seemed so
absurd that my tears were suddenly changed into boisterous laughter,
which must have become quite hysterical as I sat opposite this grave
Professor and saw him--or rather heard him--in the character of the
uproarious rooster or the puppy whose tail had been trodden upon.  Once
Lord John passed across his newspaper, upon the margin of which he had
written in pencil, "Poor devil!  Mad as a hatter."  No doubt it was very
eccentric, and yet the performance struck me as extraordinarily clever
and amusing.

Whilst this was going on, Lord John leaned forward and told me some
interminable story about a buffalo and an Indian rajah which seemed to me
to have neither beginning nor end.  Professor Summerlee had just begun to
chirrup like a canary, and Lord John to get to the climax of his story,
when the train drew up at Jarvis Brook, which had been given us as the
station for Rotherfield.

And there was Challenger to meet us.  His appearance was glorious.  Not
all the turkey-cocks in creation could match the slow, high-stepping
dignity with which he paraded his own railway station and the benignant
smile of condescending encouragement with which he regarded everybody
around him.  If he had changed in anything since the days of old, it was
that his points had become accentuated.  The huge head and broad sweep of
forehead, with its plastered lock of black hair, seemed even greater than
before.  His black beard poured forward in a more impressive cascade, and
his clear grey eyes, with their insolent and sardonic eyelids, were even
more masterful than of yore.

He gave me the amused hand-shake and encouraging smile which the head
master bestows upon the small boy, and, having greeted the others and
helped to collect their bags and their cylinders of oxygen, he stowed us
and them away in a large motor-car which was driven by the same impassive
Austin, the man of few words, whom I had seen in the character of butler
upon the occasion of my first eventful visit to the Professor.  Our
journey led us up a winding hill through beautiful country.  I sat in
front with the chauffeur, but behind me my three comrades seemed to me to
be all talking together.  Lord John was still struggling with his buffalo
story, so far as I could make out, while once again I heard, as of old,
the deep rumble of Challenger and the insistent accents of Summerlee as
their brains locked in high and fierce scientific debate.  Suddenly
Austin slanted his mahogany face toward me without taking his eyes from
his steering-wheel.

"I'm under notice," said he.

"Dear me!" said I.

Everything seemed strange to-day.  Everyone said queer, unexpected
things.  It was like a dream.

"It's forty-seven times," said Austin reflectively.

"When do you go?" I asked, for want of some better observation.

"I don't go," said Austin.

The conversation seemed to have ended there, but presently he came back
to it.

"If I was to go, who would look after 'im?"  He jerked his head toward
his master.  "Who would 'e get to serve 'im?"

"Someone else," I suggested lamely.

"Not 'e.  No one would stay a week.  If I was to go, that 'ouse would run
down like a watch with the mainspring out.  I'm telling you because
you're 'is friend, and you ought to know.  If I was to take 'im at 'is
word--but there, I wouldn't have the 'eart.  'E and the missus would be
like two babes left out in a bundle.  I'm just everything.  And then 'e
goes and gives me notice."

"Why would no one stay?" I asked.

"Well, they wouldn't make allowances, same as I do.  'E's a very clever
man, the master--so clever that 'e's clean balmy sometimes.  I've seen
'im right off 'is onion, and no error.  Well, look what 'e did this
morning."

"What did he do?"

Austin bent over to me.

"'E bit the 'ousekeeper," said he in a hoarse whisper.

"Bit her?"

"Yes, sir.  Bit 'er on the leg.  I saw 'er with my own eyes startin' a
marathon from the 'all-door."

"Good gracious!"

"So you'd say, sir, if you could see some of the goings on.  'E don't
make friends with the neighbors.  There's some of them thinks that when
'e was up among those monsters you wrote about, it was just ''Ome, Sweet
'Ome' for the master, and 'e was never in fitter company.  That's what
_they_ say.  But I've served 'im ten years, and I'm fond of 'im, and,
mind you, 'e's a great man, when all's said an' done, and it's an honor
to serve 'im.  But 'e does try one cruel at times.  Now look at that,
sir.  That ain't what you might call old-fashioned 'ospitality, is it
now?  Just you read it for yourself."

The car on its lowest speed had ground its way up a steep, curving
ascent.  At the corner a notice-board peered over a well-clipped hedge.
As Austin said, it was not difficult to read, for the words were few and
arresting:--

                 +---------------------------------------+
                 |               WARNING.                |
                 |                ----                   |
                 |  Visitors, Pressmen, and Mendicants   |
                 |        are not encouraged.            |
                 |                                       |
                 |                  G. E. CHALLENGER.    |
                 +---------------------------------------+


"No, it's not what you might call 'earty," said Austin, shaking his head
and glancing up at the deplorable placard.  "It wouldn't look well in a
Christmas card.  I beg your pardon, sir, for I haven't spoke as much as
this for many a long year, but to-day my feelings seem to 'ave got the
better of me.  'E can sack me till 'e's blue in the face, but I ain't
going, and that's flat.  I'm 'is man and 'e's my master, and so it will
be, I expect, to the end of the chapter."

We had passed between the white posts of a gate and up a curving drive,
lined with rhododendron bushes.  Beyond stood a low brick house, picked
out with white woodwork, very comfortable and pretty.  Mrs. Challenger, a
small, dainty, smiling figure, stood in the open doorway to welcome us.

"Well, my dear," said Challenger, bustling out of the car, "here are our
visitors.  It is something new for us to have visitors, is it not?  No
love lost between us and our neighbors, is there?  If they could get rat
poison into our baker's cart, I expect it would be there."

"It's dreadful--dreadful!" cried the lady, between laughter and tears.
"George is always quarreling with everyone.  We haven't a friend on the
countryside."

"It enables me to concentrate my attention upon my incomparable wife,"
said Challenger, passing his short, thick arm round her waist.  Picture a
gorilla and a gazelle, and you have the pair of them.  "Come, come, these
gentlemen are tired from the journey, and luncheon should be ready.  Has
Sarah returned?"

The lady shook her head ruefully, and the Professor laughed loudly and
stroked his beard in his masterful fashion.

"Austin," he cried, "when you have put up the car you will kindly help
your mistress to lay the lunch.  Now, gentlemen, will you please step
into my study, for there are one or two very urgent things which I am
anxious to say to you."



Chapter II

THE TIDE OF DEATH


As we crossed the hall the telephone-bell rang, and we were the
involuntary auditors of Professor Challenger's end of the ensuing
dialogue.  I say "we," but no one within a hundred yards could have
failed to hear the booming of that monstrous voice, which reverberated
through the house.  His answers lingered in my mind.

"Yes, yes, of course, it is I....  Yes, certainly, _the_ Professor
Challenger, the famous Professor, who else?...  Of course, every word of
it, otherwise I should not have written it....  I shouldn't be
surprised....  There is every indication of it....  Within a day or so at
the furthest....  Well, I can't help that, can I?...  Very unpleasant, no
doubt, but I rather fancy it will affect more important people than you.
There is no use whining about it....  No, I couldn't possibly.  You must
take your chance....  That's enough, sir.  Nonsense!  I have something
more important to do than to listen to such twaddle."

He shut off with a crash and led us upstairs into a large airy apartment
which formed his study.  On the great mahogany desk seven or eight
unopened telegrams were lying.

