censured by some Cardinals. But I thought I had heard that since then it
was constantly being taught, even at Rome; and I confess that if the
opinion of the earth's movement is false, all the foundations of my
philosophy are so also, because it is demonstrated clearly by them. It
is so bound up with every part of my treatise that I could not sever it
without making the remainder faulty; and although I consider all my
conclusions based on very certain and clear demonstrations, I would not
for all the world sustain them against the authority of the Church.'"

Ten years later, however, he did publish the book, for he had by this
time hit on an ingenious compromise. He formally denied that the earth
moved, and only asserted that it was carried along with its water and
air in one of those larger motions of the celestial ether which produce
the diurnal and annual revolutions of the solar system. So, just as a
passenger on the deck of a ship might be called stationary, so was the
earth. He gives himself out therefore as a follower of Tycho rather than
of Copernicus, and says if the Church won't accept this compromise he
must return to the Ptolemaic system; but he hopes they won't compel him
to do that, seeing that it is manifestly untrue.

This elaborate deference to the powers that be did not indeed save the
work from being ultimately placed upon the forbidden list by the Church,
but it saved himself, at any rate, from annoying persecution. He was
not, indeed, at all willing to be persecuted, and would no doubt have at
once withdrawn anything they wished. I should be sorry to call him a
time-server, but he certainly had plenty of that worldly wisdom in which
some of his predecessors had been so lamentably deficient. Moreover, he
was really a sceptic, and cared nothing at all about the Church or its
dogmas. He knew the Church's power, however, and the advisability of
standing well with it: he therefore professed himself a Catholic, and
studiously kept his science and his Christianity distinct.

In saying that he was a sceptic you must not understand that he was in
the least an atheist. Very few men are; certainly Descartes never
thought of being one. The term is indeed ludicrously inapplicable to
him, for a great part of his philosophy is occupied with what he
considers a rigorous proof of the existence of the Deity.

At the age of fifty-three he was sent for to Stockholm by Christina,
Queen of Sweden, a young lady enthusiastically devoted to study of all
kinds and determined to surround her Court with all that was most famous
in literature and science. Thither, after hesitation, Descartes went. He
greatly liked royalty, but he dreaded the cold climate. Born in
Touraine, a Swedish winter was peculiarly trying to him, especially as
the energetic Queen would have lessons given her at five o'clock in the
morning. She intended to treat him well, and was immensely taken with
him; but this getting up at five o'clock on a November morning, to a man
accustomed all his life to lie in bed till eleven, was a cruel hardship.
He was too much of a courtier, however, to murmur, and the early morning
audience continued. His health began to break down: he thought of
retreating, but suddenly he gave way and became delirious. The Queen's
physician attended him, and of course wanted to bleed him. This, knowing
all he knew of physiology, sent him furious, and they could do nothing
with him. After some days he became quiet, was bled twice, and gradually
sank, discoursing with great calmness on his approaching death, and duly
fortified with all the rites of the Catholic Church.

His general method of research was as nearly as possible a purely
deductive one:--_i.e._, after the manner of Euclid he starts with a few
simple principles, and then, by a chain of reasoning, endeavours to
deduce from them their consequences, and so to build up bit by bit an
edifice of connected knowledge. In this he was the precursor of Newton.
This method, when rigorously pursued, is the most powerful and
satisfactory of all, and results in an ordered province of science far
superior to the fragmentary conquests of experiment. But few indeed are
the men who can handle it safely and satisfactorily: and none without
continual appeals to experiment for verification. It was through not
perceiving the necessity for verification that he erred. His importance
to science lies not so much in what he actually discovered as in his
anticipation of the right conditions for the solution of problems in
physical science. He in fact made the discovery that Nature could after
all be interrogated mathematically--a fact that was in great danger of
remaining unknown. For, observe, that the mathematical study of Nature,
the discovery of truth with a piece of paper and a pen, has a perilous
similarity at first sight to the straw-thrashing subtleties of the
Greeks, whose methods of investigating nature by discussing the meaning
of words and the usage of language and the necessities of thought, had
proved to be so futile and unproductive.

A reaction had set in, led by Galileo, Gilbert, and the whole modern
school of experimental philosophers, lasting down to the present
day:--men who teach that the only right way of investigating Nature is
by experiment and observation.

It is indeed a very right and an absolutely necessary way; but it is not
the only way. A foundation of experimental fact there must be; but upon
this a great structure of theoretical deduction can be based, all
rigidly connected together by pure reasoning, and all necessarily as
true as the premises, provided no mistake is made. To guard against the
possibility of mistake and oversight, especially oversight, all
conclusions must sooner or later be brought to the test of experiment;
and if disagreeing therewith, the theory itself must be re-examined,
and the flaw discovered, or else the theory must be abandoned.

Of this grand method, quite different from the gropings in the dark of
Kepler--this method, which, in combination with experiment, has made
science what it now is--this which in the hands of Newton was to lead to
such stupendous results, we owe the beginning and early stages to Rene
Descartes.




SUMMARY OF FACTS FOR LECTURES VII AND VIII

  Otto Guericke          1602-1686
  Hon. Robert Boyle      1626-1691
  Huyghens               1629-1695
  Christopher Wren       1632-1723
  Robert Hooke           1635-1702
  NEWTON                 1642-1727
  Edmund Halley          1656-1742
  James Bradley          1692-1762

_Chronology of Newton's Life._


Isaac Newton was born at Woolsthorpe, near Grantham, Lincolnshire, on
Christmas Day, 1642. His father, a small freehold farmer, also named
Isaac, died before his birth. His mother, _nee_ Hannah Ayscough, in two
years married a Mr. Smith, rector of North Witham, but was again left a
widow in 1656. His uncle, W. Ayscough, was rector of a near parish and a
graduate of Trinity College, Cambridge. At the age of fifteen Isaac was
removed from school at Grantham to be made a farmer of, but as it seemed
he would not make a good one his uncle arranged for him to return to
school and thence to Cambridge, where he entered Trinity College as a
sub-sizar in 1661. Studied Descartes's geometry. Found out a method of
infinite series in 1665, and began the invention of Fluxions. In the
same year and the next he was driven from Cambridge by the plague. In
1666, at Woolsthorpe, the apple fell. In 1667 he was elected a fellow of
his college, and in 1669 was specially noted as possessing an
unparalleled genius by Dr. Barrow, first Lucasian Professor of
Mathematics. The same year Dr. Barrow retired from his chair in favour
of Newton, who was thus elected at the age of twenty-six. He lectured
first on optics with great success. Early in 1672 he was elected a
Fellow of the Royal Society, and communicated his researches in optics,
his reflecting telescope, and his discovery of the compound nature of
white light. Annoying controversies arose; but he nevertheless
contributed a good many other most important papers in optics, including
observations in diffraction, and colours of thin plates. He also
invented the modern sextant. In 1672 a letter from Paris was read at the
Royal Society concerning a new and accurate determination of the size of
the earth by Picard. When Newton heard of it he began the _Principia_,
working in silence. In 1684 arose a discussion between Wren, Hooke, and
Halley concerning the law of inverse square as applied to gravity and
the path it would cause the planets to describe. Hooke asserted that he
had a solution, but he would not produce it. After waiting some time for
it Halley went to Cambridge to consult Newton on the subject, and thus
discovered the existence of the first part of the _Principia_, wherein
all this and much more was thoroughly worked out. On his representations
to the Royal Society the manuscript was asked for, and when complete was
printed and published in 1687 at Halley's expense. While it was being
completed Newton and seven others were sent to uphold the dignity of the
University, before the Court of High Commission and Judge Jeffreys,
against a high-handed action of James II. In 1682 he was sent to
Parliament, and was present at the coronation of William and Mary. Made
friends with Locke. In 1694 Montague, Lord Halifax, made him Warden, and
in 1697 Master, of the Mint. Whiston succeeded him as Lucasian
Professor. In 1693 the method of fluxions was published. In 1703 Newton
was made President of the Royal Society, and held the office to the end
of his life. In 1705 he was knighted by Anne. In 1713 Cotes helped him
to bring out a new edition of the _Principia_, completed as we now have
it. On the 20th of March 1727, he died: having lived from Charles I. to
George II.


THE LAWS OF MOTION, DISCOVERED BY GALILEO, STATED BY NEWTON.

_Law 1._--If no force acts on a body in motion, it continues to move
uniformly in a straight line.

_Law 2._--If force acts on a body, it produces a change of motion
proportional to the force and in the same direction.

_Law 3._--When one body exerts force on another, that other reacts with
equal force upon the one.




LECTURE VII

SIR ISAAC NEWTON


The little hamlet of Woolsthorpe lies close to the village of
Colsterworth, about six miles south of Grantham, in the county of
Lincoln. In the manor house of Woolsthorpe, on Christmas Day, 1642, was
born to a widowed mother a sickly infant who seemed not long for this
world. Two women who were sent to North Witham to get some medicine for
him scarcely expected to find him alive on their return. However, the
child lived, became fairly robust, and was named Isaac, after his
father. What sort of a man this father was we do not know. He was what
we may call a yeoman, that most wholesome and natural of all classes. He
owned the soil he tilled, and his little estate had already been in the
family for some hundred years. He was thirty-six when he died, and had
only been married a few months.

Of the mother, unfortunately, we know almost as little. We hear that she
was recommended by a parishioner to the Rev. Barnabas Smith, an old
bachelor in search of a wife, as "the widow Newton--an extraordinary
good woman:" and so I expect she was, a thoroughly sensible, practical,
homely, industrious, middle-class, Mill-on-the-Floss sort of woman.
However, on her second marriage she went to live at North Witham, and
her mother, old Mrs. Ayscough, came to superintend the farm at
Woolsthorpe, and take care of young Isaac.

By her second marriage his mother acquired another piece of land, which
she settled on her first son; so Isaac found himself heir to two little
properties, bringing in a rental of about L80 a year.

[Illustration: FIG. 56.--Manor-house of Woolsthorpe.]

He had been sent to a couple of village schools to acquire the ordinary
accomplishments taught at those places, and for three years to the
grammar school at Grantham, then conducted by an old gentleman named Mr.
Stokes. He had not been very industrious at school, nor did he feel
keenly the fascinations of the Latin Grammar, for he tells us that he
was the last boy in the lowest class but one. He used to pay much more
attention to the construction of kites and windmills and waterwheels,
all of which he made to work very well. He also used to tie paper
lanterns to the tail of his kite, so as to make the country folk fancy
they saw a comet, and in general to disport himself as a boy should.

It so happened, however, that he succeeded in thrashing, in fair fight,
a bigger boy who was higher in the school, and who had given him a
kick. His success awakened a spirit of emulation in other things than
boxing, and young Newton speedily rose to be top of the school.

Under these circumstances, at the age of fifteen, his mother, who had
now returned to Woolsthorpe, which had been rebuilt, thought it was time
to train him for the management of his land, and to make a farmer and
grazier of him. The boy was doubtless glad to get away from school, but
he did not take kindly to the farm--especially not to the marketing at
Grantham. He and an old servant were sent to Grantham every week to buy
and sell produce, but young Isaac used to leave his old mentor to do all
the business, and himself retire to an attic in the house he had lodged
in when at school, and there bury himself in books.

After a time he didn't even go through the farce of visiting Grantham at
all; but stopped on the road and sat under a hedge, reading or making
some model, until his companion returned.

We hear of him now in the great storm of 1658, the storm on the day
Cromwell died, measuring the force of the wind by seeing how far he
could jump with it and against it. He also made a water-clock and set it
up in the house at Grantham, where it kept fairly good time so long as
he was in the neighbourhood to look after it occasionally.

At his own home he made a couple of sundials on the side of the wall (he
began by marking the position of the sun by the shadow of a peg driven
into the wall, but this gradually developed into a regular dial) one of
which remained of use for some time; and was still to be seen in the
same place during the first half of the present century, only with the
gnomon gone. In 1844 the stone on which it was carved was carefully
extracted and presented to the Royal Society, who preserve it in their
library. The letters WTON roughly carved on it are barely visible.

All these pursuits must have been rather trying to his poor mother, and
she probably complained to her brother, the rector of Burton Coggles:
at any rate this gentleman found master Newton one morning under a hedge
when he ought to have been farming. But as he found him working away at
mathematics, like a wise man he persuaded his sister to send the boy
back to school for a short time, and then to Cambridge. On the day of
his finally leaving school old Mr. Stokes assembled the boys, made them
a speech in praise of Newton's character and ability, and then dismissed
him to Cambridge.

At Trinity College a new world opened out before the country-bred lad.
He knew his classics passably, but of mathematics and science he was
ignorant, except through the smatterings he had picked up for himself.
He devoured a book on logic, and another on Kepler's Optics, so fast
that his attendance at lectures on these subjects became unnecessary. He
also got hold of a Euclid and of Descartes's Geometry. The Euclid seemed
childishly easy, and was thrown aside, but the Descartes baffled him for
a time. However, he set to it again and again and before long mastered
it. He threw himself heart and soul into mathematics, and very soon made
some remarkable discoveries. First he discovered the binomial theorem:
familiar now to all who have done any algebra, unintelligible to others,
and therefore I say nothing about it. By the age of twenty-one or two he
had begun his great mathematical discovery of infinite series and
fluxions--now known by the name of the Differential Calculus. He wrote
these things out and must have been quite absorbed in them, but it never
seems to have occurred to him to publish them or tell any one about
them.

In 1664 he noticed some halos round the moon, and, as his manner was, he
measured their angles--the small ones 3 and 5 degrees each, the larger
one 22 deg..35. Later he gave their theory.

     Small coloured halos round the moon are often seen, and are said to
     be a sign of rain. They are produced by the action of minute
     globules of water or cloud particles upon light, and are brightest
     when the particles are nearly equal in size. They are not like the
     rainbow, every part of which is due to light that has entered a
     raindrop, and been refracted and reflected with prismatic
     separation of colours; a halo is caused by particles so small as to
     be almost comparable with the size of waves of light, in a way
     which is explained in optics under the head "diffraction." It may
     be easily imitated by dusting an ordinary piece of window-glass
     over with lycopodium, placing a candle near it, and then looking at
     the candle-flame through the dusty glass from a fair distance. Or
     you may look at the image of a candle in a dusted looking-glass.
     Lycopodium dust is specially suitable, for its granules are
     remarkably equal in size. The large halo, more rarely seen, of
     angular radius 22 deg..35, is due to another cause again, and is a
     prismatic effect, although it exhibits hardly any colour. The angle
     22-1/2 deg. is characteristic of refraction in crystals with angles of
     60 deg. and refractive index about the same as water; in other words
     this halo is caused by ice crystals in the higher regions of the
     atmosphere.

He also the same year observed a comet, and sat up so late watching it
that he made himself ill. By the end of the year he was elected to a
scholarship and took his B.A. degree. The order of merit for that year
never existed or has not been kept. It would have been interesting, not
as a testimony to Newton, but to the sense or non-sense of the
examiners. The oldest Professorship of Mathematics at the University of
Cambridge, the Lucasian, had not then been long founded, and its first
occupant was Dr. Isaac Barrow, an eminent mathematician, and a kind old
man. With him Newton made good friends, and was helpful in preparing a
treatise on optics for the press. His help is acknowledged by Dr. Barrow
in the preface, which states that he had corrected several errors and
made some capital additions of his own. Thus we see that, although the
chief part of his time was devoted to mathematics, his attention was
already directed to both optics and astronomy. (Kepler, Descartes,
Galileo, all combined some optics with astronomy. Tycho and the old ones
combined alchemy; Newton dabbled in this also.)

Newton reached the age of twenty-three in 1665, the year of the Great
Plague. The plague broke out in Cambridge as well as in London, and the
whole college was sent down. Newton went back to Woolsthorpe, his mind
teeming with ideas, and spent the rest of this year and part of the next
in quiet pondering. Somehow or other he had got hold of the notion of
centrifugal force. It was six years before Huyghens discovered and
published the laws of centrifugal force, but in some quiet way of his
own Newton knew about it and applied the idea to the motion of the
planets.

We can almost follow the course of his thoughts as he brooded and
meditated on the great problem which had taxed so many previous
thinkers,--What makes the planets move round the sun? Kepler had
discovered how they moved, but why did they so move, what urged them?

Even the "how" took a long time--all the time of the Greeks, through
Ptolemy, the Arabs, Copernicus, Tycho: circular motion, epicycles, and
excentrics had been the prevailing theory. Kepler, with his marvellous
industry, had wrested from Tycho's observations the secret of their
orbits. They moved in ellipses with the sun in one focus. Their rate of
description of area, not their speed, was uniform and proportional to
time.

Yes, and a third law, a mysterious law of unintelligible import, had
also yielded itself to his penetrating industry--a law the discovery of
which had given him the keenest delight, and excited an outburst of
rapture--viz. that there was a relation between the distances and the
periodic times of the several planets. The cubes of the distances were
proportional to the squares of the times for the whole system. This law,
first found true for the six primary planets, he had also extended,
after Galileo's discovery, to the four secondary planets, or satellites
of Jupiter (p. 81).

But all this was working in the dark--it was only the first step--this
empirical discovery of facts; the facts were so, but how came they so?
What made the planets move in this particular way? Descartes's vortices
was an attempt, a poor and imperfect attempt, at an explanation. It had
been hailed and adopted throughout Europe for want of a better, but it
did not satisfy Newton. No, it proceeded on a wrong tack, and Kepler had
proceeded on a wrong tack in imagining spokes or rays sticking out from
the sun and driving the planets round like a piece of mechanism or mill
work. For, note that all these theories are based on a wrong idea--the
idea, viz., that some force is necessary to maintain a body in motion.
But this was contrary to the laws of motion as discovered by Galileo.
You know that during his last years of blind helplessness at Arcetri,
Galileo had pondered and written much on the laws of motion, the
foundation of mechanics. In his early youth, at Pisa, he had been
similarly occupied; he had discovered the pendulum, he had refuted the
Aristotelians by dropping weights from the leaning tower (which we must
rejoice that no earthquake has yet injured), and he had returned to
mechanics at intervals all his life; and now, when his eyes were useless
for astronomy, when the outer world has become to him only a prison to
be broken by death, he returns once more to the laws of motion, and
produces the most solid and substantial work of his life.

For this is Galileo's main glory--not his brilliant exposition of the
Copernican system, not his flashes of wit at the expense of a moribund
philosophy, not his experiments on floating bodies, not even his
telescope and astronomical discoveries--though these are the most taking
and dazzling at first sight. No; his main glory and title to immortality
consists in this, that he first laid the foundation of mechanics on a
firm and secure basis of experiment, reasoning, and observation. He
first discovered the true Laws of Motion.

I said little of this achievement in my lecture on him; for the work was
written towards the end of his life, and I had no time then. But I knew
I should have to return to it before we came to Newton, and here we are.

You may wonder how the work got published when so many of his
manuscripts were destroyed. Horrible to say, Galileo's own son destroyed
a great bundle of his father's manuscripts, thinking, no doubt, thereby
to save his own soul. This book on mechanics was not burnt, however. The
fact is it was rescued by one or other of his pupils, Toricelli or
Viviani, who were allowed to visit him in his last two or three years;
it was kept by them for some time, and then published surreptitiously in
Holland. Not that there is anything in it bearing in any visible way on
any theological controversy; but it is unlikely that the Inquisition
would have suffered it to pass notwithstanding.

I have appended to the summary preceding this lecture (p. 160) the three
axioms or laws of motion discovered by Galileo. They are stated by
Newton with unexampled clearness and accuracy, and are hence known as
Newton's laws, but they are based on Galileo's work. The first is the
simplest; though ignorance of it gave the ancients a deal of trouble. It
is simply a statement that force is needed to change the motion of a
body; _i.e._ that if no force act on a body it will continue to move
uniformly both in speed and direction--in other words, steadily, in a
straight line. The old idea had been that some force was needed to
maintain motion. On the contrary, the first law asserts, some force is
needed to destroy it. Leave a body alone, free from all friction or
other retarding forces, and it will go on for ever. The planetary motion
through empty space therefore wants no keeping up; it is not the motion
that demands a force to maintain it, it is the curvature of the path
that needs a force to produce it continually. The motion of a planet is
approximately uniform so far as speed is concerned, but it is not
constant in direction; it is nearly a circle. The real force needed is
