
Ben Wrail sat slumped in a chair. A newspaper was crumpled at his feet.
In his lap lay a mangled dead cigar.

"Greg!" yelled Russ. "Greg, there's something wrong!"

Greg leaped forward, stared at the screen. Russ heard his smothered cry
of rage.

In Wrail's forehead was a tiny, neatly drilled hole from which a single
drop of blood oozed.

"Murdered!" exclaimed Russ.

"Yes, murdered," said Greg, and there was a sudden calmness in his
voice.

Russ grasped the televisor control. Ranthoor's streets ran beneath them,
curiously silent and deserted. Here and there lay bodies. A few shop
windows were smashed. But the only living that stirred was a dog that
slunk across the street and into the shadows of an alley.

Swiftly the televisor swung along the streets. Straight into the screen
clanked a marching detail of government police, herding before them a
half dozen prisoners. The men had their hands bound behind their backs,
but they walked with heads held high.

"Revolution," gasped Russ.

"Not a revolution. A purge. Stutsman is clearing the city of all who
might be dangerous to him. This will be happening on every other planet
where Chambers holds control."

Perspiration ran down Russ's forehead and dripped into his eyes as he
manipulated the controls.

"Stutsman is striking first," said Greg, calmly ... far too calmly.
"He's consolidating his position, possibly on the pretense that plots
have been discovered."

A few buildings were bombed. A line of bodies were crumpled at the foot
of a steel wall, marking the spot where men had been lined up and mowed
down with one sweeping blast from a heater.

Russ turned the television controls. "Let's see about Venus and Mars."

The scenes in Ranthoor were duplicated in Sandebar on Mars, in New
Chicago, the capital of Venus. Everywhere Stutsman had struck ...
everywhere the purge was wiping out in blood every person who might
revolt against the Chambers-dictated governments. Throughout the Solar
System violence was on the march, iron-shod boots trampling the rights
of free men to tighten the grip of Interplanetary.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the control room of the _Invincible_ the two men stared at one
another.

"There's one man we need," said Greg. "One man, if he's still alive, and
I think he is."

"Who is that?" asked Russ.

"John Moore Mallory," said Greg.

"Where is he?"

"I don't know. He was imprisoned in Ranthoor, but Stutsman transferred
him some place else. Possibly to one of the prison fleet."

"If we had the records of the Callisto prison," suggested Russ, "we
could find out."

"If we had the records ..."

"We'll get them!" Russ said.

He swung back to the keyboard again.

A moment later the administration offices of the prison were on the
screen.

The two men searched the vision plate.

"The records are most likely in that vault," said Russ. "And the vault
is locked."

"Don't worry about the lock," snapped Greg. "Just bring the whole damn
thing here--vault and records and all."

Russ nodded grimly. His thumb tripped the tele-transport control and
from the engine rooms came a drone of power. In Ranthoor Prison, great
bands of force wrapped themselves around the vault, clutching it,
enfolding it within a sphere of power. Back in the _Invincible_ the
engines screamed and the vault was ripped out of the solid steel wall as
easily as a man might rip a button from his shirt.




_CHAPTER FIFTEEN_


John Moore Mallory sat on the single metal chair within his cell and
pressed his face against the tiny vision port. For hours he had sat
there, staring out into the blackness of space.

There was bitterness in John Moore Mallory's soul, a terrible and futile
bitterness. So long as he had remained within the Ranthoor prison, there
had always been a chance of escape. But now, aboard the penal ship,
there was no hope. Nothing but the taunting reaches of space, the
mocking pinpoints of the stars, the hooting laughter of the engines.

Sometimes he had thought he would go mad. The everlasting routine, the
meaningless march of hours. The work period, the sleep period ... the
work period, the sleep period ... endless monotony, an existence without
a purpose. Men buried alive in space.

"John Moore Mallory," said a voice.

Mallory heard, but he did not stir. An awful thought crossed his mind.
Now he was hearing voices calling his name!

"John Mallory," said the voice again.

Mallory slowly turned about and as he turned he started from his chair.

A man stood in the cell! A man he had never seen before, who had come
silently, for there had been no screech of opening door.

"You are John Moore Mallory, aren't you?" asked the man.

"Yes, I am Mallory. Who are you?"

"Gregory Manning."

"Gregory Manning," said Mallory wonderingly. "I've heard of you. You're
the man who rescued the Pluto Expedition. But why are you here? How did
you get in?"

"I came to take you away with me," said Greg. "Back to Callisto. Back to
any place you want to go."

Mallory flattened himself against the partition, his face white with
disbelief. "But I'm in a prison ship. I'm not free to go and come as I
please."

Greg chuckled. "You are free to go and come as you please from now on,"
he said. "Even prison ships can't hold you."

"You're mad," whispered Mallory. "Either you're mad or I am. You're a
dream. I'll wake up and find you gone."

Manning stood in silence, looking at the man. Mallory bore the marks of
prison on him. His eyes were haunted and his rugged face was pinched and
thin.

"Listen closely, Mallory," said Greg softly. "You aren't going mad and
I'm not mad. You aren't seeing things. You aren't hearing things. You're
actually talking to me."

       *       *       *       *       *

There was no change in the other's face.

"Mallory," Greg went on, "I have what you've always needed--means of
generating almost unlimited energy at almost no cost, the secret of the
energy of matter. A secret that will smash Interplanetary, that will
free the Solar System from Spencer Chambers. But I can't make that
secret available to the people until Chambers is crushed, until I'm sure
that he can't take it from me. And to do that I need your help."

Mallory's face lost its expression of bewilderment, suddenly lighted
with realization. But his voice was harsh and bitter.

"You came too late. I can't help you. Remember, I'm in a prison ship
from which no one can escape. You have to do what you can ... you must
do what you can. But I can't be with you."

Manning strode forward. "You don't get the idea at all. I said I'd get
you out of here and I'm going to. I could pick up this ship and put it
wherever I wanted. But I don't want to. I just want you."

Mallory stared at him.

"Just don't be startled," said Greg. "Something will happen soon. Get
ready for it."

Feet drummed on the metal corridor outside.

"Hey, you, pipe down!" yelled the voice of the guard. "You know there's
no talking allowed now. Go to sleep."

"That's the guard," Mallory whispered fiercely. "They'll stop us."

Greg grinned viciously. "No, they won't."

       *       *       *       *       *

The guard came into view through the grilled door.

"So it's you, Mallory ..." he began, stopping in amazement. "Hey, you!"
he shouted at Greg. "Who are you? How did you get in that cell?"

Greg flipped a hand in greeting. "Pleasant evening, isn't it?"

The guard grabbed for the door, but he did not reach the bars. Some
force stopped him six inches away. It could not be seen, could not be
felt, but his straining against it accomplished nothing.

"Mallory and I are leaving," Greg told the guard. "We don't like it
here. Too stuffy."

The guard lifted a whistle and blew a blast. Feet pounded outside. A
prisoner yelled from one of the cells. Another catcalled. Instantly the
ship was in an uproar. The convicts took up the yammering, shaking the
bars on their doors.

"Let's get started," Greg said to Mallory. "Hold tight."

Blackness engulfed Mallory. He felt a peculiar twisting wrench. And then
he was standing in the control room of a ship and Gregory Manning and
another man were smiling at him. White light poured down from a cluster
of globes. Somewhere in the ship engines purred with the hum of power.
The air was fresh and pure, making him realize how foul and stale the
air of the prison ship had been.

Greg held out his hand. "Welcome to our ship."

Mallory gripped his hand, blinking in the light. "Where am I?"

"You are on the _Invincible_, five million miles off Callisto."

"But were you here all the time?" asked Mallory. "Were you in my cell
back there or weren't you?"

"I was really in your cell," Greg assured him. "I could have just thrown
my image there, but I went there personally to get you. Russ Page, here,
sent me out. When I gave him the signal, he brought both of us back."

"I'm glad you're with us," Russ said. "Perhaps you'd like a cup of
coffee, something to eat."

Mallory stammered. "Why, I really would." He laughed. "Rations weren't
too good in the prison ship."

They sat down while Russ rang the galley for coffee and sandwiches.

Crisply, Greg informed Mallory of the situation.

"We want to start manufacturing these engines as soon as possible," he
explained, "but I haven't even dared to patent them. Chambers would
simply buy out the officials if I tried it on Earth, delay the patent
for a few days and then send through papers copied from ours. You know
what he'd do with it if he got the patent rights. He'd scrap it and the
old accumulator business would go on as always. If I tried it on any
other world, with any other government, he'd see that laws were passed
to block us. He'd probably instruct the courts to rule against the
manufacture of the engines on the grounds that they were dangerous."

Mallory's face was grave. "There's only one answer," he said. "With the
situation on the worlds, with this purge you told me about, there's only
one thing to do. We have to act at once. Every minute we wait gives
Stutsman just that much longer to tighten his hold."

"And that answer?" asked Russ.

"Revolution," said Mallory. "Simultaneous revolution in the Jovian
confederacy, on Mars and Venus. Once free, the planets will stay free
with your material energy engines. Spencer Chambers and his idea of
Solar System domination will be too late."

       *       *       *       *       *

Greg's forehead was wrinkled in thought, his facial muscles tensed.

"First thing to do," he said, "is to contact all the men we can find ...
men we can rely on to help us carry out our plans. We'll need more
televisor machines, more teleport machines, some for use on Mars and
Venus, others for the Jovian moons. We will have to bring the men here
to learn to operate them. It'll take a few days. We'll get some men to
work on new machines right away."

He started to rise from his chair, but at that moment the coffee and
sandwiches arrived.

Greg grinned. "We may as well eat first."

Mallory looked grateful and tried to keep from wolfing the food. The
others pretended not to notice.

       *       *       *       *       *

Grim hours followed, an unrelenting search over two planets and four
moons for men whom Mallory considered loyal to his cause--men willing to
risk their lives to throw off the yoke of Interplanetary.

They were hard to find. Many of them were dead, victims of the purge.
The others were in hiding and word of them was difficult to get.

But slowly, one by one, they were ferreted out, the plan explained to
them, and then, by means of the tele-transport, they were brought to the
_Invincible_.

Hour after hour men worked, stripped to their waists, in the glaring
inferno of terrible force fields, fashioning new television units. As
fast as the sets were constructed, they were placed in operation.

The work went faster than could be expected, yet it was maddeningly
slow.

For with the passing of each hour, Stutsman clamped tighter his iron
grip on the planets. Concentration camps were filled to overflowing.
Buildings were bombed and burned. Murders and executions were becoming
too common to be news.

Then suddenly there was a new development.

"Greg, Craven has found something!" Russ cried. "I can't get him!"

Supervising the installation of a new televisor set, Greg spun around.
"What's that?"

"Craven! I can't reach him. He's blocking me out!"

Greg helped, but the apparatus was unable to enter the Interplanetary
building in New York. Certain other portions of the city adjacent to the
building also were blanketed out. In all the Solar System, the
Interplanetary building was the only place they could not enter, except
the Sun itself.

Craven had developed a field from which their field shied off. The
televisor seemed to roll off it like a drop of mercury. That definitely
ended all spying on Craven and Chambers.

Russ mopped his brow, sucked at his dead pipe.

"Light penetrates it," he said. "Matter penetrates it, electricity, all
ordinary forces. But this field won't. It's ... well, whatever Craven
has is similarly dissimilar. The same thing of opposite nature. It
repels our field, but doesn't affect anything else. That means he has
analyzed our fields. We have Wilson to thank for this."

Greg nodded gravely. "There's just one thing to be thankful for," he
declared. "He probably isn't any nearer our energy than he was before.
But now we can't watch him. And that field of his shows that he has
tremendous power of some sort."

"We can't watch him, but we can follow him," corrected Russ. "He can't
shake us. None of them can. The mechanical shadow will take care of
that. I have one for Craven with a bit of 'bait' off his spectacles and
he'll keep those spectacles, never fear. He's blind as a bat without
them. And we can track Chambers with his ring."

"That's right," agreed Greg, "but we've got to speed up. Craven is
getting under way now. If he does this, he can do something else.
Something that will really hurt us. The man's clever ... too damn
clever."




_CHAPTER SIXTEEN_


A miracle came to pass in Ranthoor when a man for whom all hope had been
abandoned suddenly appeared within the city's streets. But he appeared
to be something not quite earthly, for he did not have the solidity of a
man. He was pale, like a wraith from out of space, and one could see
straight through him, yet he still had all the old mannerisms and
