operate? The consequence? Heart-sounds?]

24. The mechanism which enforces and regulates it, is as simple as it is
beautiful. Each ventricle has two openings, an inlet and an outlet, each of
which is guarded by strong curtains, or valves. These valves open freely to
admit the blood entering from the right, but close inflexibly against its
return. Thus, when the auricle contracts, the inlet valve opens; but as
soon as the ventricle begins to contract, it closes promptly. The contents
are then, so to speak, cornered, and have but one avenue of escape, that
through the outlet valve into the arteries beyond. As soon as the ventricle
begins to dilate again, this valve shuts tightly and obstructs the passage.
The closing of these valves occasions the two heart-sounds, which we hear
at the front of the chest.

[Sidenote: 25. Heart-beats? The heart as a susceptible organ? Heat,
exercise, etc.? Posture?]

25. FREQUENCY OF THE HEART'S ACTION.--The alternation of contraction and
dilation constitutes the {113} heartbeats. These follow each other not only
with great regularity, but with great rapidity. The average number in an
adult man is about seventy-two in a minute. But the heart is a susceptible
organ, and many circumstances affect its rate of action. Heat, exercise,
and food will increase its action, as cold, fasting, and sleep will
decrease it. Posture, too, has a curious influence; for if while sitting,
the beats of the heart number seventy-one; standing erect will increase
them to eighty-one, and lying down will lower them to sixty-six.

[Sidenote: 26. Mental emotions? Sudden excitement? Excessive joy? The
heart-beat rate? Bonaparte and Wellington?]

26. The modifying influence of mental emotions is very powerful. Sudden
excitement of feeling will cause the heart to palpitate, or throb
violently. Depressing emotions sometimes temporarily interrupt its
movements, and the person faints in consequence. Excessive joy, grief, or
fear, has occasionally suspended the heart's action entirely, and thus
caused death. The rate of the heart-beat may be naturally above or below
seventy-two. Thus it is stated that the pulse of the savage is always
slower than that of the civilized man. Bonaparte and Wellington were very
much alike in their heart's pulsations, which were less than fifty in the
case of each.

[Sidenote: 27. Average number of heart-beats? In one hour? Year? Lifetime?]

27. ACTIVITY OF THE HEART.--The average number of heart-beats during a
lifetime may be considered as at the rate of seventy-two per minute,
although this estimate is probably low; for during several years of early
life the rate is above one hundred a minute. In one hour, then, the heart
pulsates four thousand times; in a day, one hundred thousand times; and in
a year, nearly thirty-eight million times. If we compute the number during
a lifetime, thirty-nine years being the present average longevity of
civilized mankind, we obtain as the vast aggregate, fourteen hundred
millions of pulsations. {114}

[Sidenote: 28. Amount of blood expelled? Theories of the ancients?]

28. Again, if we estimate the amount of blood expelled by each contraction
of the ventricles, at four ounces, then the weight of the blood moved
during one minute will amount to eighteen pounds. In a day it will be about
twelve tons; in a year, four thousand tons; and in the course of a
lifetime, over one hundred and fifty thousand tons. These large figures
indicate, in some measure, the immense labor necessary to carry on the
interior and vital operations of our bodies. In this connection, we call to
mind the fanciful theories of the ancients in reference to the uses of the
heart. They regarded it as the abode of the soul, and the source of the
nobler emotions--bravery, generosity, mercy, and love. The words courage
and cordiality are derived from a Latin word signifying heart. Many other
words and phrases, as hearty, heart-felt, to learn by heart, and
large-hearted, show how tenaciously these exploded opinions have fastened
themselves upon our language.

[Sidenote: 29. The tendency at the present time? Why is this view
inadequate?]

29. At the present time the tendency is to ascribe purely mechanical
functions to the heart. This view, like the older one, is inadequate; for
it expresses only a small part of our knowledge of this organ. The heart is
unlike a simple machine, because its motive power is not applied from
without, but resides in its own substance. Moreover, it repairs its own
waste, it lubricates its own action, and it modifies its movements
according to the varying needs of the system. It is more than a mere
force-pump, just as the stomach is something more than a crucible, and the
eye something more than an optical instrument.

[Sidenote: 30. What are the arteries? Their walls? Their membrane?]

30. THE ARTERIES.--The tube-like canals which carry the blood away from the
heart are the arteries. Their walls are made of tough, fibrous materials,
so that they sustain the mighty impulse of the heart, and are not ruptured.
In common with the heart, the arteries have a {115} delicately smooth
lining membrane. They are also elastic, and thus re-enforce the action of
the heart: they always remain open when cut across, and after death are
always found empty.

[Sidenote: 31. Early anatomists? The service of the illustration?]

31. The early anatomists observed this phenomenon, and supposing that the
same condition existed during life, came to the conclusion that these tubes
were designed to act as air-vessels, hence the name artery, from a Greek
word which signifies containing air. This circumstance affords us an
illustration of the confused notions of the ancients in reference to the
internal operations of the body. Cicero speaks of the arteries as
"conveying the breath to all parts of the body."

[Sidenote: 32. The arterial system? The branches and sub-branches of the
arteries?]

32. The arterial system springs from the heart by a single trunk, like a
minute and hollow tree, with numberless branches. As these branches leave
the heart they divide and subdivide, continually growing smaller and
smaller, until they can no longer be traced with the naked eye. If, then,
we continue the examination by the aid of a microscope, we see these small
branches sending off still smaller ones, until all the organs of the body
are penetrated by arteries.

[Sidenote: 33. Successive undulations from the heart? Course of the
arteries? Protection of the arteries? General location of the arteries?]

33. THE PULSE.--With each contraction of the left heart, the impulse causes
a wave-like motion to traverse the entire arterial system. If the arteries
were exposed to view, we might see successive undulations speeding from the
heart to the smallest of the branches, in about one-sixth part of a second.
The general course of the arteries is as far as possible from the surface.
This arrangement is certainly wise, as it renders them less liable to
injury, the wounding of an artery being especially dangerous. It also
protects the arteries from external and unequal pressure, by which the
force of the heart would be {116} counteracted and wasted. Accordingly, we
generally find these vessels hugging close to the bones, or hiding behind
the muscles and within the cavities of the body.

[Sidenote: 34. Where do the arteries lie? If we apply the finger? Pulse?
Where felt?]

34. In a few situations, however, the arteries lie near the surface; and if
we apply the finger to any of these parts, we will distinctly feel the
movement described, taking place in harmony with the heart-beat. This is
part of the wave-motion just mentioned, and is known as the pulse. All are
more familiar with the pulse at the wrist, in the _radial_ artery; but the
pulse is not peculiar to that position, for it may be felt in the _carotid_
of the neck, in the _temporal_ at the temple, and elsewhere, especially
near the joints.

[Illustration: FIG. 30.--THE FORM OF THE PULSE.]

[Sidenote: 35. The pulse as an index? Of what does it inform the physician?
Instrument for recording pulsation?]

35. Since the heart-beat makes the pulse, whatever affects the former
affects the latter also. Accordingly, the pulse is a good index of the
state of the health, so far as the health depends upon the action of the
heart. It informs the physician of the condition of the circulation in four
particulars: its rate, regularity, force, and fullness; and nearly every
disease modifies in some respect the condition of the pulse. A very
ingenious instrument, known as the sphygmograph, or pulse-writer, has
recently been invented, by the aid of which the pulse is made to write upon
paper its own signature, or rather to sketch its own profile. This
instrument shows with great accuracy the difference between the pulses of
health and those of disease. In Fig. 30 is traced the form of the pulse in
health, which should be read from left to right. That part of the trace
{117} which is nearly perpendicular coincides with the contraction of the
ventricles; while the wavy portion marks their dilatation.

[Sidenote: 36. What are the veins? How do they form? What do they
resemble?]

36. THE VEINS.--The vessels which convey the blood on its return to the
heart are the veins. They begin in the several organs of the body, and at
first are extremely small; but uniting together as they advance, they
constantly increase in size, reminding us of the way in which the fine
rootlets of the plant join together to form the large roots, or of the
rills and rivulets that flow together to form the large streams and rivers.
In structure, the veins resemble the arteries, but their walls are
comparatively inelastic. They are more numerous, and communicate with each
other freely in their course, by means of interlacing branches.

[Illustration: FIG. 31.--THE VALVES OF THE VEINS.]

[Sidenote: 37. Valves in the veins? What are they? Their position?
Experiment with the cord?]

37. But the chief point of distinction is in the presence of the valves in
the veins. These are little folds of membrane, disposed in such a way, that
they only open to receive blood flowing toward the heart, and close against
a current in the opposite direction. Their position in the veins on the
back of the hand may be readily observed, if we first obstruct the return
of blood by a cord tied around the forearm or wrist. In a few minutes the
veins will appear swollen, and upon them will be seen certain prominences,
about an inch apart. These latter indicate the location of the valves, or,
rather, they show that the vessels in front of the valves are distended by
the blood, which cannot force a passage back through them.

[Sidenote: 38. What will be proved by the experiment? What inference is
drawn?]

38. This simple experiment proves that the true direction of the venous
blood is toward the heart. That the color {118} of the blood is dark, will
be evident, if we compare the hand thus bound by a cord with the hand not
so bound. It also proves that the veins lie superficially, while the
arteries are beneath the muscles, well protected from pressure; and that
free communication exists from one vein to another. If now we test the
temperature of the constricted member by means of a thermometer, we will
find that it is colder than natural, although the amount of blood is larger
than usual. From this fact we infer, that whatever impedes the venous
circulation tends to diminish vitality; and hence, articles of clothing or
constrained postures, that confine the body or limbs, and hinder the
circulation of the blood, are to be avoided as injurious to the health.

[Sidenote: 39. Capillaries? How regarded? Harvey?]

39. THE CAPILLARIES.--A third set of vessels completes the list of the
organs of the circulation, namely, the _capillary_ vessels, so called (from
the Latin word _capillaris_, hair-like), because of their extreme fineness.
They are, however, smaller than any hair, having a diameter of about 1/3000
of an inch, and can only be observed by the use of the microscope. These
vessels may be regarded as the connecting link between the last of the
arteries and the first of the veins. The existence of these vessels was
unknown to Harvey, and was the one step wanting to complete his great work.
The capillaries were not discovered until 1661, a short time after the
invention of the microscope.

[Sidenote: 40. The circulation of the blood in the web of a frog's foot?
Describe it. How general is the existence of the tissues?]

40. The circulation of the blood, as seen under the microscope, in the
transparent web of a frog's foot, is a spectacle of rare beauty, possessing
more than ordinary interest, when we consider that something very similar
is taking place in our own bodies, on a most magnificent scale. It is like
opening a secret page in the history of our own frames. We there see
distinctly the three classes of vessels with their moving contents; first,
the artery, {119} with its torrent of blood rushing down from the heart,
secondly, the vein, with its slow, steady stream flowing in the opposite
direction; and between them lies the network of capillaries, so fine that
the corpuscles can only pass through "in single file." The current has here
an uncertain or swaying motion, hurrying first in one direction, then
hesitating, and then turning back in the opposite direction, and sometimes
the capillaries contract so as to be entirely empty. Certain of the tissues
are destitute of capillaries; such are cartilage, hair, and a few others on
the exterior of the body. In all other structures, networks of these
vessels are spread out in countless numbers: so abundant is the supply,
that it is almost impossible to puncture any part with the point of a
needle without lacerating tens, or even hundreds of these vessels.

[Illustration: FIG. 32.--WEB OF A FROG'S FOOT, slightly magnified.]

[Illustration: FIG. 33.--MARGIN OF FROG'S WEB magnified 30 diameters.]

[Sidenote: 41. Elasticity of the capillaries? Grain of sand in the eye?
Blush? Other cases?]

41. The capillaries are elastic, and may so expand as to produce an effect
visible to the naked eye. If a grain of sand, or some other foreign
particle, lodge in the eye, it will become irritated, and in a short time
the white of the eye will be "blood-shot." This appearance is due to an
{120} increase in the size of these vessels. A blush is another example of
this, but the excitement comes through the nervous system, and the cause is
some transient emotion, either of pleasure or pain. Another example is
sometimes seen in purplish faces of men addicted to drinking brandy; in
them the condition is a congestion of the capillary circulation, and is
permanent, the vessels having lost their power of elastic contraction.

[Sidenote: 42. Show what time is required for a given portion of blood to
travel once around the body.]

42. RAPIDITY OF THE CIRCULATION.--That the blood moves with great rapidity
is evident from the almost instant effects of certain poisons, as prussic
acid, which act through the blood. Experiments upon the horse, dog, and
other inferior animals, have been made to measure its velocity. If a
substance, which is capable of a distinct chemical reaction (as _potassium
ferrocyanide_, or _barium nitrate_), be introduced into a vein of a horse
on one side, and blood be taken from a distant vein on the other side, its
presence may be detected at the end of twenty or thirty-two seconds. In
man, the blood moves with greater speed, and the circuit is completed in
twenty-four seconds.

[Sidenote: 43. Time required for all the blood to circulate completely
around?]

43. What length of time is required for all the blood of the body to make a
complete round of the circulation? This question cannot be answered with
absolute accuracy, since the amount of the blood is subject to continual
variations. But, if we assume this to be one-eighth of the weight of the
body, about eighteen pounds, it will be sufficiently correct for our
purpose. Now to complete the circuit, this blood must pass once through the
left ventricle, the capacity of which is two ounces. Accordingly, we find
that, under ordinary circumstances, all the blood makes one complete
rotation every two minutes; passing successively through the heart, the
capillaries of the lungs, the arteries, the capillaries of the extremities,
and through the veins. {121}

[Sidenote: 44. What is meant by assimilation? What can you say of its use,
etc.? Time?]

44. ASSIMILATION.--The crowning act of the circulation, the furnishing of
supplies to the different parts of the body, is effected by means of the
capillaries. The organs have been wasted by use; the blood has been
enriched by the products of digestion. Here, within the meshes of the
capillary network, the needy tissues and the needed nutriment are brought
together. By some mysterious chemistry, each tissue selects and withdraws
from the blood the materials it requires, and converts them into a
substance like itself. This conversion of lifeless food into living tissue
is called assimilation. The process probably takes place at all times, but
the period especially favorable for it is during sleep. Then the
circulation is slower, and more regular, and most of the functions are at
rest. The body is then like some trusty ship, which after a long voyage is
"hauled up for repairs."

[Sidenote: 45. What is stated of the injuries to the blood-vessels?]

45. INJURIES TO THE BLOOD-VESSELS.--It is important to be able to
discriminate between an artery and a vein, in the case of a wound, and if
we remember the physiology of the circulation we may readily do so. For, as
we have already seen, haemorrhage from an artery is much more dangerous
than that from a vein. The latter tends to cease spontaneously after a
short time. The arterial blood flows away from the heart with considerable
force, in jets; its color being bright scarlet. The venous blood flows
toward the heart from that side of the wound furthest from the heart; its
stream being continuous and sluggish; its color dark. In an injury to an
artery, pressure should be made between the heart and the wound; and in the
case of a vein that persistently bleeds, it should be made upon the vessel
beyond its point of injury. {122}

QUESTIONS FOR TOPICAL REVIEW.

                                                                       PAGE
  1. In what organisms is the so-called circulatory fluid found?        101
  2. How is it designated in the different organisms?                   101
  3. What can you state of the importance of blood to the body?    101, 105
  4. Of its great abundance, color, and composition?          101, 102, 107
  5. Describe the corpuscles of the human blood.              102, 103, 104
  6. What is said of them in comparison with those of the lower
        animals?                                                        103
  7. Of the importance of sometimes detecting human from other blood?   103
  8. What means have we of detecting blood in spots or stains?     103, 104
  9. What is meant by coagulation of the blood?                         104
  10. What wisdom is there in the law of the blood's coagulation?  104, 105
  11. How is this wisdom made manifest?                                 105
  12. In what cases is the aid of the surgeon required?                 105
  13. What are the two great uses of the blood?                         105
  14. Through what mediums is the blood provided with new material and
        relieved of the old material?                                   105
  15. What do you understand by the operation called transfusion?       106
  16. What cases of transfusion are reported of the lower animals?      106
  17. What can you state of transfusion as practised upon man?          106
