
Bending over the instrument he held, he placed his mouth close to the
top of it, and immediately the humming sounds, which I had noticed
before, emanated from the wires of my apparatus. The thought flashed
through my mind that the Martian held in this instrument a means of
communicating sound. If so, what were the words--what language? The
possibility of what I heard being words, made me strain every nerve to
catch the slightest resemblance to such sounds, but alas, with no
success. That they were intended to convey a message, I became fully
convinced, but I could not rest in the belief that this jumble of sounds
was the Martian language. If the Martians themselves resembled, in so
striking a degree, the inhabitants of Earth, I argued, then it was in
the nature of things to expect a language that, in some way,
corresponded to one of our languages. The fault lay in my instrument, I
was sure of that, and in the keen disappointment of my failure to
receive his message and the excitement of the moment, I gave utterance
to an exclamation of despair. Immediately a smile overspread the
Martian's countenance, and, to my great astonishment, he put down the
instrument and clapped his hands by way of showing his approval.

Before I could recover from my surprise at this new evidence of Martian
familiarity with the customs of Earth, the light suddenly grew dim and
in a few seconds had disappeared completely, leaving the instrument
plunged in darkness. Mars had risen above the frame of the skylight, and
I was no longer in contact with the light-waves. I listened intently,
thinking that if the sound-waves were of the nature of the
electrical-waves we employ in the wireless system, I would still be in
touch with my newly found friend, but I heard no further sound from the
instrument, thus proving that these waves also were projected by the
mysterious agent known only to the Martians.

I had so much to occupy my mind, with what I had just witnessed, and so
many thoughts rushed in upon me regarding the perfecting of my
instrument so that it might properly respond to the sound-waves, that I
did not experience the disappointment I had felt before at the short
duration of our contact with each other. I was glad of the opportunity
to think; I felt that it was necessary to do so before further action,
if I ever hoped to attain the knowledge of Mars and its inhabitants that
my remarkable discovery had placed within my reach. I determined that on
the morrow, if I did not meet with better results in the sound
vibrations, I would try to communicate with the Martian by writing some
simple sentence in a bold hand, and in as many languages as I could.
This I would expose in front of the instrument, but I placed little hope
in the success of the scheme, for it was not possible that the Martian
language would be identical with any of ours.





CHAPTER III.

THE VOICE FROM ANOTHER WORLD


This thought of communicating with the Martian by writing, did not deter
me from using every effort to perfect my instrument, so that this might
be done verbally, or that at least I might hear a voice and a language
spoken on a world millions of miles away. Accordingly I gave the subject
of sound-waves my best thought, and the next morning I had formulated
clearly laid principles upon which to work. By these I hoped to make an
instrument that would be the means of conversing with a Martian.

I had come to the conclusion that the jumble of sound was caused by the
prolonged vibration of the wires after each distinct wave from Mars was
received, as the wires of a piano will vibrate long after they have been
touched. With light-waves it was necessary to have a highly sensitive
surface of the composition, capable of responding to many different
vibrations, according to the light or shade of the object projected.
This accounted for the success I met with upon adopting the coated
wires, and I concluded thereupon that they were indispensable. But I now
saw that the presence of wires in the composition, though successful
with light-waves, was inimical to sound-waves, and it became evident
that a firmer but highly sensitive surface was required. The film had
not brought good results, either from sound-waves or light-waves, but,
it will be remembered, there were wires running through it to give it
rigidity, which, although necessary in my original experiments, must be
avoided in connection with sound vibrations. Clearly my new film must
not be rigid. I thereupon made a film of composition, as thin as
possible, and stretched it upon the frame of my instrument, as a
diaphragm behind the wires, hoping that the sound-waves would pass
between the wires, and vibrate the diaphragm, which, being made of
composition, would undoubtedly glow, but not more than the film had
done. This, I concluded, would not interfere with the image on the
wires, owing to the brilliancy of the latter.

I was now hopeful of success, and anxiously waited for the day to close.
Everything was in readiness by noon, and I had at least eight hours to
wait before Mars would be in a position for wave contact. But now
appeared an adversary with which I had not reckoned. Clouds began to
gather, thin and fleecy at first, but growing heavier as the afternoon
passed, until by evening the heavens were completely obscured. This was
a condition that might last for several days, and the dread of it filled
me with despair. How could I wait for days inactive, without seeing or
even hearing from my friend in Mars?

It now occurred to me how absolutely absorbed I had become in the
Martian investigation. Ordinarily a sociable person, in the past week I
had become a recluse. College friends that I had seen almost daily since
my return to Paris, I now completely neglected, even shunned, lest they
should call at my rooms some evening when I was in wave contact with
Mars. It also occurred to me that, as surely as my friendship and
necessity for them was declining, in like ratio was increasing an
attachment for an inhabitant of another world. I felt a strange soul
kinship for this Martian, which seemed to spring up the moment I saw his
image portrayed on my instrument. And the feeling was not one of
ordinary friendship. I felt I was drawn to him by some mysterious power,
that gave him the place of a brother in my affections--a power that
seemed to have brought us together, and now united us with a great
common and compelling interest. And yet as I pictured his handsome,
almost beautiful face, there was still another face I had seen--but
where? The Martian had been alone, yet I was conscious of a face that
was wonderfully beautiful, that seemed the goal for which I was
striving. It led me to greater effort after failure; the face which I
yearned to see and yet strangely dreaded seeing.

It was useless for me to try to understand such thoughts, and to banish
them from my mind was impossible. I was overcome with a sense of
loneliness. Looking at my watch, I found that it was already past the
hour when Mars would be visible through the window on a clear night,
but, alas, the sky showed no signs of clearing; though my instrument
stood ready, it was useless.

But, obeying some irresistible impulse, I decided to turn on the current
and stand by the instrument in case an opening in the clouds should
occur, for even a moment. I therefore turned the switch that controlled
the current, and immediately, to my astonishment, the surface of wires
became as brilliant as on the previous evening under a clear sky.
Turning away for a moment, to allow my eyes to become accustomed to the
brilliancy, I noticed that the sky was still overcast with heavy rain
clouds. My joy at the discovery that the Martian projecting agent was
not arrested by vapor was unbounded, for it meant that I could be in
wave-contact with Mars every night, during the period that the planet
was visible from Earth.

I approached the instrument with the intention of at once testing the
diaphragm, but, to my surprise, my Martian friend was not there to greet
me. The room and its furnishings, however, were depicted as clearly as
before, and I now had an opportunity to note the instruments, the large
volumes of books, and the maps of the heavens which hung on the wall.
Everything pointed to this being a fully equipped Martian observatory,
though the instruments were entirely strange to me. I was examining
these latter more closely, when heavy portieres parted, and my Martian
friend stepped into the room. So anxious was I to give him a pleasant
greeting, instead of staring at him in a semi-stupefied condition, as I
had done previously, that I forgot, for the moment, my determination to
test my diaphragm at the first opportunity, and greeted him merely with
a smile and a bow.

My serene demeanor lasted but a moment, for simultaneously with his
bowed response to my greeting, came in a clear voice, with perfect
accent: "Bon soir, Monsieur!"

I started back, for it seemed as if someone in the room had spoken, but
then I noticed that the Martian held in his hand the instrument I had
seen on the previous evening. Was it possible that this was his voice,
speaking French from a distance of millions of miles as clearly as if he
were in the room? The thing was incredible! How could a Martian know a
language evolved here on Earth? Was the whole thing then a delusion of
an overwrought mind? I stood staring at the instrument in amazement.

The Martian, now seeing by my actions that his voice had been heard,
raised his instrument and repeated his greeting. The voice rang as
clearly as before; there could be no further doubt; through this
wonderful instrument the Martian's voice was projected, almost
instantaneously to the Earth--millions of miles in a second. The
mysterious power which enabled the Martian to project the waves,
compared with our electricity as the telegraph does with the
stage-coach. Was it strange that I stood aghast, as my mind slowly
comprehended the enormous distance which that voice had traversed almost
instantaneously?

It was some moments before my amazement permitted me to respond to this
extraordinary salutation, then--my mind still too bewildered properly to
grasp the situation--I mumbled something in English about my great
astonishment at hearing a language of Earth spoken from a distant world.

The sound of my voice seemed to cause the Martian some surprise, but
immediately his voice issued again in clear tones from the instrument.

"I greeted you in what I supposed was your native tongue," he said in
perfect English. "Although now we have but one composite language here,
over a thousand years ago we spoke in many languages, as the people of
your planet do at the present time.

"For more than six hundred years we have been able to observe the
progress of your planet," he went on, "through an instrument by which
light-waves are projected and received, and have found it to be
identical with ours of almost fifteen hundred years ago. By the placards
in the streets of your cities and towns, we discovered that you also
spoke in many tongues, and although the progress was necessarily slow,
our astronomers were, by this means, able to learn the principal
languages of Earth.

"Anxiously we have watched and waited for the discovery of an instrument
that would respond to our projected light-waves and reveal to you the
inhabitants of your neighboring planet. At last this momentous time has
arrived. I congratulate you upon bringing it about."

As he spoke, his voice, coming from the diaphragm of my instrument,
sounded as distinct as if he were in the room, and his image, depicted
life-size, made it hard to believe that he was more than a few feet
away. That my informant was, in reality, millions of miles away, my mind
absolutely refused to grasp.

A thousand questions to put to my Martian acquaintance rushed into my
mind, but alas, in supposing that I could not come in contact with Mars
on account of cloud obscurity, I had lost much of the precious time, and
now the waning light on my instrument warned me that the planet would,
in a few moments, pass out of range. We therefore hastily bade each
other adieu, promising to continue our conversation on the morrow, as
though we had parted at a street corner. The light now faded completely,
and the instrument, that a few moments previously had been animated with
such an exuberance of life and mystery, now stood before me wrapped in
profound darkness and silence.

How impossible, how inconceivable it all seemed! How the outside world
would scoff if I attempted to explain or publish my discovery! I felt
that the time had not yet come to take anyone into my confidence, and I
determined still to keep all a secret. I was then unaware, however, that
the more I learned of Mars and its people the more closely I would guard
my knowledge.

Pacing excitedly up and down my laboratory, I spent most of the night in
reviewing what I had heard, and speculating the rare knowledge that the
morrow would bring. The secrets of another world would be unfolded to
me, and the scientific achievements of a people over a thousand years in
advance of us would be mine. What glorious possibilities this disclosed!
What a brilliant future as a scientist such knowledge would assure me!
And in the exuberance of my spirits I little thought that the possession
of this knowledge would come to mean naught to me; for I had yet to
learn that man cannot share the riches of another world without also
becoming a partner in its sorrows and its passions.





CHAPTER IV.

THE STORY OF MARTIAN LIFE.


With a determination of finding a room from which I could command a
longer view of Mars, the next day I visited several studios which were
for rent, and finally succeeded in securing one formerly occupied by a
photographer, which was located on the top floor of a house in the
immediate vicinity of my old rooms.

The room was large, in fact it occupied the entire top floor of the
building, and this feature pleased me greatly. The only communication
with the house was by a door which had every appearance of an outside
door, so heavy were the hinges and lock. The landlord, in drawing my
attention to this, had smiled and remarked that the former tenant, who
lived in another section of the city, had been very careful always to
leave his studio securely locked. The ceiling of half the room was
entirely of glass, sloping down to the floor at the angle of the roof,
and this was the only means of obtaining air and light. It was
constructed in two sections, which would slide back and forth, for the
purpose of ventilation. This arrangement, I found, would give me an
unobstructed view of Mars for several hours each night. Nothing could be
better adapted to my requirements; I could not be observed by anyone
outside, and I need not fear being overheard while conversing with my
Martian friend.

I therefore determined to have my instrument moved at once, in order to
be installed in my new quarters that evening.

I next bought a crate, used for large oil paintings, and upon its
delivery at my old rooms, I immediately commenced packing my instrument
in it. Owing to its great weight this was no easy work, and it would
express the procedure better if I said that I placed the crate around
the instrument. Making sure that it was all covered carefully, I had it
moved to my new quarters and set in place, the impression of the
carriers being that it was a painting which I was very anxious that no
one should see until it was completed.

As it was now within an hour of the time when I expected Mars to appear,
I decided to leave my books and other belongings at my former rooms
until the next day. I uncovered the instrument, and got everything into
readiness, being careful to see that the batteries were all in place, so
that nothing might occur to interrupt the long talk with the Martian
which I was anticipating.

Having turned on the current, and opened the sliding section of the
glass roof, I now awaited the appearance of Mars. There occurred to me
question alter question that seemed of sufficient importance to prompt
immediate inquiry, only to be forgotten as others came into my mind;
until the presence of the increasing faint glow on my instrument found
me unprepared with any single question of actual importance.
Consequently I decided to allow my distant informant to continue with
the account of Martian observations of Earth, as being at once the most
instructive and surest way of suggesting important questions.

As my eyes got accustomed to the brilliancy I saw the Martian waiting
for me, with his instrument in readiness. We greeted each other with the
affection we both now sincerely felt, and though I could not clasp his
hand, I endeavored in every way to show him the brotherly warmth of
feeling I entertained for him.

It now occurred to me that in the excitement of our first communication
with each other, we had completely overlooked an important
conventionality. I therefore announced that I was known on Earth as
Harold Lonsdale.

"My name is Almos," he responded, his dark eyes sparkling as he quickly
entered into the spirit of the occasion. "Although it was customary once
for us to have two or three names, we found it in better harmony with
the changed conditions of the present time to have but one. This you
will more easily understand when you have become better acquainted with
this planet and its people."

"And as I am most anxious to learn more about the conditions of life in
your world," I added, eagerly, "I trust you will continue the account of
Martian observations of Earth, which was barely commenced last evening
when the wave contact ceased. But first let me ask how you located my
whereabouts, for this morning I moved to another section of the city."

"Ah!" he replied, with a smile, "I was not aware you had moved.
Experience has taught me about where to look for the large city you call
Paris, on the side of Earth that is now exposed to us, and then by
systematic search I soon located the response of your instrument.

"As our observations of Earth with projected light-rays have been
carried on for seven hundred years, it will be necessary to give you an
outline of our history and the progress of science covering that time.
This will not only be of interest as a forecast of your own world's
future, but will also prove of the greatest value to you, if you decide
to visit this planet, an undertaking which I am convinced lies within
your power."

His words wrung an exclamation of astonishment from my lips, but, as
though not wishing to be interrupted, he went on:

"Seven hundred years ago, a power derived from that substance known on
Earth as radium, was discovered on Mars. This power was found to be
capable of projecting light rays almost instantaneously through space
for inconceivable distances, at the same time preserving their integrity
to such a remarkable degree that they would reach the farthest planets
without diffusion or diminution. Thus my image, thrown upon the
instrument before me, is conveyed to Earth in light-waves by this flow
of super-radium with such tremendous speed as to be practically
instantaneous; these are received in your instrument, which is
responsive to the flow of super-radium, in the same condition as when
they left Mars, consequently depicting the image life-size.

"Having come in contact with another body in the heavens, this
outward-flowing current of super-radium is changed to an inward-flowing
current. In making this change it frees the light-waves it conveyed from
Mars, and retains the light-waves of the objects about it, which is
merely repeating its performance upon leaving Mars. These light-waves of
objects on another globe it now conveys on its return journey to Mars,
entering a receiving instrument and depicting the objects therein
life-size.

"Possessing rays invisible to the human eye, except when agitated by a
substance of its own nature, daylight on a planet becomes an entirely
unnecessary adjunct to observations made with super-radium, and we are
able to explore the dark side of planets and other heavenly bodies, just
as effectually as those illuminated by the sun.

"Thus have we, for seven hundred years, been able to study the country,
cities, streets, and people of Earth. And not only did we note a
remarkable similarity in the people, buildings, and scientific progress
to early Martian ages, but, by the advertisements, placards, and other
street signs we were able to learn the principal languages spoken on
your planet, and these were found to correspond in a remarkable degree
to those in use on Mars, before conditions on our planet made the
adoption of a composite language an absolute necessity. And undoubtedly
these same conditions in due time will face the people of Earth."

I could not restrain an exclamation of astonishment at this prediction,
but Almos at once reassured me by stating that when the time did come,
it would be the beginning of universal peace and happiness on Earth.

"Am I to understand, then," said I, "that a condition of perfect
happiness prevails on Mars?"

"Unhappiness is considered a disease with us," Almos rejoined. "It is
heard of, but very rarely, and is treated as a serious malady. But you
will understand these things better as you gradually become acquainted
with the conditions here. You must remember that you are in the position
of a man over fifteen hundred years in advance of his day.

"Having become convinced, through close observations, that the progress
of Earth was identical with that of Mars, and that Earth, being the
younger planet, was consequently following our lead, we anxiously
watched for the discovery on Earth of the wonderful power that had been
the means of bringing us into such close visual contact with you. When
you discovered radium, we realized that this would eventually lead to
the discovery of the higher power, but we feared that this might not be
for hundreds of years.

"That communication was possible through the medium of radium and
electricity, we were totally ignorant of. It was the responsive
properties of radium in your instrument, however, that first attracted
my attention while searching over Paris for an object I had previously
been observing. Thereafter my interest in your progress was as great as
your own, and every twenty-four hours, when the eastern hemisphere of
Earth was turned toward Mars, I searched with the radioscope until I got
the response of your instrument.

