     above another, and sliding around their axles in such an
     amazing pomp and solemnity. If, after this, we contemplate
     those wide fields of aether, that reach in height as far as
     from Saturn to the fixed stars, and run abroad almost to an
     infinitude, our imagination finds its capacity filled with
     so immense a prospect, as puts it upon the stretch to
     comprehend it. But if we yet rise higher, and consider the
     fixed stars as so many vast oceans of flame, that are each
     of them attended with a different set of planets, and still
     discover new firmaments and new lights, that are sunk
     farther in those unfathomable depths of aether, so as not to
     be seen by the strongest of our telescopes, we are lost in
     such a labyrinth of suns and worlds, and confounded with the
     immensity and magnificence of nature.

     "Nothing is more pleasant to the fancy, than to enlarge
     itself by degrees, in its contemplation of the various
     proportions which its several objects bear to each other,
     when it compares the body of man to the bulk of the whole
     earth, the earth to the circle it describes round the sun,
     that circle to the sphere of the fixed stars, the sphere of
     the fixed stars to the circuit of the whole creation, the
     whole creation itself to the infinite space that is
     everywhere diffused around it; ... But if, after all this,
     we take the least particle of these animal spirits, and
     consider its capacity wrought into a world, that shall
     contain within those narrow dimensions a heaven and earth,
     stars and planets, and every different species of living
     creatures, in the same analogy and proportion they bear to
     each other in our own universe; such a speculation, by
     reason of its nicety, appears ridiculous to those who have
     not turned their thoughts that way, though, at the same
     time, it is founded on no less than the evidence of a
     demonstration."[375]

[Footnote 374: Pope: _Works_, VI, 110.]

[Footnote 375: Addison: _Spectator_, No. 420, (IV, 372-373). An
interesting contrast to this passage and a good illustration of how
the traditional phraseology continued in poetry is found in Addison's
famous hymn, written a year later:

    "Whilst all the stars that round her [earth] burn
    And all the planets in their turn,
    Confirm the tidings as they roll,
    And spread the truth from pole to pole.

    "What though in solemn silence all
    Move round this dark terrestrial ball;
    What though no real voice nor sound
    Amidst their radiant orbs be found;

    "In reason's ear they all rejoice,
    And utter forth a glorious voice;
    Forever singing, as they shine,
    'The hand that made us is divine'."]

A little later, Cotton Mather declared (1721) that the "Copernican
hypothesis is now generally preferred," and "that there is no
objection against the motion of the earth but what has had a full
solution."[376] Soon the semi-popular scientific books took up the
Newtonian astronomy. One such was described as "useful for all
sea-faring Men, as well as Gentlemen, and Others."[377]
"Newtonianisme pour les Dames" was advertised in France in the
forties.[378] By 1738 when Pope wrote the _Universal Prayer_:

    "Yet not to earth's contracted span
      Thy goodness let me bound
    Or think thee Lord alone of man,
      When thousand worlds are round,"

the Copernican-Newtonian astronomy had become a commonplace to most
well-educated people in England. To be sure, the great John Wesley
(1770) considered the systems of the universe merely "ingenious
conjectures," but then, he doubted whether "more than Probabilities we
shall ever attain in regard to things at so great a distance from
us."[379]

[Footnote 376: Mather: _Christian Philosopher_, 75, 76.]

[Footnote 377: Leadbetter: _Astronomy_ (1729).]

[Footnote 378: In de Maupertius: _Ouvrages Divers_, (at the back).]

[Footnote 379: Wesley: _Compendium of Natural Philosophy_, I, 14,
139.]

The old phraseology, however, did recur occasionally, especially in
poetry and in hymns. For instance, a hymnal (preface dated 1806)
contains such choice selections as:

    "Before the pondr'ous earthly globe
      In fluid air was stay'd,
    Before the ocean's mighty springs
      Their liquid stores display'd"--

and:

    "Who led his blest unerring hand
      Or lent his needful aid
    When on its strong unshaken base
      The pondr'ous earth was laid?"[380]

[Footnote 380: Dobell: _Hymns_, No. 5, No. 10.]

But too much importance should not be attributed to such passages;
though poetry and astronomy need not conflict, as Keble
illustrated:[381]

    "Ye Stars that round the Sun of Righteousness
      In glorious order roll...."

[Footnote 381: Keble: _Christian Year_, 279.]

By the middle of the 18th century in England, one could say with Horne
"that the Newtonian System had been in possession of the chair for
some years;"[382] but it had not yet convinced the common people, for
as Pike wrote in 1753, "Many Common Christians to this day firmly
believe that the earth really stands still and that the sun moves all
round the earth once a day: neither can they be easily persuaded out
of this opinion, because they look upon themselves bound to believe
what the Scripture asserts."[383]

[Footnote 382: Horne: _Fair, Candid, Impartial Statement ..._, 4.]

[Footnote 383: Pike: _Philosophia Sacra_, 43.]

There was, however, just at this time a little group of thinkers who
objected to Newton's scheme, "because of the endless uninterrupted
flux of matter from the sun in light, an expense which should destroy
that orb."[384] These Hutchinsonians conceived of light as pure ether
in motion springing forth from the sun, growing more dense the further
it goes till it becomes air, and, striking the circumference of the
universe (which is perhaps an immovable solid), is thrown back toward
the sun and melted into light again. Its force as its tides of motion
strike the earth and the other planets produces their constant
gyrations.[385] Men like Duncan Forbes, Lord President of the Court of
Sessions, and George Horne, President of Magdalen College, Oxford, as
a weapon against rationalism, favored this notion that had been
expounded by John Hutchinson (1674-1737) in his _Moses's Principia_
(1724).[386] They were also strongly attracted by the scriptural
symbolism with which the book abounds. Leslie Stephen summarizes their
doctrines as (1) extreme dislike for rationalism, (2) a fanatical
respect for the letter of the Bible, and (3) an attempt to enlist the
rising powers of scientific enquiry upon the side of orthodoxy.[387]
This "little eddy of thought"[388] was not of much influence even at
that time, but it has a certain interest as indicating the positions
men have taken when on the defensive against new ideas.

[Footnote 384: Forbes: _Letter_, (1755).]

[Footnote 385: See Wesley: I, 136-7.]

[Footnote 386: _Dict. of Nat. Biog._: "Hutchinson."]

[Footnote 387: Stephen: _Hist. of Eng. Thought_: I, 390.]

[Footnote 388: Ibid: 391.]




CHAPTER V.

THE CHURCH AND THE NEW ASTRONOMY: CONCLUSION.


Astronomical thought on the Continent was more hampered, in the
Catholic countries especially, by the restrictive opinions of the
Church. Yet in 1757, when the decree prohibiting all books dealing
with the Copernican doctrine was removed from the Index, that system
had already long been adopted by the more celebrated academies of
Europe, for so Mme. de Premontval claimed in 1750; and it was then
reaching out to non-scientific readers, through simple accounts for
"ladies and others not well versed in these somewhat technical
matters."[389] The great landmark in the development of the doctrine
was the publication of Newton's _Principia_ in 1687, though its effect
in Europe was of course slower in being felt than it was in England.
Newton's work and that of the astronomers immediately following him
was influential except where the Church's prohibitions still held
sway.

[Footnote 389: de Premontval: _Le Mechaniste Philosophe_, 54, 72. (The
Hague, 1750).]

During this period, the books published in free Holland were more
outspoken in their radical acceptance or in their uncertainty of the
truth than were those published in the Catholic countries. Christian
Huygens's treatises on the plurality of worlds not only fully accepted
the Copernican doctrine, but like those of Bishop Wilkins in England,
deduced therefrom the probability that the other planets are inhabited
even as the earth is. A writer[390] on the sphere in 1697 stated the
different theories of the universe so that his readers might choose
the one that to them appeared the most probable. He himself preferred
the Cartesian explanation as the simplest and most convenient of all,
"though it should be held merely as an hypothesis and not as in
absolute agreement with the truth." Pierre Bayle[391] also explained
the different systems, but appears himself to waver between the
Copernican and the Tychonic conceptions. He used, however, the old
word "perigee" (nearness to the earth) rather than the Newtonian
"perihelion" (nearness to the sun). His objections to the Copernican
doctrine have a familiar ring: It is contrary to the evidence of the
senses; a stone would not fall back to its starting-place, nor could a
bird return to her nest; the earth would not be equidistant from the
horizon and the two poles; and lastly it is contrary to the
Scriptures. Only a few years later, however, De Maupertius wrote that
no one at that day (1744) doubted any longer the motion of the earth
around its axis, and he believed with Newton that the laws of gravity
applied to the universe as well as to the earth. Then he proceeded to
explain the Copernican system which he favored on the ground of its
greater probability.[392]

[Footnote 390: de Brisbar: _Calendrier Historique_, (Leyden),
228-233.]

[Footnote 391: Bayle: _Systeme Abrege de Philosophie_ (The Hague,
1731), IV, 394-412.]

[Footnote 392: de Maupertius: _Elements de Geographie_, xv, 9-14.]

Even in 1750, Mme. de Premontval thought it wiser to publish in
Holland her little life of her father, _Le Mechaniste Philosophe_.
This Jean Piegeon, she claimed, was the first man in France to make
spheres according to the Copernican system. An orphan, he was educated
by a priest; then took up carpentry and mechanics. When he tried to
make a celestial sphere according to the Ptolemaic system, he became
convinced of its falsity because of its complexities. Therefore he
plunged into a study of the new system which he adopted. His first
Copernican sphere was exhibited before Louis XIV at Versailles in 1706
and was bought by the king and presented to the Academie des
Sciences.[393] The second was taken to Canada by one of the royal
officials. Public interest in his work was keen; even Peter the Great,
who was then in Paris, visited his workroom.[394] M. Piegeon also
wrote a book on the Copernican system.[395]

[Footnote 393: de Premontval: 123.]

[Footnote 394: Ibid: 132.]

[Footnote 395: Ibid: 157.]

It seems, however, as though M. Piegeon were slightly in advance of
his age, or more daring, perhaps, than his contemporaries, for there
was almost no outspoken support of the Copernican system at this time
in France. Even Cassini of the French Academie des Sciences did not
explicitly support it, though he spoke favorably of it and remarked
that recent observations had demonstrated the revolutions of each
planet around the sun in accordance with that supposition.[396] But
the great orator, Bossuet, (1627-1703), clung to the Ptolemaic
conception as alone orthodox, and scriptural.[397] Abbe Fenelon
(1651-1715) writing on the existence of God, asked: "Who is it who has
hung up this motionless ball of the earth; who has placed the
foundations for it," and "who has taught the sun to turn ceasely
[Transcriber's Note: ceaselessly] and regularly in spaces where
nothing troubles it?"[398] And a writer on the history of the heavens
as treated by poets, philosophers and Moses (1739), tells Gassendi,
Descartes and many other great thinkers that their ideas of the
heavens are proved vain and false by daily experience as well as by
the account of Creation; for the most enlightened experience is wholly
and completely in accord with the account of Moses. This book was
written, the author said, for young people students of philosophy and
the humanities, also for teachers.[399]

[Footnote 396: Cassini: _De l'Origine et du Progres ..._, 35.]

[Footnote 397: Shields: 59. I have failed to find this reference in
Bossuet's works.]

[Footnote 398: Fenelon: _Oeuvres_, I, 3 and 7.]

[Footnote 399: Pluche: _Histoire du Ciel_: viii, ix, xiii.]

The Jesuit order, still a power in Europe in the early 18th century,
was bound to the support of the traditional view, which led them into
some curious positions in connection with the discoveries made in
astronomy during this period. Thus the famous Jesuit astronomer
Boscovich (1711-1787) published in Rome in 1746 a study of the
ellipticity of the orbits of planets which necessitated the use of the
Copernican position; he stated he had assumed it as true merely to
facilitate his labors. In the second edition (1785) published some
years after the removal from the Index of the decree against books
teaching the Copernican doctrine (at his instigation, it is
claimed),[400] he added a note to this passage asking the reader to
remember the time and the place of its former publication.[401] Just
at the end of the preceding century, one of the seminary fathers at
Liege maintained that were the earth to move, being made up of so
many and divers combustible materials, it would soon burst into flames
and be reduced to ashes![402]

[Footnote 400: _Cath. Ency._: "Boscovich."]

[Footnote 401: _Opera_: III (1785).]

[Footnote 402: Cited in Monchamp: 335 note.]

During the 18th century at Louvain the Copernican doctrine was warmly
supported, but as a theory. A MS. of a course given there in 1748 has
come down to us, in which the professor, while affirming its
hypothetical character, described it as a simple, clear and
satisfactory explanation of the phenomena, then answered all the
objections made against it by theologians, physicists, and
astronomers.[403] A few years earlier, (1728) a Jesuit at Liege,
though well acquainted with Newton's work, declared: "For my part I do
not doubt the least in the world that the earth is eternally fixed,
for God has founded the terrestrial globe, and it will not be
shaken."[404] Another priest stated in the first chapter of his
astronomy that the sun and the planets daily revolve around the earth;
then later on, he explained the Copernican and the Tychonic schemes
and the Cartesian theory of motion with evident sympathy.[405] Two
others, one a Jesuit in 1682 at Naples,[406] the other in 1741 at
Verona, frankly preferred the Tychonic system, and the latter called
the system found by "Tommaso Copernico" a mere fancy.[407] Still
another priest, evidently well acquainted with Bradley's work, as late
as in 1774 declared that there was nothing decisive on either side of
the great controversy between the systems.[408] At this time, however,
a father was teaching the Copernican system at Liege without
differentiating between thesis and hypothesis.[409] And a Jesuit,
while he denied (1772) universal gravitation, the earth's movement,
and the plurality of inhabited worlds, declared that the Roman
Congregation had done wrong in charging these as heretical
suggestions. In fact, M. Monchamp, himself a Catholic priest at
Louvain, declared that the Newtonian proofs were considered by many in
the 18th century virtually to abrogate the condemnation of 1616 and
1633; hence the professors of the seminary at Liege had adopted the
Copernican system.[410]

[Footnote 403: Ibid: 326.]

[Footnote 404: Ibid: 330.]

[Footnote 405: Fontana: _Institutio_, II, 32-35.]

[Footnote 406: Ferramosca: _Positiones ..._: 19.]

[Footnote 407: Piccoli: _La Scienza_, 4, 7.]

[Footnote 408: Spagnio, _De Motu_, 81.]

[Footnote 409: Monchamp: 331.]

[Footnote 410: Monchamp: 345.]

The famous French astronomer Lalande, in Rome in 1757 when the
Inquisition first modified its position, tried to persuade the
authorities to remove Galileo's book also from the Index; but his
efforts were unavailing, because of the sentence declared against its
