
"Be careful of thy heart, Joan," she said, "lest it be getting away from
thee into the keeping of one who seems to love no less quickly than he
forgets."

The daughter of De Tany flushed.

"I am quite capable of safeguarding my own heart, Mary de Stutevill,"
she replied warmly. "If thou covet this man thyself, why, but say so. Do
not think though that, because thy heart glows in his presence, mine is
equally susceptible."

It was Mary's turn now to show offense, and a sharp retort was on her
tongue when suddenly she realized the folly of such a useless quarrel.
Instead she put her arms about Joan and kissed her.

"I do not love him," she said, "and I be glad that you do not, for
I know that Bertrade does, and that but a short year since, he swore
undying love for her. Let us forget that we have spoken on the subject."

It was at this time that the King's soldiers were harassing the lands of
the rebel barons, and taking a heavy toll in revenge for their stinging
defeat at Rochester earlier in the year, so that it was scarcely safe
for small parties to venture upon the roadways lest they fall into the
hands of the mercenaries of Henry III.

Not even were the wives and daughters of the barons exempt from the
attacks of the royalists; and it was no uncommon occurrence to find them
suffering imprisonment, and something worse, at the hands of the King's
supporters.

And in the midst of these alarms, it entered the willful head of Joan de
Tany that she wished to ride to London town and visit the shops of the
merchants.

While London itself was solidly for the barons and against the King's
party, the road between the castle of Richard de Tany and the city of
London was beset with many dangers.

"Why," cried the girl's mother in exasperation, "between robbers and
royalists and the Outlaw of Torn, you would not be safe if you had an
army to escort you."

"But then, as I have no army," retorted the laughing girl, "if you
reason by your own logic, I shall be indeed quite safe."

And when Roger de Conde attempted to dissuade her, she taunted him with
being afraid of meeting with the Devil of Torn, and told him that he
might remain at home and lock himself safely in her mother's pantry.

And so, as Joan de Tany was a spoiled child, they set out upon the road
to London; the two girls with a dozen servants and knights; and Roger de
Conde was of the party.

At the same time a grim, gray, old man dispatched a messenger from the
outlaw's camp; a swarthy fellow, disguised as a priest, whose orders
were to proceed to London, and when he saw the party of Joan de Tany,
with Roger de Conde, enter the city, he was to deliver the letter he
bore to the captain of the gate.

The letter contained this brief message:

"The tall knight in gray with closed helm is Norman of Torn," and was
unsigned.

All went well and Joan was laughing merrily at the fears of those who
had attempted to dissuade her when, at a cross road, they discovered two
parties of armed men approaching from opposite directions. The leader
of the nearer party spurred forward to intercept the little band, and,
reining in before them, cried brusquely,

"Who be ye?"

"A party on a peaceful mission to the shops of London," replied Norman
of Torn.

"I asked not your mission," cried the fellow. "I asked, who be ye?
Answer, and be quick about it."

"I be Roger de Conde, gentleman of France, and these be my sisters and
servants," lied the outlaw, "and were it not that the ladies be with me,
your answer would be couched in steel, as you deserve for your boorish
insolence."

"There be plenty of room and time for that even now, you dog of a French
coward," cried the officer, couching his lance as he spoke.

Joan de Tany was sitting her horse where she could see the face of Roger
de Conde, and it filled her heart with pride and courage as she saw and
understood the little smile of satisfaction that touched his lips as he
heard the man's challenge and lowered the point of his own spear.

Wheeling their horses toward one another, the two combatants, who were
some ninety feet apart, charged at full tilt. As they came together the
impact was so great that both horses were nearly overturned and the two
powerful war lances were splintered into a hundred fragments as each
struck the exact center of his opponent's shield. Then, wheeling their
horses and throwing away the butts of their now useless lances, De Conde
and the officer advanced with drawn swords.

The fellow made a most vicious return assault upon De Conde, attempting
to ride him down in one mad rush, but his thrust passed harmlessly from
the tip of the outlaw's sword, and as the officer wheeled back to renew
the battle, they settled down to fierce combat, their horses wheeling
and turning shoulder to shoulder.

The two girls sat rigid in their saddles watching the encounter, the
eyes of Joan de Tany alight with the fire of battle as she followed
every move of the wondrous swordplay of Roger de Conde.

He had not even taken the precaution to lower his visor, and the grim
and haughty smile that played upon his lips spoke louder than many words
the utter contempt in which he held the sword of his adversary. And as
Joan de Tany watched, she saw the smile suddenly freeze to a cold, hard
line, and the eyes of the man narrow to mere slits, and her woman's
intuition read the death warrant of the King's officer ere the sword of
the outlaw buried itself in his heart.

The other members of the two bodies of royalist soldiers had sat
spellbound as they watched the battle, but now, as their leader's corpse
rolled from the saddle, they spurred furiously in upon De Conde and his
little party.

The Baron's men put up a noble fight, but the odds were heavy and even
with the mighty arm of Norman of Torn upon their side the outcome was
apparent from the first.

Five swords were flashing about the outlaw, but his blade was equal to
the thrust and one after another of his assailants crumpled up in their
saddles as his leaping point found their vitals.

Nearly all of the Baron's men were down, when one, an old servitor,
spurred to the side of Joan de Tany and Mary de Stutevill.

"Come, my ladies," he cried, "quick and you may escape. They be so busy
with the battle that they will never notice."

"Take the Lady Mary, John," cried Joan, "I brought Roger de Conde to
this pass against the advice of all and I remain with him to the end."

"But, My Lady--" cried John.

"But nothing, sirrah!" she interrupted sharply. "Do as you are bid.
Follow my Lady Mary, and see that she comes to my father's castle in
safety," and raising her riding whip, she struck Mary's palfrey across
the rump so that the animal nearly unseated his fair rider as he leaped
frantically to one side and started madly up the road down which they
had come.

"After her, John," commanded Joan peremptorily, "and see that you turn
not back until she be safe within the castle walls; then you may bring
aid."

The old fellow had been wont to obey the imperious little Lady Joan from
her earliest childhood, and the habit was so strong upon him that he
wheeled his horse and galloped after the flying palfrey of the Lady Mary
de Stutevill.

As Joan de Tany turned again to the encounter before her, she saw fully
twenty men surrounding Roger de Conde, and while he was taking heavy
toll of those before him, he could not cope with the men who attacked
him from behind; and even as she looked, she saw a battle axe fall full
upon his helm, and his sword drop from his nerveless fingers as his
lifeless body rolled from the back of Sir Mortimer to the battle-tramped
clay of the highroad.

She slid quickly from her palfrey and ran fearlessly toward his
prostrate form, reckless of the tangled mass of snorting, trampling,
steel-clad horses, and surging fighting-men that surrounded him. And
well it was for Norman of Torn that this brave girl was there that day,
for even as she reached his side, the sword point of one of the soldiers
was at his throat for the coup de grace.

With a cry, Joan de Tany threw herself across the outlaw's body,
shielding him as best she could from the threatening sword.

Cursing loudly, the soldier grasped her roughly by the arm to drag her
from his prey, but at this juncture, a richly armored knight galloped up
and drew rein beside the party.

The newcomer was a man of about forty-five or fifty; tall, handsome,
black-mustached and with the haughty arrogance of pride most often
seen upon the faces of those who have been raised by unmerited favor to
positions of power and affluence.

He was John de Fulm, Earl of Buckingham, a foreigner by birth and for
years one of the King's favorites; the bitterest enemy of De Montfort
and the barons.

"What now?" he cried. "What goes on here?"

The soldiers fell back, and one of them replied:

"A party of the King's enemies attacked us, My Lord Earl, but we routed
them, taking these two prisoners."

"Who be ye?" he said, turning toward Joan who was kneeling beside De
Conde, and as she raised her head, "My God! The daughter of De Tany! a
noble prize indeed my men. And who be the knight?"

"Look for yourself, My Lord Earl," replied the girl removing the helm,
which she had been unlacing from the fallen man.

"Edward?" he ejaculated. "But no, it cannot be, I did but yesterday
leave Edward in Dover."

"I know not who he be," said Joan de Tany, "except that he be the most
marvelous fighter and the bravest man it has ever been given me to see.
He called himself Roger de Conde, but I know nothing of him other than
that he looks like a prince, and fights like a devil. I think he has no
quarrel with either side, My Lord, and so, as you certainly do not make
war on women, you will let us go our way in peace as we were when your
soldiers wantonly set upon us."

"A De Tany, madam, were a great and valuable capture in these troublous
times," replied the Earl, "and that alone were enough to necessitate my
keeping you; but a beautiful De Tany is yet a different matter and so I
will grant you at least one favor. I will not take you to the King, but
a prisoner you shall be in mine own castle for I am alone, and need the
cheering company of a fair and loving lady."

The girl's head went high as she looked the Earl full in the eye.

"Think you, John de Fulm, Earl of Buckingham, that you be talking to
some comely scullery maid? Do you forget that my house is honored
in England, even though it does not share the King's favors with his
foreign favorites, and you owe respect to a daughter of a De Tany?"

"All be fair in war, my beauty," replied the Earl. "Egad," he continued,
"methinks all would be fair in hell were they like unto you. It has been
some years since I have seen you and I did not know the old fox Richard
de Tany kept such a package as this hid in his grimy old castle."

"Then you refuse to release us?" said Joan de Tany.

"Let us not put it thus harshly," countered the Earl. "Rather let us say
that it be so late in the day, and the way so beset with dangers that
the Earl of Buckingham could not bring himself to expose the beautiful
daughter of his old friend to the perils of the road, and so--"

"Let us have an end to such foolishness," cried the girl. "I might have
expected naught better from a turncoat foreign knave such as thee,
who once joined in the councils of De Montfort, and then betrayed his
friends to curry favor with the King."

The Earl paled with rage, and pressed forward as though to strike the
girl, but thinking better of it, he turned to one of the soldiers,
saying:

"Bring the prisoner with you. If the man lives bring him also. I would
learn more of this fellow who masquerades in the countenance of a crown
prince."

And turning, he spurred on towards the neighboring castle of a rebel
baron which had been captured by the royalists, and was now used as
headquarters by De Fulm.




CHAPTER XIII

When Norman of Torn regained his senses, he found himself in a small
tower room in a strange castle. His head ached horribly, and he felt
sick and sore; but he managed to crawl from the cot on which he lay, and
by steadying his swaying body with hands pressed against the wall, he
was able to reach the door. To his disappointment, he found this locked
from without and, in his weakened condition, he made no attempt to force
it.

He was fully dressed and in armor, as he had been when struck down, but
his helmet was gone, as were also his sword and dagger.

The day was drawing to a close and, as dusk fell and the room darkened,
he became more and more impatient. Repeated pounding upon the door
brought no response and finally he gave up in despair. Going to
the window, he saw that his room was some thirty feet above the
stone-flagged courtyard, and also that it looked at an angle upon other
windows in the old castle where lights were beginning to show. He saw
men-at-arms moving about, and once he thought he caught a glimpse of a
woman's figure, but he was not sure.

He wondered what had become of Joan de Tany and Mary de Stutevill. He
hoped that they had escaped, and yet--no, Joan certainly had not, for
now he distinctly remembered that his eyes had met hers for an instant
just before the blow fell upon him, and he thought of the faith and
confidence that he had read in that quick glance. Such a look would
nerve a jackal to attack a drove of lions, thought the outlaw. What a
beautiful creature she was; and she had stayed there with him during the
fight. He remembered now. Mary de Stutevill had not been with her as he
had caught that glimpse of her, no, she had been all alone. Ah! That was
friendship indeed!

What else was it that tried to force its way above the threshold of his
bruised and wavering memory? Words? Words of love? And lips pressed to
his? No, it must be but a figment of his wounded brain.

What was that which clicked against his breastplate? He felt, and found
a metal bauble linked to a mesh of his steel armor by a strand of silken
hair. He carried the little thing to the window, and in the waning light
made it out to be a golden hair ornament set with precious stones, but
he could not tell if the little strand of silken hair were black or
brown. Carefully he detached the little thing, and, winding the filmy
tress about it, placed it within the breast of his tunic. He was vaguely
troubled by it, yet why he could scarcely have told, himself.

Again turning to the window, he watched the lighted rooms within his
vision, and presently his view was rewarded by the sight of a knight
coming within the scope of the narrow casement of a nearby chamber.

From his apparel, he was a man of position, and he was evidently in
heated discussion with some one whom Norman of Torn could not see. The
man, a great, tall black-haired and mustached nobleman, was pounding
upon a table to emphasize his words, and presently he sprang up
as though rushing toward the one to whom he had been speaking. He
disappeared from the watcher's view for a moment and then, at the far
side of the apartment, Norman of Torn saw him again just as he roughly
grasped the figure of a woman who evidently was attempting to escape
him. As she turned to face her tormentor, all the devil in the Devil of
Torn surged in his aching head, for the face he saw was that of Joan de
Tany.

With a muttered oath, the imprisoned man turned to hurl himself against
the bolted door, but ere he had taken a single step, the sound of heavy
feet without brought him to a stop, and the jingle of keys as one was
fitted to the lock of the door sent him gliding stealthily to the wall
beside the doorway, where the inswinging door would conceal him.

As the door was pushed back, a flickering torch lighted up, but dimly,
the interior, so that until he had reached the center of the room, the
visitor did not see that the cot was empty.

He was a man-at-arms, and at his side hung a sword. That was enough for
the Devil of Torn--it was a sword he craved most; and, ere the fellow
could assure his slow wits that the cot was empty, steel fingers closed
upon his throat, and he went down beneath the giant form of the outlaw.

Without other sound than the scuffing of their bodies on the floor, and
the clanking of their armor, they fought, the one to reach the dagger at
his side, the other to close forever the windpipe of his adversary.

Presently, the man-at-arms found what he sought, and, after tugging
with ever diminishing strength, he felt the blade slip from its sheath.
Slowly and feebly he raised it high above the back of the man on top of
him; with a last supreme effort he drove the point downward, but ere it
reached its goal, there was a sharp snapping sound as of a broken bone,
the dagger fell harmlessly from his dead hand, and his head rolled
backward upon his broken neck.

Snatching the sword from the body of his dead antagonist, Norman of Torn
rushed from the tower room.

As John de Fulm, Earl of Buckingham, laid his vandal hands upon Joan
de Tany, she turned upon him like a tigress. Blow after blow she rained
upon his head and face until, in mortification and rage, he struck her
full upon the mouth with his clenched fist; but even this did not subdue
her and, with ever weakening strength, she continued to strike him. And
then the great royalist Earl, the chosen friend of the King, took the
fair white throat between his great fingers, and the lust of blood
supplanted the lust of love, for he would have killed her in his rage.

It was upon this scene that the Outlaw of Torn burst with naked sword.
They were at the far end of the apartment, and his cry of anger at the
sight caused the Earl to drop his prey, and turn with drawn sword to
meet him.

There were no words, for there was no need of words here. The two men
were upon each other, and fighting to the death, before the girl had
regained her feet. It would have been short shrift for John de Fulm had
not some of his men heard the fracas, and rushed to his aid.

Four of them there were, and they tumbled pell-mell into the room,
fairly falling upon Norman of Torn in their anxiety to get their swords
into him; but once they met that master hand, they went more slowly, and
in a moment, two of them went no more at all, and the others, with the
Earl, were but circling warily in search of a chance opening--an opening
which never came.

Norman of Torn stood with his back against a table in an angle of the
room, and behind him stood Joan de Tany.

"Move toward the left," she whispered. "I know this old pile. When
you reach the table that bears the lamp, there will be a small doorway
directly behind you. Strike the lamp out with your sword, as you feel my
hand in your left, and then I will lead you through that doorway, which
you must turn and quickly bolt after us. Do you understand?"

