"Look after him, will you?  I'm going out for a while."  The man rose,
switched off the shield and went to the entrance.

"Wait," she called after him.  "I still don't know your name."

"My name is Lawrence."  He was gone.

The boy drew back and looked up at her, no longer frightened but now
tired and curious.

"Well that's better.  You don't have to be afraid of me."  He looked at
her and chewed his finger.  She returned his gaze and smiled.  "What's
your name?"

"Johnny Harris."  His leg kicked gently out over the side.  She patted
him on the head, then went to look for some paper.

The man went down between the high walls of the gap, coming out at the
twin faces of the cliffs.  Turning right, he skirted the huge southern
promontory till he came a scree hill, rising still higher toward the
frozen peaks beyond.  Here, some two hundred yards further up, a four
foot tunnel, shaded by a boulder, led deep into the mountainside.
Stooping to enter, he walked till he was weary and stiff with a sharp
pain in his back, then walked much farther.


*


It was late evening, darkening to full night.  Two men walked through
the opening with the shield still dissipating.  The familiar face came
first, then to her dismay the woman saw that the stranger was white.
He studied her as they approached, with the same hard cold gleam as the
other.

"I don't know," he said, turning to the guerrilla.  "She has the looks,
but not much grit, seemingly.  The face is much too soft."

Lawrence said nothing, hung his coat on a peg by the wall.  She half
expected him to draw out a hidden knife and bury it in the white man's
back.  But the two stood side by side, and she realized that she was
the outsider, the one in question.  The tall, fair-haired man stood
looking her up and down like a slave at auction.  She got angry.

"What am I, a piece of meat?"

"Shut up and get us some water," said the black man.  She turned on
him, furious.

"How dare you talk to me like that?  How dare you?  And if you think
you're going to turn me over to this Nazi---"  She ran to the wall and
grabbed the laser rifle, pointed it right at him.

But the older man just laughed grimly, and the fantasy fell apart.
"You see what I mean?" he said.  "She has some grit.  Put away the
rifle, Elonna."

"All right, but you get your own water."  He did, retiring to the back
while the other placed his rifle on the table and sat down.  Elonna
faced him angrily.  "You just watch how you look at me."  Then she
walked to the entrance, still unshielded, with the boy and went out.

The tall man watched her go, then turned to face his friend as he came
out with a filled water bottle.  The guerrilla handed it to him,
reactivated the shield and returned to the table.  They passed the
water back and forth between them.

"She is very beautiful, Lawrence.  But have we the right to ask her to
do this?"

"We have the right to ask.  But there will be no secrets among us.  She
will know who we are, and fully understand the danger before we ask her
to do anything.  There is no hurry.  I haven't fully judged her
character yet myself.  This will take time to set up on your end,
anyway.  We may not even get the chance."

"I think we will, if we are patient."  A pause.  "I didn't mean to
stare at her like that.  It's just that it's hard to tell her features
beneath that coverall."

"I know that, Morgan.  Still, it's a fine couple of gentlemen we've
become.  Myself especially, for having thought of it.  But if we could
eliminate Hunter....."

"No, I think it's a good plan, as far as it goes.  And if we've lost a
bit of humanity, it only helps us understand their mentality.  I was
there when they drafted the plans for these raids.  I've also had a
glimpse of what they've got in store for the Laurian socialists.  The
only way to stop them, or at least hinder them until the rest of the
quadrant wakes up, sees these bastards for what they are and sends out
real armies to stop them, is to strike at all points, especially the
top, and be just as cold and unfeeling as they are."

The other said nothing, stared soberly at the floor.

"You're right." He got up and paced across the room, his hands behind
his back.  The shield went down, and the girl reentered with the boy.
She addressed herself to Morgan.

"I'm sorry I was short with you.  I'm sure if you're with Lawrence you
have your reasons.  You just caught me off guard."  The men exchanged
glances, but did not reply.  "I'm willing to do what I can.....  You
must be hungry."

"No.  Thank you, I must be going.  I apologize too.  My name is Morgan.
 Keep in touch, Lawrence.  This will take time, but there are other
things you and I can do until then.  Elonna."  He rose and lifted the
rifle and left the room.  The boy approached Lawrence and punched him
in the leg.  The man looked down but did not smile.

"Why so grim?" she asked, not entirely able to keep the sarcasm from
her voice.

"You don't know what we're up against."

"Finding my husband dead on the balcony, I think I have a pretty good
idea.....  And how many did you lose?"

"I didn't have to.  My family was killed in a transport accident two
years ago."

...  "I'm sorry."

"Then don't speak of it again."

...  "Are you hungry?"

"Yes.  Yes, I'm hungry.  Why don't you see if you can make us something
that doesn't taste like tar.  I'm going to lie down.  Wake me if I fall
asleep."

"All right."

She went to prepare a meal.  The child followed.  When the food was
ready she called him and they ate without talking.  The only sounds
were the small sounds of the boy, tapping his tray with the utensil and
humming softly to himself.  Once he looked up at the woman and laughed:
 a piece of withered leaf was caught in her dark, flowing hair.  The
graying man watched them, and only wished he could smile.

Then night came again, and they slept.


*


Four days had passed, with Lawrence gone much of the time.  He never
said where he was going, or gave any indication that something unusual
was at hand.  But on the fifth day, as the sun sank and the shadows
grew deep around them, he said simply,

"I've got something to do tonight."

He was, if possible, tighter than ever, and at the evening meal ate
little.  Then he rose, ruffled the boy's head, and disappeared into the
second shallow chamber of the back.

He was gone a long time, and the girl took the boy outside, and when
she returned he had still not come out.  Then as she knelt on the
ground, playing some game with the child, a man emerged from the back
and she nearly collapsed from fear.

She ran to the wall, seized the rifle and would have shot.  But a
familiar voice stayed her.

"Put down the rifle, Elonna, or one of these times you really will
shoot."  The voice, she thought, came from the stranger, a square,
Russian-looking man with dark eyes and a shaved head.  He was clad in
the blue and black of a Cantonese army officer, the emblem of the
clenched white fist sewn to his breast, a small black cross in its
center.  His face wore the sharp look of command but his eyes, in that
moment, seemed to contradict it.

"Who are you?" she demanded.  "And what have you done with Lawrence?"

"I'm right here, Elonna."  The officer opened his jacket and unfastened
the garment beneath, pulling it open at the neck to reveal a dark
collar and chest, with tight curls of hair like thorny bushes covering
his breast.

"Lawrence!"  One of her hands lost its grip on the rifle.  "You scared
me half to death."

"I'm sorry for that.  I thought you had gone out."

At that moment she realized two things:  that he was going into great
danger, and that she cared for him very much.

"When must you go?"

"Very soon."  He resealed the uniform.

"Be careful, will you?"

"Yes."  He pulled a different weapon from among the equipment against
the wall, examined it carefully.  "I have to go."  He started for the
door.  She stopped him halfway and embraced him, her eyes gleaming at
the corners.

"Be careful."

"I will."  He pulled away and stood in the entrance.  He looked back at
her strangely, hesitated as if wanting to say more, then turned and was
gone.  He did not return that night.


*


The next day the woman was genuinely concerned.  She had just begun to
lose hope, when the smoky film of the entrance dissolved and opened out
onto the cleft.  A man stepped through, but it was not Lawrence.

"Morgan?  What's wrong, where's Lawrence?"

"He's dead."

Such an empty shock.  "What?  What happened?"

He was trying to sabotage a missile base, with several others.  His
papers were challenged and he was shot.  I'm sorry."

"Dead," she stammered.  "Dead.  Will they kill us all, one by one?"
She began to weep.

"Unless we stop them."

"How, damn it!  How?"

"A piece at a time."

"But you said you had a plan.  For ME."

"I do."

"Well what is it?  Stop treating me like a child!"

"Not now.  I'll come back tomorrow after dark."

"All right.  God."  She could not believe it.  He turned to go.

Without turning.  "You'd best harden your heart, Elonna, or it will
freeze inside you.  I'm sorry about Lawrence.

He was gone.


*


The next day seemed endless, but at last he came.  He looked over the
equipment leaned against the wall, then came and sat across from her.
He was at once both kinder and colder.

"I have a plan, Elonna, and them is a reasonable chance it will work.
But it may be more than your mind is equipped to handle.  Also. . .it
is sexual in nature."

"You think I don't know that, the way you're always looking at me?"

"Listen first.  Save your scorn for the enemy.  You will need it all."

"I'm sorry.  I'm not mad at you."

"Never, NEVER apologize.  And don't ever feel pity for a man who's done
you wrong.  If you do at a critical time in this, we're lost."

"You're worse than he was."

"Yes, and I'm still alive."  He stirred uncomfortably in the chair.  "I
didn't mean that.  Have you got any water?"

"Yes."  She sent the boy to get some.

"Try to understand, Elonna.  As undersecretary to Hunter, I'm
surrounded by them constantly.  These guerrillas, even Lawrence, flit
in and out of the fire."

"Lawrence did more than flit."

"Yes he did.  And if I could change that, I would.....  But I live in
the midst of it. I can't afford the luxury of emotion.  And I want
desperately to bring them down.  That they're my own people doesn't
help."

She studied him more closely.

"You say they're your own people.  What about us?  Are we just pieces
on the board?"

"Not a fair question.  You don't know what we're up against."  The boy
handed him a filled cup.

"Lawrence was found of saying that, and he's dead."

"Yes, and I'm likely to end the same way."

"Then why do you do it?"

"Because they ARE my own people.  Maybe you pity them, try to
understand.  I don't.  There's no excuse for this, Elonna.  None.  It's
all been played out a hundred times before.

"There lives are empty and harsh," he continued.  "So they say it must
be somebody's fault.  Surely their God can't want them to suffer, apple
of his eye as they're supposed to be.  So it must be anti-God.  And who
is this?  The blacks and other minorities, the corrupt and inept
liberals, a benign socialist colony two systems away.  For God's sake,
we've been in Space for two hundred years, we should know better.  They
forget, or choose to ignore, all the lessons it's taught us:  that
we're only very small, and should help each other.  They turn their
backs on history and the simplest understanding, and still find some
dark corner in which to masturbate their hatred.  There's no excuse for
it.  None."

She was silent for a time, then spoke.  "What do you want me to do?"

"Don't say yes until you've heard what it is.  Lawrence cared a great
deal for you, and if only for his sake, I must show some restraint."

"And what about you?"

"For myself, I would rather not ask a woman to do it.  Also, it flushes
me out of the inner circles for good."

"But you think it could work, and be worth it."

"Yes."

"You want me to sleep with someone and kill him."  She had forgotten
the boy.  "Johnny, would you run off in the back and play?  I'll be
there in a few minutes."

"Yes, Miss Elonna."  He walked reluctantly into the back.

"You want me to sleep with someone and kill him."

"Yes and no."

"What do you mean, yes and no?"

"You say it as if it's nothing.  I'm not asking you to sleep with some
soldier in a guardhouse and slit his throat.  We're talking about
Roland Hunter, the head of Internal Affairs."

"THE Hunter?  The man who ordered the purges?"

"Ordered, planned and executed, and the man who makes sure there is no
rebellion of conscience among the whites, no dissent of any kind.  A
big target, Elonna, and very wary."  Again she was silent.

"Still.  If you could arrange it.....  I think I could do it."

"With what weapon, Elonna?"

"Well, what about a poison needle?"

"No good.  You will be thoroughly searched.  Thoroughly."

"All right, then.  Stop turning it around.  You're the one who's
supposed to have a plan."

"Yes, though I'm not particularly proud of having thought of it."

"Morgan, you're forgetting what he's done to us."

"All right.  Have you ever heard of Sanlen 12?"

"It's some kind of nerve poison, isn't it?"

"Yes, like's snake's venom:  poison to the blood but not the stomach."

"What are you saying?"

He told her, in detail.

"But that's horrible.  God, what a way to die. . .and to kill."

"You would have to want to kill him very badly, and not hesitate at the
critical moment.  That's why I've been such a harsh judge of your
character.  This is no game, and the stakes are life and death."  She
looked into his eyes, and knew he was in deepest earnest.

"I need time to think."  The boy came back into the room.

"I'll be back tomorrow night.  Think about it in the cold light of day.
You must be very sure."  He lifted his rifle.

"Before you go....."

"Yes."

"How would you set this up?  How would you make him trust me?"

"Oh, he won't trust you, not for a minute.  But he does trust me, as
far as he trusts anyone.  As for setting it up, that's fairly simple.
Many of the cabinet ministers and high military men have taken
mistresses, and not all of them white.  If the Undersecretary of
