made several experimental runs in London; he also propelled a vessel with
it upon the Thames, and fitted up a large engine for pumping purposes. A
company was formed to introduce his engine, but it proved too wasteful of
fuel, and the company went into voluntary liquidation. Like almost all
engines of this time, the combustion of gas and air was used to produce a
vacuum, the piston being driven by atmospheric pressure.

Buren's locomotive carriage was thus in action three years before the
great trial in 1829, from which George Stephenson emerged victorious with
his wonderful engine "The Rocket." To those curious in the matter, I may
mention that S. Buren's patents are dated 1823, No. 4,874, and 1826, No.
5,350.

From this time on, a continuous series of gas engine patents appear, 20
engines being patented between 1826 and 1860, which is the next date
worthy of particular mention.

In this year, 1860, the famous "Lenoir" engine appeared. The use of high
pressure steam engines had long been common, and Lenoir's engine was
analogous to the high pressure engine, as Buren's was to the condensing
engine. It created a very general interest, and many engines were
constructed and used in France, England, and America; it resembled very
much in external appearance an ordinary high pressure horizontal steam
engine, and it was double acting.

During the following six years, other 20 British patents were granted, and
the gas engine passed from the state of a troublesome toy to a practicable
and widely useful machine.

From 1791 to the end of 1866, in all 46 British patents were granted for
gas engines, and in these patents are to be found the principles upon
which the gas engines of to-day are constructed, many years elapsing
before experience enough was gained to turn the proposals of the older
inventors to practical account.

The most important of these patents are:

                      No.  Year.
Robert Street         1,983 1794  Direct-acting engine.
Samuel Buren          4,874 1823  Vacuum engine.
Samuel Buren          5,350 1826  Vacuum engine.
W.L. Wright           6,525 1833  Direct-acting engine.
Wm. Barnett           7,615 1838  Compression first proposed.
Barsante & Matteucci  1,072 1854  Rack & clutch engine.
Drake                   562 1855  Direct-acting engine.
Lenoir                  335 1860  D.I. engine, electric ignition.
C.W. Siemens          2,074 1860  Compression, _constant
                                    pressure_.
Hugon                 2,902 1860  Platinum ignition.
Millein               1,840 1861  Compression, both constant vol. and
                                    _pressure_.
F.H. Wenham           1,873 1864  Free piston.
Hugon                   986 1865  Flame ignition.
Otto and Langen         434 1866  Rack and clutch, flame ignition.

Leaving for the present the history of the gas engine, which brings us to
a stage comparable to the state of the steam engine during the Newcomen's
time, it will be advisable to give some consideration to the principles
concerned in the economical and efficient working of gas engines, in order
to understand the more recent developments.

It has been seen that gunpowder was the explosive used to produce a vacuum
in Huyghens' engine, and that it was abandoned in favor of gas by Buren in
1823. The reason of departure is very obvious: a gunpowder explosion and a
gaseous explosion differ in very important practical points.

Gunpowder being a solid substance is capable of being packed into a very
small space; the gas evolved by its decomposition is so great in volume
that, even in the absence of any evolution of heat, a very high pressure
would result. One cubic inch of gunpowder confined in a space of one cubic
inch would cause a pressure by the gas it contains alone of 15,000 lb. per
square inch; if the heating effect be allowed for, pressures of four times
that amount, or 60,000 lb. per square inch, are easily accounted for.
These pressures are far too high for use in any engine, and the bare
possibility of getting such pressure by accident put gunpowder quite
outside the purpose of the engineer, quite apart from any question of
comparative cost. In a proper mixture of inflammable gas and air is found
an exceedingly safe explosive, perfectly manageable and quite incapable of
producing pressures in any sense dangerous to a properly constructed
engine.

The pressure produced by the explosion of any mixture of gas and air is
strictly determined and limited, whereas the pressure produced by the
explosion of gunpowder depends greatly upon the relation between the
volume of the gunpowder and the space in which it is confined.

Engines of the "Lenoir" type are the simplest in idea and construction; in
them a mixture of gas and air is made in the cylinder during the first
half of the piston stroke, air being taken from the atmosphere and drawn
into the cylinder by the forward movement of the piston. At the same time
gas entering by a number of holes, and streaming into the air to form an
explosive mixture, the movement of a valve cuts off the supply, and brings
the igniting arrangement into action. The pressure produced by the
explosion acting upon the piston makes it complete its stroke, when the
exhaust valve opens exactly as in the steam engine. The Lenoir and Hugon
engines, the earlier forms of this type, were double acting, receiving two
impulses for every revolution of the crank, the impulse differing from
that in a high pressure steam engine in commencing at half stroke.

The Lenoir igniting arrangement was complicated and troublesome. I have it
upon the table; the mixture was ignited at the proper time by the electric
spark produced from a primary battery and Ruhmkorff coil.

The Hugon engine was an advance in this respect, using a flame ignited,
and securing greater certainty of action in a comparatively simple manner.

It is really a modification of Barnett's lighting cock described in his
patent of 1838.

Other difficulties were found in using these engines; the pistons became
exceedingly hot. In the case of the Lenoir larger engines, it sometimes
became red hot, and caused complete ruin of the cylinder by scoring and
cutting up. Hugon to prevent this injected some water.

In the all important question of economy, these engines were found
grievously wanting, Lenoir consuming 95 cubic feet per I.H.P. per hour;
Hugon consuming 85 cubic feet per I.H.P. per hour.

The surviving engines of this type are only used for very small powers,
from one to four man power, or 1/8 to 1/2 horse, the most widely known of
this kind being the "Bischoff," which is very largely used; its
consumption of gas is even greater than the Lenoir, being 110 cubic feet
per horse power per hour, as tested with a half-horse engine at a late
exhibition of gas apparatus at Stockport.

So large a consumption of gas prevented these engines coming into extended
use for engines of moderate power, and led inventors to work to obtain
better results. The force generated by the explosion of a mixture of gas
and air is very short lived, and if it is to be fully utilized must be
used quickly; a high pressure is produced, but it very quickly disappears.

The quicker the piston moves after the maximum pressure is reached, the
less will be the loss of heat to the sides of the cylinder. The flame
which fills the cylinder and causes the increase of pressure rapidly loses
heat, and the pressure falls.

The idea of using a free piston was proposed as a remedy; it was thought
that a piston connected to a crank in the ordinary manner could not move
fast enough to utilize the pressure before it was lost. Many inventors
proposed to perform work upon a piston free from any direct connection
with the crank or shaft of the engine; the explosion after attaining its
maximum pressure expends its force in giving velocity to a piston; the
velocity so acquired carries it on against atmospheric pressure until the
energy is all absorbed, and a vacuum or deficit of pressure exists in the
cylinder instead of an excess of pressure. The return stroke is
accomplished by the atmospheric pressure, and the work is now done upon
the engine shaft on the return only. The method of connecting on the
return stroke while leaving the piston free on the out stroke varies, but
in many engines the principle was the same.

Barsante and Matteucci, year 1857, British patent No. 1,625, describe the
first engine of this kind, but Messrs. Otto and Langen were the first to
successfully overcome all difficulties and make a marketable engine of it.
Their patent was dated 1866, No. 434. To distinguish it from Otto's later
patents, it may be called the rack and clutch engine.

The economy obtained by this engine was a great advance upon the Lenoir.
According to a test by Prof. Tresca, at the Paris Exhibition of 1867, the
gas consumed was 44 cubic feet per indicated horse power per hour.
According to tests I have made myself in Manchester with a two horse power
engine, Otto and Langen's free piston engine consumes 40 cubic feet per
I.H.P. per hour. This is less than one-half of the gas used by the Hugon
engine for one horse power.

The igniting arrangement is a very good modification of Barnett's lighting
cock, which I have explained already, but a slide valve is used instead of
a cock.

Other engines carried out the same principle in a different manner,
including Gilles' engine, but they were not commercially so successful as
the Otto and Langen. Mr. F.H. Wenham's engine was of this type, and was
working in England, Mr. Wenham informed me, in 1866, his patent being
taken out in 1864.

The great objection to this kind of engine is the irregularity and great
noise in working; this was so great as to prevent engines from being made
larger than three horse power. The engine, however, did good work, and was
largely used from 1866 until the end of 1876, when Mr. Otto produced his
famous engine, now known as "The Otto Silent Gas Engine." In this engine
great economy is attained without the objectionable free piston by a
method proposed first by Burnett, 1838, and also by a Frenchman, Millein,
in 1861; this method is compression before ignition. Other inventors also
described very clearly the advantages to be expected from compression, but
none were able to make it commercially successful till Mr. Otto. To him
belongs the great credit of inventing a cycle of operations capable of
realizing compression in a simple manner.

Starting from the same point as inventors did to produce the free piston
engine--namely, that the more quickly the explosive force is utilized, the
less will be the loss, and the greater the power produced from a quantity
of burning gas--it is evident that if any method can be discovered to
increase the pressure upon the piston without increasing the temperature
of the flame causing this pressure, then a great gain will result, and
the engine will convert more of the heat given to it into work. This is
exactly what is done by compression before ignition. Suppose we take a
mixture of gas and air of such proportions as to cause when exploded, or
rather ignited (because explosion is too strong a term), a pressure of 45
lb. above atmosphere, or 60 lb. per square inch absolute pressure. Then
this mixture, if compressed to half volume before igniting and kept at
constant temperature, would give, when ignited, a pressure of 120 lb.
total, or 105 lb. above atmosphere, and this without any increase of the
temperature of the flame.

The effect of compression is to make a small piston do the work of a large
one, and convert more heat into work by lessening the loss of heat through
the walls of the cylinder. In addition to this advantage, greater
expansions are made possible, and therefore greatly increase economy.

The Otto engine must be so familiar in appearance to all of you, that I
need hardly trouble you with details of its external appearance. I shall
briefly describe its action. Its strong points and its weak points are
alike caused by its cycle. One cylinder and piston suffices to carry out
its whole action. Its cycle is: First outstroke, gas and air sucked into
the cylinder; first instroke, gas and air compressed into space; second
outstroke, impulse due to ignition; second instroke, discharge of
exhausted gases. When working at full power, it gets one impulse for every
two revolutions; this seems to be a retrograde movement, but,
notwithstanding, the advantages obtained are very great. The igniting
arrangement is in the main similar to that used on the rack and clutch
engine. The engine has been exceedingly successful, and is very
economical. The Otto compression engine consumes 21 cubic feet of gas per
I.H.P. per hour, and runs with great smoothness.

In 1876 I commenced my work upon gas engines, and very soon concluded that
the compression system was the true line to proceed upon. It took me two
years to produce a workable engine. My efforts have always been directed
toward producing an engine giving at least one impulse every revolution
and, if possible, to start without hand labor, just as a steam engine
does. My first gas engine was running in 1878, and patented and exhibited
in 1879. It was first exhibited at the Kilburn Royal Agricultural
Society's show.

This engine was self-starting, gave an ignition at every revolution, and
ignited without external flame. It consisted of two cylinders, a motor,
and a compressing pump, with a small intermediate reservoir. Suitable
valves introduced the mixture of gas and air into the pump, and passed it
when compressed from the reservoir to the motor cylinder. The igniting
arrangement consisted of a platinum cage firmly fixed in a valve port;
this cage was heated in the first instance by a flame of gas and air
mixed; it became white hot in a few seconds, and then the engine was
started by opening a valve.

The platinum was kept hot by the heat derived from the successive
ignitions, and, the engine once started, no further external flame was
required. I have here one of these platinum cages which has been in use.
Finding this method not well suited for small engines, I produced the
engine which is at present in the market under my name.

The cycle is different, and is designed for greater simplicity and the
avoidance of back ignitions. It also consists of two cylinders, motor
cylinder and the displace or charging cylinder. There is no intermediate
reservoir. The displace crank leads the motor by a right angle, and takes
into it the mixed charge of gas and air, in some cases taking air alone
during the latter part of its stroke.

The motor on the outstroke crosses V-shaped parts about from one-sixth to
one-seventh from the out end, the displacer charge now passing into the
motor cylinder, displacing the exhaust gases by these ports and filling
the cylinder and the space at the end of it with the explosive mixture.
The introduction of some air in advance of the charge serves the double
purpose of cooling down the exhaust gases and preventing direct contact of
the inflammable mixture with flame which may linger in the cylinder from
the previous stroke. The instroke of the motor compresses the charge into
the conical space at the end of the cylinder, and, when fully compressed,
ignition is effected by means of the slide I have upon the table.

This system of ignition has been found very reliable, and capable of
acting as often as 400 times per minute, which the Otto ignite is quite
incapable of doing. By this cycle the advantages of compression are gained
and one step nearer to the steam engine is attained, that is, an impulse
is given for every revolution of the engine.

As a consequence, I am able with my engine to give a greater amount of
power for a comparatively small weight. In addition to this, I have
introduced a method of self-starting; in this I believe I was the
first--about 100 of my engines are now using self-starting.

The largest single engine I have yet made indicates 30 H.P. The
consumption of gas in Glasgow is: Clerk engine consumes in Glasgow 18
cubic feet per I.H.P. per hour; Clerk engine consumes in Manchester 22
cubic feet per I.H.P. per hour. So far as I know, the Otto engine and my
own are the only compression engines which have as yet made any success in
the market. Other engines are being continually prepared, gas engine
patents being taken out just now at the rate of 60 per annum, but none of
them have been able as yet to get beyond the experimental stage. The
reason is simply the great experience necessary to produce these machines,
which seem so very simple; but to the inexperienced inventor the subject
fairly bristles with pitfalls.

I have here sections of some of the earlier engines, including Dr.
Siemens' and Messrs. Simon and Beechy. Although interesting and containing
many good points, these have not been practically successful.

The Simon engine is an adaptation of the well-known American petroleum
motor, the Brayton, the only difference consisting in the use of steam as
well as flame.

Dr. Siemens worked for some twenty years on gas engines, but he aimed
rather high at first to attain even moderate success. Had he lived, I
doubt not but that he would have succeeded in introducing them for large
powers. In 1882 he informed me that he had in hand a set of gas engines of
some hundreds of horse power for use on board ship, to be supplied with
gas from one of his gas producers modified to suit the altered
conditions.

Summarizing the ground over which we have passed, we find the origin of
the gas engine in the minds of the same men as were first to propose the
steam engine, Huyghens and Papin, 1680 and 1690. Greater mechanical
difficulties and ignorance of the nature of explosives caused the
abandonment of the internal combustion idea, and the mechanical
difficulties with steam being less, the steam engine became successful,
and triumphed over its rival. The knowledge and skill gained in the
construction of steam engines made it possible once again to attack the
more difficult problem, and simultaneously with the introduction and
perfecting of the steam engine, the gas engine idea became more and more
possible, the practicable stage commencing with Lenoir and continuing with
Hugon, Millein, Otto and Langen, F.H. Wenham, then Otto and Clerk. In
1860, 95 cubic feet of gas produced one horse power for an hour; in 1867,
40 cubic feet accomplished the same thing; and now (1885) we can get one
horse power for an hour for from 15 to 20 cubic feet of gas, depending on
the size of the engine used.

Considered as a heat engine, the gas engine is now twice as efficient as
the very best modern steam engine. It is true the fuel used at present
is more expensive than coal, and for large powers the steam engine is
the best because of this. But the way is clearing to change this. Gas
engines as at present, if supplied with producer gas, produced direct
from coal without leaving any coke, as is done in the Siemens, the
Wilson, and the Dawson producers, will give power at one-half the cost
of steam power. They will use 7/8 of a pound of coal per horse power per
hour, instead of 1-3/4 lb., as is done in the best steam engines. The
only producer that makes gas for gas engines at present is the Dawson,
and in it anthracite is used, because of the difficulty of getting rid
of the tar coming from the Siemens and Wilson producers, using any
ordinary slack.

When this difficulty has been overcome, and that it will be overcome there
can be no manner of doubt, gas engines will rapidly displace the steam
engine, because a gas engine with a gas producer, producing gas from any
ordinary coal with the same ease as steam is produced from a boiler, will
be much safer, and will use one-half the fuel of the very best steam
engines for equal power. The first cost also will not be greater than that
of steam. The engine itself will be more expensive than a steam engine of
equal power, but the gas producer will be less expensive than the boiler
at present. Perfect as the gas engine now is, considered as a machine for
converting heat into work, the possibility of great development is not yet
exhausted. Its economy may be increased two or even three fold; in this
lies the brilliant future before it. The steam engine is nearly as perfect
as it can be made; it approaches very nearly the possibility of its
theory. Its defect does not lie in its mechanism, but in the very
properties of water and steam itself. The loss of heat which takes place
in converting liquid water into gaseous steam is so great that by far the
greater portion of the heat given out by the fuel passes away either in
the condenser or the exhaust of a steam engine; but a small proportion of
the heat is converted into work.

The very best steam engines convert about 11 per cent. of the heat given
them into useful work, the remaining 89 per cent. being wasted,
principally in the exhaust of the engine.

Gas engines now convert 20 per cent. of the heat given to them into work,
and very probably will, in a few years more, convert 60 per cent. into
useful work. The conclusion, then, is irresistible that, when engineers
have gained greater experience with gas engines and gas producers, they
will displace steam engines entirely for every use--mills, locomotives,
and ships.

       *       *       *       *       *




RAPID CONSTRUCTION OF THE CANADIAN PACIFIC RAILWAY.

By E.T. ABBOTT, Member of the Engineers' Club of Minnesota. Read December
12, 1884.


During the winter of 1881 and 1882, the contract was let to Messrs.
Langdon, Sheppard & Co., of Minneapolis, to construct during the working
season of the latter year, or prior to January 1, 1883, 500 miles of
railroad on the western extension of the above company; the contract being
for the grading, bridging, track-laying, and surfacing, also including the
laying of the necessary depot sidings and their grading. The idea that any
such amount of road could be built in that country in that time was looked
upon by the writer hereof, as well as by railroad men generally, as a huge
joke, perpetrated to gull the Canadians. At the time the contract was let,
the Canadian Pacific Railway was in operation to Brandon, the crossing of
the Assiniboine River, 132 miles west of Winnipeg. The track was laid,
however, to a point about 50 miles west of this, and the grading done
generally in an unfinished state for thirty miles further. This was the
condition of things when the contract was entered into to build 500
miles--the east end of the 500-mile contract being at Station 4,660
(Station being at Brandon) and extending west to a few miles beyond the
Saskatchewan River.

The spring of 1882 opened in the most unpromising manner for railroad
operations, being the wettest ever known in that country. Traffic over the
St. Paul, Minneapolis & Manitoba Railroad, between St. Paul and Winnipeg,
was entirely suspended from April 15 to the 28th, owing to the floods on
the Red River at St. Vincent and Emerson, a serious blow to an early
start, as on this single track depended the transportation of all
supplies, men, timber, and contractors' plant, together with all track
materials (except ties), all of these things having to come from or
through St. Paul and Minneapolis. The writer hereof was appointed a
division engineer, and reported at Winnipeg the 15th of April, getting
through on the last train before the St. Vincent flood. No sooner was the
line open from St. Paul to Winnipeg than the cotillon opened between
Winnipeg and Brandon, with a succession of washouts that defied and
defeated all efforts to get trains over, so it was not until the fifth day
of May that I left Winnipeg to take charge of the second division of 30
miles.

By extremely "dizzy" speed I was landed at the end of the track, 180 miles
from Winnipeg, on the evening of the 9th (4 days). My outfit consisted of
three assistant engineers and the necessary paraphernalia for three
complete camps, 30 days' provisions (which turned out to be about 20), 11
carts and ponies, the latter being extremely poor after a winter's diet
on buffalo grass and no grain. On the 18th day of May I had my division
organized and camps in running order. The country was literally under
