yellow-green color, from the formation of copper arsenite; in that case
acetic acid must be added, and the boiling continued a few minutes longer.
The precipitate then becomes crystalline, and acquires the fine green
color peculiar to the aceto-arsenite." I do not know from personal
knowledge, but I have always understood that the copper salt employed in
its manufacture in France is the acetate. This would account, in my
opinion, for the larger crystalline flakes in which it is obtained in
France than can be produced by the English method of manufacturing it.
Cupric acetate is never employed, I believe, in England--the much cheaper
copper salt, the sulphate, being always employed.

In "Miller's Chemistry" it is stated it "may be obtained by _boiling_
solutions of arsenious anhydride and cupric acetate, and adding to the
mixture an equal bulk of _cold_ water." Why it should be recommended to
add _cold water_, I am at a loss to understand.

In Drs. Roscoe and Schorlemmer's large work on "Chemistry," and in the
English edition of "Wagner's Handbook of Chemical Technology," edited by
Mr. Crookes, the process as described by Dr. Ehrmann in the "Ann. Pharm.,"
xii., 92, is given. It is thus stated in Wagner's work: "This pigment is
prepared by first separately dissolving equal parts by weight of arsenious
acid and neutral acetate of copper in boiling water, and next mixing these
solutions while boiling. There is immediately formed a flocculent
olive-green colored precipitate of arsenite of copper, while the
supernatant liquid contains free acetic acid. After a while the
precipitate becomes gradually crystalline, at the same time forming a
beautiful green pigment, which is separated from the liquid by filtration,
and after washing and carefully drying is ready for use. The mode of
preparing this pigment on a large scale was originally devised by M.
Braconnot, as follows: 15 kilos. of sulphate of copper are dissolved in
the smallest quantity of boiling water, and mixed with a boiling and
concentrated solution of arsenite of soda or potassa, so prepared as to
contain 20 kilos. of arsenious acid. There is immediately formed a dirty
greenish-colored precipitate which is converted into Schweinfurt green by
the addition of some 15 liters of concentrated wood-vinegar. This having
been done, the precipitate is immediately filtered off and washed."

As I have already stated, the copper salt used in the manufacture of this
pigment in England is the sulphate, and it is carried out pretty much
according to Braconnot's method as described by Dr Ehrmann; but any one
would infer, from reading his description of the manufacturing process,
that the compound, aceto-arsenite of copper, was formed almost immediately
after the addition of the acetic acid, a higher or lower atmospheric
temperature having no effect in hastening or retarding the formation.
Furthermore, it is not stated whether the compound forms more readily in
an acid or neutral solution, or whether it can or cannot be formed in a
neutral one; now both these points are important to notice in describing
its manufacture. As regards the former I shall notice it presently, and,
as far as my knowledge extends, the pigment will not form when the
solution is neutral.

The operation is conducted in the following manner in the factory: The
requisite quantity of sulphate of copper is placed in a large wooden vat,
and hot water added to dissolve it; the requisite quantity of arsenic
(arsenious anhydride) and carbonate of soda, the latter not in quantity
quite sufficient to neutralize the whole of the sulphuric acid set free
from the sulphate of copper on the precipitation of the copper as
arsenite, are placed in another wooden vessel; water is then added, and
the formation of the arsenite of soda and its solution are aided by the
introduction of steam into the liquid. When complete solution has been
effected the arsenic solution is run off into the vat containing the
solution of the sulphate of copper, arsenite of copper being at once
precipitated. The necessary quantity of acetic acid is afterward added. In
_warm_ weather the formation of the aceto-arsenite soon commences after
the addition of the vinegar; but, even in that case, it takes a week or
more to have the whole of a big batch of arsenite converted into the
aceto-arsenite; and perfect conversion is necessary, as the presence of a
very minute quantity of unchanged arsenite lowers very much the price of
the emerald pigment, and a by no means large quantity renders the pigment
unsalable, owing to its dirty yellowish-green color. In cold weather a
much longer time is required for its complete conversion; even at the end
of a fortnight or three weeks there frequently remains sufficient
unconverted arsenite to affect seriously the selling price of the color;
when this occurs the manufacturer generally removes these last traces by a
most wasteful method viz, by adding a quantity of free sulphuric acid. The
acid of course dissolves the arsenite, but it dissolves in very much
larger quantities the aceto-arsenite; and this costly solution is not
utilized, but is run into the factory sewer.

By my method of manufacturing it, it can be produced in winter as well as
in summer in one or two hours, and the quantity of free acid required for
its formation is reduced to the lowest amount. I proceed as follows: After
having dissolved in hot water the requisite quantity of cupric sulphate, I
decompose one-fourth of this salt by adding just sufficient of a solution
of carbonate of soda to precipitate the copper, in that quantity of the
sulphate, as carbonate. I then add just sufficient acetic acid to convert
the carbonate into acetate. I have now got in solution--

    3CuSO_{4} + Cu(C_{2}H_{3}O_{2})_{2},

and I have to transform it into--

    3CuAs_{2}O_{4} + Cu(C_{2}H_{3}O_{2})_{2}.

It is at once seen that I have got the requisite quantity of acetate
formed. I next dissolve the requisite quantity of arsenious anhydride in
an amount of carbonate of soda _rather less_ than is sufficient to
neutralize the acid in the remaining cupric sulphate, and I then bring the
solution to or near the boiling-point by introducing steam into it; the
arsenic is dissolved not in the same vessel as the copper salt, but in a
separate one. When the arsenic solution is fully heated, a small current
of it is allowed to flow into the vat containing the copper salts, and
brisk stirring is kept up in the vat. The emerald green is at once formed;
but if there should be the slightest formation of any arsenite, the flow
of the arsenic solution is at once stopped until every trace of the
arsenite has been converted; the arsenic solution is then allowed to flow
in again, with the same precautions as before; in this way a large batch
of emerald-green can he formed in one or two hours, without containing the
slightest trace of the arsenite. I keep the arsenic solution near the
boiling-point during the whole of the time it is flowing into the other
vessel. By varying the proportions of water I could either make it coarse
or fine, as I wished, which is an important matter to have complete
control over in its manufacture.

Two points of interest occurred to me during the time I was occupied with
the research, which I had not time to complete; one was whether the
aceto-arsenite can be formed, adopting the old method for its formation,
if there is more than a certain quantity of water; from some experiments I
made in this direction I was inclined to the opinion it could not. I have
already stated that emerald-green is soluble to a certain extent in acids,
and that it is formed in a more or less acid solution; consequently a
varying amount of the pigment is always lost by being dissolved in the
supernatant liquid. To prevent to a certain extent this loss I
precipitated the copper from it as arsenite; but I was not successful in
the few experiments I had time to make on this part of the subject of
reconverting the copper arsenite thus obtained into the aceto-arsenite by
the addition of acetic acid.--_Jour. of Science._

       *       *       *       *       *




ANALYSIS OF ZINC ASH AND CALCINED PYRITES BY MEANS OF AMMONIUM CARBONATE.


In a recent issue of the _Chemiker Zeitung_ Dr. Kosmann has reported an
analytical method for the examination of zinciferous products; according
to this report, the ash and flue dust produced by the extraction of zinc
from its ore comprise:

1. Zinc dust, from the distillation of zinc,

2. Flue dust, condensed in chambers of zinc furnaces with Kleemann's
receivers,

3. Zinc ash, of various assortments, from iron blast furnaces.

Of these, zinc dust is the only ready product which is, as color or
reducing agent, employed in analytical and technical processes. Its value,
when serving the latter purpose, is determined by the percentage of finely
divided metallic zinc and cadmium contained therein; of equal reducing
power is cadmium, generally associating zinc; injurious, and therefore
uneffective, are zinc oxide and oxides of other metals, also metallic
lead.

Flue dust, condensed in chambers of zinc furnaces with Kleemann's
receivers, is employed with zinc ores in the extraction of zinc, and in
small quantities as substitute for zinc white; its commercial value is
similarly estimated as that of zinc ores.

The various modifications of zinciferous flue ashes from blast furnaces
are an object for continual demand, being both a valuable material for the
production of zinc and, in its superior qualities, a desirable pigment. In
the regeneration of zinc the presence of foreign substances is of some
concern; detrimental are lead, sulphur, and sulphuric acid in form of
lead, zinc, and lime sulphate.

The chemico-technical analysis of these products has until recently been
confined to the volumetric determination of zinc by means of sodium
sulphide (Schaffner's method). But as a remnant of sulphur, as sulphuric
acid, in roasted blende causes a material loss during distillation, and
otherwise being induced to produce a zinc free of lead, the estimation of
sulphur, sulphuric acid, and lead became necessary. These impurities are
determined by well-known methods; sulphur is oxidized and precipitated
with barium chloride, lead by sulphuric acid and alcohol. The examination
of zinc dust, when used for the regeneration of metal, determines the
quantity of zinc resident therein, and employed as reducing agent, the
quantity of metal which causes the generation of hydrogen. Cadmium,
showing the same deportment, must also be considered as well as lead and
arsenic.

A most complete and rapidly working method for the examination of
zinciferous products has originated with the application of neutral
ammonium carbonate as solvent. A solution of this preparation is made,
according to H. Rose, by dissolving 230 grm. commercial ammon carbonate in
180 c.c. ammoniacal liquor of 0.92 s.g., and, by addition of water,
augmenting it to one liter.

This solution dissolves the metallic components, their oxides, and basic
zinc sulphate, and transfers cadmium and lead oxide, also lead, magnesium,
and lime sulphate, into insoluble carbonates. Iron and manganese, when
present as protoxide, are dissolved; of iron sesquioxide but traces, and
of cadmium oxide _in statu nascendi_ a small portion enter into solution.
The solution of ammonium carbonate contains in each 10 c.c. 1 grm.
ammonia, which dissolves 1.5 grm. zinc.

The sample for examination is moistened with water and mixed with an
adequate volume of the solvent, is digested at 50-60 deg. C. until complete
decomposition is effected. The heating of the liquid prevents the solution
of iron, manganese, and cadmium. The content, sediment and liquid, is
thrown on a filter and washed with hot water to which a small quantity of
the solvent has been added. When the solution contains iron and manganese,
it is separated by decantation from the sediment and oxidized with bromine
(according to the method of Nic-Wolff) until a flocculent precipitate of
iron sesquioxide and manganese dioxide becomes visible; it is united with
the original residue and filtered.

The filtrate is diluted till it appears cloudy, boiled to expel ammonia,
tested with sodium sulphide upon the presence of zinc, and, when freed of
all zinc, decanted. The precipitate of zinc carbonate is filtered,
exhausted with water, transferred into zinc oxide by ignition, and
weighed. The gravimetric method can be substituted by the volumetric by
introducing a solution of sodium sulphide of known strength into the
ammoniacal filtrate. On dividing the filtered liquid into various equal
portions other substances, arsenic and sulphuric acid, can be determined
from the same sample. For this purpose the filtrate is concentrated;
divided into two equal portions, one of which is acidified and treated
with hydrogen sulphide for the determination of arsenic, the other is
acidified and used for the estimation of sulphuric acid by means of barium
chloride. The original residue is dissolved in muriatic or acetic acid and
filtered. The lead of the filtered liquid is thrown down by sulphuric
acid, and alcohol, and cadmium, after dissipation of alcohol into gas,
precipitated by hydrogen sulphide. Iron, manganese, alumina, and other
substances present in the solution are determined by known methods.

It is manifest that the determination of substances--zinc, lead, and
sulphuric acid--which are of importance in technical analysis of zinc ash,
can be executed by this method within a comparatively short time. The
application of ammonium carbonate as solvent has the advantage, over the
application of ammonia, that it is a far better solvent, that it
decomposes insoluble basic sulphates, and that the remaining carbonates
are readily dissolved by acids.

The decomposition of zinc dust is accompanied by a lively evolution of
gas; it is therefore necessary to continue the digestion of the sample
till no more hydrogen is given off. Zinc dust contains both metals and
their oxides, and methods which, from the volume of hydrogen generated,
determine indirectly the percentage of metallic zinc do not give the real
composition of the zinc dust. For the determination of the metallic
components the material is digested with a solution of copper sulphate,
which dissolves zinc and cadmium; the liquid is filtered, acidified, and
decomposed with hydrogen sulphide, or treated with a solution of ammonium
carbonate. The use of cupric chloride is not advisable, as it corrodes
lead, and gives rise to the formation of soluble chloride of lead, which
complicates the separation of zinc from cadmium. The best mode of
operation is the following: Both copper sulphate and zinc dust are weighed
separately, the former is dissolved in water and the latter introduced
into the solution of copper sulphate in small portions until it appears
colorless. During the operation the vessel is freely shaken, lumps are
comminuted with a glass rod, and a few drops of the liquid are ultimately
tested with hydrogen sulphide or ammonia. The remainder of zinc dust is
then weighed, and its value deducted from the original weight. Zinc and
cadmium of the filtrate are determined as above. On repeating this method
several times most satisfactory results are obtained.

Another mode of operating is to employ an excess of copper sulphate and to
determine the copper dissolved in the filtrate. The separation of copper
from cadmium being difficult and laborious, and the volumetric estimation
with potassium cyanide not practicable, it is not prudent to apply this
method.

When calcined zinciferous pyrites have to be examined, the estimation of
zinc is similar to that employed in the analysis of zinc ore. The sample
is exhausted with water, filtered, and, to eliminate calcium sulphate and
basic iron sulphate, evaporated to dryness. It is then dissolved in a
small quantity of alcohol and water, refiltered, and the filtrate
decomposed with ammonium carbonate. The original residue is treated with a
solution of ammonium carbonate, which dissolves arsenious acid and basic
zinc sulphate, filtered, and united with the first filtrate. When iron and
manganese are present, the filtrates are treated with bromine. The united
filtrates are boiled or examined volumetrically with sodium sulphide.

       *       *       *       *       *




PETROLEUM AS FUEL IN LOCOMOTIVE ENGINES.[2]

[Footnote 2: Abstract of paper read before the Institution of Mechanical
Engineers.]

By Mr. THOMAS URQUHART.


Comparing naphtha refuse and anthracite, the former has a theoretical
evaporative power of 16.2 lb. of water per lb. of fuel, and the latter of
12.2 lb., at a pressure of 8 atm. or 120 lb. per square inch; hence
petroleum has, weight for weight, 33 per cent. higher evaporative value
than anthracite. Now in locomotive practice a mean evaporation of from 7
lb. to 71/2 lb. of water per lb. of anthracite is about what is generally
obtained, thus giving about 60 per cent. efficiency, while 40 per cent. of
the heating power is unavoidably lost. But with petroleum an evaporation
of 12.25 lb. is practically obtained, giving 12.25/16.2 = 75 per cent.
efficiency. Thus in the first place petroleum is theoretically 33 per
cent. superior to anthracite in evaporative power; and secondly, its
useful effect is 25 per cent. greater, being 75 percent. instead of 60
percent.; while, thirdly, weight for weight, the practical evaporative
value of petroleum must be reckoned as at least from (12.25 - 7.50)/7.50 =
63 per cent. to (12.25 - 7.00)/7.00 = 75 per cent. higher than that of
anthracite.

_Spray injector._--Steam not superheated, being the most convenient for
injecting the spray of liquid fuel into the furnace, it remains to be
proved how far superheated steam or compressed air is really superior to
ordinary saturated steam, taken from the highest point inside the boiler
by a special internal pipe. In using several systems of spray injectors
for locomotives, the author invariably noticed the impossibility of
preventing leakage of tubes, accumulation of soot, and inequality of
heating of the fire box. The work of a locomotive boiler is very different
from that of a marine or stationary boiler, owing to the frequent changes
of gradient on the line, and the frequent stoppages at stations. These
conditions render firing with petroleum very difficult; and were it not
for the part played by properly arranged brickwork inside the fire box,
the spray jet alone would be quite inadequate. Hitherto the efforts of
engineers have been mainly directed toward arriving at the best kind of
"spray injector," for so minutely subdividing a jet of petroleum into a
fine spray, by the aid of steam or compressed air, as to render it
inflammable and of easy ignition. For this object nearly all the known
spray injectors have very long and narrow orifices for petroleum as well
as for steam; the width of the orifices does not exceed from 1/2 mm. to 2
mm. or 0.02 in. to 0.08 in., and in many instances is capable of
adjustment. With such narrow orifices it is clear that any small solid
particles which may find their way into the spray injector along with the
petroleum will foul the nozzle and check the fire. Hence in many of the
steamboats on the Caspian Sea, although a single spray injector suffices
for one furnace, two are used, in order that when one gets fouled the
other may still work; but, of course, the fouled orifices require
incessant cleaning out.

_Locomotives._--In arranging a locomotive for burning petroleum, several
details are required to be added in order to render the application
convenient. In the first place, for getting up steam to begin with, a gas
pipe of 1 inch internal diameter is fixed along the outside of the boiler,
and at about the middle of its length it is fitted with a three-way cock
having a screw nipple and cap. The front end of the longitudinal pipe is
connected to the blower in the chimney, and the back end is attached to
the spray injector. Then by connecting to the nipple a pipe from a
shunting locomotive under steam, the spray jet is immediately started by
the borrowed steam, by which at the same time a draught is also maintained
in the chimney. In a fully equipped engine shed the borrowed steam would
be obtained from a fixed boiler conveniently placed and specially arranged
for the purpose of raising steam. In practice steam can be raised from
cold water to 3 atm. pressure--45 lb. per square inch--in twenty minutes.
The use of auxiliary steam is then dispensed with, and the spray jet is
worked by steam from its own boiler; a pressure of 8 atm.--120 lb.--is
thus obtained in fifty to fifty-five minutes from the time the spray jet
was first started. In daily practice, when it is only necessary to raise
steam in boilers already full of hot water, the full pressure of 7 to 8
atm. is obtained in from twenty to twenty-five minutes. While
experimenting with liquid fuel for locomotives, a separate tank was placed
on the tender for carrying the petroleum, having a capacity of about 3
tons. But to have a separate tank on the tender, even though fixed in
place, would be a source of danger from the possibility of its moving
forward in case of collision. It was therefore decided, as soon as
petroleum firing was permanently introduced, to place the tank for fuel in
the tender between the two side compartments of the water tank, utilizing
the original coal space. For a six-wheeled locomotive the capacity of the
tank is 3-1/2 tons of oil--a quantity sufficient for 250 miles, with a
train of 480 tons gross exclusive of engine and tender. In charging the
tender tank with petroleum, it is of great importance to have strainers of
wire cloth in the manhole of two different meshes, the outer one having
openings, say, of 1/4 in., the inner, say 1/8 in.; these strainers are
occasionally taken out and cleaned. If care be taken to prevent any solid
particles from entering with the petroleum, no fouling of the spray
injector is likely to occur; and even if an obstruction should arise, the
obstacle being of small size can easily be blown through by screwing back
the steam cone in the spray injector far enough to let the solid particles
pass and be blown out into the fire-box by the steam. This expedient is
easily resorted to even when running; and no more inconvenience arises
than an extra puff of dense smoke for a moment, in consequence of the
sudden admission of too much fuel. Besides the two strainers in the
manhole of the petroleum tank on the tender, there should be another
strainer at the outlet valve inside the tank, having a mesh of 1/3 in.
holes.

_Driving locomotives._--In lighting up, certain precise rules have to be
followed, in order to prevent explosion of any gas that may have
accumulated in the fire box. Such explosions do often take place through
negligence; but they amount simply to a puff of gas, driving smoke out
through the ash-pan dampers, without any disagreeably loud report. This is
all prevented by adhering to the following simple rules: First clear the
spray nozzle of water by letting a small quantity of steam blow through,
with the ash-pan doors open; at the same time start the blower in the
chimney for a few seconds, and the gas, if any, will be immediately drawn
up the chimney. Next place on the bottom of the combustion chamber a piece
of cotton waste, or a handful of shavings saturated with petroleum and
burning with a flame. Then by opening first the steam valve of the spray
injector, and next the petroleum valve gently, the very first spray of oil
coming on the flaming waste immediately ignites without any explosion
whatever; after which the quantity of fuel can be increased at pleasure.
By looking at the top of the chimney, the supply of petroleum can be
regulated by observing the smoke. The general rule is to allow a
transparent light smoke to escape, thus showing that neither too much air
is being admitted nor too little. The combustion is quite under the
control of the driver, and the regulation can be so effected as to prevent
smoke altogether. While running, it is indispensable that the driver and
fireman should act together, the latter having at his side of the engine
the four handles for regulating the fire, namely, the steam wheel and the
petroleum wheel for the spray injector, and the two ash-pan door handles
in which there are notches for regulating the air admission. Each
alteration in the position of the reversing lever or screw, as well as in
the degree of opening of the steam regulator or the blast pipe, requires a
corresponding alteration of the fire. Generally the driver generally
passes the word when he intends shutting off steam, so that the alteration
in the firing can be effected before the steam is actually shut off; and
in this way the regulation of the fire and that of the steam are virtually
done together. All this care is necessary to prevent smoke, which is
nothing less than a waste of fuel. When, for instance, the train arrives
at the top of a bank, which it has to go down with the brakes on, exactly
at the moment of the driver shutting off the steam and shifting the
reversing lever into full forward gear, the petroleum and steam are shut
off from the spray injector, the ash-pan doors are closed, and if the
incline be a long one, the revolving iron damper over the chimney top is
moved into position, closing the chimney, though not hermetically. The
accumulated heat is thereby retained in the fire-box; and the steam even
rises in pressure, from the action of the accumulated heat alone. As soon
as the train reaches the bottom of the incline and steam is again
required, the first thing done is to uncover the chimney top; then the
steam is turned on to the spray injector, and next a small quantity of
petroleum is admitted, but without opening the ash-pan doors, a small fire
being rendered possible by the entrance of air around the spray injector,
as well as by possible leakage past the ash-pan doors. The spray
immediately coming in contact with the hot chamber ignites without any
audible explosion; and the ash-pan doors are finally opened, when
considerable power is required, or when the air otherwise admitted is not
sufficient to support complete combustion. By looking at the fire through
the sight hole it can always be seen at night whether the fire is white or
dusky; in fact, with altogether inexperienced men it was found that after
a few trips they could become quite expert in firing with petroleum. The
better men contrive to burn less fuel than others, simply by greater care
in attending to all the points essential to success. At present
seventy-two locomotives are running with petroleum firing; ten of them are
passenger engines, seventeen are eight-wheel coupled goods engines, and
forty-five are six-wheel coupled. As might be expected, several points
have arisen which must be dealt with in order to insure success. For
instance, the distance ring between the plates around the firing door is
apt to leak, in consequence of the intense heat driven against it, and the
absence of water circulation; it is therefore either protected by having
the brick arch built up against it, or, better still, it is taken out
altogether when the engines are in for repairs, and a flange joint is
substituted, similar to what is now used in the engines of the London and
Northwestern Railway. This arrangement gives better results, and occasions
no trouble whatever.

_Storage of petroleum._--The length of line now worked with petroleum is
from Tsaritsin to Burnack, 291 miles. There is a main iron reservoir for
petroleum at each of the four engine sheds, namely at Tsaritsin, Archeda,
Filonoff, and Borisoglebsk. Each reservoir is 66 ft. internal diameter and
24 ft. high, and when full holds about 2,050 tons. The method of charging
the reservoir, which stands a good way from the line, and is situated at a
convenient distance from all dwelling houses and buildings, is as follows:
On a siding specially prepared for the purpose are placed ten cistern cars
full of oil, the capacity of each being about ten tons. From each of these
cars a connection is made by a flexible India rubber pipe to one of ten
stand pipes which project 1 ft. above the ground line. Parallel with the
rails is laid a main pipe, with which the ten stand pipes are all
connected, thus forming one general suction main. About the middle of the
length of the main, which is laid underground and covered with sawdust or
