Mr. Dujardin Beaumetz some time ago asked Messrs. Pasteur and Roux's aid
in making some new experiments on the question, and has made known the
result of these to the Academy of Medicine. At the Cochin Hospital he
selected two rooms of 3,530 cubic feet capacity located in wooden sheds.
The walls of these rooms, which were formed of boards, allowed the air to
enter through numerous chinks, although care had been taken to close the
largest of these with paper. In each of the rooms were placed a bed,
different pieces of furniture, and fabrics of various colors. Bromine,
chlorine and sulphate of nitrosyle were successively rejected. Three
sources of sulphurous acid were then experimented with, viz., the burning
of sulphur, liquefied sulphurous acid, and the burning of sulphide of
carbon. The rooms were closed for twenty-four hours, and tubes containing
different proto-organisms, and particularly the comma bacillus made known
by Koch, were placed therein, along with other tubes containing vaccine
lymph. After each experiment these tubes were carried to Mr. Pasteur's
laboratory and compared with others.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--BURNER FOR SULPHUR.]

The process by combustion of sulphur is the simplest and cheapest. To
effect such combustion, it suffices to place a piece of iron plate upon
the floor of the room, and on this to place bricks connected with sand,
or, what is better, to use a small refractory clay furnace (as advised by
Mr. Pasteur), of oblong form, 8 inches in width by 10 in length, and
having small apertures in the sides in order to quicken combustion.

In order to obtain a complete combustion of the flowers of sulphur, it is
necessary to see to it that the burning is effected equally over its
entire surface, this being easily brought about by moistening the sulphur
with alcohol and then setting fire to the latter. Through the use of this
process a complete and absolute combustion has been obtained of much as
from 18 to 20 grains of sulphur per cubic foot.

In the proportion of 8 grains to the cubic foot, all the different
culture broths under experiment were sterilized save the one containing
the bacteria of charbon. As for the vaccine virus, its properties were
destroyed. This economical process presents but two inconveniences, viz.,
the possibility of fire when the furnace is badly constructed, and the
alteration of such metallic objects as may be in the room. In fact, the
combustion of sulphur is attended with the projection of a few particles
of the substance, which form a layer of metallic sulphide upon copper or
iron objects.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--CKIANDI BEY'S APPARATUS FOR BURNING CARBON
SULPHIDE.]

The use of liquid sulphurous acid in siphons does not offer the same
inconveniences. These siphons contain about one and a half pounds of
sulphurous acid. The proportion necessary to effect the sterilization of
the culture broths is one siphon per 706 cubic feet. In such a case the
_modus operandi_ is as follows: In the middle of the room is placed a
vessel, which is connected with the exterior by means a rubber tube that
passes through a hole in the door. After the door has been closed, it is
only necessary to place the nozzle of the siphon in the rubber tube, and
to press upon the lever of the siphon valve, to cause the liquid to pass
from the siphon to the interior of the vessel. The evaporation of the
liquid sulphurous acid proceeds very rapidly in the free air. This
process is an exceedingly convenient one; it does away with danger from
fire, and it leaves the gildings and metallic objects that chance to be
in the room absolutely intact. Finally, the acid's power of penetration
appears to be still greater than that which is obtained by the combustion
of sulphur. It has but one drawback, and that is its high price. Each
siphon is sold to the public at the price of one dollar. To
municipalities using sulphurous acid in this form the price would be
reduced to just one-half that figure.

It will be seen, then, that for a room of 3,530 cubic feet capacity the
cost would be $5.00 or $2.50.

The combustion of sulphide of carbon furnishes an abundance of sulphurous
acid, but has hitherto been attended with danger. This, however, has
recently been overcome by the invention of a new burner by Mr. Ckiandi
Bey. The general arrangement of this new apparatus is shown in Figs. 2
and 3.

Mr. Ckiandi's burner consists of an external vessel, A B C D. of tinned
copper, containing a vessel, I H E F, to the sides of which are fixed
three siphons, R, S.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--SECTION OF THE APPARATUS.]

To operate the burner, we place the cylindrical tube, K L M N, in the
inner vessel, and pour sulphide of carbon into it up to the level _aa_.
This done, we fill the external vessel with water up to the level _bb_.
Thanks to the siphons, the water enters the inner vessel, presses the
sulphide of carbon, which is the heavier, and causes it to rise in the
tube up to the level _a'a',_ where it saturates a cotton wick, which is
then lighted. The upper end of the tube is surmounted with a chimney, PQ.
which quickens the draught.

The combustion may be retarded or quickened at will by causing the level
_bb_ of the water to rise or lower.

The burner is placed in the room to be disinfected, which, after the wick
has been lighted, is closed hermetically. When all the sulphide is burned
it is replaced by water, and the lamp goes out of itself.

The combustion proceeds with great regularity and without any danger. It
takes about five and a half pounds for a room of 3,500 cubic feet
capacity. The process is sure and quite economical, since sulphide of
carbon is sold at about five cents per pound, which amounts to 25 cents
for a room of 3,500 cubic feet capacity. The burner costs ten dollars,
but may be used for an almost indefinite period.

The process of producing sulphurous acid by the combustion of sulphide of
carbon is, as may be seen, very practical and advantageous. It does not
affect metallic objects, and it furnishes a disinfecting gas
continuously, slowly, and regularly.

Mr. Ckiandi's burner may also be applied in several industries. It is
capable of rendering great services in the bleaching of silk and woolen
goods, and it may also be used for bleaching sponges, straw hats, and a
number of other objects.--_La Nature_.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE DETERMINATION OF GRAPHITE IN MINERALS.

By J.B. MACKINTOSH.


In many instances the accurate determination of the amount of graphite
present in a rock has proved a rather troublesome problem. The first
thought which naturally suggests itself is to burn the graphite and weigh
the carbonic acid produced; but in the case of the sample which led me to
seek for another method, this way could not be employed, for the specimen
had been taken from the surface, and was covered and penetrated by
vegetable growths which could not be entirely removed mechanically. Add
to this the fact of the presence of iron pyrites and the probable
occurrence of carbonates in the rock, and it will be at once seen that no
reliance could be placed on the results obtained by this suggested
method.

As the problem thus resolved itself into finding a way by which all
interfering substances could be destroyed without affecting the graphite,
it at once occurred to me to try the effect of caustic potash. I melted a
few pieces of potash in a silver crucible until it had stopped spitting
and was in quiet fusion. I then transferred the weighed sample to the
crucible, the melted potash in which readily wetted the graphite rock.
The mass was then gently heated, and occasionally stirred with a piece of
silver wire. The heat never need be much above the melting point of the
potash, though toward the last I have been in the habit of raising the
temperature slightly, to insure the complete decomposition of the melt.
When the decomposition is complete, which can be known by the complete
absence of gritty particles, the crucible is cooled and then soaked out
in cold water. This is very quickly accomplished, and we then see that we
have an insoluble residue of graphite and a flocculent precipitate of
lime, magnesia, iron hydrate, etc., while the organic matters have
disappeared. The sulphides of iron, etc., have given up their sulphur to
the potash, and everything except the graphite has suffered some change.
The solution is now filtered through a weighed Gooch crucible, the
residue washed a few times with water, and then treated with dilute
hydrochloric acid (followed by ammonia to remove any silver taken up from
the crucible), which will dissolve all the constituents of the residue
except the graphite, and after washing will leave the latter free and in
a condition of great purity.

As evidence of the accuracy of the method, I subjoin the results I
obtained on a sample whose gangue was free from all organic and other
impurities, consisting chiefly of quartz:

New Method.       Combustion in Oxygen, Weighing CO_{2}.
  15.51                         15.54

It is plain that such a result leaves nothing to be desired for the
accuracy of the method, while, as regards time and trouble, the advantage
lies on the side of the new method. I have completed a determination in
less than two hours from the start, and did not hurry myself over it in
any degree.

Fine pulverization of the sample is not essential, and in fact is rather
detrimental, as the graphite, when fine, is more difficult to wash
without loss. When operating on a coarse sample more time is necessarily
taken, but the resulting graphite shows the manner of occurrence better,
whether in scales or in the amorphous form.

In consulting the literature bearing on the subject, I cannot find any
mention of this method employed as an analytical process; it has,
however, been previously described as a commercial method for the
purification of graphite,[1] and I understand has been tried on a small
scale in this country. The method, though inexpensive, yet seems to have
been abandoned for some reason, and I am not aware that it is now
employed anywhere.--_Sch. Mines Quarterly._

[Footnote 1: Schloffel, Zeitschrift der K.K. geolog. Reichanstalt, 1866,
p. 126.]

       *       *       *       *       *




SULPHOCYANIDE OF POTASSIUM.


The elements of cyanogen, combined with sulphur, form a salt radical,
sulphocyanogen, C_{2}NS_{2}, which is expressed by the symbol Csy. The
sulphocyanide of potassium, KCsy, is prepared by fusing ferrocyanide of
potassium, deprived of its water of crystallization, intimately mixed
with half its weight of sulphur and 17 parts of carbonate of potassa. The
molten mass, after having cooled, is exhausted with water, the solution
evaporated to dryness, and extracted with alcohol, from which the
crystals of the salt are separated by evaporation.

It is also made by melting the ferrocyanide of potassium with sulphide of
potassium. It is a white, crystallizable salt of a taste resembling that
of niter, soluble in water and alcohol, and extremely poisonous. It
dissolves the chlorides, iodides, and bromides of silver, is, therefore,
a fixing agent, but has not come in general use as such. Vogel speaks
highly of it as an addition to the positive toning bath, although he
prefers the analogous ammonium salt in the following formula:

Chloride of gold solution.... (1:50) 3 c. cm. (46-1/5 grains).
Sulphocyanide of ammonium ... 20 grammes (308 grains).
Water........100 c. cm. (3 ounces 5 drachms 40 grains).

_Ferrocyanide of Potassium_--K_{2}Cfy+3HO, or K_{2}C_{8}N_{3}Fe+3HO, is
generally known by the name of yellow prussiate of potassa. It contains
ferrocyanogen, a compound radical, consisting of 1 eq. of metallic iron
and 3 eq. of the elements of cyanogen, and is designated by the symbol
Cfy.

The potassium salt is manufactured on a large scale from refuse animal
matter, as old leather, chips of horn, woolen rags, hoofs, blood (hence
its German name, "Blutlaugen salz"), greaves, and other substances rich
in nitrogen, by fusing them with crude carbonate of potassa and iron
scraps or filings to a red heat, the operation to go on in an iron pot or
shell, with the exclusion of all air. Cyanide of potassium is generated
in large quantities. The melted mass is afterward treated with hot water,
which dissolves the cyanide and other salts, the cyanide being then
quickly converted by the action of oxide of iron, formed during the
operation of fusing, into ferrocyanide. The filtered solution is
evaporated, crystallized, and recrystallized. The best temperature for
making the solution is between 158 and 176 deg. F. The conversion of the
cyanide into the ferrocyanide is greatly facilitated by the presence of
finely divided sulphuret of iron and caustic potash. Some years ago this
salt was manufactured by a process which dispensed with the use of animal
matter, the necessary nitrogen being obtained by a current of atmospheric
air. Fragments of charcoal, impregnated with carbonate of potassa, were
exposed to a white heat in a clay cylinder, through which a current of
air was drawn by a suction pump. The process succeeded in a chemical
sense, but failed on the score of economy.

Richard Brunquell passes ammonia through tubes filled with charcoal, and
heated to redness so as to form cyanide of ammonium, which is converted
into the ferrocyanide of potassium by contact with potash solution and
suitable iron compounds. Ferrocyanide of potassium is in large beautiful
transparent four-sided tabular crystals, of a lemon-yellow color, soluble
in four parts of cold and two of boiling water, insoluble in alcohol.
Exposed to heat it loses three eq. of water, and becomes anhydrous; at a
high temperature it yields cyanide of potassium, carbide of iron, and
various gases. This salt is said to have no poisonous properties,
although the dangerous hydrocyanic acid is made from it. In large doses
it occasions, however, vertigo, numbness, and coldness. It is used in
various photographic processes. Newton employs it in combination with
pyrogallol and soda in the development of bromo-gelatine plates.

The ferri or ferrid cyanide of potassium discovered by Gmelin is often,
but improperly, termed red prussiate of potash. It is formed by passing a
current of chlorine gas through a solution of ferrocyanide of potassium
until the liquid ceases to give a precipitate with a salt of sesquioxide
of iron, and acquires a deep, reddish-green color. The solution is then
evaporated, crystallized, and recrystallized. It forms regular prismatic
or tabular crystals, of a beautiful ruby-red tint, permanent in the air,
soluble in four parts of cold water. The crystals burn when introduced
into the flame of a candle, and emit sparks.

The theory of the formation of this salt is, that one eq. of chlorine
withdraws from two eq. of the ferrocyanide of potassium, one eq. of
potassium, forming chloride of potassium, which remains in the mother
liquid. The reaction is explained by the following equation:
2(K_{2}Cfy)+Cl=K_{3}Cfy_{2}+KCl.

The radical ferridcyanogen, isomeric[2] with ferrocyanogen, is supposed
to be formed by the coalescence of two equivalents of ferrocyanogen, and
is represented by the symbol Cfdy; accordingly the formula of
ferridcyanide of potassium is K_{3}Cfdy.

[Footnote 2: Isomeric bodies, or substances different in properties yet
identical in composition, are of constant occurrence in organic
chemistry, and stand among its most peculiar features.]

Ferridcyanide of potassium has found extensive application in
photographic processes for intensifying negatives; those of Eder, in
combination with nitrate of lead, or Selle's, with nitrate of uranium;
Ander's blue intensification of gelatine negatives, Farmer's process of
reducing intensity, the coloring of diapositives, the very important blue
printing, and various others, are daily practiced in our laboratories.

The ferrocyanide of potassium is a chemical reagent of great value,
giving rise to precipitates with the neutral or slightly acid solutions
of metals, like the beautiful brown ferrocyanide of copper, and that of
lead. When a ferrocyanide is added to a solution of a sesquioxide of
iron, Prussian blue or ferrocyanide of iron is produced. The exact
composition of this remarkable substance is not distinctly stated, as
various blue compounds may be precipitated under different circumstances.
Berzelius gives the following account: 3 eq. of ferrocyanide and 2 eq. of
sesquioxide of iron are mutually decomposed, forming 1 eq. of Prussian
blue and 6 eq. of the potassa salt, which remains in solution, or
3K_{2}Cfy + 2(Fe_{2}O_{3}3NO_{3}) = Fe_{4}Cfy_{3} + 6(KO,NO_{5}). It
forms a bulky precipitate of an intense blue, is quite insoluble in water
or weak acids, with the exception of oxalic acid, with which it gives a
deep blue liquid, occasionally used as blue ink.

Ferridcyanide of potassium, added to a salt of the sesquioxide of iron,
yields no precipitate, but merely darkens the reddish-brown solution;
with protoxide of iron it gives a blue precipitate, containing
Fe_{3}Cfdy, which is of a brighter tint than that of Prussian blue, and
is known by the name of Turnbull's blue. Hence, the ferridcyanide of
potassium is as excellent a test for protoxide of iron as the yellow
ferrocyanide is for the sesquioxide.--_E., Photo. Times_.

       *       *       *       *       *




FOUCAULT'S APPARATUS FOR MANUFACTURING ILLUMINATING GAS AND
HYDROGEN.


The illuminating gas and hydrogen apparatus, illustrated herewith, is
adapted to all cases in which it is desirable to manufacture gas upon a
small scale.

Through the use solely of oil or water, it produces illuminating gas or
pure hydrogen for all the applications that may be required of them. It
consists of three parts, viz., of a vaporizer, A, which converts the
liquids into gas; of a distributer, B, which contains and distributes the
liquids to be converted into gas, and of a regulator, C, which
automatically regulates the flow of the liquids in proportion as they are
used.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--FOUCAULT'S GAS APPARATUS.]

In the vaporizer Mr. Foucault, the inventor of the apparatus, obtains a
perfectly regular combustion through the use of a central column, 15,
charged with fuel, closed at the upper part, open beneath, and entering a
furnace that is fed by it with regularity, the zone of combustion not
being able to extend beyond the level of the draught. The grate, 16, is
capable of revolving upon its axis in order to separate the cinders. It
also oscillates, and is provided with jaws for crushing the fuel; and it
may likewise be lowered so as to let the fire drop into the ash-pan when
it is desired to stop operations.

The vaporizer, properly so called, is not placed directly over the fire,
and for this reason the production of a spheroidal state of the liquid is
avoided. It consists of a vessel, 44, into which the liquid is led by a
pipe, 43. The cast-iron evaporating vessel, 14, is provided with
appendages, 14 _bis_, which dip into the liquid and bring about its
evaporation. A refractory clay sleeve, 41, protects the lower part of the
cylinder, 15, from the fire, and diminishes the smoke passages at 42. The
vapor produced makes its way vertically through a layer of charcoal
placed between the evaporating vessel, 14, and the receiver, 17, and
serving to decompose the aqueous vapor formed.

All clay and red and white lead joints are done away with in this part of
the apparatus, as are also packing bolts. Thus, at the upper part the
cover, 19, is provided with a rim that enters a cavity filled with lead,
so, too, the lower part of the evaporating vessel, 14, rests in a channel
containing lead. There is also at 30, a joint of the same character for
the rim of the external cylindrical vessel, 18. Both this latter and the
receiver, 17, dip beneath into a tank of water, 66.

The distributer, B, is so arranged as to cause the water, and oil, and
the liquids to be vaporized to flow with the greatest regularity, and
proportionally to the consumption of the gas in cases where the latter is
not stored up in a gas meter. The flow is controlled by cocks that are
