to run away. One of the spearmen slung her back into the circle. She
brushed against the jeep and froze, white-faced.

"Martha," Charles said patiently, "there's nothing to be afraid of. The
guns won't go off and the jeep won't move. I'll teach you how to work
them so you can kill everybody you don't like with the guns and go
faster than a deer in the jeep--"

He was talking into empty air as far as the child was concerned. She was
muttering, staring at the arm that had brushed the jeep: "That did it, I
guess. There goes the power. May the goddess blast her--no. The power's
out of me now. I felt it go." She looked up at Charles, quite calmly,
and said: "Go on. Show me all about it. Do a good job."

"Martha, what are you talking about?"

"She was afraid of me, my sister, so she's robbing me of the power.
Don't you know? I guess not. The goddess hates iron and machines. I had
the power of the goddess in me, but it's gone now; I felt it go. Now
nobody'll be afraid of me any more." Her face contorted and she said:
"Show me how you work the guns."

       *       *       *       *       *

He taught her what he could while the circle of spearmen looked on and
grinned, cracking raw jokes about the child as anybody anywhere, would
about a tyrant deposed. She pretended to ignore them, grimly repeating
names after him and imitating his practiced movements in loading drill.
She was very bright, Charles realized. When he got a chance he muttered,
"I'm sorry about this, Martha. It isn't my idea."

She whispered bleakly: "I know. I liked you. I was sorry when the other
outsider took your dinner." She began to sob uncontrollably. "I'll never
see anything again! Nobody'll ever be afraid of me again!" She buried
her face against Charles' shoulder.

He smoothed her tangled hair mechanically and said to the watching,
grinning circle: "Look, hasn't this gone far enough? Haven't you got
what you wanted?"

The headman stretched and spat. "Guess so," he said. "Come on, girl." He
yanked Martha from the seat and booted her toward the huts.

Charles scrambled down just ahead of a spear. He let himself be led back
to the smithy block house and shoved through the crawl hole.

"I was thinking about what you said the other day," Kennedy beamed,
rasping a file over an arrowhead. "When I said that to change one
molecule in the past you'd have to change _every_ molecule in the past,
and you said, 'Maybe so.' I've figured that what you were driving at
was--"

"Kennedy," Charles said, "please shut up just this once. I've got to
think."

"In what sense do you mean that, Charles? Do you mean that you're a
rational animal and therefore that your _being_ rather than _essense_
is--"

"_Shut up or I'll pick up a rock and bust your head in with it!_"
Charles roared. He more than half meant it. Kennedy hunched down before
his hearth looking offended and scared. Charles squatted with his head
in his hands.

_I have been listening to you._

Repeated drives of the Government to wipe out the aborigines. Drives
that never succeeded.

_I'll never see anything again._

The way the witch girl had blasted her rival--but that was suggestion.
But--

_I have been listening to you. Why are you untrue to your brothers?_

He'd said nothing like that to anybody, not to her or poor Kennedy.

He thought vaguely of _psi_ force, a fragment in his memory. An old
superstition, like the id-ego-superego triad of the sick-minded
psychologists. Like vectors of the mind, exploded nonsense. But--

_I have been listening to you. Why are you untrue to your brothers?_

Charles smacked one fist against the sand floor in impotent rage. He was
going as crazy as Kennedy. Did the witch girl--and Martha--have
hereditary _psi_ power? He mocked himself savagely: that's such a
_general_ question!

Neurotic adolescent girls in kerosene-lit farmhouses, he thought
vaguely. Things that go bump--and crash and blooie and _whoo-oo-oo!_ in
the night. Not in electric lit city apartments. Not around fleshed-up
middle-aged men and women. You take a hyperthyroid virgin, isolate her
from power machinery and electric fields, put on the pressures that make
her feel alone and tense to the bursting point--and naturally enough,
something bursts. A chamberpot sails from under the bed and shatters on
the skull of stepfather-tyrant. The wide-gilt-framed portrait of
thundergod-grandfather falls with a crash. Sure, the nail crystallized
and broke--_who crystallized it?_

Neurotic adolescent girls speaking in tongues, reading face-down cards
and closed books, screaming aloud when sister or mother dies in a
railroad wreck fifty miles away, of cancer a hundred miles away, in a
bombing overseas.

Sometimes they made saints of them. Sometimes they burned them. Burned
them and _then_ made saints of them.

A blood-raw hunk of venison came sailing through one of the loopholes
and flopped on the sand.

_I was sorry when the other outsider took your dinner._

Three days ago he'd dozed off while Kennedy broiled the meat over the
hearth. When he woke, Kennedy had gobbled it all and was whimpering with
apprehension. But he'd done nothing and said nothing; the man wasn't
responsible. He'd said nothing, and yet somehow the child knew about it.

His days were numbered; soon enough the jeep would be out of gas and the
guns would be out of ammo or an unreplaceable part lost or broken. Then,
according to the serene logic that ruled the witch girl, he'd be
surplus.

But there was a key to it somehow.

He got up and slapped Kennedy's hand away from the venison. "Naughty,"
he said, and divided it equally with a broad spearblade.

"Naughty," Kennedy said morosely. "The naught-class, the null-class. I'm
the null-class. I plus the universe equal one, the universe-class. If
you could transpose--but you can't transpose." Silently they toasted
their venison over the fire.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a moonless night with one great planet, Jupiter he supposed,
reigning over the star-powdered sky. Kennedy slept muttering feebly in a
corner. The hearthfire was out. It had to be out by dark. The spearmen
took no chance of their trying to burn down the place. The village had
long since gone to sleep, campfires doused, skin flaps pulled to across
the door holes. From the corral one of the spavined, tick-ridden cows
mooed uneasily and then fell silent.

       *       *       *       *       *

Charles then began the hardest job of his life. He tried to think,
straight and uninterrupted, of Martha, the little girl. Some of the
things that interrupted him were:

The remembered smell of fried onions; they didn't have onions here;

Salt;

I wonder how the old 101st Precinct's getting along;

That fellow who wanted to get married on a hundred dollars;

Lee Falcaro, damn her!

This, is damn foolishness; it can't possibly work;

Poor old Kennedy;

I'll starve before I eat another mouthful of that greasy deer-meat;

The Van Dellen kid, I wonder if I could have saved him;

Reiner's right; we've got to clean up the Government and then try to
civilize these people;

There must be something wrong with my head, I can't seem to
concentrate;

That terrific third-chukker play in the Finals, my picture all over
town;

Would Uncle Frank laugh at this?

It was hopeless. He sat bolt upright, his eyes squeezed tensely
together, trying to visualize the child and call her and it couldn't be
done. Skittering images of her zipped through his mind, only to be
shoved aside. It was damn foolishness, anyway....

He unkinked himself, stretched and lay down on the sand floor thinking
bitterly: why try? You'll be dead in a few days or a few weeks; kiss the
world good-bye. Back in Syndic Territory, fat, sloppy, happy Syndic
Territory, did they know how good they had it? He wished he could tell
them to cling to their good life. But Uncle Frank said it didn't do any
good to cling; it was a matter of tension and relaxation. When you
stiffen up a way of life and try to fossilize it so it'll stay that way
forever, then you find you've lost it.

Little Martha wouldn't understand it. Magic, ritual, the power of the
goddess, fear of iron, fear of the jeep's vine enclosure--cursed, no
doubt--what went on in such a mind? Could she throw things like a
poltergeist-girl? They didn't have 'em any more; maybe it had something
to do with electric fields or even iron. Or were they all phonies? An
upset adolescent girl is a hell of a lot likelier to fake phenomena that
produce them. Little Martha hadn't been faking her despair, though. The
witch-girl--her sister, wasn't she?--didn't fake her icy calm and power.
Martha'd be better off without such stuff--

"_Charles_," a whisper said.

He muttered stupidly: "My God. She heard me," and crept to the palisade.
Through a chink between the logs she was just visible in the starlight.

She whispered: "I thought I wasn't going to see anything or hear
anything ever again but I sat up and I heard you calling and you said
you wanted to help me if I'd help you so I came as fast as I could
without waking anybody up--you _did_ call me, didn't you?"

"Yes, I did. Martha, do you want to get out of here? Go far away with
me?"

"You bet I do. _She's_ going to take the power of the goddess out of me
and marry me to Dinny, he stinks like a goat and he has a cockeye, and
then she'll kill all our babies. Just tell me what to do and I'll do
it." She sounded very grim and decided.

"Can you roll the boulders away from the hole there?" He was thinking
vaguely of teleportation; each boulder was a two-man job.

She said no.

He snarled: "Then why did you bother to come here?"

"Don't talk like that to me," the child said sharply--and he remembered
what she thought she was.

"Sorry," he said.

"What I came about," she said calmly, "was the ex-plosion. Can you make
an ex-plosion like you said? Back there at the jeep?"

What in God's name was she talking about?

"Back there," she said with exaggerated patience, "you was thinking
about putting all the cartridges together and blowing up the whole damn
shebang. Remember?"

He did, vaguely. One of a hundred schemes that had drifted through his
head.

"I'd sure like to see that ex-plosion," she said. "The way _she_ got
things figured, I'd almost just as soon get exploded myself as not."

"I might blow up the logs here and get out," he said slowly. "I think
you'd be a mighty handy person to have along, too. Can you get me about
a hundred of the machine gun cartridges?"

"They'll miss 'em."

"Sneak me a few at a time. I'll empty them, put them together again and
you sneak them back."

She said, slow and troubled: "_She_ set the power of the goddess to
guard them."

"Listen to me, Martha," he said. "I mean _listen_. You'll be doing it
for me and they told me the power of the goddess doesn't work on
outsiders. Isn't that right?"

There was a long pause, and she said at last with a sigh: "I sure wish I
could see your eyes, Charles. I'll try it, but I'm damned if I would if
Dinny didn't stink so bad." She slipped away and Charles tried to follow
her with his mind through the darkness, to the silly little rope of vine
with the feathers and bones knotted in it--but he couldn't. Too tense
again.

Kennedy stirred and muttered complainingly as an icy small breeze cut
through the chinks of the palisade, whispering.

His eyes, tuned to the starlight, picked up Martha bent almost double,
creeping toward the smithy-prison. She wore a belt of fifty-caliber
cartridges around her neck like a stole. Looked like about a dozen of
them. He hastily scooped out a bowl of clean sand and whispered: "Any
trouble?"

He couldn't see the grin on her face, but knew it was there. "It was
easy," she bragged. "One bad minute and then I checked with you and it
was okay."

"Good kid. Pull the cartridges out of the links the way I showed you and
pass them through."

She did. It was a tight squeeze.

He fingered one of the cartridges. The bullet fitted nicely into the
socket of an arrowhead. He jammed the bullet in and wrenched at the
arrowhead with thumb and forefinger--all he could get onto it. The brass
neck began to spread. He dumped the powder into his little basin in the
sand and reseated the bullet.

Charles shifted hands on the second cartridge. On the third he realized
that he could put the point of the bullet on a hearth-stone and press on
the neck with both thumbs. It went faster then; in perhaps an hour he
was passing the re-assembled cartridges back through the palisade.

"Time for another load?" he asked.

"Nope," the girl said. "Tomorrow night."

"Good kid."

She giggled. "It's going to be a hell of a big bang, ain't it, Charles?"




XIV


"Leave the fire alone," Charles said sharply to Kennedy. The little man
was going to douse it for the night.

There was a flash of terrified sense: "They beat you. If the fire's on
after dark they beat you. Fire and dark are equal and opposite." He
began to smile. "Fire is the negative of dark. You just change the sign,
in effect rotate it through 180 degrees. But to rotate it through 180
degrees you have to first rotate it through one degree. And to rotate it
through one degree you first have to rotate it through half a degree."
He was beaming now, having forgotten all about the fire. Charles banked
it with utmost care, heaping a couple of flat stones for a chimney that
would preserve the life of one glowing coal invisibly.

He stretched out on the sand, one hand on the little heap beneath which
five pounds of smokeless powder was buried. Kennedy continued to drone
