The turn-out of the converter plant has been gradually increased in
this country to more than four times that of fourteen years ago, while
the practice of the United States is stated by a recent visitor to
have reached such an astounding figure that I am afraid to quote it
without confirmation; but the greatest economy arises no doubt in the
labor and fuel employed in the mill.

Cogging has taken the place of hammering. Even wash-heating will be,
if it is not already, generally dispensed with by the soaking process
of our colleague, Mr. Gjers, which permits of the ingot, as it leaves
the pit, being directly converted into a rail.


STEEL RAILS 150 FEET LONG.

An extract from a letter addressed to me by our colleague, Mr. E.W.
Richards, will describe better than any words of mine the perfection
at which steel rail mills have arrived. He says, "Our cogging rolls
are 48 in. diameter, and the roughing and finishing rolls are 30 in.
diameter. We roll rails 150 feet long as easily as they used to roll
21 feet. Our ingots are 151/2 inches square, and weigh from 25 to 30
cwts. according to the weight of rail we have to roll. These heavy
ingots are all handled by machinery. We convey them by small
locomotives from the Bessemer shop to the heating furnaces, and by the
same means from the heating furnaces to the cogging rolls.

So quickly are these ingots now handled that we have given up second
heating altogether, so that after one heat the ingot is cogged from
151/2 inches square down to 8 inches square, then at once passed on to
the roughing and finishing rolls, and finished in lengths, as I have
said before, of 150 ft., then cut at the hot saws to the lengths given
in the specifications, and varying from 38 ft. to about 21 ft. The 38
ft. lengths are used by the Italian 'Meridionali' Railway Company, and
found to give very satisfactory results." I need scarcely say that in
a mill like this, the expenditure of fuel and labor and the loss by
waste caused by crop ends are reduced to a minimum.


BASIC STEEL.

The enormous production of steel has required the importation of large
quantities of iron ore of pure quality from Spain, Algeria, and
elsewhere, into this country, France, Belgium, Germany, and the United
States; and these supplies have contributed greatly to the reduction
in the price of steel to which I have referred, and what is, perhaps,
of equal importance, they have prevented the great fluctuations of
price which formerly prevailed. In 1869 this trade was in its infancy,
and almost confined to the importation of the Algerian ores of Mokta
el Hadid into France, while in 1882 Bilbao alone exported 3,700,000
tons of hematite ores to various countries to which the exports from
the south of Spain, Algeria, Elba, Greece, and other countries have to
be added. Great Britain alone imported 3,000,000 tons of high class,
including manganiferous iron ores last year.

It is questionable whether the mines of pure iron existing in Europe
would long bear a drain so great and still increasing; but happily the
question no longer presses for an answer, because the problem of
obtaining first-class steel from inferior ores has been solved by the
genius of our colleagues, Mr. Snelus and Messrs. Thomas and Gilchrist,
and by the practical skill and indomitable resolution of Mr. Windsor
Richards. It is no part of the duty of the Institute to assign to each
of these gentlemen his precise share in the development of the basic
process. Whatever those shares may be, I feel sure you will agree with
your council as to the propriety of their having awarded a Bessemer
medal to two of these gentlemen--Messrs. Snelus and Thomas--to Mr.
Snelus as the first who made pure steel from impure iron in a Bessemer
converter lined with basic materials; to Mr. Thomas, who solved the
same problem independently, and so clearly demonstrated its
practicability to Mr. Richards by the trials at Blaenavon, as to have
led that gentleman to devote all his energies and the great resources
of the Eston Works to the task of making it what it now is, a great
commercial success. All difficulties connected with the lining of the
converter and in insuring a durability of the bottom, nearly, if not
quite, equal to that in the acid process, appear now to have been
successfully surmounted, and I am informed by Mr. Gilchrist that the
present production of basic steel in this country and on the Continent
is already at the rate of considerably more than 500,000 tons per
annum, and that works are now in course of construction which will
increase this quantity to more than a million tons.

Our members will have the opportunity of seeing the process at work
during their visit to Middlesbrough, at the Eston Works of Messrs.
Bolckow, Vaughan & Co., which are now producing 150,000 tons per annum
of steel of the highest quality from the phosphoretic Cleveland ores;
and also at the North-Eastern Steel Company's Works. I believe it is
the intention of the latter company to make a pure, soft steel
suitable for plates, for which, according to the testimony of Mons.
Delafond, of Creuzot, and others, the basic steel is peculiarly
suitable on account of its remarkable regularity. I shall have the
pleasure of presenting to Mr. Snelus the medal which he has so well
deserved.


HONORS AND REWARDS TO INVENTORS.

The presentation to Mr. Thomas is deferred. His arduous labors having
affected his health, he is at present in Australia, after having, I am
happy to say, received great advantage from the voyage; and his
mother, justly proud of his merits, and appreciating fully the value
of their recognition by the award which we have made, has requested us
not to present the medal by proxy, but to await the return of her son,
in order that it may be handed to him in person. But honors, whether
conferred by the Crown, by learned bodies, or, as in this case, by the
colleagues of the recipient, though they stimulate invention, are by
themselves not always sufficient to encourage inventors to devote
their labor to the improvements of manufactures or to induce
capitalists to assist inventors in the prosecution of costly
experiments; and it is on this account that the protection of
inventions by patent is a public advantage. The members of our
profession, unlike some others, have not been eager to apply for
patents in the case of minor inventions; on the contrary, they have
freely communicated to each other the experience as to improvement in
detail which have resulted from their daily practice. It has been well
said that all the world is wiser than any one man in it, and this free
interchange of our various experiences has tended greatly to the
advancement of our trade. But new departures, like the great invention
of Sir H. Bessemer, and important improvements like the basic process,
require the protection of patents for their development.


THE PATENT LAWS.

The subject of the patent laws is, therefore, of interest to us, as it
is to other manufacturers. You are aware that the Government has
introduced a bill for amending these laws. If that bill should pass,
it will effect several important changes. It will, in the first place,
enable a poor man to obtain protection for an invention at a small
cost; secondly, it will make it more difficult than at present for a
merely pretended invention to obtain the protection and prestige of a
patent; thirdly, it will promote the amalgamation of mutually
interdependent inventions by the clause which compels patentees to
grant licenses; and, lastly, it will enable the Government to enter
into treaties with other powers for the international protection of
inventions. If you should be of opinion that these are objects
deserving of your support, I hope that you will induce your
representatives in the House of Commons to do all that is in their
power to assist the Government in passing them into law.


GROWTH OF THE SIEMENS-MARTIN PROCESS.

The growth of the open hearth or what is known as the Siemens-Martin
process of making steel, during the interval from 1869 to the present
time, has been no less remarkable than that of the Bessemer process;
for though it has not attained the enormous dimensions of the latter,
it has risen from smaller beginnings. Mr. Ramsbottom started a small
open-hearth plant at the Crewe Works of the London and North-Western
Railway, in 1868, for making railway tires, and the Landore Works were
begun by Sir W. Siemens in the same year. On the Continent there were
a few furnaces at the works of M. Emile Martin, at the Firming Works,
and at Le Creuzot. None of these works, I believe, possessed furnaces
before 1870, capable of containing more than four-ton charges,
ordinarily worked off twice in twenty-four hours. The ingots weighed
about 6 cwt., and the largest steel casting made by this process, of
which I can find any account, did not exceed 10 cwt. At the present
day, we have furnaces of a capacity of from 15 to 25 tons, and by
combining several furnaces, single ingots weighing from 120 to 125
tons have been produced at Le Creuzot. The world's production of
open-hearth steel ingots for ship and boiler plates, propeller shafts,
ordnance, wheels and axles, wire billets, armor plates, castings of
various kinds, and a multiplicity of other articles, cannot have been
less than from 800,000 to 850,000 tons in 1882.

The process itself has followed two somewhat dissimilar lines. In this
country, iron ores of a pure quality are dissolved in a bath of pig
iron, with the addition of only small quantities of scrap steel and
iron. At Le Creuzot large quantities of wrought iron are melted in
the bath. This iron is puddled in modified rotating Danks furnaces
containing a charge of a ton each. The furnaces have a mid-rib
dividing the product into two balls of 10 cwt., which are shingled
under a 10-ton hammer. The iron is of exceptional purity, containing
less than 0.01 per cent. of phosphorus and sulphur. I should add that
the two rotating furnaces produce 50 tons of billets in twenty-four
hours.


PRESENT PRODUCTION OF WROUGHT IRON.

Meanwhile, the world's production of wrought iron has not been
stationary. I cannot give very accurate figures, as the statistics of
some countries are incomplete, while in others the output of puddled
bar only, and not that of finished iron, has been ascertained. The
nearest estimate which I can arrive at is a production increased from
about 5,000,000 tons in 1869 to somewhat over 8,000,000 tons of
finished iron in 1882; an increase all the more remarkable when it is
considered that at the present time iron rails have been almost
entirely superseded by steel. It is due, no doubt, in part to the
extensive use of iron plates and angles in shipbuilding; but, apart
from these, and from bars for the manufacture of tin-plates, the
consumption has increased for the numberless purposes to which it is
applied in the world's economy.


PROGRESS OF PUDDLING.

There has been no striking improvement in the manufacture of puddled
iron, partly on account of the impression that it is doomed to be
superseded by steel. Mechanical puddling has made but little progress,
and few of the attempts to economize fuel in the puddling furnace, by
the use of gas or otherwise, have been successful. I would, however,
draw attention to the remarkable success which has attended the use of
the Bicheroux gas puddling and heating furnaces at the works of
Ougree, near Liege. The works produce 20,000 tons of puddled bars per
annum, in fifteen double furnaces. The consumption of coal per ton of
ordinary puddled bar is under 11 cwt., and per ton of "fer a fin
grain" (puddled steel, etc.) 16 cwt. The gas is produced from slack,
and the waste heat raises as much steam as that from an ordinary
double furnace. The consumption of pig iron per ton of puddled bar was
rather less than 211/2 cwts. for the year 1882; and that of "mine" for
fettling was 33 lb. The repairs are said to be considerably less than
in the ordinary furnaces, and the puddlers earn from 25 to 30 per
cent. more at the same tonnage rate. I have already mentioned the
large consumption, reckoned in tons of pig iron, of the materials for
shipbuilding.


GROSS OF IRON AND STEEL SHIP BUILDING.

It may be useful to add that the gross tonnage of iron vessels classed
during 1882 by the three societies of Lloyd's, the Liverpool Registry,
and the Bureau Veritas was 1,142,000, and of steel 143,000 tons, and
that the proportion of steel to iron vessels is increasing from year
to year. I am informed by our colleague, Mr. Pearce, of Messrs.
Elder's firm, that the largest vessel built by them in 1869 was an
iron steamer, of 3,063 tons gross, with compound engines of 3,000
horse power, working at 60 lb. pressure; speed, 14 knots.


A GIGANTIC STEAMER.

The largest vessel now on the ways is the Oregon, of 7,400 tons gross,
and 13,000 horse power; estimated speed, 18 knots. The superficial
area of the largest plates in the former was 221/2 square feet; that of
the largest plate in the latter is 206 square feet. The Oregon is an
iron vessel, but some of the largest vessels now being built by Mr.
Pearce's firm are of steel.

The information which I have obtained from Messrs. Thomson, of
Glasgow, is especially emphatic as to the supersession of iron by
steel in the construction of ships. They say that large steel plates
are as cheap as iron ones, and that they have never had one bad plate
or angle in steel. This is confirmed by Mr. Denny, who says: "Whenever
our shipwrights or smiths have to turn out anything particularly
difficult in shape, and on which much 'work' has to be put, they will
get hold of a piece of steel if they can."


REMARKABLE MACHINERY AND TOOLS.

It will be readily understood that the rolls, the hammers, the
machinery for punching, drilling, planing, etc., used in the
manufacture and preparation of plates and angles for shipbuilding and
armor plates are on a scale far different at the present date from
what they were in 1869. Perhaps the most striking examples of powerful
machinery for these purposes are the great Creuzot hammer, the falling
mass of which has recently been increased to 100 tons, and the new
planing machines at the Cyclops Works, which weigh upward of 140 tons
each, for planing compound armor plates 19 in. thick and weighing 57
tons.


THE FUTURE OF IRON AND STEEL.

Some of the eminent men who have preceded me in this chair have made
their inaugural address the occasion for a forecast of the
improvements in practice and the developments in area of the great
industry in which we are engaged. Several of these forecasts have been
verified by the results; in other cases they have proved to be
mistaken; nor need this excite surprise. I believe that few would have
predicted, when the consideration of the subject was somewhat
unfortunately deferred through want of time at our Paris meeting of
1878, that the basic process would so speedily prove itself to be of
such paramount value as we now know it to possess. On the other hand,
the extinction of the old puddling process has long been the favorite
topic of one of our most practical ex-presidents, and I have shown you
by figures that the process is not only not yet dead, but that the
manufacture of wrought iron is actually flourishing side by side with
that of its younger brother, steel. How much longer this may continue
to be the case it would not be easy to foretell, but there can be
little doubt that, just as for rails steel has superseded iron as
being cheaper and vastly more durable, so it will be in regard to
plates for constructive purposes, and especially for shipbuilding. It
is now an ascertained fact that steel ships are as cheap, ton for ton
of carrying capacity, as iron ones, and it is probable that as the
demand for, and consequently the production of, steel plates
increases, steel ships will become cheaper than those built of iron;
but, what is more important, they have been proved to be safer, and no
time can long elapse before this will tell on the premiums of
insurance. Steel forgings also are superseding, and must to an
increasing extent, supersede iron; while it is probable that the
former will in their turn be replaced for many purposes by the
beautiful solid steel castings which are now being produced by the
Terre-Noire Company in France, the Steel Company of Scotland, and
other manufacturers, by the Siemens-Martin process. On this subject I
believe Mr. Parker can give us valuable information; and on a cognate
branch, namely, the production of steel castings from the Bessemer
converter, an interesting paper will be submitted to us by Mr. Allen
at our present meeting.

I may here mention incidentally, that I have of late had occasion to
make trials on a considerable scale of edge tools made from Bessemer
steel, which show that, except perhaps in the case of the finest
cutlery, there is no longer any occasion to resort to the crucible for
the production of this quality of steel.


RAILWAY DEMAND FOR IRON AND STEEL.

But it is in the further development of the world's railways that we
must mainly look in the future, as in the past, for the support of our
trade. In India the railway between Calcutta and Bombay was only
completed in 1870, and at the present time, with a population of
250,000,000, it has less than 10,000 miles of railway, while the
United States, with only 50,000,000, possesses more than 100,000
miles. In other words, the United States have fifty times as many
miles of railway in relation to the population as India. Even Russia
in Europe has 14,000 miles, or, in relation to its population, nearly
five times as great a mileage as our Indian Empire; and the existing
Indian railways are so successful pecuniarily, and give such promise
of contributing to the wealth of the Indian people--or perhaps it
would be more just to say, of rescuing them from their present state
of poverty and depression--that it should be the aim of those who are
responsible for the well-being of our great dependency to give to its
railways the utmost and most rapid development.

As to the United States themselves, I look upon their railways as a
little more than the main arteries from which an indefinitely large
circulating system will branch out. Besides these countries I need
only allude to the Dominion of Canada, whose vast territory bids fair
to rival that of the United States in agricultural importance, to our
Australian colonies, to Brazil, and other countries in which railways
are still comparatively in their infancy, to show that, quite apart
from the renewal of existing lines, the world's manufacture of rails
has an enormous future before it.


RELATIONS BETWEEN EMPLOYERS AND WORKMEN.

I look on the excellent feeling which happily prevails between the
employers and the workmen in our great industry as another of the most
important elements of its future prosperity. It confers honor on all
concerned that by our Boards of Conciliation and Arbitration, ruinous
strikes, and even momentary suspensions of labor, are avoided; and
still more that masters like our esteemed Treasurer, Mr. David Dale,
should deserve, and that large bodies of workmen should have the
manliness and discernment to bestow on him, the confidence implied in
choosing him so frequently as an arbitrator. I believe that similar
friendly relations exist in some, at any rate, of the other great
centers of the iron and steel industries, and that although our
methods may not be adapted to the habits of all, there is no country
in which some way does not exist, or may not be found, to avoid those
contests which were so fatal to our prosperity in former days. Lastly
I regard as one of the most hopeful signs of the future the increased
estimate of the value of science entertained by our practical men. In
this respect we may claim with pride that the Iron and Steel Institute
has been the pioneer, at any rate, so far as this country is
concerned. But the conviction that the elements of science should be
placed within the reach of those who occupy a humbler position in the
industrial hierarchy than we do who are assembled here is rapidly
spreading among us. The iron manufacturers of Westphalia have been the
first to found an institution in which the intelligent and ambitious
ironworker can qualify himself by study for a higher position, and I
hope when this Institute visits Middlesbrough in the autumn, some
progress will have been made in that locality toward the establishment
of a similar school. Other districts will doubtless follow, and the
result will be, to quote the words of Sir W. Siemens on a late
occasion, that "by the dissemination of science a higher spirit will
take possession of our artisans; that they will work with the object
of obtaining higher results, instead of only discussing questions of
wages." It is on the mutual co-operation in this spirit of all the
workers of every grade in our great craft that we may build the
hope--nay, that we may even cherish the certain expectation--of
placing it on even a higher eminence than that which it has already
attained.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE "SWALLOW," A NEW VEHICLE.


The graceful vehicle shown in the accompanying cut is much used in
Poland and Russia, and we believe that it has already made its
appearance at Paris. The builder is Mr. Henri Barycki, of Warsaw, who
has very skillfully utilized a few very curious mechanical principles
in it.

[Illustration: THE SWALLOW.]

The driver's seat is fixed in the interior of a wide ring to which are
fastened the shafts. This ring revolves, by the aid of three pulleys
or small wheels, within the large ring resting on the ground. It will
be seen that when the horse is drawing the vehicle, the friction of
this large wheel against the ground being greater than that of the
concentric one within it, the latter will revolve until the center of
gravity of the whole is situated anew in a line vertical to the point
at which it bears on the ground. The result of such an arrangement is
that the driver rolls on the large wheel just as he would do on the
surface of an endless rail. As may be conceived, the tractive stress
is, as a consequence, considerably diminished.

There are two side wheels which are connected by a flexible axle to
the seat of the carriage, but these have no other purpose than that of
preventing the affair from turning to one side or the other.

The "swallow," for so it is named, is made entirely of steel and
wrought iron. It is very easily kept clean; the horse can be harnessed
to it in three minutes; and, aside from its uses for pleasure, it is
capable of being utilized in numerous ways.--_La Nature_.

[Our excellent contemporary, _La Nature_, is mistaken in its account
of the above vehicle. It is an American invention and was first
published, with engraving, in the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, December 16,
1882.]

       *       *       *       *       *




BORING AN OIL WELL.

HOW THE HOLE WAS MADE AND THE OIL BROUGHT UP.


A letter from Bradford, Pa., says: The machinery used in boring one of
these deep oil wells, while simple enough in itself, requires nice
adjustment and skill in operating. First comes the derrick, sixty feet
high, crowned by a massive pulley.

The derrick is a most essential part of the mechanism, and its shape
and height are needed in handling the long rods, piping, casting, and
other fittings which have to be inserted perpendicularly. The borer or
drill used is not much different from the ordinary hand arm of the
stone cutters, and the blade is exactly the same, but is of massive
size, three or four inches across, about four feet long, and weighing
100 or 200 pounds. A long solid rod, some thirty feet long, three
inches in diameter, and called the "stem," is screwed on the drill.
This stem weighs almost a ton, and its weight is the hammer relied on
for driving the drill through dirt and rock. Next come the "jars," two
long loose links of hardened iron playing along each other about a
foot.

The object of the jars is to raise the drill with a shock, so as to
detach it when so tightly fixed that a steady pull would break the
machinery. The upper part of the two jars is solidly welded to another
long rod called the sinker bar, to the upper end of which, in turn, is
attached the rope leading up to the derrick pulley, and thence to a
stationary steam engine. In boring, the stem and drill are raised a
foot or two, dropped, then raised with a shock by the jars, and the
operation repeated.

If I may hazard a further illustration of the internal boring
machinery of the well, let the reader link loosely together the thumbs
and forefingers of his two hands, then bring his forearms into a
straight line. Conceiving this line to be a perpendicular one, the
point of one elbow would represent the drill blade, the adjacent
forearm and hand the stem, the linked finger the jars, and the other
hand and forearm the sinker bar, with the derrick cord attached at a
point represented by the second elbow. By remembering the immense and
concentrated weight of the upright drill and stem, the tremendous
force of even a short fall may be conceived. The drill will bore many
feet in a single day through solid rock, and a few hours sometimes
suffices to force it fifty feet through dirt or gravel. When the
debris accumulates too thickly around the drill, the latter is drawn
up rapidly. The debris has previously been reduced to mud by keeping
the drill surrounded by water. A sand pump, not unlike an ordinary
syringe, is then let down, the mud sucked up, lifted, and then the
drill sent down to begin its pounding anew. Great deftness and
experience are needed to work the drill without breaking the jars or
connected machinery, and, in case of accident, there are grapples,
hooks, knives, and other devices without number, to be used in
recovering lost drills, cutting the rope, and other emergencies, the
briefest explanation of which would exceed the limits of this letter.

The exciting moment in boring a well is when a drill is penetrating
the upper covering of sand rock which overlies the oil. The force with
which the compressed gas and petroleum rushes upward almost surpasses
belief. Drill, jars, and sinker bar are sometimes shot out along with
debris, oil, and hissing gas. Sometimes this gas and oil take fire,
and last summer one of the wells thus ignited burned so fiercely that
a number of days elapsed before the flames could be extinguished. More
often the tankage provided is insufficient, and thousands of barrels
escape. Two or three years ago, at the height of the oil production of
the Bradford region, 8,000 barrels a day were thus running to waste.
But those halcyon days of Bradford have gone forever. Although
nineteen-twentieths of the wells sunk in this region "struck" oil and
flowed freely, most of them now flow sluggishly or have to be "pumped"
two or three times a week.

"Piping" and "casing," terms substantially identical, and meaning the
lining of the well with iron pipe several inches in the interior
diameter, complete the labor of boring. The well, if a good flowing
one, does all the rest of the work itself, forcing the fluid into the
local tanks, whence it is distributed into the tanks of the pipe-line
companies, and is carried from them to the refineries. The pipe lines
now reach from the oil regions to the seaboard, carrying the petroleum
over hill and valley, hundreds of miles to tide-water.

       *       *       *       *       *




A CEMENT RESERVOIR.

