
Now for the eight corresponding leaves in water:--

(1) After 2 hrs. 40 m. this had twenty of its outer tentacles
inflected, five of which re-expanded after 6 hrs. 30 m. After 10 hrs.
15 m. a most unusual circumstance occurred, namely, the whole blade
became slightly bowed towards the footstalk, and so remained for 48
hrs. The exterior tentacles, excepting those of the three or four
outermost rows, were now also inflected to an unusual degree.

(2) to (8) These leaves, after 2 hrs. 40 m., had respectively 42, 12,
9, 8, 2, 1, and 0 tentacles inflected, which all re-expanded within 24
hrs., and most of them within a much shorter time.

When the two lots of eight leaves in the solution and in the water were
compared after the lapse of 24 hrs., they undoubtedly differed much in
appearance. The few tentacles on the leaves in water which were
inflected had after this interval re-expanded, with the exception of
one leaf; and this presented the very unusual case of the blade being
somewhat inflected, though in a degree hardly approaching that of the
two leaves in the solution. Of these latter leaves, No. 1 had almost
all its tentacles, together with its blade, inflected after an
immersion of 2 hrs. 30 m. Leaves No. 2 and 3 were affected at a much
slower rate; but after from 24 hrs.  to 48 hrs. almost all their
tentacles were closely inflected, and the blade of one quite doubled
up. We must therefore admit, incredible as the fact may at first
appear, that this extremely weak solution acted on the more sensitive
leaves; each of which received only the 1/80000 of a grain (.00081 mg.)
of the phosphate. Now, leaf No. 3 bore 178 tentacles, and subtracting
the three which were not inflected, each gland could have absorbed only
the 1/14000000 of a grain, or .00000463 mg. Leaf No. 1, which was
strongly acted on within 2 hrs. 30 m., and had all its outer tentacles,
except thirteen, inflected within 6 hrs. 30 m., bore 260 tentacles; and
on the same principle as before, each gland could have [page 166]
absorbed only 1/19760000 of a grain, or .00000328 mg.; and this
excessively minute amount sufficed to cause all the tentacles bearing
these glands to be greatly inflected. The blade was also inflected.]

Summary of the Results with Phosphate of Ammonia.--The glands of the
disc, when excited by a half-minim drop (.0296 ml.), containing 1/3840
of a grain (.0169 mg.) of this salt, transmit a motor impulse to the
exterior tentacles, causing them to bend inwards. A minute drop,
containing 1/153600 of a grain (.000423 mg.), if held for a few seconds
in contact with a gland, causes the tentacle bearing this gland to be
inflected. If a leaf is left immersed for a few hours, and sometimes
for a shorter time, in a solution so weak that each gland can absorb
only the 1/9760000 of a grain (.00000328 mg.), this is enough to excite
the tentacle into movement, so that it becomes closely inflected, as
does sometimes the blade. In the general summary to this chapter a few
remarks will be added, showing that the efficiency of such extremely
minute doses is not so incredible as it must at first appear.

[Sulphate of Ammonia.--The few trials made with this and the following
five salts of ammonia were undertaken merely to ascertain whether they
induced inflection. Half-minims of a solution of one part of the
sulphate of ammonia to 437 of water were placed on the discs of seven
leaves, so that each received 1/960 of a grain, or .0675 mg. After 1
hr. the tentacles of five of them, as well as the blade of one, were
strongly inflected. The leaves were not afterwards observed.

Citrate of Ammonia.--Half-minims of a solution of one part to 437 of
water were placed on the discs of six leaves. In 1 hr. the short outer
tentacles round the discs were a little inflected, with the glands on
the discs blackened. After 3 hrs. 25 m. one leaf had its blade
inflected, but none of the exterior tentacles. All six leaves remained
in nearly the same state during the day, the submarginal tentacles,
however, [page 167] becoming more inflected. After 23 hrs. three of the
leaves had their blades somewhat inflected; and the submarginal
tentacles of all considerably inflected, but in none were the two,
three, or four outer rows affected. I have rarely seen cases like this,
except from the action of a decoction of grass. The glands on the discs
of the above leaves, instead of being almost black, as after the first
hour, were now after 23 hrs. very pale. I next tried on four leaves
half-minims of a weaker solution, of one part to 1312 of water (1 gr.
to 3 oz.); so that each received 1/2880 of a grain (.0225 mg.). After 2
hrs. 18 m. the glands on the disc were very dark-coloured; after 24
hrs. two of the leaves were slightly affected; the other two not at
all.

Acetate of Ammonia.--Half-minims of a solution of about one part to 109
of water were placed on the discs of two leaves, both of which were
acted on in 5 hrs. 30 m., and after 23 hrs. had every single tentacle
closely inflected.

Oxalate of Ammonia.--Half-minims of a solution of one part to 218 of
water were placed on two leaves, which, after 7 hrs., became
moderately, and after 23 hrs. strongly, inflected. Two other leaves
were tried with a weaker solution of one part to 437 of water; one was
strongly inflected in 7 hrs.; the other not until 30 hrs. had elapsed.

Tartrate of Ammonia.--Half-minims of a solution of one part to 437 of
water were placed on the discs of five leaves. In 31 m. there was a
trace of inflection in the exterior tentacles of some of the leaves,
and this became more decided after 1 hr. with all the leaves; but the
tentacles were never closely inflected. After 8 hrs. 30 m. they began
to re-expand. Next morning, after 23 hrs., all were fully re-expanded,
excepting one which was still slightly inflected. The shortness of the
period of inflection in this and the following case is remarkable.

Chloride of Ammonium.--Half-minims of a solution of one part to 437 of
water were placed on the discs of six leaves. A decided degree of
inflection in the outer and submarginal tentacles was perceptible in 25
m.; and this increased during the next three or four hours, but never
became strongly marked. After only 8 hrs. 30 m. the tentacles began to
re-expand, and by the next morning, after 24 hrs., were fully
re-expanded on four of the leaves, but still slightly inflected on
two.]

General Summary and Concluding Remarks on the Salts of Ammonia.--We
have now seen that the nine [page 168] salts of ammonia which were
tried, all cause the inflection of the tentacles, and often of the
blade of the leaf. As far as can be ascertained from the superficial
trials with the last six salts, the citrate is the least powerful, and
the phosphate certainly by far the most. The tartrate and chloride are
remarkable from the short duration of their action. The relative
efficiency of the carbonate, nitrate, and phosphate, is shown in the
following table by the smallest amount which suffices to cause the
inflection of the tentacles.

Column 1 : Solutions, how applied.  Column 2 : Carbonate of Ammonia.
Column 3 : Nitrate of Ammonia.  Column 4 : Phosphate of Ammonia.

Placed on the glands of the disc, so as to act indirectly on the outer
tentacles :  1/960 of a grain, or 0675 mg. : 1/2400 of a grain, or .027
mg. : 1/3840 of a grain, or .0169 mg.

Applied for a few seconds directly to the gland of an outer tentacle :
1/14400 of a grain, or .00445 mg. : 1/28800 of a grain, or .0025 mg.
grain, 1/153600 of a grain, or .000423 mg.

Leaf immersed, with time allowed for each gland to absorb all that it
can :  1/268800 of a grain, or .00024 mg. : 1/691200 of a grain, or
.0000937 mg. : 1/19760000 of a grain, or .00000328 mg.

Amount absorbed by a gland which suffices to cause the aggregation of
the protoplasm in the adjoining cells of the tentacles. 1/134400 of a
grain, or .00048 mg.

From the experiments tried in these three different ways, we see that
the carbonate, which contains 23.7 per cent. of nitrogen, is less
efficient than the nitrate, which contains 35 per cent. The phosphate
contains less nitrogen than either of these salts, namely, only 21.2
per cent., and yet is far more [page 169] efficient; its power no doubt
depending quite as much on the phosphorus as on the nitrogen which it
contains. We may infer that this is the case, from the energetic manner
in which bits of bone and phosphate of lime affect the leaves. The
inflection excited by the other salts of ammonia is probably due solely
to their nitrogen,--on the same principle that nitrogenous organic
fluids act powerfully, whilst non-nitrogenous organic fluids are
powerless. As such minute doses of the salts of ammonia affect the
leaves, we may feel almost sure that Drosera absorbs and profits by the
amount, though small, which is present in rain-water, in the same
manner as other plants absorb these same salts by their roots.

The smallness of the doses of the nitrate, and more especially of the
phosphate of ammonia, which cause the tentacles of immersed leaves to
be inflected, is perhaps the most remarkable fact recorded in this
volume. When we see that much less than the millionth* of a grain of
the phosphate, absorbed by a gland of one of the exterior tentacles,
causes it to bend, it may be thought that the effects of the solution
on the glands of the disc have been overlooked; namely, the
transmission of a motor impulse from them to the exterior tentacles. No
doubt the movements of the latter are thus aided; but the aid thus
rendered must be insignificant; for we know that a drop containing as
much as the 1/3840 of a grain placed on the disc is only just able to
cause the outer tentacles of a highly sensitive leaf to bend. It is
cer-

* It is scarcely possible to realise what a million means. The best
illustration which I have met with is that given by Mr. Croll, who
says, "Take a narrow strip of paper 83 ft. 4 in. in length, and stretch
it along the wall of a large hall; then mark off at one end the tenth
of an inch. This tenth will represent a hundred, and the entire strip a
million.  [page 170]

tainly a most surprising fact that the 1/19760000 of a grain, or in
round numbers the one-twenty-millionth of a grain (.0000033 mg.), of
the phosphate should affect any plant, or indeed any animal; and as
this salt contains 35.33 per cent. of water of crystallisation, the
efficient elements are reduced to 1/30555126 of a grain, or in round
numbers to one-thirty-millionth of a grain (.00000216 mg.). The
solution, moreover, in these experiments was diluted in the proportion
of one part of the salt to 2,187,500 of water, or one grain to 5000 oz.
The reader will perhaps best realise this degree of dilution by
remembering that 5000 oz. would more than fill a 31-gallon cask; and
that to this large body of water one grain of the salt was added; only
half a drachm, or thirty minims, of the solution being poured over a
leaf. Yet this amount sufficed to cause the inflection of almost every
tentacle, and often of the blade of the leaf.

I am well aware that this statement will at first appear incredible to
almost everyone. Drosera is far from rivalling the power of the
spectroscope, but it can detect, as shown by the movements of its
leaves, a very much smaller quantity of the phosphate of ammonia than
the most skilful chemist can of any substance.* My results were for a
long time incredible

* When my first observations were made on the nitrate of ammonia,
fourteen years ago, the powers of the spectroscope had not been
discovered; and I felt all the greater interest in the then unrivalled
powers of Drosera. Now the spectroscope has altogether beaten Drosera;
for according to Bunsen and Kirchhoff probably less than one
1/200000000 of a grain of sodium can be thus detected (see Balfour
Stewart, 'Treatise on Heat,' 2nd edit. 1871, p. 228). With respect to
ordinary chemical tests, I gather from Dr. Alfred Taylor's work on
'Poisons' that about 1/4000 of a grain of arsenic, 1/4400 of a grain of
prussic acid, 1/1400 of iodine, and 1/2000 of tartarised antimony, can
be detected; but the power of detection depends much on the solutions
under trial not being extremely weak.  [page 171]

even to myself, and I anxiously sought for every source of error. The
salt was in some cases weighed for me by a chemist in an excellent
balance; and fresh water was measured many times with care. The
observations were repeated during several years. Two of my sons, who
were as incredulous as myself, compared several lots of leaves
simultaneously immersed in the weaker solutions and in water, and
declared that there could be no doubt about the difference in their
appearance. I hope that some one may hereafter be induced to repeat my
experiments; in this case he should select young and vigorous leaves,
with the glands surrounded by abundant secretion. The leaves should be
carefully cut off and laid gently in watch-glasses, and a measured
quantity of the solution and of water poured over each. The water used
must be as absolutely pure as it can be made. It is to be especially
observed that the experiments with the weaker solutions ought to be
tried after several days of very warm weather. Those with the weakest
solutions should be made on plants which have been kept for a
considerable time in a warm greenhouse, or cool hothouse; but this is
by no means necessary for trials with solutions of moderate strength.

I beg the reader to observe that the sensitiveness or irritability of
the tentacles was ascertained by three different methods--indirectly by
drops placed on the disc, directly by drops applied to the glands of
the outer tentacles, and by the immersion of whole leaves; and it was
found by these three methods that the nitrate was more powerful than
the carbonate, and the phosphate much more powerful than the nitrate;
this result being intelligible from the difference in the amount of
nitrogen in the first two salts, and from the presence of phosphorus in
the third. It may aid the [page 172] reader's faith to turn to the
experiments with a solution of one grain of the phosphate to 1000 oz.
of water, and he will there find decisive evidence that the
one-four-millionth of a grain is sufficient to cause the inflection of
a single tentacle. There is, therefore, nothing very improbable in the
fifth of this weight, or the one-twenty-millionth of a grain, acting on
the tentacle of a highly sensitive leaf. Again, two of the leaves in
the solution of one grain to 3000 oz., and three of the leaves in the
solution of one grain to 5000 oz., were affected, not only far more
than the leaves tried at the same time in water, but incomparably more
than any five leaves which can be picked out of the 173 observed by me
at different times in water.

There is nothing remarkable in the mere fact of the
one-twenty-millionth of a grain of the phosphate, dissolved in above
two-million times its weight of water, being absorbed by a gland. All
physiologists admit that the roots of plants absorb the salts of
ammonia brought to them by the rain; and fourteen gallons of rain-water
contain* a grain of ammonia, therefore only a little more than twice as
much as in the weakest solution employed by me. The fact which appears
truly wonderful is, that the one-twenty-millionth of a grain of the
phosphate of ammonia (including less than the one-thirty-millionth of
efficient matter), when absorbed by a gland, should induce some change
in it, which leads to a motor impulse being transmitted down the whole
length of the tentacle, causing the basal part to bend, often through
an angle of above 180 degrees.

Astonishing as is this result, there is no sound reason

* Miller's 'Elements of Chemistry,' part ii. p. 107, 3rd edit. 1864.
[page 173]

why we should reject it as incredible. Prof. Donders, of Utrecht,
informs me that from experiments formerly made by him and Dr. De
Ruyter, he inferred that less than the one-millionth of a grain of
sulphate of atropine, in an extremely diluted state, if applied
directly to the iris of a dog, paralyses the muscles of this organ.
But, in fact, every time that we perceive an odour, we have evidence
that infinitely smaller particles act on our nerves.  When a dog stands
a quarter of a mile to leeward of a deer or other animal, and perceives
its presence, the odorous particles produce some change in the
olfactory nerves; yet these particles must be infinitely smaller* than
those of the phosphate of ammonia weighing the one-twenty-millionth of
a grain. These nerves then transmit some influence to the brain of the
dog, which leads to action on its part. With Drosera, the really
marvellous fact is, that a plant without any specialised nervous system
should be affected by such minute particles; but we have no grounds for
assuming that other tissues could not be rendered as exquisitely
susceptible to impressions from without if this were beneficial to the
organism, as is the nervous system of the higher animals.

* My son, George Darwin, has calculated for me the diameter of a sphere
of phosphate of ammonia (specific gravity 1.678), weighing the
one-twenty-millionth of a grain, and finds it to be 1/1644 of an inch.
Now, Dr. Klein informs me that the smallest Micrococci, which are
distinctly discernible under a power of 800 diameters, are estimated to
be from .0002 to
.0005 of a millimetre--that is, from 1/50800 to 1/127000 of an inch--in diameter. Therefore,
an object between 1/31 and 1/77 of the size of a sphere of the
phosphate of ammonia of the above weight can be seen under a high
power; and no one supposes that odorous particles, such as those
emitted from the deer in the above illustration, could be seen under
any power of the microscope.) [page 174]


                         CHAPTER VIII.

  THE EFFECTS OF VARIOUS OTHER SALTS AND ACIDS ON THE LEAVES.

Salts of sodium, potassium, and other alkaline, earthy, and metallic
salts--Summary on the action of these salts--Various acids--Summary on
their action.

HAVING found that the salts of ammonia were so powerful, I was led to
investigate the action of some other salts. It will be convenient,
first, to give a list of the substances tried (including forty-nine
salts and two metallic acids), divided into two columns, showing those
which cause inflection, and those which do not do so, or only
doubtfully. My experiments were made by placing half-minim drops on the
discs of leaves, or, more commonly, by immersing them in the solutions;
and sometimes by both methods. A summary of the results, with some
concluding remarks, will then be given. The action of various acids
will afterwards be described.

COLUMN 1 : SALTS CAUSING INFLECTION.  COLUMN 2 : SALTS NOT CAUSING
INFLECTION.

(Arranged in Groups according to the Chemical Classification in Watts'
'Dictionary of Chemistry.')

Sodium carbonate, rapid inflection. : Potassium carbonate: slowly
poisonous.  Sodium nitrate, rapid inflection. : Potassium nitrate:
somewhat poisonous.  Sodium sulphate, moderately rapid inflection. :
Potassium sulphate.  Sodium phosphate, very rapid inflection. :
Potassium phosphate.  Sodium citrate, rapid inflection. : Potassium
citrate.  Sodium oxalate; rapid inflection.  Sodium chloride,
moderately rapid inflection. : Potassium chloride.  [page 175]

COLUMN 1 : SALTS CAUSING INFLECTION.  COLUMN 2 : SALTS NOT CAUSING
INFLECTION.

(Arranged in Groups according to the Chemical Classification in Watts'
'Dictionary of Chemistry.')

Sodium iodide, rather slow inflection. : Potassium iodide, a slight and
doubtful amount of inflection.  Sodium bromide, moderately rapid
inflection. : Potassium bromide.  Potassium oxalate, slow and doubtful
inflection. :  Lithium nitrate, moderately rapid inflection. : Lithium
acetate.  Caesium chloride, rather slow inflection. : Rubidium
chloride.  Silver nitrate, rapid inflection: quick poison. :  Cadmium
chloride, slow inflection. : Calcium acetate.  Mercury perchloride,
rapid inflection: quick poison. : Calcium nitrate.
 : Magnesium acetate.  : Magnesium nitrate.  : Magnesium chloride.  :
 Magnesium sulphate.  : Barium acetate.  : Barium nitrate.  : Strontium
 acetate.  : Strontium nitrate.  : Zinc chloride.

Aluminium chloride, slow and doubtful inflection. : Aluminium nitrate,
a trace of inflection.  Gold chloride, rapid inflection: quick poison.
: Aluminium and potassium sulphate.

Tin chloride, slow inflection: poisonous. : Lead chloride.

Antimony tartrate, slow inflection: probably poisonous.  Arsenious
acid, quick inflection: poisonous.  Iron chloride, slow inflection:
probably poisonous. : Manganese chloride.  Chromic acid, quick
inflection: highly poisonous.  Copper chloride, rather slow in
flection: poisonous. : Cobalt chloride.  Nickel chloride, rapid
inflection: probably poisonous.  Platinum chloride, rapid inflection:
poisonous.  [page 176]

Sodium, Carbonate of (pure, given me by Prof. Hoffmann).--Half-minims
(.0296 ml.) of a solution of one part to 218 of water (2 grs. to 1 oz.)
were placed on the discs of twelve leaves. Seven of these became well
inflected; three had only two or three of their outer tentacles
inflected, and the remaining two were quite unaffected. But the dose,
though only the 1/480 of a grain (.135 mg.), was evidently too strong,
for three of the seven well-inflected leaves were killed. On the other
hand, one of the seven, which had only a few tentacles inflected,
re-expanded and seemed quite healthy after 48 hrs. By employing a
weaker solution (viz. one part to 437 of water, or 1 gr. to 1 oz.),
doses of 1/960 of a grain (.0675 mg.) were given to six leaves. Some of
these were affected in 37 m.; and in 8 hrs. the outer tentacles of all,
as well as the blades of two, were considerably inflected. After 23
hrs. 15 m.  the tentacles had almost re-expanded, but the blades of the
two were still just perceptibly curved inwards. After 48 hrs. all six
leaves were fully re-expanded, and appeared perfectly healthy.

Three leaves were immersed, each in thirty minims of a solution of one
part to 875 of water (1 gr. to 2 oz.), so that each received 1/32 of a
grain (2.02 mg.); after 40 m. the three were much affected, and after 6
hrs. 45 m. the tentacles of all and the blade of one closely
inflected.

Sodium, Nitrate of (pure).--Half-minims of a solution of one part to
437 of water, containing 1/960 of a grain (.0675 mg.), were placed on
the discs of five leaves. After 1 hr. 25 m. the tentacles of nearly
all, and the blade of one, were somewhat inflected. The inflection
continued to increase, and in 21 hrs. 15 m. the tentacles and the
blades of four of them were greatly affected, and the blade of the
fifth to a slight extent. After an additional 24 hrs. the four leaves
still remained closely inflected, whilst the fifth was beginning to
expand. Four days after the solution had been applied, two of the
leaves had quite, and one had partially, re-expanded; whilst the
remaining two remained closely inflected and appeared injured.

Three leaves were immersed, each in thirty minims of a solution of one
part to 875 of water; in 1 hr. there was great inflection, and after 8
hrs. 15 m. every tentacle and the blades of all three were most
strongly inflected.

Sodium, Sulphate of.--Half-minims of a solution of one part to 437 of
water were placed on the discs of six leaves. After 5 hrs. 30 m. the
tentacles of three of them, (with the blade of one) were considerably;
and those of the other three slightly, inflected. After 21 hrs. the
inflection had a little decreased, [page 177] and in 45 hrs. the leaves
were fully expanded, appearing quite healthy.

Three leaves were immersed, each in thirty minims of a solution of one
part of the sulphate to 875 of water; after 1 hr. 30 m. there was some
inflection, which increased so much that in 8 hrs. 10 m. all the
tentacles and the blades of all three leaves were closely inflected.

Sodium, Phosphate of.--Half-minims of a solution of one part to 437 of
water were placed on the discs of six leaves. The solution acted with
extraordinary rapidity, for in 8 m. the outer tentacles on several of
the leaves were much incurved. After 6 hrs. the tentacles of all six
leaves, and the blades of two, were closely inflected. This state of
things continued for 24 hrs., excepting that the blade of a third leaf
became incurved. After 48 hrs. all the leaves re-expanded. It is clear
that 1/960 of a grain of phosphate of soda has great power in causing
inflection.

Sodium, Citrate of.--Half-minims of a solution of one part to 437 of
water were placed on the discs of six leaves, but these were not
observed until 22 hrs. had elapsed. The sub-marginal tentacles of five
of them, and the blades of four, were then found inflected; but the
outer rows of tentacles were not affected. One leaf, which appeared
older than the others, was very little affected in any way. After 46
hrs. four of the leaves were almost re-expanded, including their
blades. Three leaves were also immersed, each in thirty minims of a
solution of one part of the citrate to 875 of water; they were much
acted on in 25 m.; and after 6 hrs. 35 m.  almost all the tentacles,
including those of the outer rows, were inflected, but not the blades.

Sodium, Oxalate of.--Half-minims of a solution of one part to 437 of
water were placed on the discs of seven leaves; after 5 hrs. 30 m. the
tentacles of all, and the blades of most of them, were much affected.
In 22 hrs., besides the inflection of the tentacles, the blades of all
seven leaves were so much doubled over that their tips and bases almost
touched. On no other occasion have I seen the blades so strongly
affected. Three leaves were also immersed, each in thirty minims of a
solution of one part to 875 of water; after 30 m. there was much
inflection, and after 6 hrs. 35 m. the blades of two and the tentacles
of all were closely inflected.

Sodium, Chloride of (best culinary salt).--Half-minims of a solution of
one part to 218 of water were placed on the discs [page 178] of four
leaves. Two, apparently, were not at all affected in 48 hrs.; the third
had its tentacles slightly inflected; whilst the fourth had almost all
its tentacles inflected in 24 hrs., and these did not begin to
re-expand until the fourth day, and were not perfectly expanded on the
seventh day. I presume that this leaf was injured by the salt.
Half-minims of a weaker solution, of one part to 437 of water, were
then dropped on the discs of six leaves, so that each received 1/960 of
a grain. In 1 hr. 33 m. there was slight inflection; and after 5 hrs.
30 m. the tentacles of all six leaves were considerably, but not
closely, inflected. After 23 hrs.  15 m. all had completely
re-expanded, and did not appear in the least injured.

Three leaves were immersed, each in thirty minims of a solution of one
part to 875 of water, so that each received 1/32 of a grain, or 2.02
mg. After 1 hr. there was much inflection; after 8 hrs. 30 m. all the
tentacles and the blades of all three were closely inflected. Four
other leaves were also immersed in the solution, each receiving the
same amount of salt as before, viz. 1/32 of a grain. They all soon
became inflected; after 48 hrs. they began to re-expand, and appeared
quite uninjured, though the solution was sufficiently strong to taste
saline.

Sodium, Iodide of.--Half-minims of a solution of one part to 437 of
water were placed on the discs of six leaves. After 24 hrs. four of
them had their blades and many tentacles inflected.  The other two had
only their submarginal tentacles inflected; the outer ones in most of
the leaves being but little affected. After 46 hrs. the leaves had
nearly re-expanded. Three leaves were also immersed, each in thirty
minims of a solution of one part to 875 of water. After 6 hrs. 30 m.
almost all the tentacles, and the blade of one leaf, were closely
inflected.

Sodium, Bromide of.--Half-minims of a solution of one part to 437 of
water were placed on six leaves. After 7 hrs. there was some
inflection; after 22 hrs. three of the leaves had their blades and most
of their tentacles inflected; the fourth leaf was very slightly, and
the fifth and sixth hardly at all, affected. Three leaves were also
immersed, each in thirty minims of a solution of one part to 875 of
water; after 40 m. there was some inflection; after 4 hrs. the
tentacles of all three leaves and the blades of two were inflected.
These leaves were then placed in water, and after 17 hrs. 30 m. two of
them were almost completely, and the third partially, re-expanded; so
that apparently they were not injured.  [page 179]

Potassium, Carbonate of (pure).--Half-minims of a solution of one part
to 437 of water were placed on six leaves. No effect was produced in 24
hrs.; but after 48 hrs. some of the leaves had their tentacles, and one
the blade, considerably inflected. This, however, seemed the result of
their being injured; for on the third day after the solution was given,
three of the leaves were dead, and one was very unhealthy; the other
two were recovering, but with several of their tentacles apparently
injured, and these remained permanently inflected. It is evident that
the 1/960 of a grain of this salt acts as a poison. Three leaves were
also immersed, each in thirty minims of a solution of one part to 875
of water, though only for 9 hrs.; and, very differently from what
occurs with the salts of soda, no inflection ensued.

Potassium, Nitrate of.--Half-minims of a strong solution, of one part
to 109 of water (4 grs. to 1 oz.), were placed on the discs of four
leaves; two were much injured, but no inflection ensued. Eight leaves
were treated in the same manner, with drops of a weaker solution, of
one part to 218 of water. After 50 hrs. there was no inflection, but
two of the leaves seemed injured. Five of these leaves were
subsequently tested with drops of milk and a solution of gelatine on
their discs, and only one became inflected; so that the solution of the
nitrate of the above strength, acting for 50 hrs., apparently had
injured or paralysed the leaves. Six leaves were then treated in the
same manner with a still weaker solution, of one part to 437 of water,
and these, after 48 hrs., were in no way affected, with the exception
of perhaps a single leaf. Three leaves were next immersed for 25 hrs.,
each in thirty minims of a solution of one part to 875 of water, and
this produced no apparent effect. They were then put into a solution of
one part of carbonate of ammonia to 218 of water; the glands were
immediately blackened, and after 1 hr. there was some inflection, and
the protoplasmic contents of the cells became plainly aggregated. This
shows that the leaves had not been much injured by their immersion for
25 hrs. in the nitrate.

Potassium, Sulphate of.--Half-minims of a solution of one part to 437
of water were placed on the discs of six leaves. After 20 hrs. 30 m. no
effect was produced; after an additional 24 hrs. three remained quite
unaffected; two seemed injured, and the sixth seemed almost dead with
its tentacles inflected. Nevertheless, after two additional days, all
six leaves recovered.  The immersion of three leaves for 24 hrs., each
in thirty minims of [page 180] a solution of one part to 875 of water,
produced no apparent effect. They were then treated with the same
solution of carbonate of ammonia, with the same result as in the case
of the nitrate of potash.

