many modifications and possibilities, which would take it so much
further, that it is very close to bringing the practical solution to
the problem.

Let me here lay down the conditions which seem essential to a
practical integraph. These are, I think, the following:

1. The price must be such that it is within the reach of the ordinary
draughtsman's pocket. The Amsler's planimeter at L2 10s. or L3 may be
said to satisfy this first condition. The price for the first complex
integraph designed by Coradi was L24 to L30. The modified form in
which I show it to-night is estimated to cost retail L14. Till an
equally efficient instrument can be produced for L5 I shall not
consider the price practical. If the error of its reading be not
sensibly greater than that of a planimeter, it is certainly worth
double the money.

2. The instrument must not be liable to get out of order by fair
handling and a reasonable amount of wear and tear. I cannot speak at
present with certainty as to how far our integraph satisfies this
condition; it is rather too complex to quite win my confidence in this
respect.

3. It must be capable of being used on the ordinary drawing board, and
of having a fairly wide range on it, i.e., it must not be limited to
working where the primitive is at one part only of the board.

This condition takes out of every day practical drawing use the
integraph invented by Professors James and Sir William Thomson, in
which the sum curve is drawn on a revolving cylinder. It is essential
that the sum curve should be drawn on the board not far from the
primitive, and that this sum curve can be summed once or twice again
without difficulty. The time involved in drawing the four sum curves,
for example, required in passing from the load curve to the deflection
curve of a simple beam, if these curves were drawn on different pieces
of paper and had to be shifted on and off cylinders, would probably be
as long as the ordinary graphical processes. Coradi's integraph works
on an ordinary drawing board, but since there are nearly 10 inches
between the guide point and tracer, the sum curve is thrown 10 inches
behind the primitive in each integration. Thus a double summation
requires say 26 inches of board, and it is impossible to integrate
thrice without reproducing the primitive. The fact that the primitive
and sum curve are not plotted off on the same base is also troublesome
for comparison, and involves scaling of a new base for each summation.
I have endeavored to obviate this by always drawing the second sum
curve on a thin piece of paper pinned to the board, which can then be
moved back to the position of the first primitive. But this shifting,
of course, involves additional labor, and is also a source of error.

I should like to see the trace and guide chariots on the same line of
rails, one below the other, were this possible without producing the
bad effect of a skew, pull or push.

4. The practical integraph must not have a greater maximum error than
2 per cent. The mathematical calculations, which are correct to five
or six places of decimals, are only a source of danger to the
practical calculator of stresses and strains. They tend to disguise
the important fact that he cannot possibly know the properties of the
material within 2 per cent. error, and therefore there is not only a
waste of time, but a false feeling of accuracy engendered by human and
mechanical calculation which is over-refined for technical purposes.

For comparative purposes I have measured the areas of circles of 1
inch, 2 inches, and 3 inches radius, the guide being taken round the
circumference by means of a "control lineal," first with an ordinary
Amsler's planimeter and then with the integraph. I have obtained the
following results:

  ---------+------------+-----------+-----------------------------------
           |            |           |           By integraph.
   Radius  |            |   By      |--------+--------+--------+--------
     of    | Calculated |Planimeter.|        | Upper  |        | Upper
   circle. |   areas.   |           |Middle. |  end.  |Middle. |  end.
           |            |           |p=2 in. |p=2 in. |p=4 in. |p=4 in.
  ---------+------------+-----------+--------+--------+--------+--------
     in.   |            |           |        |        |        |
      1    |   3.14159  |   3.140   |  3.140 |  3.138 |  3.120 |  3.120
           |            |           |        |        |        |
      2    |  12.56636  |  12.55    | 12.36* | 12.546 | 12.568 | 12.552
           |            |           |        |        |        |
      3    |  28.27431  |  28.24    | ...... | ...... | 28.280 | 28.288
  ---------+------------+-----------+--------+--------+--------+--------

         * Cross bar had to be moved during tracing.

From this it follows that the error of the planimeter is less than 0.1
per cent. and that of the integraph about 0.5 per cent. Obviously we
could make this error much less if we excluded small areas measured
with large polar distances, or such polar distances that the cross bar
must be shifted. Excluding such cases, we see that the accuracy of the
integraph scarcely falls behind that of the planimeter and is quite
efficient for practical purposes. It must be borne in mind that the
above measurements were made with the "control lineal," an arrangement
which carries the guide round a circle of the exact test area. In most
cases the curve has to be followed by hand, and the error will be
greater--greater probably for the integraph than for the planimeter,
as the former is distinctly hard to guide well.

I think, then, we should be safe in saying that the error of the
integraph is not likely to be greater and is probably less than 2 per
cent., so that in this respect the instrument may be considered a
practical one.

5. A further condition for a good integraph is that it should have a
wide range of polar distances, and that it should be easily set at
those distances.

One of the conditions I gave to the maker of the instrument was that
it should be able to take all polar distances from one to ten
half-inches. This condition he can scarcely be said to have fulfilled.
With polar distances of 1/2 inch and 1 inch, the machine works
unsatisfactorily, which indeed might have been foreseen from the
construction of its sliding bars. It works best from 2.5 inches to 5
inches, and this is the range to which I think we ought to confine the
present type of instrument. As the last conditions I may note that:

6. A practical integraph ought to be easy to read.

7. Draw a good clear curve.

The scale on the present instrument is very inconvenient, as it is
often almost out of sight; the curve it draws, on the other hand, I
consider very satisfactory, when the pencil is loaded, say, with a
planimeter weight. On the whole, I think you will agree with me that
this integraph goes a good way, if not the whole way, toward
fulfilling the conditions of a practical instrument.

I next turn to its construction and the claim it has to be considered
in any way new. Let me briefly remind our members of the process by
which an element Q R of the sum curve (Fig. 1) corresponding to the
point P on the primitive is drawn; P M being the mid-ordinate of L N,
a horizontal element, P B is drawn perpendicular to any vertical line
A B; and O A being a constant distance termed the base or "polar
distance," Q R is drawn between the ordinates of L and W, parallel to
O B. If P' be the point where P M meets Q R, we note the following
relationship of P' to P.

1. If P moves along a horizontal line, O B remains unchanged, and,
therefore, Q R or P' must move in the straight line Q R parallel to O
B.

2. If P moves along a vertical line, P' does not change, but Q R turns
round it, remaining parallel to O B.

[Illustration: FIG. 1, 2, 3]

Without taking the trouble, as I ought to have done, to inquire what
previous investigations had achieved in this matter, I thought, three
years ago, I could get an apparatus to save me the trouble of drawing
sum curves, made somewhat after the following fashion.

P (Fig. 2) is the guide or point to be taken round the primitive. It
is attached to a block, D, which works along the bar, B C, which in
its turn moves on the four wheels, e e f f, upon the frame R S U T
fixed upon the drawing board. O A is fixed perpendicular to R U, and
is such that O may be fixed at various points to determine the polar
distance. O B D is a light bar passing freely through B and forming
one side of a parallel ruler of two or more points, g g, h h, i i.
Along i i is a slot and in this works a loaded block containing a
wheel P', whose plane is always parallel to i i. This block also
passes through a slot in D E, an arm at right angles to B C. A little
consideration will show that P', if worked at all, would trace out the
sum curve of P.

It was only when I showed the rough idea of this to Professor
Kennedy, with the view of ascertaining what would be the amount of
back-lash and friction, that I learned that Mr. Boys had already
invented a very similar integrator. In his model the double parallel
ruler is replaced by two endless strings and pulleys, and the bar, B
C, by a T square.

Although this integrator was afterward made in a less crude form, I do
not think it has ever been a practical instrument for the draughtsman.
Shortly afterward I came across a work by Abdank-Abakanowicz, entitled
"Les Integraphes," being a study of a "new kind of mechanical
integrator."

The new kind of integrator was really only an independent version of
Boys' instrument, but in many respects a great improvement. The real
merit will ultimately belong to the scientific instrument maker who
constructs an instrument reasonably cheap and capable of efficient
practical service. Abdank-Abakanowicz's integrator however certainly
went further in the practical direction than any previously
constructed. The drawing board machines, it is true, of rather a
complex nature, were actually exhibited to the Paris Academy, but no
more have been made. The instrument before me was made by Coradi, of
Zurich, on conditions laid down by me, namely, that the cost should
not exceed L14, and that polar distances should range between one and
ten half-inches. The first machine made by Coradi on these lines was,
by a misunderstanding, sold in Germany, but the one I exhibit is the
first, I believe, that has reached England, and to this extent I may,
perhaps, be permitted to call it new. I look upon it rather as a
suggestion upon which a still more practical instrument can be made in
this country than as a perfect model. I believe there would be a wide
sale for such an instrument were it once generally known to exist,
and, what is more to work efficiently. It remains for me to point out
in what the Abdank-Abakanowicz, or, rather, Coradi, integraph differs
from Boys' instrument.

Two points deserve special attention. In the first place, the fixed
frame is abolished, and the horizontal motion of P (Fig. 3), the guide
point, is produced by putting the whole frame on friction rollers; in
the second place, as a necessary result of the first change, the guide
point carries about with it its own polar system, which renders the
changes in length of "rays" much more manageable. f f, f' f' is a
frame moving on four roughed wheels, e e e e, so that it can only move
in the direction, f', which we may term horizontal. f f and f' f' are
rails guiding the chariots, A and B, from f to f and from f' to f'. Of
these chariots, A contains the guide point, P, to trace out the
primitive with, and B the pencil, P', to draw the sum curve, i.e., the
tracer. The chariot, B, like Boys' tracer, is heavily loaded. g g is a
horizontal bar rigidly attached to the crossbars, q q and q' q', of
the frame. On g g is a movable pivot, to which h, which determines the
pole, k0 h being the polar distance. k0 is the position of a
second point, k, on the chariot, A, when the guide point, P, is on the
initial line, g g. l l is a bar with a long slot in it, in which work
the pivots, h and k; this bar represents the "ray." A projecting arm k
k' has been introduced to enable me to shorten the polar distance down
to 2 in. and under by removing the pivot, k to k'. m m is a bar
attached to the block, n, which runs on l l, so that m m is always
perpendicular to l l. On the chariot, B, is another bar, m' m',
capable of turning round the pivot, d, and always maintained parallel
to m m by the rods, m m', m m'. Attached to m' m' is a wheel, w,
whose axis is parallel to m' m'. This wheel, therefore, always moves
perpendicular to m' m', and therefore to m m; hence it moves parallel
to the ray, h k. A pencil, P', attached traces out the sum curve. If
we wish to use the machine as an integrator, we have merely to measure
the vertical distance traversed by P', or the distance B has run along
f' f'. This is done by means of a scale on f f'. If k be brought down
to k0, w runs parallel to g g, or P' traces out a horizontal
straight line, which is thus the base line. If k be fixed as near as
possible to k0, which is done by means of a screw in f f at k0,
the chariot, B, can be run down f' f' as nearly opposite to k0 as
can be guessed at; a horizontal line may then be drawn as base line,
and the guide point, P, brought into this line by a clamping screw
with which it is provided. The instrument is then ready for action.
There is a brake on one of the roughed wheels to check or stop the
motion of the integraph when required.

The instrument works best when the chariots, A and B, are about
opposite to each other; when they are at opposite extremities of f f
and f' f' respectively, the pull at P tends to produce a skewing
couple. If the chariot, B, could be put upon f f and work, if needful,
by a double parallelogram from m m, we should have, excepting the skew
pull, some great practical advantages. We might throw the whole of the
weight of the machine on the one pair of friction wheels, and replace
the other pair by a single wheel, the portion q' f' f' q' of the
machine virtually disappearing. Three wheels, of course, would be a
real improvement. Further, we should have the sum curve and primitive
drawn to the same base line, and the simplification in the number of
parts ought largely to reduce the cost of the instrument.

To be able to perform "inverse summation" (which in the language of
differential calculus is to find y as a function of x, when we are
given y=f(dy/dx), and not dy/dx=f(x) as usual), we only want a means
of making the plane of the wheel, w, parallel instead of perpendicular
to m' m', and it is easy to design a modification in the construction
which will allow of this change.

I hope the above description of the integraph may have made its
construction and method of working sufficiently clear. Those of you
who have a taste for mechanical work, and the necessary tools, might,
I think, with some patience, construct a workable integraph. I expect
the pivots would be the hardest part of the work. I hope, some day,
myself to have another instrument made with a more readily changeable
polar distance, with trace and guide points working in the same
vertical, and a wheel permitting of inverse summation. If this project
is ever carried out, I hope I may be permitted to communicate further
particulars to our society.

       *       *       *       *       *


After some forty years of immersion in the waters of the pool of
Echoschacht, not far from Hermannstadt, several human bodies have been
brought to the surface in a state of perfect preservation.

       *       *       *       *       *




SOME HINTS ON SPIKING TRACK.


The usual dimensions of track spikes are 51/2 X 9.16 inches square,
their weight about half a pound each. Their common defects are
brittleness and imperfect points. In spiking track, the most important
points to be attended to are the proper spacing of the ties and
driving the spikes in such a manner that the ties shall be held in
place at right angles to the track and the rails in true gauge; to
insure the latter, the track gauge should always be used when spiking
the gauge side, the rail being held to proper position by a lining
bar. The gauge should be kept about 6 or 8 in. ahead of the tie being
spiked and should not be lifted until the spikes are driven home;
gauges should be tested regularly and every morning when they are to
be used all day, so as to insure a true gauge all the time. The two
inner spikes should be set on one side of the tie and the two outer
spikes on the other, as indicated in the accompanying sketch. This
prevents the tie from slewing around, and thus deranging the gauge of
the track, as well as interfering with the proper spacing of the ties.
The joints and centers should be spiked first, which will bring the
rails to their proper position on the ties, which in turn will assist
intermediate spiking. Each tie should be carefully gauged as spiked
and, as before indicated, the ties with the broadest faces being
selected for the joints.

In gauging ties it is very convenient to have measured off on the
handles of the mauls in the hands of the forward spikers the distance
from the outside of the rail to the end of the tie. This distance will
then be gauged on the tie, when it will be lifted to the rail and
securely spiked; the gauge is then used, and the loose rail held in
place with the lining bar as previously indicated, loose gauge being
given on curves, in accordance with directions of the engineer, the
allowance for which is about 1/8 in. on a 2 deg. curve, up to about 3/4 in.
on a 12 deg. curve.

This widening of the gauge should begin on the tangent, back of the
P.C., the full amount of excess over true gauge being reached by the
time the P.C. is reached and continue all the way around the curve,
running from the P.T. in the same manner as back of the P.C.

The spikes should always be driven home straight and at right angles
with the face of the ties. When the foreman in charge of the
track-laying work sees a spiker, when the spike is nearly home, strike
the spike head laterally, which is done to make it lie snugly to the
rail, he should at once check such imperfect work and put the man who
does it at other work. The foreman in charge of gang of spikers should
be experienced in this branch of the work, and by weeding out
imperfect workers, can soon get together a first-rate gang of spikers.
But no trouble will be experienced from carelessly driven spikes, if
the tie has the spike holes bored into it, before laying. This is
considered good practice, but rather expensive.

[Illustration]

For boring the holes quickly and accurately, a proper template should
be made, by which the ties are marked for the borers, who should be
provided with boring machines, by the use of which a hole, square with
the face of the tie is bored. The boring machines should be so
arranged as not to cut the hole beyond the required depth, which
should be slightly less than the length of the spike. The diameter of
the holes should be about 1-16 of an inch less than the thickness of
the spike. This not only does away with the spike tearing its way
through the timber and thus injuring its fiber to a great extent and
causing it to be much more susceptible to rot, but it is said to
increase the adhesion of the spike in hard wood ties at least 50 per
cent. But in order that the best results may be obtained, the spike
should be flattened on either side of the sloping point, which will
generally prevent it leaving the hole.

The spikers should carefully avoid striking the rail with their mauls,
as such carelessness often produces fracture, which sometimes causes
the rail to break in two at such points, which is liable to produce
derailment and serious accident. Spike mauls should weigh not less
than nine nor more than ten pounds, and should be on straight handles,
not less than 3 ft. long. After considerable use, the face of the maul
will become somewhat rounded, and when this takes place it should be
sent to the shop to be redressed. The last blow on the spike should be
only sufficiently hard to cause its throat to fit snugly on the rail;
a harder blow will often fracture the spike in such a manner as to
cause the head in a short time to break off and leave the rail
unsupported at that point. Foremen should not allow a spike to be
pulled, especially in frosty weather, until it has been first struck a
light blow to break the rust and loosen its hold in the wood. The
filling of old spike holes with wooden plugs is bad practice, for the
reason that they will cause the spike in a short time to slip from its
place; to fill the holes with sand is much better, and spikes driven
in holes so filled will hold much more firmly. The best form of spike
I have seen is the curved safety railroad spike; this spike takes in
the tie a position which enables it to resist the thrust of the rail
against it much more effectually than the ordinary spike can possibly
do. I have seen in good condition, one of these curved spikes which
was said to have been driven eight times. The cost of the curved
safety spike is more than that of the ordinary spike, but it is better
made, holds the track better, and, I believe, is worth more than the
difference asked for it.--_J.A. Hall, on Construction and Maintenance
of Track, before American Society of Civil Engineers._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE EXPERIMENTS AT THE ANNAPOLIS PROVING GROUNDS.


The desperate war that has been waging between the gun and armor
plate, ever since the period when protective plates were first applied
to naval constructions, is familiar to all. In this conflict the
advantage seems to lean toward the side of the gun, the power of
penetration of which can be increased to almost indefinite limits, at
least theoretically, while we quickly reach the extreme thicknesses of
metal that can be practically employed for the protection of ships.

So, in recent times, researches have been making upon the efficacy of
armor plating, no longer in its exaggeration of thickness, but in the
intrinsic quality of the metal of which it is composed. Metallurgists
have applied themselves to the work and have thus brought out various
products, among which the plates called "compound," of Messrs. Cammell
& Co., have obtained a great notoriety. These plates, formed of a true
plating of steel upon a bed of soft iron, have been much in vogue in
the English navy, and seemed as if they were to be adopted about
everywhere.

The Creusot works alone, of all competitors, were able to fight
against the general infatuation. Many comparative experiments had
already demonstrated the superiority of the Creusot "all steel" plates
over the Cammell plates, but Messrs. Schneider & Go. were not willing
to stop here, and finally produced the new nickel steel plate, which
is by far superior to their steel plates.

Some comparative trials of these various armor plates have recently
been made by a military commission of the United States at the
Annapolis proving grounds. Three plates, one a Cammell, the second a
steel, and the third a nickel steel (the two last from Creusot), were
here submitted to firing, under absolutely identical conditions.

Our engravings show the proving grounds and the details of the
arrangements adopted for backing the plates.

Of the three plates, the Cammell was the thickest (11 in.) The steel
one was 103/4 in. in thickness, and the nickel steel 101/2 in. The last,
therefore, was at a disadvantage with respect to the two others.

The plates were arranged tangentially to an arc of a circle whose
center was occupied by the pivot of the gun, and consequently at right
angles with the latter. The piece employed was a 6 in. gun, 35
calibers in length. The distance of its muzzle from the plates
attacked was 28 ft.

[Illustration]

The charge was 44 lb. of brown prismatic powder. The projectile was a
100 lb. Holtzer shell. Under these circumstances, the initial velocity
was 2,074 ft. and the energy at the impact was 9,970,396 ft. lb.

A beginning was made by firing four shots at each plate in the
bisectrix of the corners. Then the 6 in. gun was replaced by an 8 in.
one, throwing a 209 lb. Firth projectile, with an energy at the impact
of 20,795,000 ft. lb.

Each of the plates then received in its center a final blow from this
projectile.

Our engraving represents the state of the plates after this last shot.

[Illustration: ARMORED PLATE TESTS AT ANNAPOLIS]

There is no need of being a great expert in questions of artillery to
discover on what side the superiority is found, and to see that the
Cammell plate, almost entirely in fragments, is absolutely incapable
of protection, while its two competitors are still in a state to
resist.

In one of our engravings may be seen, too, the state of the shells
after each of the three shots.

[Illustration]

The commission immediately and unanimously classified the three plates
in the following order of superiority: (1) Nickel steel; (2) all
steel; (3) compound.

This triumph of French industry merits mention so much the more in
that it was obtained in a series of experiments made in a foreign
country--that is to say, under indisputable conditions of
impartiality.-_L'Illustration._

       *       *       *       *       *




HIGH EXPLOSIVES IN WARFARE.[1]

