recreation. Of course, however, the associations of our active lifetime
retain a powerful hold on us. The companionships we formed then remain
our companionships till the end of life. We always continue honorary
members of our former guilds, and retain the keenest and most jealous
interest in their welfare and repute in the hands of the following
generation. In the clubs maintained by the honorary members of the
several guilds, in which we meet socially, there are no topics of
conversation so common as those which relate to these matters, and the
young aspirants for guild leadership who can pass the criticism of us
old fellows are likely to be pretty well equipped. Recognizing this
fact, the nation entrusts to the honorary members of each guild the
election of its general, and I venture to claim that no previous form
of society could have developed a body of electors so ideally adapted
to their office, as regards absolute impartiality, knowledge of the
special qualifications and record of candidates, solicitude for the
best result, and complete absence of self-interest.

"Each of the ten lieutenant-generals or heads of departments is himself
elected from among the generals of the guilds grouped as a department,
by vote of the honorary members of the guilds thus grouped. Of course
there is a tendency on the part of each guild to vote for its own
general, but no guild of any group has nearly enough votes to elect a
man not supported by most of the others. I assure you that these
elections are exceedingly lively."

"The President, I suppose, is selected from among the ten heads of the
great departments," I suggested.

"Precisely, but the heads of departments are not eligible to the
presidency till they have been a certain number of years out of office.
It is rarely that a man passes through all the grades to the headship
of a department much before he is forty, and at the end of a five
years' term he is usually forty-five. If more, he still serves through
his term, and if less, he is nevertheless discharged from the
industrial army at its termination. It would not do for him to return
to the ranks. The interval before he is a candidate for the presidency
is intended to give time for him to recognize fully that he has
returned into the general mass of the nation, and is identified with it
rather than with the industrial army. Moreover, it is expected that he
will employ this period in studying the general condition of the army,
instead of that of the special group of guilds of which he was the
head. From among the former heads of departments who may be eligible at
the time, the President is elected by vote of all the men of the nation
who are not connected with the industrial army."

"The army is not allowed to vote for President?"

"Certainly not. That would be perilous to its discipline, which it is
the business of the President to maintain as the representative of the
nation at large. His right hand for this purpose is the inspectorate, a
highly important department of our system; to the inspectorate come all
complaints or information as to defects in goods, insolence or
inefficiency of officials, or dereliction of any sort in the public
service. The inspectorate, however, does not wait for complaints. Not
only is it on the alert to catch and sift every rumor of a fault in the
service, but it is its business, by systematic and constant oversight
and inspection of every branch of the army, to find out what is going
wrong before anybody else does. The President is usually not far from
fifty when elected, and serves five years, forming an honorable
exception to the rule of retirement at forty-five. At the end of his
term of office, a national Congress is called to receive his report and
approve or condemn it. If it is approved, Congress usually elects him
to represent the nation for five years more in the international
council. Congress, I should also say, passes on the reports of the
outgoing heads of departments, and a disapproval renders any one of
them ineligible for President. But it is rare, indeed, that the nation
has occasion for other sentiments than those of gratitude toward its
high officers. As to their ability, to have risen from the ranks, by
tests so various and severe, to their positions, is proof in itself of
extraordinary qualities, while as to faithfulness, our social system
leaves them absolutely without any other motive than that of winning
the esteem of their fellow citizens. Corruption is impossible in a
society where there is neither poverty to be bribed nor wealth to
bribe, while as to demagoguery or intrigue for office, the conditions
of promotion render them out of the question."

"One point I do not quite understand," I said. "Are the members of the
liberal professions eligible to the presidency? and if so, how are they
ranked with those who pursue the industries proper?"

"They have no ranking with them," replied Dr. Leete. "The members of
the technical professions, such as engineers and architects, have a
ranking with the constructive guilds; but the members of the liberal
professions, the doctors and teachers, as well as the artists and men
of letters who obtain remissions of industrial service, do not belong
to the industrial army. On this ground they vote for the President, but
are not eligible to his office. One of its main duties being the
control and discipline of the industrial army, it is essential that the
President should have passed through all its grades to understand his
business."

"That is reasonable," I said; "but if the doctors and teachers do not
know enough of industry to be President, neither, I should think, can
the President know enough of medicine and education to control those
departments."

"No more does he," was the reply. "Except in the general way that he is
responsible for the enforcement of the laws as to all classes, the
President has nothing to do with the faculties of medicine and
education, which are controlled by boards of regents of their own, in
which the President is ex-officio chairman, and has the casting vote.
These regents, who, of course, are responsible to Congress, are chosen
by the honorary members of the guilds of education and medicine, the
retired teachers and doctors of the country."

"Do you know," I said, "the method of electing officials by votes of
the retired members of the guilds is nothing more than the application
on a national scale of the plan of government by alumni, which we used
to a slight extent occasionally in the management of our higher
educational institutions."

"Did you, indeed?" exclaimed Dr. Leete, with animation. "That is quite
new to me, and I fancy will be to most of us, and of much interest as
well. There has been great discussion as to the germ of the idea, and
we fancied that there was for once something new under the sun. Well!
well! In your higher educational institutions! that is interesting
indeed. You must tell me more of that."

"Truly, there is very little more to tell than I have told already," I
replied. "If we had the germ of your idea, it was but as a germ."



Chapter 18

That evening I sat up for some time after the ladies had retired,
talking with Dr. Leete about the effect of the plan of exempting men
from further service to the nation after the age of forty-five, a point
brought up by his account of the part taken by the retired citizens in
the government.

"At forty-five," said I, "a man still has ten years of good manual
labor in him, and twice ten years of good intellectual service. To be
superannuated at that age and laid on the shelf must be regarded rather
as a hardship than a favor by men of energetic dispositions."

"My dear Mr. West," exclaimed Dr. Leete, beaming upon me, "you cannot
have any idea of the piquancy your nineteenth century ideas have for us
of this day, the rare quaintness of their effect. Know, O child of
another race and yet the same, that the labor we have to render as our
part in securing for the nation the means of a comfortable physical
existence is by no means regarded as the most important, the most
interesting, or the most dignified employment of our powers. We look
upon it as a necessary duty to be discharged before we can fully devote
ourselves to the higher exercise of our faculties, the intellectual and
spiritual enjoyments and pursuits which alone mean life. Everything
possible is indeed done by the just distribution of burdens, and by all
manner of special attractions and incentives to relieve our labor of
irksomeness, and, except in a comparative sense, it is not usually
irksome, and is often inspiring. But it is not our labor, but the
higher and larger activities which the performance of our task will
leave us free to enter upon, that are considered the main business of
existence.

"Of course not all, nor the majority, have those scientific, artistic,
literary, or scholarly interests which make leisure the one thing
valuable to their possessors. Many look upon the last half of life
chiefly as a period for enjoyment of other sorts; for travel, for
social relaxation in the company of their life-time friends; a time for
the cultivation of all manner of personal idiosyncrasies and special
tastes, and the pursuit of every imaginable form of recreation; in a
word, a time for the leisurely and unperturbed appreciation of the good
things of the world which they have helped to create. But, whatever the
differences between our individual tastes as to the use we shall put
our leisure to, we all agree in looking forward to the date of our
discharge as the time when we shall first enter upon the full enjoyment
of our birthright, the period when we shall first really attain our
majority and become enfranchised from discipline and control, with the
fee of our lives vested in ourselves. As eager boys in your day
anticipated twenty-one, so men nowadays look forward to forty-five. At
twenty-one we become men, but at forty-five we renew youth. Middle age
and what you would have called old age are considered, rather than
youth, the enviable time of life. Thanks to the better conditions of
existence nowadays, and above all the freedom of every one from care,
old age approaches many years later and has an aspect far more benign
than in past times. Persons of average constitution usually live to
eighty-five or ninety, and at forty-five we are physically and mentally
younger, I fancy, than you were at thirty-five. It is a strange
reflection that at forty-five, when we are just entering upon the most
enjoyable period of life, you already began to think of growing old and
to look backward. With you it was the forenoon, with us it is the
afternoon, which is the brighter half of life."

After this I remember that our talk branched into the subject of
popular sports and recreations at the present time as compared with
those of the nineteenth century.

"In one respect," said Dr. Leete, "there is a marked difference. The
professional sportsmen, which were such a curious feature of your day,
we have nothing answering to, nor are the prizes for which our athletes
contend money prizes, as with you. Our contests are always for glory
only. The generous rivalry existing between the various guilds, and the
loyalty of each worker to his own, afford a constant stimulation to all
sorts of games and matches by sea and land, in which the young men take
scarcely more interest than the honorary guildsmen who have served
their time. The guild yacht races off Marblehead take place next week,
and you will be able to judge for yourself of the popular enthusiasm
which such events nowadays call out as compared with your day. The
demand for 'panem ef circenses' preferred by the Roman populace is
recognized nowadays as a wholly reasonable one. If bread is the first
necessity of life, recreation is a close second, and the nation caters
for both. Americans of the nineteenth century were as unfortunate in
lacking an adequate provision for the one sort of need as for the
other. Even if the people of that period had enjoyed larger leisure,
they would, I fancy, have often been at a loss how to pass it
agreeably. We are never in that predicament."



Chapter 19

In the course of an early morning constitutional I visited Charlestown.
Among the changes, too numerous to attempt to indicate, which mark the
lapse of a century in that quarter, I particularly noted the total
disappearance of the old state prison.

"That went before my day, but I remember hearing about it," said Dr.
Leete, when I alluded to the fact at the breakfast table. "We have no
jails nowadays. All cases of atavism are treated in the hospitals."

"Of atavism!" I exclaimed, staring.

"Why, yes," replied Dr. Leete. "The idea of dealing punitively with
those unfortunates was given up at least fifty years ago, and I think
more."

"I don't quite understand you," I said. "Atavism in my day was a word
applied to the cases of persons in whom some trait of a remote ancestor
recurred in a noticeable manner. Am I to understand that crime is
nowadays looked upon as the recurrence of an ancestral trait?"

"I beg your pardon," said Dr. Leete with a smile half humorous, half
deprecating, "but since you have so explicitly asked the question, I am
forced to say that the fact is precisely that."

After what I had already learned of the moral contrasts between the
nineteenth and the twentieth centuries, it was doubtless absurd in me
to begin to develop sensitiveness on the subject, and probably if Dr.
Leete had not spoken with that apologetic air and Mrs. Leete and Edith
shown a corresponding embarrassment, I should not have flushed, as I
was conscious I did.

"I was not in much danger of being vain of my generation before," I
said; "but, really--"

"This is your generation, Mr. West," interposed Edith. "It is the one
in which you are living, you know, and it is only because we are alive
now that we call it ours."

"Thank you. I will try to think of it so," I said, and as my eyes met
hers their expression quite cured my senseless sensitiveness. "After
all," I said, with a laugh, "I was brought up a Calvinist, and ought
not to be startled to hear crime spoken of as an ancestral trait."

"In point of fact," said Dr. Leete, "our use of the word is no
reflection at all on your generation, if, begging Edith's pardon, we
may call it yours, so far as seeming to imply that we think ourselves,
apart from our circumstances, better than you were. In your day fully
nineteen twentieths of the crime, using the word broadly to include all
sorts of misdemeanors, resulted from the inequality in the possessions
of individuals; want tempted the poor, lust of greater gains, or the
desire to preserve former gains, tempted the well-to-do. Directly or
indirectly, the desire for money, which then meant every good thing,
was the motive of all this crime, the taproot of a vast poison growth,
which the machinery of law, courts, and police could barely prevent
from choking your civilization outright. When we made the nation the
sole trustee of the wealth of the people, and guaranteed to all
abundant maintenance, on the one hand abolishing want, and on the other
checking the accumulation of riches, we cut this root, and the poison
tree that overshadowed your society withered, like Jonah's gourd, in a
day. As for the comparatively small class of violent crimes against
persons, unconnected with any idea of gain, they were almost wholly
confined, even in your day, to the ignorant and bestial; and in these
days, when education and good manners are not the monopoly of a few,
but universal, such atrocities are scarcely ever heard of. You now see
why the word 'atavism' is used for crime. It is because nearly all
forms of crime known to you are motiveless now, and when they appear
can only be explained as the outcropping of ancestral traits. You used
to call persons who stole, evidently without any rational motive,
kleptomaniacs, and when the case was clear deemed it absurd to punish
them as thieves. Your attitude toward the genuine kleptomaniac is
precisely ours toward the victim of atavism, an attitude of compassion
and firm but gentle restraint."

"Your courts must have an easy time of it," I observed. "With no
private property to speak of, no disputes between citizens over
business relations, no real estate to divide or debts to collect, there
must be absolutely no civil business at all for them; and with no
offenses against property, and mighty few of any sort to provide
criminal cases, I should think you might almost do without judges and
lawyers altogether."

"We do without the lawyers, certainly," was Dr. Leete's reply. "It
would not seem reasonable to us, in a case where the only interest of
the nation is to find out the truth, that persons should take part in
the proceedings who had an acknowledged motive to color it."

"But who defends the accused?"

"If he is a criminal he needs no defense, for he pleads guilty in most
instances," replied Dr. Leete. "The plea of the accused is not a mere
formality with us, as with you. It is usually the end of the case."

"You don't mean that the man who pleads not guilty is thereupon
discharged?"

"No, I do not mean that. He is not accused on light grounds, and if he
denies his guilt, must still be tried. But trials are few, for in most
cases the guilty man pleads guilty. When he makes a false plea and is
clearly proved guilty, his penalty is doubled. Falsehood is, however,
so despised among us that few offenders would lie to save themselves."

"That is the most astounding thing you have yet told me," I exclaimed.
"If lying has gone out of fashion, this is indeed the 'new heavens and
the new earth wherein dwelleth righteousness,' which the prophet
foretold."

"Such is, in fact, the belief of some persons nowadays," was the
doctor's answer. "They hold that we have entered upon the millennium,
and the theory from their point of view does not lack plausibility. But
as to your astonishment at finding that the world has outgrown lying,
there is really no ground for it. Falsehood, even in your day, was not
common between gentlemen and ladies, social equals. The lie of fear was
the refuge of cowardice, and the lie of fraud the device of the cheat.
The inequalities of men and the lust of acquisition offered a constant
premium on lying at that time. Yet even then, the man who neither
feared another nor desired to defraud him scorned falsehood. Because we
are now all social equals, and no man either has anything to fear from
another or can gain anything by deceiving him, the contempt of
falsehood is so universal that it is rarely, as I told you, that even a
criminal in other respects will be found willing to lie. When, however,
a plea of not guilty is returned, the judge appoints two colleagues to
state the opposite sides of the case. How far these men are from being
like your hired advocates and prosecutors, determined to acquit or
convict, may appear from the fact that unless both agree that the
verdict found is just, the case is tried over, while anything like bias
in the tone of either of the judges stating the case would be a
shocking scandal."

"Do I understand," I said, "that it is a judge who states each side of
the case as well as a judge who hears it?"

"Certainly. The judges take turns in serving on the bench and at the
bar, and are expected to maintain the judicial temper equally whether
in stating or deciding a case. The system is indeed in effect that of
trial by three judges occupying different points of view as to the
case. When they agree upon a verdict, we believe it to be as near to
absolute truth as men well can come."

"You have given up the jury system, then?"

"It was well enough as a corrective in the days of hired advocates, and
a bench sometimes venal, and often with a tenure that made it
dependent, but is needless now. No conceivable motive but justice could
actuate our judges."

"How are these magistrates selected?"

"They are an honorable exception to the rule which discharges all men
from service at the age of forty-five. The President of the nation
appoints the necessary judges year by year from the class reaching that
age. The number appointed is, of course, exceedingly few, and the honor
so high that it is held an offset to the additional term of service
which follows, and though a judge's appointment may be declined, it
rarely is. The term is five years, without eligibility to
reappointment. The members of the Supreme Court, which is the guardian
of the constitution, are selected from among the lower judges. When a
vacancy in that court occurs, those of the lower judges, whose terms
expire that year, select, as their last official act, the one of their
colleagues left on the bench whom they deem fittest to fill it."

"There being no legal profession to serve as a school for judges," I
said, "they must, of course, come directly from the law school to the
bench."

"We have no such things as law schools," replied the doctor smiling.
"The law as a special science is obsolete. It was a system of casuistry
which the elaborate artificiality of the old order of society
absolutely required to interpret it, but only a few of the plainest and
simplest legal maxims have any application to the existing state of the
world. Everything touching the relations of men to one another is now
simpler, beyond any comparison, than in your day. We should have no
sort of use for the hair-splitting experts who presided and argued in
your courts. You must not imagine, however, that we have any disrespect
for those ancient worthies because we have no use for them. On the
contrary, we entertain an unfeigned respect, amounting almost to awe,
for the men who alone understood and were able to expound the
interminable complexity of the rights of property, and the relations of
commercial and personal dependence involved in your system. What,
indeed, could possibly give a more powerful impression of the intricacy
and artificiality of that system than the fact that it was necessary to
set apart from other pursuits the cream of the intellect of every
generation, in order to provide a body of pundits able to make it even
vaguely intelligible to those whose fates it determined. The treatises
of your great lawyers, the works of Blackstone and Chitty, of Story and
Parsons, stand in our museums, side by side with the tomes of Duns
Scotus and his fellow scholastics, as curious monuments of intellectual
subtlety devoted to subjects equally remote from the interests of
modern men. Our judges are simply widely informed, judicious, and
discreet men of ripe years.

"I should not fail to speak of one important function of the minor
judges," added Dr. Leete. "This is to adjudicate all cases where a
private of the industrial army makes a complaint of unfairness against
an officer. All such questions are heard and settled without appeal by
a single judge, three judges being required only in graver cases. The
efficiency of industry requires the strictest discipline in the army of
