
       *       *       *       *       *


Speaking of steel ropes as transmitters of power, Professor Osborne
Reynolds says these have a great advantage over shafts, for the stress
on the section will be uniform, the velocity will be uniform, and may
be at least ten to fifteen times as great as with shafts--say 100 ft.
per second; the rope is carried on friction pulleys, which may be at
distances 500 ft. or 600 ft. so that the coefficient of friction will
not be more than 0.015, instead of 0.04.

       *       *       *       *       *




A NEW OXIDE OF COPPER BATTERY.

By MM. F. DE LALANDE and G. CHAPERON.


We have succeeded in forming a new battery with a single liquid and
with a solid depolarizing element by associating oxide of copper,
caustic potash, and zinc.

This battery possesses remarkable properties. Depolarizing electrodes
are easily formed of oxide of copper. It is enough to keep it in
contact with a plate or a cell of iron or copper constituting the
positive pole of the element.

Fig. 1 represents a very simple arrangement. At the bottom of a glass
jar, V, we place a box of sheet iron, A, containing oxide of copper,
B. To this box is attached a copper wire insulated from the zinc by a
piece of India rubber tube. The zinc is formed of a thick wire of this
metal coiled in the form of a flat spiral, D, and suspended from a
cover, E, which carries a terminal, F, connected with the zinc; an
India-rubber tube, G, covers the zinc at the place where it dips into
the liquid, to prevent its being eaten away at this level.

The jar is filled with a solution containing 30 or 40 per cent. of
potash. This arrangement is similar to that of a Callaud element, with
this difference--that the depolarizing element is solid and insoluble.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

To prevent the inconveniences of the manipulation of the potash, we
inclose a quantity of this substance in the solid state necessary for
an element in the box which receives the oxide of copper, and furnish
it with a cover supported by a ring of caoutchouc. It suffices then
for working the battery to open the box of potash, to place it at the
bottom of the jar, and to add water to dissolve the potash; we then
pour in the copper oxide inclosed in a bag.

We also form the oxide of copper very conveniently into blocks. Among
the various means which might be employed, we prefer the following:

We mix with the oxide of copper oxychloride of magnesium in the form
of paste so as to convert the whole into a thick mass, which we
introduce into metal boxes.

The mass sets in a short time, or very rapidly by the action of heat,
and gives porous blocks of a solidity increasing with the quantity of
cement employed (5 to 10 per cent.).

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

Fig. 2 represents an arrangement with blocks. The jar V, is provided
with a cover of copper, E, screwing into the glass. This cover carries
two vertical plates of sheet-iron, A, A', against which are fixed the
prismatic blocks, B, B, by means of India rubber bands. The terminal,
C, carried by the cover constitutes the positive pole. The zinc is
formed of a single pencil, D, passing into a tube fixed to the center
of the cover. The India rubber, G, is folded back upon this tube so as
to make an air-tight joint.

The cover carries, besides, another tube, H, covered by a split
India-rubber tube, which forms a safety valve.

The closing is made hermetical by means of an India rubber tube, K,
which presses against the glass and the cover. The potash to charge
the element is in pieces, and is contained either in the glass jar
itself or in a separate box of sheet-iron.

Applying the same arrangement, we form hermetically sealed elements
with a single plate of a very small size.

The employment of cells of iron, cast-iron, or copper, which are not
attacked by the exciting liquid, allows us to easily construct
elements exposing a large surface (Fig. 3).

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

The cell, A, forming the positive pole of the battery is of iron plate
brazed upon vertical supports; it is 40 centimeters long by 20
centimeters wide, and about 10 centimeters high.

We cover the bottom with a layer of oxide of copper, and place in the
four corners porcelain insulators, L, which support a horizontal plate
of zinc, D, D', raised at one end and kept at a distance from the
oxide of copper and from the metal walls of the cell; three-quarters
of this is filled with a solution of potash. The terminals, C and M,
fixed respectively to the iron cell and to the zinc, serve to attach
the leading wires. To avoid the too rapid absorption of the carbonic
acid of the air by the large exposed surface, we cover it with a thin
layer of heavy petroleum (a substance uninflammable and without
smell), or better still, we furnish the battery with a cover. These
elements are easily packed so as to occupy little space.

We shall not discuss further the arrangements which may be varied
infinitely, but point out the principal properties of the oxide of
copper, zinc, and potash battery. As a battery with a solid
depolarizing element, the new battery presents the advantage of only
consuming its element, in proportion to its working; amalgamated zinc
and copper are, in fact, not attacked by the alkaline solution, it is,
therefore, durable.

Its electromotive force is very nearly one volt. Its internal
resistance is very low. We may estimate it at 1/3 or 1/4 of an ohm for
polar surfaces one decimeter square, separated by a distance of five
centimeters.

The rendering of these couples is considerable; the small cells shown
in Figs. 1 and 2 give about two amperes in short circuit; the large
one gives 16 to 20 amperes. Two of these elements can replace a large
Bunsen cell. They are remarkably constant. We may say that with a
depolarizing surface double that of the zinc the battery will work
without notable polarization, and almost until completely exhausted,
even under the most unfavorable conditions. The transformation of the
products, the change of the alkali into an alkaline salt of zinc, does
not perceptibly vary the internal resistance. This great constancy is
chiefly due to the progressive reduction of the depolarizing electrode
to the state of very conductive metal, which augments its conductivity
and its depolarizing power.

The peroxide of manganese, which forms the base of an excellent
battery for giving a small rendering, possesses at first better
conductivity than oxide of copper, but this property is lost by
reduction and transformation into lower oxides. It follows that the
copper battery will give a very large quantity of electricity working
through low resistances, while under these conditions manganese
batteries are rapidly polarized.

The energy contained in an oxide of copper and potash battery is very
great, and far superior to that stored by an accumulator of the same
weight, but the rendering is much less rapid. Potash may be employed
in concentrated solution at 30, 40, 60 per cent.; solid potash can
dissolve the oxide of zinc furnished by a weight of zinc more than
one-third of its own weight. The quantity of oxide of copper to be
employed exceeds by nearly one-quarter the weight of zinc which enters
into action. These data allow of the reduction of the necessary
substances to a very small relative weight.

The oxide of copper batteries have given interesting results in their
application to telephones. For theatrical purposes the same battery
may be employed during the whole performance, instead of four or five
batteries. Their durability is considerable; three elements will work
continuously, night and day, Edison's carbon microphones for more than
four months without sensible loss of power.

Our elements will work for a hundred hours through low resistances,
and can be worked at any moment, after several months, for example. It
is only necessary to protect them by a cover from the action of the
carbonic acid of the atmosphere.

We prefer potash to soda for ordinary batteries, notwithstanding its
price and its higher equivalent, because it does not produce, like
soda, creeping salts. Various modes of regeneration render this
battery very economical. The deposited copper absorbs oxygen pretty
readily by simple exposure to damp air, and can be used again. An
oxidizing flame produces the same result very rapidly.

Lastly, by treating the exhausted battery as an accumulator, that is
to say, by passing a current through it in the opposite direction, we
restore the various products to their original condition; the copper
absorbs oxygen, and the alkali is restored, while the zinc is
deposited; but the spongy state of the deposited zinc necessitates its
being submitted to a process, or to its being received upon a mercury
support. Again, the oxide of copper which we employ, being a waste
product of brazing and plate works, unless it be reduced, loses
nothing of its value by its reduction in the battery; the
depolarization may therefore be considered as costing scarcely
anything. The oxide of copper battery is a durable and valuable
battery, which by its special properties seems likely to replace
advantageously in a great number of applications the batteries at
present in use.

       *       *       *       *       *




FARCOT'S SIX HORSE POWER STEAM ENGINE.


This horizontal steam engine, recently constructed by Mr. E.D. Farcot
for actuating a Cance dynamo-electric machine, consists of a cast iron
bed frame, A, upon which are mounted all the parts. The two jacketed,
cylinders, B and C, of different diameters, each contains a
simple-acting piston. The two pistons are connected by one rod in
common, which is fixed at its extremity to a cross-head, D, running in
slides, E and F, and is connected with the connecting rod, G. The head
of the latter is provided with a bearing of large diameter which
embraces the journal of the driving shaft, H.

The steam enters the valve-box through the orifice, J, which is
provided with a throttle-valve, L, that is connected with a governor
placed upon the large cylinder. The steam, as shown in Fig. 2 (which
represents the piston at one end of its travel), is first admitted
against the right surface of the small piston, which it causes to
effect an entire stroke corresponding to a half-revolution of the
fly-wheel. The stroke completed, the slide-valve, actuated by an
eccentric keyed to the driving shaft, returns backward and puts the
cylinders, B and C, in communication. The steam then expands and
drives the large piston to the right, so as to effect the second half
of the fly-wheel's revolution. The exhaust occurs through the valve
chamber, which, at each stroke, puts the large cylinder in connection
with the eduction port, M.

The volume of air included between the two pistons is displaced at
every stroke, so that, according to the position occupied by the
pistons, it is held either by the large or small cylinder. The
necessary result of this is that a compression of the air, and
consequently a resistance, is brought about. In order to obviate this
inconvenience, the constructor has connected the space between the two
pistons at the part, A', of the frame by a bent pipe. The air, being
alternately driven into and sucked out of this chamber, A', of
relatively large dimensions, no longer produces but an insignificant
resistance.

[Illustration: FARCOT'S SIX H.P. STEAM ENGINE.
  Fig. 1.--Longitudinal Section (Scale 0.10 to 1).
  Fig. 2.--Horizontal Section (Scale 0.10 to 1).
  Fig. 3.--Section across the Small Cylinder (Scale 0.10 to 1).
  Fig. 4.--Section through the Cross Head (Scale 0.10 to 1).
  Fig. 5.--Application for a Variable Expanion (Scale 0.10 to 1).]

As shown in Fig. 5, there may be applied to this engine a variable
expansion of the Farcot type. The motor being a single acting one, a
single valve-plate suffices. This latter is, during its travel,
arrested at one end by a stop and at the other by a cam actuated by
the governor. Upon the axis of this cam there is keyed a gear wheel,
with an endless screw, which permits of regulating it by hand.

This engine, which runs at a pressure of from 5 to 6 kilogrammes,
makes 150 revolutions per minute and weighs 2,000 kilogrammes.
--_Annales Industrielles_.

       *       *       *       *       *




FOOT LATHES.


We illustrate a foot lathe constructed by the Britannia Manufacturing
Company, of Colchester, and specially designed for use on board ships.
These lathes, says _Engineering_, are treble geared, in order that
work which cannot usually be done without steam power may be
accomplished by foot. For instance, they will turn a 24 inch wheel or
plate, or take a half-inch cut off a 3 inch shaft, much heavier work
than can ordinarily be done by such tools. They have 6 inch centers,
gaps 71/2 inches wide and 61/2 inches deep, beds 4 feet 6 inches long by
83/4 inches on the face and 6 inches in depth, and weigh 14 cwt. There
are three speeds on the cone pulley, 9 inches, 6 inches, and 4 inches
in diameter and 11/2 inches wide. The gear wheels are 9/16 inch pitch
and 11/2 inches wide on face. The steel leading screw is 11/2 inches in
diameter by 1/4 inch pitch. Smaller sizes are made for torpedo boats and
for places where space is limited.

[Illustration: LATHE FOR USE ON SHIPBOARD.]

       *       *       *       *       *




ENDLESS TROUGH CONVEYER.


[Illustration]

The endless trough conveyer is one of the latest applications of
link-belting, consisting primarily of a heavy chain belt carried over
a pair of wheels, and in the intermediate space a truck on which the
train runs. This chain or belt is provided with pans which, as they
overlap, form an endless trough. Power being applied to revolve one of
the wheels, the whole belt is thereby set in motion and at once
becomes an endless trough conveyer. The accompanying engraving
illustrates a section of this conveyer. A few of the pans are removed,
to show the construction of the links; and above this a link and
coupler are shown on a larger scale. As will be seen, the link is
provided with wings, to form a rigid support for the pan to be riveted
to it. To reduce friction each link is provided with three rollers, as
will be seen in the engraving. This outfit makes a fireproof conveyer
which will handle hot ore from roasting kiln to crusher, and convey
coal, broken stone, or other gritty and coarse material. The Link Belt
Machinery Company, of Chicago, is now erecting for Mr. Charles E.
Coffin, of Muirkirk, Md., about 450 ft. of this conveyer, which is to
carry the hot roasted iron ore from the kilns on an incline of about
one foot in twelve up to the crusher. This dispenses with the
barrow-men, and at an expenditure of a few more horsepower becomes a
faithful servant, ready for work in all weather and at all times of
day or night. This company also manufactures ore elevators of any
capacity, which, used in connection with this apparatus, will handle
perfectly anything in the shape of coarse, gritty material. It might
be added that the endless trough conveyer is no experiment. Although
comparatively new in this country, the American _Engineering and
Mining Journal_ says it has been in successful operation for some time
in England, the English manufacturers of link-belting having had great
success with it.

[Illustration: ENDLESS TROUGH CONVEYER.]

       *       *       *       *       *




RAILROAD GRADES OF TRUNK LINES.


On the West Shore and Buffalo road its limit of grade is 30 feet to
the mile going west and north, and 20 feet to the mile going east and
south. Next for easy grades comes the New York Central and Hudson
River road. From New York to Albany, then up the valley of the Mohawk,
till it gradually reaches the elevation of Lake Erie, it is all the
time within the 500 foot level, and this is maintained by its
connections on the lake borders to Chicago, by the "Nickel Plate," the
Lake Shore and Michigan Southern, and the Canada Southern and Michigan
Central.

The Erie, the Pennsylvania, and the Baltimore and Ohio roads pass
through a country so mountainous that, much as they have expended to
improve their grades, it is practically impossible for them to attain
the easy grades so much more readily obtained by the trunk lines
following the great natural waterways originally extending almost from
Chicago to New York.

       *       *       *       *       *




ENGLISH EXPRESS TRAINS.


The _Journal of the Statistical Society_ for September contains an
elaborate paper by Mr. E. Foxwell on "English Express Trains; their
Average Speed, etc. with Notes on Gradients, Long Runs, etc." The
author takes great pains to explain his definition of the term
"express trains," which he finally classifies thus: (a) The general
rule; those which run under ordinary conditions, and attain a
journey-speed of 40 and upward. These are about 85 per cent. of the
whole. (b) Equally good trains, which, running against exceptional
difficulties, only attain, perhaps, a journey speed as low as 36 or
37. These are about 5 per cent. of the whole. (c) Trains which should
come under (a), but which, through unusually long stoppages or similar
causes, only reach a journey speed of 39. These are about 10 per
cent.[1] of the whole.

  [Footnote 1: 10 per cent. of the number, but not of the mileage,
  of the whole; for most of this class run short journeys.]

He next explains that by "running average" is meant: The average speed
per hour while actually in motion from platform to platform, i.e., the
average speed obtained by deducting stoppages. Thus the 9-hour (up)
Great Northern "Scotchman" stops 49 minutes on its journey from
Edinburgh to King's Cross, and occupies 8 hours 11 minutes in actual
motion; its "running average" is therefore 48 miles an hour, or,
briefly, "r.a.=48." The statement for this train will thus appear:
Distance in miles between Edinburgh and King's Cross, 3921/2; time, 9 h.
0 m.; journey-speed, 43.6; minutes stopped, 49; running average, 48.

Mr. Foxwell then proceeds to describe in detail the performances of
the express trains of the leading English and Scottish railways--in
Ireland there are no trains which come under his definition of
"express"--giving the times of journey, the journey-speeds, minutes
stopped on way, and running averages, with the gradients and other
circumstances bearing on these performances. He sums up the results
for the United Kingdom, omitting fractions, as follows:

  =========================================================================
  Extent of|                   |           | Average  |         |         |
  System   |                   | Distinct  | Journey- | Running | Express |
  in Miles.|                   | Expresses.|  speed.  | Average.| Mileage.|
  ---------+-------------------+-----------+----------+---------+---------+
    1773   | North-Western     |   {54} 82 |    40    |    43   |  10,400 |
           |                   |   {28}    |          |         |         |
    1260   | Midland           |    66     |    41    |    45   |   8,860 |
