fermentative organisms, deserving study and fraught with instruction.

Let it be remembered that the aim of nature in this fermentative
action is not the partial splitting of certain organic compounds, and
their reconstruction in simpler conditions, but the ultimate setting
free, by saprophytic action, of the elements locked up in great masses
of organic tissue--the sending back into nature of the only material
of which future organic structures are to be composed.

I have said that there can be no question whatever that _Bacterium
termo_ is the pioneer of saprophytes. Exclude _B. termo_ (and
therefore with it all its congeners), and you can obtain no
putrefaction. But wherever, in ordinary circumstances, a decomposable
organic mass, say the body of a fish, or a considerable mass of the
flesh of a terrestrial animal, is exposed in water at a temperature of
60 deg. to 65 deg. F., _B. termo_ rapidly appears, and increases with a simply
astounding rapidity. It clothes the tissues like a skin, and diffuses
itself throughout the fluid.

The exact chemical changes it thus effects are not at present clearly
known; but the fermentative action is manifestly concurrent with its
multiplication. It finds its pabulum in the mass it ferments by its
vegetative processes. But it also produces a visible change in the
enveloping fluid, and noxious gases continuously are thrown off.

In the course of a week or more, dependent on the period of the year,
there is, not inevitably, but as a rule, a rapid accession of spiral
forms, such as _Spirillum volutans_, _S. undula_, and similar forms,
often accompanied by _Bacterium lineola_; and the whole interspersed
still with inconceivable multitudes of _B. termo_.

These invest the rotting tissues liked an elastic garment, but are
always in a state of movement. These, again, manifestly further the
destructive ferment, and bring about a softness and flaccidity in the
decomposing tissues, while they without doubt, at the same time, have,
by their vital activity and possible secretions, affected the
condition of the changing organic mass. There can be, so far as my
observations go, no certainty as to when, after this, another form of
organism will present itself; nor, when it does, which of a limited
series it will be. But, in a majority of observed cases, a loosening
of the living investment of bacterial forms takes place, and
simultaneously with this, the access of one or two forms of my
putrefactive monads. They were among the first we worked at; and have
been, by means of recent lenses, among the last revised. Mr. S. Kent
named them _Cercomonas typica_ and _Monas dallingeri_ respectively.
They are both simple oval forms, but the former has a flagellum at
both ends of the longer axis of the body, while the latter has a
single flagellum in front.

The principal difference is in their mode of multiplication by
fission. The former is in every way like a bacterium in its mode of
self-division. It divides, acquiring for each half a flagellum in
division, and then, in its highest vigor, in about four minutes, each
half divides again.

The second form does not divide into two, but into many, and thus
although the whole process is slower, develops with greater rapidity.
But both ultimately multiply--that is, commence new generations--by
the equivalent of a sexual process.

These would average about four times the size of _Bacterium termo_;
and when once they gain a place on and about the putrefying tissues,
their relatively powerful and incessant action, their enormous
multitude, and the manner in which they glide over, under, and beside
each other, as they invest the fermenting mass, is worthy of close
study. It has been the life history of these organisms, and not their
relations as ferment, that has specially occupied my fullest
attention; but it would be in a high degree interesting if we could
discover, or determine, what besides the vegetative or organic
processes of nutrition are being effected by one, or both, of these
organisms on the fast yielding mass. Still more would it be of
interest to discover what, if any, changes were wrought in the
pabulum, or fluid generally. For after some extended observations I
have found that it is only after one or other or both, of these
organisms have performed their part in the destructive ferment, that
subsequent and extremely interesting changes arise.

It is true that in some three or four instances of this saprophytic
destruction of organic tissues, I have observed that, after the strong
bacterial investment, there has arisen, not the two forms just named,
nor either of them, but one or other of the striking forms now called
_Tetramitus rostratus_ and _Polytoma uvella_; but this has been in
relatively few instances. The rule is that _Cercomonas typica_ or its
congener precedes other forms, that not only succeed them in promoting
and carrying to a still further point the putrescence of the
fermenting substance, but appear to be aided in the accomplishment of
this by mechanical means.

By this time the mass of tissue has ceased to cohere. The mass has
largely disintegrated, and there appears among the countless bacterial
and monad forms some one, and sometimes even three forms, that while
they at first swim and gyrate, and glide about the decomposing matter,
which is now much less closely invested by _Cercomonas typica_, or
those organisms that may have acted in its place, they also resort to
an entirely new mode of movement.

One of these forms is _Heteromita rostrata_, which, it will be
remembered, in addition to a front flagellum, has also a long fiber or
flagellum-like appendage that gracefully trails as it swims. At
certain periods of its life they anchor themselves in countless
billions all over the fermenting tissues, and as I have described in
the life history of this form, they coil their anchored fiber, as does
a vorticellan, bringing the body to the level of the point of
anchorage, then shoot out the body with lightning-like rapidity, and
bring it down like a hammer on some point of the decomposition. It
rests here for a second or two, and repeats the process; and this is
taking place by what seems almost like rhythmic movement all over the
rotting tissue. The results are scarcely visible in the mass. But if a
group of these organisms be watched, attached to a small particle of
the fermenting tissue, it will be seen to gradually diminish, and at
length to disappear.

Now, there are at least two other similar forms, one of which,
_Heteromita uncinata_, is similar in action, and the other of which,
_Dallingeria drysdali_, is much more powerful, being possessed of a
double anchor, and springing down upon the decadent mass with
relatively far greater power.

Now, it is under the action of these last forms that in a period
varying from one month to two or three the entire substance of the
organic tissues disappears, and the decomposition has been designated
by me "exhausted"; nothing being left in the vessel but slightly
noxious and pale gray water, charged with carbonic acid, and a fine,
buff colored, impalpable sediment at the bottom.

My purpose is not, by this brief notice, to give an exhaustive, or
even a sufficient account, of the progress of fermentative action, by
means of saprophytic organisms, on great masses of tissue; my
observations have been incidental, but they lead me to the conclusion
that the fermentative process is not only not carried through by what
are called saprophytic bacteria, but that a _series_ of fermentative
organisms arise, which succeed each other, the earlier ones preparing
the pabulum or altering the surrounding medium, so as to render it
highly favorable to a succeeding form. On the other hand, the
succeeding form has a special adaptation for carrying on the
fermentative destruction more efficiently from the period at which it
arises, and thus ultimately of setting free the chemical elements
locked up in dead organic compounds.

That these later organisms are saprophytic, although not bacterial,
there can be no doubt. A set of experiments, recorded by me in the
proceedings of this society some years since, would go far to
establish this (_Monthly Microscopical Journal_, 1876, p. 288). But it
may be readily shown, by extremely simple experiments, that these
forms will set up fermentative decomposition rapidly if introduced in
either a desiccated or living condition, or in the spore state, into
suitable but sterilized pabulum.

Thus while we have specific ferments which bring about definite and
specific results, and while even infusions of proteid substances may
be exhaustively fermented by saprophytic bacteria, the most important
of all ferments, that by which nature's dead organic masses are
removed, is one which there is evidence to show is brought about by
the successive vital activities of a series of adapted organisms,
which are forever at work in every region of the earth.

There is one other matter of some interest and moment on which I would
say a few words. To thoroughly instructed biologists, such words will
be quite needless; but, in a society of this kind, the possibilities
that lie in the use of the instrument are associated with the
contingency of large error, especially in the biology of the minuter
forms of life, unless a well grounded biological knowledge form the
basis of all specific inference, to say nothing of deduction.

I am the more encouraged to speak of the difficulty to which I refer,
because I have reason to know that it presents itself again and again
in the provincial societies of the country, and is often adhered to
with a tenacity worthy of a better cause. I refer to the danger that
always exists, that young or occasional observers are exposed to, amid
the complexities of minute animal and vegetable life, of concluding
that they have come upon absolute evidences of the transformation of
one minute form into another; that in fact they have demonstrated
cases of heterogenesis.

This difficulty is not diminished by the fact that on the shelves of
most microscopical societies there is to be found some sort of
literature written in support of this strange doctrine.

You will pardon me for allusion again to the field of inquiry in which
I have spent so many happy hours. It is, as you know, a region of life
in which we touch, as it were, the very margin of living things. If
nature were capricious anywhere, we might expect to find her so here.
If her methods were in a slovenly or only half determined condition,
we might expect to find it here. But it is not so. Know accurately
what you are doing, use the precautions absolutely essential, and
through years of the closest observation it will be seen that the
vegetative and vital processes generally, of the very simplest and
lowliest life forms, are as much directed and controlled by immutable
laws as the most complex and elevated.

The life cycles, accurately known, of monads repeat themselves as
accurately as those of rotifers or planarians.

And of course, on the very surface of the matter, the question
presents itself to the biologist why it should not be so. The
irrefragable philosophy of modern biology is that the most complex
forms of living creatures have derived their splendid complexity and
adaptations from the slow and majestically progressive variation and
survival from the simpler and the simplest forms. If, then, the
simplest forms of the present and the past were not governed by
accurate and unchanging laws of life, how did the rigid certainties
that manifestly and admittedly govern the more complex and the most
complex come into play?

If our modern philosophy of biology be, as we know it is, true, then
it must be very strong evidence indeed that would lead us to conclude
that the laws seen to be universal break down and cease accurately to
operate where the objects become microscopic, and our knowledge of
them is by no means full, exhaustive, and clear.

Moreover, looked at in the abstract, it is a little difficult to
conceive why there should be more uncertainty about the life processes
of a group of lowly living things than there should be about the
behavior, in reaction, of a given group of molecules.

The triumph of modern knowledge is the certainty, which nothing can
shake, that nature's laws are immutable. The stability of her
processes, the precision of her action, and the universality of her
laws, is the basis of all science, to which biology forms no
exception. Once establish, by clear and unmistakable demonstration,
the life history of an organism, and truly some change must have come
over nature as a whole, if that life history be not the same to-morrow
as to-day; and the same to one observer, in the same conditions, as to
another.

No amount of paradox would induce us to believe that the combining
proportions of hydrogen and oxygen had altered, in a specified
experimenter's hands, in synthetically producing water.

We believe that the melting point of platinum and the freezing point
of mercury are the same as they were a hundred years ago, and as they
will be a hundred years hence.

Now, carefully remember that so far as we can see at all, it must be
so with life. Life inheres in protoplasm; but just as you cannot get
_abstract matter_--that is, matter with no properties or modes of
motion--so you cannot get _abstract_ protoplasm. Every piece of living
protoplasm we see has a history; it is the inheritor of countless
millions of years. Its properties have been determined by its history.
It is the protoplasm of some definite form of life which has inherited
its specific history. It can be no more false to that inheritance than
an atom of oxygen can be false to its properties.

All this, of course, within the lines of the great secular processes
of the Darwinian laws; which, by the way, could not operate at all if
caprice formed any part of the activities of nature.

But let me give a practical instance of how what appears like fact may
override philosophy, if an incident, or even a group of incidents,
_per se_ are to control our judgment.

Eighteen years ago I was paying much attention to vorticellae. I was
observing with some pertinacity _Vorticella convallaria_; for one of
the calices in a group under observation was in a strange and
semi-encysted state, while the remainder were in full normal activity.

I watched with great interest and care, and have in my folio still the
drawings made at the time. The stalk carrying this individual calyx
fell upon the branch of vegetable matter to which the vorticellan was
attached, and the calyx became perfectly globular; and at length there
emerged from it a small form with which, in this condition, I was
quite unfamiliar; it was small, tortoise-like in form, and crept over
the branch on setae or hair-like pedicels; but, carefully followed, I
found it soon swam, and at length got the long neck-like appendage of
_Amphileptus anser_!

Here then was the cup or calyx of a definite vorticellan form changing
into (?) an absolutely different infusorian, viz., _Amphileptus
anser_!

Now I simply reported the _fact_ to the Liverpool Microscopical
Society, with no attempt at inference; but two years after I was able
to explain the mystery, for, finding in the same pond both _V.
convallaria_ and _A. anser_, I carefully watched their movements, and
saw the _Amphileptus_ seize and struggle with a calyx of
_convallaria_, and absolutely become encysted upon it, with the
results that I had reported two years before.

And there can be no doubt but this is the key to the cases that come
to us again and again of minute forms suddenly changing into forms
wholly unlike. It is happily among the virtues of the man of science
to "rejoice in the truth," even though it be found at his expense; and
true workers, earnest seekers for nature's methods, in the obscurest
fields of her action, will not murmur that this source of danger to
younger microscopists has been pointed out, or recalled to them.

And now I bid you, as your president, farewell. It has been all
pleasure to me to serve you. It has enlarged my friendships and my
interests, and although my work has linked me with the society for
many years, I have derived much profit from this more organic union
with it; and it is a source of encouragement to me, and will, I am
sure, be to you, that, after having done with simple pleasure what I
could, I am to be succeeded in this place of honor by so distinguished
a student of the phenomena of minute life as Dr. Hudson. I can but
wish him as happy a tenure of office as mine has been.

       *       *       *       *       *




INQUIRIES REGARDING THE INCUBATOR.

P.H. JACOBS.


Space in the _Rural_ is valuable, and so important a subject as
artificial incubation cannot perhaps be made entirely plain to a
novice in a few articles; but as interested parties have written for
additional information, it may interest others to answer them here.
Among the questions asked are: "Does the incubator described in the
_Rural_ dispense entirely with the use of a lamp, using at intervals a
bucket of water to maintain proper temperature? I fear this will not
be satisfactory unless the incubator is kept in a warm room or
cellar."

All incubators must be kept in a warm location, whether operated by a
lamp or otherwise. The warmer the room or cellar, the less warmth
required to be supplied. Bear in mind that the incubator recommended
has four inches of sawdust surrounding it, and more sawdust would
still be an advantage. The sawdust is not used to protect against the
outside temperature, but to absorb and hold a large amount of heat,
and that is the secret of its success. The directions given were to
first fill the tank with boiling water and allow it to remain for 24
hours. In the meantime the sawdust absorbs the heat, and more boiling
water is then added until the egg-drawer is about 110 or 115 degrees.
By this time there is a quantity of stored heat in the sawdust. The
eggs will cool the drawer to 103. The loss of heat (due to its being
held by the sawdust) will be very slow. All that is needed then is to
supply that which will be lost in 12 hours, and a bucket of boiling
water should keep the heat about correct, if added twice a day, but it
may require more, as some consideration must be given to fluctuations
of the temperature of the atmosphere. The third week of incubation,
owing to animal heat from the embryo chicks, a bucket of boiling water
will sometimes hold temperature for 24 hours. No objection can be
urged against attaching a lamp arrangement, but a lamp is dangerous at
night, while the flame must be regulated according to temperature. The
object of giving the hot water method was to avoid lamps. We have a
large number of them in use (no lamps) here, and they are equal to any
others in results.

With all due respect to some inquirers, the majority of them seem
afraid of the work. Now, there is some work with all incubators. What
is desired is to get rid of the anxiety. I stated that a bucket of
water twice a day would suffice. I trusted to the judgment of the
reader somewhat. Of course, if the heat in the egg drawer is 90
degrees, and the weather cold, it may then take a wash boiler full of
water to get the temperature back to 103 degrees, but when it is at
103 keep it there, even if it occasionally requires two buckets of
boiling water. To judge of what may be required, let us suppose the
operator looks at the thermometer in the morning, and it is exactly
103 degrees. He estimates that it will lose a little by night, and
draws off half a bucket of water. At night he finds it at 102. Knowing
that it is on what we term "the down grade," he applies a bucket and a
half (always allowing for the night being colder than the day). As
stated, the sawdust will not allow the drawer to become too cold, as
it gives off heat to the drawer. And, as the sawdust absorbs, it is
not easy to have the heat too high. One need not even look at the
drawer until the proper times. No watching--the incubator regulates
itself. If a lamp is used, too much heat may accumulate. The flame
must be occasionally turned up or down, and the operator must remain
at home and watch it, while during the third week he will easily cook
his eggs.

The incubator can be made at home for so small a sum (about $5 for the
tank, $1 for faucet, etc., with 116 feet of lumber) that it will cost
but little to try it. A piece of glass can be placed in front of the
egg drawer, if preferred. If the heat goes down to 90, or rises at
times to 105, no harm is done. But it works well, and hatches, the
proof being that hundreds are in use. I did not give the plan as a
theory or an experiment. They are in practical use here, and work
alongside of the more expensive ones, and have been in use for four
years. To use a lamp attachment, all that is necessary is to have a
No. 2 burner lamp with a riveted sheet-iron chimney, the chimney
fitting over the flame, like an ordinary globe, and extending the
chimney (using an elbow) through the tank from the rear, ending in
front. It should be soldered at the tank. The heat from the lamp will
then pass through the chimney and consequently warm the surrounding
water.--_Rural New-Yorker._

[For description and illustrations of this incubator see SUPPLEMENT,
No. 630.]

       *       *       *       *       *




THE PEAK OF TENERIFFE.


The Hon. Ralph Abercromby made a trip to the island of Teneriffe in
October, 1887, for the purpose of making some electrical and
meteorological observations, and now gives some of the results which
he obtained, which may be summarized as follows: The electrical
condition of the peak of Teneriffe was found to be the same as in
every other part of the world. The potential was moderately positive,
from 100 to 150 volts, at 5 ft. 5 in. from the ground, even at
considerable altitudes; but the tension rose to 549 volts on the
summit of the peak, 12,200 ft., and to 247 volts on the top of the
rock of Gayga, 7,100 feet. A large number of halos were seen
associated with local showers and cloud masses. The necessary ice dust
appeared to be formed by rising currents. The shadow of the peak was
seen projected against the sky at sunset. The idea of a southwest
current flowing directly over the northeast trade was found to be
erroneous. There was always a regular vertical succession of air
currents in intermediate directions at different levels from the
surface upward, so that the air was always circulating on a
complicated screw system.

       *       *       *       *       *




ESTRADE'S HIGH SPEED LOCOMOTIVE.


We illustrate a very remarkable locomotive, which has been constructed
from the designs of M. Estrade, a French engineer. This engine was
exhibited last year in Paris. Although the engine was built, M.
Estrade could not persuade any railway company to try it for him, and
finally he applied to the French government, who have at last
sanctioned the carrying out of experiments with it on one of the state
railway lines. The engine is in all respects so opposed to English
ideas that we have hitherto said nothing about it. As, however, it is
going to be tried, an importance is given to it which it did not
possess before; and, as a mechanical curiosity, we think it is worth
the consideration of our readers.

In order that we may do M. Estrade no injustice, we reproduce here in
a condensed form, and in English, the arguments in its favor contained
in a paper written by M. Max de Nansouty, C.E., who brought M.
Estrade's views before the French Institution of Civil Engineers, on
May 21, 1886. M. Nansouty's paper has been prepared with much care,
and contains a great deal of useful data quite apart from the Estrade
engine. The paper in question is entitled "_Memoire relatif au
Materiel Roulant a Grand Vitesse_," D.M. Estrade.

About thirty years ago, M. Estrade, formerly pupil of the Polytechnic
School, invented rolling stock for high speed under especial
conditions, and capable of leading to important results, more
especially with regard to speed. Following step by step the progress
made in the construction of railway stock, the inventor, from time to
time, modified and improved his original plan, and finally, in 1884,
arrived at the conception of a system entirely new in its fundamental
