each point of the object which fall on the pupil of the eye (whose
diameter is about equal to _mp_ suppose) will serve to render the object
visible. On the other hand, every point of the image _emf_ has received
the whole of the light gathered up by the large glass AB. If then we can
only make this light _available_, it is clear that we shall have
acquired a large increase of _light_ from the distant object. Now it
will be noticed that the light which has converged to _p_, diverges from
_p_ so that an eye, placed that this diverging pencil of rays may fall
upon it, would be too small to receive the whole of the pencil. Or, if
it did receive the whole of this pencil, it clearly could not receive
the whole of the pencils proceeding from other parts of the image _emf_.
_Something_ would be gained, though, even in this case, since it is
clear that an eye thus placed at a distance of ten inches from _emf_
(which is about the average distance of distinct vision) would not only
receive much more light from the image _emf_, than it would from the
object EMF, but see the image much larger than the object. It is in this
way that a simple object-glass forms a telescope, a circumstance we
shall presently have to notice more at length. But we want to gain the
full benefit of the light which has been gathered up for us by our
object-glass. We therefore interpose a small convex glass _ab_ (called
an eye-glass) between the image and the eye, at such a distance from the
image that the divergent pencil of rays is converted into a pencil of
parallel or nearly parallel rays. Call this an emergent pencil. Then all
the emergent pencils now converge to a point on the axial line _m_M
(produced beyond _m_), and an eye suitably placed can take in all of
them at once. Thus the whole, or a large part, of the image is seen at
once. But the image is seen inverted as shown. This is the Telescope, as
it was first discovered, and such an arrangement would now be called a
_simple astronomical Telescope_.

Let us clearly understand what each part of the astronomical telescope
does for us:--

The object-glass AB gives us an illuminated image, the amount of
illumination depending on the size of the object-glass. The eye-glass
enables us to examine the image microscopically.

We may apply eye-glasses of different focal length. It is clear that the
shorter the focal length of _ab_, the nearer must _ab_ be placed to the
image, and the smaller will the emergent pencils be, but the greater the
magnifying power of the eye-glass. If the emergent pencils are severally
larger than the pupil of the eye, light is wasted at the expense of
magnifying power. Therefore the eye-glass should never be of greater
focal length than that which makes the emergent pencils about equal in
diameter to the pupil of the eye. On the other hand, the eye-glass must
not be of such small focal length that the image appears indistinct and
contorted, or dull for want of light.

[Illustration: _Fig. 2._]

Let us compare with the arrangement exhibited in fig. 1 that adopted by
Galileo. Surprise is sometimes expressed that this instrument, which in
the hands of the great Florentine astronomer effected so much, should
now be known as the _non-astronomical Telescope_. I think this will be
readily understood when we compare the two arrangements.

In the Galilean Telescope a small concave eye-glass, _ab_ (fig. 2), is
placed between the object-glass and the image. In fact, no image is
allowed to be formed in this arrangement, but the convergent pencils are
intercepted by the concave eye-glass, and converted into parallel
emergent pencils. Now in fig. 2 the concave eye-glass is so placed as to
receive only a part of the convergent pencil A _p_ B, and this is the
arrangement usually adopted. By using a concave glass of shorter focus,
which would therefore be placed nearer to _m p_, the whole of the
convergent pencil might be received in this as in the former case. But
then the axis of the emergent pencil, instead of returning (as we see it
in fig. 1) _towards_ the axis of the telescope, would depart as much
_from_ that axis. Thus there would be no point on the axis at which the
eye could be so placed as to receive emergent pencils showing any
considerable part of the object. The difference may be compared to that
between looking through the small end of a cone-shaped roll of paper and
looking through the large end; in the former case the eye sees at once
all that is to be seen through the roll (supposed fixed in position), in
the latter the eye may be moved about so as to command the same range of
view, but _at any instant_ sees over a much smaller range.

To return to the arrangement actually employed, which is illustrated by
the common opera-glass. We see that the full illuminating power of the
telescope is not brought into play. But this is not the only objection
to the Galilean Telescope. It is obvious that if the part C D of the
object-glass were covered, the point P would not be visible, whereas, in
the astronomical arrangement no other effect is produced on the
visibility of an object, by covering part of the object-glass, than a
small loss of illumination. In other words, the dimensions of the field
of view of a Galilean Telescope depend on the size of the object-glass,
whereas in the astronomical Telescope the field of view is independent
of the size of the object-glass. The difference may be readily tested.
If we direct an opera-glass upon any object, we shall find that any
covering placed over a part of the object-glass _becomes visible_ when
we look through the instrument, interfering therefore _pro tanto_ with
the range of view. A covering similarly placed on any part of the
object-glass of an astronomical telescope does not become visible when
we look through the instrument. The distinction has a very important
bearing on the theory of telescopic vision.

In considering the application of the telescope to practical
observation, the circumstance that in the Galilean Telescope no real
image is formed, is yet more important. A real image admits of
measurement, linear or angular, while to a _virtual_ image (such an
image, for instance, as is formed by a common looking-glass) no such
process can be applied. In simple observation the only noticeable effect
of this difference is that, whereas in the astronomical Telescope a
_stop_ or diaphragm can be inserted in the tube so as to cut off what is
called the _ragged edge_ of the field of view (which includes all the
part not reached by _full pencils of light_ from the object-glass),
there is no means of remedying the corresponding defect in the Galilean
Telescope. It would be a very annoying defect in a telescope intended
for astronomical observation, since in general the edge of the field of
view is not perceptible at night. The unpleasant nature of the defect
may be seen by looking through an opera-glass, and noticing the gradual
fading away of light round the circumference of the field of view.

The properties of reflection as well as of refraction have been enlisted
into the service of the astronomical observer. The formation of an image
by means of a concave mirror is exhibited in fig. 3. As the observer's
head would be placed between the object and the mirror, if the image,
formed as in fig. 3, were to be microscopically examined, various
devices are employed in the construction of reflecting telescopes to
avoid the loss of light which would result--a loss which would be
important even with the largest mirrors yet constructed. Thus, in
Gregory's Telescope, a small mirror, having its concavity towards the
great one, is placed in the axis of the tube and forms an image which is
viewed through an aperture in the middle of the great mirror. A similar
plan is adopted in Cassegrain's Telescope, a small convex mirror
replacing the concave one. In Newton's Telescope a small inclined-plane
reflector is used, which sends the pencil of light off at right-angles
to the axis of the tube. In Herschel's Telescope the great mirror is
inclined so that the image is formed at a slight distance from the axis
of the telescope. In the two first cases the object is viewed in the
usual or direct way, the image being erect in Gregory's and inverted in
Cassegrain's. In the third the observer looks through the side of the
telescope, seeing an inverted image of the object. In the last the
observer sees the object inverted, but not altered as respects right and
left. The last-mentioned method of viewing objects is the only one in
which the observer's back is turned towards the object, yet this method
is called the _front view_--apparently _quasi lucus a non lucendo_.

[Illustration: _Fig. 3._]

It appears, then, that in all astronomical Telescopes, reflecting or
refracting, a _real image_ of an object is submitted to microscopical
examination.

Of this fact the possessor of a telescope may easily assure himself;
for if the eye-glass be removed, and a small screen be placed at the
focus of the object-glass, there will appear upon the screen a small
picture of any object towards which the tube is turned. But the image
may be viewed in another way which requires to be noticed. If the eye,
placed at a distance of five or six inches from the image, be directed
down the tube, the image will be seen as before; in fact, just as a
single convex lens of short focus is the simplest microscope, so a
simple convex lens of long focus is the simplest telescope.[1] But a
singular circumstance will immediately attract the observer's notice. A
real picture, or the image formed on the screen as in the former case,
can be viewed at varying distances; but when we view the image directly,
it will be found that for distinct vision the eye must be placed almost
exactly at a fixed distance from the image. This peculiarity is more
important than it might be thought at first sight. In fact, it is
essential that the observer who would rightly apply the powers of his
telescope, or fairly test its performance, should understand in what
respect an image formed by an object-glass or object-mirror differs from
a real object.

The peculiarities to be noted are the _curvature_, _indistinctness_, and
_false colouring_ of the image.

The curvature of the image is the least important of the three defects
named--a fortunate circumstance, since this defect admits neither of
remedy nor modification. The image of a distant object, instead of lying
in a plane, that is, forming what is technically called a _flat field_,
forms part of a spherical surface whose centre is at the centre of the
object-glass. Hence the centre of the field of view is somewhat nearer
to the eye than are the outer parts of the field. The amount of
curvature clearly depends on the extent of the field of view, and
therefore is not great in powerful telescopes. Thus, if we suppose that
the angular extent of the field is about half a degree (a large or
low-power field), the centre is nearer than the boundary of the field by
about 1-320th part only of the field's diameter.

The indistinctness of the image is partly due to the obliquity of the
pencils which form parts of the image, and partly to what is termed
_spherical aberration_. The first cause cannot be modified by the
optician's skill, and is not important when the field of view is small.
Spherical aberration causes those parts of a pencil which fall near the
boundary of a convex lens to converge to a nearer (_i.e._ shorter) focus
than those which fall near the centre. This may be corrected by a proper
selection of the forms of the two lenses which replace, in all modern
telescopes, the single lens hitherto considered.

The false colouring of the image is due to _chromatic aberration_. The
pencil of light proceeding from a point, converges, not to one point,
but to a short line of varying colour. Thus a series of coloured images
is formed, at different distances from the object-glass. So that, if a
screen were placed to receive the mean image _in focus_, a coloured
fringe due to the other images (_out of focus, and therefore too large_)
would surround the mean image.

Newton supposed that it was impossible to get rid of this defect, and
therefore turned his attention to the construction of reflectors. But
the discovery that the _dispersive_ powers of different glasses are not
proportional to their reflective powers, supplied opticians with the
means of remedying the defect. Let us clearly understand what is the
discovery referred to. If with a glass prism of a certain form we
produce a spectrum of the sun, this spectrum will be thrown a certain
distance away from the point on which the sun's rays would fall if not
interfered with. This distance depends on the _refractive_ power of the
glass. The spectrum will have a certain length, depending on the
_dispersive_ power of the glass. Now, if we change our prism for another
of exactly the same shape, but made of a different kind of glass, we
shall find the spectrum thrown to a different spot. If it appeared that
the length of the new spectrum was increased or diminished in exactly
the same proportion as its distance from the line of the sun's direct
light, it would have been hopeless to attempt to remedy chromatic
aberration. Newton took it for granted that this was so. But the
experiments of Hall and the Dollonds showed that there is no such strict
proportionality between the dispersive and refractive powers of
different kinds of glass. It accordingly becomes possible to correct the
chromatic aberration of one glass by superadding that of another.

[Illustration: _Fig. 4._]

This is effected by combining, as shown in fig. 4, a convex lens of
_crown_ glass with a concave lens of _flint_ glass, the convex lens
being placed nearest to the object. A little colour still remains, but
not enough to interfere seriously with the distinctness of the image.

But even if the image formed by the object-glass were perfect, yet this
image, viewed through a single convex lens of short focus placed as in
fig. 1, would appear curved, indistinct, coloured, and also _distorted_,
because viewed by pencils of light which do not pass through the centre
of the eye-glass. These effects can be diminished (but not entirely
removed _together_) by using an _eye-piece_ consisting of two lenses
instead of a single eye-glass. The two forms of eye-piece most commonly
employed are exhibited in figs. 5 and 6. Fig. 5 is Huyghens' eye-piece,
called also the _negative_ eye-piece, because a real image is formed
_behind_ the _field-glass_ (the lens which lies nearest to the
object-glass). Fig. 6 represents Ramsden's eye-piece, called also the
_positive_ eye-piece, because the real image formed by the object-glass
lies _in front of_ the field-glass.

[Illustration: _Fig. 5._]

[Illustration: _Fig. 6._]

The course of a slightly oblique pencil through either eye-piece is
exhibited in the figures. The lenses are usually plano-convex, the
convexities being turned towards the object-glass in the negative
eye-piece, and towards each other in the positive eye-piece. Coddington
has shown, however, that the best forms for the lenses of the negative
eye-piece are those shown in fig. 5.

The negative eye-piece, being achromatic, is commonly employed in all
observations requiring distinct vision only. But as it is clearly unfit
for observations requiring micrometrical measurement, or reference to
fixed lines at the focus of the object-glass, the positive eye-piece is
used for these purposes.

For observing objects at great elevations the diagonal eye-tube is
often convenient. Its construction is shown in fig. 7. ABC is a totally
reflecting prism of glass. The rays from the object-glass fall on the
face AB, are totally reflected on the face BC, and emerge through the
face AC. In using this eye-piece, it must be remembered that it
lengthens the sliding eye-tube, which must therefore be thrust further
in, or the object will not be seen in focus. There is an arrangement by
which the change of direction is made to take place between the two
glasses of the eye-piece. With this arrangement (known as the _diagonal
eye-piece_) no adjustment of the eye-tube is required. However, for
amateurs' telescopes the more convenient arrangement is the diagonal
eye-tube, since it enables the observer to apply any eye-piece he
chooses, just as with the simple sliding eye-tube.

[Illustration: _Fig. 7._]

We come next to the important question of the _mounting_ of our
telescope.

The best known, and, in some respects, the simplest method of
mounting a telescope for general observation is that known as the
_altitude-and-azimuth_ mounting. In this method the telescope is
pointed towards an object by two motions,--one giving the tube the
required _altitude_ (or elevation), the other giving it the required
_azimuth_ (or direction as respects the compass points).

For small alt-azimuths the ordinary pillar-and-claw stand is
sufficiently steady. For larger instruments other arrangements are
needed, both to give the telescope steadiness, and to supply slow
movements in altitude and azimuth. The student will find no difficulty
in understanding the arrangement of sliding-tubes and rack-work commonly
adopted. This arrangement seems to me to be in many respects defective,
however. The slow movement in altitude is not uniform, but varies in
effect according to the elevation of the object observed. It is also
limited in range; and quite a little series of operations has to be gone
through when it is required to direct the telescope towards a new
quarter of the heavens. However expert the observer may become by
practice in effecting these operations, they necessarily take up some
time (performed as they must be in the dark, or by the light of a small
lantern), and during this time it often happens that a favourable
opportunity for observation is lost.

These disadvantages are obviated when the telescope is mounted in such a
manner as is exhibited in fig. 8, which represents a telescope of my own
construction. The slow movement in altitude is given by rotating the rod
_he_, the endless screw in which turns the small wheel at _b_, whose
axle in turn bears a pinion-wheel working in the teeth of the quadrant
_a_. The slow movement in azimuth is given in like manner by rotating
the rod _h'e'_, the lantern-wheel at the end of which turns a
crown-wheel on whose axle is a pinion-wheel working in the teeth of the
circle _c_. The casings at _e_ and _e'_, in which the rods _he_ and
_h'e'_ respectively work, are so fastened by elastic cords that an
upward pressure on the handle _h_, or a downward pressure on the handle
_h'_, at once releases the endless screw or the crown-wheel
respectively, so that the telescope can be swept at once through any
desired angle in altitude or azimuth. This method of mounting has other
advantages; the handles are conveniently situated and constant in
position; also, as they do not work directly on the telescope, they can
be turned without setting the tube in vibration.

[Illustration: _Fig. 8._]

I do not recommend the mounting to be exactly as shown in fig. 8. That
method is much too expensive for an alt-azimuth. But a simple
arrangement of belted wheels in place of the toothed wheels _a_ and _c_
might very readily be prepared by the ingenious amateur telescopist; and
I feel certain that the comfort and convenience of the arrangement would
amply repay him for the labour it would cost him. My own
telescope--though the large toothed-wheel and the quadrant were made
inconveniently heavy (through a mistake of the workman who constructed
the instrument)--worked as easily and almost as conveniently as an
equatorial.

Still, it is well for the observer who wishes systematically to survey
the heavens--and who can afford the expense--to obtain a well-mounted
_equatorial_. In this method of mounting, the main axis is directed to
the pole of the heavens; the other axis, at right angles to the first,
carries the telescope-tube. One of the many methods adopted for mounting
equatorials is that exhibited--with the omission of some minor
details--in fig. 9. _a_ is the polar axis, _b_ is the axis (called the
declination axis) which bears the telescope. The circles _c_ and _d_
serve to indicate, by means of verniers revolving with the axes, the
motion of the telescope in right ascension and declination,
respectively. The weight _w_ serves to counterpoise the telescope, and
the screws _s_, _s_, _s_, _s_, serve to adjust the instrument so that
the polar axis shall be in its proper position. The advantage gained by
the equatorial method of mounting is that only one motion is required to
follow a star. Owing to the diurnal rotation of the earth, the stars
appear to move uniformly in circles parallel to the celestial equator;
and it is clear that a star so moving will be kept in the field of
view, if the telescope, once directed to the star, be made to revolve
uniformly and at a proper rate round the polar axis.

[Illustration: _Fig. 9._]

The equatorial can be directed by means of the circles _c_ and _d_ to
any celestial object whose right ascension and declination are known. On
the other hand, to bring an object into the field of view of an
alt-azimuth, it is necessary, either that the object itself should be
visible to the naked eye, or else that the position of the object should
be pretty accurately learned from star-maps, so that it may be picked up
by the alt-azimuth after a little searching. A small telescope called a
_finder_ is usually attached to all powerful telescopes intended for
general observation. The finder has a large field of view, and is
adjusted so as to have its axis parallel to that of the large telescope.
Thus a star brought to the centre of the large field of the finder
(indicated by the intersection of two lines placed at the focus of the
eye-glass) is at, or very near, the centre of the small field of the
large telescope.

If a telescope has no finder, it will be easy for the student to
construct one for himself, and will be a useful exercise in optics. Two
convex lenses not very different in size from those shown in fig. 1, and
placed as there shown--the distance between them being the sum of the
focal lengths of the two glasses--in a small tube of card, wood, or tin,
will serve the purpose of a finder for a small telescope. It can be
attached by wires to the telescope-tube, and adjusted each night before
commencing observation. The adjustment is thus managed:--a low power
being applied to the telescope, the tube is turned towards a bright
star; this is easily effected with a low power; then the finder is to be
fixed, by means of its wires, in such a position that the star shall be
in the centre of the field of the finder when also in the centre of the
telescope's field. When this has been done, the finder will greatly help
the observations of the evening; since with high powers much time would
be wasted in bringing an object into the field of view of the telescope
without the aid of a finder. Yet more time would be wasted in the case
