frustrated; but in 1333 Vasco Paez de Meira, having allowed the
fortifications and garrison to decay, was obliged to capitulate to
Mahomet IV. (third siege). Alphonso's attempts to recover possession
(fourth siege) were futile, though pertinacious and heroic, and he was
obliged to content himself with a tribute for the rock from Abdul
Melek of Granada; but after his successful attack on Algeciras in 1344
he was encouraged to try his fortune again at Gibraltar. In 1349 he
invested the rock, but the siege (fifth siege) was brought to an
untimely close by his death from the plague in February, 1350. The
next or sixth siege resulted simply in the transference of the coveted
position from the hands of the King of Morocco to those of Yussef III.
of Granada; and the seventh, undertaken by the Spanish Count of
Niebla, Enrico de Guzman, proved fatal to the besieger and his forces.
In 1462, however, success attended the efforts of Alphonso de Arcos
(eighth siege), and in August the rock passed once more under
Christian sway. The Duke of Medina Sidonia, a powerful grandee who had
assisted in its capture, was anxious to get possession of the
fortress, and though Henry IV. at first managed to maintain the claims
of the crown, the duke ultimately made good his ambition by force of
arms (ninth siege), and in 1469 the king was constrained to declare
his son and his heirs perpetual governors of Gibraltar. In 1479
Ferdinand and Isabella made the second duke Marquis of Gibraltar, and
in 1492 the third duke, Don Juan, was reluctantly allowed to retain
the fortress. At length, in 1501, Garcilaso de la Vega was ordered to
take possession of the place in the king's name, and it was formally
incorporated with the domains of the crown. After Ferdinand and
Isabella were both dead the duke, Don Juan, tried in 1506 to recover
possession, and added a tenth to the list of sieges. Thirty-four years
afterward the garrison had to defend itself against a much more
formidable attack (eleventh siege)--the pirates of Algiers having
determined to recover the rock for Mahomet and themselves. The
conflict was severe, but resulted in the repulse of the besiegers.
After this the Spaniards made great efforts to strengthen the place,
and they succeeded so well that throughout Europe Gibraltar was
regarded as impregnable.

In the course of the war of the Spanish succession, however, it was
taken by a combined English and Dutch fleet under Sir George Rooke,
assisted by a body of troops under Prince George of Hesse-Darmstadt.
The captors had ostensibly fought in the interests of Charles Archduke
of Austria (afterward Charles III.), but, though his sovereignty over
the rock was proclaimed on July 24, 1704, Sir George Rooke on his own
responsibility caused the English flag to be hoisted, and took
possession in name of Queen Anne. It is hardly to the honor of England
that it was both unprincipled enough to sanction and ratify the
occupation and ungrateful enough to leave unrewarded the general to
whose unscrupulous patriotism the acquisition was due. The Spaniards
keenly felt the injustice done to them, and the inhabitants of the
town of Gibraltar in great numbers abandoned their homes rather than
recognize the authority of the invaders. In October, 1704, the rock
was invested by sea and land; but the Spanish ships were dispersed by
Sir John Leake, and the Marquis of Villadarias fared so ill with his
forces that he was replaced by Marshal Tesse, who was at length
compelled to raise the siege in April, 1705. During the next twenty
years there were endless negotiations for the peaceful surrender of
the fortress, and in 1726 the Spaniards again appealed to arms. But
the Conde de la Torres, who had the chief command, succeeded no better
than his predecessors, and the defense of the garrison under General
Clayton and the Earl of Portmore was so effectual that the armistice
of June 23 practically put a close to the siege, though two years
elapsed before the general pacification ensued. The most memorable
siege of Gibraltar, indeed one of the most memorable of all sieges,
was that which it sustained from the combined land and sea forces of
France and Spain during the years 1779-1783. The grand attack on the
place was made on the 13th September, 1782, and all the resources of
power and science were exhausted by the assailants in the fruitless
attempt. On the side of the sea they brought to bear against the
fortress forty-six sail of the line and a countless fleet of gun and
mortar boats. But their chief hope lay in the floating batteries
planned by D'Arcon, an eminent French engineer, and built at the cost
of half a million sterling. They were so constructed as to be
impenetrable by the red hot shot which it was foreseen the garrison
would employ; and such hopes were entertained of their efficiency that
they were styled invincible. The Count D'Artois (afterward Charles X.)
hastened from Paris to witness the capture of the place. He arrived in
time to see the total destruction of the floating batteries and a
considerable portion of the combined fleet by the English fire.
Despite this disaster, however, the siege continued till brought to a
close by the general pacification, February 2, 1783. The history of
the four eventful years' siege is fully detailed in the work of
Drinkwater, who himself took part in the defense, and in the life of
its gallant defender Sir George Augustus Eliott, afterward Lord
Heathfield, whose military skill and moral courage place him among the
best soldiers and noblest men whom Europe produced during the 18th
century.

Since 1783 the history of Gibraltar has been comparatively uneventful.
In the beginning of 1801 there were rumors of a Spanish and French
attack, but the Spanish ships were defeated off Algeciras in June by
Admiral Saumarez. Improvements in the fortifications, maintenance of
military discipline, and legislation in regard to trade and smuggling
are the principal matters of recent interest.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FRANZ JOSEF I., NEW WAR SHIP.


Another addition was made to the Austrian navy by the launching on May
18 of the ram cruiser Franz Josef I. from the yards of S. Rocco in the
Stabilimento Tecnico Triestino. Her dimensions are: Length (over all),
103.7 meters; length (between perpendiculars), 97.9 meters; greatest
breadth (outside), 14.8 meters; draught (bow), 5.28 meters; draught
(stern), 6.05 meters; displacement on the construction water line,
4,000 tons. The armament consists of two 24-centimeter and six
15-centimeter Krupp breech loaders of 35 caliber length, two
7-centimeter Uchatius guns as an armament for the boats and for
landing purposes, eleven Hotchkiss quick-firing guns, and several
torpedo-launching ports; indicated horse power with natural draught
6,400, speed 17.5 knots; with forced draught 9,800, speed 19 knots.

The ship is built of steel, and constructed according to the "double
bottom" system along the engine, boiler, and ammunition rooms. The
vaulted armor deck, extending 1.25 meters below the water line and
protecting the most vital parts of the ship, is 0.057 meter thick.
There are more than 100 water tight compartments below and above the
deck. A protecting belt of "cellulose" is provided for the engines and
boilers, extending from the armor deck downward.

The two main guns, placed on Krupp's hydraulic carriages, occupy
positions in front and rear, and are protected by stands 0.09 meter
thick and 1.60 meters high. They fire _en barbette_ with a lateral
range each of 260 degrees at bow and stern--i.e., 130 degrees on
either of the broadsides. The weight of the barrel of the gun is 25
tons, that of the steel shell 215 kilogrammes (about 430 lb.), that of
the brown powder charge 100 kilogrammes; initial velocity of
projectile, 610 meters; penetration, 0.524 meter iron; longest range,
17 kilometers (about 101/2 English miles); range at 15 deg. elevation,
10 kilometers. The six 15-centimeter guns are placed in a kind of
machicouli arrangement in two tiers on each of the broadsides, so that
always four guns can fire in the direction of the keel to the front
and rear. The weight of the barrel of the gun is each six tons, that
of the steel shells 51 kilogrammes, that of the charge 22 kilogrammes;
initial velocity, 610 meters.

The 11 quick-firing guns are partly placed along the broadsides,
partly in the masts, of which there are two. The triple expansion
engines, having each a bronze screw of 4.42 meters diameter, with
three blades and a rise of 6.3 meters, make with natural draught 105
revolutions, and with forced draught 120. The pumping apparatus are
able to lift in one hour 400 tons of water. The front boiler room
contains a special cylindrical boiler for the working of the
electrical apparatus, for hydraulic pumps of the artillery service,
for anchor windlasses, ventilators, fire engines, etc. The whole
engines weigh 890 tons. The bunkers have a capacity for 660 tons of
coal, which allows for a run of 4,500 sea miles.

       *       *       *       *       *




CLARK'S GYROSCOPIC TORPEDOES.


Figs. 1 and 2 represent, upon a scale of about 1/10, two types of
torpedoes, the greatest number possible of the parts of which are made
revolvable, so as to render the torpedoes as dirigible as the gyrating
motion permits of.

Fig. 1 represents an electric torpedo actuated by accumulators, A A,
keyed upon the shaft, and revolving along with the gearings. At the
beginning of the running, the accumulators are not all coupled, but
under the action of a clockwork movement which is set in motion at the
moment of starting, metallic brushes descend one after another upon
the collectors, B, and set in action new batteries for keeping
constant or, if need be, accelerating the speed at the end of the
travel.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2. CLARK'S GYROSCOPIC TORPEDOES.]

Fig. 2 represents an air torpedo proposed by the same inventor. The
air reservoir, C, revolves along with the gearings under the action
of the pneumatic machine, D. The central shaft is hollow, so as to
serve as a conduit. The admission of air into the slide valve of the
machine is regulated by a clockwork which actuates a slide in an
aperture whose form and dimensions are so calculated that the speed
remains as constant as possible toward the end of the travel.

The trajectory of the two torpedoes is regulated by a cylindrical
bellows, F, which gives entrance to the sea water. The springs shown
in the figure balance the hydraulic pressure. The tension of these
springs is regulated by the rod, H, according to the indications of
the scale of depths, I.

When the torpedo reaches too great a depth, the action of the springs
can no longer balance the increase of the hydraulic pressure, and the
accumulation of the charge in the rear causes the front to rise toward
the surface. When the torpedo reaches the surface, a contrary action
is produced.--_Revue Industrielle._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FIRST STEAMBOAT ON THE SEINE.


[Illustration: FIRST STEAMBOAT BUILT ON THE SEINE.]

The accompanying engraving represents the remarkable steamboat that
the unfortunate Marquis de Jouffroy constructed at Paris in 1816,
after organizing a company for the carriage of passengers on the
Seine. De Jouffroy, as well known, made the first experiment in steam
navigation at Lyons in 1783, but the inventor's genius was not
recognized, and he met with nothing but deception and hostility. With
the obstinacy of men of conviction, he did not cease to prosecute his
task. He assuredly had an inkling of the future in store for the
invention that he was offering to humanity.

The paddle wheel boat that he constructed at Paris in 1816 did not
succeed any better than its predecessors; it was remarkable
nevertheless in appearance and structure.

The engine was forward, as shown in the engraving, which is copied
from a composition of Dubucourt's.

The company organized by the marquis was ruined, and, as well known,
the unfortunate inventor himself died in poverty in 1832, at the age
of eighty-one years.--_La Nature._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE ELECTRIC MOTOR TESTS ON THE NEW YORK ELEVATED RAILROAD.


The American Institute of Electrical Engineers at its last meeting of
the season, held June 25, again considered the subject of electrical
traction, the paper presented by Mr. Leo Daft being based upon some
recent electrical work on the elevated railroads and its bearing on
the rapid transit problem. The _Railroad Gazette_ gives the following
abstract:

    He introduced the subject with a tribute to the efficiency of
    the elevated railroad system as it is now operated by steam,
    with special reference to that section of it known as the Ninth
    Avenue line, upon which his experiments with the electric motor
    have been conducted, over which passengers are now conveyed a
    distance of five miles in 26 minutes for five cents, which he
    considered the best and cheapest municipal rapid transit in the
    world, and which is operated with a higher degree of safety than
    any other railroad in the world making an equal number of stops
    per 100 miles. On a recent holiday, April 30 last, 835,720
    passengers were carried upon the entire system without
    noticeable detention or accident. The rapidly increasing traffic
    makes the demand for better facilities a pressing one, and as
    the average half million now carried daily will soon become a
    million, it appears doubtful if any method can be devised of
    providing for the growth by the use of steam motors on the
    present structures, which are now taxed to their utmost. To the
    mind of the mechanical engineer, having in view the ordinary
    coefficients of tractive ability, there is no remedy for this.
    The speaker stated that these coefficients were not entirely
    trustworthy. He reiterated his previously expressed opinion,
    based on frequent experiments, that there is a decided increase
    in traction gained by the passage of the electric current from
    the wheels to the rails, giving the details of one test where a
    motor with a load making a total of 600 lb. climbed a gradient
    of 2,900 ft. per mile, starting from a state of rest. He stated
    that some of those people who had ridiculed his statements had
    finally admitted that they were true.

    The motor Ben Franklin, which had been used in making these
    tests on the elevated roads, weighed 10 tons, and performed
    service nearly equal to the steam motors weighing 18 tons. The
    object of these tests was the determination of coal economy.
    Tests with a Prony brake showed that the motor developed 128
    H.P. The piece of track on which the experiments were conducted
    embraced 2,200 ft. of level track and 1-8/10 miles of gradients,
    varying from 11-3/10 to 98-7/10 ft. per mile, while at Thirtieth
    street the station is at the foot of the steepest grade, thus
    testing to the utmost the tractive capacity of the motor. The
    experiments were begun in October, 1888, and carried on between
    the hours of 9 P.M. and 4 A.M., beginning with one or two cars,
    the load being increased nightly until it was finally made up of
    eight coaches of 12 tons each, which were hauled up the 98 ft.
    grade at a speed of 71/2 miles per hour, the entire distance being
    covered at the rate of 14-6/10 miles per hour. The maximum speed
    obtained on level with that train was 16.36 miles per hour.
    Seventy trips were subsequently made with a 70 ton train
    operated between the steam trains under 3 minutes headway, but
    the work was considered too critical on account of the absence
    of suitable brakes. A number of experiments made about this time
    showed that the mean speed with a three-car train running
    express on the up-town track was about 24 miles per hour,
    although the ability of the motor on a level with a similar
    train was nearly 28 miles per hour. This, however, was not the
    maximum speed, as the level track was not long enough to permit
    of its attaining the highest rate. It was the opinion of the
    speaker, however, that the speed attained could not be exceeded
    with prudence on the elevated structure.

    The measurements of speed were made by dividing the track into
    19 sections of 500 ft., each section being provided with a
    circuit-closing plate connected with a chronograph which was
    carefully tested. The indicator cards were taken at the central
    station by Mr. Idell and his assistants, and the dynamometer
    used was of the liquid type made by Mr. Shaw, of Philadelphia.
    The diagrams prepared from the data obtained were then explained
    by the speaker, who stated that there was not a marked
    difference between the 10 ton motor and the 18 ton locomotive in
    the initial effort on the level, as will be seen by comparing a
    run observed by a railroad officer on March 9 with a steam motor
    and a load of about 571/2 tons. The steam motor required 1 min.
    and 29 sec. to make the distance from 14th to 23d streets, while
    the electric motor with a train of 70 tons made the same trip in
    1 min. and 50 sec.; the absence of power brakes compelled the
    current to be taken off at 19th street, while it was probable
    that the throttle of the steam locomotive was not closed until
    it reached 23d street, this being the usual practice. The data
    obtained in these experiments shows that 29,940 h.p. is required
    to operate the Ninth avenue railroad for the 16 hours' service,
    or an average of 1,871 h.p. per hour, or 2,181 h.p., adding
    station friction. The varying requirements of the traffic during
    the day shows that the service could be advantageously divided
    up between four stationary engines of 800 h.p. each, there being
    but five hours of the day when all of them would be required.
    The fuel consumption per day, allowing 22 lb. of coal per h.p.
    per hour at $2.25 per ton, would make a total of $92.25 per diem
    for fuel, the coal being a mixture deliverable at the dock for
    about $1.80 per ton. The weight of coal used for the present
    locomotives is about the same, viz., 40 tons per day, but
    practice has shown it to be most economical to use coal of the
    best quality, costing $5 per ton, making the cost of fuel about
    double that required for the electric system. Without entering
    into other economies which the speaker claimed were in favor of
    electricity, and ignoring the plan suggested by Sir William
    Siemens of braking the train by converting the motor into a
    dynamo and thus utilizing the energy of momentum, he believed
    that the economy in fuel alone was sufficient to prove that the
    application of power by electricity was preferable to direct
    steam propulsion for the elevated railroad service.

       *       *       *       *       *




MAGNETISM IN ITS RELATION TO INDUCED ELECTROMOTIVE FORCE AND
CURRENT.[1]

   [Footnote 1: A paper read before the American Institute of
   Electrical Engineers, New York, May 22, 1889.]

By ELIHU THOMSON.


There is perhaps no subject which at the present time can have a
greater interest to the physicist, the electrician, and the electrical
engineer than the one which heads this paper. The advances which have
been made in the study from its purely theoretical or scientific side,
and the great technical progress in the utilization of the known facts
and principles concerning magnetic inductions, can but deepen and
strengthen that interest.

On the side of pure theory we find the eager collection of
experimental data to be submitted to the scrutiny of the ablest and
brightest minds, to be examined and reasoned upon with the hope of
finding some clew to satisfying explanations, and on the side of
practice we find the search for new facts and relations no less
diligent, though often stimulated by practical problems presented for
solution. Indeed, the urgency for results is often the greater on the
practical side, for theory can wait, practice cannot, at least in the
United States.

We must look for continued triumphs in both directions, and the most
welcome of all will be the framing of a theory or explanation which
will enable us to interpret magnetic and electric phenomena. The
recent beautiful experiments of Hertz on magnetic waves have opened a
fertile region for investigation.

It would seem that the study of magnetism and electricity will give us
the ability to investigate the ether of space, which medium has been
theorized upon at great length, with the result of leaving it very
much where it was before, a mysterious necessity.

Faraday says, speaking of magnetism:

    "Such an action may be a function of the ether, for it is not at
    all unlikely that if there be an ether it should have other uses
    than simply the conveyance of radiations." 3,075. Vol. III.,
    Exp. Res.

    "It may be a vibration of the hypothetical ether, or a state of
    tension of that ether equivalent to either a dynamic or a static
    condition," etc. 3,263. Vol. III., Exp. Res.

Faraday again says, speaking of the magnetic power of a vacuum:

    "What that surrounding magnetic medium deprived of all material
    substance may be I cannot tell, perhaps the ether." 3,277. Vol.
    III., Exp. Res.

Modern views would seem to point that through a study of magnetic
phenomena we may take a feeble hold upon the universal ether.
Magnetism is an action or condition of that medium, and it may be that
electrical actions are the expression of molecular disturbances
brought about by ether strains or interferences. The close relations
which are shown to exist between magnetism and light tend to
strengthen such views. Indeed, it would not be too much to expect that
if the mechanics of the ether are ever worked out, we should find the
relation between sensible heat and electric currents to be as close as
that of light to magnetism, perhaps find ultimately the forms of
matter, the elements and compounds to be the more complex
manifestations of the universal medium--aggregations in stable
equilibrium. It is a difficult conception, I confess, and a most
shadowy and imperfect one, yet facts and inferences which favor such
views are not wanting.

Our science of electricity seems almost to be in the same condition
that chemistry was before the work of Lavoisier had shed its light on
chemical theory. Our store of facts is daily increasing, and
apparently disconnected phenomena are being brought into harmonious
relation. Perhaps the edifice of complete theory will not be more than
begun in our time, perhaps the building process will be a very gradual
one, but I cannot refrain from the conviction that the intelligence of
man will, if it has time, continue its advance until such a structure
exists.

I have been led to make these general allusions to electrical theory
in order to emphasize the fact that in the present paper no unraveling
of the mystery is to be attempted, but rather the presentation of some
few considerations upon a subject of absorbing interest.

The conception of Faraday in regard to the existence of lines of
magnetic force representing directions of magnetic strain or tension
in a medium has not only lost nothing of its usefulness up to the
present time, but has continually been of great service in the
understanding of magnetic phenomena. We need spend no time in showing,
as Faraday and others have done, that these lines are always closed
circuits, polarized so that the direction of the lines cannot be
reversed without reversal of the actions. Nor need we take time to
show that in any medium the lines are mutually repellent laterally if
of the same direction of polarization. Opposing this tendency to
separation or lateral diffusion of magnetic force is the strong
apparent tendency of the lines to shorten themselves in any medium.
These actions are distributed by the presentation of a better medium,
as iron instead of space or air. Lines of force will move into the
better medium, having apparently the constant tendency to diminish the
resistance in their paths.

The peculiar and mysterious nature of media, such as iron, is to
permit an extraordinary crowding of lines on account of slight
resistance to their passage through it. We need not, in addition, do
more than refer to the other well-known facts of an electric current
developing magnetic lines encircling the conductor, as being the
general type, which includes all forms of magnetic field or
electro-magnets, sustained by currents, and the fact of a development
when magnetic lines or circuits and material masses are in relative
movement of electromotive forces transversely to the direction of the
lines of magnetism, and also transversely to the direction of relative
movement, as in the case of electric conductors traversing or cutting
through a field, or of a field traversing or being moved across a
conductor. We must not forget that even insulators, as well as
conductors, cutting lines of force, have the electromotive force
developed in them. The action simply develops potential difference,
and this generates the current where a circuit exists. While we are in
the habit of saying that a conductor moved across a field of lines, or
_vice versa_, generates electric current, I think the statement
incomplete. The movement only sets up a potential difference, and the
power expended in effecting the movement generates C x E. The current
is energy less the potential, or the energy expended gives the two
effects of potential or pressure and current or rate of movement.
Consequently an insulator, or an open-circuited conductor, traversing
a field, consumes no energy, potential difference only being produced.
Nevertheless, as will be shown, the magnetic circuits or lines
themselves may furnish the energy for their own movement across a
conductor, and so develop current as well as potential.
