toward the slidestairs.

Seconds later, the three cadets of the _Polaris_ unit were down in the
main hallway of the dormitory building, tiptoeing toward the front
portal. Pausing only to look into the O.D.'s office to make sure the
officer wouldn't spot them, they reached the portal and ducked out.
Pausing again to scan the immediate area for any watch officers, they
darted across the slidewalk and into the shadows of the shrubbery.

Quickly and soundlessly, they raced across the green lawn of the
quadrangle toward the dormitory where the _Capella_ unit was quartered.
Once they sprawled headlong on the turf and lay still as a watch officer
suddenly appeared out of the darkness at the base of the Tower of
Galileo. But he walked past without seeing them and they continued on
across the quadrangle.

Reaching another clump of shrubbery right opposite the _Capella_ unit's
dormitory, the boys stopped and discussed their final move.

"This is getting ridiculous," whispered Roger. "I shouldn't have let you
two come with me. But I'm going the rest of the way myself."

"We came this far, Roger," asserted Tom. "We'll go the rest of the way
and help you explain."

"And you've got a space-blasting lot to explain."

The three cadets whirled as a familiar voice snarled out of the darkness
behind them. They saw three figures, all in cadet uniforms, wearing the
insigne of the _Capella_ unit. In the forefront was Tony Richards
scowling angrily.

"Tony!" gasped Tom. "What are you doing out here?"

"We were on our way over to your dorm, Corbett," growled Tony Richards.
"We saw you three sneaking across the quadrangle."

"Coming to pay us a visit, fellas?" asked Roger blandly.

"You know blasted well why we were coming," snapped McAvoy, the second
member of the _Capella_ crew.

Davison, the third member of the unit, stepped forward. "Give us back
our study spools," he demanded.

"Take it easy," said Tom in a calm voice. "We were bringing them back to
you."

"I'll bet," snapped McAvoy.

"Relax," growled Astro. "Tom said we were returning them. We admit it
was a dirty trick, but you haven't lost much time. Half an hour maybe."

"Don't try to cover for Manning, Astro," said Tony heatedly. "It's a
shame you two guys are stuck with a bad rocket like Manning in your
unit."

"Bad rocket!" exclaimed Roger.

"Now, wait a minute, Tony," Tom said, advancing toward the
broad-shouldered cadet. "We are returning the spools, and we apologize
for yanking them from the Earthworm. But that doesn't mean we'll listen
to that kind of talk about Roger."

"He stole them, didn't he?" retorted Davison.

Roger stepped forward. "Davy, my boy," he said in a low controlled tone,
"I don't like that remark. I've got a notion to make you eat that word."

"I don't think you can, Manning," replied the angry cadet.

Tom stepped between them quickly. "Listen, fellows, we don't want any
trouble. Here are the spools." He held them out.

"That's what I mean, Corbett," said McAvoy sarcastically. "Manning gets
you in trouble and then you and the big boy have to bail him out."

"We've apologized," retorted Astro angrily. "You're getting the spools
back. So no more cracks about Roger."

"I can take care of myself, Astro," said Roger.

"Here, take the spools and get back to your dorm," growled Tom. He
handed the pile of spools over, but as Tony extended his hands, one of
the spools dropped to the grass. No one made a move to pick it up.

"There are the spools," said Tom icily. "Now beat it."

"Let's go," said Davison, leaning over to pick up the spool. "The air is
beginning to stink around here."

Red-faced, Roger stepped forward and put his foot on the spool just as
Davison reached for it. "That's enough, Davison," he snarled.

"Why, you dirty space crawler--" Davison straightened up and swung
wildly. Roger ducked the blow easily, then spun the heavy-set cadet
around and pushed him back into the bushes.

Tony Richards stepped forward and Astro turned to him threateningly, but
Tom quickly shoved them aside and faced Richards.

"Listen, Tony," he said. "We're all out after hours, and if a watch
officer spots us, we've had it. We don't want any trouble." He glanced
at Davison, who was being restrained by McAvoy. "We apologize. Now get
out of here before we're all logged."

Richards nodded and started to turn to his unit mates when suddenly
Davison jerked free and lunged at Roger. The blond-haired cadet was not
caught unawares. He stepped aside and threw a quick jolting right
straight to the _Capella_ cadet's jaw. Davison staggered back and fell
to the ground. He shook his head, jumped to his feet again, and charged
back with a roar.

Both Tom and Astro and Tony Richards and McAvoy grabbed at their
respective unit mates and tried to restrain them. In the struggle to
keep Roger and Davison apart, Astro accidentally pushed Richards to one
side.

"What in blazes--!" yelled Richards. He suddenly released Davison and
gave Astro a shove that sent the big cadet sprawling. And then, without
warning, McAvoy swung at Tom. The curly-haired cadet saw the blow coming
a fraction of a second too late and caught it on the side of his head.
He fell back into the bushes.

Roger yelled in anger at the sudden attack, and grabbing Davison by the
front of his tunic, slammed a hard right into the cadet's stomach.
Richards grabbed Roger, holding him around the head and neck, as McAvoy
swung at him viciously. Seeing their unit mate pommeled, Tom and Astro
charged back and the battle was on. The two units forgot about the watch
officers and the strong possibility of being caught and slugged it out
in the darkness of the quadrangle. The fight seemed to be the climax of
a long-standing feud. The _Polaris_ crew had first come to grips with
Richards and his unit mates when they were assigned to the old rocket
cruiser _Arcturus_. When the ship was scrapped, the cadets were
transferred to the _Capella_, but the rivalry continued stronger than
before. Time and time again, the two crack units had competed for hours
on the athletic fields, in space flight tests, and in the classroom. The
_Polaris_ unit had constantly come out ahead, often by no more than a
fraction of points, but their superiority was clear, and the _Capella_
unit could not repress its resentment and jealousy.

Tony Richards and Tom had squared off and were boxing with lightninglike
thrusts of their fists, each waiting for an opening. In back of them,
Roger and Davison were simply hammering away at each other's
mid-sections, and Astro and McAvoy were rolling around on the ground
like bears, growling and tugging. It was brute strength against brute
strength.

Tom danced away from Richards' rapierlike left, weaved low, and shot a
hard right to his opponent's stomach that left him gasping. Richards
doubled over and stepped in to bring up a solid right, then hesitated.
Richards was through. The blow to the mid-section had taken all the
fight out of him. Tom refused to pursue his advantage while the other
could not fight back. His anger cooling rapidly, Tom realized that the
whole fight was nothing more than a misunderstanding. As Richards sank
to the grass helpless and gasping for breath, Tom turned to break up the
other two fights. But Roger was just finishing his battle with Davison.
Feinting to the mid-section and pulling Davison's guard down, Roger
hooked his left cleanly to the jaw, following immediately with a
haymaker right. Davison dropped to the turf, out cold.

Meanwhile, Astro had rolled on top of the last cadet of the _Capella_
unit, and with his great strength, clamped McAvoy's arms to his side.
Face to face, the two cadets glared at each other. The muscles tightened
in Astro's arms, and beads of sweat popped out on his face.

"Give up!" demanded the Venusian, tightening his grip.

[Illustration: _Tom shot a hard right to his opponent's stomach_]

Slowly McAvoy sagged under the pressure Astro was applying and his face
began to redden.

"He'll break his back," whispered Roger to Tom.

Tom nodded and stepped forward. "Let him go, Astro. He's finished."

Astro did not let go. His face was white with anger. McAvoy bent further
back. "Give up," demanded Astro.

"Grab him," said Tom to Roger. "Get him off Mac before he breaks his
back."

Tom and Roger jumped to Astro's side and each grabbed one of the
powerful arms encircling McAvoy. It took all their strength to break the
viselike hold the giant Venusian had on the other cadet, but slowly they
pulled the muscular arms back and McAvoy slumped to the grass.

The three victorious cadets paused and looked down at the beaten
_Capella_ crew, then looked at each other.

"Well," sighed Roger, "I suppose that the least we can do now is get
them back to their dorm."

Tom and Astro nodded. As the three boys started forward they were
stopped by a voice behind them--a voice that roared like an atomic
blast.

"_Stand to!_"

Whirling around in surprise for the second time within a space of ten
minutes, Tom, Astro, and Roger saw a menacing sight standing behind
them, his balled fists jammed on his hips, his booted legs widespread,
and his massive head thrust forward. It was Major Lou Connel, more
familiarly known as "Blast-off" Connel, a Senior Line Officer of the
Solar Guard and the sternest disciplinarian in the whole Academy. Behind
him stood a short, thin man, whom none of the boys recognized.

Connel stepped forward slowly and menacingly, glaring at the three boys.

"Out a little late, aren't you, boys?" he asked with a mildness that
sent a chill down their spines.

"Y-yes sir," replied Tom, a slight tremor in his voice.

"On official business, I presume?" The major's voice was still as smooth
as silk.

Tom gulped and then shook his head. "N-no, sir," he quavered.

Connel's eyes widened in mock horror. "Why, Corbett," he exclaimed,
"didn't anyone ever tell you the rules of Space Academy? Or perhaps you
didn't know what time it was?"

Tom bit his lip. He knew that he and his unit mates were caught in a
hopeless trap and that Connel was simply baiting them. "I knew what time
it was, sir," he said. "We're out after hours."

Suddenly there was a movement in the brush behind Tom as McAvoy stumbled
to his feet. Richards also sat up groggily.

"Major!" It was the man behind Connel who spoke. "Who are they?"

As though in answer, Davison stood up too and the three members of the
_Capella_ unit were suddenly and horribly aware of the presence of
Connel. They immediately braced themselves, their faces white with
sudden fear.

"So!" Now the major's voice began to roar again. "Fighting, eh? Well,
now we really have something here."

"Sir," began Richards tremulously, "if you'll let us explain--"

"I'll let you explain all right," thundered Connel. "Out after hours,
fighting, you'll have a great time explaining to an inquiry."

"An inquiry!" Tom exclaimed involuntarily.

"Did you expect anything less?" roared Connel. "You are all under arrest
and confined to quarters."

The six cadets all trembled but said nothing, standing at rigid
attention, eyes straight ahead.

"Return to your quarters immediately."

As one, the cadets wheeled and marched off. Tom, Astro, and Roger walked
across the quadrangle back to their dorm, and the _Capella_ unit took
the slidewalk that led to their quarters. Connel watched them go, a
ferocious scowl on his craggy features.

"Little rough on them, weren't you, Major?" asked the man who stood
beside the Solar Guard officer.

"Rules are meant to be obeyed, Professor Hemmingwell," retorted Connel
stiffly.

"Perhaps you're right," mused the stranger. "But what's this about an
inquiry?"

"A trial, Professor. A trial conducted by the cadets themselves to see
whether or not the accused should be kicked out of the Academy."

"Kicked out?" exclaimed the professor. "You certainly do believe in
discipline."

"These boys are to be Solar Guardsmen," replied Connel shortly. "If they
can't obey orders now, they never will."

"Well, it's all very unimportant really, Major," Hemmingwell said with
a shrug. "We have many more vital things to think about now than mere
cadets. Shall we go? Commander Walters is waiting for us."

As the little man in civilian clothes walked away, Connel stifled a
blistering retort. True, his mission here at the Academy was of great
importance. But cadets were important too. And he was afraid. The
_Polaris_ unit was in grave trouble, grave enough to cause expulsion
from the Academy.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER 2


Space Academy, U.S.A.!

This was the dream and goal of every boy in the thrilling year 2354,
when mankind had reached out beyond the bounds of Earth and had
conquered space, colonizing planets and blazing trails to distant worlds
deep in the black void of the outer universe. To support the
ever-growing need for trained spacemen to man the rocket ships that
linked the planets and distant satellite outposts, the Solar Alliance,
the government of the solar system, had erected Space Academy. It was
there that the most promising boys were trained to become members of the
Solar Guard to patrol the space lanes and keep peace in the universe.

Organized into tight, hard-hitting units of three, the Academy cadets
were trained to work together under the most severe conditions. Their
waking hours were spent in one of two places; in powerful rocket
cruisers, blasting through space on endless training missions, or at the
Academy in classrooms and lecture halls, where they studied everything
from the theory of space flight to the application of space laws. A very
important course of study was the theory of government. For, above all
else, the Solar Alliance was a government of the people. And to assure
the survival and continuance of that democratic system, the officers of
the Solar Guard functioned as the watchdogs of the space democracy,
entrusted with the vital mission of making sure the government reflected
the will of the people.

As a practical approach to this course, the Academy officials had
established a Cadet Council for the settlement of disputes and
infractions of rules by the cadets. It was to this cadet governing body
that the fight between the _Polaris_ and the _Capella_ units was
referred by Major Connel.

The Academy had buzzed with talk since the fight, and sides were drawn
hard and fast. Both units were extremely popular and the arguments raged
through the dormitories as to which unit was at fault.

Meanwhile, the Cadet Council decided to have a full trial to give each
unit a fair chance to defend itself against the charges. A judge and
jury were selected and lawyers appointed for each side. Finally a date
was set for the trial.

During this time, Tom, Roger, and Astro were confined to their quarters.
They did not talk much, each conscious of the fact that should the Cadet
Council decide against them, they might be expelled from the Academy.
The same was true about the _Capella_ unit, of course, but the Council
