says, she being housekeeper, as you know, sir, leaving word not to
disturb him for dinner.

"We don't think so much of that, Mr. Butler being took with streaks of
working at all hours, as you know. But when Miss Hope came home
unexpected this morning--"

"What?"

"She cut her visit a few days short, her aunt having other house guests
turn up unexpected like, and Miss Hope arrives first thing this morning,
being here when I return from town after mailing the letter to you, sir.

"Mrs. Perrin had just told her about the master, and Miss Hope looks
into his room. He isn't there, and the bed hasn't been slept in. 'The
poor dear,' she says, 'he's worked himself half to death, and dropped
off on that horrible cot he keeps in his laboratory,' says Miss Hope.
'I'll let him sleep.'

"But just a few minutes ago, just before you arrived, sir, she became
nervous like, and rapped on the door. There wasn't a sound. So she went
up to the master's room and found a key, and went in. And now _she_
don't answer, and we were just about ready to call the police!"

"Let's go inside!" I hurried by Perrin and through the cool, quiet hall
to the broad door that opened into the big room at the back of the
house, which was Vic's laboratory.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Vic! Hope!" I pounded as hard as I could, shouting their names. There
was no response.

"Is there another key, Perrin?" I snapped.

"No, sir; none that I know of. The master was mighty fussy about his
workroom."

"Can we get in through the windows?"

"No. They're barred, if you remember rightly, and fitted with this
frosted glass, so you can't see in, even."

"Then get me an ax!" I commanded. "Quick!"

"An ax?" hesitated Perrin.

"An ax--and be quick about it!"

Perrin mumbled a protest and hurried away. I turned to Mrs. Perrin, who
had come up to determine the result of my shouting.

"How long is it since Miss Hope went in there?"

"How long, sir? I'd say about twenty minutes before you came. Maybe
twenty-five. I wasn't paying any particular attention, sir. She just got
the key and went in. After a few minutes I heard something buzzing in
there, and I thought maybe Mr. Butler was showing her some new gadget of
his, like he was always doing. Then there was a telephone call for him,
and I couldn't make neither of them answer; that's when Mr. Perrin and I
began to get worried."

"I see." Perrin came hurrying up with the ax, and I motioned them aside.
I swung the ax, and the head of the weapon crashed against the lock. The
knob dropped to the floor with a clatter, but the door gave not at all.

I brought the ax down again, and something cracked sharply. The third
blow sent the door swinging wide.

Cautiously, fearing I know not what, I entered the familiar room.
Nothing, apparently, had been disturbed. There was no sign of disorder
anywhere. The blankets on the narrow cot in the corner of the room had
not been unfolded.

But neither Vic nor Hope were anywhere in sight.

       *       *       *       *       *

"You and Mrs. Perrin stay there by the door," I suggested. "I don't know
what's wrong here, but something's happened. There's no need for all of
us entering."

My second glance around the room was more deliberate. To my right were
the big generators and the switchboards, gleaming with copper bus-bar,
and intricate with their tortuous wiring. Directly before me was the
long work-bench that ran the full length of the room, littered with a
dozen set-ups for as many experiments. At my left was a sizable piece of
apparatus that was strange to me; on a small enameled table beside it
was a rather large sheet of paper, weighted down with a cracked Florence
flask.

In a sort of panic, I snatched up the paper. Vic had said in his note,
that he would leave another note for me here. This was it, for in a bold
scrawl at the top was my name. And in hardly decipherable script, below,
was his message:


     Dear Pete:

     First of all, let me say that you've no particular call to do
     anything about this. If I'm in a jam, it's my own doing, and
     due to my bull-headedness, of which you have so often reminded
     me.

     Knowing your dislike for science other than that related to
     aeronautics, I'll cut this pretty short. It'll probably sound
     crazy to you, anyway.

     You know that there's sound above the frequencies to which the
     human ear will respond. You know there are light rays that the
     human eyes can't perceive. Some work I've been doing the last
     five or six months indicates that there's a form of life about
     us, all around us, which isn't perceptible to our
     senses--which doesn't mean that it doesn't exist.

     Well, I'm going to do a little exploring. I'm going to take a
     whirl at what I'll call the Infra-Median existence. What I'll
     find there, I don't know. Life of some kind, however, for my
     experiments prove that. Possibly not friendly.

     All this being so, there's an off chance that I'll find myself
     tangled with something I can't anticipate. And if you are
     called upon to read this, then something has gone wrong with
     my plans.

     Should you wish to take a flier after me, stand in the center
     of the square outlined by the four uprights of the device
     beside which this little table stands. Be sure your weapon--I
     told you to bring a gat--is on your person.

