
Once more he found himself in the blackness of the cave. He was this
time lying on the ground, but Tydomin was still with him, holding his
hand. He was in horrible bodily agony, but this was only a setting for
the despairing anguish that filled his mind.

Tydomin addressed him in tones of gentle reproach. "Why are you back so
soon? I've not had time yet. You must return."

He caught hold of her, and pulled himself up to his feet. She gave a
low scream, as though in pain. "What does this mean--what are you doing,
Maskull?"

"Krag--" began Maskull, but the effort to produce his words choked him,
so that he was obliged to stop.

"Krag--what of Krag? Tell me quickly what has happened. Free my arm."

He gripped her arm tighter.

"Yes, I've seen Krag. I'm awake."

"Oh! You are awake, awake."

"And you must die," said Maskull, in an awful voice.

"But why? What has happened?..."

"You must die, and I must kill you. Because I am awake, and for no other
reason. You blood-stained dancing mistress!"

Tydomin breathed hard for a little time. Then she seemed suddenly to
regain her self-possession.

"You won't offer me violence, surely, in this black cave?"

"No, the sun shall look on, for it is not a murder. But rest assured
that you must die--you must expiate your fearful crimes."

"You have already said so, and I see you have the power. You have
escaped me. It is very curious. Well, then, Maskull, let us come
outside. I am not afraid. But kill me courteously, for I have also been
courteous to you. I make no other supplication."



Chapter 11. ON DISSCOURN

BY THE TIME that they regained the mouth of the cavern, Blodsombre was
at its height. In front of them the scenery sloped downward--a long
succession of mountain islands in a sea of clouds. Behind them the
bright, stupendous crags of Disscourn loomed up for a thousand feet or
more. Maskull's eyes were red, and his face looked stupid; he was still
holding the woman by the arm. She made no attempt to speak, or to get
away. She seemed perfectly gentle and composed.

After gazing at the country for along time in silence, he turned toward
her. "Whereabouts is the fiery lake you spoke of?"

"It lies on the other side of the mountain. But why do you ask?"

"It is just as well if we have some way to walk. I shall grow calmer,
and that's what I want. I wish you to understand that what is going to
happen is not a murder, but an execution."

"It will taste the same," said Tydomin.

"When I have gone out of this country, I don't wish to feel that I have
left a demon behind me, wandering at large. That would not be fair to
others. So we will go to the lake, which promises an easy death for
you."

She shrugged her shoulders. "We must wait till Blodsombre is over."

"Is this a time for luxurious feelings? However hot it is now, we will
both be cool by evening. We must start at once."

"Without doubt, you are the master, Maskull.... May I not carry
Crimtyphon?"

Maskull looked at her strangely.

"I grudge no man his funeral."

She painfully hoisted the body on her narrow shoulders, and they stepped
out into the sunlight. The heat struck them like a blow on the head.
Maskull moved aside, to allow her to precede him, but no compassion
entered his heart. He brooded over the wrongs the woman had done him.

The way went along the south side of the great pyramid, near its base.
It was a rough road, clogged with boulders and crossed by cracks and
water gullies; they could see the water, but could not get at it. There
was no shade. Blisters formed on their skin, while all the water in
their blood seemed to dry up.

Maskull forgot his own tortures in his devil's delight at Tydomin's.
"Sing me a song!" he called out presently. "A characteristic one."

She turned her head and gave him a long, peculiar look; then, without
any sort of expostulation, started singing. Her voice was low and weird.
The song was so extraordinary that he had to rub his eyes to ascertain
whether he was awake or dreaming. The slow surprises of the grotesque
melody began to agitate him in a horrible fashion; the words were pure
nonsense--or else their significance was too deep for him.

"Where, in the name of all unholy things, did you acquire that stuff,
woman?"

Tydomin shed a sickly smile, while the corpse swayed about with ghastly
jerks over her left shoulder. She held it in position with her two left
arms. "It's a pity we could not have met as friends, Maskull. I could
have shown you a side of Tormance which now perhaps you will never see.
The wild, mad, side. But now it's too late, and it doesn't matter."

They turned the angle of the mountain, and started to traverse the
western base.

"Which is the quickest way out of this miserable land?" asked Maskull.

"It is easiest to go to Sant."

"Will we see it from anywhere?"

"Yes, though it is a long way off."

"Have you been there?"

"I am a woman, and interdicted."

"True. I have heard something of the sort."

"But don't ask me any more questions," said Tydomin, who was becoming
faint.

Maskull stopped at a little spring. He himself drank, and then made a
cup of his hand for the woman, so that she might not have to lay down
her burden. The gnawl water acted like magic--it seemed to replenish
all the cells of his body as though they had been thirsty sponge pores,
sucking up liquid. Tydomin recovered her self-possession.

About three-quarters of an hour later they worked around the second
corner, and entered into full view of the north aspect of Disscourn.

A hundred yards lower down the slope on which they were walking, the
mountain ended abruptly in a chasm. The air above it was filled with
a sort of green haze, which trembled violently like the atmosphere
immediately over a furnace.

"The lake is underneath," said Tydomin.

Maskull looked curiously about him. Beyond the crater the country sloped
away in a continuous descent to the skyline. Behind them, a narrow path
channelled its way up through the rocks toward the towering summit of
the pyramid. Miles away, in the north-east quarter, a long, flat-topped
plateau raised its head far above all the surrounding country. It was
Sant--and there and then he made up his mind that that should be his
destination that day.

Tydomin meanwhile had walked straight to the gulf, and set down
Crimtyphon's body on the edge. In a minute or two, Maskull joined her;
arrived at the brink, he immediately flung himself at full length on
his chest, to see what could be seen of the lake of fire. A gust of hot,
asphyxiating air smote his face and set him coughing, but he did not get
up until he had stared his fill at the huge sea of green, molten lava,
tossing and swirling at no great distance below, like a living will.

A faint sound of drumming came up. He listened intently, and as he did
so his heart quickened and the black cares rolled away from his soul.
All the world and its accidents seemed at that moment false, and without
meaning....

He climbed abstractedly to his feet. Tydomin was talking to her dead
husband. She was peering into the hideous face of ivory, and fondling
his violet hair. When she perceived Maskull, she hastily kissed the
withered lips, and got up from her knees. Lifting the corpse with all
three arms, she staggered with it to the extreme edge of the gulf and,
after an instant's hesitation, allowed it to drop into the lava. It
disappeared immediately without sound; a metallic splash came up. That
was Crimtyphon's funeral.

"Now I am ready, Maskull."

He did not answer, but stared past her. Another figure was standing,
erect and mournful, not far behind her. It was Joiwind. Her face was
wan, and there was an accusing look in her eyes. Maskull knew that
it was a phantasm, and that the real Joiwind was miles away, at
Poolingdred.

"Turn around, Tydomin," he said oddly, "and tell me what you see behind
you."

"I don't see anything," she answered, looking around.

"But I see Joiwind."

Just as he was speaking, the apparition vanished.

"Now I present you with your life, Tydomin. She wishes it."

The woman fingered her chin thoughtfully.

"I little expected I should ever be beholden for my life to one of my
own sex--but so be it. What really happened to you in my cavern?"

"I really saw Krag."

"Yes, some miracle must have taken place." She suddenly shivered. "Come,
let us leave this horrible spot. I shall never come here again."

"Yes," said Maskull, "it stinks of death and dying. But where are we
to go--what are we to do? Take me to Sant. I must get away from this
hellish land."

Tydomin remained standing, dull and hollow-eyed. Then she gave an
abrupt, bitter little laugh. "We make our journey together in singular
stages. Rather than be alone, I'll come with you--but you know that if I
set foot in Sant they will kill me."

"At least set me on the way. I wish to get there before night. Is it
possible?"

"If you are willing to take risks with nature. And why should you
not take risks today? Your luck holds. But someday or other it won't
hold--your luck."

"Let us start," said Maskull. "The luck I've had so far is nothing to
brag about."

Blodsombre was over when they set off; it was early afternoon, but
the heat seemed more stifling than ever. They made no more pretence at
conversation; both were buried in their own painful thoughts. The land
fell away from Disscourn in all other directions, but toward Sant there
was a gentle, persistent rise. Its dark, distant plateau continued to
dominate the landscape, and after walking for an hour they seemed none
the nearer to it. The air was stale and stagnant.

By and by, an upright object, apparently the work of man, attracted
Maskull's notice. It was a slender tree stem, with the bark still on,
imbedded in the stony ground. From the upper end three branches sprang
out, pointing aloft at a sharp angle. They were stripped to twigs and
leaves and, getting closer, he saw that they had been artificially
fastened on, at equal distances from each other.

As he stared at the object, a strange, sudden flush of confident vanity
and self-sufficiency seemed to pass through him, but it was so momentary
that he could be sure of nothing.

"What may that be, Tydomin?"

"It is Hator's Trifork."

"And what is its purpose?"

"It's a guide to Sant."

"But who or what is Hator?"

"Hator was the founder of Sant--many thousands of years ago. He laid
down the principles they all live by, and that trifork is his symbol.
When I was a little child my father told me the legends, but I've
forgotten most of them."

Maskull regarded it attentively.

"Does it affect you in any way?"

"And why should it do that?" she said, dropping her lip scornfully. "I
am only a woman, and these are masculine mysteries."

"A sort of gladness came over me," said Maskull, "but perhaps I am
mistaken."

They passed on. The scenery gradually changed in character. The solid
parts of the land grew more continuous, the fissures became narrower and
more infrequent. There were now no more subsidences or upheavals. The
peculiar nature of the Ifdawn Marest appeared to be giving place to a
different order of things.

Later on, they encountered a flock of pale blue jellies floating in the
air. They were miniature animals. Tydomin caught one in her hand and
began to eat it, just as one eats a luscious pear plucked from a tree.
Maskull, who had fasted since early morning, was not slow in following
her example. A sort of electric vigour at once entered his limbs and
body, his muscles regained their elasticity, his heart began to beat
with hard, slow, strong throbs.

"Food and body seem to agree well in this world," he remarked smiling.

She glanced toward him. "Perhaps the explanation is not in the food, but
in your body."

"I brought my body with me."

"You brought your soul with you, but that's altering fast, too."

In a copse they came across a short, wide tree, without leaves, but
possessing a multitude of thin, flexible branches, like the tentacles
of a cuttlefish. Some of these branches were moving rapidly. A furry
animal, somewhat resembling a wildcat, leaped about among them in the
most extraordinary way. But the next minute Maskull was shocked to
realise that the beast was not leaping at all, but was being thrown from
branch to branch by the volition of the tree, exactly as an imprisoned
mouse is thrown by a cat from paw to paw.

He watched the spectacle a while with morbid interest.

"That's a gruesome reversal of roles, Tydomin."

"One can see you're disgusted," she replied, stifling a yawn. "But that
is because you are a slave to words. If you called that plant an animal,
you would find its occupation perfectly natural and pleasing. And why
should you not call it an animal?"

"I am quite aware that, as long as I remain in the Ifdawn Marest, I
shall go on listening to this sort of language."

They trudged along for an hour or more without talking. The day became
overcast. A thin mist began to shroud the landscape, and the sun changed
into an immense ruddy disk which could be stared at without flinching. A
chill, damp wind blew against them. Presently it grew still darker,
the sun disappeared and, glancing first at his companion and then at
himself, Maskull noticed that their skin and clothing were coated by a
kind of green hoarfrost.

The land was now completely solid. About half a mile, in front of them,
against a background of dark fog, a moving forest of tall waterspouts
gyrated slowly and gracefully hither and thither. They were green and
self-luminous, and looked terrifying. Tydomin explained that they were
not waterspouts at all, but mobile columns of lightning.

"Then they are dangerous?"

"So we think," she answered, watching them closely.

"Someone is wandering there who appears to have a different opinion."

Among the spouts, and entirely encompassed by them, a man was walking
with a slow, calm, composed gait, his back turned toward Maskull and
Tydomin. There was something unusual in his appearance--his form looked
extraordinarily distinct, solid, and real.

"If there's danger, he ought to be warned," said Maskull.

"He who is always anxious to teach will learn nothing," returned the
woman coolly. She restrained Maskull by a pressure of the arm, and
continued to watch.

The base of one of the columns touched the man. He remained unharmed,
but turned sharply around, as if for the first time made aware of the
proximity of these deadly waltzers. Then he raised himself to his full
height, and stretched both arms aloft above his head, like a diver. He
seemed to be addressing the columns.

While they looked on, the electric spouts discharged themselves, with
a series of loud explosions. The stranger stood alone, uninjured. He
dropped his arms. The next moment he caught sight of the two, and stood
still, waiting for them to come up. The pictorial clarity of his person
grew more and more noticeable as they approached; his body seemed to be
composed of some substance heavier and denser than solid matter.

Tydomin looked perplexed.

"He must be a Sant man. I have seen no one quite like him before. This
is a day of days for me."

"He must be an individual of great importance," murmured Maskull.

They now came up to him. He was tall, strong, and bearded, and was
clothed in a shirt and breeches of skin. Since turning his back to the
wind, the green deposit on his face and limbs had changed to streaming
moisture, through which his natural colour was visible; it was that of
pale iron. There was no third arm. His face was harsh and frowning, and
a projecting chin pushed the beard forward. On his forehead there were
two flat membranes, like rudimentary eyes, but no sorb. These membranes
were expressionless, but in some strange way seemed to add vigour to the
stem eyes underneath. When his glance rested on Maskull, the latter felt
as though his brain were being thoroughly travelled through. The man was
middle-aged.

His physical distinctness transcended nature. By contrast with him,
every object in the neighbourhood looked vague and blurred. Tydomin's
person suddenly appeared faint, sketch-like, without significance, and
Maskull realised that it was no better with himself. A queer, quickening
fire began running through his veins.

He turned to the woman. "If this man is going to Sant, I shall bear him
company. We can now part. No doubt you will think it high time."

"Let Tydomin come too."

The words were delivered in a rough, foreign tongue, but were as
intelligible to Maskull as if spoken in English.

"You who know my name, also know my sex," said Tydomin quietly. "It is
death for me to enter Sant."

"That is the old law. I am the bearer of the new law."

"Is it so--and will it be accepted?"

"The old skin is cracking, the new skin has been silently forming
underneath, the moment of sloughing has arrived."

The storm gathered. The green snow drove against them, as they stood
talking, and it grew intensely cold. None noticed it.

"What is your name?" asked Maskull, with a beating heart.

"My name, Maskull, is Spadevil. You, a voyager across the dark ocean of
space, shall be my first witness and follower. You, Tydomin, a daughter
of the despised sex, shall be my second."

"The new law? But what is it?"

"Until eye sees, of what use it is for ear to hear?.... Come, both of
you, to me!"

Tydomin went to him unhesitatingly. Spadevil pressed his hand on her
sorb and kept it there for a few minutes, while he closed his own eyes.
