"All right!" cried Andy, now in his element. "I'll make those Esquimaux
wish they had let us alone!"

Dirola had disappeared inside the cabin. In a few minutes the professor
and Washington were hard at work setting the machinery in motion.

First, after having seen that none of the apparatus was disarranged,
Amos Henderson started the gas generating machine. Next, leaving
Washington in charge of this and the engine room, the inventor prepared
a big patch with some cement on it. This he gave to Mark, who quickly
found the place where the old patch had come off the silk bag, and
covered the opening. Already the bag was beginning to swell with the
gas.

But now with loud yells the Esquimaux came rushing up. Leaping off their
sleds, they began throwing their spears and shooting their arrows.




CHAPTER XVIII

NORTHWARD ONCE MORE


"Repel boarders!" sung out Andy. "Where are the guns?"

"Here!" shouted Tom, handing out the rifles fully loaded.

The old hunter seized a weapon, as did Bill, Jack, and Mark. Tom also
leveled his gun at the savages.

Bang! Crack! Bang! went the guns. It was like a skirmish in battle. As
Andy directed, each one fired low.

So heavy a fusillade as the adventurers were able to fire had its
effect. Many of the Esquimaux fell, none badly hurt, but disabled so
they could not attack. Still the main body advanced up the slope with
angry cries, determined to capture the airship and regain their
captives.

The ship now began to quiver through its whole length. Larger and larger
distended the gas bag. Then, with a motion as of a great bird arising
from where it had been fastened to the earth, the _Monarch_ arose
slowly in the air. A cry of astonishment burst from the Esquimaux. Some
who had hold of the rail retained their grip until they felt themselves
lifted up. Then they let go suddenly and dropped to the ice.

"We're off!" cried Andy. He aimed a blow at a native who was still
clinging to the ship and endeavoring to spear the old hunter. Andy
missed his blow, just as the native let fly his spear, which pierced the
hunter in the arm.

With a yell of rage, the native let go and fell. Andy sank back on the
deck of the ship sorely wounded. The ship soared aloft. The next instant
the propeller started revolving and the _Monarch_ passed off over the
heads of the savages.

"Is any one hurt?" asked the professor, coming from the engine room.

"Andy was struck by a spear!" exclaimed Jack.

At the inventor's suggestion they carried the old hunter into the cabin,
and laid him on one of the bunks.

"You take the steering wheel," said Amos Henderson to Jack. "Washington
will run the engines for a while and Mark and I will see to Andy. Bill
and Tom, you can get something to eat; and turn on the heating stoves;
it is cold here."

Soon everyone on board was busily engaged. The professor bandaged
Andy's arm, which contained a severe though not fatal wound. In a little
while the hunter awoke from the stupor into which the pain had thrown
him.

"Fire!" he cried.

"There is no need," said the professor soothingly. "We are safe now."

Then Andy grew quiet. In the meanwhile Bill and Tom had started the
gasolene and electric stoves, and a meal, made from the capsule food,
was soon ready. That it tasted good goes without saying.

On and on rushed the ship, for Washington had speeded up all the engines
in order to sooner escape from the natives who had held him and his
friends captives.

As soon as the professor could leave Andy in charge of Mark, he went to
the engine room. There he found everything in good shape. Next he went
to the conning tower, where Jack was steering.

"How is she heading?" asked the old man.

"Straight for the north!" replied the boy.

"Good! Keep her so. Let me see; we are about a mile high now. I guess
that will do," and he turned off the gas generator. "Moving about
twenty miles an hour," he added. "That is fast enough. I wonder how
cold it is?"

He consulted the dial that was connected to a thermometer outside.

"Whew!" he whistled. "Fifty below! I'm glad we are here!"

Jack was too. The old inventor glanced at the direction compass and then
at the deflecting one that indicated how near the north pole they were.
As he did so he uttered a cry.

"What is it?" cried the boy.

For answer Mr. Henderson pointed to the needle. It was almost straight
up and down.

"Well?" asked Jack, who did not understand much about scientific things.

"That means we are almost at the north pole!" cried the professor. "At
the exact north the needle points straight down, because the pole is a
magnet, and being directly underneath pulls the end of the needle down.
See, it is almost down now. I believe we shall really get to the pole,
and my ambition will be realized."

Aside from the wound Andy had received, none of the party was any the
worse for their adventures as prisoners. Now that they were safe back on
the ship they were inclined to laugh at the fears they had felt.

For several hours the _Monarch_ was held to her course at a fairly good
speed. Then, at the professor's order, the engines were turned on at
full power, since the air was still, and there was no sign of a storm.
Straight to the north the craft shot, every one on board now anxious, as
they became aware that they were near to their destination.

The former life was resumed, and the hours of watch were marked out as
they had been. The sun still shone, never setting, but by this time the
adventurers were used to perpetual day. Dirola kept to herself, not
saying a word to anybody.

"I think I'll drop the ship down a bit and see what sort of a country is
beneath us," announced Mr. Henderson about four o'clock, though whether
it was four o'clock in the morning or the afternoon, no one knew.
However, it did not matter much. "If there is an open sea around the
north pole, as some believe," he went on, "we ought to see some signs of
it now."

He let some gas out of the bag, and the _Monarch_ slowly settled toward
the earth. The inventor opened the trap door that covered the plate
glass in the floor of the cabin, and peered down. When within five
hundred feet of the ground he signaled to stop the descent of the ship.

"Nothing but ice, ice, ice!" he announced. "Big hills and mountains of
it. There is no sign of open water. Well, we are not quite at the pole
yet."

Jack's turn at the wheel came to a close, and Mark relieved him.
Washington, who had been on duty pretty steadily in the engine room,
gave his place up to the inventor, and stretched out to sleep. Bill and
Tom were snoring in their bunks, and Andy was resting easily, the pain
from his wound being relieved by some ointment the professor put on.

The boy in the conning tower kept his eye on the two compasses, the one
telling the direction, the other the nearness to the north pole. The
latter gradually kept inclining more and more toward the earth.

"If we can only make it," thought Mark. "It will be something no one has
ever done before. My! What a story the papers would make of it if they
knew!"

"How is she running?" asked the captain, coming into the tower.

"Very well, indeed, sir."

"You might send her up a little," suggested the professor. "Keep her
about half a mile high, and I'll be with you again before long."

The professor went to his bunk, and Mark was pleased enough to be left
alone in charge of the ship. He held the wheel firmly, and did not
deviate half a point from the northern course.

He had been steering for half an hour when he was suddenly aware of a
dense gloom that settled down all about him. Then there came a great
roaring sound. The air craft rocked violently. The wind whistled shrilly
through the cordage and careened the _Monarch_ to one side.

Then the whole atmosphere grew from a dense black to a strange opaque
whiteness: a whiteness that shut out the view from every side, and
enveloped the ship as if it had fallen into a feather bed. Mark started
back in fright and let go his hold on the steering wheel.




CHAPTER XIX

A BLINDING SNOWSTORM


"Quick! Professor!" cried Mark. "Jack, Washington, everybody! Hurry up!"

"What's the matter?" asked the inventor, running to the conning tower.

In answer Mark pointed outside.

"A snow storm!" exclaimed the captain. "We must expect them up north.
But this is worse than I thought!"

He glanced ahead. Nothing could be seen but a wall of white. The wind
increased until it blew with almost the force of a cyclone, and the ship
swayed fearfully.

"Stop the engines!" cried the professor. "We had better drift than run
the chances of hitting an iceberg if we should suddenly take a drop down
to the ground."

Washington, awakened from his sleep, turned off the power. Then began a
fight between the ship and the elements; a battle between the _Monarch_
and the wind and snow. Which was to win?

The airship was, apparently, in the heart of the storm. It was tossed
this way and that, now up and now down, though because of the quantity
of gas in the bag the craft was buoyed up. The gas generating machine
had not been stopped, only the machinery that moved the propeller.

How the wind howled! How the snow blew! It was a blinding storm, for
from the windows of the conning tower and from those on either side of
the cabin nothing could be discerned five feet away. Through the window
in the bottom of the ship nothing showed but a sea of white flakes.

The cold was intense, seventy degrees below zero being marked on the
thermometer. Even with the gasolene stoves going it was chilling inside
the airship, for the cutting, biting wind found many cracks through
which to enter.

But, if the propeller no longer urged the ship on, the force of the wind
sent it ahead at a fearful pace. The gale careened the _Monarch_ from
side to side. Now the bow would be elevated, and, again, the stern. It
was like a ship on a rough sea, and the occupants of the craft were
tossed from side to side, receiving many bruises.

Old Andy was tied into his bunk, or he never could have stayed there,
so violent was the motion.

"Where is Dirola?" asked Mr. Henderson suddenly.

"She was out on the stern a while ago," answered Bill. "She was saying
something about it being too hot for her inside. That was before the
storm came up."

"We must see to her," said the captain. "She must come inside. The
motion of the ship may toss her off!"

Bill volunteered to go out and bring the Esquimaux woman in. It was all
he could do to open the door, so strong was the pressure of wind on it.

When he did swing it back such a cloud of snow entered that it seemed as
if some one had emptied a feather bed in the cabin.

"She don't want to come in," Bill reported when, after much exertion, he
had made his way back again. "She is laughing at this storm, and says
it's like what they have where she came from. She is braced against the
cabin, and is wrapped up in furs. I guess she is all right."

"I suppose we must let her have her way," remarked Amos Henderson.
"After all she may be used to it."

In anxiousness and apprehension the voyagers waited for the storm to
cease. But it showed no signs of abating. More and more violently rocked
the _Monarch_.

"We must shut off the gasolene stoves!" exclaimed the inventor after a
particularly heavy pitching and tossing motion, when the craft nearly
turned over. "If we upset, the fluid will run from the tanks, come in
contact with the flames, and we will burn in mid-air!"

Washington set to work turning off all the gasolene, and the larger
tanks were lashed fast and securely stopped up.

"Better put our furs on," suggested the inventor. "It will be very cold
in here soon."

The lack of heat quickly made itself felt, the ship becoming like an
ice-box. Old Andy was warmly covered, for he was asleep in his bunk,
having fallen into a slumber after being lashed in. The noise of the
storm did not awaken him, since he was somewhat stupid from a fever into
which his wound had thrown him.

All that could be done was to wait and hope. No human force could
prevail over the storm. Bracing themselves against whatever offered, and
clinging by their hands to projections, the adventurers in the cabin
expected every moment to be their last. Washington, who had gone out to
the engine room, came hurrying back.

"Look, here, Perfessor," he said, sticking his head in the dining cabin
door, "de gas machine hab stopped circulatin'."

"Did you shut off the power?"

"No, sah! I ain't done gone and shut off no power!"

Making his way as best he could while the ship pitched and tossed, Amos
Henderson reached the engine room. He looked at the gas generator. The
power was turned on full, but the apparatus was not working.

"That is strange," he remarked. "I wonder--"

Then he hurried forward to the conning tower. As he did so the ship was
whirled quickly around several times, and the sudden motion threw the
old man down, his head striking on the edge of one of the bunks. He lay
white and still.

"He's killed!" cried Washington.

"We are in a whirlwind!" yelled Bill at the same instant. "We'll be
sucked up to the sky!"

The airship was swinging around and around as if in the grasp of some
giant. The craft was really caught in the centre of a whirlwind, which
spun it around like a top. Every one felt sick and dizzy from the queer
motion.

"We must see to the professor!" said Jack. "Washington, get some of the
remedy you used before. I think he has only fainted."
