of his disciples the unique results of my private research."

He struck the bell. Ferradji appeared.

"Coffee for these gentlemen," ordered M. Le Mesge.

He handed us a box, gorgeously decorated in the most flaming colors,
full of Egyptian cigarettes.

"I never smoke," he explained. "But Antinea sometimes comes here.
These are her cigarettes. Help yourselves, gentlemen."

I have always had a horror of that pale tobacco which gives a barber
of the Rue de la Michodiere the illusion of oriental voluptuousness.
But, in their way, these musk-scented cigarettes were not bad, and it
was a long time since I had used up my stock of Caporal.

"Here are the back numbers of _Le Vie Parisienne_" said M. Le Mesge
to me. "Amuse yourself with them, if you like, while I talk to your
friend."

"Sir," I replied brusquely, "it is true that I never studied with
Berlioux. Nevertheless, you must allow me to listen to your
conversation: I shall hope to find something in it to amuse me."

"As you wish," said the little old man.

We settled ourselves comfortably. M. Le Mesge sat down before the
desk, shot his cuffs, and commenced as follows:

"However much, gentlemen, I prize complete objectivity in matters of
erudition, I cannot utterly detach my own history from that of the
last descendant of Clito and Neptune.

"I am the creation of my own efforts. From my childhood, the
prodigious impulse given to the science of history by the nineteenth
century has affected me. I saw where my way led. I have followed it,
in spite of everything.

"In spite of everything, everything--I mean it literally. With no
other resources than my own work and merit, I was received as Fellow
of History and Geography at the examination of 1880. A great
examination! Among the thirteen who were accepted there were names
which have since become illustrious: Julian, Bourgeois, Auerbach.... I
do not envy my colleagues on the summits of their official honors; I
read their works with commiseration; and the pitiful errors to which
they are condemned by the insufficiency of their documents would amply
counterbalance my chagrin and fill me with ironic joy, had I not been
raised long since above the satisfaction of self-love.

"When I was Professor at the Lycee du Parc at Lyons. I knew Berlioux
and followed eagerly his works on African History. I had, at that
time, a very original idea for my doctor's thesis. I was going to
establish a parallel between the Berber heroine of the seventh
century, who struggled against the Arab invader, Kahena, and the
French heroine, Joan of Arc, who struggled against the English
invader. I proposed to the _Faculte des Lettres_ at Paris this title
for my thesis: _Joan of Arc and the Tuareg_. This simple announcement
gave rise to a perfect outcry in learned circles, a furor of
ridicule. My friends warned me discreetly. I refused to believe them.
Finally I was forced to believe when my rector summoned me before him
and, after manifesting an astonishing interest in my health, asked
whether I should object to taking two years' leave on half pay. I
refused indignantly. The rector did not insist; but fifteen days
later, a ministerial decree, with no other legal procedure, assigned
me to one of the most insignificant and remote Lycees of France, at
Mont-de-Marsan.

"Realize my exasperation and you will excuse the excesses to which I
delivered myself in that strange country. What is there to do in
Landes, if you neither eat nor drink? I did both violently. My pay
melted away in _fois gras_, in woodcocks, in fine wines. The result
came quickly enough: in less than a year my joints began to crack like
the over-oiled axle of a bicycle that has gone a long way upon a dusty
track. A sharp attack of gout nailed me to my bed. Fortunately, in
that blessed country, the cure is in reach of the suffering. So I
departed to Dax, at vacation time, to try the waters.

"I rented a room on the bank of the Adour, overlooking the _Promenade
des Baignots_. A charwoman took care of it for me. She worked also for
an old gentleman, a retired Examining Magistrate, President of the
Roger-Ducos Society, which was a vague scientific backwater, in which
the scholars of the neighborhood applied themselves with prodigious
incompetence to the most whimsical subjects. One afternoon I stayed in
my room on account of a very heavy rain. The good woman was
energetically polishing the copper latch of my door. She used a paste
called Tripoli, which she spread upon a paper and rubbed and
rubbed.... The peculiar appearance of the paper made me curious. I
glanced at it. 'Great heavens! Where did you get this paper?' She was
perturbed. 'At my master's; he has lots of it. I tore this out of a
notebook.' 'Here are ten francs. Go and get me the notebook.'

"A quarter of an hour later, she was back with it. By good luck it
lacked only one page, the one with which she had been polishing my
door. This manuscript, this notebook, have you any idea what it was?
Merely the _Voyage to Atlantis_ of the mythologist Denis de Milet,
which is mentioned by Diodorus and the loss of which I had so often
heard Berlioux deplore.[10]

[Footnote 10: How did the _Voyage to Atlantis_ arrive at Dax? I have
found, so far, only one credible hypothesis: it might have been
discovered in Africa by the traveller, de Behagle, a member of the
Roger-Ducos Society, who studied at the college of Dax, and later, on
several occasions, visited the town. (Note by M. Leroux.)]

"This inestimable document contained numerous quotations from the
Critias. It gave an abstract of the illustrious dialogue, the sole
existing copy of which you held in your hands a little while ago. It
established past controversy the location of the stronghold of the
Atlantides, and demonstrated that this site, which is denied by
science, was not submerged by the waves, as is supposed by the rare
and timorous defenders of the Atlantide hypothesis. He called it the
'central Mazycian range,' You know there is no longer any doubt as to
the identification of the Mazyces of Herodotus with the people of
Imoschaoch, the Tuareg. But the manuscript of Denys unquestionably
identifies the historical Mazyces with the Atlantides of the supposed
legend.

"I learned, therefore, from Denys, not only that the central part of
Atlantis, the cradle and home of the dynasty of Neptune, had not sunk
in the disaster described by Plato as engulfing the rest of the
Atlantide isle, but also that it corresponded to the Tuareg Ahaggar,
and that, in this Ahaggar, at least in his time, the noble dynasty of
Neptune was supposed to be still existent.

"The historians of Atlantis put the date of the cataclysm which
destroyed all or part of that famous country at nine thousand years
before Christ. If Denis de Milet, who wrote scarcely three thousand
years ago, believed that in his time, the dynastic issue of Neptune
was still ruling its dominion, you will understand that I thought
immediately--what has lasted nine thousand years may last eleven
thousand. From that instant I had only one aim: to find the possible
descendants of the Atlantides, and, since I had many reasons for
supposing them to be debased and ignorant of their original splendor,
to inform them of their illustrious descent.

"You will easily understand that I imparted none of my intentions to
my superiors at the University. To solicit their approval or even
their permission, considering the attitude they had taken toward me,
would have been almost certainly to invite confinement in a cell. So I
raised what I could on my own account, and departed without trumpet or
drum for Oran. On the first of October I reached In-Salah. Stretched
at my ease beneath a palm tree, at the oasis, I took infinite pleasure
in considering how, that very day, the principal of Mont-de-Marsan,
beside himself, struggling to control twenty horrible urchins howling
before the door of an empty class room, would be telegraphing wildly
in all directions in search of his lost history professor."

M. Le Mesge stopped and looked at us to mark his satisfaction.

I admit that I forgot my dignity and I forgot the affectation he had
steadily assumed of talking only to Morhange.

"You will pardon me, sir, if your discourse interests me more than I
had anticipated. But you know very well that I lack the fundamental
instruction necessary to understand you. You speak of the dynasty of
Neptune. What is this dynasty, from which, I believe, you trace the
descent of Antinea? What is her role in the story of Atlantis?"

M. Le Mesge smiled with condescension, meantime winking at Morhange
with the eye nearest to him. Morhange was listening without
expression, without a word, chin in hand, elbow on knee.

"Plato will answer for me, sir," said the Professor.

And he added, with an accent of inexpressible pity:

"Is it really possible that you have never made the acquaintance of
the introduction to the Critias?"

He placed on the table the book by which Morhange had been so
strangely moved. He adjusted his spectacles and began to read. It
seemed as if the magic of Plato vibrated through and transfigured this
ridiculous little old man.

"'Having drawn by lot the different parts of the earth, the gods
obtained, some a larger, and some, a smaller share. It was thus that
Neptune, having received in the division the isle of Atlantis, came to
place the children he had had by a mortal in one part of that isle.
It was not far from the sea, a plain situated in the midst of the
isle, the most beautiful, and, they say, the most fertile of plains.
About fifty stades from that plain, in the middle of the isle, was a
mountain. There dwelt one of those men who, in the very beginning, was
born of the Earth, Evenor, with his wife, Leucippe. They had only one
daughter, Clito. She was marriageable when her mother and father died,
and Neptune, being enamored of her, married her. Neptune fortified the
mountain where she dwelt by isolating it. He made alternate girdles of
sea and land, the one smaller, the others greater, two of earth and
three of water, and centered them round the isle in such a manner that
they were at all parts equally distant!..."

M. Le Mesge broke off his reading.

"Does this arrangement recall nothing to you?" he queried.

"Morhange, Morhange!" I stammered. "You remember--our route yesterday,
our abduction, the two corridors that we had to cross before arriving
at this mountain?... The girdles of earth and of water?... Two
tunnels, two enclosures of earth?"

"Ha! Ha!" chuckled M. Le Mesge.

He smiled as he looked at me. I understood that this smile meant: "Can
he be less obtuse than I had supposed?"

As if with a mighty effort, Morhange broke the silence.

"I understand well enough, I understand.... The three girdles of
water.... But then, you are supposing, sir,--an explanation the
ingeniousness of which I do not contest--you are supposing the exact
hypothesis of the Saharan sea!"

"I suppose it, and I can prove it," replied the irascible little old
chap, banging his fist on the table. "I know well enough what Schirmer
and the rest have advanced against it. I know it better than you do. I
know all about it, sir. I can present all the proofs for your
consideration. And in the meantime, this evening at dinner, you will
no doubt enjoy some excellent fish. And you will tell me if these
fish, caught in the lake that you can see from this window, seem to
you fresh water fish.

"You must realize," he continued, "the mistake of those who, believing
in Atlantis, have sought to explain the cataclysm in which they
suppose the island to have sunk. Without exception, they have thought
that it was swallowed up. Actually, there has not been an immersion.
There has been an emersion. New lands have emerged from the Atlantic
wave. The desert has replaced the sea, the _sebkhas_, the salt lakes,
the Triton lakes, the sandy Syrtes are the desolate vestiges of the
free sea water over which, in former days, the fleets swept with a
fair wind towards the conquest of Attica. Sand swallows up
civilization better than water. To-day there remains nothing of the
beautiful isle that the sea and winds kept gay and verdant but this
chalky mass. Nothing has endured in this rocky basin, cut off forever
from the living world, but the marvelous oasis that you have at your
feet, these red fruits, this cascade, this blue lake, sacred witnesses
to the golden age that is gone. Last evening, in coming here, you had
to cross the five enclosures: the three belts of water, dry forever;
the two girdles of earth through which are hollowed the passages you
traversed on camel back, where, formerly, the triremes floated. The
only thing that, in this immense catastrophe, has preserved its
likeness to its former state, is this mountain, the mountain where
Neptune shut up his well-beloved Clito, the daughter of Evenor and
Leucippe, the mother of Atlas, and the ancestress of Antinea, the
sovereign under whose dominion you are about to enter forever."

"Sir," Morhange with the most exquisite courtesy, "it would be only a
natural anxiety which would urge us to inquire the reasons and the end
of this dominion. But behold to what extent your revelation interests
me; I defer this question of private interest. Of late, in two
caverns, it has been my fortune to discover Tifinar inscriptions of
this name, Antinea. My comrade is witness that I took it for a Greek
name. I understand now, thanks to you and the divine Plato, that I
need no longer feel surprised to hear a barbarian called by a Greek
name. But I am no less perplexed as to the etymology of the word. Can
you enlighten me?"

"I shall certainly not fail you there, sir," said M. Le Mesge. "I may
tell you, too, that you are not the first to put to me that question.
Most of the explorers that I have seen enter here in the past ten
years have been attracted in the same way, intrigued by this Greek
work reproduced in Tifinar. I have even arranged a fairly exact
catalogue of these inscriptions and the caverns where they are to be
met with. All, or almost all, are accompanied by this legend:
_Antinea. Here commences her domain_. I myself have had repainted with
ochre such as were beginning to be effaced. But, to return to what I
was telling you before, none of the Europeans who have followed this
epigraphic mystery here, have kept their anxiety to solve this
etymology once they found themselves in Antinea's palace. They all
become otherwise preoccupied. I might make many disclosures as to the
little real importance which purely scientific interests possess even
for scholars, and the quickness with which they sacrifice them to the
most mundane considerations--their own lives, for instance."

"Let us take that up another time, sir, if it is satisfactory to you,"
said Morhange, always admirably polite.

"This digression had only one point, sir: to show you that I do not
count you among these unworthy scholars. You are really eager to know
the origin of this name, _Antinea_, and that before knowing what kind
of woman it belongs to and her motives for holding you and this
gentleman as her prisoners."

I stared hard at the little old man. But he spoke with profound
seriousness.

"So much the better for you, my boy," I thought. "Otherwise it
wouldn't have taken me long to send you through the window to air your
ironies at your ease. The law of gravity ought not to be topsy-turvy
here at Ahaggar."

"You, no doubt, formulated several hypotheses when you first
encountered the name, Antinea," continued M. Le Mesge, imperturbable
under my fixed gaze, addressing himself to Morhange. "Would you object
to repeating them to me?"

"Not at all, sir," said Morhange.

And, very composedly, he enumerated the etymological suggestions I
have given previously.

The little man with the cherry-colored shirt front rubbed his hands.

"Very good," he admitted with an accent of intense jubilation.
"Amazingly good, at least for one with only the modicum of Greek that
you possess. But it is all none the less false, super-false."
