Professor Mantelish."

"Fibber!" Trigger said quietly. "So you know!"

Plemponi looked appealingly at Mihul. She was grinning. "My lips are
sealed, Trigger! I can't help it. Please believe me."

"Let _me_ sum it up then," Trigger said, tapping the arm of her chair
with a finger tip. "Eight weeks ago I get pulled off my job in the Manon
System and sent here to arrange the organizational details of this
Plasmoid Project. The only reason I took on the job, as a temporary
assignment, was that Commissioner Tate convinced me it was important to
him to have me do it. I even let him talk me into doing it under the
assumed name of Ruya Farn and"--she reached up and touched the side of
her head--"and to dye my hair. For no sane reason that I could discover!
He said the U-League had requested it."

Doctor Plemponi coughed. "Well, you know, Trigger, how sensitive the
League is to personal notoriety."

The eyebrow went up again. "Notoriety?"

"Not in the wrong sense!" Plemponi said hastily. "But your name _has_
become much more widely known than you may believe. The news viewers
mentioned you regularly in their reports on Harvest Moon and the
Commissioner. Didn't they, Mihul?"

Mihul nodded. "You made good copy, kid! We saw you in the solidopics any
number of times."

"Well, maybe," Trigger said. "The cloak and dagger touches still don't
make much sense to me. But let's forget them and go on.

"When we get here, I manage to see Mantelish just once to try to find
out what his requirements will be. He's pretty vague about them.
Commissioner Tate is in and out of the Project--usually out. He's also
turned pretty vague. About everything. Three weeks ago today I'm told
he's gone. Nobody here can, or will, tell me where he's gone or how he
can be contacted. The same thing in the Maccadon Precol office. Same
thing at the Evalee Home office. Same thing at the U-League--any
office. Then I try to contact Mantelish. I'm informed he's with Tate!
The two of them have left word I'm to carry on."

She spread her hands. "Carry on with what? I've done all I can do until
I get further instructions from the people supposedly directing this
supposedly very urgent and important project! Mantelish doesn't even
seem to have a second in command...."

Plemponi nodded. "I was told he hadn't selected his Project assistants
yet."

"Except," said Trigger, "for that little flock of Junior Scientists who
keep themselves locked in with the plasmoids. They know less than
nothing and would be too scared to tell me that if I asked them."

Plemponi looked confused for a moment. "The last sentence--" He checked
himself. "Well, let's not quibble. Go on."

Trigger said, "That's it. Holati didn't need me on this job to begin
with. There's nothing involved about the organizational aspects. Unless
something begins to happen--and rather soon--there's no excuse for me to
stay here."

"Couldn't you," Plemponi suggested, "regard this as a kind of
well-earned little vacation?"

"I've tried to regard it as that. Holati impressed on me that one of us
had to remain in the area of the Project at all times, so I haven't even
been able to leave the school grounds. I've caught up with my reading,
and Mihul has put me through two of her tune-up commando courses. But
the point is that I'm not on vacation. I don't believe Precol would feel
that any of my present activities come under the heading of detached
duty work!"

There was a short silence. Plemponi stared down at his empty tray, said,
"Excuse me," got up and walked over to the wall chef with the tray.

"Wrong slot," Trigger told him.

He looked back. "Eh?"

"You want to put it in the disposal, don't you?"

"Thanks," Plemponi said absently. "Always doing that. Confusing
them...." He dropped the tray where it belonged, shoved his hands into
the chef's cleaning recess and waved them around, then came back, still
looking absent-minded, and stopped before Trigger's chair. He studied
her face for a moment.

"Commissioner Tate gave me a message for you," he said suddenly.

Trigger's eyes narrowed slightly. "When?"

"The day after he left." Plemponi lifted a hand. "Now wait! You'll see
how it was. He called in and said, and I quote, 'Plemp, you don't stand
much of a chance at keeping secrets from Trigger, so I'll give you no
unnecessary secrets to keep. If this business we're on won't let us get
back to the Project in the next couple of weeks, she'll get mighty
restless. When she starts to complain--but no earlier--just tell her
there are reasons why I can't contact her at present, or let her know
what I'm doing, and that I _will_ contact her as soon as I possibly
can.' End of quote."

"That was all?" asked Trigger.

"Yes."

"He didn't say a thing about how long this situation might continue?"

"No. I've given you the message word for word. My memory is excellent,
Trigger."

"So it could be more weeks? Or months?"

"Yes. Possibly. I imagine...." Plemponi had begun to perspire.

"Plemp," said Trigger, "will you give Holati a message from me?"

"Gladly!" said Plemponi. "What--oh, oh!" He flushed.

"Right," said Trigger. "You can contact him. I thought so."

Doctor Plemponi looked reproachful. "That was unfair, Trigger! You're
quick-witted."

Trigger shrugged. "I can't see any justification for all this mystery,
that's all." She stood up. "Anyway, here's the message. Tell him that
unless somebody--rather promptly--gives me a good sane reason for
hanging around here, I'll ask Precol to transfer me back to the Manon
job."

Plemponi tut-tutted gloomily. "Trigger," he said, "I'll do my best about
the message. But otherwise--"

She smiled nicely at him. "I know," she said, "your lips are sealed.
Sorry if I've disturbed you, Plemp. But I'm just a Precol employee,
after all. If I'm to waste their time, I'd like to know at least why
it's necessary."

Plemponi watched her walk out of the room and off down the adjoining
hall. In his face consternation struggled with approval.

"Lovely little figure, hasn't she?" he said to Mihul. He made vague
curving motions in the air with one hand, more or less opposing ones
with the other. "That sort of an up-and-sideways lilt when she walks."

"Uh-huh," said Mihul. "Old goats."

"Eh?" said Doctor Plemponi.

"I overheard you discussing Trigger's lilt with Mantelish."

Plemponi sat down at his desk. "You shouldn't eavesdrop, Mihul," he said
severely. "I'd better get that message promptly to Tate, I suppose. She
meant what she said, don't you think?"

"Every bit of it," said Mihul.

"Tate warned me she might get very difficult about this time. She's too
conscientious, I feel."

"She also," said Mihul, "has a boy friend in the Manon System. They've
been palsy ever since they went through the school here together."

"Ought to get married then," Plemponi said. He shuddered. "My blood runs
cold every time I think of how close those grabbers got to her
yesterday!"

Mihul shrugged. "Relax! They never had a chance. The characters Tate has
guarding her are the fastest-moving squad I ever saw go into action."

"That," Plemponi said reflectively, "doesn't sound much like our
Maccadon police."

"I don't think they are. Imported talent of some kind, for my money.
Anyway, if someone wants to pick up Trigger Argee here, he'd better come
in with a battleship."

Plemponi glanced nervously across the balcony at the cloudless blue sky
about the quadrangle.

"The impression I got from Holati Tate," he said, "is that somebody
might."




2


There was a tube portal at the end of the hall outside Doctor Plemponi's
office. Mihul stepped into the portal, punched the number of her
personal quarters, waited till the overhead light flashed green a few
seconds later, and stepped out into another hall seventeen floors below
Plemponi's office and a little over a mile and a half away from it.

Mihul crossed the hall, went into her apartment, locked the door behind
her and punched a shield button. In her bedroom, she opened a wall safe
and swung out a high-powered transmitter. She switched the transmitter
to active.

"Yes?" said a voice.

"Mihul here," said Mihul. "Quillan or the Commissioner...."

"Quillan here," the transmitter said a few seconds later in a different
voice, a deep male one. "Go ahead, doll."

Mihul grunted. "I'm calling," she said, "because I feel strongly that
you boys had better take some immediate action in the Argee matter."

"Oh?" said the voice. "What kind of action?"

"How the devil would I know? I'm just telling you I can't be responsible
for her here much longer."

"Has something happened?" Quillan asked quickly.

"If you mean has somebody taken another swing at her, no. But she's all
wound up to start swinging herself. She isn't going to do much waiting
either."

Quillan said thoughtfully, "Hasn't she been that way for quite a while?"

"Not like she's been the last few days." Mihul hesitated. "Would it be
against security if you told me whether something has happened to her?"

"Happened to her?" Quillan repeated cautiously.

"To her mind."

"What makes you think so?"

Mihul frowned at the transmitter.

"Trigger always had a temper," she said. "She was always obstinate. She
was always an individualist and ready to fight for her own rights and
anyone else's. But she used to show good sense. She's got one of the
highest I.Q.s we ever processed through this place. The way she's acting
now doesn't look too rational."

"How would she have acted earlier?" Quillan asked.

Mihul considered. "She would have been very annoyed with Commissioner
Tate," she said. "I don't blame her for that--I'd be, too, in the
circumstances. When he got back, she'd have wanted a reasonable
explanation for what has been going on. If she didn't get one that
satisfied her, she'd have quit. But she _would_ have waited till he got
back. Why not, after all?"

"You don't think she's going to wait now?"

"I do not," Mihul said. "She's forwarded him a kind of ultimatum through
Plemponi. Communicate-or-else, in effect. Frankly, I wouldn't care to
guarantee she'll stay around to hear the answer."

"Hm.... What do you expect she'll do?"

"Take off," Mihul said. "One way or the other."

"Ungh," Quillan said disgustedly. "You make it sound like the chick's
got built-in space drives. You can stop her, can't you?"

"Certainly I can stop her," Mihul said. "If I can lock her in her room
and sit on her to make sure she doesn't leave by the window. But
'unobtrusively?' You're the one who stressed she isn't to know she's
being watched."

"True," Quillan said promptly. "I spoke like a loon, Mihul."

"True, Major Quillan, sir," said Mihul. "Now try again."

The transmitter was silent a few seconds. "Could you guarantee her for
three days?" he asked.

"I could not," said Mihul. "I couldn't guarantee her another three
hours."

"As bad as that?"

"Yes," said Mihul. "As bad as that. She was controlling herself with
Plemponi. But I've been observing her in the physical workouts. I've fed
it to her as heavy as I could, but there's a limit to what you can do
that way. She's kept herself in very good shape."

"One of the best, I've been told," said Quillan.

"Condition, I meant," said Mihul. "Anyway, she's trained down fine right
now. Any more of it would just make her edgier. You know how it goes."

"Uh-huh," he said. "Fighter nerves."

"Same deal," Mihul agreed.

There was a short pause. "How about slapping a guard on all Colonial
school exits?" he suggested.

"Can you send me an army?"

"No."

"Then forget it. She was a student here, remember? Last year a bunch of
our students smuggled the stuffed restructured mastodon out and left it
in the back garden of the mayor of Ceyce, just for laughs. Too many
exits. And Trigger was a trickier monkey than most that way, when she
felt like it. She'll fade out of here whenever she wants to."

"It's those damn tube portal systems!" said Quillan, with feeling. "Most
gruesome invention that ever hit the tailing profession." He sighed.
"You win, Mihul! The Commissioner isn't in at the moment. But whether he
gets in or not, I'll have someone over today to pick her up. Matter of
fact, I'll come along myself."

"Good for you, boy!" Mihul said relievedly. "Did you get anything out of
yesterday's grabbers?"

"A little. 'Get her, don't harm her' were their instructions. Otherwise
it was like with those other slobs. A hole in the head where the real
info should be. But at least we know for sure now that someone is
specifically after Argee. The price was kind of interesting."

"What was it?"

"Flat half million credits."

Mihul whistled. "Poor Trigger!"

"Well, nobody's very likely to earn the money."

"I hope not. She's a good kid. All right, Major. Signing off now."

"Hold on a minute," said Quillan. "You asked a while ago if the girl had
gone ta-ta."

"So I did," Mihul said, surprised. "You didn't say. I figured it was
against security."

"It probably is," Quillan admitted. "Everything seems to be, right now.
I've given up trying to keep up with that. Anyway--I don't know that she
has. Neither does the Commissioner. But he's worried. And Argee has a
date she doesn't know about with the Psychology Service, four days from
now."

"The eggheads?" Mihul was startled. "What do they want with her?"

"You know," Quillan remarked reflectively, "that's odd! They didn't
think to tell me."

"Why are you letting me know?" Mihul asked.

"You'll find out, doll," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

The U-League guard leaning against the wall opposite the portal snapped
to attention as it opened. Trigger stepped out. He gave her a fine
flourish of a salute.

"Good morning, Miss Farn."

"Morning," Trigger said. She flashed him a smile. "Did the mail get in?"

"Just twenty minutes ago."

She nodded, smiled again and walked past him to her office. She always
got along fine with cops of almost any description, and these League
boys were extraordinarily pleasant and polite. They were also, she'd
noticed, a remarkably muscled group.

She locked the office door behind her--part of the Plasmoid Project's
