Groverzb pushed at his spectacles, sniffed, and said, "Quite."

The big man said, "Ain't no native here over three feet tall. And they
got some crazy kind of communication. They don't talk."

Groverzb said, "Quiet."

"Uh?"

"Precisely why I am here. I," said Groverzb, sniffing again, "loathe
conversation."

"Oh. Well." He left.

Alone, Groverzb surveyed his realm. The house was the shell of what had
formerly been a Little People apartment building. Ceilings, floors and
walls had been removed to form one large room. The tiny doors and
windows had been sealed, and a single window and door had been cut into
the shell for Groverzb's use. Crude, but serviceable.

Groverzb walked to the window and looked down the slope. Little People
buildings dotted the landscape, and the people themselves scurried
silently about. Yes, thought Groverzb, it would do nicely. He had
brought an adequate food-tablet supply. He would finish, without the
distraction of voices, his beautiful concerto. He would return to Earth
famous and happy.

Armed with paper and pencils, he went to the piano, having decided to
enlarge upon the theme in the second movement. His mind knew exactly how
the passage should run, and he swiftly covered the paper with sharp,
angular notes. Then he triumphantly lifted his hands and began to play
what he had written.

He jerked back from the keyboard, his hair on end, his teeth, on edge,
his ears screaming with the mass of sounds he had produced. He looked at
his hands, peered at the score, adjusted his spectacles and tried again.

I'm tired, he thought, recoiling in horror from the racket. A food
tablet and a nap will remedy the situation.

       *       *       *       *       *

When he awoke, Groverzb walked to the window, refreshed. A violet glow
had replaced the harsh yellow light of day. At the foot of the slope,
the Little People dashed to and fro, but no voice broke the peaceful
quiet of the evening.

With a sigh of satisfaction, Groverzb went to the piano. Gently, he
struck the keys. Blatant, jumbled noise filled the room.

Breathing hard, Groverzb rose and gingerly lifted the spinet's lid. No,
nothing amiss there. Good felts, free hammers, solid sounding
board--must be out of tune.

Groverzb closed the lid, sat down and struck a single note. A clear
