   6.  tahaia.
   7.  hokaikinis  = 2 + 5.
   8.  hatsikikiri = 3 + 5.
   9.  kirihariki-ikiriu.
  10.  etsehewi.


  CAHUILLO.[310]

   1.  supli.
   2.  mewi.
   3.  mepai.
   4.  mewittsu.
   5.  nomekadnun.
   6.  kadnun-supli = 5-1.
   7.  kan-munwi    = 5-2.
   8.  kan-munpa    = 5-3.
   9.  kan-munwitsu = 5-4.
  10.  nomatsumi.


  TIMUKUA.[311]

   1.  yaha.
   2.  yutsa.
   3.  hapu.
   4.  tseketa.
   5.  marua.
   6.  mareka       = 5 + 1
   7.  pikitsa      = 5 + 2
   8.  pikinahu     = 5 + 3
   9.  peke-tsaketa = 5 + 4
  10.  tuma.


  OTOMI[312]

   1.  nara.
   2.  yocho.
   3.  chiu.
   4.  gocho.
   5.  kuto.
   6.  rato   = 1 + 5.
   7.  yoto   = 2 + 5.
   8.  chiato = 3 + 5.
   9.  guto   = 4 + 5.
  10.  reta.


  TARASCO.[313]

   1.  ma.
   2.  dziman.
   3.  tanimo.
   4.  tamu.
   5.  yumu.
   6.  kuimu.
   7.  yun-dziman = [5] + 2.
   8.  yun-tanimo = [5] + 3.
   9.  yun-tamu   = [5] + 4.
  10.  temben.


  MATLALTZINCAN.[314]

   1.  indawi.
   2.  inawi.
   3.  inyuhu.
   4.  inkunowi.
   5.  inkutaa.
   6.  inda-towi     = 1 + 5.
   7.  ine-towi      = 2 + 5.
   8.  ine-ukunowi   = 2-4.
   9.  imuratadahata = 10 - 1?
  10.  inda-hata.


  CORA.[315]

   1.  ceaut.
   2.  huapoa.
   3.  huaeica.
   4.  moacua.
   5.  anxuvi.
   6.  a-cevi    = [5] + 1.
   7.  a-huapoa  = [5] + 2.
   8.  a-huaeica = [5] + 3.
   9.  a-moacua  = [5] + 4.
  10.  tamoamata (akin to moamati, "hand").


  AYMARA.[316]

   1.  maya.
   2.  paya.
   3.  kimsa.
   4.  pusi.
   5.  piska.
   6.  tsokta.
   7.  pa-kalko    = 2 + 5.
   8.  kimsa-kalko = 3 + 5.
   9.  pusi-kalko  = 4 + 5.
  10.  tunka.


  CARIBS OF ESSEQUIBO, GUIANA.[317]

   1.  oween.
   2.  oko.
   3.  oroowa.
   4.  oko-baimema.
   5.  wineetanee     = 1 hand.
   6.  owee-puimapo   = 1 again?
   7.  oko-puimapo    = 2 again?
   8.  oroowa-puimapo = 3 again?
   9.  oko-baimema-puimapo = 4 again?
  10.  oween-abatoro.


  CARIB.[318] (ROUCOUYENNE?)

   1.  aban, amoin.
   2.  biama.
   3.  eleoua.
   4.  biam-bouri = 2 again?
   5.  ouacabo-apourcou-aban-tibateli.
   6.  aban laoyagone-ouacabo-apourcou.
   7.  biama laoyagone-ouacabo-apourcou.
   8.  eleoua laoyagone-ouacabo-apourcou.
   9.  ----
  10.  chon noucabo.

It is unfortunate that the meanings of these remarkable numerals cannot be
given. The counting is evidently quinary, but the terms used must have been
purely descriptive expressions, having their origin undoubtedly in certain
gestures or finger motions. The numerals obtained from this region, and
from the tribes to the south and east of the Carib country, are especially
rich in digital terms, and an analysis of the above numerals would probably
show clearly the mental steps through which this people passed in
constructing the rude scale which served for the expression of their ideas
of number.


  KIRIRI.[319]

   1.  biche.
   2.  watsani.
   3.  watsani dikie.
   4.  sumara oroba.
   5.  mi biche misa = 1 hand.
   6.  mirepri bu-biche misa sai.
   7.  mirepri watsani misa sai.
   8.  mirepri watsandikie misa sai.
   9.  mirepri sumara oraba sai.
  10.  mikriba misa sai = both hands.


  CAYUBABA[320]

   1.  pebi.
   2.  mbeta.
   3.  kimisa.
   4.  pusi.
   5.  pisika.
   6.  sukuta.
   7.  pa-kaluku     = 2 again?
   8.  kimisa-kaluku = 3 again?
   9.  pusu-kaluku   = 4 again?
  10.  tunka.


  SAPIBOCONA[320]

   1.  karata.
   2.  mitia.
   3.  kurapa.
   4.  tsada.
   5.  maidara (from _arue_, hand).
   6.  karata-rirobo = 1 hand with.
   7.  mitia-rirobo  = 2 hand with.
   8.  kurapa-rirobo = 3 hand with.
   9.  tsada-rirobo  = 4 hand with.
  10.  bururutse     = hand hand.


  TICUNA.[321]

   1.  hueih.
   2.  tarepueh.
   3.  tomepueh.
   4.  aguemoujih
   5.  hueamepueh.
   6.  naimehueapueh      = 5 + 1.
   7.  naimehueatareh     = 5 + 2.
   8.  naimehueatameapueh = 5 + 3.
   9.  gomeapueh          = 10 - 1.
  10.  gomeh.


  YANUA.[322]

   1.  tckini.
   2.  nanojui.
   3.  munua.
   4.  nairojuino = 2d 2.
   5.  tenaja.
   6.  teki-natea    = 1 again?
   7.  nanojui-natea = 2 again?
   8.  munua-natea   = 3 again?
   9.  nairojuino-natea = 4 again?
  10.  huijejuino    = 2 x 5?

The foregoing examples will show with considerable fulness the wide
dispersion of the quinary scale. Every part of the world contributes its
share except Europe, where the only exceptions to the universal use of the
decimal system are the half-dozen languages, which still linger on its
confines, whose number base is the vigesimal. Not only is there no living
European tongue possessing a quinary number system, but no trace of this
method of counting is found in any of the numerals of the earlier forms of
speech, which have now become obsolete. The only possible exceptions of
which I can think are the Greek [Greek: pempazein], to count by fives, and
a few kindred words which certainly do hint at a remote antiquity in which
the ancestors of the Greeks counted on their fingers, and so grouped their
units into fives. The Roman notation, the familiar I., II., III., IV.
(originally IIII.), V., VI., etc., with equal certainty suggests quinary
counting, but the Latin language contains no vestige of anything of the
kind, and the whole range of Latin literature is silent on this point,
though it contains numerous references to finger counting. It is quite
within the bounds of possibility that the prehistoric nations of Europe
possessed and used a quinary numeration. But of these races the modern
world knows nothing save the few scanty facts that can be gathered from the
stone implements which have now and then been brought to light. Their
languages have perished as utterly as have the races themselves, and
speculation concerning them is useless. Whatever their form of numeration
may have been, it has left no perceptible trace on the languages by which
they were succeeded. Even the languages of northern and central Europe
which were contemporary with the Greek and Latin of classical times have,
with the exception of the Celtic tongues of the extreme North-west, left
behind them but meagre traces for the modern student to work on. We presume
that the ancient Gauls and Goths, Huns and Scythians, and other barbarian
tribes had the same method of numeration that their descendants now have;
and it is a matter of certainty that the decimal scale was, at that time,
not used with the universality which now obtains; but wherever the decimal
was not used, the universal method was vigesimal; and that the quinary ever
had anything of a foothold in Europe is only to be guessed from its
presence to-day in almost all of the other corners of the world.

From the fact that the quinary is that one of the three natural scales with
the smallest base, it has been conjectured that all tribes possess, at some
time in their history, a quinary numeration, which at a later period merges
into either the decimal or the vigesimal, and thus disappears or forms with
one of the latter a mixed system.[323] In support of this theory it is
urged that extensive regions which now show nothing but decimal counting
were, beyond all reasonable doubt, quinary. It is well known, for example,
that the decimal system of the Malays has spread over almost the entire
Polynesian region, displacing whatever native scales it encountered. The
same phenomenon has been observed in Africa, where the Arab traders have
disseminated their own numeral system very widely, the native tribes
adopting it or modifying their own scales in such a manner that the Arab
influence is detected without difficulty.

In view of these facts, and of the extreme readiness with which a tribe
would through its finger counting fall into the use of the quinary method,
it does not at first seem improbable that the quinary was _the_ original
system. But an extended study of the methods of counting in vogue among the
uncivilized races of all parts of the world has shown that this theory is
entirely untenable. The decimal scale is no less simple in its structure
than the quinary; and the savage, as he extends the limit of his scale from
5 to 6, may call his new number 5-1, or, with equal probability, give it an
entirely new name, independent in all respects of any that have preceded
it. With the use of this new name there may be associated the conception of
"5 and 1 more"; but in such multitudes of instances the words employed show
no trace of any such meaning, that it is impossible for any one to draw,
with any degree of safety, the inference that the signification was
originally there, but that the changes of time had wrought changes in
verbal form so great as to bury it past the power of recovery. A full
discussion of this question need not be entered upon here. But it will be
of interest to notice two or three numeral scales in which the quinary
influence is so faint as to be hardly discernible. They are found in
considerable numbers among the North American Indian languages, as may be
seen by consulting the vocabularies that have been prepared and published
during the last half century.[324] From these I have selected the
following, which are sufficient to illustrate the point in question:


  QUAPPA.

   1.  milchtih.
   2.  nonnepah.
   3.  dahghenih.
   4.  tuah.
   5.  sattou.
   6.  schappeh.
   7.  pennapah.
   8.  pehdaghenih.
   9.  schunkkah.
  10.  gedeh bonah.


  TERRABA.[325]

   1.  krara.
   2.  krowue.
   3.  krom miah.
   4.  krob king.
   5.  krasch kingde.
   6.  terdeh.
   7.  kogodeh.
   8.  kwongdeh.
   9.  schkawdeh.
  10.  dwowdeh.


  MOHICAN

   1.  ngwitloh.
   2.  neesoh.
   3.  noghhoh.
   4.  nauwoh.
   5.  nunon.
   6.  ngwittus.
   7.  tupouwus.
   8.  ghusooh.
   9.  nauneeweh.
  10.  mtannit.

In the Quappa scale 7 and 8 appear to be derived from 2 and 3, while 6 and
9 show no visible trace of kinship with 1 and 4. In Mohican, on the other
hand, 6 and 9 seem to be derived from 1 and 4, while 7 and 8 have little or
no claim to relationship with 2 and 3. In some scales a single word only is
found in the second quinate to indicate that 5 was originally the base on
which the system rested. It is hardly to be doubted, even, that change
might affect each and every one of the numerals from 5 to 10 or 6 to 9, so
that a dependence which might once have been easily detected is now
unrecognizable.

But if this is so, the natural and inevitable question follows--might not
this have been the history of all numeral scales now purely decimal? May
not the changes of time have altered the compounds which were once a clear
indication of quinary counting, until no trace remains by which they can be
followed back to their true origin? Perhaps so. It is not in the least
degree probable, but its possibility may, of course, be admitted. But even
then the universality of quinary counting for primitive peoples is by no
means established. In Chapter II, examples were given of races which had no
number base. Later on it was observed that in Australia and South America
many tribes used 2 as their number base; in some cases counting on past 5
without showing any tendency to use that as a new unit. Again, through the
habit of counting upon the finger joints, instead of the fingers
themselves, the use of 3 as a base is brought into prominence, and 6 and 9
become 2 threes and 3 threes, respectively, instead of 5 + 1 and 5 + 4. The
same may be noticed of 4. Counting by means of his fingers, without
including the thumbs, the savage begins by dividing into fours instead of
fives. Traces of this form of counting are somewhat numerous, especially
among the North American aboriginal tribes. Hence the quinary form of
counting, however widespread its use may be shown to be, can in no way be
claimed as the universal method of any stage of development in the history
of mankind.

In the vast majority of cases, the passage from the base to the next
succeeding number in any scale, is clearly defined. But among races whose
intelligence is of a low order, or--if it be permissible to express it in
this way--among races whose number sense is feeble, progression from one
number to the next is not always in accordance with any well-defined law.
After one or two distinct numerals the count may, as in the case of the
Veddas and the Andamans, proceed by finger pantomime and by the repetition
of the same word. Occasionally the same word is used for two successive
numbers, some gesture undoubtedly serving to distinguish the one from the
other in the savage's mind. Examples of this are not infrequent among the
forest tribes of South America. In the Tariana dialect 9 and 10 are
expressed by the same word, _paihipawalianuda;_ in Cobeu, 8 and 9 by
_pepelicoloblicouilini;_ in Barre, 4, 5, and 9 by _ualibucubi._[326] In
other languages the change from one numeral to the next is so slight that
one instinctively concludes that the savage is forming in his own mind
another, to him new, numeral immediately from the last. In such cases the
entire number system is scanty, and the creeping hesitancy with which
progress is made is visible in the forms which the numerals are made to
take. A single illustration or two of this must suffice; but the ones
chosen are not isolated cases. The scale of the Macunis,[327] one of the
numerous tribes of Brazil, is

   1.  pocchaenang.
   2.  haihg.
   3.  haigunhgnill.
   4.  haihgtschating.
   5.  haihgtschihating     = another 4?
   6.  hathig-stchihathing  = 2-4?
   7.  hathink-tschihathing = 2-5?
   8.  hathink-tschihating  = 2 x 4?

The complete absence of--one is tempted to say--any rhyme or reason from
this scale is more than enough to refute any argument which might tend to
show that the quinary, or any other scale, was ever the sole number scale
of primitive man. Irregular as this is, the system of the Montagnais fully
matches it, as the subjoined numerals show:[328]

   1.  inl'are.
   2.  nak'e.
   3.  t'are.
   4.  dinri.
   5.  se-sunlare.
   6.  elkke-t'are      = 2 x 3.
   7.  t'a-ye-oyertan   = 10 - 3,
        or inl'as dinri = 4 + 3?
   8.  elkke-dinri      = 2 x 4.
   9.  inl'a-ye-oyertan = 10 - 1.
  10.  onernan.





CHAPTER VII.

THE VIGESIMAL SYSTEM.


In its ordinary development the quinary system is almost sure to merge into
either the decimal or the vigesimal system, and to form, with one or the
other or both of these, a mixed system of counting. In Africa, Oceanica,
and parts of North America, the union is almost always with the decimal
scale; while in other parts of the world the quinary and the vigesimal
systems have shown a decided affinity for each other. It is not to be
understood that any geographical law of distribution has ever been observed
which governs this, but merely that certain families of races have shown a
preference for the one or the other method of counting. These families,
disseminating their characteristics through their various branches, have
produced certain groups of races which exhibit a well-marked tendency, here
toward the decimal, and there toward the vigesimal form of numeration. As
far as can be ascertained, the choice of the one or the other scale is
determined by no external circumstances, but depends solely on the mental
characteristics of the tribes themselves. Environment does not exert any
appreciable influence either. Both decimal and vigesimal numeration are
found indifferently in warm and in cold countries; in fruitful and in
barren lands; in maritime and in inland regions; and among highly civilized
or deeply degraded peoples.

Whether or not the principal number base of any tribe is to be 20 seems to
depend entirely upon a single consideration; are the fingers alone used as
an aid to counting, or are both fingers and toes used? If only the fingers
are employed, the resulting scale must become decimal if sufficiently
extended. If use is made of the toes in addition to the fingers, the
outcome must inevitably be a vigesimal system. Subordinate to either one of
these the quinary may and often does appear. It is never the principal base
in any extended system.

To the statement just made respecting the origin of vigesimal counting,
exception may, of course, be taken. In the case of numeral scales like the
Welsh, the Nahuatl, and many others where the exact meanings of the
