looked like a dime's worth of catmeat. She doesn't stand out too much
until she starts to move, but then--Oh, _brother_!" Eddie rolled his
eyes, made motions with his hands, and whistled expressively. "Talk
about poetry in motion! Just walking across a stage, she'd bring down
the house and stop the show cold in its tracks."

"O. K., O. K., don't blow a fuse," Deston said, resignedly. "I know.
You'll love her undyingly; all this trip, maybe. So bring her up, next
watch, and I'll give her a gold badge. As usual."

"You ... how _dumb_ can you get?" Eddie demanded. "D'you think I'd even
_try_ to play footsie with _Barbara Warner_?"

"You'd play footsie with the Archangel Michael's sister if she'd let
you; and she probably would. So who's Barbara Warner?"

Eddie Thompson gazed at his superior pityingly. "I know you're ten nines
per cent monk, Babe, but I _did_ think you pulled your nose out of the
megacycles often enough to learn a _few_ of the facts of life. Did you
ever hear of Warner Oil?"

"I think so." Deston thought for a moment. "Found a big new field,
didn't they? In South America somewhere?"

"Just the biggest on Earth, is all. And not only on Earth. He operates
in all the systems for a hundred parsecs around, and he never sinks a
dry hole. Every well he drills is a gusher that blows the rig clear up
into the stratosphere. Everybody wonders how he does it. My guess is
that his wife's an oil-witch, which is why he lugs his whole family
along wherever he goes. Why else would he?"

"Maybe he loves her. It happens, you know."

"Huh?" Eddie snorted. "After twenty years of her? Comet-gas! Anyway,
would _you_ have the sublime gall to make passes at Warner Oil's
heiress, with more millions in her own sock than you've got dimes?"

"I don't make passes."

"That's right, you don't. Only at books and tapes, even on ground
leaves; more fool you. Well, then, would you _marry_ anybody like that?"

"Certainly, if I loved...." Deston paused, thought a moment, then went
on: "Maybe I wouldn't, either. She'd make me dress for dinner. She'd
probably have a live waiter; maybe even a butler. So I guess I wouldn't,
at that."

"You nor me neither, brother. But _what_ a dish! What a lovely,
luscious, toothsome _dish_!" Eddie mourned.

"You'll be raving about another one tomorrow," Deston said, unfeelingly,
as he turned away.

"I don't know; but even if I do, _she_ won't be anything like _her_,"
Eddie said, to the closing door.

And Deston, outside the door, grinned sardonically to himself. Before
his next watch, Eddie would bring up one of the prettiest girls aboard
for a gold badge; the token that would let her--under approved escort,
of course--go through the Top.

He himself never went down to the Middle, which was passenger territory.
There was nothing there he wanted. He was too busy, had too many
worthwhile things to do, to waste time that way ... but the hunch was
getting stronger and stronger all the time. For the first time in all
his three years of deep-space service he felt an overpowering urge to go
down into the very middle of the Middle; to the starship's main lounge.

He knew that his hunches were infallible. At cards, dice, or wheels he
had always had hunches and he had always won. That was why he had
stopped gambling, years before, before anybody found out. He was that
kind of a man.

Apart from the matter of unearned increment, however, he always followed
his hunches; but this one he did not like at all. He had been resisting
it for hours, because he had never visited the lounge and did not want
to visit it now. But _something_ down there was pulling like a tractor,
so he went. He didn't go to his cabin; didn't even take off his
side-arm. He didn't even think of it; the .41 automatic at his hip was
as much a part of his uniform as his pants.

Entering the lounge, he did not have to look around. She was playing
bridge, and as eyes met eyes and she rose to her feet a shock-wave swept
through him that made him feel as though his every hair was standing
straight on end.

"Excuse me, please," she said to the other three at her table. "I must
go now." She tossed her cards down onto the table and walked straight
toward him; eyes still holding eyes.

He backed hastily out into the corridor, and as the door closed behind
her they went naturally and wordlessly into each other's arms. Lips met
lips in a kiss that lasted for a long, long time. It was not a
passionate embrace--passion would come later--it was as though each of
them, after endless years of bootless, fruitless longing, had come
finally home.

"Come with me, dear, where we can talk," she said, finally; eying with
disfavor the half-dozen highly interested spectators.

And a couple of minutes later, in cabin two hundred eighty-one, Deston
said: "So _this_ is why I had to come down into passenger territory. You
came aboard at exactly zero seven forty-three."

"Uh-uh." She shook her yellow head. "A few minutes before that. That was
when I read your name in the list of officers on the board. First
Officer, Carlyle Deston. I got a tingle that went from the tips of my
toes up and out through the very ends of my hair. Nothing like when we
actually saw each other, of course. We both knew the truth, then. It's
wonderful that you're so strongly psychic, too."

"I don't know about that," he said, thoughtfully. "All my training has
been based on the axiomatic fact that the map is _not_ the territory.
Psionics, as I understand it, holds that the map is--practically--the
territory, but can't prove it. So I simply don't know _what_ to believe.
On one hand, I have had real hunches all my life. On the other, the
signal doesn't carry much information. More like hearing a siren when
you're driving along a street. You know you have to pull over and stop,
but that's all you know. It could be police, fire ambulance--_anything_.
Anybody with any psionic ability at all ought to do a lot better than
that, I should think."

"Not necessarily. You've been fighting it. Ninety-nine per cent of your
mind doesn't _want_ to believe it; is dead set against it. So it has to
force its way through whillions and skillions of ohms of resistance, so
only the most powerful stimuli--'maximum signal' in your jargon,
perhaps?--can get through to you at all." Suddenly she giggled like a
schoolgirl. "You're either psychic or the biggest wolf in the known
universe, and I know you aren't a wolf. If you hadn't been as psychic as
I am, you'd've jumped clear out into subspace when a perfectly strange
girl attacked you."

"How do you know so much about me?"

"I made it a point to. One of the juniors told me you're the only virgin
officer in all space."

"That was Eddie Thompson."

"Uh-huh." She nodded brightly.

"Well, is that bad?"

"Anything else but. That is, he thought it was terrible--outrageous--a
betrayal of the whole officer caste--but to me it makes everything just
absolutely perfect."

"Me, too. How soon can we get married?"

"I'd say right now, except...." She caught her lower lip between her
teeth and thought. "No, no 'except'. Right now, or as soon as you can.
You can't, without resigning, can you? They'd fire you?"

"Don't worry about that," he grinned. "My record is good enough, I
think, to get a good ground job. Even if they fire me for not waiting
until we ground, there's lots of jobs. I can support you, sweetheart."

"Oh, I know you can. I wasn't thinking of _that_. You wouldn't _like_ a
ground job."

"What difference does that make?" he asked, in honest surprise. "A man
grows up. I couldn't have you with me in space, and I'd like that a lot
less. No, I'm done with space, as of now. But what was that 'except'
business?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"I thought at first I'd tell my parents first--they're both aboard--but
I decided not to. She'd scream bloody murder and he'd roar like a lion
and none of it would make me change my mind, so we'll get married
first."

He looked at her questioningly; she shrugged and went on: "We aren't
what you'd call a happy family. She's been trying to make me marry an
old goat of a prince and I finally told her to go roll her hoop--to get
a divorce and marry the foul old beast herself. And to consolidate two
empires, he's been wanting me to marry a multi-billionaire--who is also
a louse and a crumb and a heel. Last week he _insisted_ on it and I blew
up like an atomic bomb. I told him if I got married a thousand times I'd
pick every one of my husbands myself, without the least bit of help from
either him or her. I'd keep on finding oil and stuff for him, I said,
but that was all...."

"_Oil_!" Deston exclaimed, involuntarily, as everything fell into place
in his mind. The way she walked; poetry in motion ... the oil-witch ...
two empires ... more millions than he had dimes.... "Oh, you're Barbara
Warner, then."

"Why, of course; but my friends call me 'Bobby'. Didn't you--but of
course you didn't--you never read passenger lists. If you did, you'd've
got a tingle, too."

"I got plenty of tingle without reading, believe me. However, I never
expected to----"

"Don't say it, dear!" She got up and took both his hands in hers. "I
know how you feel. I don't like to let you ruin your career, either, but
_nothing_ can separate us, now that we've found each other. So I'll tell
you this." Her eyes looked steadily into his. "If it bothers you the
least bit, later on, I'll give every dollar I own to some foundation or
other, I swear it."

He laughed shamefacedly as he took her in his arms. "Since that's the
way _you_ look at it, it won't bother me a bit."

"Uh-huh, you _do_ mean it." She snuggled her head down into the curve of
his neck. "I can tell."

"I know you can, sweetheart." Then he had another thought, and with
strong, deft fingers he explored the muscles of her arms and back. "But
those acrobatics in plus gee--and you're trained down as hard and fine
