lungs, but a phase of the work of glands. From the cells where they are
formed, the waste materials pass into the lymph and from the lymph they
find their way into the blood. They are removed from the blood by glands
and then passed to the exterior of the body.

*The Necessity for Excretion* is found in the results attending oxidation
and other chemical changes at the cells (page 107). Through these changes
large quantities of materials are produced that can no longer take any
part in the vital processes. They correspond to the ashes and gases of
ordinary combustion and form wastes that must be removed. The most
important of these substances, as already noted (page 110), are carbon
dioxide, water, and urea.(74) A number of mineral salts are also to be
included with the waste materials. Some of these are formed in the body,
while others, like common salt, enter as a part of the food. They are
solids, but, like the urea, leave the body dissolved in water.

Waste products, if left in the body, interfere with its work (some of,
them being poisons), and if allowed to accumulate, cause death. Their
removal, therefore, is as important as the introduction of food and oxygen
into the body. The most important of the excretory glands are

*The Kidneys.*--The kidneys are two bean-shaped glands, situated in the
back and upper portion of the abdominal cavity, one on each side of the
spinal column. They weigh from four to six ounces each, and lie between
the abdominal wall and the peritoneum. Two large arteries from the aorta,
called the _renal arteries_, supply them with blood, and they are
connected with the inferior vena cava by the _renal veins_. They remove
from the blood an exceedingly complex liquid, called the _urine_, the
principal constituents of which are water, salts of different kinds,
coloring matter, and urea. The kidneys pass their secretion by two slender
tubes, the _ureters_, to a reservoir called the _bladder_ (Fig. 87).

                                [Fig. 87]


   Fig. 87--*Relations of the kidneys.* (Back view.) 1. The kidneys. 2.
 Ureters. 3. Bladder. 4. Aorta. 5. Inferior vena cava. 6. Renal arteries.
                             7. Renal veins.


*Structure of the Kidneys.*--Each kidney is a compound tubular gland and is
composed chiefly of the parts concerned in secretion. The ureter serves as
a duct for removing the secretion, while the blood supplies the materials
from which the secretion is formed. On making a longitudinal section of
the kidney, the upper end of the ureter is found to expand into a
basin-like enlargement which is embedded in the concave side of the
kidney. The cavity within this enlargement is called the _pelvis of the
kidney_, and into it project a number of cone-shaped elevations from the
kidney substance, called the _pyramids_ (Fig. 88).

From the summits of the pyramids extend great numbers of very small tubes
which, by branching, penetrate to all parts of the kidneys. These are the
_uriniferous tubules_, and they have their beginnings at the outer margin
of the kidney in many small, rounded bodies called the _Malpighian
capsules_ (_A_, Fig. 88). Each capsule incloses a cluster of looped
capillaries and connects with a single tubule (Fig. 89). From the capsule
the tubule extends toward the concave side of the kidney and, after
uniting with similar tubules from other parts, finally terminates at the
pyramid. Between its origin and termination, however, are several
convolutions and one or more loops or turns. After passing a distance many
times greater than from the surface to the center of the kidney, the
tubule empties its contents into the expanded portion of the ureter.

                                [Fig. 88]


    Fig. 88--*Sectional view of kidney.* 1. Outer portion or cortex. 2.
 Medullary portion. 3. Pyramids. 4. Pelvis. 5. Ureter. _A._ Small section
   enlarged to show the tubules and their connection with the capsules.


                                [Fig. 89]


Fig. 89--*Malpighian capsule* highly magnified (Landois). _a._ Small artery
  entering capsule and forming cluster of capillaries within. _e._ Small
vein leaving capsule and branching into _c_, a second set of capillaries,
                  _h._ Beginning of uriniferous tubule.


The uriniferous tubules are lined with secreting cells. These differ
greatly at different places, but they all rest upon a basement membrane
and are well supplied with capillaries. These cells provide one means of
separating wastes from the blood (Fig. 90).

                                [Fig. 90]


  Fig. 90--*Diagram illustrating renal circulation.* 1. Branch from renal
artery. 2. Branch from renal vein. 3. Small artery branches, one of which
  enters a Malpighian capsule (5). 6. Small vein leaving the capsule and
branching into the capillaries (7) which surround the uriniferous tubules.
4. Small veins which receive blood from the second set of capillaries. 8.
                Tubule showing lining of secreting cells.


*Blood Supply to the Kidneys.*--The method by which the kidneys do their
work is suggested by the way in which the blood circulates through them.
The renal artery entering each kidney divides into four branches and these
send smaller divisions to all parts of the kidney. At the outer margin of
the kidney, called the _cortex_, the blood is passed through _two sets of
capillaries_. The first forms the clusters in the Malpighian capsules and
receives the blood directly from the smallest arteries. The second forms a
network around the uriniferous tubules and receives the blood which has
passed from the capillary clusters into a system of small veins (Fig. 90).
From the last set of capillaries the blood is passed into veins which
leave the kidneys where the artery branches enter, uniting there to form
the main renal veins.

*Work of the Kidneys.*--Why should the blood pass through two systems of
capillaries in the kidneys? This is because the separation of waste is
done in part by the Malpighian capsules and in part by the uriniferous
tubules. Water and salts are removed chiefly at the capsules, while the
remaining solid constituents of the urine pass through the secreting cells
that line the tubules. It was formerly believed that the kidneys obtained
their secretion by a process of filtration from the blood, but this belief
has been gradually modified. The prevailing view now is that the processes
of filtration and secretion are both carried on by the kidneys,--that the
capillary clusters in the Malpighian bodies serve as delicate filters for
the separation of water and salts, while the secreting cells of the
tubules separate substances by the process of secretion.

On account of the large volume of blood passing through the kidneys this
liquid is still a bright red color as it flows into the renal veins (Fig.
90). The kidney cells require oxygen, but the amount which they remove
from the blood is not sufficient to affect its color noticeably. The blood
in the renal veins, having given up most of its impurities and still
retaining its oxygen, is considered the purest blood in the body.

*Urea* is the most abundant solid constituent of the urine and is the
chief waste product arising from the oxidation of nitrogenous substances
in the body. Although secreted by the cells lining the uriniferous
tubules, it is not formed in the kidneys. The secreting cells simply
separate it from the blood where it already exists. The muscles also have
been suggested as a likely source of urea, for here the proteids are
broken down in largest quantities; but the muscles produce little if any
urea. Its production has been found to be the _work of the liver_. In the
muscular tissue, and in the other tissues as well, the proteids are
reduced to a lower order of compounds, such as the compounds of ammonia,
which pass into the blood and are then taken up by the liver. By the
action of the liver cells these are converted into urea and this is turned
back into the blood. From the blood the urea is separated by the secreting
cells of the kidneys.

*Work of the Liver.*--The liver, already described as an organ of digestion
(page 152), assists in the work of excretion both by changing waste
nitrogenous compounds into urea and by removing from the blood the wastes
found in the bile. While the chief work of the liver is perhaps not that
of excretion, its functions may here be summarized. The liver is, first of
all, a _manufacturing organ_, producing, as we have seen, three distinct
products--bile, glycogen, and urea. On account of the nature of the urea
and the bile, the liver is properly classed as an _excretory organ_; but
in the formation of the glycogen it plays the part of a _storage organ_.
Then, on account of the use made of the bile after it is passed into the
food canal, the liver is also classed as a _digestive organ_. These
different functions make of the liver an organ of the first importance.

*Excretory Work of the Food Canal.*--The glands connected with the food
canal, other than the liver, while secreting liquids that aid in
digestion, also separate waste materials from the blood. These are passed
into the canal, whence they leave the body with the undigested portions of
the food and the waste from the liver. Though the nature and quantity of
the materials removed by these glands have not been fully determined,
recent investigations have tended to enhance the importance attached to
this mode of excretion.

*The Perspiratory Glands.*--The perspiratory, or sweat, glands are located
in the skin. They belong to the type of simple tubular glands and are very
numerous over the entire surface of the body. A typical sweat gland
consists of a tube which, starting at the surface of the cuticle,
penetrates to the under portion of the true skin and there forms a
ball-shaped coil. The coiled extremity, which forms the secreting portion,
is lined with secreting cells and surrounded by a network of capillaries.
The portion of the tube passing from the coil to the surface serves as a
duct (Figs. 91 and 121).

                                [Fig. 91]


 Fig. 91--*Diagram of section through a sweat gland.* _a._ Outer layer of
 skin or cuticle. _b._ Dermis or true skin. _d, e._ Sections of the tube
forming the coiled portion of the gland. _c._ Duct passing to the surface.
               The other structures of the skin not shown.


The sweat glands secrete a thin, colorless fluid, called _perspiration_,
or sweat. This consists chiefly of water, but contains a small per cent of
salts and of urea. The excretory work of these glands seems not to be so
great as was formerly supposed, but they supplement in a practical way the
work of the kidneys and, during diseases of these organs, show an increase
in excretory function to a marked degree. The perspiration also aids in
the regulation of the temperature of the body (Chapter XVI).

*Excretory Work of the Lungs.*--While the lungs cannot be regarded as
glands, they do a work in the removal of waste from the body which must be
considered in the general process of excretion. They are especially
adapted to the removal of gaseous substances from the blood, and it is
through them that most of the carbon dioxide leaves the body. The lungs
remove also a considerable quantity of water. This is of course in the
gaseous form, being known as water vapor.

*Ductless Glands and Internal Secretion.*--Midway in function between the
glands that secrete useful liquids and those that remove waste materials
from the blood is a class of bodies, found at various places, known as the
_ductless glands._ They are so named from their having the general form of
glands and from the fact that they have no external openings or ducts.
They prepare special materials which are passed into the blood and which
are supposed to exert some beneficial effect either upon the blood or upon
the tissues through which the blood circulates. The most important of the
ductless glands are the thyroid gland, located in the neck; the suprarenal
bodies, situated one just over each kidney; and the thymus gland, a
temporary gland in the upper part of the chest. The spleen and the
lymphatic glands (page 68) are also classed with the ductless glands. The
liver, the pancreas, and (according to some authorities) the kidneys, in
addition to their external secretions, produce materials that pass into
the blood. They perform in this way a function like that of the ductless
glands. The work of glands in preparing substances that enter the blood is
known as _internal secretion._

*Quantity of Excretory Products.*--If the weight of the normal body be
taken at intervals, after growth has been attained, there will be found to
be practically no gain or loss from time to time. This shows that
materials are leaving the body as fast as they enter and that the tissues
are being torn down as fast as they are built up. It also shows that
substances do not remain in the body _permanently_, but only so long
perhaps as is necessary for them to give up their energy, or serve some
additional purpose in the ever changing protoplasm. The excretory organs
then remove from the body a quantity of material that is equal in weight
to the materials absorbed by the organs of digestion and respiration. This
is estimated for the average individual to be about five pounds daily. The
passage of waste from the body is summarized in Table III.

      TABLE III. THE PASSAGE OF WASTE MATERIALS FROM THE BODY
Materials   State       How Formed       Condition in   How Removed
                        in the Body      the Blood      from the
                                                        Blood
Carbon      Gas         By the           Dissolved in   Separated
dioxide                 oxidation of     the plasma     from the
                        the carbon       and in loose   blood at the
                        of proteids,     combination    alveoli of
                        carbohydrates,   with salts     the lungs
                        and fats.        in the         and then
                                         blood.         forced
                                                        through the
                                                        air passages
                                                        into the
                                                        atmosphere.
Urea        Solid       By the           Dissolved in   Removed by
                        oxidation in     the plasma.    the
                        the liver of                    uriniferous
                        nitrogenous                     tubules of
                        compounds.                      the kidneys
                                                        and to a
                                                        small extent
                                                        by the
                                                        perspiratory
                                                        glands.
Water       Liquid      By the           As water.      Removed by
                        oxidation of                    all the
                        the hydrogen                    organs of
                        of proteids,                    excretion,
                        carbohydrates,                  but in the
                        and fats.                       largest
                        Amount formed                   quantities
                        in the body is                  by the
                        small.                          kidneys and
                                                        the skin.
Salts       Solid                        Dissolved in   By the
                                         the plasma.    kidneys,
                                                        liver, and
                                                        skin.



HYGIENE


The separation of wastes from the body has such a close relation to the
health that all conditions affecting it should receive the most careful
attention. Their retention beyond the time when they should be discharged
undoubtedly does harm and is the cause of many bodily disorders.

*Value of Water.*--As a rule the work of excretion is aided by drinking
_freely_ of pure water. As water is the natural dissolver and transporter
of materials in the body, it is generally conceded by hygienists and
physicians that the taking of plenty of water is a healthful practice.
People do not as a rule drink a sufficient amount of water, about three
pints per day being required by the average adult, in addition to that
contained in the food. Most of the water should, of course, be taken
between meals, although the sipping of a small amount during meals does
not interfere with digestion. As stated elsewhere, the taking of a cup of
water on retiring at night and again on rising in the morning is very
generally recommended.

*Protection of Kidneys and Liver.*--The kidneys and liver are closely
related in their work and in many instances are injured or benefited by
the same causes. Both, as already stated (page 124), are liable to injury
from an _excess of proteid food_, especially meats, and also by a
condition of inactivity of the bowels (page 166). The free use of alcohol
also has an injurious effect on both of these organs.(75) On the other
hand, increasing the activity of the skin has a beneficial effect upon
them, especially the kidneys. Exercise and bathing, which tend to make the
skin more active, are valuable aids both in ridding the body of impurities
and in lessening the work of the other excretory organs. One having a
disease of the kidneys, however, needs to exercise great care in bathing
on account of the bad results which follow getting chilled.

*Special Care after Certain Diseases.*--Certain diseases, as measles,
diphtheria, scarlet fever, and typhoid fever, sometimes have the effect of
weakening the kidneys (and other vital organs) and of starting disease in
them. When this occurs it is usually the result of exposure or of
over-exertion while the body is in a weakened condition. Severe chilling
at such a time, by driving blood from the surface to the parts within,
often causes inflammation of the kidneys. On recovering from any wasting
disease one should exercise great caution both in resuming his regular
work and in exposing his body to wet or cold.

*Misunderstood Symptoms.*--Pains in the small of the back, an increase in
the secretions of the kidneys, and a sediment in the urine very naturally
suggest some disorder of the kidneys. It is a fact, however, that these
symptoms have little or no relation to the state of the kidneys and may
occur when the kidneys are in a perfectly healthy condition. The kidneys
are not located in the small of the back, but above this place, so that
pains in this region are evidently not from the kidneys, while the
increase in the flow of the urine may arise from a number of causes, one
of which is an increase of certain waste products passed into the blood.
The symptoms referred to are frequently the results of nervous exhaustion,
resulting from overstudy, worry, eye strain, or some other condition that
overtaxes the nervous system. When this is the case, relief is obtained
through resting the nerves. Actual disease of the kidneys can only be
determined through a chemical and microscopic examination of the urine. To
resort to some patent medicine for kidney trouble without knowing that
such trouble exists, as is sometimes done, is both foolish and unhygienic.

*Alcoholic Beverages and the Elimination of Waste.*--Causing as it does
such serious diseases as cirrhosis of the liver and Bright's disease of
the kidneys (footnote, page 210), alcohol will greatly interfere in this
way with the elimination of waste. There is also evidence to the effect
that it interferes with waste elimination before the stage is reached of
causing disease of these organs. Researches have shown that alcohol
increases the amount of uric acid in the body and decreases the amount of
urea found in the urine. The conclusion to be drawn is that alcohol
interferes in some way with the change of the harmful uric acid into the
comparatively harmless urea--an interference which in some instances
results in great harm. It has also been shown that malted liquors, such as
beer and ale, contain substances which, like the caffein of tea and coffee
(page 167), are readily converted into uric acid.(76) Wines contain acids
which may also act injuriously. The harm which such substances do is, of
course, additional to that caused by the alcohol.

*Summary.*--As a result of the oxidations and other changes at the cells,
substances are produced that can no longer serve a purpose in the body.
They are of the nature of waste, and their continuous removal from the
body is as necessary to the maintenance of life as the introduction of
food and oxygen. The organs whose work it is to remove the waste,
excepting the lungs, are glands; and the material which they remove are of
the nature of secretions. From the cells, the waste passes through the
lymph in the blood. From the blood it is separated by the excretory organs
and passed to the exterior of the body.

*Exercises.*--1. What general purposes are served by the glands in the
body?

2. What are the parts common to all glands? What purpose is served by each
of these parts?

3. How do tubular glands differ in structure from saccular glands? What is
a racemose gland? Why so called?

4. Describe the nature of the secretory process.

5. What conditions render necessary the formation of waste materials in
the body? Why must these be removed?

6. How do the waste materials get from the cells to the organs of
excretion?

7. Show by a drawing the connections of the kidneys with the large blood
vessels and the bladder. Name parts of drawing.

8. In what do the uriniferous tubes have their beginning? In what do they
terminate? With what are they lined?

9. Why should the blood pass through two sets of capillaries in the
kidneys?

10. Bright's disease of the kidneys affects the uriniferous tubes and
interferes with their work. What impurity is then left in the blood?

11. Trace water and salts from the Malpighian capsules to the bladder,
naming parts through which they pass.

12. Trace carbon dioxide from the cells to the outside atmosphere.

13. How does the quantity of material introduced into the body compare
with that which is removed by the organs of excretion?

14. Name two ways of lessening the work of the kidneys.

15. Why is the drinking of plenty of pure water a healthful practice?



PRACTICAL WORK


*To suggest the Double Work of Glands.*--Prepare a simple filter by fitting
a piece of porous paper into a glass funnel. Through this pass pure water
and also water having salt dissolved in it and containing some sediment,
as sand. The water and the dissolved salt pass through, while the sediment
remains on the filter. Now substitute a fresh piece of paper in the funnel
and drop on its surface a little solid coloring matter, such as cochineal.
Again pass the liquid through the funnel. This time it comes through
colored, the color being added by the filter. Compare the filter and
materials filtered to the gland and the materials concerned in secretion
(blood, the liquid secreted, substances added by the gland, etc.).

                                [Fig. 92]


   Fig. 92--*The physiological scheme.* Diagram suggesting the essential
 relation of the bodily activities. See Summary of Part I, page 215, and
                      Summary of Part II, page 413.



SUMMARY OF PART I


The body is an organization of different kinds of cells; it grows through
the growth and reproduction of these cells; and its life as a whole is
maintained by providing such conditions as will enable the cells to keep
alive. Of chief importance in the work of the body is a nutrient fluid
which supplies the cells with food and oxygen and relieves them of waste.
A moving portion of this fluid, called the blood, serves as a transporting
agent, while another portion, called the lymph, passes the materials
between the blood and the cells. Through their effects upon the blood and
the lymph, the organs of circulation, respiration, digestion, and
excretion minister in different ways to the cells, and aid in the
maintenance of life. By their combined action two distinct movements are
kept up in the body, as follows:

1. An _inward_ movement which carries materials from the outside of the
body toward the cells.

2. An _outward_ movement which carries materials from the cells to the
outside of the body.

Passing _inward_ are the oxygen and food materials _in a condition to
unite with each other_ and thereby change their potential into kinetic
energy. Passing _outward_ are the oxygen and the elements that formed the
food materials _after having united_ at the cells and liberated their
energy.

As a final and all-important result, there is kept up a _continuous series
of chemical changes_ in the cells. These liberate the energy, provide
special substances needed by the cells, and preserve the life of the body
(Fig. 92).

In the chapters which follow, we are to consider the problem of adjusting
the body to and of bringing it into proper relations with its
surroundings.





PART II: MOTION, COORDINATION, AND SENSATION




CHAPTER XIV - THE SKELETON


One necessary means of establishing proper relations between the body and
its surroundings is _motion_.(77) Not only can the body move itself from
place to place, but it is able to move surrounding objects as well. In the
production of motion three important systems are employed--the muscular
system, the nervous system, and a system of mechanical devices which are
found mainly in the skeleton. The muscular system supplies the energy for
operating the mechanical devices, while the nervous system controls the
movements.(78) Although the skeleton serves other purposes, such as giving
shape to the body and protecting certain organs, its main use is that of
an aid in the production of motion.

*Skeleton Tissues.*--The tissues employed in the construction of the
skeleton are the osseous, the cartilaginous, and the connective tissues.
These are known as the supporting tissues of the body. They form the
bones, supply the elastic pads at the ends of the bones, and furnish
strong bands, called ligaments, for fastening the bones together. The
skeleton forms about 16 per cent of the weight of the body. Its tissues,
being of a more durable nature than the rest of the body, do not so
readily decay. Especially is this true of the osseous tissue, which may be
preserved indefinitely, after removal from the body, by simply keeping it
dry.

*The Bones.*--The separate units, or parts, of which the skeleton is
constructed are called bones. They are the hard structures that can be
felt in all parts of the body, and they comprise nearly the entire amount
of material found in the prepared skeleton. As usually estimated, the
bones are 208 in number. They vary greatly in size and shape in different
parts of the body.

*Composition and Properties of Bones.*--The most noticeable and important
properties of the bones are those of hardness, stiffness, and toughness.
Upon these properties the uses of the bones depend. These properties may,
in turn, be shown to depend upon the presence in osseous tissue of two
essentially different kinds of substance, known as the _animal matter_ and
the _mineral matter_. If a bone is soaked in an acid, the mineral matter
is dissolved out, and as a result it loses its properties of hardness and
stiffness. (See Practical Work.) This is because the mineral matter
supplies these properties, being composed of substances which are hard and
closely resemble certain kinds of rock. The chief materials forming the
mineral matter are calcium phosphate and calcium carbonate.

On the other hand, burning a bone destroys the animal matter. When this is
done the bone loses its toughness, and becomes quite brittle. The property
of toughness is, therefore, supplied by the animal matter. This consists
mainly of a substance called _ossein_, which may be dissolved out of the
bones by boiling them. Separated from the bones it is known as _gelatine_.
The blood vessels and nerves in the bones, and the protoplasm of the bone
cells, are also counted in with the animal matter.

                                [Fig. 93]


 Fig. 93--*Section of a long bone* (_tibia_), showing the gross structure.


If a dry bone from a full-grown, but not old, animal be weighed before and
after being burned, it is found to lose about one third of its weight.
From this we may conclude that about one third of the bone by weight is
animal matter and two thirds is mineral matter. This proportion, however,
varies with age, the mineral matter increasing with advance of years.

*Gross Structure of Bones.*--The gross structure of the bones is best
learned by studying both dry and fresh specimens. (See Practical Work.)
The ends of the bones are capped by a layer of smooth, elastic cartilage,
while all the remaining surface is covered by a rather dense sheath of
connective tissue, called the _periosteum_. Usually the central part of
the long bones is hollow, being filled with a fatty substance known as the
_yellow marrow_. Around the marrow cavity the bone is very dense and
