course. And we have to get some new equipment, including nuclite
shielding. Also, sir, I'd appreciate it if you'd let my men clean up and
eat. They haven't been in air since we left the cruiser."

For answer, O'Brine strode to the operating-room communicator. "Get it,"
he called. "The deputy commander will prepare landing boat one and issue
new space suits and helmets for all Planeteers with damaged equipment.
Put in two rolls of nuclite. Sergeant Major Koa will see that all
Planeteers have an opportunity to clean up and eat. They will return to
the asteroid in one hour."

Rip asked, "Will I be able to go into space by then?"

The doctor replied, "Your arm will be normal in about twenty minutes. It
will ache some, but you'll have full use of it. We'll bring you back to
the ship in about twenty-four hours for another look at it, just to be
sure."

Sixty minutes later, clean, fed, and contented, the Planeteers were again
on the thorium planet, while the _Scorpius_, riding the same orbit, stood
by a few miles out in space.

The asteroid and the great cruiser arched high above the belt of tiny
worlds in the orbit Rip had set, traveling together toward distant Mars.




CHAPTER TWELVE

Mercury Transit


The long hours passed, and only Rip's chronometer told him when the end
of a day was reached. The Planeteers alternately worked on the surface
and rested in the air of the landing boat compartment, while the asteroid
sped steadily on its way.

When a series of sightings over several days gave Rip enough exact data
to work on, he recalculated the orbit, found the amount that the course
had to be corrected, and supervised the cutting of new holes in the
metal.

Tubes of ordinary rocket fuel were placed in these and fired, and the
thrust moved the asteroid slightly, just enough to make the corrections
Rip needed. It was not necessary to take to the landing boat for these
blasts. The Planeteers retired to their cave, which was now lined with
nuclite as a protection against radiation.

Rip watched his dosimeter climb steadily as the radiation dosage mounted.
Then he took the landing boat to the Scorpius, talked the problem over
with the ship's medical department, and arranged for his men to take
injections that would keep them from getting radiation sickness.

They left the asteroid belt far behind and passed within ten thousand
miles of Mars. The _Scorpius_ sent its entire complement of snapper-boats
to the asteroid for protection, in case Consops made another try, then
flamed off to Marsport to put in new supplies to replace those damaged
when Rip had forced sudden and disastrous acceleration.

The asteroid had reached Earth's solar orbit before the cruiser returned,
though Earth itself was on the other side of the sun. Rip ordered a
survey and found the best place on the dark side to make a new base. The
Planeteers cut out a cave with the torch, lined it with nuclite, and
moved in the supplies. It would be their base to the end of the trip.

The sun was very hot now. On the sunny side of the asteroid the
temperature had soared far past the boiling point of water. But on the
dark side, Rip measured temperatures close to absolute zero.

When the _Scorpius_ returned, he arranged with Commander O'Brine for the
Planeteers to take turns going to the cruiser for showers and decent
meals.

The asteroid approached the orbit of Venus, but the bright planet was
some distance away, at its greatest elongation to the east of the sun.
Mercury, however, loomed larger and larger. They would pass close to the
hot planet.

O'Brine recalled Rip to the _Scorpius_ and handed him a message.

  Asteroid now within protection reach of Mercury and Terra bases. Your
  escort no longer required. Proceed immediately Titan, take on cargo and
  personnel.

The commander sighed. "Looks like I'll never get to Earth long enough to
see my family."

Rip sympathized. "Tough, sir. Perhaps the cargo from Titan will be
scheduled for Terra."

"That's what I hope," O'Brine agreed. "Well, here's where we part. Is
there anything you need?"

Rip made a mental check on supplies. He had more than enough. "The only
thing we need is a long-range communicator, sir. We'll need one to
contact the planet bases."

"I'll see that you get one." The Irishman thrust out his hand. "Stay
out of high vack, Foster. Too bad you didn't join us instead of the
Planeteers. I might have made a decent officer out of you."

Rip grinned. "That's a real compliment, sir. I might return it by saying
that you have the makings of a Planeteer officer yourself."

O'Brine chuckled. "All right. Let's declare a truce, Planeteer. We'll
meet again. Space isn't very big."

A short time later Rip stood in front of his asteroid base and watched
the great cruiser drive into space. A short distance away a snapper-boat
was lashed to the landing boat. O'Brine had left it, with a word of
warning.

"These Connies are plenty smart. I don't like leaving you unprotected,
even within reach of Mercury and Terra, but orders are orders. Keep the
snapper-boat, and you'll at least be able to put up a fight if you bump
into trouble."

The asteroid sped on its lonely way for two days, and then a cruiser came
out of space, its nuclear drive glowing. The Planeteers manned the rocket
launcher, and Rip and Santos stood by the snapper-boat, just in case, but
the cruiser was the _Sagittarius_, out of Mercury.

Capt. Go Sian-tek, a Chinese Planeteer officer, arrived in one of the
cruiser's boats with three enlisted men.

Captain Go greeted Rip and his men, then handed over a plastic stylus
plate ordering Rip to deliver six cubic meters of thorium for use on
Mercury. While Koa supervised the cutting of the block, Rip and the
captain chatted.

The Mercurian Planeteer base was in the twilight zone, but the Planeteers
always worked on the sun side, wearing special alloy suits to mine the
precious nuclite that only the hot planet provided.

At some time during its first years, Mercury had been so close to the
sun that its temperature was driven high enough to permit a subatomic
thermonuclear reaction. The reaction had shorn some elements of their
electrons and left a thin coating of material composed almost entirely
of neutrons. The nuclite was incredibly dense. It could be handled only
in low gravity because of its weight. But nothing else provided the
shielding against radiation and meteors half so well, and it was in great
demand.

"Things aren't so bad," Go told Rip. "The base is comfortable, and we
only work a two-hour shift out of each ten. We've had a plague of silly
dillies recently. They got into one man's suit while we were working, but
mostly they're just a nuisance."

Rip had heard of the creatures. They were like Earth armadillos, except
that they were silicon animals and not carbon like those of Earth. They
were drawn to oxygen like iron to a magnet, and their diamond-hard
tongues, used for drilling rock in order to get the minerals on which
they lived, could drive right through a space suit. Or, if these animals
worked undetected for a while, they could drill through the shell of a
space station.

_Scralabus primus_ was the scientific name of the creature, but the fact
that it looked like a silicon armadillo had given it the popular name of
"silly dilly." Apart from its desire for oxygen, it was harmless.

Koa reported, "Sir, the block of thorium is ready. We've hung it on a
line behind the landing-boat. The blast won't hurt it, and it's too big
to get inside the boat."

"Fine, Koa. Well, Captain, that does it."

The Mercurian Planeteers got into their craft and blasted off, trailing
the block of thorium in their exhaust. Rip watched the cruiser take the
craft and thorium aboard, then drive toward Mercury, brilliant sunlight
reflecting from its sleek sides. The planet was only a short distance
away by spaceship. It was the largest thing in space, except for the sun,
as seen from the asteroid.

Past the orbit of Mercury, the sun side of the asteroid grew dangerously
hot for men in space suits. Rip and the Planeteers stayed in the bitter
cold of the dark side, which ceased to be entirely dark. The temperature
rose somewhat. They were close enough to the sun that the prominences,
great flaming tongues of hydrogen that sped many thousands of miles into
space, gave them light and enough heat to register on Rip's instruments.

Mercury was left far behind, and Earth could not be seen because of the
sun. There was nothing to do now but ride out the rest of the trip as
comfortably as possible, until it was time to throw the asteroid into
a series of ever-tightening elliptical orbits around Earth, known as
braking ellipses. The method would use Earth's gravity to slow them down
to the proper speed. A single atomic bomb and a half dozen tubes of
rocket fuel remained.

Then, as Rip was enjoying the comfort of air during his off-watch hour in
the boat compartment, Koa beat an alarm on the door.

Rip and the Planeteers got into suits and opened up.

"It's Terra base calling on the communicator, sir," Koa reported. "Urgent
message, they said, and they want to talk to you personally."

Rip hurried to the cave. The communicator indicator light was glowing
bright red. He plugged in his helmet circuit and said, "This is
Lieutenant Foster. Go ahead."

A voice crackled across space from Earth. "This is Terra base. Foster,
a Consops cruiser has apparently been hiding behind the sun waiting for
you. Our screens just picked it up, heading your way. We've sent orders
to the _Sagittarius_ on Mercury to give you cover, and the _Aquila_ has
taken off from here. But get this, Foster. The Consops cruiser will reach
you first. You have about one hour. Do you understand?"

Rip understood all right. He understood too well. "Got you," he said
shortly. "Now what?"

The communicator buzzed. "Take any appropriate action. You're on your
own. Sorry. Sending the cruisers is all we can do. We'll stand by for
word from you. If you think of any way we can help, let us know."

Rip asked, "How long before the cruisers arrive?"

"You're too close to us for them to move fast. They'll have to use time
accelerating and decelerating. The _Sagittarius_ should arrive in
something less than two hours and the _Aquila_ a few minutes later."

The communicator paused, then continued. "One thing more, Foster. The
Connies know how badly we want that asteroid, but they also know we don't
want it enough to start a war. Got that?"

"Got it," Rip stated wryly. "I got it good. Thanks for the warning, Terra
base. Foster off."

"Terra base off. Stay out of high vack."

Fine advice, if it could be taken. Rip stared up at the brilliant stars,
thinking fast. The Connie would have almost an hour's lead on the
space-patrol cruisers. In that hour, if the Connie were willing to pay
the price in blasted snapper-boats, Consops would have the asteroid. And
Terra base had made it clear that the space patrol would not try to blast
the Connie cruiser, because that would mean war.

Added together, the facts said just one thing: They had one hour in which
to think of some way to hold off the Connies for an additional hour.

The Planeteers were clustered around him. Rip asked grimly, "Any of you
ever study the ancient art of magic?"

The Planeteers remained silent and tense.

"Magic is what we need," Rip told them. "We have to make the whole
asteroid disappear, or else we have to conjure up a space cruiser out
of the thorium. Otherwise, we have barely an hour till we're either
prisoners or dead!"




CHAPTER THIRTEEN

Peril!


Sergeant major Koa asked thoughtfully, "Sir, would it do the Connie much
good to launch boats this close to the sun? They'd have to use too much
fuel just keeping position."

"You could be right," Rip said slowly. Koa had a point! To counter
gravitational attraction took velocity, which meant consumption of fuel.
Maneuvering boats meant rapid velocity changes. Against the sun's
terrific gravity at this distance, it also meant maximum thrust and
maximum fuel flow most of the time. The asteroid, in a planned orbit with
the correct velocity, was safe enough, and the Connie cruiser would
simply match the asteroid's orbit. But boats, which had to maneuver, were
another matter.

Rip figured quickly. In accordance with Newton's Law, gravitational
attraction increased rapidly on approaching a body. If he could put the
asteroid even closer to the sun, the boat problem would become worse,
until even a small velocity change in the wrong direction could leave
a boat in the terrible position of not having enough thrust for a long
enough time to keep from being drawn into the sun.

But to change the asteroid's orbit was dangerous! It meant losing just
enough velocity to be drawn closer to the sun, and then picking up a much
higher velocity to get free again!

Rip got his instruments and pulled out a special slide rule designed for
use in space. He had Koa stand by with stylus and computation board and
take down his figures.

He recalculated the safety factor he had used when deciding how close
to the sun to put the asteroid, then took quick star sights to determine
their exact position. They were within a few miles of perihelion, the
point at which they would be closest to Sol.

Rip tapped gloved fingers on his helmet absently. If they could blast out
of the orbit and drive into the sun.... He estimated the result. A few
miles per second of less speed would let them be pulled so far within the
sun's field of gravity that, within an hour or so, small boats would
venture into space only at their peril.

He reviewed the equipment. They had tubes of rocket fuel, but the tubes
wouldn't give the powerful thrust needed for this job. They had one
atomic bomb. One wasn't enough. Not only must they drive toward the sun,
but also they must keep reserve power to blast free again. If only they
had a pair of nuclear charges!

He called his Planeteers together and outlined the problem. Perhaps
one of them would have an idea. But no useful suggestions were
forth-coming--until Dominico spoke up. "Sir, why don't we make two
bombs from one?"

"I wish we could," Rip said. "Do you know how?"

"No, Lieutenant. If we had parts, I could put bombs together. I can take
them apart, but I don't know how to make two out of one." The Italian
Planeteer looked accusingly at Rip. "I thought maybe you knew, sir."

Rip grunted. If they had parts, he could assemble nuclear bombs, too.
Part of his physics training had been concerned with fission and its
various applications. But no one had taught him how to make two bombs
out of one.

The theory behind this particular bomb design was simple. Two or more
correctly sized pieces of plutonium or uranium isotope, when brought
together, formed what was known as a critical mass, which would fission.
The fissioning released energy and produced the explosion.

But there was a wide gap between theory and practice. A nuclear bomb was
actually pretty complicated. It had to be complicated to keep the pieces
of the fissionable material apart until a chemical explosion drove them
together fast and hard enough to create a fission explosion. If the
pieces weren't brought together rapidly enough, the mass would fission
in a slow chain reaction with no explosion.

Rip was trained in scientific analysis. He tackled the problem logically,
considering the design of a nuclear bomb and the reasons for it.

Atomic bombs had to be carried. That meant an outer casing was necessary.
The casing had a lot to do with the design. Suppose no casing were
required? What would be needed?

He took the stylus and computation board from Koa and jotted down the
parts required. First, two or more pieces of plutonium large enough to
form a critical mass. Second, a neutron source--the type of radioactivity
that produced neutrons--to accelerate the reaction. Third, some kind of
