projecting from its cabin plating.

The seven objects rose one by one and went bellowing and blundering out
to the open air. At 40 and 50 feet above the ground, they jockeyed into
some sort of formation, with much wallowing and pitching and clumsy
maneuvering.

Then, without preliminary, they started up. They rose swiftly. The noise
of their going diminished from a bellow to a howl, and from a howl to a
moaning noise, and then to a faint, faint, ever-dwindling hum.

Presently that faded out, too.




8


All the sensations were familiar, the small fleet of improbable objects
rose and rose. Of all flying objects ever imagined by man, the launching
cages supported by pushpots were most irrational.

The squadron, though, went bumbling upward. In the manned ship, Joe was
more tense than on his other take-off--if such a thing was possible. His
work was harder this trip. Before, he'd had Mike at communications and
the Chief at the steering rockets while Haney kept the pushpots balanced
for thrust. Now Joe flew the manned ship alone. Headphones and a mike
gave him communications with the Shed direct, and the pushpots were
balanced in groups, which cost efficiency but helped on control. He
would have, moreover, to handle his own steering rockets during
acceleration and when he could--and dared--he should supervise the
others. Because each of the other three had two drone-ships to guide.
True, they had only to keep their drones in formation, but Joe had to
navigate for all. The four of them had been assigned this flight because
of its importance. They happened to be the only crew alive who had ever
flown a space ship designed for maneuvering, and their experience
consisted of a single trip.

The jet stream was higher this time than on that other journey now two
months past. They blundered into it at 36,000 feet. Joe's headphones
buzzed tinnily. Radar from the ground told him his rate-of-rise, his
ground speed, his orbital speed, and added comments on the handling of
the drones.

The last was not a precision job. On the way up Joe protested,
"Somebody's ship--Number Four--is lagging! Snap it up!"

Mike said crisply, "Got it, Joe. Coming up!"

"The Shed says three separate ships are getting out of formation. And we
need due east pointing. Check it."

The Chief muttered, "Something whacky here ... come round, you! Okay,
Joe."

Joe had no time for reflection. He was in charge of the clumsiest
operation ever designed for an exact result. The squadron went wallowing
toward the sky. The noise was horrible. A tinny voice in his headphones:

"_You are at 65,000 feet. Your rate-of-climb curve is flattening. You
should fire your jatos when practical. You have some leeway in rocket
power._"

Joe spoke into the extraordinary maze of noise waves and pressure
systems in the air of the cabin.

"We should blast. I'm throwing in the series circuit for jatos. Try to
line up. We want the drones above us and with a spread, remember! Go to
it!"

He watched his direction indicator and the small graphic indicators
telling of the drones. The sky outside the ports was dark purple. The
launching cage responded sluggishly. Its open end came around toward the
east. It wobbled and wavered. It touched the due-east point. Joe stabbed
the firing-button.

Nothing happened. He hadn't expected it. The seven ships had to keep in
formation. They had to start off on one course--with a slight spread as
a safety measure--and at one time. So the firing-circuits were keyed to
relays in series. Only when all seven firing-keys were down at the same
time would any of the jatos fire. Then all would blast together.

The pilots in the cockpit-bubbles of the pushpots had an extraordinary
view of the scene. At something over twelve miles height, seven
aggregations of clumsy black things clung to frameworks of steel,
pushing valorously. Far below there were clouds and there was Earth.
There was a horizon, which wavered and tilted. The pushpots struggled
with seeming lack of purpose. One of the seven seemed to drop below the
others. They pointed vaguely this way and that--all of them. But
gradually they seemed to arrive at an uncertain unanimity.

Joe pushed the firing-button again as his own ship touched the due-east
mark. Again nothing happened. Out of the corner of his eye he saw Haney
pressing down both buttons. The Chief's finger lifted. Mike pushed down
one button and held off the other.

Roarings and howlings of pushpots. Wobblings and heart-breaking
clumsinesses of the drone-ships. They hung in the sky while the pushpots
used up their fuel.

"We've got to make it soon," said Joe grimly. "We've got forty seconds.
Or we'll have to go down and try again."

There was a clock dial with a red sweep-hand which moved steadily and
ominously toward a deadline time for firing. Up to that deadline, the
pushpots could let the ships back down to Earth without crashing them.
After it, they'd run out of fuel before a landing could be made.

The deadline came closer and closer. Joe snapped:

"Take a degree leeway. We've got ten seconds."

He had the manned ship nearly steady. He held down the firing-button,
holding aim by infinitesimal movements of the controls. Haney pushed
both hands down, raised one, pushed again. The Chief had one finger
down. Mike had both firing buttons depressed.... The Chief pushed down
his second button, quietly.

There was a monstrous impact. Every jato in every pushpot about every
launching cage fired at once. Joe felt himself flung back into his
acceleration chair. Six gravities. He began the horrible fight to stay
alive, while the blood tried to drain from the conscious forepart of his
brain, and while every button of his garments pressed noticeably against
him, and objects in his pockets pushed. The sides of his mouth dragged
back, and his cheeks sagged, and his tongue strove to sink back into his
throat and strangle him.

It was very bad. It seemed to last for centuries.

Then the jatos burned out. There was that ghastly feeling of lunging
forward to weightlessness. One instant, Joe's body weighed half a ton.
The next instant, it weighed less than a dust grain. His head throbbed
twice as if his skull were about to split open and let his brains run
out. But these things he had experienced before.

There were pantings in the cabin about him. The ship fell. It happened
to be going up, but the sensation and the fact was free fall. Joe had
been through this before, too. He gasped for breath and croaked,
"Drones?"

"Right," said Haney.

Mike panted anxiously, "Four's off course. I'll fix it."

The Chief grunted guttural Mohawk. His hands stirred on the panel for
remote control of the drones he had to handle.

"Crazy!" he growled. "Got it now, Joe. Fire when ready."

"Okay, Mike?"

A half-second pause.

"Okay!"

Joe pressed the firing-button for the take-off rockets. And he was
slammed back into his acceleration chair again. But this was three
gravities only. Pressed heavily against the acceleration cushions, he
could perform the navigation for the fleet. He did. The mother-ship had
to steer a true course, regardless of the vagaries of its rockets. The
drones had simply to be kept in formation with it. The second task was
simpler. But Joe was relieved, this time, of the need to report back
instrument-readings. A telemetering device took care of that.

The take-off rockets blasted and blasted and blasted. The mere matter of
staying alive grew very tedious. The ordeal seemed to last for
centuries. Actually it could be measured only in minutes. But it seemed
millennia before the headphones said, staccato fashion: "_You are on
course and will reach speed in fourteen seconds. I will count for you._"

"Relays for rocket release," panted Joe. "Throw 'em over!"

Three hands moved to obey. Joe could release the drive rockets on all
seven ships at will.

The voice counted:

"_Ten ... nine ... eight ... seven ... six ... five ... four ... three
... two ... one ... cut!_"

Joe pressed the master-key. The remnants of the solid-fuel take-off
rockets let go. They flashed off into nothingness at unbelievable speed,
consuming themselves as they went.

There was again no weight.

This time there was no resting. No eager gazing out the cabin ports. Now
they weren't curious. They'd had over a month in space, and something
like sixteen days back on Earth, and now they were back in space again.

Mike and Haney and the Chief worked doggedly at their control boards.
The radar bowls outside the cabin shifted and moved and quivered. The
six drone ships showed on the screens. But they also had telemetering
apparatus. They faithfully reported their condition and the direction in
which their bows pointed. The radars plotted their position with
relation to each other and the mother-ship.

Presently Joe cast a glance out of a port and saw that the dark line of
sunset was almost below. The take-off had been timed to get the ships
into Earth's shadow above the area from which war rockets were most
likely to rise. It wouldn't prevent bombing, of course. But there was a
gadget....

Joe spoke into the microphone: "Reporting everything all right so far.
But you know it."

The voice from solid ground said, "_Report acknowledged._"

The ships went on and on and on. The Chief muttered to himself and made
very minute adjustments of the movement of one of his drones. Mike
fussed with his. Haney regarded the controls of his drones with a
profound calm.

Nothing happened, except that they seemed to be falling into a
bottomless pit and their stomach-muscles knotted and cramped in purely
reflex response to the sensation. Even that grew tedious.

The headphones said, "_You will enter Earth's shadow in three minutes.
Prepare for combat._"

Joe said drily, "We're to prepare for combat."

The Chief growled. "I'd like to do just that!"

The phrasing, of course, was intentional--in case enemy ears were
listening. Actually, the small fleet was to use a variant on the tin can
shield which protected the Platform. It would be most effective if
visual observation was impossible. The fleet was seven ships in very
ragged formation. Most improbably, after the long three-gravity
acceleration, they were still within a fifty-mile globe of space. Number
Four loitered behind, but was being brought up by judicious bursts of
steering-rocket fire. Number Two was some distance ahead. The others
were simply scattered. They went floating on like a group of meteors.
Out the ports, two of them were visible. The others might be picked out
by the naked eye--but it wasn't likely.

Drone Two, far ahead and clearly visible, turned from a shining steel
speck to a reddish pin-point of light. The red color deepened. It winked
out. The sunlight in the ports of the mother-ship turned red. Then it
blacked out.

"Shoot the ghosts," said Joe.

The three drone-handlers pushed their buttons. Nothing happened that
anybody could see. Actually, though, a small gadget outside the hull
began to cough rhythmically. Similar devices on the drones coughed, too.
They were small, multiple-barreled guns. Rifle shells fired two-pound
missiles at random targets in emptiness. They wouldn't damage anything
they hit. They'd go varying distances, explode and shoot small lead shot
ahead to check their missile-velocity, and then emit dense masses of
aluminum foil. There was no air resistance. The shredded foil would
continue to move through emptiness at the same rate as the convoy-fleet.
The seven ships had fired a total of eighty-four such objects away into
the blackness of Earth's shadow. There were, then, seven ships and
eighty-four masses of aluminum foil moving through emptiness. They
could not be seen by telescopes.

And radars could not tell ships from masses of aluminum foil.

If enemy radars came probing upward, they reported ninety-one space
ships in ragged but coherent formation, soaring through emptiness toward
the Platform. And a fleet like that was too strong to attack.

The radar operators had been prepared to forward details of the speed
and course of a single ship to waiting rocket-launching submarines
half-way across the Pacific. But they reported to Very High Authority
instead.

He received the report of an armada--an incredible fleet--in space. He
didn't believe it. But he didn't dare disbelieve it.

So the fleet swam peacefully through the darkness that was Earth's
shadow, and no attempt at attack was made. They came out into sunlight
to look down at the western shore of America itself. With seven ships to
get on an exact course, at an exact speed, at an exact moment, time was
needed. So the fleet made almost a complete circuit of the Earth before
reaching the height of the Platform's orbit.

They joined it. A single man in a space suit, anchored to its outer
plates, directed a plastic hose which stretched out impossibly far and
clamped to one drone with a magnetic grapple. He maneuvered it to the
hull and made it fast. He captured a second, which was worked delicately
within reach by coy puffs of steering-rocket vapor.

One by one, the drones were made fast. Then the manned ship went in the
lock and the great outer door closed, and the plastic-fabric walls
collapsed behind their nets, and air came in.

Lieutenant Commander Brown was the one to come into the lock to greet
them. He shook hands all around--and it again seemed strange to all the
four from Earth to find themselves with their feet more or less firmly
planted on a solid floor, but their bodies wavering erratically to right
and left and before and back, because there was no up or down.

"Just had reports from Earth," Brown told Joe comfortably. "The news of
your take-off was released to avoid panic in Europe. But everybody who
doesn't like us is yelling blue murder. Somebody--you may guess who--is
announcing that a fleet of ninety-one war rockets took off from the
United States and now hangs poised in space while the decadent American
war-mongers prepare an ultimatum to all the world. Everybody's
frightened."

"If they'll only stay scared until we get unloaded," said Joe in some
satisfaction, "the government back home can tell them how many we were
and what we came up for. But we'll probably make out all right, anyhow."

"My crew will unload," said Brown, in conscious thoughtfulness. "You
must have gotten pretty well exhausted by that acceleration."

Joe shook his head. "I think we can handle the freight faster. We found
out a few things by going back to Earth."

A section of plating at the top of the lock--at least it had been the
top when the Platform was built on Earth--opened up as on the first
journey here. A face grinned down. But from this point on, the procedure
was changed. Haney and Joe went into the cargo-section of the rocketship
and heaved its contents smoothly through weightlessness to the storage
chamber above. The Chief and Mike stowed it there. The speed and
precision of their work was out of all reason. Brown stared
incredulously.

The fact was simply that on their first trip to the Platform, Joe and
his crew didn't know how to use their strength where there was no
weight. By the time they'd learned, their muscles had lost all tone. Now
they were fresh from Earth, with Earth-strength muscles--and they knew
how to use them.

"When we got back," Joe told Brown, "we were practically invalids. No
exercise up here. This time we've brought some harness to wear. We've
some for you, too."

They moved out of the airlock, and the ship was maneuvered to a mooring
outside, and a drone took its place. Brown's eyes blinked at the
unloading of the drone. But he said, "Navy style work, that!"

"Out here," said Joe, "you take no more exercise than an invalid on
Earth--in fact, not as much. By now the original crew would have trouble
standing up on a trip back to Earth. You'd feel pretty heavy, yourself."

Brown frowned.
