superior alien culture. What we don't know can't hurt Earth. No
conceivable method could get that information out of us, any more than
it could be had from the squeak-box that Survey dropped here.

"Base all your thinking on that, Johnny. If that seems like leaning over
backwards, it's only a sample of how careful we've got to be, how many
angles we've got to figure."

"Hell," said the pilot. "I know all that. I was just ribbing the
bat-snatcher here." He thumbed a cigarette out of his tunic, touched his
lighter to it. He frowned, stared at the lighter, tried it again. "It
doesn't work. _Damn_ it!" he barked explosively, "I don't like things
that don't work!"

Paresi was beside him, catlike, watchful. "Here's a light. Take it easy,
Johnny! A bum lighter's not that important."

Johnny looked sullenly at his lighter. "It doesn't work," he muttered.
"Guaranteed, too. When we get back I'm going to feed it to Supply." He
made a vivid gesture to describe the feeding technique, and jammed the
lighter back into his pocket.

"Heh!" Ives' heavy voice came from the communications desk. "Maybe the
natives are primitives, at that. Not a whisper of any radio on any band.
No powerline fields, either. These are plowboys, for sure."

Johnny looked out at the sleeping valley. His irritation over the
lighter was still in his voice. "Imagine that. No video or trideo. No
jet-races or feelies. What do people do with their time in a place like
this?"

"Books," said Hoskins, almost absently. "Chess. Conversation."

"I don't know what chess is, and conversation's great if you want to
tell somebody something, like 'bring me a steak'," said Johnny. "Let's
get out of this fire-trap," he said to the Captain.

"In time," said the Captain. "Ives, DX those radio frequencies.
If there's so much as a smell of radiation even from the other
side of this planet, we want to know about it. Hoskins, check the
landing-suits--food, water, oxygen, radio, everything. Earth-type planet
or no, we're not fooling with alien viruses. Johnny, I want you to
survey this valley in every way you can and plot a minimum of three
take-off vectors."


The crew fell to work, Ives and Hoskins intently, Johnny off-handedly,
as if he were playing out a ritual with some children. Paresi bent over
a stereomicroscope, manipulating controls which brought in samples of
air-borne bacteria and fungi and placed them under its objective.
Captain Anderson ranged up beside him.

"We could walk out of the ship as if we were on Muroc Port," said
Paresi. "These couldn't be more like Earth organisms if they'd been
transplanted from home to delude us."

The Captain laughed. "Sometimes I tend to agree with Johnny. I never met
a more suspicious character. How'd you ever bring yourself to sign your
contract?"

"Turned my back on a couple of clauses," said Paresi. "Here--have a
look."

At that moment the usually imperturbable Ives uttered a sharp grunt that
echoed and re-echoed through the cabin. Paresi and the Captain turned.
Hoskins was just coming out of the after alleyway with an oxygen bottle
in his hand, and had frozen in his tracks at the sharp sound Ives had
made. Johnny had whipped around as if the grunt had been a lion's roar.
His back was to the bulkhead, his lean, long frame tensed for fight or
flight. It was indescribable, Ives' grunt, and it was the only sound
which could have had such an effect on such a variety of men--the same
shocked immobility.

Ives sat over his Communications desk as if hypnotized by it. He moved
one great arm forward, almost reluctantly, and turned a knob.

A soft, smooth hum filled the room. "Carrier," said Ives.

Then the words came. They were English words, faultlessly spoken, loud
and clear and precise. They were harmless words, pleasant words even.

They were: "_Men of Earth! Welcome to our planet._"

The voice hung in the air. The words stuck in the silence like insects
wriggling upon a pin. Then the voice was gone, and the silence was
complete and heavy. The carrier hum ceased. With a spine-tingling brief
blaze of high-frequency sound, Hoskins' oxygen-bottle hit the steel
deck.


Then they all began to breathe again.

"There's your farmers, Johnny," said Paresi.

"Knight to bishop's third," said Hoskins softly.

"What's that?" demanded Johnny.

"Chess again," said the Captain appreciatively. "An opening gambit."

Johnny put a cigarette to his lips, tried his lighter. "Damn. Gimme a
light, Ives."

Ives complied, saying over his big shoulder to the Captain, "In case you
wondered, there was no fix on that. My direction-finders indicate that
the signal came simultaneously from forty-odd transmitters placed in a
circle around the ship which is their way of saying 'I dunno'."

The Captain walked to the view bubble in front of the console and peered
around. He saw the valley, the warm light of mid-afternoon, the
too-green slopes and the blue-green distances. Trees, rocks, a balancing
bird.

"It doesn't work," muttered Johnny.

The Captain ignored him. "'_Men of Earth...._'" he quoted. "Ives,
they've gotten into Survey's squeak-box and analyzed its origin. They
know all about us!"

"They don't because they can't," said Ives flatly. "Survey traverses
those boxes through second-order space. They materialize near a planet
and drop in. No computation on earth or off it could trace their
normal-space trajectory, let alone what happens in the second-order
condition. The elements the box is made of are carefully averaged
isotopic forms that could have come from any of nine galaxies we know
about and probably more. And all it does is throw out a VUHF signal that
says _beep_ on one side, _boop_ on the other, and _bup-bup_ in between.
It does _not_ speak English, mention the planet Earth, announce anyone's
arrival and purpose, or teach etiquette."

Captain Anderson spread his hands. "They got it from somewhere. They
didn't get it from us. This ship and the box are the only Terran
objects on this planet. Therefore they got their information from the
box."

"Q.E.D. You reason like Euclid," said Paresi admiringly. "But don't
forget that geometry is an artificial school, based on arbitrary axioms.
It just doesn't work where the shortest distance is _not_ a straight
line.... I'd suggest we gather evidence and postpone our conclusions."

"How do you think they got it?" Ives challenged.

"I think we can operate from the fact they got it, and make our analyses
when we have more data."


Ives went back to his desk and threw a switch.

"What are you doing?" asked the Captain.

"Don't you think they ought to be answered?"

"Turn it off, Ives."

"But--"

"Turn it off!" Ives did. An expedition is an informal, highly democratic
group, and can afford to be, for when the situation calls for it, there
is never any question of where authority lies. The Captain said, "There
is nothing we can say to them which won't yield them more information.
Nothing. For all we know it may be very important to them to learn
whether or not we received their message. Our countermove is obviously
to make no move at all."

"You mean just sit here and wait until they do something else?" asked
Johnny, appalled.

The Captain thumped his shoulder. "Don't worry. We'll do something in
some other area than communications. Hoskins--are those landing suits
ready?"

"All but," rapped Hoskins. He scooped up the oxygen bottle and
disappeared.

Paresi said, "We'll tell them something if we _don't_ answer."

The Captain set his jaw. "We do what we can, Nick. We do the best we
can. Got any better ideas?"

Paresi shrugged easily and smiled. "Just knocking, skipper. Knock
everything. Then what's hollow, you know about."

"I should know better than to jump salty with you," said the Captain,
all but returning the doctor's smile. "Johnny. Hoskins. Prepare for
exploratory patrol."

"I'll go," said Paresi.

"Johnny goes," said the Captain bluntly, "because it's his first trip,
and because if he isn't given something to do he'll bust his adrenals.
Hoskins goes, because of all of us, the Engineer is most expendable.
Ives stays because we need hair-trigger communications. I stay to
correlate what goes on outside with what goes on inside. You stay
because if anything goes wrong I'd rather have you fixing the men up
than find myself trying to fix you up." He squinted at Paresi. "Does
that knock solid?"

"Solid."

"Testing, Johnny," Ives said into a microphone. Johnny's duplicated
voice, from the open face-plate of his helmet and from the intercom
speaker, said, "I hear you fine."

"Testing, Hoskins."

"If I'd never seen you," said the speaker softly, "I'd think you were
right here in the suit with me." Hoskins' helmet was obviously buttoned
up.

The two men came shuffling into the cabin, looking like gleaming ghosts
in their chameleon-suits, which repeated the color of the walls.
"Someday," growled Johnny, "there'll be a type suit where you can
scratch your--"


"Scratch when you get back," said the Captain. "Now hear this. Johnny,
you can move fastest. You go out first. Wait in the airlock for thirty
seconds after the outer port opens. When Ives gives you the beep, jump
out, run around the bows and plant your back against the hull directly
opposite the port. Hold your blaster at the ready, aimed down--you hear
me? _Down_, so that any observer will know you're armed but not
attacking. Hoskins, you'll be in the lock with the outer port open by
that time. When Johnny gives the all clear, you'll jump out and put your
back against the hull by the port. Then you'll both stay where you are
until you get further orders. Is that clear?"

"Aye."

"Yup."

"You're covered adequately from the ship. Don't fire without orders.
There's nothing you can get with a blaster that we can't get first with
a projector--unless it happens to be within ten meters of the hull and
we can't depress to it. Even then, describe it first and await orders to
fire except in really extreme emergency. A single shot at the wrong time
could set us back a thousand years with this planet. Remember that this
ship isn't called _Killer_ or _Warrior_ or even _Hero_. It's the Earth
Ship _Ambassador_. Go to it, and good luck."

Hoskins stepped back and waved Johnny past him. "After you, Jets."

Johnny's teeth flashed behind the face-plate. He clicked his heels and
bowed stiffly from the waist, in a fine burlesque of an ancient
courtier. He stalked past Hoskins and punched the button which
controlled the airlock.

They waited. Nothing.

Johnny frowned, jabbed the button again. And again. The Captain started
to speak, then fell watchfully silent. Johnny reached toward the button,
touched it, then struck it savagely. He stepped back then, one foot
striking the other like that of a clumsy child. He turned partially to
the others. In his voice, as it came from the speaker across the room,
was a deep amazement that rang like the opening chords of a prophetic
and gloomy symphony.

He said, "The port won't open."




                     II

    _The extremes of mysticism and of pragmatism have their own
    expressions of worship. Each has its form, and the difference
    between them is the difference between_ deus ex machina _and_
    deus machina est.
        --_E. Hunter Waldo_

