when you least expect it, or sailing along as we ought to."

Accordingly Washington prepared the morning meal, and they all found
they had appetites for it, in spite of their fright. Afterward they all
came on deck again and looked about them.

They were in the midst of a wild waste of water. Not a sign of land
could be seen in any direction, and there was no evidence of a sail or
steamship as far as the horizon showed.

The little island which held the _Porpoise_ so close a prisoner was a
mere speck in the vast ocean, but it was large enough to put an end,
temporarily at least, to the progress of the powerful submarine.

The professor and the boys went over the side and climbed down to the
rock. Then the inventor verified his surmise that the rocky point was of
volcanic origin. It was also seen that there was little chance to get
the craft back into the ocean.

"I guess we're doomed to stick here for some time," remarked Mr.
Henderson, with a grim smile. "The rock has caught us squarely and
nothing short of dynamite will free us. To use the explosive might mean
the destruction of the ship, and I dare not risk it."

Gloom settled over the party in spite of the efforts the professor made
to be cheerful. Washington, after the first few minutes of fright,
regained his usual good spirits, but, no matter how he laughed and
joked, there was a feeling of terror in every heart.

They realized their helplessness, and knew that unless another upheaval
of nature occurred there was small likelihood of their release.

On the third day of their strange adventure Professor Henderson resolved
on a bold step.

"We must use dynamite," he declared. "If we stay here on this desolate
rock we are bound to perish sooner or later, for our food cannot last
many months, though we have a large supply. We are out of the path of
steamers and only by chance would one pass here. With care we may be
able to blast the rock so that the ship will not be permanently
damaged. What do you all say? I would like your advice, for this
concerns all of us."

One after the other all said they were willing to abide by whatever the
inventor did. Accordingly he made his preparations. Washington, with a
hammer and chisel, was set to cutting a fair sized hole in the big rock,
as far away from the ship as possible.

He was two days at the job, and, during this time those on the stranded
_Porpoise_ watched in vain for the sight of a vessel.

"I am going to put the dynamite in," announced Mr. Henderson one
morning. "We must all get into the small boat and row some distance
away, as there is no telling what the result of the explosion may be."

"Suppose the submarine is destroyed?" asked Mrs. Johnson.

"Then we will have to sail for the nearest land in the small boat,"
replied the captain. "I will provision it and we will take all the
precautions we can."

It was with anxious hearts that the little party embarked in the little
craft that was carried on the _Porpoise_. It was barely large enough to
hold them. The professor was the last in, and he lighted a long fuse
that led to the dynamite before taking his seat. Then with Tom and Bill
at the oars the little craft moved away.

"How long before the explosion will take place?" asked Jack.

"I timed the fuse for ten minutes," answered Mr. Henderson. "That will
enable us to get far enough away so we will not be swamped by a wave."

Five minutes later Mark, who was intently watching the volcanic rock,
gave a loud cry.

"There she goes!" he shouted.

They all looked to behold a wonderful thing. As easily as though it was
some conjuring trick the rock began to settle down in the water. Lower
and lower it went until only the tallest jagged points showed above the
waves, whose crested tops the keel of the ship now almost touched.

"That isn't the explosion!" exclaimed the professor. "The fuse has not
had time to get to the powder yet."

"But the rock is disappearing!" yelled Andy.

As he spoke the big pile of volcanic stone vanished completely and the
_Porpoise_ floated easily on the surface of the sea.

"Hurrah!" cried Mark.

"It am de most kloslostrous occurranceness dat eber transpositioned
itself!" exploded Washington.

"Let's row back to the ship now!" cried Mark.

"Not yet!" said the professor quickly. "The dynamite has not gone off
yet."

"There it goes now," remarked Jack.

At that instant a big column of water shot upward and a dull rumbling
could be heard. A few seconds later the little boat rocked violently
from the effects of the waves. Then the sea became calm, and the
_Porpoise_ could be seen dancing up and down on the heaving billows.

"Now we can go back in safety," spoke Mr. Henderson, and Tom and Bill
bent to the oars.

"What happened?" asked Mrs. Johnson. "The rock seemed to disappear
before the explosion occurred."

"That's exactly what it was," explained the inventor. "By some strange
freak of nature the volcanic mass dropped back into the ocean a little
before I was ready to blow it to pieces. In settling down it lowered the
ship. Then the explosion occurred beneath the waves. If I had waited a
little while I need not have risked the dynamite."

"Well, there was no guarantee that the rock would go back where it came
from," remarked Jack.

"No, we had to act," agreed the professor. "But now let us go aboard."

They rowed back to the _Porpoise_, which they found had sustained no
damage from the queer experience it had been through.

The motors were set in motion and in a little while the craft was again
moving through the water out of the dangerous vicinity of the volcanic
area.

"Who has the two watches to-night?" asked Mr. Henderson after supper had
been served.

"Washington and Andy," answered Jack, who kept track of the matter.

"I guess we'll change it, and have you and Mark take them," went on the
captain. He gave Jack a peculiar look, and made a sign to him not to say
anything. Wondering what was to come Jack went up on deck to watch the
sunset.




CHAPTER XXI

CAUGHT IN A WHIRLPOOL


The boy was joined a little later by the captain, who, coming close to
him whispered:

"I am going to try to discover the ghost to-night. That is why I wanted
you boys on hand to help me. This thing must be stopped if it is a joke,
and, if it isn't--"

"Do you think it is some one playing tricks?" asked Jack.

"I don't know what to think," answered Mr. Henderson. "We will see what
happens to-night."

Mark came on deck a little while, and the three talked of the strange
appearances of the mysterious white object. The boys told of their
experiences, and Jack related more fully his on the night the ship went
up on the big rock upheaval.

"I don't believe in ghosts," said Mr. Henderson, "I'm going to lay this
one," and he smiled grimly.

Night settled down. Jack, who had the first tour under the new
arrangement, had made himself comfortable in the conning tower, and Mr.
Henderson had hidden himself in the companionway. His idea was to thus
guard both openings into the ship and ascertain whether the ghost came
from within or without the craft.

Up to a short time before twelve o'clock nothing out of the ordinary
happened. The only sound was the lapping of the waves on the steel sides
of the _Porpoise_, and now and then a splash as a big fish leaped out of
the water. There was only the slightest breeze.

Jack who, somehow or other, felt much sleepier than usual, caught
himself nodding several times. Once he awoke with a start and realized
that he had been dozing.

"Come, come," he remarked to himself, "this will not do at all. This is
a fine way to watch for a ghost."

He remained wide awake for perhaps five minutes. Then he was off to the
land of nod again. He was just dreaming that he was skating on a pond
and was playing snap the whip with a lot of boys, when he awoke with a
start.

He felt something pressing on his chest and to his horror, as he looked
up, he saw a big towering white object standing over him. A second
glance showed him it was a man, or the semblance of one, and the thing's
foot was on his chest.

With a terrified scream Jack sprang up, upsetting the ghost, which, the
boy thought at the time, seemed rather heavy for an unearthly spirit.

"Did you catch it?" cried the professor.

"No! Yes! I don't know!" yelled Jack, struggling to his feet in time to
see the white object glide down the stairs that led from the conning
tower into the forward cabin.

"Run after it! We must solve the mystery!" cried Mr. Henderson springing
from the companionway up on deck.

But at that moment the ship began to whirl about in a circle slowly at
first, but with increasing speed until Jack and the professor felt sick
and dizzy. All about the water seemed to be bubbling and boiling, while,
at the same time, there arose on the air a mournful howl.

The professor jumped to the rail and looked over the side. What he saw
made him recoil with horror.

"Quick! Close the man-hole hatch!" he cried. "Shut the door of the
conning tower!"

"What is it?" Jack managed to ask.

"We are caught in a whirlpool!" Mr. Henderson yelled as he leaped down
the companionway and pulled the heavy steel cover after him.

Stricken with a nameless dread, Jack closed the water-tight door of the
conning tower and made his way to the cabin. He could hardly get down
the stairs, so swiftly was the ship whirling about.

He found the captain busy in the engine room and, in response to calls,
Washington and Mark came hurrying in. They had been awakened by the
commotion and the strange movements of the _Porpoise_.

"Turn on all the lights," ordered the inventor. "We must prepare for the
worst."

The incandescents were soon glowing and in the glare the frightened
adventurers gathered about Mr. Henderson, wondering what new terror had
befallen them.

"See!" exclaimed the inventor. "We are going comparatively slow now, but
we are on the outer edge. Wait until we reach the centre."

He pointed to a compass and, as the needle pointed steadily to the north
the card seemed to be going around like the hands of a clock that has
lost the balance and escapement wheels. The ship made three complete
circles a minute.

Pale and frightened, Mrs. Johnson came from her cabin, whence the
terrified cries of Nellie could be heard.

"Are we sinking?" she asked.

"Sinking will never harm the _Porpoise_," replied Mr. Henderson. "This
is something decidedly worse."

"I know! It is a whirlpool!" exclaimed the lady.

"I'm dizzy; I'm so dizzy!" wailed Nellie. "Please stop the ship from
going round, Mr. Henderson."

She came from her bed crying, and all her mother could do did not quiet
her.

Meanwhile the submarine continued to whirl about faster and faster in
the swirling waters. Five times each minute now it made the circuit,
and, like the coils of a boa constrictor that is enfolding its victim,
the circles continually grew smaller.

"We are being sucked down," said Jack in a low tone as he glanced at the
depth gage, and noted that it showed them to be thirty feet under water.

"That is so," remarked Mr. Henderson quietly.

"What will be the result?" asked Mrs. Johnson.

"I do not know," was the answer, and the captain turned aside. He seemed
to have lost all courage in the face of the new disaster.

"Can't we empty the tanks and rise to the surface?" asked Andy.

"The tanks are not filled," replied Mr. Henderson. "What is taking us
down is the force of the whirlpool and not the weight of water."

"Then you fear for the worst?" asked Andy.

"I do," said the captain simply.

"Don't give up the ship!" exclaimed the old hunter suddenly. "Never say
die! It's a long lane that has no turns! Hip! Hip! Hurrah!"

They all turned to stare at the old man.

"Never mind," said Mr. Henderson in a soothing tone, that one would use
toward a baby, or a person not right in their head. "Never mind. We may
be saved."

"Oh I'm not crazy!" exclaimed Andy. He tried to caper about but the
motion of the ship made him dizzy and he had to sit down. "I'm all
right! I just happened to think of something!"

"What is it?" asked the captain eagerly.

"Send the ship ahead!" exclaimed Andy. "Speed her as fast as she will
go. Try her strength against the force of the whirlpool! We may win!"

"Good!" exclaimed Mr. Henderson. "I was too much depressed to think of
that! The ship has powerful engines. Queer you should remember that
instead of me. Come, Washington, start the screw going! We will try to
beat the whirlpool!"

The submarine was now whirling around so rapidly that it was difficult
for any one to stand without leaning against the sides or holding on to
something. It was going lower and lower down, as the gage showed.

Soon a throb that was felt through the length of the craft told that the
engine had started. The vibration increased until it seemed that the
ship would be torn apart. Never had the big screw revolved at greater
speed.

For a while the struggle between the force of man represented by the
engine, and the power of nature, embodied in the whirlpool, seemed
equal. Neither could gain the mastery. The ship continued to slide
around in ever narrowing circles while the big cable of water, forced
through the tunnel by the screw, was like a cataract.

"Which will win?" asked the professor softly to himself.

He crawled to the gages and watched them. Only by their needles could it
be told when the battle had turned in favor of the adventurers.

The circular motion, that was now terrible in its speed and power,
seemed to culminate in a rush that almost overturned the ship. In the
engine room Washington was laboring to keep the machine at top speed. He
put on the last ounce of power.

"Hurrah!" yelled the professor suddenly. "I think we shall win!"

He pointed to the depth gage. The needle, which had showed a constantly
increasing record, until it was now at two hundred feet, had stopped. It
showed they were going no lower.

Then Mr. Henderson looked at the indicator which showed the progress
straight ahead. The needle was beginning to tremble. As he watched he
saw it move, slowly at first, until, as the powerful screw won a victory
over the terrible whirlpool. The gage marked one, two and then three
miles an hour.

"We are leaving the swirling waters!" cried Mr. Henderson.

Then, all at once, as though it was an arrow shot from a gigantic bow,
the _Porpoise_ cleft the under-billows and shot ahead, free at last from
the grip of the whirlpool.

Man had triumphed over nature!

On rushed the ship like a race horse, for the engine was working as it
never had before, and it did not have the pool to contend against.

"Slow down," said Mr. Henderson, "and we will go to the surface."

Two minutes later, under the buoyancy of her empty tanks, the _Porpoise_
lay floating on the top of the waves, under the shining stars.




CHAPTER XXII

UNDER FIRE

