Nicholas Shinny sat on the power deck and listened to Loring issue
orders over the intercom.

"I don't know if Connel will go for it, or not," said Loring, "but just
in case he doesn't, we gotta get outta here fast! You got that, Shinny?"

"Yeah," answered Shinny, "I got it!"

"Mason," yelled Loring, "you take over on the radar bridge!"

"All ready up here," said Mason.

"Well, be sure we've got a clear trajectory out. Better take us into the
sun Alpha Centauri. That way, maybe they'll miss us on their radar. The
sun will show all sorts of blips on their screen."

"O.K.," said Mason. "You think he'll go for it?"

"I don't know," answered Loring, "but if he doesn't, it's going to be
space dust for Manning."

Shinny got up and walked around the deserted power deck. His legs felt
weak. The plan he had made was a desperate one. Over and over, he
checked the operation in his mind. It would have to be quick, sure, and
sudden. That was the only thing that would ensure success. "Yes, sir,"
he thought, "if we can surprise 'em, we can get away with it." He dug
out a piece of chewing tobacco, took a bite, eyed the remaining piece,
and then shoved the whole thing in his mouth. His cheek bulged.

He went to the intercom and flipped it on. "Hey, Loring," he yelled.
"I've got to check the timer on number-three rocket. She's not acting
just right. It'll take me about a minute."

"O.K.," came Loring's reply, "but make it snappy."

The timers were to the left of the control board, but Shinny turned to
the right and the ladder leading to the lower deck. He eased the hatch
open, glanced around, and then climbed down quickly. He stopped at a
locker, opened the doors quietly, and took out two paralo-ray guns and
two rifles. Then, closing the doors, he made his way to the opposite
side of the ship.

"Hey, Manning!" he whispered through the closed storeroom hatch. "Can ya
hear me?"

"Who is it?" asked Roger.

"Me--Shinny," hissed the wizened spaceman. He opened the hatch and Roger
quickly stepped out.

"What's the idea?" gasped Roger when Shinny shoved a rifle and pistol
into his hands.

"I ain't got time to explain now," said Shinny. "We've got to hurry if
we're going to take over this tub."

Roger's eyes glowed. "You mean--"

"Never mind what I mean," said Shinny. "Just listen. Loring's on the
control deck and Mason's on the radar bridge. Loring's just talked to
Connel. He's trying to make him blast outta here. If Connel doesn't,
Loring's going to dump you in space!"

"Yeah, I know. That murdering space crawler!" snarled Roger. He gripped
the rifle tightly. "I'll blast him--"

"Now wait a minute," hissed Shinny. "You go up and get Loring, see? Make
it look like you got out by yourself. If you can handle him, O.K. I'll
stay in back, and if anything goes wrong, I'll back you up!"

"Fine," said Roger. He patted the spaceman on the back and smiled.
"Don't worry, Mr. Shinny, nothing will go wrong!"

"Watch your step. That Loring is a smart cookie!"

Roger turned into the passageway and made his way silently to the
control-deck hatch. He peered around the edge of the hatch and saw
Loring sitting in front of the teleceiver screen, his back toward Roger.
The cadet quickly stepped into the control room, leveled the rifle, and
said quietly, "All right, Loring, keep your hands in view!"

Loring spun around and stared openmouthed at Roger. "Mann--" he gasped.

"Yeah, me!" said Roger. "Call Mason and tell him to come down here on
the double. But one wrong move, Loring, and I'll give you a quick freeze
with this ray gun!"

Moving slowly, Loring turned to the intercom and flipped the switch.
"Hey, Mason," he yelled. "Come down here a minute, will ya?"

"What do you want?" growled Mason. "I've got to figure out this course."

Roger stepped close to Loring, raising the gun.

Loring licked his lips and turned back to the intercom. "Don't gimme any
back talk! I said get down here!"

Suddenly the teleceiver came to life. "_Polaris_ to _Space Devil_! Come
in, Loring! This is Major Connel on the _Polaris_ calling Loring on the
_Space Devil_!"

The suddenness of the voice startled Roger, and for a split second he
took his eyes off Loring. In that instant Loring leaped for the boy,
grabbing at the rifle. The quickness of his lunge caught Roger off guard
and he was thrown back against the bulkhead, but he held onto the rifle
as Loring tried to twist it out of his grasp.

"What th--" cried Mason from the ladder leading to the radar bridge.
When he saw Roger and Loring struggling, he grabbed for the paralo-ray
gun at his side. Just at that moment Shinny stepped through the hatch
and fired his rifle. Mason was frozen into a rigid statue, unable to
move.

"All right, Loring," yelled Shinny, "step back or I'll blast you like I
did Mason!"

Roger wrenched the rifle out of Loring's grasp and stepped back. "Good
work, Mr. Shinny!" he said to the little spaceman. "You sure figured it
right!"

"Attention! Attention! This is Connel on the _Polaris_. Come in,
Loring ..."

Shinny looked over at Roger and winked. "Better answer him, while I get
this joker locked up." He motioned to Loring who stood backed up against
the bulkhead, his hands high over his head.

"You dirty double-crossing space rat!" he snarled at Shinny.

"Now, now, none of that," said Shinny, leveling the rifle. "If you get
too noisy, I'll freeze you like I did Mason to keep your trap shut!"

Loring cast a sidelong glance at Mason, who stood as if carved out of
marble. The effects of the ray blast were devastating, having paralyzed
his entire nervous system. While the victim was still able to breathe
and his heartbeat remained normal, he was unable to move so much as an
eyelid. The gun was developed after all lethal weapons had been outlawed
by the Solar Alliance. Though any victim could be released from its
paralyzing effect by a neutralizing charge from the same gun, while
under its power the victim was reduced to a state of mild hysteria. He
was able to hear, see, and think, but not to act. When released, it was
not unusual to see a man crumple to the floor from exhaustion.

[Illustration: _Mason was frozen into a rigid statue, unable to move_]

Loring marched meekly in front of Shinny to the storage room that had
held Roger. The cadet spaceman remained on the control deck. He twisted
the dials of the teleceiver and spoke into the mike.

"_Space Devil_ to Major Connel. Come in! This is Manning on the _Space
Devil_ calling Major Connel ..."

"Manning!" shouted Connel. "I thought you were a prisoner!"

"Ah, it was nothing, skipper," said Roger blandly. "I just took over the
ship--with a little help, of course!"

"A little help?" asked Connel. "From whom?"

Roger then gave the officer a complete review of what had happened to
him since leaving the space station, finishing with Shinny's aid in his
escape.

"Why would he want to help you?" asked Connel.

"I don't know, sir," replied Roger.

"Well, never mind," said Connel. "I suppose you two can handle that ship
all right between you. Land on Tara as soon as you can. I'll get the
details then!"

"Aye, aye, sir," replied Roger. Then, just before breaking contact, he
yelled into the mike, "Hey, Astro--Tom! See ya in a few minutes!"

As the teleceiver screen darkened, Shinny reappeared. He had released
Mason from the effects of the ray charge, and both Mason and Loring were
safe in the storage room. He walked over and slapped Roger on the back.

"Well, it looks like we did it, sonny boy!" he said.

Roger turned to look at the wizened spaceman who still was chewing on
the plug of tobacco. "What made you do this for me, Mr. Shinny?" asked
Roger quietly.

"Tell ya a little secret," said Shinny, with a merry twinkle in his eye.
"I was in the Solar Guard for twenty years. Enlisted man. Got into an
accident and hurt my leg, but it wasn't in the line of duty, so I was
tossed out without a pension. Ever since then I been kinda bitter, you
might say. And, strangely enough, it was Major Connel that kicked me
out."

"But you--you--" gasped Roger.

"Let's just say," said Shinny with a smile, "that once you're a Solar
Guardsman, you're always a Guardsman. Now, how about getting this wagon
down to Tara?"

"Yeah, yeah, sure," said Roger absently, his eyes trailing after the
small limping figure. Once a Solar Guardsman, always a Guardsman, he
thought. Smiling, he turned to the control board. He felt the same way.
He was a Guardsman, and it was good to be back home!

[Illustration]




CHAPTER 14


Major Connel paced nervously in front of the group of spacemen. Tom,
Roger, Astro, Alfie, and Mr. Shinny were lounging around the small
clearing between the _Polaris_ and the _Space Devil_. A piece of thin
space cloth had been stretched between the two ships to shield the men
from the blazing sun. Connel stopped in front of Roger and Shinny.

"And you say the satellite is three-quarters solid copper?" asked
Connel.

"Yes, sir," replied Roger, "at least that's what Loring and Mason told
us."

"Where is it?" asked Connel. "I mean, where exactly?"

"I spotted her coming in, sir," replied Roger. "I'd say she was about
three hundred thousand miles outside of Tara in perfect orbit."

"By the blessed rings of Saturn," exclaimed Connel, "it's almost too
good to be true! The whole Solar Alliance needs copper desperately. And
if what you say is true, that's enough to last for a hundred and fifty
years!"

"Didn't you have any idea they discovered it, sir?" asked Tom. "I mean,
when they took that unauthorized flight on your first trip out here?"

"Didn't suspect a thing, Tom," replied Connel. "I thought they had
gotten a little space rocky on some homemade rocket juice and just went
on a wingding. Imagine the colossal nerve of those two wanting to corner
the market with the largest deposit of copper ever found."

"How do you plan to get it back, Major?" asked Shinny.

"I don't know, Shinny--"

"_Mr._ Shinny!" snapped the wizened spaceman. "_I'm_ not one of your
cadets!"

"Still the hotheaded rocket buster, eh?" asked Connel, eying the
toothless spaceman. "It was the same thing that got you kicked out of
the Solar Guard twenty years ago!"

"Wasn't either! And you know it!" snapped Shinny. "You retired me
because I busted my leg!"

"That helped," said Connel, "but the main reason was because you were
too hotheaded. Couldn't take orders!"

"Well," said Shinny doggedly, "I ain't in no Solar Guard now, and when
you talk to me, it's _Mr._ Shinny!"

"Why, you old goat!" exploded Connel. "I ought to arrest you for aiding
criminals!"

"You can't do a thing to me," barked Shinny. "Prospecting is
prospecting, whether it's in the asteroid belt or out here on Tara!"

Unable to hold back any longer, the four space cadets suddenly roared
with laughter at the sight of the two old space foes jawing at each
other. Actually, Connel and Shinny were glad to see each other. And when
they saw the boys doubled up with laughter, they couldn't help laughing
also. Finally Connel turned to Roger.

"Can you find that satellite again?" he asked.

"Yes, sir!" Roger grinned.

"All right, then," said Connel finally, "let's go take a look at it. I
still won't believe it until I see it!"

"Who's hardheaded now?" snorted Shinny, climbing into the _Polaris_.

Later, as the rocket cruiser blasted smoothly through space, Connel
joined Roger and Alfie on the radar deck. The two cadets were bent over
the radar scanner.

"Pick her up yet?" asked Connel.

"There she is, right there, sir," said Roger, placing a finger on a
circular white blip on the scanner. "But the magnascope shows pretty
rugged country. I think we'd better take a look on the opposite side.
Maybe we can find a better place to touch down."

"Very well, Manning," replied Connel. "Do what you think best. Tell Tom
to land as soon as possible."

"Aye, aye, sir," replied Roger.

Leaving Alfie on watch at the scanner, Roger hurried down the ladder to
the control deck where Tom was seated in front of the great board.

"Tom," called Roger, walking up behind his unit-mate, "we're going to
take a look at this baby on the other side. See if we can't find a
better place to touch down. Stand by to pick up the surface of the
satellite on the teleceiver as soon as we get close enough."

"O.K., Roger," said Tom. "Where are you going?"

"Down to Loring and Mason in the cooler! I want to see their faces when
I tell them they finally are getting where they wanted to go, but under
slightly different circumstances!"

Tom laughed and turned back to the board. "Power deck, check in!"

"Power deck, aye," replied Astro. "When do we set down on the precious
rock, Tom?" asked the Venusian.

"Should be soon, Astro," said Tom. "Better stand by for maneuvering."

"Right!" replied Astro.

Tom turned his full attention to the control board and the teleceiver
screen above his head. He was happier than he had ever been in his life.
The report sent back to Space Academy by Major Connel had been answered
with a commendation to both Roger and Shinny for capturing Loring and
Mason. With Roger back in the unit, Tom was at peace. Even Alfie was
overjoyed at seeing Roger back aboard the _Polaris_.

And Tom had noticed that Major Connel was beginning to call them by
their first names!

"Radar deck to control deck!" said Alfie. "From casual observations,
Tom, the surface of the far side of the satellite is more suitable for a
touchdown. I would suggest you observe the planetoid yourself with the
magnascope and draw your own conclusions."

"O.K.," replied Tom. He switched the teleceiver screen on to the more
powerful magnascope and studied the surface of the small celestial body.
He saw a deep valley with a flat hard surface set between two tall
cliffs. It would be a tricky spot for a landing, but it looked like the
best place available. Tom snapped open the intercom.

"Attention! Attention! Stand by for touchdown. Power deck stand by for
deceleration. Radar bridge stand by for range and altitude checks!"
Sharply, crisply, Tom's orders crackled through the ship.

Working together with the ease and thoroughness of men well acquainted
with their jobs, Astro and Shinny on the power deck, Roger and Alfie on
the radar bridge, and Tom on the control deck handling the delicate
maneuvering, combined to bring the great ship to a safe landing on the
dry valley floor of the satellite.

"Touchdown!" yelled Tom and began securing the ship. Two minutes later
the entire crew faced Major Connel for briefing.

"We'll all go out to different parts of the satellite and make
geological tests," announced Connel. "We'll pair off, two to a jet boat.
Astro and Roger, Alfie and Mr. Shinny, Tom and myself. This is a simple
test." He held up a delicate instrument and a vial full of colorless
liquid. "You simply pour a little of this liquid, about a spoonful, on
the ground, wait about five minutes, and then stick the end of this into
the spot where you poured the liquid." He held up a two-foot steel shaft
a quarter inch in diameter, fastened to a clock-face gauge with numbers
from one to a thousand. The other end of the shaft was needle sharp.
"When you stick this into the ground, there'll be a reading on the
meter. Relay it to me. This way well get an estimate of the amount of
copper in a three-mile area for a depth of a hundred feet. It must be
