clock over the instrument panel had moved eight G.S. hours. Joe
Kivelson wasn't in sight, but Glenn Murell and Oscar were drinking
coffee. I went to the front window, and there was a scarlet glow on
the horizon ahead of me.

That's another sight Cesario Vieria will miss, if he takes his next
reincarnation off Fenris. Really, it's nothing but damp, warm air,
blown up from the exhaust of the city's main ventilation plant,
condensing and freezing as it hits the cold air outside, and
floodlighted from below. I looked at it for a while, and then got
myself a cup of coffee and when I had finished it I went to the
screen.

It was still tuned to the _Times_, and Mohandas Feinberg was sitting
in front of it, smoking one of his twisted black cigars. He had a big
10-mm Sterberg stuffed into the waistband of his trousers.

"You guys poked along," he said. "I always thought the _Pequod_ was
fast. We got in three hours ago."

"Who else is in?"

"Corkscrew and some of his gang are here at the _Times_, now.
_Bulldog_ and _Slasher_ just got in a while ago. Some of the ships
that were farthest west and didn't go to your camp have been in quite
a while. We're having a meeting here. We are organizing the Port
Sandor Vigilance Committee and Renegade Hunters' Co-operative."




15

VIGILANTES


When the _Pequod_ surfaced under the city roof, I saw what was
cooking. There were twenty or more ships, either on the concrete docks
or afloat in the pools. The waterfront was crowded with men in boat
clothes, forming little knots and breaking up to join other groups,
all milling about talking excitedly. Most of them were armed; not just
knives and pistols, which is normal costume, but heavy rifles or
submachine guns. Down to the left, there was a commotion and people
were getting out of the way as a dozen men come pushing through,
towing a contragravity skid with a 50-mm ship's gun on it. I began not
liking the looks of things, and Glenn Murell, who had come up from his
nap below, was liking it even less. He'd come to Fenris to buy
tallow-wax, not to fight a civil war. I didn't want any of that stuff,
either. Getting rid of Ravick, Hallstock and Belsher would come under
the head of civic improvements, but towns are rarely improved by
having battles fought in them.

Maybe I should have played dumb and waited till I'd talked to Dad face
to face, before making any statements about what had happened on the
_Javelin_, I thought. Then I shrugged that off. From the minute the
_Javelin_ had failed to respond to Dad's screen-call and the general
call had gone out to the hunter-fleet, everybody had been positive of
what had happened. It was too much like the loss of the _Claymore_,
which had made Ravick president of the Co-op.

Port Sandor had just gotten all of Steve Ravick that anybody could
take. They weren't going to have any more of him, and that was all
there was to it.

Joe Kivelson was grumbling about his broken arm; that meant that when
a fight started, he could only go in swinging with one fist, and that
would cut the fun in half. Another reason why Joe is a wretched shot
is that he doesn't like pistols. They're a little too impersonal to
suit him. They weren't for Oscar Fujisawa; he had gotten a
Mars-Consolidated Police Special out of the chart-table drawer and put
it on, and he was loading cartridges into a couple of spare clips.
Down on the main deck, the gunner was serving out small arms, and
there was an acrimonious argument because everybody wanted a chopper
and there weren't enough choppers to go around. Oscar went over to the
ladder head and shouted down at them.

"Knock off the argument, down there; you people are all going to stay
on the ship. I'm going up to the _Times_; as soon as I'm off, float
her out into the inner channel and keep her afloat, and don't let
anybody aboard you're not sure of."

"That where we're going?" Joe Kivelson asked.

"Sure. That's the safest place in town for Mr. Murell and I want to
find out exactly what's going on here."

"Well, here; you don't need to put me in storage," Murell protested.
"I can take care of myself."

Add, Famous Last Words, I thought.

"I'm sure of it, but we can't take any chances," Oscar told him.
"Right now, you are Fenris's Indispensable Man. If you're not around
to buy tallow-wax, Ravick's won the war."

Oscar and Murell and Joe and Tom Kivelson and I went down into the
boat; somebody opened the port and we floated out and lifted onto the
Second Level Down. There was a fringe of bars and cafes and dance
halls and outfitters and ship chandlers for a couple of blocks back,
and then we ran into the warehouse district. Oscar ran up town to a
vehicle shaft above the Times Building, careful to avoid the
neighborhood of Hunters' Hall or the Municipal Building.

There was a big crowd around the _Times_, mostly business district
people and quite a few women. They were mostly out on the street and
inside the street-floor vehicle port. Not a disorderly crowd, but I
noticed quite a few rifles and submachine guns. As we slipped into the
vehicle port, they recognized the _Pequod's_ boat, and there was a
rush after it. We had trouble getting down without setting it on
anybody, and more trouble getting out of it. They were all
friendly--too friendly for comfort. They began cheering us as soon as
they saw us.

Oscar got Joe Kivelson, with his arm in a sling, out in front where he
could be seen, and began shouting: "Please make way; this man's been
injured. Please don't crowd; we have an injured man here." The crowd
began shoving back, and in the rear I could hear them taking it up:
"Joe Kivelson; he's been hurt. They're carrying Joe Kivelson off."
That made Joe curse a blue streak, and somebody said, "Oh, he's been
hurt real bad; just listen to him!"

When we got up to the editorial floor, Dad and Bish Ware and a few
others were waiting at the elevator for us. Bish was dressed as he
always was, in his conservative black suit, with the organic opal
glowing in his neckcloth. Dad had put a coat on over his gun. Julio was
wearing two pistols and a knife a foot long. There was a big crowd in
the editorial office--ships' officers, merchants, professional people. I
noticed Sigurd Ngozori, the banker, and Professor Hartzenbosch--he was
wearing a pistol, too, rather self-consciously--and the Zen Buddhist
priest, who evidently had something under his kimono. They all greeted
us enthusiastically and shook hands with us. I noticed that Joe Kivelson
was something less than comfortable about shaking hands with Bish Ware.
The fact that Bish had started the search for the _Javelin_ that had
saved our lives didn't alter the opinion Joe had formed long ago that
Bish was just a worthless old souse. Joe's opinions are all
collapsium-plated and impervious to outside influence.

I got Bish off to one side as we were going into the editorial room.

"How did you get onto it?" I asked.

He chuckled deprecatingly. "No trick at all," he said. "I just
circulated and bought drinks for people. The trouble with Ravick's
gang, it's an army of mercenaries. They'll do anything for the price
of a drink, and as long as my rich uncle stays solvent, I always have
the price of a drink. In the five years I've spent in this Garden Spot
of the Galaxy, I've learned some pretty surprising things about Steve
Ravick's operations."

"Well, surely, nobody was going around places like Martian Joe's or
One Eye Swanson's boasting that they'd put a time bomb aboard the
_Javelin_," I said.

"It came to pretty nearly that," Bish said. "You'd be amazed at how
careless people who've had their own way for a long time can get. For
instance, I've known for some time that Ravick has spies among the
crews of a lot of hunter-ships. I tried, a few times, to warn some of
these captains, but except for Oscar Fujisawa and Corkscrew Finnegan,
none of them would listen to me. It wasn't that they had any doubt
that Ravick would do that; they just wouldn't believe that any of
their crew were traitors.

"I've suspected this Devis for a long time, and I've spoken to Ramon
Llewellyn about him, but he just let it go in one ear and out the
other. For one thing, Devis always has more money to spend than his
share of the _Javelin_ take would justify. He's the showoff type;
always buying drinks for everybody and playing the big shot. Claims to
win it gambling, but all the times I've ever seen him gambling, he's
been losing.

"I knew about this hoard of wax we saw the day Murell came in for some
time. I always thought it was being held out to squeeze a better price
out of Belsher and Ravick. Then this friend of mine with whom I was
talking aboard the _Peenemuende_ mentioned that Murell seemed to know
more about the tallow-wax business than about literary matters, and
after what happened at the meeting and afterward, I began putting two
and two together. When I crashed that party at Hunters' Hall, I heard
a few things, and they all added up.

"And then, about thirty hours after the Javelin left port, I was in
the Happy Haven, and who should I see, buying drinks for the house,
but Al Devis. I let him buy me one, and he told me he'd strained his
back hand-lifting a power-unit cartridge. A square dance got started a
little later, and he got into it. His back didn't look very strained
to me. And then I heard a couple of characters in One Eye Swanson's
betting that the _Javelin_ would never make port again."

I knew what had happened from then on. If it hadn't been for Bish
Ware, we'd still be squatting around a fire down on the coast of
Hermann Reuch's Land till it got too cold to cut wood, and then we'd
freeze. I mentioned that, but Bish just shrugged it off and suggested
we go on in and see what was happening inside.

"Where is Al Devis?" I asked. "A lot of people want to talk to him."

"I know they do. I want to get to him first, while he's still in
condition to do some talking of his own. But he just dropped out of
sight, about the time your father started calling the _Javelin_."

"Ah!" I drew a finger across under my chin, and mentioned the class of
people who tell no tales. Bish shook his head slowly.

"I doubt it," he said. "Not unless it was absolutely necessary. That
sort of thing would have a discouraging effect the next time Ravick
wanted a special job done. I'm pretty sure he isn't at Hunters' Hall,
but he's hiding somewhere."

Joe Kivelson had finished telling what had happened aboard the
_Javelin_ when we joined the main crowd, and everybody was talking
about what ought to be done with Steve Ravick. Oddly enough, the most
bloodthirsty were the banker and the professor. Well, maybe it wasn't
so odd. They were smart enough to know what Steve Ravick was really
doing to Port Sandor, and it hurt them as much as it did the hunters.
Dad and Bish seemed to be the only ones present who weren't in favor
of going down to Hunters' Hall right away and massacring everybody in
it, and then doing the same at the Municipal Building.

"That's what I say!" Joe Kivelson was shouting. "Let's go clean out
both rats' nests. Why, there must be a thousand hunter-ship men at the
waterfront, and look how many people in town who want to help. We got
enough men to eat Hunters' Hall whole."

"You'll find it slightly inedible, Joe," Bish told him. "Ravick has
about thirty men of his own and fifteen to twenty city police. He has
at least four 50-mm's on the landing stage above, and he has half a
dozen heavy machine guns and twice that many light 7-mm's."

"Bish is right," somebody else said. "They have the vehicle port on
the street level barricaded, and they have the two floors on the level
below sealed off. We got men all around it and nobody can get out, but
if we try to blast our way in, it's going to cost us like Nifflheim."

"You mean you're just going to sit here and talk about it and not do
anything?" Joe demanded.

"We're going to do something, Joe," Dad told him. "But we've got to
talk about what we're going to do, and how we're going to do it, or
it'll be us who'll get wiped out."

"Well, we'll have to decide on what it'll be, pretty quick," Mohandas
Gandhi Feinberg said.

"What are things like at the Municipal Building?" Oscar Fujisawa
asked. "You say Ravick has fifteen to twenty city cops at Hunters'
Hall. Where are the rest of them? That would only be five to ten."

"At the Municipal Building," Bish said. "Hallstock's holed up there,
trying to pretend that nothing out of the ordinary is happening."

"Good. Let's go to the Municipal Building, first," Oscar said. "Take a
couple of hundred men, make a lot of noise, shoot out a few windows
and all yell, 'Hang Mort Hallstock!' loud enough, and he'll recall the
cops he has at Hunters' Hall to save his own neck. Then the rest of us
can make a quick rush and take Hunters' Hall."

"We'll have to keep our main force around Hunters' Hall while we're
demonstrating at the Municipal Building," Corkscrew Finnegan said. "We
can't take a chance on Ravick's getting away."

"I couldn't care less whether he gets away or not," Oscar said. "I
don't want Steve Ravick's blood. I just want him out of the
Co-operative, and if he runs out from it now, he'll never get back
in."

"You want him, and you want him alive," Bish Ware said. "Ravick has
close to four million sols banked on Terra. Every millisol of that's
money he's stolen from the monster-hunters of this planet, through the
Co-operative. If you just take him out and string him up, you'll have
the Nifflheim of a time getting hold of any of it."

That made sense to all the ship captains, even Joe Kivelson, after Dad
reminded him of how much the salvage job on the _Javelin_ was going to
cost. It took Sigurd Ngozori a couple of minutes to see the point, but
then, hanging Steve Ravick wasn't going to cost the Fidelity & Trust
Company anything.

"Well, this isn't my party," Glenn Murell said, "but I'm too much of a
businessman to see how watching somebody kick on the end of a rope is
worth four million sols."

"Four million sols," Bish said, "and wondering, the rest of your
lives, whether it was justice or just murder."

The Buddhist priest looked at him, a trifle startled. After all, he
was the only clergyman in the crowd; he ought to have thought of that,
instead of this outrageous mock-bishop.

"I think it's a good scheme," Dad said. "Don't mass any more men
around Hunters' Hall than necessary. You don't want the police to be
afraid to leave when Hallstock calls them in to help him at Municipal
Building."

Bish Ware rose. "I think I'll see what I can do at Hunters' Hall, in
the meantime," he said. "I'm going to see if there's some way in from
the First or Second Level Down. Walt, do you still have that sleep-gas
gadget of yours?"

I nodded. It was, ostensibly, nothing but an oversized pocket lighter,
just the sort of a thing a gadget-happy kid would carry around. It
worked perfectly as a lighter, too, till you pushed in on a little
gismo on the side. Then, instead of producing a flame, it squirted
out a small jet of sleep gas. It would knock out a man; it would
almost knock out a Zarathustra veldtbeest. I'd bought it from a
spaceman on the _Cape Canaveral_. I'd always suspected that he'd
stolen it on Terra, because it was an expensive little piece of work,
but was I going to ride a bicycle six hundred and fifty light-years to
find out who it belonged to? One of the chemists' shops at Port Sandor
made me up some fills for it, and while I had never had to use it, it
was a handy thing to have in some of the places I had to follow
stories into, and it wouldn't do anybody any permanent damage, the way
a gun would.

"Yes; it's down in my room. I'll get it for you," I said.

"Be careful, Bish," Dad said. "That gang would kill you sooner than
look at you."

"Who, me?" Bish staggered into a table and caught hold of it. "Who'd
wanna hurt me? I'm just good ol' Bish Ware. _Good_ ol' Bish! nobody
hurt him; he'sh everybody's friend." He let go of the table and
staggered into a chair, upsetting it. Then he began to sing:

    "_Come all ye hardy spacemen, and harken while I tell
    Of fluorine-tainted Nifflheim, the Planetary Hell._"

Involuntarily, I began clapping my hands. It was a superb piece of
acting--Bish Ware sober playing Bish Ware drunk, and that's not an
easy role for anybody to play. Then he picked up the chair and sat
down on it.

"Who do you have around Hunters' Hall, and how do I get past them?"
he asked. "I don't want a clipful from somebody on my own side."

Nip Spazoni got a pencil and a pad of paper and began drawing a plan.

"This is Second Level Down," he said. "We have a car here, with a
couple of men in it. It's watching this approach here. And we have a
ship's boat, over here, with three men in it, and a 7-mm machine gun.
And another car--no, a jeep, here. Now, up on the First Level Down, we
have two ships' boats, one here, and one here. The password is
'Exotic,' and the countersign is 'Organics.'" He grinned at Murell.
"Compliment to your company."

"Good enough. I'll want a bottle of liquor. My breath needs a little
touching up, and I may want to offer somebody a drink. If I could get
inside that place, there's no telling what I might be able to do. If
one man can get in and put a couple of guards to sleep, an army can
get in after him."

Brother, I thought, if he pulls this one off, he's in. Nobody around
Port Sandor will ever look down on Bish Ware again, not even Joe
Kivelson. I began thinking about the detective agency idea again, and
wondered if he'd want a junior partner. Ware & Boyd, Planetwide
