They reached the opposite curb through some obscure miracle, with
Blackwell hanging on grimly until Taber pushed a door open and plunged
into a thick odor of formaldehyde.

"Have you still got that court order?" Taber asked as though hopeful of
a negative answer.

Blackwell held it up triumphantly. A few minutes later, he was gaping
down at a hasty reassembly of what had once been the ninth android.

He swallowed hard and said, "Nope. It ain't Jack."

"You're sure?" Taber said sarcastically. "It looks just like the
picture.

"Not quite. Anyhow, it ain't Jack."

The mystified Dr. Entman eyed Taber quizzically. "What's this all
about?"

Taber jerked a thumb in the direction of Blackwell. "The eleventh
android," he said tersely, and strode out of the laboratory.

Dr. Entman shook his head sadly, certain that Taber had slipped a cog.

       *       *       *       *       *

Charles Blackwell, a trifle ill from the smell of formaldehyde, stood on
the corner, closed his eyes, and took a deep breath. When he opened his
eyes a man in a blue suit was standing beside him.

"I would like you to answer some questions for me," the man said.

Blackwell gulped and blinked. "Sorry, mister, I'm kind of a stranger
here myself."

"That man you entered this building with--what business did you have
with him?"

It should have occurred to Charles Blackwell that this was none of the
stranger's business, but it didn't. That thought came later but, at the
moment, as he looked into the man's oddly empty eyes, his question
seemed entirely justified.

"Well, you see, my brother Jack bothers us, kind of. He gets
manic-depressive spells."

"What did that have to do with Brent Taber?"

"We thought maybe my brother broke his leg and then dropped dead or--or
something. Anyhow, I got this here court order--they gave it to me--and
I showed it to Taber--"

"Who are _they_?"

Blackwell felt strangely excited. He felt as though this man were a
friend, although he didn't know quite why.

"Well, you see I've been around a long time. I run errands and things
for Senator Crane. I'm confidential to him, you understand, because I
never talk. I always keep my mouth shut. So he trusts me and he gave me
this here court order--"

"Who is Senator Crane?"

"You don't know Senator Crane? You new in this country maybe?"

"He is a government official?"

"He's elected to office. He's a United States Senator. Anyhow, Brent
Taber showed me this here guy all cut up and I said it wasn't Jack
and--well, that was that."

"What room did Brent Taber take you to?"

"The damn place smelled like a skunk factory."

"What room number?"

"Ten twenty-six--I think. Yeah, ten twenty-six it was, and I'm telling
you, if you go in there, for Christ sake wear a gas mask. I damn near--"

But Charles Blackwell was talking to himself. The man had turned away
abruptly and was now disappearing around the corner.

"I wonder what the hell he wanted?" Blackwell asked plaintively. Then he
hailed a cab and went to report to Senator Crane.

       *       *       *       *       *

The tenth android stood with his back to the window in Les King's room
in Manhattan and said, "There is something I want you to do. If you are
very careful, you will succeed. If you succeed, there is a great deal of
money in it for you."

The fear that grew in Les King when they were apart, the uneasy feeling
that maybe money wasn't the most important thing in the world, died
automatically as John Dennis stared at him through those strangely empty
eyes.

"Is it something I can handle?"

"Yes." Dennis handed King a folded slip of paper. "I have written down
an address there. It is in Washington, D.C. I want you to enter those
premises--that room--and find some reports that should be there."

"Reports on what?"

"It is a dissecting place of some kind. That's where the bodies of the
androids are. The man who is doing it must have reports. There must be
records that tell what was wrong with the androids. It must be put down
somewhere why they died."

"Does it matter?"

"It is a matter of vital importance. There will be much money for you if
you get those reports and give them to me."

"Who pays the money?"

"I will pay it to you if you get the reports."

The prospect was exciting to King. Later, there could be a story about
how he got vital pictures of the project. His thinking had changed, but
this did not seem odd to him. All thought of functioning in
counterespionage against the Russians had moved into the back of his
mind. He was in the game now for the money. Oh was it that? Maybe he was
in it for the excitement. There was something in the man who called
himself John Dennis that generated excitement. It was like living a
melodrama. It tingled in the blood and took a man out of the drab world
where every day was like the one before it.

"I'll try," Les King said.

"You will succeed."

"I will succeed."

Jesus! This man had a thing about him. He inspired you. When he looked
at you with those weird eyes, you just knew you couldn't fail.




10


The doorbell rang. Rhoda Kane sprang up from the sofa and almost spilled
her drink. She was halfway across the room before she realized she was
almost running. She stopped. The hand that held the cocktail glass
shook.

Resolutely, she steadied, crossed to the liquor cabinet, put down the
glass, and went calmly to the door.

He stood there looking at her through those oddly empty eyes which,
through some contradiction of all probability, warmed her.

He came in and closed the door, saying nothing. A touch of panic rippled
through her. He was so silent, so unbending, so impersonal. Was this a
reflection of her inability to communicate with him? Could their
relationship fail because of this shortcoming on her part? What good was
love if you couldn't communicate it to the loved one?

She moved into his arms and raised her lips. His arms went around her,
but there was no pressure or affection in them. Their lips were an inch
apart. Her urge was to give full rein to the heady happiness and
excitement within her--to show her love in a kiss.

But she held off and, after a few moments, he drew, back, raised one
hand and passed it through her hair. Not with affection, she thought,
but rather with curiosity; almost as though he were preoccupied with its
composition. He rolled a strand of hair between thumb and finger,
testing it.

"It needs cutting," Rhoda said.

"Do you cut it?"

She laughed nervously. "You don't know much about women, do you."

"I know nothing about woman."

Trying to inject a gay note into her voice, she said, "We eat, we sleep,
we--we're very functional, really."

He rubbed a finger down her cheek. He pressed the flesh on her neck and
watched the muscle spring back as he withdrew his finger.

"Do that to me," he said.

Mystified, Rhoda pressed her finger against his neck until she could
feel a pulse in his throat. She withdrew the finger. "Like that?"

"Did it leave a mark?"

"No. Is there something wrong? Do you have a sore throat?"

"My throat is not sore."

Rhoda's frustration was a pitiful thing. How could she get to him? How
could she break through his shyness?

"I think you're afraid of me," she said lightly.

He did not answer. He took a backward step and regarded her for a moment
with a frown. Then he began to unbutton her blouse.

Rhoda wanted to object. An instinctive protest caused her to draw back.
His only reaction to this was to step forward and continue to unbutton
her blouse. She wanted to resist but the fear of driving him away held
her mute; that and something in his eyes that told of excitement, an
unformed phantom of delight that had never materialized but still held
sway over her through promise.

He stripped the blouse off. She wore no brassiere underneath, and he
regarded her breasts somberly. He pressed a nipple with the tip of one
finger and watched it spring back into place.

"Please. I--"

He ignored her. He pressed the nipple again and then found the zipper on
the side of her slacks. He pulled it down and pushed the slacks down
over her hips. She lifted each foot obediently.

He was on his knees now, running his fingers gently down her thighs.
Rhoda trembled at the touch. Then she realized it was not love-making on
his part--not in any sense. He was preoccupied with the fine hair on her
skin. He studied it closely.

"I should have shaved my legs," Rhoda said uncertainly. He raised his
head, the cold eyes trained into hers. "This hair grows, too?"

Rhoda caught her lower lip between her teeth. Tears were close to the
surface.

_This is crazy. This is utterly insane. I'm mad or he's mad. I don't
know. I just don't know ..._

The last garment was removed and she was naked there in the middle of
the living room. He studied her body again, that passionless,
preoccupied frown on his face. He drew her down onto the floor and, for
a moment, the room spun around Rhoda, her emotional entrapment now the
focal point, the eye of the storm that raged in her being. He went on
with his minute inspection of her person.

_No--no. Please don't. Please don't treat me like this. I'm a woman.
Don't be contemptuous of me. Oh, no--please. Don't degrade and humiliate
me like this._

There was sudden pain. Rhoda's body wrenched and heaved upward. With a
sob, she sank back to the floor.

_I must fight. I must not allow this. I must not let him do these cruel,
degrading things to me. I must fight but I am afraid to. I am afraid
he'll go away and never come back--and if he did that, there would be
nothing left for me._

John Dennis seemed to become aware for the first time that certain
manipulations caused reaction--the jerking of Rhoda's body and her
involuntary cry of pain. He repeated the manipulation with his eyes on
her face.

_I cannot allow this. I must fight. I must resist. Oh, Rhoda Kane, what
has happened to you? Frank, please help, help me. Frank--_

But something seemed to flow out of John Dennis and into her mind and
soul and spirit; something that made the flesh and what was done to the
flesh unimportant.

The touch of John Dennis' hand brought fright as it foretold further
pain and degradation. Rhoda sobbed inwardly and braced herself to
withstand whatever was to come.

_Mad!--mad!--mad!_

But it meant nothing.

       *       *       *       *       *

The building was not for tourists. It wasn't like the Pentagon or the
White House or any of the other historical or glamour symbols in
Washington, D.C. It was on a side street, and while no one associated it
with governmental activity, it was of a size and importance that
justified a uniformed attendant in the lobby.

He was a hard-bitten old Irishman named Callahan, and nobody got past
him without justification. Also, he was a man of robust hates and great
loyalties; a man whom Brent Taber was honored to call friend.

He was also a man Brent Taber was waiting to hear from.

The call came late in the afternoon of the day following Charles
Blackwell's search for his would-be brother. Taber picked up the phone.

"It's me--Callahan. He's here, Mr. Taber."

"Thanks. I'll be right over."

"And be hurrying right along if you want to get here in time. He's not
one to be restrained indefinitely."

"Tell him the elevator's busted."

Brent Taber slammed the phone down and left. He used an elevator this
time and went across town in a cab. Even then, he was almost too late.
As he arrived at his destination, Senator Crane was protesting loudly.

"It's just plain stupidity. Elevators don't quit running for no reason.
Find a burnt-out fuse. Do something! And do it quick or I'll phone
somebody who will!"

"Well, I'll be blessed," Callahan said, completely crest-fallen. "It
was the switch, Senator. The blessed switch was off."

"Well, turn it on and get me up to ten."

"Good afternoon, Senator."

Crane whirled. "Brent Taber!" He threw a quick scowl at Callahan and was
on the verge of accusing the Irishman of high treason, but he said, "All
right. I'm glad you're here, Taber. We might as well get this thing
into the open. Are you going to take me to room ten twenty-six or do I
have to take steps to force your co-operation?"

Taber stared morosely at Crane's nose. "Why, Senator, where did you get
the idea my department wouldn't help a member of Congress to the
utmost?"

"None of your sarcasm. Let's go upstairs."

"All right, Callahan. Let's go upstairs."

They got off on ten and walked down the corridor. "Ten twenty-eight, you
said?"

