moon as seen from earth.

Past the orbit of Mercury, the sun side of the asteroid grew dangerously
hot for men in space suits. Rip and the Planeteers stayed in the bitter
cold of the dark side, which ceased to be entirely dark. Even the
temperature rose somewhat. They were close enough to the sun so that the
prominences, great flaming tongues of hydrogen that sped many thousands of
miles into space, gave them light and enough heat to register on Rip's
instruments.

Mercury was left far behind, and earth could not be seen because of the
sun. There was nothing to do now but ride out the rest of the trip as
comfortably as possible until it was time to throw the asteroid into an
ever-tightening series of elliptical orbits around earth, known as braking
ellipses. The method would use earth's gravity to slow them down to the
proper speed. A single atomic bomb and a half dozen tubes of rocket fuel
remained.

Then, as Rip was enjoying the comfort of air during his off-watch hour in
the boat compartment, Koa beat an alarm on the door.

Rip and the Planeteers with him hurriedly got into space suits and opened
up.

"It's Terra base calling on the communicator, sir," Koa reported. "Urgent
message, they said, and they want to talk to you, personally."

Rip hurried to the base cave. The communicator indicator light was glowing
red. He plugged in his helmet circuit and said, "This is Lieutenant
Foster. Go ahead."

A voice crackled across space from earth. "This is Terra base. Foster, a
Consops cruiser has apparently been hiding behind the sun waiting for you.
Our screens just picked it up, heading your way. We've sent orders to the
_Sagittarius_ on Mercury to give you cover, and the _Aquila_ has taken off
from here. But get this, Foster. The Consops cruiser will reach you first.
You have about one hour. Do you understand?"

Rip understood all right. He understood too well. "Got you," he said
shortly. "Now what?"

The communicator buzzed. "Take any appropriate action. You're on your own,
Foster. Sorry. Sending the cruisers is all we can do. We'll stand by for
word from you. If you think of any way we can help, let us know."

Rip asked, "How long before the cruisers arrive?"

"You're too close to us for them to move fast. They'll have to use time
accelerating and decelerating. The _Sagittarius_ should arrive in
something less than two hours and the _Aquila_ a few minutes later."

The communicator paused, then continued. "One thing more, Foster. The
Connies know how badly we want that asteroid, but they also know we don't
want it enough to start a war. Got that?"

"Got it," Rip stated wryly. "I got it good. Thanks for the warning, Terra
base. Foster off."

"Terra base off. Stay out of high vack."

Fine advice, if it could be taken. Rip stared up at the brilliant stars,
thinking fast. The Connie would have almost an hour's lead on the space
patrol cruisers. In that hour, if the Connie were willing to pay the price
in blasted snapper-boats, Consops would have the asteroid. And Terra base
had made it clear that the space patrol would not try to blast the Connie
cruiser and take back the asteroid, because that would mean war.

Added together, the facts said just one thing: they had one hour in which
to think of some way to hold off the Connies for an additional hour.

The Planeteers were clustered around him. Rip asked grimly, "Any of you
ever study the ancient art of magic?"

The Planeteers remained silent and tense.

"Magic is what we need," Rip told them. "We have to make the whole
asteroid disappear, or else we have to conjure up a space cruiser out of
the thorium. Otherwise, we have a little more than an hour before we're
either prisoners or dead!"





CHAPTER THIRTEEN - PERIL AT PERIHELION


Sergeant-major Koa had made no comment since notifying Rip of the call
from Terra base. Now he asked thoughtfully, "Lieutenant, can the Connie
launch boats this close to the sun? Won't the sun's pull suck them right
in?"

Corporal Pederson scoffed, "Naw, Koa. If sun's gravity be that strong, it
pull us in, too."

"Not quite, Pederson," Rip corrected. "Koa is on the right track. The pull
of the sun is pretty strong. But I don't think it's strong enough to
capture boats."

He had figured the asteroid's orbit to pass as close to the sun as
possible while maintaining a margin of safety. He had wanted to use the
sun's gravity to pick up speed. His regular star sightings had told him
several days before that the sun was dragging them.

But Koa had started a train of ideas running through Rip's head. If they
could get close enough to the sun so small boats would be unable to break
free of its gravity, the Connie wouldn't dare send a landing force. The
powerful engines of a cruiser could break loose from Sol's pull, but not
the chemical jets of a cruiser's boats.

Rip got his instruments and pulled out a special slide rule designed for
use in space. He had Koa stand by with stylus and computation board and
take down figures as he called them off.

He recalculated the safety factor he had used when deciding how close to
put the asteroid to the sun, then took quick star sights to determine
their exact position. They were within a few miles of perihelion, the
point at which they would be closest to Sol.

Rip tapped gloved fingers on his helmet absently. If they could blast out
of the orbit and drive into the sun ... he estimated the result. A few
miles per second of extra speed would put them so far within the sun's
field of gravity that, within an hour or so, small boats would venture
into space only at their peril.

He reviewed the equipment. They had tubes of rocket fuel, but the tubes
wouldn't give the powerful thrust needed for this job. They had one atomic
bomb. One wasn't enough. Not only must they drive toward the sun, they
must keep reserve power to blast free again. If only they had a pair of
nuclear charges!

He called his Planeteers together and outlined the problem. Perhaps one of
them would have an idea. But no useful suggestions were forthcoming until
little Dominico spoke up. "Sir, why don't we make two bombs from one?"

       [Illustration: "Sir, Why Don't We Make Two Bombs From One?"]

               "Sir, Why Don't We Make Two Bombs From One?"


"I wish we could," Rip said. "Do you know how, Dominico?"

"No, Lieutenant. If we had parts, I could put bombs together. I can take
them apart, but I don't know how to make two out of one." The Italian
Planeteer looked accusingly at Rip. "I thought maybe you know, sir."

Rip grunted. If they had parts, he could assemble nuclear bombs, too. Part
of his physics training had been concerned with fission and its various
applications. But no one had taught him how to make two bombs out of one.

The theory of nuclear explosions was simple enough. Two or more correctly
sized pieces of plutonium or uranium isotope, when brought together,
formed what was known as a critical mass, which would fission. The
fissioning released energy and produced the explosion.

But there was a wide gap between theory and practice. A nuclear bomb was
actually pretty complicated. It had to be complicated to keep the pieces
of the fissionable material apart until a chemical explosion drove them
together fast and hard enough to create a fission explosion. If the pieces
weren't brought together rapidly enough, the mass would fission in a slow
chain reaction and no explosion would result.

Rip was trained in scientific analysis. He tackled the problem logically,
considering the design of a nuclear bomb and the reasons for it.

Atomic bombs had to be carried. That meant an outer casing was necessary.
Probably the casing had a lot to do with the design. Suppose no casing
were required? What would be needed?

He took the stylus and computation board from Koa and jotted down the
parts required. First, two or more pieces of plutonium large enough to
form a critical mass. Second, a neutron source--some material with the type
of radioactivity that produced neutrons--to start the reaction. Third, some
kind of neutron reflector. And fourth, explosive to drive the pieces
together.

Did they have all those items? He checked them off. Their single five KT
bomb contained at least enough plutonium for two critical masses, if
brought together inside a good neutron reflector. Each mass should give
about a two kiloton explosion. And they did have a good neutron
reflector--nuclite. There wasn't anything better for the purpose.

"What have we got for a neutron source?" he asked aloud. He was really
asking himself, but he got a quick answer from Koa.

"Sir, some of the stuff left in the craters from the other explosions
gives off neutrons."

"You're right," Rip agreed instantly. A small piece from one of the
craters, when combined with half of the neutron source in the bomb, should
be enough. As for the explosive, they had exploding heads on their attack
rockets.

In other words, he had what he needed--except for a method of putting all
the pieces together to create a bomb.

If only they had a tube of some sort that would withstand the chemical
explosion--the one that brought the critical mass together!

He told the Planeteers what he had been thinking, then asked, "Any ideas
for a tube?"

"How about a tube from the snapper-boat?" Santos suggested.

Rip shook his head. "Not strong enough. They're designed to withstand the
slow push of rocket fuel, not the fast rap of an explosion. When I say
slow, I mean slow-burning when compared with explosive. Who has another
idea?"

Kemp, the expert torchman, said, "Sir, I can burn you a tube into the
asteroid."

Rip grabbed the Planeteer so hard they both floated upward. "Kemp, that's
wonderful! That's it!" The details took form in his mind even as he called
orders. "Dominico, tear down that bomb. Santos, remove two heads from your
rockets and wire them to explode on electrical impulse. Kemp, we'll want
the tube just a fraction of an inch wider than a rocket head. Get your
torch ready."

He took the stylus and began calculating. He talked as he worked, telling
the Planeteers exactly what they were up against. "I'm figuring out where
to put the charge so it will do the most good, but my data isn't complete.
If our homemade bomb goes off, I don't know exactly how much power it will
give. If it gives too much, we'll be driven so close to the sun well never
get free of its gravity."

Bradshaw, the English Planeteer, said mildly, "Don't worry, Lieutenant.
We're caught either way. If it isn't the solar frying pan, it's Connie
fire."

A chorus of agreement came from the other Planeteers. What a crew! Rip
thought. What a great gang of space pirates!

He finished his calculations and found the exact spot where Kemp would
cut. A few feet away from the spot was a thick pyramid of thorium. That
would do, and they could cut into it horizontally instead of drilling
straight down. He pointed to it. "Let's have a hole straight in for six
feet. And keep it straight, Kemp. Allow enough room for a lining of
nuclite. Koa, pull a sheet of nuclite out of the cave and cut it to size."

Kemp's torch already was slicing into the metal. Rip asked, "Can you weld
with that thing, Kemp?"

"Just show me what you want, sir."

"Good." Rip motioned to Trudeau. "Frenchy, we'll need a strong rod at
least eight feet long."

The French Planeteer hurried off. Rip consulted his chronometer. Less than
ten minutes had passed since the call from Terra base.

He went over his plan again. It had to work! If it didn't, asteroid and
Planeteers would end up as subatomic particles in the sun's photosphere,
because he had calculated his blast to drive the asteroid past the limit
of safety. It was the only way he could be sure of putting them beyond
danger from Connie landing boats or snapper-boats. The Connie would have
only one chance--to bring his cruiser down on the asteroid.

If he tried that, Rip thought grimly, he would get a surprise. The second
nuclear charge would be set, ready to be fired. The Connie cruiser was so
big that no matter how it pulled up to the asteroid, some part of it would
be close enough to the charge to be blown into space dust. No cruiser
could survive an atomic explosion within five hundred yards, and the
Connie would have to get closer to the nuclear charge than that.

Dominico reported that the bomb had been dismantled. Rip went to it and
examined the raw plutonium, being careful to keep the pieces widely
separated.

This particular bomb design used five pieces of plutonium which were
driven together to form a ball. Rip made a quick estimate. Two were enough
to form a critical mass. He would use two to blast into the sun and three
to blast out again. He would need the extra kick.

There was only one trouble. The pieces were wedge shaped. They would have
to be mounted in thorium in order to keep them rigid. Only Kemp could do
that. They had no cutting tool but the torch.

Santos appeared, carrying a rocket head under each arm. They had wires
wound around them, ready to be attached to an electrical source.

Rip hurried back to where Kemp was at work. The private was using a
cutting nozzle that threw an almost invisible flame five feet long. In
air, the nozzle wouldn't have worked effectively beyond two feet, but in
space it cut right down to the end of the flame. Kemp had his arm inside
the hole and was peering past it as he finished the cut.

"Done, sir," he said, and adjusted the flame to a spout of red fire. He
thrust the torch into the hole and quickly withdrew it as pieces of
thorium flew out. A stream of water hosed into the tube would have washed
them out the same way.

Rip took a block of plutonium from Dominico and handed it to Kemp. "Cut a
plug and fit this into it. Then cut a second plug for the other piece.
They have to match perfectly, and you can't put them together to try out
the fit. If you do, we'll have fission right here in the open."

Kemp searched and found a piece he had cut in making the tube. It was
perfectly round, ideal for the purpose. He sliced off the inner side where
it tapered to a cone, then, working only by eye estimate, cut out a hole
in which the wedge of fission material would fit. He wasn't off by a
thirty-second of an inch. Skillful application of the torch melted the
thorium around the wedge and sealed it tightly.

Koa was ready with a sheet of nuclite. Trudeau arrived with a long pole he
had made by lashing two crate sticks together.

Rip gave directions as they formed a cylinder of nuclite. Kemp spot-welded
it, and they pushed it into the hole, forming a lining.

Nunez found a small piece of material in one of the earlier craters. It
would provide some neutrons to start the chain reaction. Rip added it to
the front of the plutonium wedge along with a piece of beryllium from the
bomb, and Kemp welded it in place.

They put the thorium block which contained the plutonium into the hole,
the plutonium facing outward. Trudeau rammed it to the bottom with his
pole. The neutron source, the neutron reflector, and one piece of
fissionable material were in place.

Kemp sliced another round block of thorium out of a near-by crystal and
fitted the second wedge of plutonium into it. At first Rip had worried
about the two pieces of plutonium making a good enough contact, but Kemp's
skillful hand and precision eye removed that worry.

The torchman finished fitting the plutonium and carried the block to the
tube opening. He tried it, removed a slight irregularity with his torch,
then said quietly, "Finished, sir."

Rip took over. He slid the thorium-plutonium block into the tube, took a
rocket head from Santos and used it to push the block in farther. When the
rocket head was about four inches inside the tube, its wires trailing out,
Rip called Kemp. At his direction, the torchman sliced a thin slot up the
face of the crystal. Rip fitted the wires into it and held them in place
with a small wedge of thorium.

Kemp cut a plug, fitted it into the hole, and welded the seams closed. The
tube was sealed. When electric current fired the rocket head, the thorium
carrying the plutonium wedge would be driven forward to meet the wedge in
the back. And, unless Rip had miscalculated the mass of the two pieces,
they would have their nuclear blast. Rip surveyed the crystal with some
anxiety. It looked right.

Dominico already had rigged the timer from the atomic bomb. He connected
the wires, then looked at Rip. "Do I set it, sir?"

"Load the communicator, the extra bomb parts, the rocket launcher and
rockets, the cutting equipment, my instruments, and the tubes of fuel,"
Rip ordered. "Leave everything else in the cave."

The Planeteers ran to obey. Rip waited until the landing boat was nearly
loaded, then told Dominico to set the timer for five minutes. He wondered
how they would explode the second charge, since they had only the one
timer left, then forgot about it. Time enough to worry when faced with the
