stigmas on spreading styles; fruit maturing the second year.


=Quercus alba, L.=

WHITE OAK.

=Habitat and Range.=--Light loams, sandy plains, and gravelly ridges,
often constituting extensive tracts of forest.

     Quebec and Ontario.

Maine,--southern sections; New Hampshire,--most abundant eastward; in
the Connecticut valley confined to the hills in the immediate vicinity
of the river, extending up the tributary streams a short distance and
disappearing entirely before reaching the mouth of the Passumpsic (W. F.
Flint); Vermont,--common west of the Green mountains, less so in the
southern Connecticut valley (_Flora of Vermont_, 1900); Massachusetts,
Rhode Island, and Connecticut,--common.

     South to the Gulf of Mexico; west to Minnesota, Nebraska, Kansas,
     Arkansas, and Texas.

=Habit.=--A tree of the first rank, 50-75 feet high and 1-6 feet in
diameter above the swell of the roots, exhibiting considerable diversity
in general appearance, trunk sometimes dissolving into branches like the
American elm, and sometimes continuous to the top. The finest specimens
in open land are characterized by a rather short, massive trunk, with
stout, horizontal, far-reaching limbs, conspicuously gnarled and twisted
in old age, forming a wide-spreading, open head of striking grandeur,
the diameter at the base of which is sometimes two or three times the
height of the tree.

=Bark.=--Trunk and larger branches light ash-gray, sometimes nearly
white, broken into long, thin, loose, irregular, soft-looking flakes; in
old trees with broad, flat ridges; inner bark light; branchlets
ash-gray, mottled; young shoots grayish-green, roughened with minute
rounded, raised dots.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds 1/8 to 1/4 inch long, round-ovate,
reddish-brown. Leaves simple, alternate, 3-7 inches long, 2-4 inches
wide, delicately reddish-tinted and pubescent upon both sides when
young; at maturity glabrous, light dull or glossy green above, paler and
somewhat glaucous beneath, turning to various reds in autumn; outline
obovate to oval; lobes 5-9; ascending, varying greatly in different
trees; when few, short and wide-based, with comparatively shallow
sinuses; when more in number, ovate-oblong, with deeper sinuses, or
somewhat linear-oblong, with sinuses reaching nearly to midrib; apex of
lobe rounded; base of leaf tapering; leafstalks short; stipules linear,
soon falling. The leaves of this species are often persistent till
spring, especially in young trees.

=Inflorescence.=--May. Appearing when the leaves are half grown; sterile
catkins 2-3 inches long, with slender, usually pubescent thread; calyx
yellow, pubescent; lobes 5-9, pointed: pistillate flowers sessile or
short-peduncled, reddish, ovate-scaled.

=Fruit.=--Maturing in the autumn of the first year, single, or more
frequently in pairs, sessile or peduncled: cup hemispherical to deep
saucer-shaped, rather thin; scales rough-knobby at base: acorn varying
from 1/2 inch to an inch in length, oblong-ovoid: meat sweet and edible,
said to be when boiled a good substitute for chestnuts.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy in New England; grows well in all except
very wet soils, in all open exposures and in light shade; like all oaks,
difficult to transplant unless prepared by frequent transplanting in
nurseries, from which it is not readily obtainable in quantity; grows
very slowly and nearly uniformly up to maturity; comparatively free
from insect enemies but occasionally disfigured by fungous disease which
attacks immature leaves in spring. Propagated from seed.

[Illustration: PLATE XXXVII.--Quercus alba.]

  1. Winter buds.
  2. Flowering branch.
  3-4. Sterile flower, front view.
  5. Fertile flower, side view.
  6. Fruiting branch.
  7-8. Variant leaves.


=Quercus stellata, Wang.=

_Q. obtusiloba, Michx. Q. minor, Sarg_.

POST OAK. BOX WHITE OAK.

=Habitat and Range.=

     Doubtfully reported from southern Ontario.

In New England, mostly in sterile soil near the sea-coast;
Massachusetts,--southern Cape Cod from Falmouth to Brewster, the most
northern station reported, occasional; the islands of Naushon, Martha's
Vineyard where it is rather common, and Nantucket where it is rare;
Rhode Island,--along the shore of the northern arm of Wickford harbor
(L. W. Russell); Connecticut,--occasional along the shores of Long
Island sound west of New Haven.

     South to Florida; west to Kansas, Indian territory, and Texas.

=Habit.=--Farther south, a tree of the first magnitude, reaching a
height of 100 feet, with a trunk diameter of 4 feet; in southern New
England occasionally attaining in woodlands a height of 50-60 feet; at
its northern limit in Massachusetts, usually 10 to 35 feet in height,
with a diameter at the ground of 6-12 inches. The trunk throws out
stout, tough, and often conspicuously crooked branches, the lower
horizontal or declining, forming a disproportionately large head, with
dark green, dense foliage. Near the shore the limbs often grow very low,
stretching along the ground as if from an underground stem.

=Bark.=--Resembling that of the white oak, but rather a darker gray,
rougher and firmer; upon old trunks furrowed and cut into oblongs; small
limbs brownish-gray, rough-dotted; season's shoots densely
tawny-tomentose.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds small, rounded or conical, brownish,
scales minutely pubescent or scurfy. Leaves simple, alternate, 3-8
inches long, two-thirds as wide, thickish, yellowish-green and tomentose
upon both sides when young, becoming a deep, somewhat glossy green
above, lighter beneath, both sides still somewhat scurfy; general
outline of leaf and of lobes, and number and shape of the latter,
extremely variable; type-form 5-lobed, all the lobes rounded, the three
upper lobes much larger, more or less subdivided, often squarish, the
two lower tapering to an acute, rounded, or truncate base; sinuses deep,
variable, often at right angles to the midrib; leafstalk short,
tomentose; stipules linear, pubescent, occasionally persistent till
midsummer. The leaves are often arranged at the tips of the branches in
star-shaped clusters, giving rise to the specific name _stellata_.

=Inflorescence.=--May. Sterile catkins 1-3 inches long, connecting
thread woolly; calyx 4-8 parted, lobes acute, densely pubescent, yellow;
stamens 4-8, _anthers with scattered hairs_: pistillate flowers single
or in clusters of 2, 3, or more, sessile or on a short stem; stigma red.

=Fruit.=--Maturing the first season, single and sessile, or nearly so,
or in clusters of 2, 3, or more, on short footstalks: cup top-shaped or
cup-shaped, 1/3-1/2 the length of the acorn, about 3/4 inch wide, thin;
scales smooth or sometimes hairy along the top, acutish or roundish,
slightly thickened at base: acorn 1/2-1 inch long, sweet.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy in New England; prefers a good,
well-drained, open soil; quite as slow-growing as the white oak; seldom
found in nurseries and difficult to transplant. Propagated from the
seed.

[Illustration: PLATE XXXVIII.--Quercus stellata.]

  1. Winter buds.
  2. Flowering branch.
  3. Sterile flower, back view.
  4. Sterile flower, front view.
  5. Fertile flower.
  6. Fruiting branch.


=Quercus macrocarpa, Michx.=

BUR OAK. OVER-CUP OAK. MOSSY-CUP OAK.

=Habitat and Range.=--Deep, rich soil; river valleys.

     Nova Scotia to Manitoba, not attaining in this region the size of
     the white oak, nor covering as large areas.

Maine,--known only in the valleys of the middle Penobscot (Orono)
and the Kennebec (Winslow, Waterville); Vermont,--lowlands
about Lake Champlain, especially in Addison county, not common;
Massachusetts,--valley of the Ware river (Worcester county), Stockbridge
and towns south along the Housatonic river (Berkshire county); Rhode
Island,--no station reported; Connecticut,--probably introduced in
central and eastern sections, possibly native near the northern border.

     South to Pennsylvania and Tennessee; west to Montana, Nebraska,
     Kansas, Indian territory, and Texas.

=Habit.=--A medium-sized tree, 40-60 feet high, with a trunk diameter of
1-3 feet; attaining great size in the Ohio and Mississippi river basins;
trunk erect, branches often changing direction, ascending, save the
lowest, which are often nearly horizontal; branchlets numerous, on the
lowest branches often declined or drooping; head wide-spreading, rounded
near the center, very rough in aspect; distinguished in summer by the
luxuriance of the dark-green foliage and in autumn by the size of its
acorns.

=Bark.=--Bark of trunk and branches ash-gray, but darker than that of
the white oak, separating on old trees into rather firm, longitudinal
ridges; bark of branches sometimes developed into conspicuous corky,
wing-like layers; season's shoots yellowish-brown, minutely hairy, with
numerous small, roundish, raised dots.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds brown, 1/16 to 1/8 inch long, conical,
scattered along the shoots and clustered at the enlarged tips. Leaves
simple, alternate, 6-9 inches long, 3-4 inches broad, smooth and dark
green above, lighter and downy beneath; outline obovate to oblong,
varying from irregularly and deeply sinuate-lobed, especially near the
center, to nearly entire, base wedge-shaped; stalk short; stipules
linear, pubescent.

=Inflorescence.=--May. Sterile catkins 3-5 inches long; calyx mostly
5-parted, yellowish-green; divisions linear-oblong, more or less
persistent; stamens 10; anthers yellow, glabrous: pistillate flowers
sessile or short-stemmed; scales reddish; stigma red.

=Fruit.=--Maturing the first season; extremely variable; sessile or
short-stemmed: cup top-shaped to hemispherical, 3/4-2 inches in
diameter, with thick, close, pointed scales, the upper row often
terminating in a profuse or sparing hairy or leafy fringe: acorn ovoid,
often very large, sometimes sunk deeply and occasionally entirely in the
cup.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy in New England; in general appearance
resembling the swamp white oak, but better adapted to upland; grows
rather slowly in any good, well-drained soil; difficult to transplant;
seldom disfigured by insects or disease; occasionally grown in
nurseries. Propagated from seed. A narrower-leafed form with small
acorns (var. _olivaeformis_) is occasionally offered.

[Illustration: PLATE XXXIX.--Quercus macrocarpa.]

  1. Winter buds.
  2. Flowering branch.
  3. Sterile flower, back view.
  4. Sterile flower, front view.
  5. Fertile flowers.
  6. Fruiting branch.


=Quercus bicolor, Willd.=

_Quercus platanoides, Sudw._

SWAMP WHITE OAK.

=Habitat and Range.=--In deep, rich soil; low, moist, fertile
grounds, bordering swamps and along streams.

     Quebec to Ontario, where it is known as the blue oak.

Maine,--York county; New Hampshire,--Merrimac valley as far as the mouth
of the Souhegan, and probably throughout Rockingham county;
Vermont,--low grounds about Lake Champlain; Massachusetts,--frequent in
the western and central sections, common eastward; Rhode Island and
Connecticut,--common.

     South to Delaware and along the mountains to northern Georgia; west
     to Minnesota, Iowa, east Kansas, and Arkansas.

=Habit.=--A medium-sized tree, 40-60 feet high, with a trunk diameter of
2-3 feet; attaining southward of the Great Lakes and in the Ohio basin
much greater dimensions; roughest of all the oaks, except the bur oak,
in general aspect; trunk erect, continuous, in young trees often beset
at point of branching with down-growing, scraggly branchlets, surmounted
by a rather regular pyramidal head, the lower branches horizontal or
declining, often descending to the ground, with a short, stiff,
abundant, and bushy spray; smaller twigs ridgy, widening beneath buds;
foliage a dark shining green; heads of large trees less regular, rather
open, with a general resemblance to the head of the white oak, but
narrower at the base, with less contorted limbs.

=Bark.=--Bark of trunk and larger branches thick, dark grayish-brown,
longitudinally striate, with flaky scales; bark of young stems,
branches, and branchlets darker, separating in loose scales which curl
back, giving the tree its shaggy aspect; season's shoots
yellowish-green.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds brown, roundish-ovate, obtuse. Leaves
simple, alternate, 3-8 inches long, 2-4 wide, downy on both sides when
unfolding, at maturity thick and firm, smooth and dark shining green
above, slightly to conspicuously whitish-downy beneath, in autumn
brownish-yellow; obovate, coarsely and deeply crenate or obtusely
shallow-lobed, when opening sometimes pointed and tapering to a
wedge-shaped base, often constricted near the center; leafstalk short;
stipules linear, soon falling.

=Inflorescence.=--May. Sterile catkins 2-3 inches long, thread hairy;
calyx deeply 3-7-parted, pale yellow, hairy; stamens 5-8; anthers
yellow, glabrous: pistillate flowers tomentose, on rather long, hairy
peduncles; stigmas red.

=Fruit.=--Variable, on stems 1-3 inches long, maturing the first season,
single or frequently in twos: cup rounded, rather thin, deep, rough to
mossy, often with fringed margins: acorn about 1 inch long,
oblong-ovoid, more or less tapering: meat sweet, edible.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy throughout New England; grows in any good
soil, wet or dry, but prefers a position on the edge of moist or boggy
land, where its roots can find a constant supply of water; growth fairly
rapid; seldom affected by insects or disease; occasionally offered by
nurserymen and rather less difficult to transplant than most of the
oaks. Its sturdy, rugged habit and rich dark green foliage make it a
valuable tree for ornamental plantations or even for streets.

[Illustration: PLATE XL.--Quercus bicolor.]

  1. Winter buds.
  2. Flowering branch.
  3. Sterile flower, side view.
  4. Sterile flower, front view.
  5. Fertile flowers.
  6. Fruiting branch.


=Quercus Prinus, L.=

CHESTNUT OAK. ROCK CHESTNUT OAK.

=Habitat and Range.=--Woods, rocky banks, hill slopes.

     Along the Canadian shore of Lake Erie.

Maine,--Saco river and Mt. Agamenticus, near the southern coast (York
county); New Hampshire,--belts or patches in the eastern part of the
state and along the southern border, Hinsdale, Winchester, Brookline,
