Man bent down and put his hand upon it. There was some form of
vegetation there, and, leaning closer, he could see what appeared to be
the ruins of a tiny forest, bent and trampled, the tree-trunks no larger
than slender twigs that he could have snapped asunder easily between his
fingers.

"Look at this," he exclaimed. "The woods--we're here."

The others knelt down with him.

"Be careful," cautioned the Doctor. "Don't move around. We must get
smaller." He drew the papers from his pocket.

"Rogers was in doubt about this quantity to take," he added. "We should
be now somewhere at the edge or in the forest he mentions. Yet we may be
very far from the point at which he reached the bottom of that incline.
I think, too, that we are somewhat larger than he was. Probably the
strength of our drug differs from his to some extent."

"How much should we take next, I wonder?" said the Big Business Man as
he looked at his companions.

The Doctor took a pill and crushed it in his hand. "Let us take so
much," he said, indicating a small portion of the powder. The others
each crushed one of the pills and endeavored to take as nearly as
possible an equal amount.

"I'm hungry," said the Very Young Man. "Can we eat right after the
powder?"

"I don't think that should make any difference," the Doctor answered,
and so accustomed to the drug were they now that, quite nonchalantly,
they sat down and ate.

After a few moments it became evident that in spite of their care the
amounts of the drug they had taken were far from equal.

Before they had half finished eating, the Very Young Man was hardly more
than a third the size of the Doctor, with the Big Business Man about
half-way between. This predicament suddenly struck them as funny, and
all three laughed heartily at the effect of the drug.

"Hey, you, hurry up, or you'll never catch me," shouted the Very Young
Man gleefully. "Gosh, but you're big!" He reached up and tried to touch
the Doctor's shoulder. Then, seeing the huge piece of chocolate in his
friend's hand and comparing it with the little one in his own, he added:
"Trade you chocolate. That's a regular meal you got there."

"That's a real idea," said the Big Business Man, ceasing his laughter
abruptly. "Do you know, if we ever get really low on food, all we have
to do is one of us stay big and his food would last the other two a
month."

"Fine; but how about the big one?" asked the Very Young Man, grinning.
"He'd starve to death on that plan, wouldn't he?"

"Well, then he could get much smaller than the other two, and they could
feed him. It's rather involved, I'll admit, but you know what I mean,"
the Big Business Man finished somewhat lamely.

"I've got a much better scheme than that," said the Very Young Man. "You
let the food stay large and you get small. How about that?" he added
triumphantly. Then he laid carefully on the ground beside him a bit of
chocolate and a few of the hard crackers they were eating. "Stay there,
little friends, when you grow up, I'll take you back," he added in a
gleeful tone of voice.

"Strange that should never have occurred to us," said the Doctor. "It's
a perfect way of replenishing our food supply," and quite seriously both
he and the Big Business Man laid aside some of their food.

"Thank me for that brilliant idea," said the Very Young Man. Then, as
another thought occurred to him, he scratched his head lugubriously.
"Wouldn't work very well if we were getting bigger, would it? Don't
let's ever get separated from any food coming out."

The Doctor was gigantic now in proportion to the other two, and both he
and the Big Business Man took a very small quantity more of the drug in
an effort to equalize their rate of bodily reduction. They evidently hit
it about right, for no further change in their relative size occurred.

All this time the vegetation underneath them had been growing steadily
larger. From tiny broken twigs it grew to sticks bigger than their
fingers, then to the thickness of their arms. They moved slightly from
time to time, letting it spread out from under them, or brushing it
aside and clearing a space in which they could sit more comfortably.
Still larger it grew until the tree-trunks, thick now almost as their
bodies, were lying broken and twisted, all about them. Over to one side
they could see, half a mile away, a place where the trees were still
standing--slender saplings, they seemed, growing densely together.

In half an hour more the Very Young Man announced he had stopped getting
smaller. The action of the drug ceased in the others a few minutes
later. They were still not quite in their relative sizes, but a few
grains of the powder quickly adjusted that.

They now found themselves near the edge of what once was a great forest.
Huge trees, whose trunks measured six feet or more in diameter, lay
scattered about upon the ground; not a single one was left standing. In
the distance they could see, some miles away, where the untrodden forest
began.

They had replaced the food in their belts some time before, and now
again they were ready to start. Suddenly the Very Young Man spied a
huge, round, whitish-brown object lying beside a tree-trunk near by. He
went over and stood beside it. Then he called his friends excitedly. It
was irregularly spherical in shape and stood higher than his knees--a
great jagged ball. The Very Young Man bent down, broke off a piece of
the ball, and, stuffing it into his mouth, began chewing with
enthusiasm.

"Now, what do you think of that?" he remarked with a grin. "A cracker
crumb I must have dropped when we first began lunch!"

They decided now to make for the nearest part of the unbroken forest. It
was two hours before they reached it, for among the tangled mass of
broken, fallen trees their progress was extremely difficult and slow.
Once inside, among the standing trees, they felt more lost than ever.
They had followed implicitly the Chemist's directions, and in general
had encountered the sort of country they expected. Nevertheless, they
all three realized that it was probable the route they had followed
coming in was quite different from that taken by the Chemist; and in
what direction lay their destination, and how far, they had not even the
vaguest idea, but they were determined to go on.

"If ever we find this city of Arite, it'll be a miracle sure," the Very
Young Man remarked as they were walking along in silence.

They had gone only a short distance farther when the Big Business Man,
who was walking in front, stopped abruptly.

"What's that?" he asked in a startled undertone.

They followed the direction of his hand, and saw, standing rigid against
a tree-trunk ahead, the figure of a man little more than half as tall as
themselves, his grayish body very nearly the color of the blue-gray tree
behind him.

The three adventurers stood motionless, staring in amazement.

As the Big Business Man spoke, the little figure, which had evidently
been watching them for some time, turned irresolutely as though about to
run. Then with gathering courage it began walking slowly towards them,
holding out its arms with the palm up.

"He's friendly," whispered the Very Young Man; and they waited, silent,
as the man approached.

As he came closer, they could see he was hardly more than a boy, perhaps
twenty years of age. His lean, gray body was nearly naked. Around his
waist he wore a drab-colored tunic, of a substance they could not
identify. His feet and legs were bare. On his chest were strapped a thin
stone plate, slightly convex. His thick, wavy, black hair, cut at the
base of his neck, hung close about his ears. His head was uncovered. His
features were regular and pleasing; his smile showed an even row of very
white teeth.

The three men did not speak or move until, in a moment, more, he stood
directly before them, still holding out his hands palm up. Then abruptly
he spoke.

"The Master welcomes his friends," he said in a soft musical voice. He
gave the words a most curious accent and inflexion, yet they were quite
understandable to his listeners.

"The Master welcomes his friends," he repeated, dropping his arms to his
sides and smiling in a most friendly manner.

The Very Young Man caught his breath. "He's been sent to meet us; he's
from Rogers. What do you think of that? We're all right now!" he
exclaimed excitedly.

The Doctor held out his hand, and the Oroid, hesitating a moment in
doubt, finally reached up and grasped it.

"Are you from Rogers?" asked the Doctor.

The Oroid looked puzzled. Then he turned and flung out his arm in a
sweeping gesture towards the deeper woods before them. "Rogers--Master,"
he said.

"You were waiting for us?" persisted the Doctor; but the other only
shook his head and smiled his lack of comprehension.

"He only knows the first words he said," the Big Business Man suggested.

"He must be from Rogers," the Very Young Man put in. "See, he wants us
to go with him."

The Oroid was motioning them forward, holding out his hand as though to
lead them.

The Very Young Man started forward, but the Big Business Man held him
back.

"Wait a moment," he said. "I don't think we ought to go among these
people as large as we are. Rogers is evidently alive and waiting for us.
Why wouldn't it be better to be about his size, instead of ten-foot
giants as we would look now?"

"How do you know how big Rogers is?" asked the Very Young Man.

"I think that a good idea," agreed the Doctor. "Rogers described these
Oroid men as being some six inches shorter than himself, on the
average."

"This one might be a pygmy, for all we know," said the Very Young Man.

"We might chance it that he's of normal size," said the Doctor, smiling.
"I think we should make ourselves smaller."

The Oroid stood patiently by and watched them with interested eyes as
each took a tiny pellet from a vial under his arm and touched it to his
tongue. When they began to decrease in size his eyes widened with fright
and his legs shook under him. But he stood his ground, evidently assured
by their smiles and friendly gestures.

In a few minutes the action of the drug was over, and they found
themselves not more than a head taller than the Oroid. In this size he
seemed to like them better, or at least he stood in far less awe of
them, for now he seized them by the arms and pulled them forward
vigorously.

They laughingly yielded, and, led by this strange being of another
world, they turned from the open places they had been following and
plunged into the depths of the forest.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE CHEMIST AND HIS SON


For an hour or more the three adventurers followed their strange guide
in silence through the dense, trackless woods. He walked very rapidly,
looking neither to the right nor to the left, finding his way apparently
by an intuitive sense of direction. Occasionally he glanced back over
his shoulder and smiled.

Walking through the woods here was not difficult, and the party made
rapid progress. The huge, upstanding tree-trunks were devoid of limbs
for a hundred feet or more above the ground. On some of them a luxuriant
vine was growing--a vine that bore a profusion of little gray berries.
In the branches high overhead a few birds flew to and fro, calling out
at times with a soft, cooing note. The ground--a gray, finely powdered
sandy loam--was carpeted with bluish fallen leaves, sometimes with a
species of blue moss, and occasional ferns of a like color.

The forest was dense, deep, and silent; the tree branches overhead
locked together in a solid canopy, shutting out the black sky above. Yet
even in this seclusion the scene remained as light as it had been
outside the woods in the open. Darkness indeed was impossible in this
land; under all circumstances the light seemed the same--neither too
bright nor too dim--a comfortable, steady glow, restful, almost hypnotic
in its sameness.

They had traveled perhaps six miles from the point where they met their
Oroid guide when suddenly the Very Young Man became aware that other
Oroids were with them. Looking to one side, he saw two more of these
strange gray men, silently stalking along, keeping pace with them.
Turning, he made out still another, following a short distance behind.
The Very Young Man was startled, and hurriedly pointed them out to his
companions.

"Wait," called the Doctor to their youthful guide, and abruptly the
party came to a halt.

By these signs they made their guide understand that they wanted these
other men to come closer. The Oroid shouted to them in his own quaint
tongue, words of a soft, liquid quality with a wistful sound--words
wholly unintelligible to the adventurers.

The men came forward diffidently, six of them, for three others appeared
out of the shadows of the forest, and stood in a group, talking among
themselves a little and smiling at their visitors. They were all dressed
similarly to Lao--for such was the young Oroid's name--and all of them
older than he, and of nearly the same height.

"Do any of you speak English?" asked the Doctor, addressing them
directly.

Evidently they did not, for they answered only by shaking their heads
and by more smiles.

Then one of them spoke. "The Master welcomes his friends," he said. And
all the others repeated it after him, like children in school repeating
proudly a lesson newly learned.

The Doctor and his two friends laughed heartily, and, completely
reassured by this exhibition of their friendliness, they signified to
Lao that they were ready again to go forward.

As they walked onward through the apparently endless and unchanging
forest, surrounded by what the Very Young Man called their "guard of
honor," they were joined from time to time by other Oroid men, all of
whom seemed to know who they were and where they were going, and who
fell silently into line with them. Within an hour their party numbered
twenty or more.

Seeing one of the natives stop a moment and snatch some berries from one
of the vines with which many of the trees were encumbered, the Very
Young Man did the same. He found the berries sweet and palatable, and he
ate a quantity. Then discovering he was hungry, he took some crackers
from his belt and ate them walking along. The Doctor and the Big
Business Man ate also, for although they had not realized it, all three
were actually famished.

Shortly after this the party came to a broad, smooth-flowing river, its
banks lined with rushes, with here and there a little spot of gray,
sandy beach. It was apparent from Lao's signs that they must wait at
this point for a boat to take them across. This they were glad enough to
do, for all three had gone nearly to the limit of their strength. They
drank deep of the pure river water, laved their aching limbs in it
gratefully, and lay down, caring not a bit how long they were forced to
wait.

In perhaps another hour the boat appeared. It came from down the river,
propelled close inshore by two members of their own party who had gone
to fetch it. At first the travelers thought it a long, oblong raft. Then
as it came closer they could see it was constructed of three canoes,
each about thirty feet long, hollowed out of tree-trunks. Over these was
laid a platform of small trees hewn roughly into boards. The boat was
propelled by long, slender poles in the hands of the two men, who, one
on each side, dug them into the bed of the river and walked with them
the length of the platform.

On to this boat the entire party crowded and they were soon well out on
the shallow river, headed for its opposite bank. The Very Young Man,
seated at the front end of the platform with his legs dangling over and
his feet only a few inches above the silver phosphorescence of the
rippling water underneath, sighed luxuriously.

"This beats anything we've done yet," he murmured. "Gee, it's nice
here!"

When they landed on the farther bank another group of natives was
waiting for them. The party, thus strengthened to nearly forty, started
off immediately into the forest, which on this side of the river
appeared equally dense and trackless.

They appeared now to be paralleling the course of the river a few
hundred yards back from its bank. After half an hour of this traveling
they came abruptly to what at first appeared to be the mouth of a large
cave, but which afterwards proved to be a tunnel-like passageway. Into
this opening the party unhesitatingly plunged.

Within this tunnel, which sloped downward at a considerable angle, they
made even more rapid progress than in the forest above. The tunnel walls
here were perhaps twenty feet apart--walls of a glistening, radiant,
crystalline rock. The roof of the passageway was fully twice as high as
its width; its rocky floor was smooth and even.

After a time this tunnel was crossed by another somewhat broader and
higher, but in general of similar aspect. It, too, sloped downward, more
abruptly from the intersection. Into this latter passageway the party
turned, still taking the downward course.

As they progressed, many other passageways were crossed, the
intersections of which were wide at the open spaces. Occasionally the
travelers encountered other natives, all of them men, most of whom
turned and followed them.

The Big Business Man, after over an hour of this rapid walking downward,
was again near the limit of his endurance, when the party, after
crossing a broad, open square, came upon a sort of sleigh, with two
animals harnessed to it. It was standing at the intersection of a still
broader, evidently more traveled passageway, and in it was an attendant,
apparently fast asleep.

Into this sleigh climbed the three travelers with their guide Lao; and,
driven by the attendant, they started down the broader tunnel at a rapid
pace. The sleigh was balanced upon a broad single runner of polished
stone, with a narrow, slightly shorter outrider on each side; it slid
smoothly and easily on this runner over the equally smooth, metallic
rock of the ground.

The reindeer-like animals were harnessed by their heads to a single
shaft. They were guided by a short, pointed pole in the hands of the
driver, who, as occasion demanded, dug it vigorously into their flanks.

In this manner the travelers rode perhaps half an hour more. The
passageway sloped steeply downward, and they made good speed. Finally
without warning, except by a sudden freshening of the air, they emerged
into the open, and found themselves facing a broad, rolling stretch of
country, dotted here and there with trees--the country of the Oroids at
last.

For the first time since leaving their own world the adventurers found
themselves amid surroundings that at least held some semblance of an
aspect of familiarity. The scene they faced now might have been one of
their own land viewed on an abnormally bright though moonless evening.

For some miles they could see a rolling, open country, curving slightly
upward into the dimness of the distance. At their right, close by, lay a
broad lake, its surface wrinkled under a gentle breeze and gleaming
bright as a great sheet of polished silver.

Overhead hung a gray-blue, cloudless sky, studded with a myriad of
faint, twinkling, golden-silver stars. On the lake shore lay a
