the earth.

It was a wonderfully quiet and beautiful spot where we had come down.
The air had a delicate feel and a bracing temperature, while a soft
breeze soughed through the leaves of the tree above our heads.

Not far away was the bank of a canal, bordered by a magnificent avenue
shaded by a double row of immense umbrageous trees.

We approached the canal, and, getting upon the road, turned to the left
to make an exploration in that direction. The shadow of the trees
falling upon the roadway produced a dense gloom, in the midst of which
we felt that we should be safe, unless the Martians had eyes like those
of cats.

As we pushed along, our hearts, I confess, beating a little quickly, a
shadow stirred in front of us.

Something darker than the night itself approached.

As it drew near it assumed the appearance of an enormous dog, as tall as
an ox, which ran swiftly our way with a threatening motion of its head.
But before it could even utter a snarl, the whirr of Colonel Smith's
disintegrator was heard and the creature vanished in the shadow.

"Gracious, did you ever see such a beast?" said the Colonel. "Why he was
as big as a grizzly."

"The people he belonged to must be near by," I said. "Very likely he was
a watch on guard."

"But I see no signs of a habitation."

"True, but you observe there is a thick hedge on the side of the road
opposite the canal. If we get through that perhaps we shall catch sight
of something."

Cautiously we pushed our way through the hedge, which was composed of
shrubs as large as small trees, and very thick at the bottom, and,
having traversed it, found ourselves in a great meadow-like expanse
which might have been a lawn. At a considerable distance, in the midst
of a clump of trees, a large building towered skyward, its walls of some
red metal, gleaming like polished copper in the soft light that fell
from the cloud dome.

There were no lights around the building itself, and we saw nothing
corresponding to windows on that side which faced us, but toward the
right a door was evidently open, and out of this streamed a brilliant
shaft of illumination, which lay bright upon the lawn, then crossed the
highway through an opening in the hedge, and gleamed on the water of the
canal beyond.

Where we stood the ground had evidently been recently cleared, and there
was no obstruction, but as we crept closer to the house--for our
curiosity had now become irresistible--we found ourselves crawling
through grass so tall that if we had stood erect it would have risen
well above our heads.

"This affords good protection," said Colonel Smith, recalling his
adventures on the western plains. "We can get close in to the Indians--I
beg pardon, I mean the Martians--without being seen."

Heavens, what an adventure was this! To be crawling about in the night
on the face of another world and venturing, perhaps, into the jaws of a
danger which human experience could not measure!

But on we went, and in a little while we had emerged from the tall grass
and were somewhat startled by the discovery that we had got close to the
wall of the building.

Carefully we crept around to the open door.

As we neared it we suddenly stopped as if we had been stricken with
instantaneous paralysis.

Out of the door floated, on the soft night air, the sweetest music to
which I have ever listened.

It carried me back in an instant to my own world. It was the music of
the earth. It was the melodious expression of a human soul. It thrilled
us both to the heart's core.

"My God!" exclaimed Colonel Smith. "What can that be? Are we dreaming,
or where in heaven's name are we?"

Still the enchanting harmony floated out upon the air.

What the instrument was I could not tell, but the sound seemed more
nearly to resemble that of a violin than anything else of which I could
think.

When we first heard it the strains were gentle, sweet, caressing and
full of an infinite depth of feeling, but in a little while its tone
changed, and it became a magnificent march, throbbing upon the air in
stirring notes that set our hearts beating in unison with its stride and
inspiring in us a courage that we had not felt before.

Then it drifted into a wild fantasia, still inexpressibly sweet, and
from that changed again into a requiem or lament, whose mellifluous tide
of harmony swept our thoughts back again to the earth.

"I can endure this no longer," I said. "I must see who it is that makes
that music. It is the product of a human heart and must come from the
touch of human fingers."

We carefully shifted our position until we stood in the blaze of light
that poured out of the door.

The doorway was an immense arched opening, magnificently ornamented,
rising to a height of, I should say, not less than twenty or twenty-five
feet and broad in proportion. The door itself stood widely open and it,
together with all of its fittings and surroundings, was composed of the
same beautiful red metal.

Stepping out a little way into the light I could see within the door an
immense apartment, glittering on all sides with metallic ornaments and
gems and lighted from the center by a great chandelier of electric
candles.

In the middle of the great floor, holding the instrument delicately
poised, and still awaking its ravishing voice, stood a figure, the sight
of which almost stopped my breath.

It was a slender sylph of a girl!

A girl of my own race; a human being here upon the planet Mars!

[Illustration: _"In the middle of the great floor, holding the instrument
delicately poised, and still awaking its ravishing voice, stood a
figure, the sight of which almost stopped my breath! It was a slender
sylph of a girl! A girl of my own race; a human being here on Mars!"_]

Her hair was loosely coiled and she was attired in graceful white
drapery.

"By God!" cried Colonel Smith, "she's human!"




CHAPTER TWELVE

_RETREAT TO DEIMOS_


Still the Bewildering Strains of the music came to our ears, and yet we
stood there unperceived, though in the full glare of the chandelier.

The girl's face was presented in profile. It was exquisite in beauty,
pale, delicate with a certain pleading sadness which stirred us to the
heart.

An element of romance and a touch of personal interest such as we had
not looked for suddenly entered into our adventure.

Colonel Smith's mind still ran back to the perils of the plains.

"She is a prisoner," he said, "and by the Seven Devils of Dona Ana we'll
not leave her here. But where are the hellhounds themselves?"

Our attention had been so absorbed by the sight of the girl that we had
scarcely thought of looking to see if there was any one else in the
room.

Glancing beyond her, I now perceived sitting in richly decorated chairs
three or four gigantic Martians. They were listening to the music as if
charmed.

The whole story told itself. This girl, if not their slave, was at any
rate under their control, and she was furnishing entertainment for them
by her musical skill. The fact that they could find pleasure in music so
beautiful was, perhaps, an indication that they were not really as
savage as they seemed.

Yet our hearts went out to the girl, and were turned against them with
an uncontrollable hatred.

They were of the same remorseless race with those who had so lately lain
waste our fair earth and who would have completed its destruction had
not Providence interferred in our behalf.

Singularly enough, although we stood full in the light, they had not yet
seen us.

Suddenly the girl, moved by what impulse I know not, turned her face in
our direction. Her eyes fell upon us. She paused abruptly in her
playing, and her instrument dropped to the floor. Then she uttered a
cry, and with extended arms ran toward us.

But when she was near she stopped abruptly, the glad look fading from
her face, and started back with terror-stricken eyes, as if, after all,
she had found us not what she expected.

Then for an instant she looked more intently at us, her countenance
cleared once more, and, overcome by some strange emotion, her eyes
filled with tears, and, drawing a little nearer, she stretched forth her
hands to us appealingly.

Meanwhile the Martians had started to their feet. They looked down upon
us in astonishment. We were like pygmies to them; like little gnomes
which had sprung out of the ground at their feet.

One of the giants seized some kind of a weapon and started forward with
a threatening gesture.

The girl sprang to my side and grasped my arm with a cry of fear.

This seemed to throw the Martian into a sudden frenzy, and he raised his
arms to strike.

But the disintegrator was in my hand.

My rage was equal to his.

I felt the concentrated vengeance of the earth quivering through me as I
pressed the button of the disintegrator and, sweeping it rapidly up and
down, saw the gigantic form that confronted me melt into nothingness.

There were three other giants in the room, and they had been on the
point of following up the attack of their comrade. But when he
disappeared from before their eyes, they paused, staring in amazement at
the place where, but a moment before, he had stood, but where now only
the metal weapon he had wielded lay on the floor.

At first they started back, and seemed on the point of fleeing; then,
with a second glance, perceiving again how small and insignificant we
were, all three together advanced upon us.

The girl sank trembling on her knees.

In the meantime I had readjusted my disintegrator for another discharge,
and Colonel Smith stood by me with the light of battle upon his face.

"Sweep the discharge across the three," I exclaimed. "Otherwise there
will be one left and before we can fire again he will crush us."

The whirr of the two instruments sounded simultaneously, and with a
quick horizontal motion we swept the lines of force around in such a
manner that all three of the Martians were caught by the vibratory
streams and actually cut in two.

Long gaps were opened in the wall of the room behind them, where the
destroying currents had passed, for with wrathful fierceness, we had ran
the vibrations through half a gamut on the index.

The victory was ours. There were no other enemies, that we could see, in
the house.

Yet at any moment others might make their appearance, and what more we
did must be done quickly.

The girl evidently was as much amazed as the Martians had been by the
effects which we had produced. Still she was not terrified, and
continued to cling to us and glance beseechingly into our faces,
expressing in her every look and gesture the fact that she knew we were
of her own race.

But clearly she could not speak our tongue, for the words she uttered
were unintelligible.

Colonel Smith, whose long experience in Indian warfare had made him
intensely practical, did not lose his military instincts, even in the
midst of events so strange.

"It occurs to me," he said, "that we have got a chance at the enemies'
supplies. Suppose we begin foraging right here. Let's see if this girl
can't show us the commissary department."

He immediately began to make signs to the girl to indicate that he was
hungry.

A look of comprehension flitted over her features, and, seizing our
hands, she led us into an adjoining apartment, and pointed to a number
of metallic boxes.

One of these she opened, taking out of it a kind of cake, which she
placed between her teeth, breaking off a very small portion and then
handing it to us, motioning that we should eat, but at the same time
showing us that we ought to take only a small quantity.

"Thank God! It's compressed food," said Colonel Smith. "I thought these
Martians with their wonderful civilization would be up to that. And it's
mighty lucky for us, because, without overburdening ourselves, if we can
find one or two more caches like this we shall be able to reprovision
the entire fleet. But we must get reinforcements before we can take
possession of the fodder."

Accordingly we hurried out into the night, passed into the roadway, and,
taking the girl with us, ran as rapidly as possible to the foot of the
tree where we had made our descent. Then we signalled to the electric
ship to drop down to the level of the ground.

This was quickly done, the girl was taken aboard, and a dozen men, under
our guidance, hastened back to the house, where we loaded ourselves with
the compressed provisions and conveyed them to the ship.

On this second trip to the mysterious house we had discovered another
apartment containing a very large number of the metallic boxes, filled
with compressed food.

"By Jove, it is a storehouse," said Colonel Smith. "We must get more
force and carry it all off. Gracious, but this is a lucky night. We can
reprovision the whole fleet from this room."

"I thought it singular," I said, "that with the exception of the girl
whom we have rescued no women were seen in the house. Evidently the
lights over yonder indicate the location of a considerable town, and it
is quite probable that this building, without windows, and so strongly
constructed, is the common storehouse, where the provisions for the town
are kept. The fellows we killed must have been the watchmen in charge of
the storehouse, and they were treating themselves to a little music from
the slave girl when we happened to come upon them."

With the utmost haste several of the other electrical ships, waiting
above the cloud curtain, were summoned to descend, and, with more than a
hundred men, we returned to the building, and this time almost entirely
exhausted its stores, each man carrying as much as he could stagger
under.

Fortunately our proceedings had been conducted without much noise, and
the storehouse being situated at a considerable distance from other
buildings, none of the Martians, except those who would never tell the
story, had known of our arrival or of our doings on the planet.

"Now, we'll return and surprise Edison with the news," said Colonel
Smith.

Our ship was the last to pass up through the clouds, and it was a
strange sight to watch the others as one after another they rose toward
the great dome, entered it, though from below it resembled a solid vault
of grayish-pink marble, and disappeared.

We quickly followed them, and having penetrated the enormous curtain,
were considerably surprised on emerging at the other side to find that
the sun was shining brilliantly upon us. It will be remembered that it
was night on this side of Mars when we went down, but our adventure had
occupied several hours, and now Mars had so turned upon its axis that
the portion of its surface over which we were had come around into the
sunlight.

We knew that the squadron which we had left besieging the Lake of the
Sun must also have been carried around in a similar manner, passing into
the night while the side of the planet where we were was emerging into
day.

Our shortest way back would be by traveling westward, because then we
should be moving in a direction opposite to that in which the planet
rotated, and the main squadron, sharing that rotation, would be
continually moving in our direction.

But to travel westward was to penetrate once more into the night side of
the planet.

The prows, if I may so call them, of our ships were accordingly turned
in the direction of the vast shadow which Mars was invisibly projecting
into space behind it, and on entering that shadow the sun disappeared
from our eyes, and once more the huge hidden globe beneath us became a
black chasm among the stars.

Now that we were in the neighborhood of a globe capable of imparting
considerable weight to all things under the influence of its attraction
that peculiar condition which I have before described as existing in the
midst of space, where there was neither up nor down for us, had ceased.
Here where we had weight "up" and "down" had resumed their old meanings.
"Down" was toward the center of Mars, and "up" was away from that
center.

Standing on the deck, and looking overhead as we swiftly ploughed our
smooth way at a great height through the now imperceptible atmosphere of
the planet, I saw the two moons of Mars meeting in the sky exactly above
us.

Before our arrival at Mars, there had been considerable discussion among
the learned men as to the advisability of touching at one of their
moons, and when the discovery was made that our provisions were nearly
exhausted, it had been suggested that the Martian satellites might
furnish us with an additional supply.

But it had appeared a sufficient reply to this suggestion that the moons
of Mars are both insignificant bodies, not much larger than the asteroid
we had fallen in with, and that there could not possibly be any form of
vegetation or other edible products upon them.

This view having prevailed, we had ceased to take an interest in the
satellites, further than to regard them as objects of great curiosity on
account of their motions.

The nearer of these moons, Phobos, is only 3,700 miles from the surface
of Mars, and we watched it traveling around the planet three times in
the course of every day. The more distant one, Deimos, 12,500 miles
away, required considerably more than one day to make its circuit.

It now happened that the two had come into conjunction, as I have said,
just over our heads, and, throwing myself down on my back on the deck of
the electrical ship, for a long time I watched the race between the two
satellites, until Phobos, rapidly gaining upon the other, had left its
rival far behind.

Suddenly Colonel Smith, who took very little interest in these
astronomical curiosities, touched me, and pointing ahead, said:

"There they are."

I looked, and sure enough there were the signal lights of the principal
squadron, and as we gazed we occasionally saw, darting up from the vast
cloud mass beneath, an electric bayonet, fiercely thrust into the sky,
which showed that the siege was still actively going on, and that the
Martians were jabbing away at their invisible enemies outside the
curtain.

In a short time the two fleets had joined, and Colonel Smith and I
immediately transferred ourselves to the flagship.

"Well, what have you done?" asked Mr. Edison, while others crowded
around with eager attention.

"If we have not captured their provision train," said Colonel Smith, "we
have done something just about as good. We have foraged on the country,
and have collected a supply that I reckon will last this fleet for at
least a month."

