highest importance, for it confers on the soil, in a high degree, the
power of absorbing and retaining water, diminishes its tenacity and
permits its being more easily worked, adds to its hygrometric power and
property of absorbing oxygen from the air, and finally, from its dark
colour, causes the more rapid absorption of heat from the sun's rays. It
will be thus understood, that though it does not directly supply food to
the plant, it ministers indirectly in a most important manner to its
well-being, and that to so great an extent that it must be considered an
indispensable constituent of a fertile soil. But it is important to
observe that it must not be present in too large a quantity, for an
excess does away with all the good effects of a smaller supply, and
produces soils notorious for their infertility.

Such are the important physical properties of the soil, and it is
greatly to be desired that they should be more extensively examined. The
great labour which this involves has, however, hitherto prevented its
being done, and will, in all probability, render it impossible except in
a limited number of cases. Some of these characters are, however, of
minor importance, and for ordinary purposes it might be sufficient to
determine the specific gravity of the soil in the dry and moist state,
the power of imbibing and retaining water, its hygrometric power, its
tenacity, and its colour. With these data we should be in a condition to
draw probable conclusions regarding the others; for the higher the
specific gravity in the dry state, the greater is the power of the soil
to retain heat, and the darker its colour the more readily does it
absorb it. The greater its tenacity the more difficult is it to work,
and the greater difficulty will the roots of the young plant find in
pushing their way through it. The greater the power of imbibing water,
the more it shrinks in drying; and the more slowly the water evaporates,
the colder is the soil produced. The hygrometric power is so important a
character that Davy and other chemists have even believed it possible to
make it the measure of the fertility of a soil; but though this may be
true within certain limits, it must not be too broadly assumed, the
results of recent experiments by no means confirming the opinion in its
integrity, but indicating only some relation between the two.

_The Subsoil._--The term soil is strictly confined to that portion of
the surface turned over by the plough working at ordinary depth; which,
as a general rule, may be taken at 10 inches. The portion immediately
subjacent is called the subsoil, and it has considerable agricultural
importance, and requires a short notice. In many instances, soil and
subsoil are separated by a purely imaginary line, and no striking
difference can be observed either in their chemical or physical
characters. In such cases it has been the practice with some persons not
to limit the term soil to the upper portion, but to apply it to the
whole depth, however great it may be, which agrees in characters with
the upper part, and only to call that subsoil which manifestly differs
from it. This principle is perhaps theoretically the more correct, but
great practical advantages are derived from limiting the name of soil to
the depth actually worked in common agricultural operations. The subsoil
is always analogous in its general characters to a soil, but it may be
either identical with that which overlies it or not. Of the former,
striking illustrations are seen in the wheat subsoils, the analyses of
which have been already given. In the latter case great differences may
exist, and a heavy clay is often found lying on an open and porous sand,
or on peat, and _vice versa_. Even where the characters of the subsoil
appear the same as those of the soil, appreciable chemical differences
are generally observed, especially in the quantity of organic matter,
which is increased in the soil by the decay of plants growing upon it
and by the manure added. In general, then, all that we have said
regarding the characters of soils both chemically and physically, will
apply to the subsoils, except that, owing to the difficulty with which
the air reaches the latter, some minor peculiarities are observed. The
most important is the effect of the decay of vegetable matter, without
access of air, which is attended by the reduction of the peroxide of
iron to the state of protoxide, and not unfrequently by the production
of sulphuret of iron, compounds which are extremely prejudicial to
vegetation, and occasionally give rise to some difficulties when the
subsoil is brought to the surface, as we shall afterwards have to
notice.

The physical characters of the subsoil are often of much importance to
the soil itself. As, for instance, where a light soil lies on a clay
subsoil, in which case its value is much higher than if it reposed on an
open or sandy subsoil. And in many similar modes an important influence
is exerted; but these belong more strictly to the practical department
of agriculture, and need not be mentioned here.

_Classification of Soils._--Numerous attempts have been made to form a
classification of soils according to their characters and value, but
they have not hitherto proved very successful; and the result of more
recent chemical investigations has not been such as to encourage a
farther attempt. We have not at present data sufficient for the purpose,
nor, if we had, would it be possible to arrange any soil in its class
except after an elaborate chemical examination. The only classification
at present possible must be founded on the general physical characters
of the soil; and the ordinary mode followed in practice of dividing them
into clays, loams, etc. etc., which we need not here particularize,
fulfils all that can be done until we have more minute information
regarding a large number of soils. Those of our readers who desire more
full information on this point are referred to the works of Thaer,
Schuebler, and others, where the subject is minutely discussed.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote I: Transactions of the Highland and Agricultural Society, vol.
vi., p. 317.]




CHAPTER VI.

THE IMPROVEMENT OF THE SOIL BY MECHANICAL PROCESSES.


Comparatively few uncultivated soils possess the physical properties or
chemical composition required for the production of the most abundant
crops. Either one or more of the substances essential to the growth of
plants are absent, or, if present, they are deficient in quantity, or
exist in some state in which they cannot be absorbed. Such defects,
whether mechanical or chemical, admit of diminution, or even entire
removal, by certain methods of treatment, the adaptation of which to
particular cases is necessarily one of the most important branches of
agricultural practice, as the elucidation of their mode of action is of
its theory. The observations already made with regard to the characters
of fertile soils must have prepared the reader for the statement that
these defects may be removed, either by mechanical or chemical
processes. The former method of improvement may at first sight appear to
fall more strictly under the head of practical agriculture, of which the
mechanical treatment of the soil forms so important a part, and that
their improvement by chemical means should form the sole subject of our
consideration in a treatise on agricultural chemistry. But the line of
demarcation between the mechanical and the chemical, which seems so
marked, disappears on more minute observation, and we find that the
mechanical methods of improvement are frequently dependent on chemical
principles; and those which, at first sight, appear to be entirely
chemical, are also in reality partly mechanical. It will be necessary
for us, therefore, to consider shortly the mechanical methods of
improving the soil.

_Draining._--By far the most important method of mechanically improving
the soil is by draining--a practice the beneficial action of which is
dependent on a great variety of circumstances. It is unnecessary to
insist on the advantage derived from the rapid removal of moisture,
which enables the soil to be worked at times when this used to be almost
impossible, and other direct practical benefits. Of its more strictly
chemical effects, the most important is probably that which it produces
on the temperature of the soil. It has been already remarked that the
germination of a seed is dependent on the soil in which it is sown
acquiring a certain temperature, and the rapidity of the after-growth of
the plant is, in part at least, dependent on the same circumstance. The
necessary temperature is speedily attained by the heating action of the
sun's rays, when the soil is dry; but when it is wet, the heat is
expended in evaporating the moisture with which it is saturated; and it
is only after this has been effected that it acquires a sufficiently
high temperature to produce the rapid growth of the seeds committed to
it.

The extent to which this effect occurs may be best illustrated by
reference to some experiments made by Schuebler, in which he determined
the temperature attained by different soils, in the wet and dry state,
when exposed to the sun's rays, from 11 till 3 o'clock, in the latter
part of August, when the temperature in the shade varied from 73 deg. to
77 deg..

+-----------------------+-------+-------+
| Description of Soil.  | Wet.  | Dry.  |
+-----------------------+-------+-------+
|                       | Degs. | Degs. |
| Siliceous sand        |  99.1 | 112.6 |
| Calcareous sand       |  99.3 | 112.1 |
| Sandy clay            |  98.2 | 111.4 |
| Loamy clay            |  99.1 | 112.1 |
| Stiff clay            |  99.3 | 112.3 |
| Fine bluish-grey clay |  99.5 | 113.0 |
| Garden mould          |  99.5 | 113.5 |
| Arable soil           |  97.7 | 111.7 |
| Slaty marl            | 101.8 | 115.3 |
+-----------------------+-------+-------+

In a soil which is naturally dry or has been drained, the superfluous
moisture escapes by the drains, and only that comparatively small
quantity which is retained by capillary attraction is evaporated, and
hence the soil is more frequently and for a longer period in a condition
to take advantage of the heating effect of the sun's rays, and in this
way the period of germination, and, by consequence also, that of
ripening is advanced. The extent of this influence is necessarily
variable, but it is generally considerable, and in some districts of
Scotland the extensive introduction of draining has made the harvest, on
the average of years, from ten to fourteen days earlier than it was
before. It is unnecessary to insist on the importance of such a change,
which in upland districts may make cultivation successful when it was
previously almost impossible. The removal of moisture by drainage
affects the physical characters of the soil in another manner; it makes
it lighter, more friable, and more easily worked; and this change is
occasioned by the downward flow of the water carrying with it to the
lower part of the soil the finer argillaceous particles, leaving the
coarser and sandy matters above, and in this way a marked improvement is
produced on heavy and retentive clays. The access of air to the soil is
also greatly promoted by draining. In wet soils the pores are filled
with water, and hence the air, which is so important an agent in their
amelioration, is excluded; but so soon as this is removed, the air is
enabled to reach and act upon the organic matters and other decomposable
constituents present. In this way also provision is made for the
frequent change of the air which permeates the soil; for every shower
that falls expels from it a quantity of that which it contains, and as
the moisture flows off by the drains, a new supply enters to take its
place, and thus the important changes which the atmospheric oxygen
produces on the soil are promoted in a high degree. The air which thus
enters acts on the organic matters of the soil, producing carbonic acid,
which we have already seen is so intimately connected with many of its
chemical changes. In its absence the organic matters undergo different
decompositions, and pass into states in which they are slowly acted on,
and are incapable of supplying a sufficient quantity of carbonic acid to
the soil; and they thus exercise an action on the peroxide of iron,
contained in all soils, reduce it to the state of protoxide, or, with
the simultaneous reduction of the sulphuric acid, they produce sulphuret
of iron, forms of combination which are well known to be most injurious
to vegetation.

The removal of water from the lower part of the soil, and the admission
of air, which is the consequence of draining, submits that part of it to
the same changes which take place in its upper portion, and has the
effect of practically deepening the soil to the extent to which it is
thus laid dry. The roots of the plants growing on the soil, which stop
as soon as they reach the moist part, now descend to a lower level, and
derive from that part of it supplies of nourishment formerly
unavailable. The deepening of the soil has further the effect of making
the plants which grow upon it less liable to be burned up in seasons of
drought, a somewhat unexpected result of making a soil drier, but which
manifestly depends on its permitting the roots to penetrate to a greater
depth, and so to get beyond the surface portion, which is rapidly dried
up, and to which they were formerly confined.

It may be added also that the abundant escape of water from the drains
acts chemically by removing any noxious matters the soil may contain,
and by diminishing the amount of soluble saline matters, which sometimes
produce injurious effects. It thus prevents the saline incrustation
frequently seen in dry seasons on soils which are naturally wet, and
which is produced by the water rising to the surface by capillary
attraction, and, as it evaporates, depositing the soluble substances it
contained, as a hard crust which prevents the access of air to the
interior of the soil.

It is thus obvious that the drainage of the soil modifies its properties
both mechanically and chemically. It exerts also various other actions
in particular cases which we cannot here stop to particularize. It
ameliorates the climate of districts in which it is extensively carried
out, and even affects the health of the population in a favourable
manner. The sum of its effects must necessarily differ greatly in
different soils, and in different districts; but a competent
authority[J] has estimated, that, on the average, land which has been
drained produces a quarter more grain per acre than that which is
undrained. But this by no means exhausts the benefits derived from it,
draining being merely the precursor of further improvement. It is only
after it has been carried out that the farmer derives the full benefit
of the manures which he applies. He gains also by the increased facility
of working the soil, and by the rapidity with which it dries after
continued rain, thus enabling him to proceed at their proper season with
agricultural operations, which would otherwise have to be postponed for
a considerable time.

It would be out of place to enlarge here upon the mode in which draining
ought to be carried out; it may be remarked, however, that much
inconvenience and loss has occasionally been produced by too close
adherence to particular systems. No rules can be laid down as to the
depth or distance between the drains which can be universally
applicable, but the intelligent drainer will seek to modify his practice
according to the circumstances of the case. As a general rule, the
drains ought to be as deep as possible, but in numerous instances it may
be more advantageous to curtail their depth and increase their number.
If, for instance, a thick impervious pan resting on a clay were found at
the depth of three feet below the surface, it would serve no good
purpose to make the drains deeper; but if the pan were thin, and the
subjacent layer readily permeable by water, it might be advantageous to
go down to the depth of four feet, trusting to the possible action of
the air which would thus be admitted, gradually to disintegrate the pan,
and increase the depth of soil above it. It is a common opinion that if
we reach, at a moderate depth, a tenacious and little permeable clay, no
advantage is obtained by sinking the drains into it; but this is an
opinion which should be adopted with caution, both because no clay is
absolutely impermeable, even the most tenacious permitting to a certain
extent the passage of water, and because the clay may have been brought
down by water from the upper part of the soil, and may have stopped
there merely for want of some deeper escape for the water, and which
drains at a lower level might supply. In some cases it may even be
advisable to vary the depth of the drains in different parts of the same
field, and the judicious drainer may sometimes save a considerable sum
by a careful observation of the peculiarities of the different parts of
the ground to be drained.

_Subsoil and Deep Ploughing._--It frequently happens, when a soil is
drained, that the subsoil is so stiff as to permit the passage of water
imperfectly, and to prevent the tender roots of the plant from
penetrating it, and reaching the new supplies of nourishment which are
laid open to them. In such cases the benefits of subsoil ploughing and
deep ploughing are conspicuous. The mode of action of these two methods
of treatment is similar but not identical. The subsoil plough merely
stirs and opens the subsoil, and permits the more ready passage of water
and the access of air and of the roots of plants--the former to effect
the necessary decompositions, the latter to avail themselves of the
valuable matters set free. But deep ploughing produces more extensive
changes; it raises new soil to the surface, mixes it with the original
soil, and thus not only brings up fresh supplies of valuable matters to
it, but frequently changes its chemical and mechanical characters,
rendering a heavy soil lighter by the admixture of a light subsoil, and
_vice versa_. Both are operations which are useless unless they are
combined with draining, for it must manifestly serve no good purpose to
attempt to open up a soil unless the water which lies in it be
previously removed. In fact, subsoiling is useless unless the subsoil
has been made thoroughly dry; and it has been found by experience that
no good effects are obtained if it be attempted immediately after
draining, but that a sufficient time must elapse, in order to permit the
escape of the accumulated moisture, which often takes place very slowly.
Without this precaution, the subsoil, after being opened by the plough,
soon sinks together, and the good effects anticipated are not realized.
The necessity for allowing some time to elapse between draining and
further operations is still more apparent in deep ploughing, when the
soil is actually brought to the surface. In that case it requires to be
left for a longer period after draining, in order that the air may
produce the necessary changes on the subsoil; for if it be brought up
after having been for a long time saturated with moisture, and
containing its iron as protoxide, and the organic matter in a state in
which it is not readily acted upon by the air, the immediate effect of
the operation is frequently injurious in place of being advantageous.
One of the best methods of treating a soil in this way is to make the
operation a gradual one, and by deepening an inch or two every year
gradually to mix the soil and subsoil; as in this way from a small
quantity being brought up at a time no injurious effects are produced.
Deep ploughing may be said to act in two ways, _firstly_, by again
bringing to the surface the manures which have a tendency to sink to the
lower part of the soil, and, _secondly_, by bringing up a soil which has
not been exhausted by previous cropping--in fact a virgin soil.

The success which attends the operation of subsoiling or deep ploughing
must manifestly be greatly dependent on the character of the subsoil,
and good effects can only be obtained when its chemical composition is
such as to supply in increased quantity the essential constituents of
the plant; and it is no doubt owing to this that the opinions
entertained by practical men, each of whom speaks from the results of
his own experience, are so varied. The effects produced by deep
ploughing on the estates of the Marquis of Tweeddale, are familiarly
known to most Scottish agriculturists, and they are at once explained by
the analyses of the soil and subsoil here given, which show that the
latter, though poor in some important constituents, contains more than
twice as much potash as the soil.

                                 Soil.  Subsoil.

Insoluble silicates             87.623  82.72
Soluble silica                   0.393   0.12
Alumina and peroxide of iron     4.129   8.60
Lime                             0.341   0.18
Magnesia                         0.290   0.24
Sulphuric acid                   0.027   0.03
Phosphoric acid                  0.240   trace
Potash                           0.052   0.12
Soda                             0.050   0.04
Water                            1.956   3.26
Organic matter                   5.220   4.02
                                ------  -----
                               100.321  99.33

In addition to the difference in the amount of potash, something is
probably due to the large proportion of alumina and oxide of iron in the
subsoil, which for this reason must be more tenacious than the soil
itself, which appears to be rather light. In other instances, the use of
the subsoil plough has occasioned much disappointment, and has led to
its being decried by many practical men; but of late years its use
having become better understood, its merits are more generally
admitted. We believe, that in all cases in which the soil is deep, more
or less marked good effects must be produced by its use, but of course
there must be cases in which, from the defective composition of the
subsoil or other causes, it must fail. It may sometimes be possible _a
priori_ to detect these cases, but in a large majority of them our
knowledge is still too limited to admit of satisfactory conclusions
being arrived at.

_Improving the Soil by Paring and Burning._--It has long been familiarly
known, that a decided improvement has been produced on some soils by
burning. Its advantages have chiefly been observed on two sorts, heavy
clays and peat soils, on both of which it has been practised to a great
extent. The action of heat on the heavy clays appears to be of a twofold
character, depending partly on the change effected in its physical
properties, and partly on a chemical decomposition produced by the heat.
The operation of burning is effected by mixing the clay with brushwood
and vegetable refuse, and allowing it to smoulder in small heaps for
some time. It is a process of some nicety, and its success is greatly
dependent on the care which has been taken to keep the temperature as
low as possible during the whole course of the burning.

Experience has shown that burning is by no means equally advantageous to
all clays, but is most beneficial on those containing a considerable
quantity of calcareous matter, and of silicates of potash. In such clays
heat operates by causing the lime to decompose the alkaline silicates,
and liberate a quantity of the potash which was previously in an
unavailable state. Its effect may be best illustrated by the following
analyses by Dr. Voelcker of a soil, and the red ash produced in burning
it.
