
"I know," Lanko assured him. "We haven't checked over that way for a
long time, but I still remember. I didn't put it exactly that way, of
course, but I did ask Musa how he planned to get over the Eastern. And,
I got an answer." He paused as he gathered up the garments he had
discarded.

"It seems there's a new priesthood at Norlar, who've got something," he
continued. "It's all wrapped up in religious symbology, and they don't
let any details get out, but they are guiding ships out to sea, and
they're bringing them back again, loaded with goods that never
originated in the Galankar, or in any place accessible to the
Galankar." He hung up the last article of clothing and turned, a
sheathed sword in his hand.

"Musa sold me this," he said, extending the hilt toward Banasel. "I
never saw anything like it on this planet. Did you?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Banasel accepted the weapon, drawing it from its scabbard. He examined
the handwork on the hilt, then snapped a fingernail against the blade.
As he listened to the musical _ping_, the technician looked at the
weapon with more interest. Gently, he flexed it, watching for signs of
strain. Lanko grinned at him.

"Go ahead," he invited, "get rough with it. That's a sword you're
holding, Chum, not one of those bronze skull busters."

Banasel extended the sword, whipping it violently. The blade bent, then
straightened, and bent again, as it slashed through the air.

"Well," he murmured. "Something new."

He put the sword on the workbench and took an instrument from a cabinet.
For a few minutes, he busied himself taking readings and tapping out
data on his computer. He sat back, looking at the sword curiously. At
last, he glanced at the computer, then put the test instrument he had
been using back in the cabinet, taking another to replace it. After
taking more readings, he looked at the computer, then shook his head,
turning to Lanko.

"This," he said slowly, "is excellent steel. Of course, it could be an
accidental alloy, but I wouldn't think anyone on this planet could have
developed the technology to get it just so." He held the sword away from
him, looking at it closely. "Assuming an accidental alloy, an accident
in getting precisely the right degree of heat before quenching, and
someone who ground and polished with such care as to leave the temper
undisturbed, while getting this finish--Oh, it's possible, all right.
But 'tain't likely. Musa told you this came from overseas?"

"To the best of his knowledge. He got it from a trader who claimed to
have been on a voyage across the Eastern Sea."

Banasel leaned back, clasping his hands behind his head. "You must have
had quite a talk with Musa. Did he remember you?"

Lanko shook his head. "Don't be foolish," he grunted. "You and I were
blotted out of his memory, remember? So are quite a few of the things
that happened around Atakar, way back when. He's got a complete past, of
course, but we're not part of it.

"No, he had a booth in the Karth market. I came through, just looking
things over, and recognized him. So, I picked an acquaintance. Beat him
down to about half the asking price for this sword, still leaving him a
whopping profit. He went to dinner with me, still bewailing the rooking
I'd given him. Told you, he's a trader. We had quite a talk, certainly.
But we were strangers."

"Yeah." Banasel looked off into space. "Seems funny. You and I were born
on this planet. We were brought up here, and a lot of people once knew
us. But they've all forgotten, and we don't belong any more. I'm
beginning to see what they mean by 'the lonely life of a guardsman.'"

He was silent for a time, then looked at his companion.

"Do you think these priests at Norlar might be in our line of business?"

"Could be," nodded Lanko. "There's a lot of seafaring out of Konassa,
and there are several other busy seaports we know of. But no one in any
of them ever heard of navigation out of sight of land, let alone trying
it. There's nothing but pilotage, and even that's pretty sketchy. And,
there's this thing." He crossed to the workbench, picked up the sword,
and stroked its blade.

"Normally," he mused, "technical knowledge gets around. Part of it's
developed here, part there. Then someone comes along and puts it
together. And someone else adds to it. And so on.

"Then, there are other times, when there's an abnormal source, or where
there are unusual conditions, and knowledge is very closely guarded.
This might be one of those cases, and those priests might be fronting
for someone very much in our line of business." He broke off.

"Any maedli hot?"

"Sure." Banasel picked a pot from the heater and poured two cups.

"Think we should set up a base near Norlar and have a look?"

"Probably be a good idea." Lanko accepted a cup, took a sip, and shook
his head violently.

"Ouch! I said hot, not boiling." He blew on the cup and set it aside to
steam itself cool.

"These mountains were an excellent base," he continued, "but this area
seems to be developing perfectly. There's no outside interference, all
traces of former interference have been eliminated, and there's very
little excuse for us to hang around." He picked up the cup again,
cautiously sampling its contents. "And it's about time we moved around
and checked on the rest of the planet."

Banasel turned back to the workbench. "Good idea," he agreed. "I'll get
this scanner set up again, and we'll be ready to load out." He picked up
his tools. "As I remember, Norlar has a mountainous backbone where no
one ever goes. We should be able to set up right on the island."

       *       *       *       *       *

On the eastern slope of the Midra Kran, a cloud of dust paced a caravan,
which wound up the trail, through a pass. The treachery of the narrow
path was testified to by an occasional slither, followed by a startled
curse.

Musa stood in his stirrups, looking ahead at the long trail which
twisted a little farther up, then dropped to the wide Jogurthan plateau.
Far ahead, over the poorly marked way, he knew, was another range, the
Soruna Kran, which blocked his way to the Eastern Sea.

He looked back at the straggling caravan.

"Better get them to close up, Baro," he remarked. "We'd be in a lot of
trouble if a robber band caught us scattered like this."

The other trader nodded and turned his mount. Then, he paused as shouts
came from the rear of the line. Mixed with the shouting was the clatter
of weapons.

"Come on," cried Musa. "It's happened."

He kicked his mount in the ribs, and swung about, starting up the steep
bank. The bandits would have bowmen posted to deal with anyone who might
try to get back along the narrow path, and he had no desire to test the
accuracy of their aim.

As his beast scrambled up the bank, Musa saw a man standing on a
pinnacle, alertly watching the center of the caravan. His guess had been
right. The bandit leader's strategy had been to cut the caravan in two,
and to deal with the rear guard first. As the watcher started to aim at
something down on the trail, Musa quickly raised his own bow and sent an
arrow to cut the man down before he could fire.

It was a good shot. The man made no sound as the arrow struck, but
clawed for an instant at the shaft in his side, then dropped, to slide
down the face of a low cliff. Musa, followed by his guards, stormed up
the slope.

They went through a saddle in the hill, to find themselves confronted by
a half dozen men, who swung about, trying to bring their bows to bear on
the unexpected targets. Two of these went down as arrows sang through
the air, then the traders were upon the rest, swords flailing, too close
for archery.

One of the bandits swung his sword wildly at Musa, who had drawn a twin
to that blade he had sold back in Karth. The slender shaft of steel rang
against the bandit's bronze blade, deflecting it, then Musa made a quick
thrust which passed through the man's leather shield, to penetrate
flesh. The bronze weapon sagged, and its holder staggered. Musa jerked
back violently, disengaged his sword, and made a swift cut. For an
instant, the bandit sat his mount, staring at his opponent. Then, he
slumped, and rolled loosely from his saddle.

The action had been fast. Only one bandit, a skilled swordsman,
remained, to keep Baro busy. Musa rode quickly behind him, thrusting as
he passed. Baro looked across the limp body.

"Now, what did you have to do that for?" he demanded. "I was having a
good time."

"Let's get down to the trail again," Musa told him. "We can have a
wonderful time there." He pointed.

The caravan's rear guard was in trouble. Several of them were in the
dust of the trail, and the survivors were being pressed by a number of
determined swordsmen.

Baro wheeled and slid down the incline, closely followed by the rest of
the group.

The surrounded bandits fought desperately, but hopelessly. The charge
from the hill had driven them off balance, and they were never given a
chance to recover. At last, Musa and Baro looked over the results of the
raid.

They had lost several guards. One trader, Klaron, had been killed by an
arrow launched early in the attack. Several of the survivors were
wounded.

"We'll have to hire some more guards and drivers in Jogurth," said Baro.
"And what are we going to do about Klaron's goods?"

"We can divide them and sell them in Jogurth," Musa told him. "Klaron
has a brother back in Karth who can use the money, and money's a lot
easier to carry than goods. You'll see him on your return trip."

Baro nodded, and started up the line, reorganizing the caravan. At last,
they got under way again, and resumed their slow way toward the plateau.

       *       *       *       *       *

The caravan went on, to enter the plateau, where the traders started
resting by day and traveling by night, to avoid exertion during the
day's heat.

They came to the city of Jogurth, which for most of them was a terminal.
From there, they would return to Karth, a few possibly going on to their
homes still farther west. Musa stayed in town for a few days, trading
his few remaining eastern goods for locally produced articles, and
helping in the sale of Klaron's goods. At last, he joined another
caravan, headed by an old trader, Kerunar, who habitually traveled
between Jogurth and Manotro, on the east coast.

The trip across the Soruna Kran was uneventful, and Musa finally saw the
glint of the Eastern Sea. He did not stay long in Manotro, for he
discovered that the small channel ships traveled frequently, and he was
able to guide his pack beasts to the wharf, where his bales were
accepted for shipment. Leaving his goods, he led his animals back to the
market.

Old Kerunar shook his head when he saw Musa. "Be careful, son," he
cautioned. "I've been coming here for twenty years. Used to trade in
Norlar, too. But you couldn't get me over there now for ten thousand
caldor."

"Oh?" Musa looked at him curiously. "What's wrong?"

Kerunar looked at his newly set up booth. Hung about it were durable
goods and trinkets from a dozen cities. There were articles even from
far-off Telon, in the Konassan gulf. He looked back at Musa.

"Norlar," he declared, "has fallen into the hands of thieves and
murderers. You can trade there, to be sure. You can even make a profit.
But you cannot be sure you will not excite the avarice of the Kondarans,
or arouse their anger. For they have a multitude of strange laws, which
they can invoke against anyone, and which they enforce with
confiscation of goods. Death or slavery await any who protest their
actions or question their rules." He paused.

[Illustration]

"Some manage to trade, and come back with profitable bales. Some leave
their goods in the hands of the priests of Kondaro. Some remain, to find
a quick death. But I stop here. I prefer to deal with honorable men.
When I face the thief or the bandit, I prefer to have a weapon in my
hand. A book of strange laws can be worse than any bandit born."

Musa looked about the market. "Here, of course," he acknowledged, "are
the goods of the Far East. But I must see them at their source." He
shook his head. "No," he decided, "I shall make one trip at least."

"I'll give you just one word of caution, then," he was told. "Whatever
you see, make little comment. Whenever you are asked for an offering,
make no objection, but give liberally. Keep your eyes open and your
opinions to yourself."

"Thanks." Musa grinned. "I'll try to remember."

"Don't just remember. Follow the advice, if you wish to return."

Musa's grin widened. "I'll be back," he promised.

       *       *       *       *       *

The harbor of Tanagor, chief seaport of Norlar, was full of shipping.
Here were the ships which plied the trackless wastes of the Eastern Sea.
Huge, red-sailed, broad-beamed, they rode at anchor in the harbor,
served by small galleys from the city. Tied up at the wharves, were the
smaller, yellow and white-sailed ships which crossed the channel between
the mainland and the island empire.

Slowly, Musa's ship drew in toward the wharf, where a shouting gang of
porters and stevedores awaited her arrival. Together with other
passengers, Musa stood at the rail, watching the activity on the pier.

Four slaves, bearing a crimson curtained litter, came to the wharf and
stopped. The curtains opened, and a man stepped out. He was not large,
nor did his face or figure differ from the normal. But his elegantly
embroidered crimson and gold robes made him a colorfully outstanding
figure, even on this colorful waterfront. And the imperious assurance of
his bearing made him impossible to ignore.

He adjusted his strangely shaped, flat cap, glanced about the wharf
