solar tide. Separating with regret from her cradle, but attached to the
Earth by indissoluble ties of attraction, she rotates round us in a
month, from west to east, and this movement keeps her back a little each
day in relation to the stars. If we watch, evening by evening, beginning
from the new moon, we shall observe that she is each night a little
farther to the left, or east, than on the preceding evening. This
revolution of the Moon around our planet produces the phases, and gives
the measure of our months.

[Illustration: FIG. 64.--The Full Moon slowly rises.]

During her monthly journey she always presents the same face to us. One
might think that the fear of losing us had immobilized her globe, and
prevented her from turning. And so we only know of her the vague sketch
of a human face that has been observed through all the ages.

It seems, in fact, as though she were looking down upon us from the
Heavens, the more so as the principal spots of her disk vaguely recall
the aspect of a face. If we try to draw it without the aid of
instruments we observe dark regions and clear regions that each
interprets in his own fashion. To the author, for instance, the full
Moon has the appearance represented in the following figure. The spots
resemble two eyes and the sketch of a nose; resulting in a vague human
figure, as indicated on the lower disk. Others see a man carrying a
bundle of wood, a hare, a lion, a dog, a kangaroo, a sickle, two heads
embracing, etc.[13] But generally speaking, there is a tendency to see a
human figure in it.

If this appearance is helped a little by drawing, it gives the profile
of a man's head fairly well sketched, and furnished with an abundant
crop of hair (Fig. 66). Others go much more into detail, and draw a
woman's head that is certainly too definite, like this of M. Jean Sardou
(Fig. 67). Others, again, like M. Zamboni, see behind the man's profile
the likeness of a young girl being embraced by him (Fig. 68). There is
certainly some imagination about these. And yet, on the first suitable
occasion, look at the Moon through an opera-glass, a few days after the
first quarter, and you will not fail to see the masculine profile just
described, and even to imagine the "kiss in the Moon."

[Illustration: FIG. 65.--The Moon viewed with the unaided eye.]

[Illustration: FIG. 66.--The Man's head in the Moon.]

These vague aspects disappear as soon as the Moon is examined with even
the least powerful instruments: the spots are better defined, and the
illusions of indistinct vision vanish. Compare this direct photograph of
the Moon, taken by the author some years ago (Fig. 69): here is neither
a human figure, man, dog, hare, nor faggot; simply deep geographical
configurations, and in the lower region, a luminous point whence certain
light bands spread out, some being prolonged to a considerable distance.
And yet, from a little way off, does it not form the man's face above
indicated?

[Illustration: FIG. 67.--Woman's head in the Moon.]

From the earliest astronomical observations made with the aid of
instruments by Galileo, in 1609, people tried to find out what the dark
spots could represent, and they were called seas, because water absorbs
light, and reflects it less than _terra firma_. The Moon of itself
possesses no intrinsic light, any more than our planet, and only shines
by the light of the Sun that illuminates it. As it rotates round the
Earth, and constantly changes its position with respect to the Sun, we
see more or less of its illuminated hemisphere, and the result is the
phases that every one knows so well.

[Illustration: FIG. 68.--The kiss in the Moon.]

[Illustration: FIG. 69.--Photograph of the Moon.]

At the commencement of each lunation, the Moon is between the Sun and
the Earth, and its non-illuminated hemisphere is turned toward us. This
is the New Moon, invisible to us; but two days later, the slim crescent
of Diana sheds a gentle radiance upon the Earth. Gradually the crescent
enlarges. When the Moon arrives at right angles with ourselves and with
the Sun, half the illuminated hemisphere is presented to us. This is the
first quarter. At the time of Full Moon, it is opposite the Sun, and we
see the whole of the hemisphere illuminated. Then comes the decline: the
brilliant disk is slightly corroded at first; it diminishes from day to
day, and about a week before the New Moon our fair friend only shows her
profile before she once more passes in front of the Sun: this is the
last quarter.

[Illustration: FIG. 70.--The Moon's Phases.]

When the Moon is crescent, in the first evenings of the lunation, and
after the last quarter, the rest of the disk is visible, illuminated
feebly by a pale luminosity. This is known as the ashy light. It is due
to the shine of the Earth, reflecting the light received from the Sun
into space. Accordingly the ashy light is the reflection of our own sent
back to us by the Moon. It is the reflection of a reflection.

This rotation of the Moon round the Earth is accomplished in
twenty-seven days, seven hours, forty-three minutes, eleven seconds; but
as the Earth is simultaneously revolving round the Sun, when the Moon
returns to the same point (the Earth having become displaced relatively
to the Sun), the Moon has to travel two days longer to recover its
position between the Sun and the Earth, so that the lunar month is
longer than the sidereal revolution of the Moon, and takes twenty-nine
days, twelve hours, forty-four minutes, three seconds. This is the
duration of the sequence of phases.

This revolution is accomplished at a distance of 384,000 kilometers
(238,000 miles). The velocity of the Moon in its orbit is more than 1
kilometer (0.6214 mile) per second. But our planet sweeps it through
space at a velocity almost thirty times greater.

The diameter of the Moon represents 273/1000 that of the Earth, _i.e._,
3,480 kilometers (2,157 miles).

Its surface = 38,000,000 square kilometers (15,000,000 square miles), a
little more than the thirteenth part of the terrestrial surface, which
= 510,000,000 (200,000,000 square miles).

In volume, the Moon is fifty times less than the Earth. Its mass or
weight is only 1/81 that of the terrestrial globe. Its density = 0.615,
relatively to that of the Earth, _i.e._, a little more than three times
that of water. Weight at its surface is very little: 0.174. A kilogram
transported thither would only weigh 174 grams.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the meager distance of 384,000 kilometers (238,000 miles) that
separates us from it (about thirty times the diameter of the Earth), the
Moon is a suburb of our terrestrial habitation. What does this small
distance amount to? It is a mere step in the universe.

A telegraphic message would get there in one and a half second; a
projectile fired from a gun would arrive in eight days, five hours; an
express-train would be due in eight months, twenty-two days. It is only
the 1/388 part of the distance that separates us from the Sun, and only
the 100/1,000,000 part of the distance of the stars nearest to us. Many
men have tramped the distance that separates us from the Moon. A bridge
of thirty terrestrial globes would suffice to unite the two worlds.

Owing to this great proximity, the Moon is the best known of all the
celestial spheres. Its geographical (or more correctly,
selenographical, _Selene_, moon) map was drawn out more than two
centuries ago, at first in a vague sketch, and afterward with more
details, until to-day it is as precise and accurate as any of our
terrestrial maps of geography.

Before the invention of the telescope, from antiquity to the seventeenth
century, people lost themselves in conjectures as to the nature of this
strange lunar figure. It was held to be a mysterious world, the more
extraordinary in that it always presented the same face to us. Some
compared it to an immense mirror reflecting the image of the Earth.
Others pictured it as a silver star, an enchanted abode where all was
wealth and happiness. For many a long day it was the fashion to think,
quite irrationally, that the inhabitants of the Moon were fifteen times
bigger than ourselves.

The invention of telescopes, however, brought a little order and a grain
of truth into these fantastic assumptions. The first observations of
Galileo revolutionized science, and his discoveries filled the
best-ordered minds with enthusiasm. Thenceforward, the Moon became our
property, a terrestrial suburb, where the whole world would gladly have
installed itself, had the means of getting there been as swift as the
wings of the imagination. It became easy enough to invent a thousand
enchanting descriptions of the charms of our fair sister, and no one
scrupled to do so. Soon, it was observed that the Moon closely resembled
the Earth in its geological features; its surface bristles with sharp
mountain peaks that light up in so many luminous points beneath the rays
of the Sun. Alongside, dark and shaded parts indicate the plains;
moreover, there are large gray patches that were supposed to be seas
because they reflect the solar light less perfectly than the adjacent
countries. At that epoch hardly anything was known of the physical
constitution of the Moon, and it was figured as enveloped with an
atmospheric layer, analogous to that at the bottom of which we carry on
our respiration.

To-day we know that these "seas" are destitute of water, and that if the
lunar globe possesses an atmosphere, it must be excessively light.

The Moon became the favorite object of astronomers, and the numerous
observations made of it authorized the delineation of very interesting
selenographic charts. In order to find one's way among the seas, plains,
and mountains that make up the lunar territory, it was necessary to name
them. The seas were the first to be baptized, in accordance with their
reputed astrological influences. Accordingly, we find on the Moon, the
Sea of Fecundity, the Lake of Death, the Sea of Humors, the Ocean of
Tempests, the Sea of Tranquillity, the Marsh of Mists, the Lake of
Dreams, the Sea of Putrefaction, the Peninsula of Reverie, the Sea of
Rains, etc.

With regard to the luminous parts and the mountains, it was at first
proposed to call them after the most illustrious astronomers, but the
fear of giving offense acted as a check on Hevelius and Riccioli,
authors of the first lunar maps (1647, 1651), and they judged it more
prudent to transfer the names of the terrestrial mountains to the Moon.
The Alps, the Apennines, the Pyrenees, the Carpathians, are all to be
found up there; then, as the vocabulary of the mountains was not
adequate, the scientists reasserted their rights, and we meet in the
Moon, Aristotle, Plato, Hipparchus, Ptolemy, Copernicus, Kepler, Newton,
as well as other more modern and even contemporaneous celebrities.

We have not space to reproduce the general chart of the Moon (that
published by the author measures not less than a meter, with the
nomenclature); but the figure subjoined gives a summary sufficient for
the limits of this little book. Here are the names of the principal
lunar mountains, with the numbers corresponding to them upon the map.

[Illustration: FIG. 71.--Map of the Moon.

(From Fowler's "Telescopic Astronomy.")

           1 Furnerius
           2 Petavius
           3 Langrenus
           4 Macrobius
           5 Cleomedes
           6 Endymion
           7 Altas
           8 Hercules
           9 Romer
          10 Posidonius
          11 Fracastorius
          12 Theophilus
          13 Piccolomini
          14 Albategnius
          15 Hipparchus
          16 Manilius
          17 Eudoxus
          18 Aristotle
          19 Cassini
          20 Aristillus
          21 Plato
          22 Archimedes
          23 Eratosthenes
          24 Copernicus
          25 Ptolemy
          26 Alphonsus
          27 Arzachel
          28 Walter
          29 Clavius
          30 Tycho
          31 Bullialdus
          32 Schiller
          33 Schickard
          34 Gassendi
          35 Kepler
          36 Grimaldi
          37 Aristarchus

          A Mare Crisum
          B Mare Fercunditatis
          C Mare Nectaris
          D Mare Tranquilitatis
          E Mare Serenitatis
          F Mare Imbrium
          G Sinus Iridum
          H Oceanus Procellarum
          I Mare Humorum
          K Mare Nubium
          V Altai Mountains
          W Mare Vaporum
          X Apennine Mountains
          Y Caucasus Mountains
          Z Alps]

The constantly growing progress of optics leads to perpetual new
discoveries in science, and at the present time we can say that we know
the geography of the Moon as well as, and even better than, that of our
own planet. The heights of all the mountains of the Moon are measured to
within a few feet. (One cannot say as much for the mountains of the
Earth.) The highest are over 7,000 meters (nearly 25,000 feet).
Relatively to its proportions, the satellite is much more mountainous
than the planet, and the plutonian giants are much more numerous there
than here. If we have peaks, like the Gaorisankar, the highest of the
Himalayas and of the whole Earth, whose elevation of 8,840 meters
(29,000 feet) is equivalent to 1/1140 the diameter of our globe, there
are peaks on the Moon of 7,700 meters (25,264 feet), _e.g._, those of
Doerfel and Leibniz, the height of which is equivalent to 1/470 the
lunar diameter.

Tycho's Mountain is one of the finest upon our satellite. It is visible
with the naked eye (and perfectly with opera-glasses) as a white point
shining like a kind of star upon the lower portion of the disk. At the
time of full moon it is dazzling, and projects long rays from afar upon
the lunar globe. So, too, Mount Copernicus, whose brilliant whiteness
sparkles in space. But the strangest thing about these lunar mountains
is that they are all hollow, and can be measured as well in depth as in
height. A type of mountain as strange to us as are the seas without
water! In effect, these mountains of the moon are ancient volcanic
craters, with no summits, nor covers.

At the top of the highest peaks, there is a large circular depression,
prolonged into the heart of the mountain, sometimes far below the level
of the surrounding plains, and as these craters often measure several
hundred kilometers, one is obliged, if one does not want to go all round
them in crossing the mountain, to descend almost perpendicularly into
the depths and cross there, to reascend the opposite side, and return to
the plain. These alpine excursions incontestably deserve the name of
perilous ascents!

No country on the Earth can give us any notion of the state of the lunar
soil: never was ground so tormented; never globe so profoundly shattered
to its very bowels. The mountains are accumulations of enormous rocks
tumbled one upon the other, and round the awful labyrinth of craters one
sees nothing but dismantled ramparts, or columns of pointed rocks like
cathedral spires issuing from the chaos.

As we said, there is no atmosphere, or at least so little at the bottom
of the valleys that it is imperceptible. No clouds, no fog, no rain nor
snow. The sky is an eternally black space, vaultless, jeweled with stars
by day as by night.

Let us suppose that we arrive among these savage steppes at daybreak:
the lunar day is fifteen times longer than our own, because the Sun
takes a month to illuminate the entire circuit of the Moon; there are no
less than 354 hours from the rising to the setting of the Sun. If we
arrive before the sunrise, there is no aurora to herald it, for in the
absence of atmosphere there can be no sort of twilight. Of a sudden on
the dark horizon come flashes of the solar light, striking the summits
of the mountains, while the plains and valleys are still in darkness.
The light spreads slowly, for while on the Earth in central latitudes
the Sun takes only two minutes and a quarter to rise, on the Moon it
takes nearly an hour, and in consequence the light it sends out is very
weak for some minutes, and increases excessively slowly. It is a kind of
aurora, but lasts a very short time, for when at the end of half an
hour, the solar disk has half risen, the light appears as intense to the
eye as when it is entirely above the horizon; the radiant orb is seen
with its protuberances and its burning atmosphere. It rises slowly, like
a luminous god, in the depths of the black sky, a profound and formless
sky in which the stars shine all day, since they are not hidden by any
atmospheric veil such as conceals them from us during the daylight.

[Illustration: FIG. 72.--The Lunar Apennines.]

The absence of sensible atmosphere must produce an effect on the
temperature of the Moon analogous to that perceived on the high
mountains of our globe, where the rarefaction of the air does not permit
the solar heat to concentrate itself upon the surface of the soil, as it
does below the atmosphere, which acts as a forcing-house: the Sun's heat
is not kept in by anything, and incessantly radiates out toward space.
In all probability the cold is extremely and constantly rigorous, not
only during the nights, which are fifteen times longer than our own, but
even during the long days of sunshine.

We give two different drawings to represent these curious aspects of
lunar topography. The first (Fig. 72) is taken in the neighborhood of
the Apennines, and shows a long chain of mountains beneath which are
three deep rings, Archimedes, Aristillus, and Autolycus: the second
(Fig. 73) depicts the lunar ring of Flammarion,[14] whose outline is
constructed of dismantled ramparts, and whose depths are sprinkled with
little craters. The first of these two drawings was made in England by
Nasmyth, the second in Germany by Krieger: they both give an exact idea
of what one sees in the telescope with different modes of solar
illumination.

In the Moon's always black and starry sky a majestic star that is not
visible from the Earth, and exhibits this peculiarity that it is
stationary in the Heavens, while all the others pass behind it, may
constantly be admired, by day as well as by night; and it is also of
considerable apparent magnitude. This orb, some four times as large as
the Moon in diameter, and thirteen to fourteen times more extensive in
surface, is our Earth, which presents to the Moon a sequence of phases
similar to those which our satellite presents to us, but in the inverse
direction. At the moment of New Moon, the Sun fully illuminates the
terrestrial hemisphere turned toward our satellite, and we get "Full
Earth"; at the time of Full Moon, on the contrary, the non-illuminated
hemisphere of the Earth is turned toward the satellite, and we get "New
Earth": when the Moon shows us first quarter, the Earth is in last
quarter, and so on. The drawing subjoined gives an idea of these
aspects.

[Illustration: FIG. 73.--Flammarion's Lunar Ring.]

What a curious sight our globe must be during this long night of
fourteen times twenty-four hours! Independent of its phases, which bring
it from first quarter to full earth for the middle of the night, and
from full earth to last quarter for sunrise, how interested we should be
to see it thus stationary in the sky, and turning on itself in
twenty-four hours.

[Illustration: FIG. 74.--Lunar landscape with the Earth in the sky.]

Yes, thanks to us, the inhabitants of the lunar hemisphere turned toward
us are gratified by the sight of a splendid nocturnal torch, doubtless
less white than our own despite the clouds with which the terrestrial
globe is studded, and shaded in a tender tone of bluish emerald-green.
The royal orb of their long nights, the Earth, gives them moonlight of
unparalleled beauty, and we may say without false modesty that our
presence in the lunar sky must produce marvelous and absolutely
fairy-like effects.

Maybe, they envy us our globe, a dazzling dwelling-place whose splendor
radiates through space; they see its greenish clarity varying with the
extent of cloud that veils its seas and continents, and they observe its
motion of rotation, by which all the countries of our planet are
revealed in succession to its admirers.

We are talking of these pageants seen from the Moon, and of the
inhabitants of our satellite as if they really existed. The sterile and
desolate aspect of the lunar world, however, rather brings us to the
conclusion that such inhabitants are non-existent, although we have no
authorization for affirming this. That they have existed seems to me
beyond doubt. The lunar volcanoes had a considerable activity, in an
atmosphere that allowed the white volcanic ashes to be carried a long
way by the winds, figuring round the craters the stellar rays that are
still so striking. These cinders were spread over the soil, preserving
all its asperities of outline, a little heaped up on the side to which
they were impelled. The magnificent photographs recently made at the
Paris Observatory by MM. Loewy and Puiseux are splendid evidence of
these projections. In this era of planetary activity there were liquids
and gases on the surface of the lunar globe, which appear subsequently
to have been entirely absorbed. Now the teaching of our own planet is
that Nature nowhere remains infertile, and that the production of Life
is a law so general and so imperious that life develops at its own
expense, sooner than abstain from developing. Accordingly, it is
difficult to suppose that the lunar elements can have remained inactive,
when only next door they exhibited such fecundity upon our globe. Yes,
the Moon has been inhabited by beings doubtless very different from
ourselves, and perhaps may still be, although this globe has run through
the phases of its astral life more rapidly than our own, and the
daughter is relatively older than the mother.

The duration of the life of the worlds appears to have been in
proportion with their masses. The Moon cooled and mineralized more
quickly than the Earth. Jupiter is still fluid.
