duration of the world. Huart feels positive that in Mo[t.]ahhar's time the
present Arabic symbols had not yet come into use, and that the Indian
symbols, although known to scholars, were not current. Unless this were the
case, neither the author nor his readers would have found anything
extraordinary in the appearance of the number which he cites.

Mention should also be made of a widely-traveled student, Al-Mas`[=u]d[=i]
(885?-956), whose journeys carried him from Bagdad to Persia, India,
Ceylon, and even {8} across the China sea, and at other times to
Madagascar, Syria, and Palestine.[21] He seems to have neglected no
accessible sources of information, examining also the history of the
Persians, the Hindus, and the Romans. Touching the period of the Caliphs
his work entitled _Meadows of Gold_ furnishes a most entertaining fund of
information. He states[22] that the wise men of India, assembled by the
king, composed the _Sindhind_. Further on[23] he states, upon the authority
of the historian Mo[h.]ammed ibn `Al[=i] `Abd[=i], that by order of
Al-Man[s.][=u]r many works of science and astrology were translated into
Arabic, notably the _Sindhind_ (_Siddh[=a]nta_). Concerning the meaning and
spelling of this name there is considerable diversity of opinion.
Colebrooke[24] first pointed out the connection between _Siddh[=a]nta_ and
_Sindhind_. He ascribes to the word the meaning "the revolving ages."[25]
Similar designations are collected by Sedillot,[26] who inclined to the
Greek origin of the sciences commonly attributed to the Hindus.[27]
Casiri,[28] citing the _T[=a]r[=i]kh al-[h.]okam[=a]_ or _Chronicles of the
Learned_,[29] refers to the work {9} as the _Sindum-Indum_ with the meaning
"perpetuum aeternumque." The reference[30] in this ancient Arabic work to
Al-Khow[=a]razm[=i] is worthy of note.

This _Sindhind_ is the book, says Mas`[=u]d[=i],[31] which gives all that
the Hindus know of the spheres, the stars, arithmetic,[32] and the other
branches of science. He mentions also Al-Khow[=a]razm[=i] and [H.]abash[33]
as translators of the tables of the _Sindhind_. Al-B[=i]r[=u]n[=i][34]
refers to two other translations from a work furnished by a Hindu who came
to Bagdad as a member of the political mission which Sindh sent to the
caliph Al-Man[s.][=u]r, in the year of the Hejira 154 (A.D. 771).

The oldest work, in any sense complete, on the history of Arabic literature
and history is the _Kit[=a]b al-Fihrist_, written in the year 987 A.D., by
Ibn Ab[=i] Ya`q[=u]b al-Nad[=i]m. It is of fundamental importance for the
history of Arabic culture. Of the ten chief divisions of the work, the
seventh demands attention in this discussion for the reason that its second
subdivision treats of mathematicians and astronomers.[35]

{10}

The first of the Arabic writers mentioned is Al-Kind[=i] (800-870 A.D.),
who wrote five books on arithmetic and four books on the use of the Indian
method of reckoning. Sened ibn `Al[=i], the Jew, who was converted to Islam
under the caliph Al-M[=a]m[=u]n, is also given as the author of a work on
the Hindu method of reckoning. Nevertheless, there is a possibility[36]
that some of the works ascribed to Sened ibn `Al[=i] are really works of
Al-Khow[=a]razm[=i], whose name immediately precedes his. However, it is to
be noted in this connection that Casiri[37] also mentions the same writer
as the author of a most celebrated work on arithmetic.

To Al-[S.][=u]f[=i], who died in 986 A.D., is also credited a large work on
the same subject, and similar treatises by other writers are mentioned. We
are therefore forced to the conclusion that the Arabs from the early ninth
century on fully recognized the Hindu origin of the new numerals.

Leonard of Pisa, of whom we shall speak at length in the chapter on the
Introduction of the Numerals into Europe, wrote his _Liber Abbaci_[38] in
1202. In this work he refers frequently to the nine Indian figures,[39]
thus showing again the general consensus of opinion in the Middle Ages that
the numerals were of Hindu origin.

Some interest also attaches to the oldest documents on arithmetic in our
own language. One of the earliest {11} treatises on algorism is a
commentary[40] on a set of verses called the _Carmen de Algorismo_, written
by Alexander de Villa Dei (Alexandra de Ville-Dieu), a Minorite monk of
about 1240 A.D. The text of the first few lines is as follows:

 "Hec algorism' ars p'sens dicit' in qua
  Talib; indor[um] fruim bis quinq; figuris.[41]

"This boke is called the boke of algorim or augrym after lewder use. And
this boke tretys of the Craft of Nombryng, the quych crafte is called also
Algorym. Ther was a kyng of Inde the quich heyth Algor & he made this
craft.... Algorisms, in the quych we use teen figurys of Inde."

       *       *       *       *       *


{12}

CHAPTER II

EARLY HINDU FORMS WITH NO PLACE VALUE

While it is generally conceded that the scientific development of astronomy
among the Hindus towards the beginning of the Christian era rested upon
Greek[42] or Chinese[43] sources, yet their ancient literature testifies to
a high state of civilization, and to a considerable advance in sciences, in
philosophy, and along literary lines, long before the golden age of Greece.
From the earliest times even up to the present day the Hindu has been wont
to put his thought into rhythmic form. The first of this poetry--it well
deserves this name, being also worthy from a metaphysical point of
view[44]--consists of the Vedas, hymns of praise and poems of worship,
collected during the Vedic period which dates from approximately 2000 B.C.
to 1400 B.C.[45] Following this work, or possibly contemporary with it, is
the Brahmanic literature, which is partly ritualistic (the
Br[=a]hma[n.]as), and partly philosophical (the Upanishads). Our especial
interest is {13} in the S[=u]tras, versified abridgments of the ritual and
of ceremonial rules, which contain considerable geometric material used in
connection with altar construction, and also numerous examples of rational
numbers the sum of whose squares is also a square, i.e. "Pythagorean
numbers," although this was long before Pythagoras lived. Whitney[46]
places the whole of the Veda literature, including the Vedas, the
Br[=a]hma[n.]as, and the S[=u]tras, between 1500 B.C. and 800 B.C., thus
agreeing with Buerk[47] who holds that the knowledge of the Pythagorean
theorem revealed in the S[=u]tras goes back to the eighth century B.C.

The importance of the S[=u]tras as showing an independent origin of Hindu
geometry, contrary to the opinion long held by Cantor[48] of a Greek
origin, has been repeatedly emphasized in recent literature,[49] especially
since the appearance of the important work of Von Schroeder.[50] Further
fundamental mathematical notions such as the conception of irrationals and
the use of gnomons, as well as the philosophical doctrine of the
transmigration of souls,--all of these having long been attributed to the
Greeks,--are shown in these works to be native to India. Although this
discussion does not bear directly upon the {14} origin of our numerals, yet
it is highly pertinent as showing the aptitude of the Hindu for
mathematical and mental work, a fact further attested by the independent
development of the drama and of epic and lyric poetry.

It should be stated definitely at the outset, however, that we are not at
all sure that the most ancient forms of the numerals commonly known as
Arabic had their origin in India. As will presently be seen, their forms
may have been suggested by those used in Egypt, or in Eastern Persia, or in
China, or on the plains of Mesopotamia. We are quite in the dark as to
these early steps; but as to their development in India, the approximate
period of the rise of their essential feature of place value, their
introduction into the Arab civilization, and their spread to the West, we
have more or less definite information. When, therefore, we consider the
rise of the numerals in the land of the Sindhu,[51] it must be understood
that it is only the large movement that is meant, and that there must
further be considered the numerous possible sources outside of India itself
and long anterior to the first prominent appearance of the number symbols.

No one attempts to examine any detail in the history of ancient India
without being struck with the great dearth of reliable material.[52] So
little sympathy have the people with any save those of their own caste that
a general literature is wholly lacking, and it is only in the observations
of strangers that any all-round view of scientific progress is to be found.
There is evidence that primary schools {15} existed in earliest times, and
of the seventy-two recognized sciences writing and arithmetic were the most
prized.[53] In the Vedic period, say from 2000 to 1400 B.C., there was the
same attention to astronomy that was found in the earlier civilizations of
Babylon, China, and Egypt, a fact attested by the Vedas themselves.[54]
Such advance in science presupposes a fair knowledge of calculation, but of
the manner of calculating we are quite ignorant and probably always shall
be. One of the Buddhist sacred books, the _Lalitavistara_, relates that
when the B[=o]dhisattva[55] was of age to marry, the father of Gopa, his
intended bride, demanded an examination of the five hundred suitors, the
subjects including arithmetic, writing, the lute, and archery. Having
vanquished his rivals in all else, he is matched against Arjuna the great
arithmetician and is asked to express numbers greater than 100 kotis.[56]
In reply he gave a scheme of number names as high as 10^{53}, adding that
he could proceed as far as 10^{421},[57] all of which suggests the system
of Archimedes and the unsettled question of the indebtedness of the West to
the East in the realm of ancient mathematics.[58] Sir Edwin Arnold, {16} in
_The Light of Asia_, does not mention this part of the contest, but he
speaks of Buddha's training at the hands of the learned Vi[s.]vamitra:

  "And Viswamitra said, 'It is enough,
  Let us to numbers. After me repeat
  Your numeration till we reach the lakh,[59]
  One, two, three, four, to ten, and then by tens
  To hundreds, thousands.' After him the child
  Named digits, decads, centuries, nor paused,
  The round lakh reached, but softly murmured on,
  Then comes the k[=o]ti, nahut, ninnahut,
  Khamba, viskhamba, abab, attata,
  To kumuds, gundhikas, and utpalas,
  By pundar[=i]kas into padumas,
  Which last is how you count the utmost grains
  Of Hastagiri ground to finest dust;[60]
  But beyond that a numeration is,
  The K[=a]tha, used to count the stars of night,
  The K[=o]ti-K[=a]tha, for the ocean drops;
  Ingga, the calculus of circulars;
  Sarvanikchepa, by the which you deal
  With all the sands of Gunga, till we come
  To Antah-Kalpas, where the unit is
  The sands of the ten crore Gungas.  If one seeks
  More comprehensive scale, th' arithmic mounts
  By the Asankya, which is the tale
  Of all the drops that in ten thousand years
  Would fall on all the worlds by daily rain;
  Thence unto Maha Kalpas, by the which
  The gods compute their future and their past.'"

{17}

Thereupon Vi[s.]vamitra [=A]c[=a]rya[61] expresses his approval of the
task, and asks to hear the "measure of the line" as far as y[=o]jana, the
longest measure bearing name. This given, Buddha adds:

  ... "'And master! if it please,
  I shall recite how many sun-motes lie
  From end to end within a y[=o]jana.'
  Thereat, with instant skill, the little prince
  Pronounced the total of the atoms true.
  But Viswamitra heard it on his face
  Prostrate before the boy; 'For thou,' he cried,
  'Art Teacher of thy teachers--thou, not I,
  Art G[=u]r[=u].'"

It is needless to say that this is far from being history. And yet it puts
in charming rhythm only what the ancient _Lalitavistara_ relates of the
number-series of the Buddha's time. While it extends beyond all reason,
nevertheless it reveals a condition that would have been impossible unless
arithmetic had attained a considerable degree of advancement.

To this pre-Christian period belong also the _Ved[=a][.n]gas_, or "limbs
for supporting the Veda," part of that great branch of Hindu literature
known as _Sm[r.]iti_ (recollection), that which was to be handed down by
tradition. Of these the sixth is known as _Jyoti[s.]a_ (astronomy), a short
treatise of only thirty-six verses, written not earlier than 300 B.C., and
affording us some knowledge of the extent of number work in that
period.[62] The Hindus {18} also speak of eighteen ancient Siddh[=a]ntas or
astronomical works, which, though mostly lost, confirm this evidence.[63]

As to authentic histories, however, there exist in India none relating to
the period before the Mohammedan era (622 A.D.). About all that we know of
the earlier civilization is what we glean from the two great epics, the
Mah[=a]bh[=a]rata[64] and the R[=a]m[=a]yana, from coins, and from a few
inscriptions.[65]

It is with this unsatisfactory material, then, that we have to deal in
searching for the early history of the Hindu-Arabic numerals, and the fact
that many unsolved problems exist and will continue to exist is no longer
strange when we consider the conditions. It is rather surprising that so
much has been discovered within a century, than that we are so uncertain as
to origins and dates and the early spread of the system. The probability
being that writing was not introduced into India before the close of the
fourth century B.C., and literature existing only in spoken form prior to
that period,[66] the number work was doubtless that of all primitive
peoples, palpable, merely a matter of placing sticks or cowries or pebbles
on the ground, of marking a sand-covered board, or of cutting notches or
tying cords as is still done in parts of Southern India to-day.[67]

{19}

The early Hindu numerals[68] may be classified into three great groups, (1)
the Kharo[s.][t.]h[=i], (2) the Br[=a]hm[=i], and (3) the word and letter
forms; and these will be considered in order.

The Kharo[s.][t.]h[=i] numerals are found in inscriptions formerly known as
Bactrian, Indo-Bactrian, and Aryan, and appearing in ancient Gandh[=a]ra,
now eastern Afghanistan and northern Punjab. The alphabet of the language
is found in inscriptions dating from the fourth century B.C. to the third
century A.D., and from the fact that the words are written from right to
left it is assumed to be of Semitic origin. No numerals, however, have been
found in the earliest of these inscriptions, number-names probably having
been written out in words as was the custom with many ancient peoples. Not
until the time of the powerful King A['s]oka, in the third century B.C., do
numerals appear in any inscriptions thus far discovered; and then only in
the primitive form of marks, quite as they would be found in Egypt, Greece,
Rome, or in {20} various other parts of the world. These A['s]oka[69]
inscriptions, some thirty in all, are found in widely separated parts of
India, often on columns, and are in the various vernaculars that were
familiar to the people. Two are in the Kharo[s.][t.]h[=i] characters, and
the rest in some form of Br[=a]hm[=i]. In the Kharo[s.][t.]h[=i]
inscriptions only four numerals have been found, and these are merely
vertical marks for one, two, four, and five, thus:

  |     ||     |||     ||||

In the so-called ['S]aka inscriptions, possibly of the first century B.C.,
more numerals are found, and in more highly developed form, the
right-to-left system appearing, together with evidences of three different
scales of counting,--four, ten, and twenty. The numerals of this period are
as follows:

[Illustration]

There are several noteworthy points to be observed in studying this system.
In the first place, it is probably not as early as that shown in the
N[=a]n[=a] Gh[=a]t forms hereafter given, although the inscriptions
themselves at N[=a]n[=a] Gh[=a]t are later than those of the A['s]oka
period. The {21} four is to this system what the X was to the Roman,
probably a canceling of three marks as a workman does to-day for five, or a
laying of one stick across three others. The ten has never been
satisfactorily explained. It is similar to the A of the Kharo[s.][t.]h[=i]
alphabet, but we have no knowledge as to why it was chosen. The twenty is
evidently a ligature of two tens, and this in turn suggested a kind of
radix, so that ninety was probably written in a way reminding one of the
quatre-vingt-dix of the French. The hundred is unexplained, although it
resembles the letter _ta_ or _tra_ of the Br[=a]hm[=i] alphabet with 1
before (to the right of) it. The two hundred is only a variant of the
symbol for hundred, with two vertical marks.[70]

This system has many points of similarity with the Nabatean numerals[71] in
use in the first centuries of the Christian era. The cross is here used for
four, and the Kharo[s.][t.]h[=i] form is employed for twenty. In addition
to this there is a trace of an analogous use of a scale of twenty. While
the symbol for 100 is quite different, the method of forming the other
hundreds is the same. The correspondence seems to be too marked to be
wholly accidental.

It is not in the Kharo[s.][t.]h[=i] numerals, therefore, that we can hope
to find the origin of those used by us, and we turn to the second of the
Indian types, the Br[=a]hm[=i] characters. The alphabet attributed to
Brahm[=a] is the oldest of the several known in India, and was used from
the earliest historic times. There are various theories of its origin, {22}
none of which has as yet any wide acceptance,[72] although the problem
offers hope of solution in due time. The numerals are not as old as the
alphabet, or at least they have not as yet been found in inscriptions
earlier than those in which the edicts of A['s]oka appear, some of these
having been incised in Br[=a]hm[=i] as well as Kharo[s.][t.]h[=i]. As
already stated, the older writers probably wrote the numbers in words, as
seems to have been the case in the earliest Pali writings of Ceylon.[73]

The following numerals are, as far as known, the only ones to appear in the
A['s]oka edicts:[74]

[Illustration]

These fragments from the third century B.C., crude and unsatisfactory as
they are, are the undoubted early forms from which our present system
developed. They next appear in the second century B.C. in some inscriptions
in the cave on the top of the N[=a]n[=a] Gh[=a]t hill, about seventy-five
miles from Poona in central India. These inscriptions may be memorials of
the early Andhra dynasty of southern India, but their chief interest lies
in the numerals which they contain.

The cave was made as a resting-place for travelers ascending the hill,
which lies on the road from Kaly[=a]na to Junar. It seems to have been cut
out by a descendant {23} of King ['S][=a]tav[=a]hana,[75] for inside the
wall opposite the entrance are representations of the members of his
family, much defaced, but with the names still legible. It would seem that
the excavation was made by order of a king named Vedisiri, and "the
inscription contains a list of gifts made on the occasion of the
performance of several _yagnas_ or religious sacrifices," and numerals are
to be seen in no less than thirty places.[76]

There is considerable dispute as to what numerals are really found in these
inscriptions, owing to the difficulty of deciphering them; but the
following, which have been copied from a rubbing, are probably number
forms:[77]

[Illustration]

The inscription itself, so important as containing the earliest
considerable Hindu numeral system connected with our own, is of sufficient
interest to warrant reproducing part of it in facsimile, as is done on page
24.

{24}

