
       *       *       *       *       *

They went aboard, Harriet and two other women, and six men counting the
guide and Weaver. The ship was a red-lit cavern. The "crewman" turned
out to be a hairy horror, a three-foot headless lump shaped like an
eggplant, supported by four splayed legs and with an indefinite number
of tentacles wriggling below the stalked eyes.

"They're more like us than you'd think," said the guide. "They're
mammals, they have a nervous organization very like ours, they're
susceptible to some of our diseases--which is very rare--and they even
share some of our minor vices." He opened his kit and offered the thing
a plug of chewing tobacco, which was refused with much tentacle-waving,
and a cigar, which was accepted. The creature stuck the cigar into the
pointed tip of its body, just above the six beady black eyes, lit it
with some sort of flameless lighter, and puffed clouds of smoke like a
volcano.

"--And of course, as you see, they're oxygen breathers," the guide
finished. "The atmosphere in the ship here is almost identical to our
own--we could breathe it without any discomfort whatever."

_Then why don't we?_ Weaver thought irritably. He had been forced to
wear either a breathing mask or a pressure suit all the time he had been
on the Moon, except when he had been in his own sealed room at the
sanatorium. And his post-nasal drip was unmistakably maturing into a
cold; he had been stifling sneezes for the last half hour.

He was roused by a commotion up ahead; someone was on the floor, and the
others were crowding around. "Help me carry her," said the guide's voice
sharply in his earphones. "We can't treat her here. What is she, a heart
case?... Good Lord. Clear the way there, will you?"

Weaver hurried up, struck by a sharp suspicion. Indeed, it was Harriet
who was being carried out--and a good thing, he thought, that they
didn't have to support her full weight. He wondered vaguely if she would
die before they got her to a doctor. He could not give the thought his
full attention, or feel as much fraternal anxiety as he ought, because--

He had ... he _had_ to sneeze.

       *       *       *       *       *

The others had crowded out into the red-lit space of the control room,
where the airlock was. Weaver stopped and frantically tugged his arm
free of the rubberoid sleeve. The repressed spasm was an acute agony in
his nose and throat. He fumbled the handkerchief out of his pocket,
thrust his hand up under the helmet--and blissfully let go.

His eyes were watering. He wiped them hurriedly, put the handkerchief
away, worked his arm back into the sleeve, and looked around to see what
had become of the others.

The airlock door was closed, and there was no one in the room but the
hairy eggplant shape of the Aurigean, still puffing its cigar.

"Hey!" said Weaver, forgetting his manners. The Aurigean did not
turn--but then, which was its front, or back? The beady black eyes
regarded him without expression.

Weaver started forward. He got nearly to the airlock before a cluster of
hairy tentacles barred his way. He said indignantly, "Let me out, you
monster. Let me out, do you hear?"

The creature stood stock-still in an infuriating attitude until a little
light on the wall changed from orange to red-violet. Then it crossed to
the control board, did something there, and the inner door of the lock
swung open.

"Well, I should think so!" said Weaver. He stepped forward again--But
his eyes were beginning to water. There was an intolerable tickling far
back in his nostrils. He was going to--he was--

Eyes squeezed shut, his whole body contorted with effort, he raised his
arm to begin the desperate race once more. His hand brushed against
something--his kit, slung just above his waist. There were handkerchiefs
in the kit, he recalled suddenly. And he remembered what the guide had
said about Aurigean air.

He tugged the kit open, fumbled and found a handkerchief. He zipped open
the closure of his helmet and tilted the helmet back. He brought up the
handkerchief, and gave himself over to the spasm.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was startled by a hoarse boom, as if someone had scraped the strings
of an amplified bull fiddle. He looked around, blinking, and discovered
that the sound was coming from the Aurigean. The monster, with its
tentacles tightly curled around the tip of its body, was scuttling into
the corridor. As Weaver watched in confusion, it vanished, and a sheet
of metal slid across the doorway.

More boomings came shortly from a source Weaver finally identified as a
grille over the control panels. He took a step that way, then changed
his mind and turned back toward the airlock.

Just as he reached the nearer airlock door, the farther one swung open
and an instant torrent of wind thrust him outward.

Strangling, Weaver grabbed desperately at the door-frame as it went by.
He swung with a sickening thud into the inner wall, but he hung on and
pulled himself back inside.

The force of the wind was dropping rapidly; so was the air pressure.
Ragged black blotches swam before Weaver's eyes. He fumbled with his
helmet, trying to swing it back over his head; but it stubbornly
remained where it was. The blow when he struck the airlock wall, he
thought dimly--it must have bent the helmet so that it would not fit
into its grooves.

He forced himself across the room, toward the faint gleam of the
Aurigean control board--shaped like a double horseshoe it was, around
the two lattice-topped stools, and bristling with levers, knobs and
sliding panels. One of these, he knew, controlled the airlock. He
slapped blindly at them, pulling, pushing, turning as many as he could
reach. Then the floor reeled under him, and, as he fell toward it,
changed into a soft gray endless mist....

       *       *       *       *       *

When he awoke, the airlock door was closed. His lungs were gratefully
full of air. The Aurigean was nowhere to be seen; the door behind which
he had disappeared was still closed.

Weaver got up, stripped off his spacesuit, and, by hammering with the
sole of one of the boots, managed to straighten out the dent in the back
of the helmet. He put the suit back on, then looked doubtfully at the
control board. It wouldn't do to go on pulling things at random; he
might cause some damage. Tentatively, he pushed a slide he remembered
touching before. When nothing happened, he pushed it back. He tried a
knob, then a lever.

The inner door of the airlock swung open.

Weaver marched into it, took one look through the viewport set in the
outer door, and scrambled back out. He closed the airlock again, and
thought a minute.

In the center of each horseshoe curve of the control board was a gray
translucent disk, with six buttons under it. They might, Weaver thought,
be television screens. He pressed the first button under one of them,
and the screen lighted up. He pressed the second button, then all the
others in turn.

They all showed him the same thing--the view he had seen from the
viewport in the airlock: stars, and nothing but stars.

The Moon, incredibly, had disappeared. He was in space.

       *       *       *       *       *
