pair of glittering eyes that stared like a pair of critics from a small
heart-shaped face. "I've been here before. Wallabies and wombats!"

"Very good, Frances."

Frances smirked at the approbation. "I've been to the zoo lots of
times," she said to the girl next to her. "My father takes me."

"I wish my father would take me too," replied the other little girl,
with an air of wistfulness.

"Why don't you ask him to?" Before the other little girl could answer,
Frances paused, cocked her head slightly, and demanded, "Who are you?
You aren't in our class."

"I'm in Miss Hassel's class."

"Miss Hassel? Who is she? Is she in our school?"

"I don't know," said the other little girl uncertainly. "I go to P. S.
77--"

"Oh, Miss Burton," screamed Frances. "Here's a girl who isn't in our
class! She got lost from her own class!"

                   *       *       *       *       *

"Really?" Miss Burton seemed rather pleased at the idea that some other
teacher had been so careless as to lose one of her charges. "What's your
name, child?"

"I'm Carolyn."

"Carolyn what?"

"Carolyn Manto. Please, Miss Burton, I had to go to the bathroom, and
then when I came out--"

"Yes, yes, I know."

A shrill cry came from another section of her class. "Oh, Miss Burton,
here's another one who's lost!"

The other little girl was pushed forward. "Now, who are _you_?" Miss
Burton asked.

"I'm Doris Palit. I went with Carolyn to the bathroom--"

                   *       *       *       *       *

Miss Burton made a sound of annoyance. Imagine losing _two_ children and
not noticing it right away. The other teacher must be frantic by now,
and serve her right for being so careless.

"All right, you may stay with us until we find a policeman--" She
interrupted herself. "Frances, what are you giggling at now?"

"It's Carolyn. She's making faces just like you!"

"Really, Carolyn, that isn't at all nice!"

Carolyn's face altered itself in a hurry, so as to lose any resemblance
to Miss Burton's. "I'm sorry, Miss Burton, I didn't really mean to do
anything wrong."

"Well, I'd like to know how you were brought up, if you don't know that
it's wrong to mimic people to their faces. A big girl like you, too. How
old are you, Carolyn?"

Carolyn shrank, she hoped imperceptibly, by an inch. "I'm two--"

An outburst of shrill laughter. "She's two years old, she's two years
old!"

"I was going to say, I'm _to_welve. Almost, anyway."

"Eleven years old," said Miss Burton. "Old enough to know better."

"I'm sorry, Miss Burton. And honest, Miss Burton, I didn't mean
anything, but I'm studying to be an actress, and I imitate people, like
the actors you see on television--"

"Oh, Miss Burton, please don't make her go home with a policeman. If
she's going to be an actress, I'll bet she'd love to see Curt George!"

"Well, after the way she's behaved, I don't know whether I should let
her. I really don't."

"Please, Miss Burton, it was an accident. I won't do it again."

"All right, if you're good, and cause no trouble. But we still have
plenty of time before seeing Mr. George. It's only two now, and we're
not supposed to go to the lecture hall until four."

"Miss Burton," called Barbara Willman, "do you think he'd give us his
autograph?"

"Now, children, I've warned you about that. You mustn't annoy him. Mr.
George is a famous movie actor, and his time is valuable. It's very kind
of him to offer to speak to us, especially when so many grown-up people
are anxious to hear him, but we mustn't take advantage of his kindness."

"But he likes children, Miss Burton! My big sister read in a movie
magazine where it said he's just crazy about them."

"I know, but--he's not in good health, children. They say he got jungle
fever in Africa, where he was shooting all those lions, and
rhinoceroses, and elephants for his new picture. That's why you mustn't
bother him too much."

"But he looks so big and strong, Miss Burton. It wouldn't hurt him to
sign an autograph!"

"Oh, yes, it would," asserted one little girl. "He shakes. When he has
an attack of fever, his hand shakes."

"Yes, Africa is a dangerous continent, and one never knows how the
