out from the center of the building. The doorway was in the side of the
gatehouse on the second floor, and to reach it one climbed a flight of
narrow stairs.

_Why plan for a siege that probably will never take place?_ Simon asked
himself.

_Because I have tried to go beyond my duty this day and accomplished
nothing. I had better be sure I can do what I am expected to do._

The door swung open as Simon reached the top step.

"Oh, you look too serious, ragazzo caro. Don't frown so--it will put
wrinkles in your smooth brow. Surely your life is not so melancholy as
all that?" Fingernails stroked his forehead and then his cheek.

Simon recognized the voice, but after the bright sunlight of the street
it took his eyes a moment to adjust to the darkness inside the doorway
and actually to see Donna Elvira, the Contessa di Monaldeschi.

She took him by the hand and led him through the inner door, which, in
the time-honored practice of fortified buildings, was set at right
angles to the outer one. The hallway that ran the length of the second
floor was dimly illuminated through the barred windows. Unlit brass oil
lamps hung at intervals from the ceiling.

"I saw you from my window and came down to let you in myself." The
contessa's nose was sharp and hooked like a falcon's beak. It might have
been handsome on a man, but it gave her an unpleasantly predatory look.
Simon felt distaste at the short silky hairs on her upper lip and
uneasiness at the bright black eyes that looked at him so greedily. She
gave off a strong smell of wine. How old was she, he wondered. At least
eighty.

He politely bowed over her bony knuckles and kissed them quickly. She
held his hand longer than necessary.

"Your greeting does me too much honor, Donna Elvira," Simon said, easing
his hand away from hers. "I was frowning because I was thinking of what
we must do to protect the ambassadors from Tartary. I am happy to see
that you have a guard posted on the roof."

"Always." The contessa held up a clenched, bejeweled fist. "But surely
you are not afraid for the emissaries. Who would want to hurt those
little brown men? No, I am ever on guard against my family's ancient
enemies, the Filippeschi."

Simon felt the boulder on his back grow a little heavier.

_Something else to worry about._

"Is it possible that the Filippeschi family might attack us here?"

The contessa nodded grimly. "They have wanted blood ever since my
retainers killed the three Filippeschi brothers--the father and the
uncles of Marco di Filippeschi, who is now their capo della famiglia.
They caught them on the road to Rome and cut off the heads of all three,
to my eternal joy. Six years ago, that was."

"My God! Why did your retainers do that?"

There was more than a little madness, Simon thought, in the bright-eyed,
toothless grin the contessa gave him. "Ah, that was to pay them back for
the death of my husband, Conte Ezzelino, twenty years ago, and my son
Gaitano, who died fighting beside him, and my nephew Ermanno, whom they
shot with an arrow from ambush twelve years ago." She held up bony
fingers, totaling up the terrible score. "They cut out my husband's
tongue and his heart."

"Horrible!" Simon exclaimed.

"Now there remain only myself and my grandnephew, Vittorio, a ragazzo of
twelve, to lead the Monaldeschi."

"What of Vittorio's mother?" Simon asked.

The contessa shrugged. "She went mad."

_Well she might_, thought Simon.

The contessa's face turned scarlet as she recounted her injuries. "Now
that canaglia Marco would surely love to finish us by killing Vittorio
and me. But he is not man enough. And one day I will cut out _his_
tongue and _his_ heart."

"Might the Filippeschi attack John and Philip, thinking it would hurt
you?" Simon asked.

The contessa thought for a moment and nodded. "Ah, that is very clever
of you. Certainly, they would treat any guest of mine as an enemy of
theirs." She smiled. "At any rate, you need not worry about protecting
the Tartars today. They are not here."

Simon felt as if a trapdoor had opened under his feet. "Where are they?"

The contessa shrugged. "Riding out in the hills. They left hours ago.
They took their own guards and the old Franciscan with them. He told me
they were restless."

_God's wounds!_

Simon remembered the bloody fight between the Venetians and the
Armenians. He remembered Giancarlo and his bravos. He thought about what
the contessa had just said about the enmity of the Filippeschi.

He pictured the mutilated bodies of the Tartars sprawled on a mountain
road.

"Did my French knights go with them?"

The contessa shrugged. "They are in the palazzo courtyard, practicing
with wooden swords."

Simon ground his teeth in rage.

_The idiots! Training themselves for some future battle while their
charges go off to face God knows what dangers!_

"Which road did the Tartars take? I must go after them."

The contessa was by now rather obviously annoyed at his lack of interest
in her. "I do not know. Perhaps Cardinal Paulus knows. He spoke to them
before they left."

Simon bade the contessa a polite good-bye. She insisted on embracing
him. He wondered if he had looked as foolish to Sophia as Donna Elvira
now appeared to him.

       *       *       *       *       *

For the second time that day Simon found himself sitting in a chair that
was too small for him. The back of this one came to an abrupt stop
halfway up his spine, and his shoulders ached even though he had been
sitting for only a few moments. He had taken off his gloves and tucked
them in his sword belt, and he sat with his fists clenched in his lap.

De Verceuil strode across the room and stood over Simon. "I may yet
demand that you be sent home. I cannot imagine why the Count of Anjou
entrusted such a stripling with a mission of this importance."

"Your Eminence may not approve of my visiting Cardinal Ugolini," Simon
said, keeping his voice firm, "but can you show me where I have done
wrong?" He did not want to talk about Ugolini; he wanted to find out
where the Tartars were. But de Verceuil had not even given him time to
ask.

"You could have gone wrong in a thousand ways," said de Verceuil,
staring down at Simon. "Both the king and Count Charles have confided in
you. Rashly, I believe. You might have revealed more about their
intentions than you should have."

Simon remembered how Ugolini had reacted at once to the idea that the
purpose of the alliance was to conquer Islam completely. Saying that
might indeed have been a blunder. He felt his face grow hot.

Discomfort and anger pushed Simon to his feet. De Verceuil had to take a
step backward.

"Why have you allowed the ambassadors to go riding in the hills with
only six men to escort them?" Simon demanded. "That is negligence, Your
Eminence. A good deal more dangerous than my visit to Cardinal Ugolini.
Where have they gone?"

De Verceuil whirled, the heavy gold cross on his chest swinging, and
paced to the mullioned window, then turned to face Simon again. His
face, a deep crimson, seemed to glow in the light that came in through
the translucent glass.

"Guarding the ambassadors is your responsibility, Count." He spoke in a
low, relentless tone. "I did not bother to inquire where they were
going. If you think they should not have gone out into the countryside,
you should have been here to stop them." His voice rose to a shout. "Not
waiting upon Cardinal Ugolini!"

Simon's face grew hot with shame. De Verceuil had him.

Even if he had not done anything wrong by visiting Ugolini, he should
have first made sure the ambassadors would be safe while he was gone. He
could have left explicit orders with Henri de Puys or with Alain de
Pirenne.

"I will go after them now." Simon started for the door.

"I have not dismissed you."

Rage boiled up within Simon. "I am the Count de Gobignon. Only the king
can command me."

De Verceuil crossed the room to thrust his face into Simon's once again.
"God can command you, young man, and the Cardinal-Archbishop of Verceuil
is God's spokesman. Have a care, or I doubt not God will show you how
fleeting is worldly rank."

_Is he trying to use God to threaten me?_ Simon thought, dumbfounded.

"If you overstep your bounds again," de Verceuil went on, "I promise you
my messenger will fly to the Count d'Anjou, demanding that you be
removed from this post. If the count must choose between you and me, I
have no doubt he will choose the more experienced head and the one more
influential with the pope."

"Do that," said Simon, his voice trembling with fury. "And I will make
my own report to the count."

He turned on his heel, and de Verceuil's shout of "What do you mean by
that?" was cut off by the slam of the heavy oak door.

       *       *       *       *       *

It seemed to Simon as if the air were filled with motes of gold. He, his
equerry, Thierry, and de Pirenne and de Puys were riding high on the
western slope of a mountain thickly clad with pines. Shadow drowned the
valley below. The horizon to the west was an undulating black
silhouette. From beyond that range, the platinum glow of the setting sun
dazzled his eyes.

"Look ahead, Monseigneur," said Alain, gripping Simon's shoulder and
pointing toward a dark green hill with a rounded top to the north.
Simon's stomach tightened as he saw a party of riders strung out along
the road. They rode in sunlight, and he recognized the flame-colored
tunics of the Armenians.

_At last_, he thought, sighing and smiling. The Tartars' party had
ridden far. He had followed their trail most of the afternoon, and found
them only now because they were coming back.

He squinted, trying to see the Tartars. He clucked to his palfrey and
spurred her lightly from a walk to a trot. His three companions did the
same.

Two carts with high sides lurched down the road behind the Armenians. A
single mule pulled the cart in front, two drew the second. A man in a
red tunic drove each cart. Where the devil were the Tartars? Bringing up
the rear of the party on the back of a donkey, he saw a figure in brown.
Friar Mathieu. Simon began to feel panic again.

"Do you see the Tartars?" he asked his men.

De Puys snorted. "They are probably too lazy to ride. They are sitting
in one of those carts, fancying themselves lords of the earth."

"Tartars think it unmanly to be carried when they can ride," Simon told
de Puys, annoyed at the old knight's ignorance.

"But I see horses without riders," Alain de Pirenne said. "Four of
them."

Simon squinted again and saw that each of four Armenians on horseback
was leading a riderless horse.

Even though it was a warm evening, he felt as if a sudden blast of cold
wind were blowing right through him. He sat frozen in the saddle.

_Dear God, are we too late?_

"Follow me," he snapped, kicking his palfrey hard.

Riding as quickly as they dared down the rocky, unfamiliar road, they
heard church bells chiming out the Angelus. The shadow cast by the hills
to the west rose to engulf them as they descended.

The Armenians had gathered on the other side of a meandering river at
the very bottom of the valley and seemed to be trying to decide where to
cross. Simon still saw no sign of the Tartars, but it was too dark to
make anyone out clearly.

In his dread he rode his horse straight into the river. She stumbled on
the rocky bed a time or two, and once plunged into a deep place where
she had to swim. It being the end of August, all the streams hereabout
were at their lowest level. Even so, when Simon got across he was soaked
up to his waist.

He saw the Armenians unslinging their bows and nocking arrows. "It is I,
de Gobignon!" he shouted. He heard Friar Mathieu call something to the
men, and they lowered their bows. Good that they were alert, he thought,
but what might have happened to them on the road to make them so?

He rode in among the Armenians, and felt a hollow pit in his stomach as
he saw the rich saddles on two of the riderless horses, silver and
mother-of-pearl inlays glistening even in the darkness of the forest.

"Simon!" Friar Mathieu, on donkeyback, called.

Simon turned to the nearest cart and looked in over the shoulder of the
driver, one of the Armenians, who stared at him from under heavy brows.

There, on a bed of straw, lay two bodies. They had the short, broad
build of the Tartar ambassadors. Simon's heart stopped beating.

"Mary, Mother of God!" Simon whispered. He got down from his horse.

Mathieu was beside him, gripping his arm. "Did you come looking for us,
Simon?"

Simon was sick with despair. He gestured feebly at the two bodies.

"What happened to them?"

"You might call it a mischance due to their inexperience. I tried to
warn them, but they would not heed me."

"Mischance? What sort of mischance?" Did it matter, Simon wondered, how
this had happened? He had failed utterly and absolutely, that was all
that counted. His foolish decision to go to Ugolini had led to this
disaster. Another stain on the house of Gobignon.

He put his hands to his face. "If only I had stayed with them this
morning."

Mathieu patted his arm. "Do not reproach yourself. No one will blame
you. It would probably have happened just the same even if you were
there."

Simon felt the old friar's words like a blow in the face. What shame, to
be thought so useless that even his presence would not have saved the
Tartars. But, he told himself, turning the knife in his own guts, it was
true. Anyone stupid enough to let something like this happen _would_
surely be useless in a moment of danger.

"Did you not know how dangerous these hills could be?" he asked.

"They were determined on a long ride," said Friar Mathieu. "Tartars are
used to vast distances and great spaces. You cannot imagine how
miserable they were feeling, cooped up in a hill town surrounded by a
wall on top of a rock. I felt sorry for them. In fact, I even feared for
their health."

Simon was indignant. "Feared for their health! The devil you say! Now
look at them."

Friar Mathieu squeezed Simon's arm. "Do not mention the devil. He may
come when you call. As for them"--he waved a hand at the two inert
forms in the cart--"this is embarrassing, to be sure, but we need not
blame ourselves."

"Embarrassing? Embarrassing! Is that all you call it?"

One of the bodies on the straw moved. As Simon stared, it lurched to its
knees. He heard a few slurred words in the guttural speech of the
Tartars. The figure crawled on hands and knees to the side of the cart,
lifted its head, and vomited loudly and copiously.

"They are not dead!" Simon cried.

"Dead drunk," said Friar Mathieu.

Relief was so sudden and stunning that for a moment Simon could not
breathe. He caught his breath and gasped. The gasp was followed by a
roar of laughter. Simon stood, his head thrown back, helpless with
laughter. He pressed his hands against his aching stomach.

Friar Mathieu had gone to attend the sick Tartar. He wiped the man's
face with the sleeve of his robe, went to the stream and washed the
sleeve, then came back and pressed the wet wool to the Tartar's brow.

"Can you not stop laughing?" he said on his second trip to the stream.
"The Armenians do not like you laughing at their masters."

"Dead drunk!" Simon shouted, and went into another spasm of laughter.

       *       *       *       *       *

It started innocently enough, Friar Mathieu explained as they rode back
together. He himself had proposed to take the road to Montefiascone,
along which he had heard there was a particularly impressive view of
Orvieto. Simon remembered the spot. He had been enjoying that same view
when David of Trebizond's servant--what was his name?--Giancarlo, came
along with those three heavily armed men.

The Tartars had been pleased enough with the view, but they wanted to
ride on. Friar Mathieu felt some trepidation that they might encounter
highwaymen in the hills. But he had confidence in the Armenians, too,
and so they pressed on along the mountain road.

"They observed everything and talked to each other in such low voices I
could not hear them." Mathieu turned to give Simon a pained look. "I
think they were discussing how an army might be brought through these
hills."

Simon was appalled. He pictured a Tartar army, tens of thousands of
fur-clad savages on horseback, sweeping through Umbria on its way to
Rome, burning the towns and the farms and slaughtering the people. Simon
shook his head in perplexity. If such a thing happened, he would have
helped to bring it about.

By the time the Tartars and their entourage reached the little town of
Montefiascone, Mathieu went on, in the heart of vineyard-covered hills,
they were all hungry and thirsty. They took over the inn--the black
looks cast by the Armenians were enough to drive out the other
patrons--and proceeded to drink up the host's considerable supply of
wine.

"The wine of Montefiascone is a great gift from God," Mathieu said.
"Very clear, almost as light as spring water, just a touch sweet, just a
touch tart. And the host brought it up from a stone cellar that kept it
deliciously cold. Not strong wine, actually, but the Tartars drank _all
there was_."

Friar Mathieu pointed to the young Armenian leader, Prince Hethum, who
was now riding beside Alain de Pirenne, at the head of their procession
back to Orvieto. The prince was carrying the Tartars' purse, now
somewhat less fat with gold florins. The host at the inn had been
delighted to serve his thirsty guests, but when his supply of wine was
gone, the Tartars turned ugly. Philip Uzbek, the younger Tartar, grabbed
the host by the throat. The Armenians, who were careful to drink
sparingly, fingered their bows. The innkeeper left his wife as a hostage
and went out to the nearby farms, and after a tense hour arrived back
with a cartload of wine barrels. This time the wine outlasted the
Tartars.

"They have no head for wine, you see," Mathieu said. "Poor innocent
world conquerors. They drink a beverage called kumiss, which is
fermented mare's milk. Very mild, but it satisfies their desire to get
drunk. When they conquered the civilized lands, for the first time they
could have as much wine as they wanted. They have an ungodly appetite
for it."

When the Tartar ambassadors collapsed, unconscious, Mathieu and the host
had both sighed with relief. With the Tartars' gold, Mathieu bought two
carts and three mules, and they loaded John Chagan and Philip Uzbek in
one and the remaining barrels of Montefiascone wine in the other.

"Montefiascone may be the only town in the world that can say it has
been invaded by Tartars and profited," said Mathieu. Simon laughed.

He had thought to bring flint, tinder, a lantern, and a supply of
candles with him, and now Thierry rode at the head of the party with the
lantern raised on the end of a long tree branch, giving them a little
light to follow. At least this way the Tartars would not go over a cliff
in their cart in the dark.

"If I could have found you this morning, I would have asked you to come
along and bring some of your Frenchmen," the old friar said. "But you
were meeting with Cardinal Ugolini, were you not?"

When Mathieu mentioned Ugolini, Simon immediately found himself thinking
of the cardinal's beautiful niece. He wondered, was she older than he?
How would she react if he tried to see her again? He wished he could
forget Tartars and crusaders and Saracens and devote himself to paying
court to Sophia. Of course, if he went anywhere near Ugolini's
establishment again, de Verceuil would undoubtedly think he was trying
to continue the forbidden negotiations.

"My efforts went badly," he told Friar Mathieu. Before going on, he
peered as far along the road ahead as he could see. De Pirenne and de
Puys were both riding at the head of the party, just behind Thierry with
his lantern. Hethum and the other Armenians came next, and they
understood no French. Simon and Friar Mathieu were at the end of the
line, behind the two carts. There was no risk in talking.

"Cardinal Ugolini nearly convinced me that our efforts to liberate the
Holy Land are futile. And then de Verceuil knew that I had gone to
Ugolini, and he was furious. How did he know where I had been?"

Friar Mathieu smiled. "He had you followed."

"That snake!"

The Franciscan reached over and laid his fragile hand lightly on
Simon's. "Hush, Simon. The cardinal will answer to God one day for his
worldly ways."

Simon shook his head. "I tell you, Friar Mathieu, between Ugolini's
persuasion and de Verceuil's bullying, I was nearly ready to leave
Orvieto today."

But he would not have left under any circumstances, he knew. Especially
not after meeting Sophia. He recalled her smoldering eyes and full red
lips. And her splendid breasts. Ah, no, he must stay in Orvieto and
become better acquainted with Sophia Orfali.




XVIII


A swollen yellow moon appeared over the treetops, and Simon was grateful
for its light. Now they would have less trouble following the road.

Friar Mathieu said, "It is not an easy thing for so young a man to match
wits with two powerful churchmen skilled in dialectic. I congratulate
you on doing it at all."

Simon felt a hollow in his stomach. He saw himself going back to France,
sneered at not only for his family's disgrace but for his own
incompetence.

"Our mission _must_ succeed," he said, clenching his fist. His voice
rose above the creak of the wagon wheels, surprising even himself with
his vehemence.

"God has His own ideas about what ought to succeed or fail," said Friar
Mathieu. "Do not try to take the whole burden on yourself."

"I must," said Simon, feeling tears burn his eyes.

The voice in the semidarkness beside him was soft, kindly. "Why _must_?"

"Because of who I am," Simon said in a low voice.

"What do you mean, Simon?"

_Can I tell him_, Simon wondered. Ever since, seven years ago, his
mother and Roland had told him the secret of his birth, questions of who
he really was, questions of right and wrong, had assailed him, and there
had been no one to ask. He loved his mother and he admired Roland, but
they were too close to it all. But to tell anyone else would bring
calamity down on all three of them.

There had been times during the years Simon had lived with King Louis
that the king had seemed ready to listen. But Simon had also known that
King Louis believed in doing right no matter whom it hurt.

Friar Mathieu, though, seemed to have more of a sense that life was not
a matter of simple rights and wrongs. He could see the Tartars for the
ferocious creatures they were, and yet feel kindly toward them. His
wisdom and worldly experience could help Simon sort things out.

Then, too, there was a way to bind Friar Mathieu never to speak of this
to anyone.

But when Simon tried to speak, his chest and throat were constricted by
fear, and his voice came out in a croak. He felt as if he were under a
spell to prevent him from uttering his family secrets.

"Father, may I confide in you under the seal of confession?"

The old Franciscan tugged on the reins of his donkey, so that they fell
farther behind the rest of the party. Simon slowed his palfrey to fall
back beside Mathieu.

"Is it truly a matter for confession, or just a secret?"

Simon's hands were so cold he pressed them against his palfrey's neck to
warm them. How could he tell everything to this priest he had known only
a few months? Perhaps he should just apologize and say no more.

But he thought a little longer and said, "It is a question of right and
wrong. And if I am doing wrong, I am committing a terribly grave sin."

Friar Mathieu looked around him. "Very well, then, what you tell me is
under the seal of the sacrament of confession, and I may repeat it to no
man, under penalty of eternal damnation. Make the sign of the cross and
begin."

Simon touched his fingertips to forehead, chest, and shoulders. For a
moment he hesitated, his mouth dry and his heart hammering. He had
promised his mother and Roland never to tell anyone about this.

_But I must! I cannot have it festering inside me for the rest of my
life._

What, though, if Friar Mathieu disappointed him? What if he had nothing
useful, or even comforting to say on learning Simon's secret? Well,
there was a way to test him.

The secret was really twofold. One part of it was terrible enough, but
already known to the king and queen and many knights who had been on the
last crusade. Simon could tell Friar Mathieu the lesser secret safely
enough, then weigh his response and decide whether to tell him what was
known to only three people in the world.

"I said I must make this mission succeed because of who I am. What have
you heard about the last Count de Gobignon?"

By now the moon had risen high, and Simon could see the old Franciscan's
face quite clearly. Friar Mathieu frowned and stroked his long white
beard.

"Very little, I am afraid. He was a very great landowner, one of the
five Peers of the Realm, as you are now, and he was zealous in putting
down the Cathar heretics in Languedoc." He cast a pained look at Simon.
"I spent the years when your father was prominent wandering the roads as
a beggar, then studying for the priesthood, and I am afraid I paid very
little attention to what was happening in the world."

Friar Mathieu's reply brought a sad smile to Simon's lips.

"That you, like most people, know so little of Amalric de Gobignon I owe
to the generosity of King Louis and those close to him. The man whose
name I inherited was a murderer, an archtraitor, a Judas. But when King
Louis came back from that failed crusade in Egypt, he decreed that Count
Amalric's deeds not be made known."

"I well remember my horror when I heard that the king was captured and
his army destroyed," said Friar Mathieu. "I fell on my knees in the
road, weeping, and prayed for him and the queen and the other captives.
What joy when we learned they were ransomed and would be coming back to
us."

"It was Count Amalric's treachery that caused the calamity." It seemed
to Simon that Nicolette, his mother, and her husband, Roland, had told
him the story hundreds of times. They wanted him to know it by heart.

"He believed that the Cathars had murdered his father, Count Stephen de
Gobignon, my grandfather," Simon went on. "King Louis advocated mercy
toward heretics. Count Amalric had a brother, Hugues, a Dominican
inquisitor, who was killed before his very eyes by an assassin's arrow
in Beziers while he was presiding over the burning of Cathars."

"Ah, those heresy-hunting Dominicans." Friar Mathieu shook his head.

"When Hugues was killed, Count Amalric blamed the king's leniency toward
heretics. After that, it seems, a madness possessed the count. He came
to believe he could overthrow the king and take his throne."

"He must have been mad," said Friar Mathieu. "Never has a King of France
been so loved as this Louis."

"Count Amalric went on crusade with King Louis, taking my mother,
Countess Nicolette, along with him, even as King Louis took Queen
Marguerite. I was a very young child then. They left me in the keeping
of my mother's sisters. The crusaders captured Damietta, at the mouth of
the Nile, left the noncombatants there and marched southward toward
Cairo."

Simon hesitated, feeling himself choke up again. These were the crimes
of the man everyone believed was his father. It was agony to give voice
to them.

But he plunged on. "At a city called Mansura, Count Amalric led part of
his own army into a trap, and most were killed. He tricked the rest of
the army, including the king, into surrendering to the Mamelukes. He
alone escaped. He went to Damietta, supposedly to take charge of the
defense. He made a secret promise to the Sultan of Cairo to deliver
Damietta, together with the ransom money, if the sultan would slay the
king and all the other captive crusaders."

Friar Mathieu gasped. "Why in God's name would a French nobleman do such
dreadful things?"

"With the king and his brothers dead, he would be the most powerful man
in France," said Simon. "He might have succeeded, but for two things.
First, the Mameluke emirs, led by the same Baibars who now rules Egypt,
rose in revolt and killed the sultan with whom Count Amalric was
bargaining. Baibars and the Mamelukes preferred to deal honorably with
their prisoners."

"Ah, yes, Baibars," Friar Mathieu nodded. "The Tartars hate him and all
of Outremer fears him."

"And then a knight-troubadour captured along with the king, one who had
an old grudge against the Count de Gobignon, offered to go to Damietta
and meet the count in single combat. After a fierce combat he slew Count
Amalric. The king and the surviving crusaders were saved and they
ransomed themselves. The troubadour's name was Roland de Vency."

"I never heard of him," said Friar Mathieu.

"No, just as you never heard of Count Amalric's treason. The king wanted
the whole episode buried in an unmarked grave along with the count."

There was silence between them for a moment. Simon listened to the cart
wheels creak and looked up at the moon painting the Umbrian hillsides
silver. Soon they would round a bend and see the lights of Orvieto.

Simon, torn by anguish, wondered what Friar Mathieu thought of him. Did
he despise him, as so many great nobles did? He remembered that Friar
Mathieu had once been a knight himself. How could he not hate a man with
Amalric de Gobignon's blood in him? His muscles knotted as he waited to
hear what Friar Mathieu would say.

He looked at the old Franciscan and saw sadness in his watery eyes.

"But what happened does not lie buried, much as the king and you would
wish it to."

Simon felt tears sting his eyes and a lump grow in his throat. He
remembered the sneers, the slights, the whispers he had endured. Such
heartbreaking moments were among his earliest memories.

He shook his head miserably. "No. What happened has never been
forgotten."

"You are ashamed of the name you bear." The kindness in Friar Mathieu's
voice evoked a warm feeling in Simon's breast.

_I was not mistaken in him._

"You are--how old--twenty?"

Simon nodded.

"At your age most men, especially those like you with vast estates and
great responsibilities, are married or at least plighted."

Pain poured out with Simon's words. "I have been rebuffed twice. The
name of de Gobignon is irrevocably tainted."

Friar Mathieu rubbed the back of his donkey's neck thoughtfully.
"Evidently the king does not think so, or he would not have honored you
with so important a task."

"He did everything possible to help me. When my mother and my
grandmother fought over who should have the rearing of me, the king
settled it by making himself my guardian and taking me to live in the
palace. Then his brother, Count Charles d'Anjou, took me for a time as
his equerry."

"Why did your mother and grandmother fight over you?"

The hollow of dread in Simon's middle grew huge. Now they were coming to
the deepest secret of all.

"My mother married the troubadour, Roland de Vency. My grandmother,
Count Amalric's mother, could never accept as a father to me the man who
slew her son."

He felt dizzy with pain, remembering his grandmother's screams of rage,
his mother's weeping, Roland facing the sword points of a dozen
men-at-arms, long, mysterious journeys, hours of doing nothing in empty
rooms while, somewhere nearby, people argued over his fate. God, it had
been horrible!

Friar Mathieu reached out from the back of his donkey and laid a
comforting hand on Simon's arm. "Ah, I understand you better now.
Carrying this family shame, fought over in childhood, no real parents to
live with. And the burden of all that wealth and power."

Simon laughed bitterly. "Burden! Few men would think wealth and power a
burden."

Friar Mathieu chuckled. "No, of course not. But you know better, do you
not? You have already realized that you must work constantly to use
rightly what you have, or it will destroy you as it destroyed your
father."

_Yes, but ..._

Simon thought of the endless fields and forests of the Gobignon domain
in the north, what pleasure it was to ride through them on the hunt. How
the unquestioning respect of vassals and serfs eased his doubts of
himself. He thought of the complaisant village and peasant girls who
happily helped him forget that no woman of noble blood would marry him.
He reminded himself that only three or four men in all the world were in
a position to tell him what to do. No, if only the name he bore were
free of the accursed stain of treachery, he would be perfectly happy to
be the Count de Gobignon.

Friar Mathieu broke in on his thoughts. "You feel you must do something
grand and noble to make up for your father's wickedness. Listen: A man
can live only his own life. The name de Gobignon, what is it? A puff of
air. A scribble on a sheet of parchment. You are not your name. You are
not Simon de Gobignon."

Simon's blood turned to ice. _Does he know?_

But then he realized Friar Mathieu was speaking only figuratively.

"But men of great families scorn me because I bear the name de
Gobignon," he said. "I will have to live out my life in disgrace."

"God respects you," said Friar Mathieu quietly and intensely. "Weighed
against that, the opinion of men is nothing."

_That is true_, Simon thought, and great chains that had weighed him
down as long as he could remember suddenly fell away. He felt himself
gasping for breath.

Friar Mathieu continued. "The beauty of my vows is that with their help
I have come to know who I truly am. I have given up my name, my
possessions, the love of women, my worldly position. You need not give
up all those things. But if you can part with them in your mind, you can
come to know yourself as God knows you. You can see that you are not
what people think of you."

Tears of joy burned Simon's eyelids. _Thank you, God, for allowing me to
meet this man._

"Yes," Simon whispered. "Yes, I understand."

"But," said Friar Mathieu, a note of light reproof in his voice, "I know
you have not told me everything."

Caught by surprise, Simon was thankful that the lantern up ahead started
swinging from right to left, a ball of light against the stars.

De Pirenne's voice came back faintly to Simon. "Orvieto!"

From the cart in front of Simon, the one carrying the Tartars, came the
sound of loud snoring. An Armenian chuckled and said something in a
humorous tone, and the others laughed. Simon pretended to be intensely
interested in what the Armenians were saying and in the view up ahead.
