that's supposed to be a salary. It's inconvenient to be so dependent,
and sometimes I regret that unfortunate market crash of 2009 that wiped
out my own money, although it did keep me from marrying Whimsy White,
and van Manderpootz, through his subjunctivisor, succeeded in proving
that that would have been a catastrophe. But it turned out nearly as
much of a disaster anyway, as far as my feelings were concerned. It took
me months to forget Joanna Caldwell and her silvery eyes. Just another
instance when I was a little late.

Van Manderpootz himself is my old Physics Professor, head of the
Department of Newer Physics at N. Y. U., and a genius, but a bit
eccentric. Judge for yourself.

"And that's the thesis," he said suddenly, interrupting my thoughts.

"Eh? Oh, of course. But what's that grinning robot got to do with it?"

He purpled. "I've just told you!" he roared. "Idiot! Imbecile! To dream
while van Manderpootz talks! Get out! Get out!"

I got. It was late anyway, so late that I overslept more than usual in
the morning, and suffered more than the usual lecture on promptness from
my father at the office.

       *       *       *       *       *

Van Manderpootz had forgotten his anger by the next time I dropped in
for an evening. The robot still stood in the corner near the window,
and I lost no time asking its purpose.

"It's just a toy I had some of the students construct," he explained.
"There's a screen of photoelectric cells behind the right eye, so
connected that when a certain pattern is thrown on them, it activates
the mechanism. The thing's plugged into the light-circuit, but it really
ought to run on gasoline."

"Why?"

"Well, the pattern it's set for is the shape of an automobile. See
here." He picked up a card from his desk, and cut in the outlines of a
streamlined car like those of that year. "Since only one eye is used,"
he continued, "The thing can't tell the difference between a full-sized
vehicle at a distance and this small outline nearby. It has no sense of
perspective."

He held the bit of cardboard before the eye of the mechanism. Instantly
came its roar of "_A-a-gh-rasp!_" and it leaped forward a single pace,
arms upraised. Van Manderpootz withdrew the card, and again the thing
relapsed stolidly into its place.

"What the devil!" I exclaimed. "What's it for?"

"Does van Manderpootz ever do work without reason back of it? I use it
as a demonstration in my seminar."

"To demonstrate what?"

"The power of reason," said van Manderpootz solemnly.

"How? And why ought it to work on gasoline instead of electric power?"

"One question at a time, Dixon. You have missed the grandeur of van
Manderpootz's concept. See here, this creature, imperfect as it is,
represents the predatory machine. It is the mechanical parallel of the
tiger, lurking in its jungle to leap on living prey. _This_ monster's
jungle is the city; its prey is the unwary machine that follows the
trails called streets. Understand?"

"No."

"Well, picture this automaton, not as it is, but as van Manderpootz
could make it if he wished. It lurks gigantic in the shadows of
buildings; it creeps stealthily through dark alleys; it skulks on
deserted streets, with its gasoline engine purring quietly. Then--an
unsuspecting automobile flashes its image on the screen behind its
eyes. It leaps. It seizes its prey, swinging it in steel arms to its
steel jaws. Through the metal throat of its victim crash steel teeth;
the blood of its prey--the gasoline, that is--is drained into its
stomach, or its gas-tank. With renewed strength it flings away the husk
and prowls on to seek other prey. It is the machine-carnivore, the tiger
of mechanics."

I suppose I stared dumbly. It occurred to me suddenly that the brain of
the great van Manderpootz was cracking. "What the--?" I gasped.

"That," he said blandly, "is but a concept. I have many another use for
the toy. I can prove anything with it, anything I wish."

"You can? Then prove something."

"Name your proposition, Dixon."

I hesitated, nonplussed.

"Come!" he said impatiently. "Look here; I will prove that anarchy is
the ideal government, or that Heaven and Hell are the same place, or
that--"

"Prove that!" I said. "About Heaven and Hell."

"Easily. First we will endow my robot with intelligence. I add a
mechanical memory by means of the old Cushman delayed valve; I add a
mathematical sense with any of the calculating machines; I give it a
voice and a vocabulary with the magnetic-impulse wire phonograph. Now
the point I make is this: Granted an intelligent machine, does it not
follow that every other machine constructed like it must have the
identical qualities? Would not each robot given the same insides have
exactly the same character?"

"No!" I snapped. "Human beings can't make two machines exactly alike.
There'd be tiny differences; one would react quicker than others, or one
would prefer Fox Airsplitters as prey, while another reacted most
vigorously to Carnecars. In other words, they'd have--_individuality_!"
I grinned in triumph.

"My point exactly," observed van Manderpootz. "You admit, then, that
this individuality is the result of imperfect workmanship. If our means
of manufacture were perfect, all robots would be identical, and this
individuality would not exist. Is that true?"

"I--suppose so."

"Then I argue that our own individuality is due to our falling short of
perfection. All of us--even van Manderpootz--are individuals only
because we are not perfect. Were we perfect, each of us would be exactly
like everyone else. True?"

"Uh--yes."

"But Heaven, by definition, is a place where all is perfect. Therefore,
in Heaven everybody is exactly like everybody else, and _therefore_,
everybody is thoroughly and completely bored! There is no torture like
boredom, Dixon, and--Well, have I proved my point?"

I was floored. "But--about anarchy, then?" I stammered.

"Simple. Very simple for van Manderpootz. See here; with a perfect
nation--that is, one whose individuals are all exactly alike, which I
