not a propelling but a deflecting force.

The second law asserts that when a force acts, the motion changes,
either in speed or in direction, or both, at a pace proportional to the
magnitude of the force, and in the same direction as that in which the
force acts. Now since it is almost solely in direction that planetary
motion alters, a deflecting force only is needed; a force at right
angles to the direction of motion, a force normal to the path.
Considering the motion as circular, a force along the radius, a radial
or centripetal force, must be acting continually. Whirl a weight round
and round by a bit of elastic, the elastic is stretched; whirl it
faster, it is stretched more. The moving mass pulls at the elastic--that
is its centrifugal force; the hand at the centre pulls also--that is
centripetal force.

The third law asserts that these two forces are equal, and together
constitute the tension in the elastic. It is impossible to have one
force alone, there must be a pair. You can't push hard against a body
that offers no resistance. Whatever force you exert upon a body, with
that same force the body must react upon you. Action and reaction are
always equal and opposite.

Sometimes an absurd difficulty is felt with respect to this, even by
engineers. They say, "If the cart pulls against the horse with precisely
the same force as the horse pulls the cart, why should the cart move?"
Why on earth not? The cart moves because the horse pulls it, and because
nothing else is pulling it back. "Yes," they say, "the cart is pulling
back." But what is it pulling back? Not itself, surely? "No, the horse."
Yes, certainly the cart is pulling at the horse; if the cart offered no
resistance what would be the good of the horse? That is what he is for,
to overcome the pull-back of the cart; but nothing is pulling the cart
back (except, of course, a little friction), and the horse is pulling it
forward, hence it goes forward. There is no puzzle at all when once you
realise that there are two bodies and two forces acting, and that one
force acts on each body.[16]

If, indeed, two balanced forces acted on one body that would be in
equilibrium, but the two equal forces contemplated in the third law act
on two different bodies, and neither is in equilibrium.

So much for the third law, which is extremely simple, though it has
extraordinarily far-reaching consequences, and when combined with a
denial of "action at a distance," is precisely the principle of the
Conservation of Energy. Attempts at perpetual motion may all be regarded
as attempts to get round this "third law."

[Illustration: FIG. 57.]

     On the subject of the _second_ law a great deal more has to be said
     before it can be in any proper sense even partially appreciated,
     but a complete discussion of it would involve a treatise on
     mechanics. It is _the_ law of mechanics. One aspect of it we must
     attend to now in order to deal with the motion of the planets, and
     that is the fact that the change of motion of a body depends solely
     and simply on the force acting, and not at all upon what the body
     happens to be doing at the time it acts. It may be stationary, or
     it may be moving in any direction; that makes no difference.

     Thus, referring back to the summary preceding Lecture IV, it is
     there stated that a dropped body falls 16 feet in the first second,
     that in two seconds it falls 64 feet, and so on, in proportion to
     the square of the time. So also will it be the case with a thrown
     body, but the drop must be reckoned from its line of motion--the
     straight line which, but for gravity, it would describe.

     Thus a stone thrown from _O_ with the velocity _OA_ would in one
     second find itself at _A_, in two seconds at _B_, in three seconds
     at _C_, and so on, in accordance with the first law of motion, if
     no force acted. But if gravity acts it will have fallen 16 feet by
     the time it would have got to _A_, and so will find itself at _P_.
     In two seconds it will be at _Q_, having fallen a vertical height
     of 64 feet; in three seconds it will be at _R_, 144 feet below _C_;
     and so on. Its actual path will be a curve, which in this case is a
     parabola. (Fig. 57.)

     If a cannon is pointed horizontally over a level plain, the cannon
     ball will be just as much affected by gravity as if it were
     dropped, and so will strike the plain at the same instant as
     another which was simply dropped where it started. One ball may
     have gone a mile and the other only dropped a hundred feet or so,
     but the time needed by both for the vertical drop will be the same.
     The horizontal motion of one is an extra, and is due to the powder.

     As a matter of fact the path of a projectile in vacuo is only
     approximately a parabola. It is instructive to remember that it is
     really an ellipse with one focus very distant, but not at infinity.
     One of its foci is the centre of the earth. A projectile is really
     a minute satellite of the earth's, and in vacuo it accurately obeys
     all Kepler's laws. It happens not to be able to complete its orbit,
     because it was started inconveniently close to the earth, whose
     bulk gets in its way; but in that respect the earth is to be
     reckoned as a gratuitous obstruction, like a target, but a target
     that differs from most targets in being hard to miss.

[Illustration: FIG. 58.]

     Now consider circular motion in the same way, say a ball whirled
     round by a string. (Fig. 58.)

     Attending to the body at _O_, it is for an instant moving towards
     _A_, and if no force acted it would get to _A_ in a time which for
     brevity we may call a second. But a force, the pull of the string,
     is continually drawing it towards _S_, and so it really finds
     itself at _P_, having described the circular arc _OP_, which may
     be considered to be compounded of, and analyzable into the
     rectilinear motion _OA_ and the drop _AP_. At _P_ it is for an
     instant moving towards _B_, and the same process therefore carries
     it to _Q_; in the third second it gets to _R_; and so on: always
     falling, so to speak, from its natural rectilinear path, towards
     the centre, but never getting any nearer to the centre.

     The force with which it has thus to be constantly pulled in towards
     the centre, or, which is the same thing, the force with which it is
     tugging at whatever constraint it is that holds it in, is
     _mv^2/r_; where _m_ is the mass of the particle, _v_ its
     velocity, and _r_ the radius of its circle of movement. This is the
     formula first given by Huyghens for centrifugal force.

     We shall find it convenient to express it in terms of the time of
     one revolution, say _T_. It is easily done, since plainly T =
     circumference/speed = _2[pi]r/v_; so the above expression for
     centrifugal force becomes _4[pi]^2mr/T^2_.

     As to the fall of the body towards the centre every microscopic
     unit of time, it is easily reckoned. For by Euclid III. 36, and
     Fig. 58, _AP.AA' = AO^2_. Take _A_ very near _O_, then _OA = vt_,
     and _AA' = 2r_; so _AP = v^2t^2/2r = 2[pi]^2r
     t^2/T^2_; or the fall per second is _2[pi]^2r/T^2_,
     _r_ being its distance from the centre, and _T_ its time of going
     once round.

     In the case of the moon for instance, _r_ is 60 earth radii; more
     exactly 60.2; and _T_ is a lunar month, or more precisely 27 days,
     7 hours, 43 minutes, and 11-1/2 seconds. Hence the moon's
     deflection from the tangential or rectilinear path every minute
     comes out as very closely 16 feet (the true size of the earth being
     used).

Returning now to the case of a small body revolving round a big one, and
assuming a force directly proportional to the mass of both bodies, and
inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them:
_i.e._ assuming the known force of gravity, it is

  _V Mm/r^2_

where _V_ is a constant, called the gravitation constant, to be
determined by experiment.

If this is the centripetal force pulling a planet or satellite in, it
must be equal to the centrifugal force of this latter, viz. (see above).

  _4[pi]^2mr/T^2

Equate the two together, and at once we get

  _r^3/T^2 = V/4[pi]^2M;_

or, in words, the cube of the distance divided by the square of the
periodic time for every planet or satellite of the system under
consideration, will be constant and proportional to the mass of the
central body.

This is Kepler's third law, with a notable addition. It is stated above
for circular motion only, so as to avoid geometrical difficulties, but
even so it is very instructive. The reason of the proportion between
_r^3_ and _T^2_ is at once manifest; and as soon as the constant _V_
became known, _the mass of the central body_, the sun in the case of a
planet, the earth in the case of the moon, Jupiter in the case of his
satellites, was at once determined.

Newton's reasoning at this time might, however, be better displayed
perhaps by altering the order of the steps a little, as thus:--

The centrifugal force of a body is proportional to _r^3/T^2_, but by
Kepler's third law _r^3/T^2_ is constant for all the planets,
reckoning _r_ from the sun. Hence the centripetal force needed to hold
in all the planets will be a single force emanating from the sun and
varying inversely with the square of the distance from that body.

Such a force is at once necessary and sufficient. Such a force would
explain the motion of the planets.

But then all this proceeds on a wrong assumption--that the planetary
motion is circular. Will it hold for elliptic orbits? Will an inverse
square law of force keep a body moving in an elliptic orbit about the
sun in one focus? This is a far more difficult question. Newton solved
it, but I do not believe that even he could have solved it, except that
he had at his disposal two mathematical engines of great power--the
Cartesian method of treating geometry, and his own method of Fluxions.
One can explain the elliptic motion now mathematically, but hardly
otherwise; and I must be content to state that the double fact is
true--viz., that an inverse square law will move the body in an ellipse
or other conic section with the sun in one focus, and that if a body so
moves it _must_ be acted on by an inverse square law.

[Illustration: FIG. 59.]

This then is the meaning of the first and third laws of Kepler. What
about the second? What is the meaning of the equable description of
areas? Well, that rigorously proves that a planet is acted on by a force
directed to the centre about which the rate of description of areas is
equable. It proves, in fact, that the sun is the attracting body, and
that no other force acts.

     For first of all if the first law of motion is obeyed, _i.e._ if no
     force acts, and if the path be equally subdivided to represent
     equal times, and straight lines be drawn from the divisions to any
     point whatever, all these areas thus enclosed will be equal,
     because they are triangles on equal base and of the same height
     (Euclid, I). See Fig. 59; _S_ being any point whatever, and _A_,
     _B_, _C_, successive positions of a body.

     Now at each of the successive instants let the body receive a
     sudden blow in the direction of that same point _S_, sufficient to
     carry it from _A_ to _D_ in the same time as it would have got to
     _B_ if left alone. The result will be that there will be a
     compromise, and it will really arrive at _P_, travelling along the
     diagonal of the parallelogram _AP_. The area its radius vector
     sweeps out is therefore _SAP_, instead of what it would have been,
     _SAB_. But then these two areas are equal, because they are
     triangles on the same base _AS_, and between the same parallels
     _BP_, _AS_; for by the parallelogram law _BP_ is parallel to _AD_.
     Hence the area that would have been described is described, and as
     all the areas were equal in the case of no force, they remain equal
     when the body receives a blow at the end of every equal interval of
     time, _provided_ that every blow is actually directed to _S_, the
     point to which radii vectores are drawn.

[Illustration: FIG. 60.]

[Illustration: FIG. 61.]

     It is instructive to see that it does not hold if the blow is any
     otherwise directed; for instance, as in Fig. 61, when the blow is
     along _AE_, the body finds itself at _P_ at the end of the second
     interval, but the area _SAP_ is by no means equal to _SAB_, and
     therefore not equal to _SOA_, the area swept out in the first
     interval.

     In order to modify Fig. 60 so as to represent continuous motion and
     steady forces, we have to take the sides of the polygon _OAPQ_,
     &c., very numerous and very small; in the limit, infinitely
     numerous and infinitely small. The path then becomes a curve, and
     the series of blows becomes a steady force directed towards _S_.
     About whatever point therefore the rate of description of areas is
     uniform, that point and no other must be the centre of all the
     force there is. If there be no force, as in Fig. 59, well and good,
     but if there be any force however small not directed towards _S_,
     then the rate of description of areas about _S_ cannot be uniform.
     Kepler, however, says that the rate of description of areas of each
     planet about the sun is, by Tycho's observations, uniform; hence
     the sun is the centre of all the force that acts on them, and there
     is no other force, not even friction. That is the moral of Kepler's
     second law.

     We may also see from it that gravity does not travel like light, so
     as to take time on its journey from sun to planet; for, if it did,
     there would be a sort of aberration, and the force on its arrival
     could no longer be accurately directed to the centre of the sun.
     (See _Nature_, vol. xlvi., p. 497.) It is a matter for accuracy of
     observation, therefore, to decide whether the minutest trace of
     such deviation can be detected, _i.e._ within what limits of
     accuracy Kepler's second law is now known to be obeyed.

     I will content myself by saying that the limits are extremely
     narrow. [Reference may be made also to p. 208.]

Thus then it became clear to Newton that the whole solar system depended
on a central force emanating from the sun, and varying inversely with
the square of the distance from him: for by that hypothesis all the laws
of Kepler concerning these motions were completely accounted for; and,
in fact, the laws necessitated the hypothesis and established it as a
theory.

Similarly the satellites of Jupiter were controlled by a force emanating
from Jupiter and varying according to the same law. And again our moon
must be controlled by a force from the earth, decreasing with the
distance according to the same law.

Grant this hypothetical attracting force pulling the planets towards
the sun, pulling the moon towards the earth, and the whole mechanism of
the solar system is beautifully explained.

If only one could be sure there was such a force! It was one thing to
calculate out what the effects of such a force would be: it was another
to be able to put one's finger upon it and say, this is the force that
actually exists and is known to exist. We must picture him meditating in
his garden on this want--an attractive force towards the earth.

If only such an attractive force pulling down bodies to the earth
existed. An apple falls from a tree. Why, it does exist! There is
gravitation, common gravity that makes bodies fall and gives them their
weight.

Wanted, a force tending towards the centre of the earth. It is to hand!

It is common old gravity that had been known so long, that was perfectly
familiar to Galileo, and probably to Archimedes. Gravity that regulates
the motion of projectiles. Why should it only pull stones and apples?
Why should it not reach as high as the moon? Why should it not be the
gravitation of the sun that is the central force acting on all the
planets?

Surely the secret of the universe is discovered! But, wait a bit; is it
discovered? Is this force of gravity sufficient for the purpose? It must
vary inversely with the square of the distance from the centre of the
earth. How far is the moon away? Sixty earth's radii. Hence the force of
gravity at the moon's distance can only be 1/3600 of what it is on the
earth's surface. So, instead of pulling it 16 ft. per second, it should
pull it 16/3600 ft. per second, or 16 ft. a minute.[17] How can one
decide whether such a force is able to pull the moon the actual amount
required? To Newton this would seem only like a sum in arithmetic. Out
with a pencil and paper and reckon how much the moon falls toward the
earth in every second of its motion. Is it 16/3600? That is what it
ought to be: but is it? The size of the earth comes into the
calculation. Sixty miles make a degree, 360 degrees a circumference.
This gives as the earth's diameter 6,873 miles; work it out.

The answer is not 16 feet a minute, it is 13.9 feet.

Surely a mistake of calculation?

No, it is no mistake: there is something wrong in the theory, gravity is
too strong.

Instead of falling toward the earth 5-1/3 hundredths of an inch every
second, as it would under gravity, the moon only falls 4-2/3 hundredths
of an inch per second.

With such a discovery in his grasp at the age of twenty-three he is
disappointed--the figures do not agree, and he cannot make them agree.
Either gravity is not the force in action, or else something interferes
with it. Possibly, gravity does part of the work, and the vortices of
Descartes interfere with it.

He must abandon the fascinating idea for the time. In his own words, "he
laid aside at that time any further thought of the matter."

So far as is known, he never mentioned his disappointment to a soul. He
might, perhaps, if he had been at Cambridge, but he was a shy and
solitary youth, and just as likely he might not. Up in Lincolnshire, in
the seventeenth century, who was there for him to consult?

True, he might have rushed into premature publication, after our
nineteenth century fashion, but that was not his method. Publication
never seemed to have occurred to him.

His reticence now is noteworthy, but later on it is perfectly
astonishing. He is so absorbed in making discoveries that he actually
has to be reminded to tell any one about them, and some one else always
has to see to the printing and publishing for him.

I have entered thus fully into what I conjecture to be the stages of
this early discovery of the law of gravitation, as applicable to the
heavenly bodies, because it is frequently and commonly misunderstood. It
is sometimes thought that he discovered the force of gravity; I hope I
have made it clear that he did no such thing. Every educated man long
before his time, if asked why bodies fell, would reply just as glibly as
they do now, "Because the earth attracts them," or "because of the force
of gravity."

His discovery was that the motions of the solar system were due to the
action of a central force, directed to the body at the centre of the
system, and varying inversely with the square of the distance from it.
This discovery was based upon Kepler's laws, and was clear and certain.
It might have been published had he so chosen.

But he did not like hypothetical and unknown forces; he tried to see
whether the known force of gravity would serve. This discovery at that
time he failed to make, owing to a wrong numerical datum. The size of
the earth he only knew from the common doctrine of sailors that 60 miles
make a degree; and that threw him out. Instead of falling 16 feet a
minute, as it ought under gravity, it only fell 13.9 feet, so he
abandoned the idea. We do not find that he returned to it for sixteen
years.




LECTURE VIII

NEWTON AND THE LAW OF GRAVITATION


We left Newton at the age of twenty-three on the verge of discovering
the mechanism of the solar system, deterred therefrom only by an error
in the then imagined size of the earth. He had proved from Kepler's laws
that a centripetal force directed to the sun, and varying as the inverse
square of the distance from that body, would account for the observed
planetary motions, and that a similar force directed to the earth would
account for the lunar motion; and it had struck him that this force
might be the very same as the familiar force of gravitation which gave
to bodies their weight: but in attempting a numerical verification of
this idea in the case of the moon he was led by the then received notion
that sixty miles made a degree on the earth's surface into an erroneous
estimate of the size of the moon's orbit. Being thus baffled in
obtaining such verification, he laid the matter aside for a time.

The anecdote of the apple we learn from Voltaire, who had it from
Newton's favourite niece, who with her husband lived and kept house for
him all his later life. It is very like one of those anecdotes which are
easily invented and believed in, and very often turn out on scrutiny to
have no foundation. Fortunately this anecdote is well authenticated, and
moreover is intrinsically probable; I say fortunately, because it is
always painful to have to give up these child-learnt anecdotes, like
Alfred and the cakes and so on. This anecdote of the apple we need not
resign. The tree was blown down in 1820 and part of its wood is
preserved.

I have mentioned Voltaire in connection with Newton's philosophy. This
acute critic at a later stage did a good deal to popularise it
throughout Europe and to overturn that of his own countryman Descartes.
Cambridge rapidly became Newtonian, but Oxford remained Cartesian for
fifty years or more. It is curious what little hold science and
mathematics have ever secured in the older and more ecclesiastical
University. The pride of possessing Newton has however no doubt been the
main stimulus to the special pursuits of Cambridge.

He now began to turn his attention to optics, and, as was usual with
him, his whole mind became absorbed in this subject as if nothing else
had ever occupied him. His cash-book for this time has been discovered,
and the entries show that he is buying prisms and lenses and polishing
powder at the beginning of 1667. He was anxious to improve telescopes by
making more perfect lenses than had ever been used before. Accordingly
he calculated out their proper curves, just as Descartes had also done,
