collie is but I have fun with Bobby all the time. Sometimes he lets me
ride on his back and we talk to each other and have secrets even though
I don't think he is very smart. I don't know why mommy and daddy don't
understand me when I talk to them the way I talk to Bobby but maybe they
just pretend they can't hear me talk that way.

I am always sorry when daddy goes to work in the morning. Daddy is nice
to me most times and takes me and Bobby for walks. But mommy never takes
me for walks and when we are alone she is busy and she isn't nice to me.
Sometimes she says I am a bad boy and makes me stay in my room even when
I haven't done anything bad and sometimes she thinks things in her head
that she doesn't say to me. I don't know why mommy doesn't like me and
Bobby doesn't know either, but we like it best when mommy lets us go
outdoors to play in the barn or down by the creek. If I get my feet wet
mommy says I am very bad so I stay on the bank and let Bobby go in, but
one day when Bobby went into the water just before we went home for
supper mommy scolded me and told me I was bad for letting Bobby go into
the water and when I told her she hadn't told me not to let Bobby go in
she was angry and I could tell that she didn't like me at all that day.

Almost every day I do something that mommy says is bad even when I try
specially to be good. Sometimes right after daddy goes away in the
morning I know that mommy is angry and is going to spank me sooner or
later that day because she is already thinking how she will spank me,
but she never says so out loud. Sometimes she pretends that she's not
angry and takes me up on her lap and says I'm her nice little boy but
all the time I can hear her thinking that she doesn't really like me
even when she tries and she doesn't even want to touch me if she can
help it. I can hear her wondering why my hair doesn't grow nice like the
Bennet twins that live up the road. I don't see how mommy can be saying
one thing out loud and something else inside her head at the same time
but when I look at her she puts me down and says she's busy and will I
get out from underfoot, and then pretty soon I do something that makes
her angry and she makes me go to my room or she spanks me. Bobby doesn't
like this. Once when she spanked me he growled at mommy, and mommy
chased him outdoors with a broom before she sent me to bed. I cried all
day that day because it was cold outdoors and I wanted to have Bobby
with me.

I wonder why mommy doesn't like me?

       *       *       *       *       *

One day I was a bad boy and let Bobby come into the house before mommy
told me I could. Bobby hadn't done anything bad but mommy hit him on the
back with the broom and hurt him and chased him back outdoors and then
she told me I was a very bad boy. I could tell that she was going to
spank me and I knew she would hurt me because she was so big, and I ran
upstairs and hid in my room. Then mommy stamped her foot hard and said
Jimmy you come down here this minute. I didn't answer and then she said
if I have to come upstairs and get you I'll whip you until you can't sit
down, and I still didn't answer because mommy hurts me when she gets
angry like that. Then I heard her coming up the stairs and into my room
and she opened the closet door and found me. I said please don't hurt me
mommy but she reached down and caught my ear and dragged me out of the
closet. I was so scared I bit her hand and she screamed and let go and
I ran and locked myself in the bathroom because I knew she would hurt me
bad if I didn't. I stayed there all day long and I could hear mommy
running the sweeper downstairs and I couldn't see why she wanted to hurt
me so much just because I let Bobby come in before she told me I could.
But somehow it seemed that mommy was afraid of me even though she was so
big and strong. I don't see why anybody as big as mommy should be afraid
of me but she was.

When daddy came home that night I heard him talking to mommy, and then
he came up to the bathroom and said open the door Jimmy I want to talk
to you. I said I want Bobby first so he went down and called Bobby and
then I opened the door and came out of the bathroom. Daddy reached down
and lifted me high up on his shoulder and took me into my bedroom and
just sat there for a long time patting Bobby's head and I couldn't hear
what he was thinking very well. Finally he said out loud Jimmy you've
got to be good to your mommy and do what she says and not lock yourself
up in rooms any more. I said but mommy was going to hurt me and daddy
said when you're a bad boy your mommy has to punish you so you'll
remember to be good, but she doesn't like to spank you. She only does it
because she loves you.

I knew that wasn't true because mommy likes to punish me but I didn't
dare say that to daddy. Daddy isn't afraid of me the way mommy is and he
