"Well?" I said.

"You are sparing of words, Haljan. By the devils of the airways, I could
make you talk! But I want to be friendly."

       *       *       *       *       *

I handed him back the scrolls. I stood up; I was almost within reach of
his weapon, but with a sweep of his great arm he abruptly knocked me
back to my bunk.

"You dare?" Then he smiled. "Let us not come to blows!"

"No," I said. I returned his smile. In truth, physical violence could
get me nothing in dealing with this fellow. I would have to try guile.
And I saw now that his face was flushed and his eyes unnaturally bright.
He had been drinking alcolite; not enough to befuddle him--but enough to
make him triumphantly talkative.

"Hahn may not be much of a mathematician," I suggested. "But there is
your Sir Arthur Coniston." I managed a sarcastic grin. "Is that his
name?"

"Almost. Haljan, will you verify these figures?"

"Yes. But why? Where are we going?"

He laughed. "You are afraid I will not tell you! Why should I not? This
great adventure of mine is progressing perfectly. A tremendous stake,
Haljan. A hundred millions of dollars in gold-leaf; there will be
fabulous riches for us all, when that radium ore is sold for a hundred
million in gold-leaf."

"But where are we going?"

"To that asteroid," he said abruptly. "I must get rid of these
passengers. I am no murderer."

       *       *       *       *       *

With half a dozen killings in the recent fight this was hardly
convincing. But he was obviously wholly serious. He seemed to read my
thoughts.

"I kill only when necessary. We will land upon the asteroid. A perfect
place to maroon the passengers. Is it not so? I will give them the
necessities of life. They will be able to signal. And in a month or so,
when we are safely finished with our adventure, a police ship no doubt
will rescue them."

"And then, from the asteroid," I suggested, "we are going--"

"To the Moon, Haljan. What a clever guesser you are! Coniston and Hahn
are calculating our course. But I have no great confidence in them. And
so I want you."

"You have me."

"Yes. I have you. I would have killed you long ago--I am an impulsive
fellow--but my sister restrained me."

He gazed at me slyly. "Moa seems strangely to like you, Haljan."

"Thanks," I said. "I'm flattered."

"She still hopes I may really win you to join us," he went on.
"Gold-leaf is a wonderful thing; there would be plenty for you in this
affair. And to be rich, and have the love of a woman like Moa...."

He paused. I was trying cautiously to gauge him, to get from him all the
information I could. I said, with another smile, "That is premature, to
talk of Moa. I will help you chart your course. But this venture, as you
call it, is dangerous. A police-ship--"

"There are not many," he declared. "The chances of us encountering one
is very slim." He grinned at me. "You know that as well as I do. And we
now have those code pass-words--I forced Dean to tell me where he had
hidden them. If we should be challenged, our pass-word answer will
relieve suspicion."

"The _Planetara_," I objected, "being overdue at Ferrok-Shahn, will
cause alarm. You'll have a covey of patrol-ships after you."

"That will be two weeks from now," he smiled. "I have a ship of my own
in Ferrok-Shahn. It lies there waiting now, manned and armed. I am
hoping that, with Dean's help, we may be able to flash it a signal. It
will join us on the Moon. Fear not for the danger, Haljan. I have great
interests allied with me in this thing. Plenty of money. We have planned
carefully."

       *       *       *       *       *

He was idly fingering his cylinder; his gaze roved me as I sat docile on
my bunk. "Did you think George Prince was a leader of this? A mere boy.
I engaged him a year ago--his knowledge of ores is valuable."

My heart was pounding, but I strove not to show it. He went on calmly.

"I told you I am impulsive. Half a dozen times I have nearly killed
George Prince, and he knows it." He frowned. "I wish I had killed him,
instead of his sister. That was an error."

There was a note of real concern in his voice. Did he love Anita Prince?
It seemed so.

He added, "That is done--nothing can change it. George Prince is helpful
to me. Your friend Dean is another. I had trouble with him, but he is
docile now."

I said abruptly, "I don't know whether your promise means anything or
not, Miko. But George Prince said you would use no more torture."

"I won't. Not if you and Dean obey me."

"You tell Dean I have agreed to that. You say he gave you the code-words
we took from Johnson?"

"Yes. There was a fool! That Johnson! You blame me, Haljan, for the
killing of Captain Carter? You need not. Johnson offered to try and
capture you. Take you alive. He killed Carter because he was angry at
him. A stupid, vengeful fool! He is dead, and I am glad of it."

       *       *       *       *       *

My mind was on Miko's plans. I ventured. "This treasure on the Moon--did
you say it was on the Moon?"

"Don't be an idiot," he retorted. "I know as much about Grantline as you
do."

"That's very little."

"Perhaps."

"Perhaps you know more, Miko. The Moon is a big place. Where, for
instance, is Grantline located?"

I held my breath. Would he tell me that? A score of questions--vague
plans--were in my mind. How skilled at mathematics were these brigands?
Miko, Hahn, Coniston--could I fool them? If I could learn Grantline's
location on the Moon, and keep the _Planetara_ away from it. A pretended
error of charting. Time lost--and perhaps Snap could find an opportunity
to signal Earth, get help.

Miko answered my question as bluntly as I asked it. "I don't know where
Grantline is located. But we will find out. He will not suspect the
_Planetara_. When we get close to the Moon, we will signal and ask him.
We can trick him into telling us. You think I do not know what is on
your mind, Haljan? There is a secret code of signals arranged between
Dean and Grantline. I have forced Dean to confess it. Without torture!
Prince helped me in that. He persuaded Dean not to defy me. A very
persuasive fellow, George Prince. More diplomatic than I am, I give him
credit."

I strove to hold my voice calm. "If I should join you, Miko--my word, if
I ever gave it, you would find dependable--I would say George Prince is
very valuable to us. You should rein your temper. He is half your
size--you might some time, without intention do him injury."

       *       *       *       *       *

He laughed. "Moa says so. But have no fear--"

"I was thinking," I persisted, "I'd like to have a talk with George
Prince."

Ah, my pounding, tumultuous heart! But I was smiling calmly. And I
tried to put into my voice a shrewd note of cupidity. "I really know
very little about this treasure, Miko. If there were a million or two of
gold-leaf in it for me--"

"Perhaps there would be."

"I was thinking. Suppose you let me have a talk with Prince? I have some
knowledge of radium ores. His skill and mine--a calculation of what
Grantline's treasure may really be. You don't know; you are only
assuming."

I paused. Whatever may have been in Miko's mind I cannot say. But
abruptly he stood up. I had left my bunk, but he waved me back.

"Sit down. I am not like Moa. I would not trust you just because you
protested you would be loyal." He picked up his cylinder. "We will talk
again." He gestured to the scrolls he had left upon my desk. "Work on
those. I will judge you by the results."

He was no fool, this brigand leader.

"Yes," I agreed. "You want a true course now to the asteroid?"

"Yes. I will get rid of these passengers. Then we will plan further. Do
your best, Haljan--no error! By the Gods, I warn you I can check up on
you!"

I said meekly, "Very well. But you ask Prince if he wants my
calculations of Grantline's ore-body."

I shot Miko a foxy look as he stood by my door. I added, "You think you
are clever. There is plenty you don't know. Our first night out from the
Earth--Grantline's signals--didn't it ever occur to you that I might
have some figures on his treasure?"

It startled him. "Where are they?"

I tapped my forehead. "You don't suppose I was foolish enough to record
them. You ask Prince if he wants to talk to me. A high thorium content
in ore--you ask Prince. A hundred millions, or two hundred. It would
make a big difference, Miko."

"I will think about it." He backed out and sealed the door upon me once
again.

       *       *       *       *       *

But Anita did not come. I verified Hahn's figures, which were very
nearly correct. I charted a course for the asteroid; it was almost the
one which had been set.

Coniston came for my results. "I say, we are not so bad as navigators,
are we? I think we're jolly good, considering our inexperience. Not bad
at all, eh?"

"No."

I did not think it wise to ask him about Prince.

"Are you hungry, Haljan?" he demanded.

"Yes."

A steward came with a meal. The saturnine Hahn stood at my door with a
weapon upon me while I ate. They were taking no chances--and they were
wise not to.

The day passed. Day and night, all the same of aspect here in the starry
vault of Space. But with the ship's routine it was day.

And then another time of sleep. I slept, fitfully, worrying, trying to
plan. Within a few hours we would be nearing the asteroid.

The time of sleep was nearly passed. My chronometer marked five A. M. of
our original Earth starting time. The seal of my cubby door hissed. The
door slowly, opened.

Anita!

She stood there with her cloak around her. A distance away on the
shadowed deck-space Coniston was loitering.

"Anita!" I whispered it.

"Gregg, dear!"

She turned and gestured to the watching brigand. "I will not be long,
Coniston."

She came in and half closed the door upon us, leaving it open enough so
that we could make sure that Coniston did not advance.

I stepped back where he could not see us.

"Anita!"

She flung herself into my opened arms.




CHAPTER XV

_The Masquerader_


A moment when beyond all thought of the nearby brigand--or the
possibility of an eavesdropping ray trained now upon my little cubby--a
moment while Anita and I held each other; and whispered those things
which could mean nothing to the world, but which were all the world to
us.

Then it was she whose wits brought us back from the shining fairyland of
our love, into the sinister reality of the _Planetara_.

"Gregg, if they are listening--"

I pushed her away. This brave little masquerader! Not for my life, or
for all the lives on the ship, would I consciously have endangered her.

"But the ore," I said aloud. "There was, in Grantline's message--See
here, Prince."

Coniston was too far away on the deck to hear us. Anita went to my door
again and waved at him reassuringly. I put my ear to the door opening,
and listened at the space across the grid of the ventilator over my
bunk. The hum of a vibration would have been audible at those two
points. But there was nothing.

"It's all right," I whispered. "Anita--not you who was killed! I can
hardly realize it now. Not you whom they buried yesterday morning."

We stood and whispered, and she clung to me--so small beside me. With
the black robe thrown aside, it seemed that I could not miss the curves
of her woman's figure. A dangerous game she was playing. Her hair had
been cut short to the base of her neck, in the fashion of her dead
brother. Her eyelashes had been clipped; the line of her brows altered.
And now, in the light of my ray tube as it shone upon her earnest face,
I could remark other changes. Glutz, the little beauty specialist, was
in this secret. With plastic skill he had altered the set of her jaw
with his wax--put masculinity there.

She was whispering: "It was--was poor George whom Miko shot."

       *       *       *       *       *

I had now the true version of what had occurred. Miko had been forcing
his wooing upon Anita. George Prince was a weakling whose only good
quality was a love for his sister. Some years ago he had fallen into
evil ways. Been arrested, and then discharged from his position with the
Federated Radium Corporation. He had taken up with evil companions in
Great-New York. Mostly Martians. And Miko had met him. His technical
knowledge, his training with the Federated Corporation, made him
valuable to Miko's enterprise. And so Prince had joined the brigands.

Of all this, Anita had been unaware. She had never liked Miko. Feared
him. And it seemed that the Martian had some hold upon her brother,
which puzzled and frightened Anita.

Then Miko had fallen in love with her. George had not liked it. And that
night on the _Planetara_, Miko had come and knocked upon Anita's door.
Incautiously she opened it; he forced himself in. And when she repulsed
him, struggled with him, George had been awakened.

She was whispering to me now. "My room was dark. We were all three
struggling. George was holding me--the shot came--and I screamed."

And Miko had fled, not knowing whom his shot had hit in the darkness.

"And when George died, Captain Carter wanted me to impersonate him. We
planned it with Dr. Frank, to try and learn what Miko and the others
