
"What does that lead to?"

"I have described the composition of lead, the densest known element,
over thirteen times as heavy as water, bulk for bulk. Conceive what it
would mean if some force could compress together these widely
separated particles until they touched. The resulting substance would
be an element of almost inconceivable density. Such a condition is
approached in the stars, some of which are as high as four thousand
times as dense as the earth. What Saranoff has done is to find some
way of compressing together the atoms into that yellow powder which we
found in the cavern. He has not gone to the limit, for the stuff is
only a little over four thousand times as dense as water. A cubic inch
of it weighs one hundred and thirty-two pounds. With its density
increased to that extent, the volume is reduced accordingly. That was
what accounted for those caverns into which the earth tumbled."

"I'll believe you, Doctor," replied the detective; "but I'd believe
you just as quickly if you swore that the moon was made of cream
cheese made from the milk taken from the milky way. One would be just
as understandable to me as the other."

       *       *       *       *       *

They were interrupted by the entrance of a waiter who bore a huge pot
of steaming coffee. Dr. Bird's eyes lighted up as a cup was poured.
Carnes knew enough not to interrupt while the doctor poured and drank
eight cups of the strong black fluid. As he drank, the lines of
fatigue disappeared from the scientist's face. He sat up as fresh as
though he had not been working at high pressure the entire night.

"Dr. Fisher tells me that the amount of caffeine I drink would kill a
horse," he said with a chuckle; "but sometimes it is needed. I feel
better now. Let's get to work."

"What shall we do?"

"Despite Saranoff's words, it must be possible to trace him. He is
undoubtedly releasing his energy from some form of subterranean borer,
and such a thing can be located. The energy he uses must set up
electrical disturbances which instruments will detect. I have had work
started on a number of ultra-sensitive wave detectors which will
record any wave-length from zero to five millimeters. We'll send them
to various points along the seacoast. They ought to pick up the stray
waves from the energy he is using to blast a path through the earth.
I'm not going to bother with the waves from his motor; they may be of
any wave-length, and there would be constant false alarms. I have
another idea."

"What is it?"

"I am judging Saranoff from his previous actions. You remember that he
used a submarine in that alien-smuggling scheme the Coast Guard broke
up, and also when he loosed that sea monster on the Atlantic shipping?
He seems to be rather fond of submarines."

"Well?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"The amount of energy he uses must be almost inconceivable," Dr. Bird
went on. "He can hardly carry an amount of fuel which will enable him
to bore underground for very many miles, Charleston is on the coast. I
have an idea that he uses a submarine to transport his borer from
point to point. After using the borer he must return to the submarine
for recharging and transportation to the point where he plans to
strike next. I already have two hundred planes scouring the sea
looking for such a craft."

"Where do you expect him to strike next?"

"I have no idea. New York and Washington will undoubtedly be targets
eventually, but neither of them may be next. Meanwhile, would you like
to do a little more flying?"

"Surely."

"A plane is waiting for us at Langley Field. I want to look over the
coast in the vicinity of Charleston Harbor and some of the sounds near
there. If he is using a sub, he must have a base somewhere."

       *       *       *       *       *

With a competent pilot at the stick, Carnes and the Doctor spent the
day in exploring. The day yielded no results, and with the coming of
dusk they landed at Savannah for the night. Carnes talked with Bolton
over the telephone, but the secret service chief could report no
favorable progress. Tired and disgusted, they retired early, but they
were not destined to enjoy a night of uninterrupted sleep. At one
o'clock a telegram was brought to their room. Dr. Bird tore it open
and glanced sleepily at it.

"Get up, Carnes," he cried sharply. "Read this!"

The yawning detective glanced at the telegram. It contained only two
words and a signature. It was signed "Ivan," and read simply, "Watch
Wilmington."

"What the dickens?" he exclaimed as he studied the yellow slip. Dr.
Bird was hurriedly pulling on his clothes.

"Saranoff has slipped a cog this time," said the doctor. "He sent that
as a night message, but it was delivered as a straight message through
error. He has got further north than I expected. We will turn out our
pilot and take off. We should make Wilmington by daybreak. I'll
telephone Washington and have a couple of destroyers started up
Delaware Bay at once. We ought to give him a first class surprise
party. I suppose that Philadelphia was meant to be his next stop."

In an hour the army plane took off into the night. At seven o'clock
they were circling over Wilmington. The city had not been disturbed.
For an hour they flew back and forth before they landed. Startling
news awaited them. At six that morning an earthquake had struck
Wilmington, North Carolina. Half the town had sunk into the earth. Dr.
Bird struck his brow with his clenched fist.

"Score one for the enemy," he said grimly. "We were too sure of
ourselves, Carnes. We should have realized that he would hardly be so
far north yet. Well, I've got to use the telephone while we're
refueling."

       *       *       *       *       *

Within an hour after landing they were again in the air One o'clock
found them over the stricken city. Dr. Bird wasted no time on
Wilmington but headed north along the coast. For a hundred miles he
skirted the shore, two miles out. With an exclamation of
disappointment he ordered the pilot to turn the plane and retrace his
route southward, keeping ten miles from the shore. Fifty miles south
he ordered the plane further out and again turned north. From time to
time they passed a ship of the air patrol which was steadily skirting
the coast, but none of them had seen a submarine. Off Cape Hatteras
the pilot asked for orders.

"The gas is running low. Doctor," he said. "I think we had better put
in somewhere and refuel. If we are going to keep the air much longer,
you had better get a relief pilot. I have been flying for thirty hours
out of the last thirty-six and I'm about done."

"Head back for Washington," said the doctor with a sigh. "I seem to
have gone off on a false scent."

At Cape Charles the pilot swung east over Chesapeake Bay. Hardly had
he turned than Dr. Bird gave a cry. Excitedly he pointed toward the
water. Carnes grasped a pair of binoculars and looked in the
direction Dr. Bird was indicating. Sliding along under the water was
a long cigar-shaped shadow.

"It's a submarine!" exclaimed Carnes. "Is it a navy ship or the one
we're after?"

"It's no navy sub," said the doctor positively. "It's not the right
shape. Look at that bump on the side!"

The symmetry of the craft was marred by a huge projection on one side
that could not be explained by the pattern of any known type of
under-water craft.

"He's towing the borer!" cried the doctor in exultation. He took up
the speaking tube. "Turn back to sea!" he cried. "We passed four
destroyers less than ten miles out. We want to get in touch with
them."

The plane roared out to sea while Dr. Bird feverishly sounded the
"Alnav" call on the radio sending set. In a few minutes an answer
came. From their point of vantage they could see flags break out at
the peak of the destroyer leader. The four ships turned into column
formation and stormed at full speed into the bay. The plane raced
ahead to guide them.

"We've got him this time, Doctor!" cried Carnes in exultation. He
pointed to the bay below where the submarine was still making its way
slowly forward. Dr. Bird shook his head.

"I hope so," he said, "but I have my doubts. Saranoff is no fool. He
wouldn't walk into a trap like this unless he had some means of
escape. Here comes the first destroyer. We'll soon know the truth."

       *       *       *       *       *

With the radio set he directed the oncoming boat. The destroyer
reduced to half speed and changed direction slightly. From side to
side she maneuvered until she was less than half a mile behind the
submarine and headed straight for it. Dr. Bird tapped a few words on
his key. With a belch of smoke, the destroyer lurched forward. She
cut the waters with her sharp bow, throwing up a wave higher than her
decks. Dr. Bird watched anxiously.

The destroyer was almost over the submarine and Dr. Bird's fingers
trembled on the key. One word from him would send a half dozen depth
charges into the water. On came the destroyer until it was directly
over the underseas craft. Dr. Bird pounded his key rapidly.

"Good Lord!" cried Carnes.

From the bump on the side of the submarine came a flash of red light.
The destroyer staggered for a moment, and the entire central section
of the ill-fated ship disappeared. The bow and stern came together
with a rush and went down in a swirling maelstrom of water. The plane
lurched in the air as a thundering crash rose from the sea.

The second destroyer, in no way daunted by the fate of her colleague,
rushed to the attack. Dr. Bird pounded his key frantically in an
attempt to turn her back. His message was too late or was
misunderstood. Straight over the submarine went the second ship. Again
came the red flash. The forward half of the destroyer disappeared and
the stern slid down into a huge hole which had opened in the water.

"He's invulnerable!" cried the doctor. He pounded his key with
feverish rapidity. The two remaining destroyers slackened speed and
veered off. Slowly, as though loath to turn their backs on the enemy,
they headed out for the broad Atlantic and comparative safety.

The submarine went slowly on her way. She did not turn west at the
mouth of the Potomac but continued on up the bay. As long as there was
light enough, the doctor's plane kept above her but the fading light
soon made it impossible to see her. When she had disappeared from
view, the doctor reluctantly gave the word to return to Washington.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Where do you suppose he will attack next, Doctor?" asked Carnes when
they sat again in the doctor's private laboratory.

"Washington, of course," said Dr. Bird absently as he looked up from a
pile of telegrams he was running through.

"Why Washington?"

"Use your head. Representatives of every civilized power are in
Washington now at the President's invitation to consider means of
halting the anti-religious activities of the Soviets. The destruction
of the city and the killing of these men would be a telling blow for
Russia to strike."

"But, Doctor, you don't think--"

"Excuse me, Carnes; that will keep. Let me read these telegrams."

For half an hour silence reigned in the laboratory. Dr. Bird laid down
the last message with a sigh.

"Carnes," he said, "I'm check-mated. I sent out a hundred
ultra-sensitive short wave receivers yesterday. Four of them were
located within fifty miles of Wilmington, North Carolina. One of these
four was destroyed, but none of the others detected a sign of a wave
during the attack. One of them was within a hundred feet of the edge
of the hole. If he isn't using a ray of some sort, what on earth is he
using?"

"It looked like a flash of red light when it came from the submarine."

"Yes, but it couldn't be light. Let me think."

The doctor sat for a few minutes with corrugated brows. Suddenly he
sprang to his feet.

"I deserve to be beaten," he cried. "Why didn't I think of that
possibility before?"

       *       *       *       *       *

He hurried into his laboratory and brought out a small box with a
glass front. From the top projected a spike topped with a ball.
Through the glass, Carnes could see a thin sheet of metal hanging
pendant from the spike.

"An electroscope," explained the doctor. "That sheet of metal is
really two sheets of gold-leaf, at present stuck together. If I rub a
piece of hard rubber with a woolen cloth, the rod will become charged
with static electricity. If I then touch the ball with it, the charge
is transferred to the electroscope and causes the two sheets of
gold-leaf to stand apart at an angle. Watch me."

He took a hard rubber rod and rubbed it briskly on his coat sleeve. As
he touched the ball of the electroscope the sheets of gold-leaf
separated and stood apart at a right angle.

"As long as the air remains non-conducting, the two bits of gold-leaf
will hold that position. The air, however, is not a perfect insulator
and the charge will gradually leak off. If I bring a bit of
radioactive substance, for instance, pitchblende, near the
electroscope, the charge will leak rapidly. Do you understand?"

"Yes, but how is that going to help us?"

"Saranoff is accomplishing his result by artificially compressing the
atoms. It is inevitable that he will do it imperfectly, and some
electrons will be loosened and escape. These electrons, traveling up
through the earth will make the air conducting. To-morrow we will have
a means of locating the borer under ground."

"Once you locate it, how will you fight it?"

"That is the problem I must work out to-night."

"Could we bury a charge of explosive and blow it up?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Ordinary explosives would be useless," the doctor answered. "They
would react in the same manner as other substances, and would be
rendered harmless. Radite might do the work if it could be placed in
the path, but it couldn't be. We may locate the position and depth of
the borer, but long before we could dig and blast a hole deep enough
to place a charge of radite before it, it would have passed on or
changed direction. No, Carnes, old dear, the only solution that I can
see is to turn his own guns on him. If I can, before morning,
duplicate his device, we can train it on the spot where he is and
reduce him and his machine to a pinch of yellow powder."

"Can you do it, Doctor?"

"What one man's brain can device, another man's brain can duplicate.
The only question is that of time. I am confident that Saranoff will
attack Washington to-morrow. If I can do the job to-night, we may save
the city. If not--At any rate, Carnes, your job will be to see that
the President and all of the heads of the government are out of the
city by morning. The President may refuse to leave. Knowing him as I
do, I rather expect he will."

"In that case, the issue is in the hands of the gods. Now get out of
here. I want to work. Report back at daybreak with a car."

Dr. Bird turned back to his laboratory.

"He must be using a ray of some sort, possibly a radium emanation," he
muttered to himself. "That would have no wave motion and might
accomplish the result, although I would expect the exact opposite from
it. The first thing to do is to examine that powder with a
spectroscope and see if I can get a clue to the electronic
arrangement."

       *       *       *       *       *

When Carnes arrived at the Bureau of Standards at dawn be rubbed his
eyes in astonishment. The buildings were lighted up and the grounds
swarmed with workmen. Before the buildings were lined up a dozen
trucks and twice that many touring cars. A cordon of police held back
the curious. Carnes' gold badge won him an entrance and he hurried up
the stairs to Dr. Bird's laboratory. The doctor's face was drawn and
haggard, but his eyes glowed with a feverish light. Workmen were
carrying down huge boxes.

"What's up, Doctor?" demanded the detective.

"Oh, you got here at last, did you? You're just in time. If you'd been
fifteen minutes later, you would have found us gone."

"Gone where?"

"Out into Maryland in an attempt to stop Saranoff in his progress
toward Washington."

"Have you found your means of combating him?"

