relieved of its impurities, and becomes the red, or pure blood,
which contains the principles so essential to life. (Appendix K.)

489. The formation of carbonic acid and water, eliminated from the
system through the lungs and skin, is explained by the following
theory: In the lungs and upon the skin the oxygen separates from the
nitrogen and unites with the blood in the capillary vessels of these
organs. The oxygen is conveyed with the blood to the capillary
arteries and veins of the different tissues of the system. In these
membranes there is a chemical union of the oxygen with the carbon and
hydrogen contained in the blood and waste atoms of the system. This
combustion, or union of oxygen with carbon and hydrogen, is attended
with the disengagement of heat, and the formation of carbonic acid and
water. (Appendix L.)

490. The following experiment will illustrate the passage of fluids
through membranes, and the different affinity of gases for each other.
Put a mixture of water and alcohol into a phial and leave it uncorked.
Both the water and alcohol have a greater affinity for air than for
each other. Alcohol has a greater affinity for the air, and will be
diffused through it more readily than the water, when there is no
intervening obstacle. But tie a piece of bladder over the mouth of the
phial, and let it stand a few days,--the water will leave the
alcohol, and pass through the membrane. By the aid of this experiment,
we shall endeavor to explain the interchange of fluids in the lungs.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

488. What is formed when oxygen unites with carbon or hydrogen? 489.
Give the theory for the formation of carbonic acid and watery vapor
thrown out of the system. 490. Illustrate the passage of fluids
through membranes, and the different affinities of gases.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

491. The walls of the air-vesicles, and coats of the blood-vessels,
are similar, in their mechanical arrangement, to the membranous
bladder in the before described experiment. As the oxygen of the air
has greater affinity for blood than for nitrogen, so it permeates the
membranes that intervene between the air and blood more readily than
the nitrogen. As the carbonic acid and water have a greater affinity
for air than for the other elements of the blood, so they will also
pass through the walls of the blood-vessels and air-cells more readily
than the other elements of the dark-colored blood.

[Illustration: Fig. 98. 1, A bronchial tube divided into three branches.
2, 2, 2, Air-cells. 3, Branches of the pulmonary artery, that spread over
the air-cells. Through the pulmonary artery the dark, impure blood is
carried to the air-cells of the lungs. 4, Branches of the pulmonary vein,
that commence at the minute terminations of the pulmonary artery. Through
the pulmonary vein the red blood is returned to the heart.]

492. As the impure blood is passing in the minute vessels over the
air-cells, the oxygen passes through the thin coats of the air-cells
and blood-vessels, and unites with the blood. At the same time, the
carbonic acid and water leave the blood, and pass through the coats of
the blood-vessels and air-cells, and mix with the air in the cells.
These are thrown out of the system every time we breathe. This
interchange of products produces the change in the color of the
blood.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

Explain fig. 98. 492. How and where is the blood changed?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

_Experiment._ Fill a bladder with dark blood drawn from any animal.
Tie the bladder closely, and suspend it in the air. In a few hours,
the blood next to the membrane will have become of a bright red color.
This is owing to the oxygen from the air passing through the bladder,
and uniting with the blood, while the carbonic acid has escaped
through the membrane.

[Illustration: Fig. 99. An ideal view of the pulmonary circulation. 1, 1,
The right lung. 2, 2, The left lung. 3, The trachea. 4, The right
bronchial tube. 5, The left bronchial tube. 6, 6, 6, 6, Air-cells. 7, The
right auricle. 8, The right ventricle. 9, The tricuspid valves. 10, The
pulmonary artery. 11, The branch to the right lung. 12, The branch to the
left lung. 13, The right pulmonary vein. 14, The left pulmonary vein. 15,
The left auricle. 16, The left ventricle. 17, The mitral valves.]

493. The presence of carbonic acid and watery vapor in the expired
air, can be proved by the following experiments: 1st. Breathe into
lime-water, and in a few minutes it will become of a milk-white color.
This is owing to the carbonic acid of the breath uniting with the
lime, forming the _carbonate of lime_. 2d. Breathe upon a cold, dry
mirror for a few minutes, and it will be covered with moisture. This
is condensed vapor from the lungs. In warm weather, this watery vapor
is invisible in the expired air, but in a cold, dry morning in winter,
the successive jets of vapor issuing from the mouth and nose are
sufficiently obvious.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

Give the experiment showing that oxygen changes the dark-colored blood
to a bright red color. What is represented by fig. 99? 493. How can
the presence of carbonic acid in the lungs be proved?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

494. From the lungs are eliminated other impurities beside carbonic
acid, the perceptible quality of which is various in different
persons. The offensive breath of many persons may be caused by decayed
teeth, or the particles of food that may be retained between them, but
it often proceeds from the secretion, in the lungs, of certain
substances which previously existed in the system.

_Illustration._ When spirituous liquors are taken into the stomach,
they are absorbed by the veins and mixed with the dark-colored blood,
in which they are carried to the lungs to be expelled from the body.
This will explain the fact, which is familiar to most persons, that
the odor of different substances is perceptible in the breath, or
expired air, long after the mouth is free from these substances.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

How the watery vapor? 494. Are there other excretions from the lungs?
Give the illustration.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

_Note._ Let the anatomy and physiology of the respiratory organs be
reviewed from figs. 96, 97, and 99, or from anatomical outline plates
Nos. 5 and 7.




CHAPTER XXV.

HYGIENE OF THE RESPIRATORY ORGANS.


495. For man to enjoy the highest degree of health, it is necessary
that the impure "venous" blood be properly changed. As this is
effected in the lungs by the action of the air, it follows that this
element, when breathed, should be pure, or contain twenty-one per
cent. of oxygen to about seventy-nine per cent. of nitrogen.

496. The volume of air expelled from the lungs is somewhat less than
that which is inspired. The amount of loss varies under different
circumstances. An eightieth part of the volume taken into the lungs,
or half a cubic inch, may be considered an average estimate.

497. _The quality and purity of the air is affected by every
respiration._ 1st. The quantity of oxygen is diminished. 2d. The
amount of carbonic acid is increased. 3d. A certain proportion of
watery vapor is ejected from the lungs in the expired air. Of the
twenty-one parts of oxygen in the inspired air, only eighteen parts
are expired, while the carbonic acid and watery vapor are increased
about four per cent. The quantity of nitrogen is nearly the same in
the expired as in the inspired air.

_Observation._ It is now fully ascertained that while the chemical
composition of the blood is essentially changed, its weight remains
the same, as the carbon and hydrogen discharged are equal to the
united weight of the oxygen and nitrogen absorbed.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

495-546. _Give the hygiene of the respiratory organs._ 495. What is
necessary that man enjoy the highest degree of health? 496. How does
the volume Of expired air compare with that which was inspired? Does
this loss vary, and what is an average estimate? 497. How is the
purity of the air affected by respiration? How is the inhaled oxygen
affected? What effect on the carbonic acid and watery vapor? On the
nitrogen? What is said respecting the weight of the blood?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

498. If one fourth part of the volume of air received by the lungs at
one inspiration is decomposed at one "beat" of the heart, it might be
supposed that if the expired air be again received into the lungs, one
half of the oxygen would be consumed, and, in a similar ratio, if
re-breathed four times, all the oxygen would be consumed. But it does
not follow, if the air is thus re-breathed, that the same changes will
be effected in the lungs. For air that has been inspired does not part
with its remaining oxygen as freely as when it contains the proper
amount of this life-giving element, and thus the changes in the impure
blood are not so completely effected.

_Illustration._ In the process of dyeing, each successive article
immersed in the dye weakens it; but it does not follow that the dye
each time is affected in the same degree, or that the coloring matter
by repeated immersions can be wholly extracted. The same principle
applies to the exchange of oxygen and carbonic acid gas in the lungs.

499. _If the inspired air is free from moisture and carbonic acid,
these substances contained in the blood will be more readily imparted
to it._ When the air is loaded with vapor, they are removed more
slowly; but if it is saturated with moisture, no vapor will escape
from the blood through the agency of the lungs. This may be
illustrated by the following experiment: Take two and a half pounds of
water, add to it half a pound of common salt, (chloride of sodium,)
and it will readily mix with the water; and to this solution add the
same quantity of salt, and it will be dissolved more slowly. Again,
add more salt, and it will remain undissolved, as the water has become
saturated by the pound before dissolved.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

498. Does air that is re-breathed freely impart its oxygen? Why? 499.
What is the effect on the blood when the air is free from vapor and
carbonic acid? When loaded with vapor? When saturated? How is this
illustrated?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

500. The principle in this experiment is analogous to that of the
union between carbonic gas and atmospheric air. Allen and Pepy showed
by experiment, that air which had been once breathed, contained eight
and a half per cent. of carbonic acid. They likewise showed, that no
continuance of the respiration of the same air could make it take up
more than ten per cent. This is the point of saturation.

_Experiment._ Sink a glass jar that has a stop-cock, or one with a
glass stopper, into a pail of water, until the air is expelled from
the jar. Fill the lungs with air, and retain it in the chest a short
time, and then breathe into the jar, and instantly close the
stop-cock. Close the opening of the jar that is under the water with a
piece of paper laid on a plate of sufficient size to cover the
opening, invert the jar, and sink into it a lighted candle. The flame
will be extinguished as quickly as if put in water.[15] Remove the
carbonic acid by inverting the jar, and place a lighted candle in it,
and the flame will be as clear as when out of the jar.

  [15] As a substitute for a jar with a stop-cock, take a piece of lead
       pipe bent in the form of a siphon, and insert it in the mouth
       of a reversed jar. This experiment is as conclusive whether the
       air is inhaled once only or breathed many times.

_Observations._ 1st. It is familiarly known that a taper will not burn
where carbonic acid exists in any considerable quantity, or when there
is a marked deficiency of oxygen. From this originated the judicious
practice of sinking a lighted candle into a well or pit before
descending into it. If the flame is extinguished, respiration cannot
there be maintained, and life would be sacrificed should a person
venture in, until the noxious air is removed.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

500. What did the experiments of Allen and Pepy show? How can the
presence of carbonic gas in the expired air be demonstrated? State
observation 1st. Observation 2d.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

2d. It is the action of carbonic acid upon the respiratory organs,
that gives rise to a phenomenon frequently seen in mines and caves. A
man may enter these subterranean rooms, and feel no inconvenience in
breathing; but the dog that follows him, falls apparently dead, and
soon dies if not speedily removed to pure air. This arises from the
fact that this gas is heavier than air, and sinks to the bottom of the
room or cave.

3d. While it is true that carbonic acid possesses properties that
render it unfit to be breathed, it is, notwithstanding, productive of
very agreeable effects, when conveyed into the stomach. It forms the
sparkling property of mineral waters, and fills the bubbles that rise
when beer or cider is fermenting.

501. _Pure atmospheric air is best adapted to a healthy action of the
system._ As the air cannot be maintained pure under all circumstances,
the question may be asked, To what degree may the air be vitiated and
still sustain life? and what is the smallest quantity of pure air a
person needs each minute to maintain good health? Birnan says, that
air which contains more than three and a half per cent. of carbonic
acid is unfit for respiration, and, as air once respired contains
eight and a half per cent. of carbonic acid, it clearly shows that it
is not fitted to be breathed again.

502. No physiologist pretends that less than seven cubic feet of air
are adequate for a man to breathe each minute, while Dr. Reid allows
ten feet. The necessity of fifteen or twenty times the amount of air
actually taken into the lungs, arises from the circumstance, that the
expired air mixes with and vitiates the surrounding element that has
not been inhaled.

503. _The quantity of air which different persons actually need,
varies._ The demand is modified by the size, age, habits, and
condition of the body. A person of great size who has a large quantity
of blood, requires more air than a small man with a less amount of
circulating fluid. Individuals whose labor is active, require more air
than sedentary or idle persons, because the waste of the system is
greater. On the same principle, the gormandizer needs more of this
element than the person of abstemious habits. So does the growing lad
require more air than an adult of the same weight, for the reason that
he consumes more food than a person of mature years. Habit also exerts
a controlling influence. A man who works in the open air suffers more
when placed in a small, unventilated room, than one who is accustomed
to breathe the confined air of workshops.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

Observation 3d. 501. What questions may be asked respecting the
inspired air? Give the remark of Birnan. 502. How many cubic feet of
air are adequate for a man to breathe each minute? How much does Dr.
Reid allow? 503. Mention some reasons why different persons do not
require the same amount of air.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

504. _Air, in which lamps will not burn with brilliancy, is unfitted
for respiration._ In crowded rooms, which are not ventilated, the air
is vitiated, not only by the abstraction of oxygen and the deposition
of carbonic acid, but by the excretions from the skin and lungs of the
audience. The lamps, under such circumstances, emit but a feeble
light. Let the oxygen gas be more and more expended, and the lamps
will burn more and more feebly, until they are extinguished.

_Illustrations._ 1st. The effects of breathing the same air again and
again, are well illustrated by an incident that occurred in one of our
halls of learning. A large audience had assembled in an ill-ventilated
room, to listen to a lecture; soon the lamps burned so dimly that the
speaker and audience were nearly enveloped in darkness. The
oppression, dizziness, and faintness experienced by many of the
audience induced them to leave, and in a few minutes after, the lamps
were observed to rekindle, owing to the exchange of pure air on
opening the door.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

How is it with the laborer? With the gormandizer? With the person that
works in the open air? 504. What effect has impure air on a burning
lamp? Give the illustration of the effects of impure air on lighted
lamps.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

2d. In the "Black Hole of Calcutta," one hundred and forty-six
Englishmen were shut up in a room eighteen feet square, with only two
small windows on the same side to admit air. On opening this dungeon,
ten hours after their imprisonment, only twenty-three were alive. The
others had died from breathing impure air.

505. _Air that has become impure from the abstraction of oxygen, an
excess of carbonic acid, or the excretions from the lungs and skin,
has a deleterious effect on the body._ When this element is vitiated
from the preceding causes, it prevents the proper arterialization, or
change in the blood. For this reason, pure air should be admitted
freely and constantly into work-shops and dwelling-houses, and the
vitiated air permitted to escape. This is of greater importance than
the warming of these apartments. We can compensate for the deficiency
of a stove, by an extra garment or an increased quantity of food; but
neither garment, exercise, nor food will compensate for pure air.

506. _School-rooms should be ventilated._ If they are not, the pupils
will be restless, and complain of languor and headache. Those
unpleasant sensations are caused by a want of pure air, to give an
adequate supply of oxygen to the lungs. When pupils breathe for a
series of years such vitiated air, their life is undoubtedly
shortened, by giving rise to consumption and other fatal diseases.

_Illustration._ A school-room thirty feet square and eight feet high,
contains 7200 cubic feet of air. This room will seat sixty pupils,
and, allowing ten cubic feet of air to each pupil per minute, all the
air in the room will be vitiated in twelve minutes.

_Observation._ In all school-rooms where there is not adequate
ventilation, it is advisable to have a recess of five or ten minutes
each hour. During this time, let the pupils breathe fresh air, and
open the doors and windows, so that the air of the room shall be
completely changed.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

Of the effects of breathing impure air. 505. In preserving health,
what is of greater importance than warming the room? 506. Why should a
school-room be ventilated? Give the illustration.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

507. _Churches, concert halls, and all rooms designed for a collection
of individuals, should be amply ventilated._ While the architect and
workmen are assiduous in giving these public rooms architectural
beauty and splendor, by adorning the ceiling with Gothic tracery,
rearing richly carved columns, and providing carefully for the warming
of the room, it too frequently happens that no direct provision is
made for the change of that element which gives us beauty, strength,
and life.

_Illustration._ A hall sixty feet by forty, and fifteen feet high,
contains 36,000 cubic feet of air. A hall of this size will seat four
hundred persons; by allowing ten cubic feet of air to each person per
minute, the air of the room will be rendered unfit for respiration in
nine minutes.

508. _Railroad cars, cabins of steam and canal-boats, omnibuses, and
stage-coaches, require ample ventilation._ In the construction of
these public conveyances, too frequently, the only apparent design is,
to seat the greatest number of persons, regardless of the quantity and
character of the air to maintain health and even life. The character
of the air is only realized when, from the fresh, pure air, we enter a
crowded cabin of a boat or a closed coach; then the vitiated air from
animal excretions and noxious gases is offensive, and frequently
produces sickness.

509. The influence of habit is strikingly expressed by Birnan, in the
"Art of Warming and Ventilating Rooms:" "Not the least remarkable
example of the power of habit is its reconciling us to practices
which, but for its influence, would be considered noxious and
disgusting. We instinctively shun approach to the dirty, the squalid,
and the diseased, and use no garment that may have been worn by
another. We open sewers for matters that offend the sight or the
smell, and contaminate the air. We carefully remove impurities from
what we eat and drink, filter turbid water, and fastidiously avoid
drinking from a cup that may have been pressed to the lips of a
friend. On the other hand, we resort to places of assembly, and draw
into our mouths air loaded with effluvia from the lungs, skin, and
clothing of every individual in the promiscuous crowd--exhalations
offensive, to a certain extent, from the most healthy individuals; but
when arising from a living mass of skin and lungs, in all stages of
evaporation, disease, and putridity,--prevented by the walls and
ceiling from escaping--they are, when thus concentrated, in the
highest degree deleterious and loathsome."

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

What suggestion when a school-room is not ventilated? 507. What is
said in regard to ventilating churches, concert halls, &c.? State the
illustration. 508. What remarks relative to public conveyances? 509.
State the influence of habit by Birnan.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

510. _The sleeping-room should be so ventilated that the air in the
morning will be as pure as when retiring to rest in the evening._
Ventilation of the room would prevent morning headaches, the want of
appetite, and languor--so common among the feeble. The impure air of
sleeping-rooms probably causes more deaths than intemperance. Look
around the country, and those who are most exposed, who live in huts
but little superior to the sheds that shelter the farmer's flocks, are
found to be the most healthy and robust. Headaches, liver complaints,
coughs, and a multitude of nervous affections, are almost unknown to
them; not so with those who spend their days and nights in rooms in
which the sashes of the windows are calked, or perchance doubled, to
prevent the keen but healthy air of winter from entering their
apartments. Disease and suffering are their constant companions.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

510. What is said of the ventilation of sleeping-rooms? What would
adequate ventilation prevent? Give a common observation.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

_Illustration._ By many, sleeping apartments twelve feet square and
seven feet high, are considered spacious for two persons, and good
accommodations for four to lodge in. An apartment of this size
contains 1008 cubic feet of air. Allowing ten cubic feet to each
person per minute, two occupants would vitiate the air of the room in
fifty minutes, and four in twenty-five minutes. When lodging-rooms are
not ventilated, we would strongly recommend early rising.

511. _The sick-room, particularly, should be so arranged that the
impure air may escape, and pure air be constantly admitted into the
room._ It is no unusual practice in some communities, when a child or
an adult is sick of an acute disease, to prevent the ingress of pure
air, simply from the apprehension of the attendants, that the patient
will contract a cold. Again, the prevalent custom of several
individuals sitting in the sick-room, particularly when they remain
there for several hours, tends to vitiate the air, and, consequently,
to increase the suffering and danger of the sick person. In fevers or
inflammatory diseases of any kind, let the patient breathe pure air;
for the purer the blood, the greater the power of the system to remove
disease, and the less the liability to contract colds.

_Observation._ Among children, convulsions, or "fits," usually occur
when they are sleeping. In many instances, these are produced by the
impure air which is breathed. To prevent these alarming and
distressing convulsions, the sleeping-room should be ventilated, and
there should be no curtains around the bed, or coverings over the
face, as they produce an effect similar to that experienced when
sleeping in a small, unventilated room. To relieve a child when
convulsed, carry it into the open air.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

What is said of the size of sleeping-rooms? 511. What is said of the
sick-room? Mention some prevailing customs in reference to these
rooms. What is said of convulsions among children?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

512. _While occupying a room, we are insensible of the gradual
vitiation of the air._ This is the result of the diminished
sensibility of the nervous system, and gradual adaptation of the
organs to blood of a less stimulating character. This condition is
well illustrated in the hibernating animals. We are insensible of the
impure air of unventilated sleeping-rooms, until we leave them for a
walk or ride. If they have been closed, we are made sensible of the
character of the air as soon as we reenter them, for the system has
regained its usual sensibility while inhaling a purer atmosphere.

513. _In the construction of every inhabited room, there should be
adequate means of ventilation, as well as warming._ No room is well
ventilated, unless as much pure air is brought into it as the
occupants vitiate at every respiration. This can be effected by making
an aperture in the ceiling of the room, or by constructing a
ventilating flue in the chimney. This should be in contact with the
flues for the escape of smoke, but separated from them by a thin brick
partition. The hot air in the smoke flues will warm the separating
brick partition, and consequently rarefy the air in the ventilating
flue. Communication from every room in a house should be had to such
flues. The draught of air can be regulated by well-adjusted registers,
which in large rooms should be placed near the floor as well as near
the ceiling.

514. While provision is made for the escape of rarefied impure air, we
should also provide means by which pure air may be constantly admitted
into the room, as the crevices of the doors and windows are not always
sufficient; and, if they should be adequate, air can be introduced in
a more convenient, economical, and appropriate manner. There should be
an aperture opposite the ventilating flue, at or near the floor, to
connect with the outer walls of the building or external air. But if
pure heated air is introduced into the room, it obviates the necessity
of the introduction of the external air.[16]

  [16] Mr. Frederick Emerson, of Boston, has devised a simple and
       effective apparatus for removing vitiated air from a room. It
       is successfully used upon all the public school-houses of
       Boston. It is now being generally applied to the school-houses
       and other public buildings, as well as private dwellings, of
       New England.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

512. Why are we insensible to the gradual vitiation of the air of an
unventilated room? 513. What is very important in the building of
every inhabited room? How can a room be well ventilated? 514. What is
said relative to a communication with the external air?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

515. In warming rooms, the hot air furnaces, or box and air-tight
stoves converted into hot air furnaces, should be used in preference
to the ordinary stoves. The air thus introduced into the room is pure
as well as warm. In the adaptation of furnaces to dwelling-houses,
&c., it is necessary that the air should pass over an ample surface of
iron moderately heated; as a red heat abstracts the oxygen from the
contiguous air, and thus renders it unfit to be respired.[17]

  [17] Dr. Wyman's valuable work on "Ventilation," and the work of Henry
       Barnard, Esq., on "School-house architecture," can be
       advantageously consulted, as they give the practical methods of
       ventilating and warming shops, school-rooms, dwelling-houses,
       public halls, &c.

_Observation_. Domestic animals need a supply of pure air as well as
man. The cows of cities, that breathe a vitiated air, have, very
generally, tubercles. Sheep that are shut in a confined air, die of a
disease called the "rot," which is of a tuberculous character.
Interest and humanity require that the buildings for animals be
properly ventilated.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

515. How should rooms be warmed? What is necessary in the adaptation
of furnaces to dwelling-houses?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=




CHAPTER XXVI.

HYGIENE OF THE RESPIRATORY ORGANS, CONTINUED.


516. The change that is effected in the blood while passing through
the lungs, not only depends upon the purity of the air, but the amount
inspired. The quantity varies according to the size of the chest, and
the movement of the ribs and diaphragm.

517. _The size of the chest and lungs can be reduced by moderate and
continued pressure._ This is most easily done in infancy, when the
cartilages and ribs are very pliant; yet it can be effected at more
advanced periods of life, even after the chest is fully developed. For
want of knowledge of the pliant character of the cartilages and ribs
in infants, too many mothers, unintentionally, contract their chests,
and thus sow the seeds of disease by the close dressing of their
offspring.

518. If slight but steady pressure be continued from day to day and
from week to week, the ribs will continue to yield more and more, and
after the expiration of a few months, the chest will become diminished
in size. This will be effected without any suffering of a marked
character; but the general health and strength will be impaired. It is
not the violent and ephemeral pressure, but the moderate and
protracted, that produces the miscalled, "genteel," contracted
chests.

519. The style of dress which at the present day is almost universal,
is a prolific cause of this deformity. These baneful fashions are
copied from the periodicals, so widely circulated, containing a
"fashion plate of the latest fashions, from Paris." In every instance;
the contracted, deformed, and, as it is called, lady-like waist, is
portrayed in all its fascinating loveliness. These periodicals are
found on almost every centre-table, and exercise an influence almost
omnipotent. If the plates which corrupt the morals are excluded by
civil legislation, with the same propriety ought not those to be
suppressed that have a tendency so adverse to health?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

516. What varies the amount of air received into the lungs? 517. How
can the size of the chest be diminished? When is this most easily
effected? 518. How are the miscalled, "genteel," contracted chests
usually produced? 519. What is said of the style of the dress at the
present day?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

[Illustration: Fig. 100. A correct outline of the Venus de Medici, the
beau ideal of female symmetry.]

[Illustration: Fig. 101. An outline of a well-corseted modern beauty.

One has an artificial, insect waist; the other, a natural
waist. One has sloping shoulders, while the shoulders of the other are
comparatively elevated, square, and angular. The proportion of the
corseted female below the waist, is also a departure from the symmetry of
nature.]

_Observations._ 1st. The Chinese, by compressing the feet of female
children, prevent their growth; so that the foot of a _Chinese belle_
is not larger than the foot of an American girl of five years.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

What does fig. 100 represent? Fig. 101? Give observation 1st.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

2d. The American women _compress their chests_, to prevent their
growth; so that the chest of an _American belle_ is not larger than
the chest of a Chinese girl of five years. Which country, in this
respect, exhibits the greater intelligence?

3d. The chest can be deformed by making the linings of the waists of
the dresses tight, as well as by corsets. Tight vests, upon the same
principle, are also injurious.

520. In children, who have never worn close garments, the circumference
of the chest is generally about equal to that of the body at the hips;
and similar proportions would exist through life, if there were no
improper pressure of the clothing. This is true of the laboring
women of the Emerald Isle, and other countries of Europe, and in the
Indian female, whose blanket allows the free expansion of the chest. The
symmetrical statues of ancient sculptors bear little resemblance to
the "beau ideal" of American notions of elegant form. This perverted
taste is in opposition to the laws of nature. The design of the human
chest is not simply to connect the upper and lower portions of the
body, like some insects, but to form a case for the protection of the
vital organs.
