
Closing their perception against the Zid's distracting ragings, they set
to work with perfect coordination.

Chafi Three set down the ship on an island that was only one of a
freckling chain of similar islands. Chafi Four projected himself first
to the opened port; then, when the Zid charged after him, to the
herbivore-cropped sward of tropical setting outside.

The Zid lunged out. Chafi Four teleported inside again. Chafi Three
closed the port. Together they relaxed their perception shields in
relief--

Unaware in their consternation that they committed the barbarous lapse
of vocalizing, they twittered aloud when they realized the extent of
their error.

Above the far, murmurous whisper of expected marine cerebration there
rose an uncoordinated mishmash of thought from at least two strong and
relatively complex intelligences.

"Gas-breathing!" Chafi Four said unbelievingly. "Warm-blooded,
land-dwelling, mammalian!"

"A Class Five culture," Chafi agreed shakenly. His aura quivered with
the shock of betrayal. "The catalogue was _wrong_."

Ironically, their problem was more pressing now than before. Unless
checked, the Zid would rapidly depopulate the island--and, to check it,
they must break a prime rule of Galactic protocol in asking the help of
a new and untested species.

But they had no choice. They teleported at once into the presence of the
two nearby natives--and met with frustration beyond Ciriimian
experience.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jeff Aubray glimpsed the Ciriimian ship's landing because the morning
was a Oneday, and on Onedays his mission to the island demanded that he
be up and about at sunrise.

For two reasons: On Onedays, through some unfailing miracle of Calaxian
seamanship, old Charlie Mack sailed down in his ancient _Island Queen_
from the township that represented colonial Terran civilization in
Procynian Archipelago 147, bringing supplies and gossip to last Jeff
through the following Tenday. The _Queen_ would dock at Jeff's little
pier at dawn; she was never late.

Also on Onedays, necessarily before Charlie Mack's visit, Jeff must
assemble his smuggled communicator--kept dismantled and hidden from
suspicious local eyes--and report to Earth Interests Consulate his
progress during the cycle just ended. The ungodly hour of transmission,
naturally, was set to coincide with the closing of the Consul's field
office halfway around the planet.

So the nacreous glory of Procyon's rising was just tinting the windows
of Jeff's cottage when he aligned and activated his little communicator
on his breakfast table. Its three-inch screen lighted to signal and a
dour and disappointed Consul Satterfield looked at him. Behind
Satterfield, foreshortened to gnomishness by the pickup, lurked Dr.
Hermann, Earth Interests' resident zoologist.

"No progress," Jeff reported, "except that the few islanders I've met
seem to be accepting me at last. A little more time and they might let
me into the Township, where I can learn something. If Homeside--"

"You've had seven Tendays," Satterfield said. "Homeside won't wait
longer, Aubray. They need those calm-crystals too badly."

"They'll use force?" Jeff had considered the possibility, but its
immediacy appalled him. "Sir, these colonists had been autonomous for
over two hundred years, ever since the Fourth War cut them off from us.
Will Homeside deny their independence?"

His sense of loss at Satterfield's grim nod stemmed from something
deeper than sympathy for the islanders. It found roots in his daily
rambles over the little island granted him by the Township for the
painting he had begun as a blind to his assignment, and in the gossip of
old Charlie Mack and the few others he had met. He had learned to
appreciate the easy life of the islands well enough to be dismayed now
by what must happen under EI pressure to old Charlie and his handful of
sun-browned fisherfolk.

       *       *       *       *       *

Unexpectedly, because Jeff had not considered that it might matter, he
was disturbed by the realization that he wouldn't be seeing Jennifer,
old Charlie Mack's red-haired niece, once occupation began. Jennifer,
who sailed with her uncle and did a crewman's work as a matter of
course, would despise the sight of him.

The Consul's pessimism jolted Jeff back to the moment at hand.

"Homeside will deny their autonomy, Aubray. I've had a warp-beam message
today ordering me to move in."

The situation was desperate enough at home, Jeff had to admit. Calaxian
calm-crystals did what no refinement of Terran therapeutics had been
able to manage. They erased the fears of the neurotic and calmed the
quiverings of the hypertensive--both in alarming majority in the
shattering aftermath of the Fourth War--with no adverse effects at all.
Permanent benefit was slow but cumulative, offering for the first time a
real step toward ultimate stability. The medical, psychiatric and
political fields cried out for crystals and more crystals.

"If the islanders would tell us their source and let us help develop
it," Satterfield said peevishly, "instead of doling out a handful of
crystals every Tenday, there wouldn't be any need of action. Homeside
feels they're just letting us have some of the surplus."
