"Oona, you arm yourself with a phone. Lee, you rush over to The Brain.
Oona will give you a pass to the Thorax. Every assistance you need will
be at your disposal. I'll sit down and whip up some kind of a speech.
We'll all meet again afterwards."

       *       *       *       *       *

Seven hours later, one hour before sunrise and just in time to see the
big official plane from Washington shoot up into the first grey streak
of dawn, they met. They were all pale and shivering with the chill of
the air, of physical and nervous exhaustion. There was a note of
hysteria even in Oona's voice as she ordered a tremendous breakfast from
the Skull Hotel. But then as the fragrance of coffee mingled with that
of bacon and eggs, things rapidly improved and there were sudden
uncontrollable bursts of laughter. They had only to look at one another
to feel the tickle of renewed mirth.

The first thing to strike Lee, as he remembered, as he met the
senatorial group in the subterranean dome of the murals, was their
incongruity with the functional beauty which surrounded them, and the
sharp contrast they formed to the scientific workers of The Brain. As
they descended from their cars after a late dinner at the Skull Hotel
they resembled an average tourist group in Carlsbad Caverns bent upon a
good time and in a holiday mood.

There were seven. Two women senators among them, as they ascended with
Lee at the head along "Glideway Y," the "Visitors' Special" as the
brain-crews called it. It was wider than the service glideways and
equipped with comfortable seats. It led through The Brains median
section in-between the two hemispheres describing a loop which opened
vistas into but did not enter any of the grey matter convolutions. It
was brilliantly illuminated in order to forestall claustrophobia and
also to forestall too close a view into the black-lighted interior of
The Brain.

To Lee it was like a ride in an enormous Ferris Wheel fused with a
nightmarish dream wherein one shouts for help and nobody hears or seems
to understand: "... More than nine billion electronic tubes, more than
ten billion resistors, two billion capacitators, eight billion miles of
wires, etc., etc." He struggled trying to convey some idea of the
magnitude of The Brain. "Did you say _billion_ or did you say _million_
professor?" The senator from Michigan was busily scribbling notes.

"... It is the cerebral hemispheres which analyze and synthesize the
problems which are entered through the Apperception Centers in over a
million ideopulses per minute. Racing through the centers these form the
ideo-circuits...."

"I see, it's like a _typewriter_." That would be the senator from
Vermont.

"In some types of circuits the wires are so fine that skilled weavers of
Panama hats had to be brought in from Central America. Likewise from the
Pavlov Institute in Leningrad a layout for the circuits of 'conditioned
reflexes'...."

"I'm very much against that," the senator from Tennessee frowned. "All
those foreigners. I would have voted against that had the measure come
up in the House."

Lee felt the cold sweat of fear breaking out all over him, especially as
now, in the region of the telencephalon, with nothing but acres of
radioactive pyramidal cells around, when the senator from Connecticut in
audible and agitated whispers inquired whether there was a ladies'
powder room somewhere.

During the steep descent things went from bad to worse as the honorable
member from Kentucky discovered some interesting parallel between The
Brain and a coal mine he had previously seen and, as in between two of
The Brain's convolutions dedi-[A] woman from Connecticut went violently
sick....

In the "Brainwave's" cabin the great Scriven convulsed with laughter as
Lee narrated these things; Oona clapped her hands in delight: "Oh, how
wonderful; and do you remember how they solved the servant problem when
they saw those 'Gog and Magog' things?"

Yes, Lee remembered. His own conducted tour had been only the beginnings
of last nights nightmares of which there seemed to be no end....

Somewhat restored by black coffee at the communications center the
intrepid group had descended into those lower regions of the Thorax
which Lee himself had never before seen.

The drop of the freight-elevator was a good mile. Through the
transparent walls of the cage they saw new excavations being made on
various levels, all of them by powertools and chemicals alone, since
explosives might have caused tremors dangerous to The Brain. It was like
watching a skyscraper being built from the top down and all the way vast
amber colored, translucent pillars had followed them down the shaft, the
spinal column of The Brain.

Down at the lowest level the gentlemanly plainclothesmen of "Military
Intelligence" took over and did all the explaining. There were visions
of scores of tunnel tubes curving into the rock with the gleaming eyes
of narrow-gauge electric trains streaking away into the infinite;
visions of forbidding steel doors operated by photoelectric cells which
opened at a finger's raising of a guard's hand: "This is the Atomic
Powerplant," and their astonished eyes looked down from a dizzy height
into something like a huge drydock with something like the inverted hull
of an oceanliner in the middle of it, a selfcontained machine which
would continue to pour kilowatts for years, for decades on end without a
moving part, without a human being anywhere in sight. Vistas of
breathtaking airconditioning plants, vistas of giant mess halls, living
quarters, kitchens, plotting-rooms, all ready for immediate occupancy in
the event of war but yawning now with emptiness in the sleep of an
uneasy peace....

But the most awe-inspiring and, to Lee, foreboding sights, were the
"C.P.F.'s" as the guards called them, the "Critical-Parts-Factories." On
a superficial glance they looked ordinary modern plants: staggered rows
of machine tools sprouting from the main stem of the assembly line.
There was the familiar din of steel, the piercing screeches of the
multiple drills, the heavy pantings of the hydraulic presses. But after
a minute or so the visitors felt a vague uneasiness and then the
realization dawned that there was something missing and that this
something was human life.

"Aren't there even machine tenders or supervisors? Isn't there
_anybody_?"

"Not a soul," the answer came. "It's all automatic. Full automatic down
here."

They stared at the end of the assembly line; every twenty seconds it
spit out a fractional horsepower motor onto a transport band which
nursed the newborn engine into the rows of testing machines.

       *       *       *       *       *

The elevator brought them back to the communication center where the
Terminal Cafeteria was ablaze with lights and where Dr. Scriven,
received his honored guests.

The guests were seated after the manner of a French restaurant, all in
one row, and as they raised expectant faces in the direction of the
service entrance "Gog and Magog" entered the room carrying trays with
refreshments which they served with the skill and the dignity of
accomplished waiters.

Gog and Magog were products of two assembly lines down in the Thorax.
Robots, still in an experimental stage, yet of remarkable perfection.
Both of them were about human size and approximately human-shaped but
the design of the two was different. Gog, the "light-duty" robot,
balanced itself by a gyroscope on a pair of stumpy legs, while the
"heavy-duty" Magog crawled noiselessly and rapidly on caterpillar
rubbertracks like a miniature tank. Of both types the arms were
uncommonly long and simian-like, but the remarkable progress made in the
engineering of prothesis after the Second World War had lent them
perfect articulation and sensitivity down to the last hydraulically
operated fingerjoint.

The photoelectric cells of their eyes looked pale and repulsive; the
square audion-screens of their ears however made up for that by the
comical precision with which they turned in every direction at the sound
of a commanding human voice. Their understanding of any given order
appeared perfect.

"Congratulations, Dr. Scriven, you've got the country's servant problem
licked at last."

"I wonder whether one could buy one and how much he would be?"

"First waiter who ever came when I called him."

"What a butler Gog would make, the perfect Jeeves. Could he learn to
answer the phone?"

"I bet he would even make a fourth at bridge."

"Magog, the check please."

"See, how he understands. He shakes his head; he says it's on the
house."

"Let's try to tip him: Gog, here's fifty cents for you; no he won't take
it."

"He has no use for it, no taste for a glass of beer, I suppose."

"What do you feed him, Dr. Scriven; a glass of electric juice for
breakfast? Is he AC or DC or both?"

Scriven's leonine face beamed; the stunt had come off.

Lee on the other hand had paled. He hadn't said a word ever since Gog
and Magog had trotted in. Now he took a silver dollar out of his pocket
and beckoning to Magog he handed it to him. "Magog, will you please
break this in two for me?"

For a second the Robot stood without motion as if undecided what to do.
Then he took the piece between two steely fingers. Inside his breast one
could hear the soft swoosh of the hydraulic pump; there was a sharp
report as of a small calibre gun; two bent and broken pieces were
politely handed back to Lee.

"Thank you, Magog," Lee said. "That's what I wanted to know." From a
corner of his eye he saw Oona and Scriven watching him with uneasy
looks.

       *       *       *       *       *

Into the sudden and shocked silence of the table, there fell the
tinkling of a glass. On the other end of the table the great Scriven had
arisen to deliver the little speech he had prepared.

"... I wished you would think of The Brain, not in terms of electronics,
not in terms of dollars, but in terms of American lives.... Just think
of what it would mean to American mothers if in the event of another war
the mighty armour of our National Defense would go into battle without
exposing the life of one of their boys. Give us the funds and we'll
finish the job so that under the central control of The Brain our every
plane, every ship, every tank will roar into action unmanned and fully
automatic.

"And just as The Brain would be our impregnable shield in war, so it is
destined to carry the torch of progress in times of peace. Consider what
it would mean to every citizen if we had automatic functioning and
unerring direction by the Brain.

"Never again would there be cities without water, without electricity,
without transportation due to crippling strikes, because The Brain would
come to the rescue through its control over the essential services, and
if necessary with an industrial reserve army of perfected Gogs and
Magogs, kept for just such emergencies.

"... If in the past it has been true that trade follows the flag, thus
today it is true that trade and prosperity follow in the wake of science
and technology. In the invaluable services which it has rendered to
science and technology and to our national safety as well, The Brain has
already paid for itself. With the relatively small additional investment
which is now being proposed, The Brain's net profits to the nation would
be raised many times; never since the Louisiana Purchase has our
national government made a sounder business deal. With your own eyes you
have witnessed tonight what we have done, what we are doing and also how
much more we would be able to do. Thus I confidently trust that with our
nation's interest forever foremost in your minds you will support the
cause of The Brain."

There had been thunderous applause; at Oona's shouted order even Gog and
Magog did some mighty clapping of their steely hands to the delight of
the party.

And now that it was all over with and the reaction had begun to set in
Scriven asked: "Do you really think we put the idea over to them?"

"With this group? One hundred percent," Oona reassured him. "What do you
think, Lee?"

Lee nursed himself out of his settee, every bone in his gaunt frame now
was aching with weariness. "I think," he said hoarsely, "It was very
convincing, as far as those people are concerned. I think I'm too tired
to think. I think I better go now."

"Was there anything the matter with Lee?" Scriven asked after he'd gone.

"No, I guess not. Why?"

"He acted sort of queer with that silver dollar; shouldn't have done it.
Almost spoiled the show."

"He's been under a strain; we all were a little daffy by that time."

Scriven nodded and as he did his eyelids closed. They remained closed.
Staring at him for a moment, Oona thought that in a stupor of exhaustion
his features showed a strange similarity to a contented tiger dreaming
of the blood he's drawn in a successful hunt.




CHAPTER VII


Lee's Journal:

Cephalon Ariz. Nov. 21, 1 a.m.

I've kept away now from the Pineal Gland for three nights in
succession. I know from experience how very important it is to approach
that tempestuous personality, The Brain, in a state of mental calm and
equilibrium. But then all those things which went "bump" in that
phantastic night before last had me completely thrown out of gear:

Oona, her holding out on me, her mysterious reasons why she won't marry
me ... I cannot get that out of my head. Preposterous as this may be, I
think she likes me a great deal. I'm convinced, for instance, that she
won't tell Scriven what I told her about The Brain....

Then, Scriven's character; that's another enigma to me. I didn't like
his speech that night and I didn't like his whole attitude. I feel as if
against my will I were drawn into some sort of a conspiracy. It's
probably inevitable that the scientist in his defense against
politicians turns cynic. Scriven, no doubt, thinks that all is fair in
his battle for The Brain and that the end justifies the means.

But ultimately this would mean the overthrow of our form of government.
Even if I'm crazy, even if The Brain were not alive and a personality,
the Brainpower-Extension-Bill in itself would suffice to establish a
dictatorship of the machine. Does Scriven realize that?

Sometimes I feel as if I ought to shout it in the streets: "Wake up,
you people of America; you have defeated the dictators abroad but now a
new one has arisen in your midst. You all see him, touch him, you use,
you feed, you worship him, but under your loving care and devotion,
under the sacrifice of your very lives he has grown so enormous that you
know him not, this Idol of the machines, because it hides its head in a
nameless mountain and only his feet and fingers you sense."

But I'm not that type of a man and this is not the day and age where it
is possible to move the masses from a soap box in the streets.

Then what could I do; what could anybody do in my place?

       *       *       *       *       *

Cephalon, Ariz., Nov. 22nd 4 a.m.

I'd pulled myself together for this meeting with The Brain. Arrived at
the P. G. at midnight. Everything normal and unchanged except that Gus
Krinsley told me this was his last night on the job. Gus has been
transferred to the Thorax. He hedged a bit, sounding me out just how
much I knew and when he learned I'd been there one night, he came
across:

'Did you see them Gog and Magog things? That's it; that's my new job
and how I hate it. Those darned Robots, they're scabs, that's what they
are and I of all people am supposed to be their instructor, teach them
how to operate machine tools on an assembly line. I asked them whether
they knew anything about the rights of organized labor in this country
but those dumbbells merely flopped their ears and kinda grinned. Got to
drill some holes into their squareheads to let a little reason in. I
tell you, Aussie, it scares the wits out of me the way they handle a
wrench with those steel fingers of theirs; they'd pull my nose off just
