influential critic, should guess at the real background and the sources
of the Forell tales, and if he should misunderstand the motives behind
those tales, he would probably publish his thoughts. And those thoughts
would be widely read. Many would smile as they read and regard the thing
as a hoax. But others might start their own analyses. And some of those
might come to highly undesirable conclusions and cause undesirable,
even disastrous, reactions. It would be many generations before clear
explanations could be made and definite principles outlined without
causing misunderstanding and serious damage. The Forell tales were
evasive and preparatory as well as vaguely instructive.

[Illustration]

He recovered his self-discipline and waved his hand negligently.

"You know, Charo," he said laughingly, "I've been thinking along similar
lines for a long while. Of course, you know I must have built up some
sort of fantasy world to base my yarns on?"

Andorra nodded. "That's obvious. I've been wondering about some of your
basic theory. Like to see your notes some time."

Forell spread his hands. "You're quite welcome to look them over," he
said. "Come on up to my rooms now." He smiled. "As a matter of fact,
I've been doing a little extension on my dream world. Built up a little
sketch a while ago, and I'm not just sure what to do with it."

       *       *       *       *       *

As they entered the study, Forell walked across to his desk. He fumbled
for a few seconds under the desk, then opened a drawer. For a moment, he
paused, looking inside, then pulled out a thin folder. Again, he
hesitated. At last, he picked a small, metallic object from the drawer
and held it in his left hand.

"Might need this," he told himself. "If I'm wrong, it'll take a sector
patrolman to straighten out the mess. And I could be wrong--two ways."

Casually, he placed his left hand in his pocket, then he turned toward
Andorra, holding out the folder.

"Here," he said. "See what you think of this one."

Andorra opened the folder, taking out a few sheets of paper. He read for
a moment, then looked up quizzically.

"A little different from your usual style, isn't it?"

Forell nodded, watching the man tensely. "I'm trying something new," he
said. "Go ahead and read it, then tell me what you think."

He busied himself with a bottle and glasses.

       *       *       *       *       *

INFORMAL MEMO

                                                            130-263
 From: Explorations Officer, Sector Nine
 To: Ecological Officer
 Subject: Incident Report

Enclosed is the file on that recent occurrence on Planet 3-G3-9/4871,
consisting of the certificates and statements of the various officers
and guardsmen concerned, together with a digest of the interrogation of
Elwar Forell, a young planetary native, who appears to have been the
instigator.

It seems to me that something is seriously wrong with our system of
operation, at least on the subject planet. After all, our operations
have the purpose of research and observation, with a view to protection
and development. Certainly, we cannot create chaos. And knowledge of our
existence by very young cultures would certainly cause just that. We've
got to clear this up in a hurry. The Elder Galactics are most certain to
be unhappy about it in any event, and I don't like to make them unhappy.

Obviously, there was a chain of errors, and some of our people concerned
will have to be reassigned for further training, but that's just the
beginning. I've recalled all the observers from this planet, pending
reorganization, and we've got to come up with an answer that'll prevent
further occurrences of this nature, as well as covering this affair on
the planet concerned.

I realize that the situation has some of the elements of comedy, and I
presume that it will eventually be regarded with considerable amusement,
but right at the moment, my sense of humor is working very poorly.

I have a few ideas of my own, but would like to have your
recommendations and those of other section officers before I make any
final decision or report. I am calling a conference on this incident at
280.1000, so make a full investigation on this, and give me some
practical recommendation as soon as possible.

                                        CIJORN
 6 enclosures


STATEMENT

I, Florand Anremdor, am assigned to the Communications Branch,
Exploratory Section, Sector Nine.

At 261.0196, I was on duty in the emergency communications room at
Increment Four. A call came in from Resident Station number fourteen,
Planet 3-G3-9/4871, requesting emergency condensation over the immediate
station area. Co-ordinates were not given and I checked the planetary
co-ordinates with the call sign and the Communications List. I added
these to the message and forwarded the request to the Patrol Duty
Officer for his action.

There was no visual on the call, but the voice sounded urgent. I relayed
the request without requiring special authentication, since the station
was precisely on the correct settings, no inimical culture is known to
be operating in this sector, and the coded call was correct. At the
time, I had no way of suspecting that this was not a genuine emergency
call.

                                        Florand Anremdor
                                        Comm. 1/c


CERTIFICATE

I, Captain Binkar Morancos, am assigned to the 334th Vector, which is
presently under the orders of the Commander, Sector Nine.

I was assigned as Sector Patrol Duty Officer at 261.0200, when a message
was relayed from Increment Four, requesting emergency condensation on a
planet in that increment. I checked the co-ordinates and data furnished,
consulted the situation chart, and instructed Cruiser P-4730, Captain
Klorantel commanding, to carry out the mission.

Since the message came through normal channels, I had no doubt as to its
authenticity, and treated it as routine. I felt that the cruiser
