  18. What further can you say on the subject?                     106, 107
  19. What changes take place in the color of the blood in its journey
        through the system?                                             107
  20. State all you can in relation to the circulation of the blood.    107
  21. All, in relation to the size, shape, and location of the
        heart.                                                     107, 109
  22. How is the loss of power in the heart movements obviated?         109
  23. Give a description of the formation of the heart.       109, 110, 111
  24. What can you state of the ventricles and auricles of the heart?   110
  25. Describe the action of the heart.                                 111
  26. What special vitality does the tissue of the heart possess?       111
  27. State all you can on the subject.                                 111
  28. Describe the course of the blood through the cavities of the
        heart.                                                          112
  29. Describe the mechanism that regulates the heart-currents.         112
  30. How do you account for the two heart-sounds at the front of
      the chest?                                                        112
  31. State what you can of the frequency of the heart's action.   112, 113
  32. Of the activity of the heart.                                113, 114
  33. What do you understand by the arteries?                      114, 115
  34. State what you can of the arteries and the arterial system.  114, 115
  35. What do you understand by the pulse?                         115, 116
  36. In what part of the body may the pulse be felt?                   116
  37. What further can you state of the pulse?                     116, 117
  38. What are the veins?                                               117
  39. Where do they exist, and how are they formed?                     117
  40. Describe the valves of the veins and their uses.                  117
  41. Now give a full description of the construction of the veins.     117
  42. What further can you state of the veins?                     117, 118
  43. What do you understand by the capillaries?                   118, 119
  44. What service do the capillaries perform?                118, 119, 121
  45. Describe the circulation of the blood in the region of
        the heart.                                                 118, 119
  46. What can you state of the rapidity of the blood's circulation?    120
  47. Of the process known as assimilation?                             121
  48. Of injuries to the blood-vessels?                                 121

       *       *       *       *       *


{123}

CHAPTER VIII.

RESPIRATION.

    _The Objects of Respiration--The Lungs--The Air-Passages--The Movements
    of Respiration--Expiration and Inspiration--The Frequency of
    Respiration--Capacity of the Lungs--The Air we breathe--Changes in the
    Air from Respiration--Changes in the Blood--Interchange of Gases in the
    Lungs--Comparison between Arterial and Venous Blood--Respiratory
    Labor--Impurities of the Air--Dust--Carbonic Acid--Effects of Impure
    Air--Nature's Provision for Purifying the Air--Ventilation--Animal
    Heat--Spontaneous Combustion._

[Sidenote: 1. Difference between the two sets of capillaries? Change
effected by respiration or breathing?]

1. THE OBJECT OF RESPIRATION.--In one set of capillaries, or hair-like
vessels, the blood is impoverished for the support of the different members
and organs of the body. In another capillary system the blood is refreshed
and again made fit to sustain life. The former belongs to the greater or
_systemic_ circulation; the latter to the lesser or _pulmonary_, so called
from _pulmo_, the lungs, in which organs it is situated. The blood, as sent
from the right side of the heart to the lungs, is venous, dark, impure, and
of a nature unfit to circulate again through the tissues. But, when the
blood returns from the lungs to the left side of the heart, it has become
arterial, bright, pure, and no longer hurtful to the tissues. This
marvellous purifying change is effected by means of the very familiar act
of respiration, or breathing.

[Sidenote: 2. What are the lungs? How many lungs are there? Lung-substance?
Its properties? The pleura?]

2. THE LUNGS.--The lungs are the special organs of respiration. There are
two of them, one on each side of the chest, which cavity they, with the
heart, almost wholly occupy. The lung-substance is soft, elastic, and
sponge-like. Under pressure of the finger, it _crepitates_, or crackles,
and floats when thrown into water; these properties being {124} due to the
presence of air in the minute air-cells of the lungs. To facilitate the
movements necessary to these organs, each of them is provided with a double
covering of an exceedingly smooth and delicate membrane, called the
_pleura_. One layer of the pleura is attached to the walls of the chest,
and the other to the lungs; and they glide, one upon the other, with utmost
freedom. Like the membrane which envelops the heart, the pleura secretes
its own lubricating fluid, in quantities sufficient to keep it always
moist.

[Illustration: FIG. 34.--ORGANS OF THE CHEST.

A, Lungs. B, Heart. D, Pulmonary Artery. E, Trachea.]

{125}

[Illustration: FIG. 35.--LARYNX, TRACHEA, AND BRONCHIAL TUBES.]

[Illustration: FIG. 36.--DIAGRAM AND SECTION OF THE AIR-CELLS.]

[Sidenote: 3. Communication of the lungs with the external air? Bronchial
tubes?]

3. THE AIR-PASSAGES. --The lungs communicate with the external air by means
of certain air-tubes, the longest of which, the _trachea_, or windpipe,
runs along the front of the neck (Fig. 34, E, and 35). Within the chest
this tube divides into two branches, one entering each lung; these in turn
give rise to numerous branches, or bronchial tubes, as they are called,
which gradually diminish in size until they are about one-twenty-fifth of
an inch in diameter. Each of these terminates in a cluster of little
pouches, or "air-cells," having very thin walls, and covered with a
capillary network, the most intricate in the body (Fig. 36).

[Sidenote: 4. Office of the bronchial tubes? What further can you state of
them?]

4. These tubes are somewhat flexible, sufficiently so to bend when the
parts move in which they are situated; but they are greatly strengthened by
bands or rings of cartilage which keep the passages always open; otherwise
there would be a constantly-recurring tendency to collapse after every
breath. The lung-substance essentially consists of these bronchial tubes
and terminal air-cells, with the blood-vessels ramifying about them (Fig.
37). At the top of the trachea is the larynx, a sort of {126} box of
cartilage, across which are stretched the vocal cords. Here the voice is
produced chiefly by the passage of the respired air over these cords,
causing them to vibrate.

[Illustration: FIG. 37.--SECTION OF THE LUNGS.]

[Sidenote: 5. The epiglottis? When it does not close in time, what is the
consequence?]

5. Over the opening of the larynx is found the _epiglottis_, which fits
like the lid of a box at the entrance to the lungs, and closes during the
act of swallowing, so that food and drink shall pass backward to the
oesophagus, or gullet (Fig. 38). Occasionally it does not close in time,
and some substance intrudes within the larynx, when we at once discover, by
a choking sensation, that "something has gone the wrong way," and, by
coughing, we attempt to expel the unwelcome intruder. The epiglottis is one
of the many safeguards furnished by nature for our security and {127}
comfort, and is planned and put in place long before these organs are
brought into actual use in breathing and in taking food.

[Illustration: FIG. 38.--SECTION OF MOUTH AND THROAT.

A, The Tongue. B, The Uvula C, Vocal Cord. E, Epiglottis. L, Larynx.
N, Trachea. O, Oesophagus.]

[Sidenote: 6. Lining of the air-passages? Ciliated cells? Their uses? The
three diseases of the lungs?]

{128}

[Illustration: FIG. 39.--CILIATED CELLS.]

6. The air-passages are lined through nearly their whole extent with mucous
membrane, which maintains these parts in a constantly moist condition. This
membrane has a peculiar kind of cells upon its outer surface. If examined
under a powerful microscope, we may see, even for a considerable time after
their removal from the body, that these cells have minute hair-like
processes in motion, which wave like a field of grain under the influence
of a breeze (Fig. 39). This is a truly beautiful sight; and since it is
found that these little _cilia_, as they are called, always produce
currents in one direction, from within outward, it is probable that they
serve a useful purpose in catching and carrying away from the lungs dust
and other small particles drawn in with the breath (Fig. 39). The three
diseases which more commonly affect the lungs, as the result of exposure,
are pneumonia, or inflammation of the lungs, implicating principally the
air-cells; bronchitis, an inflammation of the large bronchial tubes; and
pleurisy, an inflammation of the investing membrane of the lungs, or
pleura. Among the young, an affection of the trachea takes place, known as
croup.

[Sidenote: 7. The act of breathing? Extension of the chest by breathing?]

7. THE MOVEMENTS OF RESPIRATION.--The act of breathing has two parts--(1),
_inspiration_, or drawing air into the lungs, and (2), _expiration_, or
expelling it from the lungs again. In inspiration, the chest extends in its
length, breadth, and height, or width. We can prove that this is the case
as regards the two latter, by observing the effect of a deep breath. The
ribs are elevated by means of numerous muscles, some of which occupy the
entire spaces between those bones. But the increase in length, or
vertically, is not so apparent, as it is caused by a muscle within the body
called the _diaphragm_, it being the thin partition which separates the
chest from the abdomen, rising like a dome within the chest. (Fig. 16).
{129}

[Sidenote: 8. Contraction of the diaphragm? Power of the diaphragm? Effects
of extending the walls of the chest? The habit of taking frequent and deep
inspirations?]

8. With every inspiration, the diaphragm contracts, and in so doing,
approaches more nearly a plane, or horizontal, surface, and thus enlarges
the capacity of the chest. Laughing, sobbing, hiccoughing, and sneezing are
caused by the spasmodic or sudden contraction of the diaphragm. The special
power of this muscle is important in securing endurance, or "long wind," as
it is commonly expressed; which may be obtained mainly by practice. It is
possessed in a marked degree by the mountaineer, the oarsman, and the
trained singer. As the walls of the chest extend, the lungs expand, and the
air rushes in to fill them. This constitutes an inspiration. The habit of
taking frequent and deep inspirations, in the erect position, with the
shoulders thrown back, tends greatly to increase the capacity and power of
the organs of respiration.

[Sidenote: 9. Expiration? The mechanism of expiration?]

9. EXPIRATION is a less powerful act than inspiration. The diaphragm
relaxes its contraction, and ascends in the form of a dome; the ribs
descend and contract the chest; while the lungs themselves, being elastic,
assist to drive out the air. The latter passes out through the same
channels by which it entered. At the end of each expiration there is a
pause, or period of repose, lasting about as long as the period of action.

[Sidenote: 10. Frequency of respiration? Effect of hurried action of the
heart?]

10. FREQUENCY OF RESPIRATION.--It is usually estimated that we breathe once
during every four beats of the heart, or about eighteen times in a minute.
There is, of course, a close relation between the heart and lungs, and
whatever modifies the pulse, in like manner affects the breathing. When the
action of the heart is hurried, a larger amount of blood is sent to the
lungs, and, as the consequence, they must act more rapidly. Occasionally,
the heart beats so very forcibly that the lungs cannot keep pace with it,
and then we experience a peculiar sense of {130} distress from the want of
air. This takes place when we run until we are "out of breath." At the end
of every fifth or sixth breath, the inspiration is generally longer than
usual, the effect being to change more completely the air of the lungs.

[Sidenote: 11. Respiration controlled by the will? Advantage of the
knowledge to us?]

11. Although, as a general rule, the work of respiration goes on
unconsciously and without exertion on our part, it is nevertheless under
the control of the will. We can increase or diminish the frequency of its
acts at pleasure, and we can "hold the breath," or arrest it altogether for
a short time. From twenty to thirty seconds is ordinarily the longest
period in which the breath can be held; but if we first expel all the
impure air from the lungs, by taking several very deep inspirations, the
time may be extended to one and a half or even two minutes. This should be
remembered, and acted upon, before passing through a burning building, or
any place where the air is very foul. The arrest of the respiration may be
still further prolonged by training and habit; thus it is said, the
pearl-fishers of India can remain three or four minutes under water without
being compelled to breathe.

[Sidenote: 12. Capacity of the lungs? Time required to renovate the air in
the lungs? In tranquil respiration? Importance of the provision?]

12. CAPACITY OF THE LUNGS.--The lungs are not filled and emptied by each
respiration. For while their full capacity, in the adult, is three hundred
and twenty cubic inches, or more than a gallon, the ordinary breathing air
is only one-sixteenth part of that volume, or twenty cubic inches, being
two-thirds of a pint. Accordingly, a complete renovation, or rotation, of
the air of the lungs does not take place more frequently than about once in
a minute; and by the gradual introduction of the external air, its
temperature is considerably elevated before it reaches the delicate
pulmonary capillaries. In tranquil respiration, less than two-thirds of the
breathing power is {131} called into exercise, leaving a reserve capacity
of about one hundred and twenty cubic inches, equivalent to three and one
half pints. This provision is indispensable to the continuation of life;
otherwise, a slight embarrassment of respiration, by an ordinary cold, for
instance, would suffice to cut off the necessary air, and the spark of life
would be speedily extinguished.

[Sidenote: 13. The atmosphere? How high or deep? How essential to life?
Marine life in perfectly pure water and air?]

13. THE AIR WE BREATHE.--The earth is enveloped on all sides by an
invisible fluid, called the atmosphere. It forms a vast and shoreless ocean
of air, forty-five miles deep, encircling and pervading all objects on the
earth's surface, which is absolutely essential for the preservation of all
vegetable and animal life,--in the sea, as well as on the land and in the
air. At the bottom, or in the lower strata of this aerial ocean, we move
and have our being. Perfectly pure water will not support marine life, for
a fish may be drowned in water from which the air has been exhausted, just
as certainly as a mouse, or any other land animal, will perish if put
deeply into the water for a length of time. The cause is the same in both
cases: the animal is deprived of the requisite amount of air. It is also
stated, that if the water-supply of the plant be deprived of air, its vital
processes are at once checked.

[Sidenote: 14. Composition of the air? Properties of the two gases?]

14. The air is not a simple element, as the ancients supposed, but is
formed by the mingling of two gases, known to the chemist as oxygen and
nitrogen, in the proportion of one part of the former to four parts of the
latter. These gases are very unlike, being almost opposite in their
properties: nitrogen is weak, inert, and cannot support life; while oxygen
is powerful, and incessantly active; and is the essential element which
gives to the atmosphere its power to support life and combustion. The
discovery of this fact was made by the French chemist, Lavoisier, in 1778.
{132}

[Sidenote: 15. Air once breathed? An animal in it? A candle? Analysis of
expired air? Change in volume?]

15. CHANGES IN THE AIR FROM RESPIRATION.--Air that has been once breathed
is no longer fit for respiration. An animal confined within it will sooner
or later die; so too, a lighted candle placed in it will be at once
extinguished. If we collect a quantity of expired air and analyze it, we
shall find that its composition is not the same as that of the inspired
air. When the air entered the lungs it was rich in oxygen; now it contains
twenty-five per cent. less of that gas. Its volume, however, remains nearly
the same; its loss being replaced by another and very different gas, which
the lungs exhaled, called _carbonic acid_, or, as the chemist terms it,
_carbon dioxide_.

[Sidenote: 16. What else has the expired air gained? When and where
noticed?]

16. The expired air has also gained moisture. This is noticed when we
breathe upon a mirror, or the window-pane, the surface being tarnished by
the condensation of the watery vapor exhaled by the lungs. In cold weather,
this causes the fine cloud which is seen issuing from the nostrils or mouth
with each expiration, and contributes in forming the feathery crystals of
ice which decorate our window-panes on a winter's morning.

[Sidenote: 17. Nature of the watery vapor? Its effects upon animals?]

17. This watery vapor contains a variable quantity of animal matter, the
exact nature of which is unknown; but when collected it speedily putrefies
and becomes highly offensive. From the effects, upon small animals, of
confinement in their own exhalations, having at the same time an abundant
supply of fresh air, it is believed that the organic matters thrown off by
the lungs and skin are direct and active poisons; and that to such
emanations from the body, more than to any other cause, are due the
depressing and even fatal results which follow the crowding of large
numbers of persons into places of limited capacity. {133}

[Sidenote: 18. Give some of the instances furnished by history.]

18. History furnishes many painful instances of the ill effects of
overcrowding. In 1756, of one hundred and forty-six Englishmen imprisoned
in the Black Hole of Calcutta, only twenty-three, at the end of eight
hours, survived. After the battle of Austerlitz, three hundred prisoners
were crowded into a cavern, where, in a few hours, two-thirds of their
number died. On board a steam-ship, during a stormy night, one hundred and
fifty passengers were confined in a small cabin, but when morning came,
only eighty remained alive.

[Sidenote: 19. Change in the blood from blue to red. Upon what does the
change depend? How shown?]

19. CHANGES IN THE BLOOD FROM RESPIRATION.--The most striking change which
