remarkable that iron is the only substance which can become magnetic in
any considerable degree. Nickel and one or two other metals have the
same property, but in a very slight degree. It is also remarkable that,
however powerfully a bar of steel may be magnetized, not the slightest
effect of the magnetism can be seen by its action on other than
magnetic substances. It is no heavier than before. Its magnetism does
not produce the slightest influence upon the human body. No one would
know that it was magnetic until something containing iron was brought
into its immediate neighborhood; then the attraction is set up. The
most important principle of magnetic science is that there are two
opposite kinds of magnetism, which are, in a certain sense, contrary in
their manifestations. The difference is seen in the behavior of the
magnet itself. One particular end points north, and the other end
south. What is it that distinguishes these two ends? The answer is that
one end has what we call north magnetism, while the other has south
magnetism. Every magnetic bar has two poles, one near one end, one near
the other. The north pole is drawn towards the north pole of the earth,
the south pole towards the south pole, and thus it is that the
direction of the magnet is determined. Now, when we bring two magnets
near each other we find another curious phenomenon. If the two like
poles are brought together, they do not attract but repel each other.
But the two opposite poles attract each other. The attraction and
repulsion are exactly equal under the same conditions. There is no more
attraction than repulsion. If we seal one magnet up in a paper or a
box, and then suspend another over the box, the north pole of the one
outside will tend to the south pole of the one in the box, and vice
versa.

Our next discovery is, that whenever a magnet attracts a piece of iron
it makes that iron into a magnet, at least for the time being. In the
case of ordinary soft or untempered iron the magnetism disappears
instantly when the magnet is removed. But if the magnet be made to
attract a piece of hardened steel, the latter will retain the magnetism
produced in it and become itself a permanent magnet.

This fact must have been known from the time that the compass came into
use. To make this instrument it was necessary to magnetize a small bar
or needle by passing a natural magnet over it.

In our times the magnetization is effected by an electric current. The
latter has curious magnetic properties; a magnetic needle brought
alongside of it will be found placing itself at right angles to the
wire bearing the current. On this principle is made the galvanometer
for measuring the intensity of a current. Moreover, if a piece of wire
is coiled round a bar of steel, and a powerful electric current pass
through the coil, the bar will become a magnet.

Another curious property of magnetism is that we cannot develop north
magnetism in a bar without developing south magnetism at the same time.
If it were otherwise, important consequences would result. A separate
north pole of a magnet would, if attached to a floating object and
thrown into the ocean, start on a journey towards the north all by
itself. A possible method of bringing this result about may suggest
itself. Let us take an ordinary bar magnet, with a pole at each end,
and break it in the middle; then would not the north end be all ready
to start on its voyage north, and the south end to make its way south?
But, alas! when this experiment is tried it is found that a south pole
instantly develops itself on one side of the break, and a north pole on
the other side, so that the two pieces will simply form two magnets,
each with its north and south pole. There is no possibility of making a
magnet with only one pole.

It was formerly supposed that the central portions of the earth
consisted of an immense magnet directed north and south. Although this
view is found, for reasons which need not be set forth in detail, to be
untenable, it gives us a good general idea of the nature of terrestrial
magnetism. One result that follows from the law of poles already
mentioned is that the magnetism which seems to belong to the north pole
of the earth is what we call south on the magnet, and vice versa.

Careful experiment shows us that the region around every magnet is
filled with magnetic force, strongest near the poles of the magnet, but
diminishing as the inverse square of the distance from the pole. This
force, at each point, acts along a certain line, called a line of
force. These lines are very prettily shown by the familiar experiment
of placing a sheet of paper over a magnet, and then scattering iron
filings on the surface of the paper. It will be noticed that the
filings arrange themselves along a series of curved lines, diverging in
every direction from each pole, but always passing from one pole to the
other. It is a universal law that whenever a magnet is brought into a
region where this force acts, it is attracted into such a position that
it shall have the same direction as the lines of force. Its north pole
will take the direction of the curve leading to the south pole of the
other magnet, and its south pole the opposite one.

The fact of terrestrial magnetism may be expressed by saying that the
space within and around the whole earth is filled by lines of magnetic
force, which we know nothing about until we suspend a magnet so
perfectly balanced that it may point in any direction whatever. Then it
turns and points in the direction of the lines of force, which may thus
be mapped out for all points of the earth.

We commonly say that the pole of the needle points towards the north.
The poets tell us how the needle is true to the pole. Every reader,
however, is now familiar with the general fact of a variation of the
compass. On our eastern seaboard, and all the way across the Atlantic,
the north pointing of the compass varies so far to the west that a ship
going to Europe and making no allowance for this deviation would find
herself making more nearly for the North Cape than for her destination.
The "declination," as it is termed in scientific language, varies from
one region of the earth to another. In some places it is towards the
west, in others towards the east.

The pointing of the needle in various regions of the world is shown by
means of magnetic maps. Such maps are published by the United States
Coast Survey, whose experts make a careful study of the magnetic force
all over the country. It is found that there is a line running nearly
north and south through the Middle States along which there is no
variation of the compass. To the east of it the variation of the north
pole of the magnet is west; to the west of it, east. The most rapid
changes in the pointing of the needle are towards the northeast and
northwest regions. When we travel to the northeastern boundary of Maine
the westerly variation has risen to 20 degrees. Towards the northwest
the easterly variation continually increases, until, in the northern
part of the State of Washington, it amounts to 23 degrees.

When we cross the Atlantic into Europe we find the west variation
diminishing until we reach a certain line passing through central
Russia and western Asia. This is again a line of no variation. Crossing
it, the variation is once more towards the east. This direction
continues over most of the continent of Asia, but varies in a somewhat
irregular manner from one part of the continent to another.

As a general rule, the lines of the earth's magnetic force are not
horizontal, and therefore one end or the other of a perfectly suspended
magnet will dip below the horizontal position. This is called the "dip
of the needle." It is observed by means of a brass circle, of which the
circumference is marked off in degrees. A magnet is attached to this
circle so as to form a diameter, and suspended on a horizontal axis
passing through the centre of gravity, so that the magnet shall be free
to point in the direction indicated by the earth's lines of magnetic
force. Armed with this apparatus, scientific travellers and navigators
have visited various points of the earth in order to determine the dip.
It is thus found that there is a belt passing around the earth near the
equator, but sometimes deviating several degrees from it, in which
there is no dip; that is to say, the lines of magnetic force are
horizontal. Taking any point on this belt and going north, it will be
found that the north pole of the magnet gradually tends downward, the
dip constantly increasing as we go farther north. In the southern part
of the United States the dip is about 60 degrees, and the direction of
the needle is nearly perpendicular to the earth's axis. In the northern
part of the country, including the region of the Great Lakes, the dip
increases to 75 degrees. Noticing that a dip of 90 degrees would mean
that the north end of the magnet points straight downward, it follows
that it would be more nearly correct to say that, throughout the United
States, the magnetic needle points up and down than that it points
north and south.

Going yet farther north, we find the dip still increasing, until at a
certain point in the arctic regions the north pole of the needle points
downward. In this region the compass is of no use to the traveller or
the navigator. The point is called the Magnetic Pole. Its position has
been located several times by scientific observers. The best
determinations made during the last eighty years agree fairly well in
placing it near 70 degrees north latitude and 97 degrees longitude west
from Greenwich. This point is situated on the west shore of the
Boothian Peninsula, which is bounded on the south end by McClintock
Channel. It is about five hundred miles north of the northwest part of
Hudson Bay. There is a corresponding magnetic pole in the Antarctic
Ocean, or rather on Victoria Land, nearly south of Australia. Its
position has not been so exactly located as in the north, but it is
supposed to be at about 74 degrees of south latitude and 147 degrees of
east longitude from Greenwich.

The magnetic poles used to be looked upon as the points towards which
the respective ends of the needle were attracted. And, as a matter of
fact, the magnetic force is stronger near the poles than elsewhere.
When located in this way by strength of force, it is found that there
is a second north pole in northern Siberia. Its location has not,
however, been so well determined as in the case of the American pole,
and it is not yet satisfactorily shown that there is any one point in
Siberia where the direction of the force is exactly downward.

[Illustration with caption: DIP OF THE MAGNETIC NEEDLE IN VARIOUS
LATITUDES. The arrow points show the direction of the north end of the
magnetic needle, which dips downward in north latitudes, while the
south end dips in south latitudes.]

The declination and dip, taken together, show the exact direction of
the magnetic force at any place. But in order to complete the statement
of the force, one more element must be given--its amount. The intensity
of the magnetic force is determined by suspending a magnet in a
horizontal position, and then allowing it to oscillate back and forth
around the suspension. The stronger the force, the less the time it
will take to oscillate. Thus, by carrying a magnet to various parts of
the world, the magnetic force can be determined at every point where a
proper support for the magnet is obtainable. The intensity thus found
is called the horizontal force. This is not really the total force,
because the latter depends upon the dip; the greater the dip, the less
will be the horizontal force which corresponds to a certain total
force. But a very simple computation enables the one to be determined
when the value of the other is known. In this way it is found that, as
a general rule, the magnetic force is least in the earth's equatorial
regions and increases as we approach either of the magnetic poles.

When the most exact observations on the direction of the needle are
made, it is found that it never remains at rest. Beginning with the
changes of shortest duration, we have a change which takes place every
day, and is therefore called diurnal. In our northern latitudes it is
found that during the six hours from nine o'clock at night until three
in the morning the direction of the magnet remains nearly the same. But
between three and four A.M. it begins to deviate towards the east,
going farther and farther east until about 8 A.M. Then, rather
suddenly, it begins to swing towards the west with a much more rapid
movement, which comes to an end between one and two o'clock in the
afternoon. Then, more slowly, it returns in an easterly direction until
about nine at night, when it becomes once more nearly quiescent.
Happily, the amount of this change is so small that the navigator need
not trouble himself with it. The entire range of movement rarely
amounts to one-quarter of a degree.

It is a curious fact that the amount of the change is twice as great in
June as it is in December. This indicates that it is caused by the
sun's radiation. But how or why this cause should produce such an
effect no one has yet discovered.

Another curious feature is that in the southern hemisphere the
direction of the motion is reversed, although its general character
remains the same. The pointing deviates towards the west in the
morning, then rapidly moves towards the east until about two o'clock,
after which it slowly returns to its original direction.

The dip of the needle goes through a similar cycle of daily changes. In
northern latitudes it is found that at about six in the morning the dip
begins to increase, and continues to do so until noon, after which it
diminishes until seven or eight o'clock in the evening, when it becomes
nearly constant for the rest of the night. In the southern hemisphere
the direction of the movement is reversed.

When the pointing of the needle is compared with the direction of the
moon, it is found that there is a similar change. But, instead of
following the moon in its course, it goes through two periods in a day,
like the tides. When the moon is on the meridian, whether above or
below us, the effect is in one direction, while when it is rising or
setting it is in the opposite direction. In other words, there is a
complete swinging backward and forward twice in a lunar day. It might
be supposed that such an effect would be due to the moon, like the
earth, being a magnet. But were this the case there would be only one
swing back and forth during the passage of the moon from the meridian
until it came back to the meridian again. The effect would be opposite
at the rising and setting of the moon, which we have seen is not the
case. To make the explanation yet more difficult, it is found that, as
in the case of the sun, the change is opposite in the northern and
southern hemispheres and very small at the equator, where, by virtue of
any action that we can conceive of, it ought to be greatest. The
pointing is also found to change with the age of the moon and with the
season of the year. But these motions are too small to be set forth in
the present article.

There is yet another class of changes much wider than these. The
observations recorded since the time of Columbus show that, in the
course of centuries, the variation of the compass, at any one point,
changes very widely. It is well known that in 1490 the needle pointed
east of north in the Mediterranean, as well as in those portions of the
Atlantic which were then navigated. Columbus was therefore much
astonished when, on his first voyage, in mid-ocean, he found that the
deviation was reversed, and was now towards the west. It follows that a
line of no variation then passed through the Atlantic Ocean. But this
line has since been moving towards the east. About 1662 it passed the
meridian of Paris. During the two hundred and forty years which have
since elapsed, it has passed over Central Europe, and now, as we have
already said, passes through European Russia.

The existence of natural magnets composed of iron ore, and their
property of attracting iron and making it magnetic, have been known
from the remotest antiquity. But the question as to who first
discovered the fact that a magnetized needle points north and south,
and applied this discovery to navigation, has given rise to much
discussion. That the property was known to the Chinese about the
beginning of our era seems to be fairly well established, the
statements to that effect being of a kind that could not well have been
invented. Historical evidence of the use of the magnetic needle in
navigation dates from the twelfth century. The earliest compass
consisted simply of a splinter of wood or a piece of straw to which the
magnetized needle was attached, and which was floated in water. A
curious obstacle is said to have interfered with the first uses of this
instrument. Jack is a superstitious fellow, and we may be sure that he
was not less so in former times than he is today. From his point of
view there was something uncanny in so very simple a contrivance as a
floating straw persistently showing him the direction in which he must
sail. It made him very uncomfortable to go to sea under the guidance of
an invisible power. But with him, as with the rest of us, familiarity
breeds contempt, and it did not take more than a generation to show
that much good and no harm came to those who used the magic pointer.

The modern compass, as made in the most approved form for naval and
other large ships, is the liquid one. This does not mean that the card
bearing the needle floats on the liquid, but only that a part of the
force is taken off from the pivot on which it turns, so as to make the
friction as small as possible, and to prevent the oscillation back and
forth which would continually go on if the card were perfectly free to
turn. The compass-card is marked not only with the thirty-two familiar
points of the compass, but is also divided into degrees. In the most
accurate navigation it is probable that very little use of the points
is made, the ship being directed according to the degrees.

A single needle is not relied upon to secure the direction of the card,
the latter being attached to a system of four or even more magnets, all
pointing in the same direction. The compass must have no iron in its
construction or support, because the attraction of that substance on
the needle would be fatal to its performance.

From this cause the use of iron as ship-building material introduced a
difficulty which it was feared would prove very serious. The thousands
of tons of iron in a ship must exert a strong attraction on the
magnetic needle. Another complication is introduced by the fact that
the iron of the ship will always become more or less magnetic, and when
the ship is built of steel, as modern ones are, this magnetism will be
more or less permanent.

We have already said that a magnet has the property of making steel or
iron in its neighborhood into another magnet, with its poles pointing
in the opposite direction. The consequence is that the magnetism of the
earth itself will make iron or steel more or less magnetic. As a ship
is built she thus becomes a great repository of magnetism, the
direction of the force of which will depend upon the position in which
she lay while building. If erected on the bank of an east and west
stream, the north end of the ship will become the north pole of a
magnet and the south end the south pole. Accordingly, when she is
launched and proceeds to sea, the compass points not exactly according
to the magnetism of the earth, but partly according to that of the ship
also.

