job was to make money for the company under Bending's direction while
Bending himself spent as much time as he could fussing around with
things that interested him.

The word "genius" has several connotations, depending on how one defines
a genius. Leaving aside the Greek, Roman and Arabic definitions, a
careful observer will find that there are two general classes of genius:
the "partial" genius, and the "general" genius. Actually, such a narrow
definition doesn't do either kind justice, but defining a human being is
an almost impossible job, anyway, so we'll have to do the best we can
with the tools we have to work with.

The "partial" genius follows the classic definition. "A genius is a man
with a one-track mind; an idiot has one track less." He's a real wowser
at one class of knowledge, and doesn't know spit about the others.

The "general" genius doesn't specialize. He's capable of original
thought in any field he works in.

The trouble is that, because of the greater concentration involved, the
partial genius usually gets more recognition than the general--that is,
if he gets any recognition at all. Thus, the mathematical and optical
work of Sir Isaac Newton show true genius; his theological and political
ideas weren't worth the paper he wrote them on. Similar accusations
might be leveled against Albert Einstein--and many others.

The general genius isn't so well known because he spreads his abilities
over a broad area. Some--like Leonardo da Vinci--have made a name for
themselves, but, in general, they have remained in the background.

Someone once defined a specialist as "a man who learns more and more
about less and less until he finally knows everything about nothing."
And there is the converse, the general practitioner, who knows "less and
less about more and more until he finally knows nothing about
everything."

Both types can produce geniuses, and there is, of course, a broad
spectrum in between. Da Vinci, for instance, became famous for his
paintings; he concentrated on that field because he knew perfectly well
that his designs for such things as airplanes were impracticable at the
time, whereas the Church would pay for art.

Samson Bending was a genius, granted; but he was more toward the
"special" than the "general" side of the spectrum. His grasp of nuclear
physics was far and away beyond that of any other scientist of his day;
his ability to handle political and economic relationships was rather
feeble.

As he sat in his waiting room on that chill day of February, 1981, his
mind was centered on nuclear physics, not general economics. Not that
Bending was oblivious to the power of the Great God Ammon; Bending was
very fond of money and appreciated the things it could achieve. He
simply didn't appreciate the over-all power of Ammon. At the moment, he
was brooding darkly over the very fact of existence of Power Utilities,
and trying to figure out a suitable rejoinder to their _coup de demon_.

And then he heard the whir of helicopter blades over the building. The
police had come.

He opened the door of the lab building as they came up the steps. There
were two plainclothes men--the Technical Squad, Bending knew--and four
uniformed officers.

       *       *       *       *       *

The plainclothesman in the lead, a tall, rather thin man, with dark
straight hair and a small mustache, said: "Mr. Bending? I'm Sergeant
Ketzel. Mind if the boys take a look at the scene? And I'd like to ask a
few questions?"

"Fine," said Sam Bending. "Come on in."

He showed the officers to the lab, and telling them nothing, left them
to their work. Then he went into his office, followed by Sergeant
Ketzel. The detective took down all the pertinent data that Bending
chose to give him, and then asked Bending to go with him to the lab.

The other plainclothesman came up to Sergeant Ketzel and Bending as they
entered. "Pretty easy to see what happened," he said. "Come on over and
take a look." He led them over to the wall where the Converter had been
hidden.

"See," he said, "here's your main power line coming in here. It's been
burned off. They shut off the power to cut off the burglar alarm to
that safe over there."

Ketzel shook his head slowly, but said nothing for the moment. He looked
at Bending. "Has the safe been robbed?"

"I don't know," Bending admitted. "I didn't touch it after I saw all
this wreckage."

Ketzel told a couple of the uniformed men to go over the safe for
evidence. While they waited, Bending looked again at the hole in the
wall where the Converter had been. And it suddenly struck him that, even
if he had reported the loss of the Converter to the police, it would be
hard to prove. The thief had taken care to burn off the ends of the old
leads that had originally come into the building. Bending himself had
cut them a week before to install the Converter. Had they been left as
they were, Bending could have proved by the oxidation of the surface
that they had been cut a long time before the leads on this side of the
Converter. But both had been carefully fused by a torch.

"Nothing on the safe," said one of the officers. "No prints, at any
rate. Micros might show glove or cloth traces, but--" He shrugged.

"Would you mind opening the safe, Mr. Bending?" Sergeant Ketzel asked.

"Certainly," Bending said. He wondered if the safe _had_ been robbed. In
the certainty that it was only the Converter that the burglars had been
after, he hadn't even thought about the safe.

Bending touched the handle, turned it a trifle, and the door swung open
easily in his hand. "It wasn't even locked," Bending said, almost to
himself.

He looked inside. The safe had been thoroughly gone through, but as far
as Bending could see, there were no papers missing.

"Don't touch anything in there, Mr. Bending," said Ketzel, "Just tell us
as much as you can by looking at it."

"The papers have been disturbed," Bending said carefully, "but I don't
think anything is missing, except the petty cash box."

"Uh-huh," Ketzel grunted significantly. "Petty cash box. About how much
was in it, Mr. Bending?"

"Three or four thousand, I imagine: you'll have to ask Jim Luckman, my
business manager. He keeps track of things like that."

"Three or four _thousand_ in petty cash?" Ketzel asked, as though he'd
prefer Bending to correct the figure to "two or three hundred."

"About that. Sometimes we have to order equipment of one kind or another
in a hurry, and we can usually expedite matters if we can promise cash.
You know how it is."

Sergeant Ketzel nodded sourly. He evidently knew only too well how it
was. Even the most respectable businessmen were doing occasional
business with the black market in technological devices. But he didn't
say anything to Bending.

"What did the cash box look like?" he asked.

Bending held out his hands to measure off a distance. "About so
long--ten inches, I guess; maybe six inches wide and four deep. Thin
sheet steel, with a gray crackle finish. There was a lock on it, but it
wasn't much of one; since it was kept in the safe, there was no need for
a strong lock."

Sergeant Ketzel nodded. "In other words, an ordinary office cash box. No
distinguishing marks at all?"

"It had 'Bending Consultants' on the top. And underneath that, the word
'Lab'. In black paint. That 'Lab' was to distinguish it from the petty
cash box in the main office."

"I see. Do you know anything about the denominations of the bills? Were
they marked in any way?"

Bending frowned. "I don't know. You'd have to ask Luckman about that,
too."

"Where is he now?"

"Home, I imagine. He isn't due to report for work until ten."

"O.K. Will you leave word that we want to talk to him when he comes in?
It'll take us a while to get all the information we can from the lab,
here." He looked back at the hole in the wall. "It still doesn't make
sense. Why should they go to all that trouble just to shut off a burglar
alarm?" He shook his head and went over to where the others were
working.

It was hours before the police left, and long before they were gone Sam
Bending had begun to wish fervently that he had never called them. He
felt that he should have kept his mouth shut and fought Power Utilities
on the ground they had chosen. They had known about the Converter only
two weeks, and they had already struck. He tried to remember exactly how
the Utilities representative had worded what he'd said, and couldn't.

Well, there was an easy way to find out. He went over to his files and
took out the recording for Friday, 30 January 1981. He threaded it
through the sound player--he had no particular desire to look at the
man's face again--and turned on the machine. The first sentence brought
the whole scene back to mind.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Thank you for your time, Mr. Bending," the man whose card had announced
him as Richard Olcott. He was a rather average-sized man, with a
fiftyish face, graying hair that was beginning to thin, and an
expression like that of a friendly poker player--pleasant, but
inscrutable.

"I always have time to see a representative of Power Utilities, Mr.
Olcott," Bending said. "Though I must admit that I'm more used to
dealing with various engineers who work for your subsidiaries."

"Not subsidiaries, please," Olcott admonished in a friendly tone. "Like
the Bell Telephone Company, Power Utilities is actually a group of
independent but mutually co-operative companies organized under a parent
company."

Bending grinned. "I stand corrected. What did you have on your mind, Mr.
Olcott?"

Olcott's hesitation was of half-second duration, but it was perceptible.

"Mr. Bending," he began, "I understand that you have been ... ah ...
working on a new and ... ah ... radically different method of power
generation. Er ... is that substantially correct?"

Bending looked at the man, his blocky, big-jawed face expressionless.
"I've been doing experimenting with power generators, yes," he said
after a moment. "That's my business."

"Oh, quite, quite. I understand that," Olcott said hurriedly.
"I ... ah ... took the trouble to look up your record before I came.
I'm well aware of the invaluable work you've done in the power field."

"Thank you," Bending said agreeably. He waited to see what the other
would say next. It was his move.

"However," Olcott said, "that's not the sort of thing I was referring
to." He leaned forward in his chair, and his bright gray eyes seemed to
take on a new life; his manner seemed to alter subtly.

"Let me put my ... _our_ cards on the table, Mr. Bending. We understand
that you have designed, and are experimenting with, an amazingly compact
power source. We understand that little remains but to get the bugs out
of your pilot model.

"Naturally, we are interested. Our business is supplying the nation with
power. Anything from a new type solar battery on up is of interest to
us." He stopped, waiting for Bending to speak.

Bending obliged. "I see Petternek let the cat out of the bag
prematurely," he said with a smile. "I hadn't intended to spring it
until it was a polished work of engineering art. It's been more of a
hobby than anything else, you see."

Olcott smiled disarmingly. "I'm not acquainted with Mr. Petternek; to be
quite honest, I have no idea where our engineers picked up the
