
Near the end of his fifteenth orbit as Greenland slipped by noiselessly
below, he made the routine measurements that tested the operation of his
space capsule and checked the automatic instruments which would transmit
their stored data to Earth on his next pass over Control. Everything
normal; all mechanical devices were operating perfectly.

This information didn't surprise him, in fact, he really didn't even
think about it. The previous orbits and the long simulated flights on
Earth during training had made such checks routine and perfect results
expected. The capsules were developed by exhaustive testing both on the
ground and as empty satellites before entrusting them to carry animals
and then the first human.

He returned to contemplation of the panorama passing below and above,
although as he noted idly, above and below had lost some of their usual
meaning. Since his capsule, like all heavenly bodies, was stable in
position with respect to the entire universe and, thanks to Sir Isaac
Newton and his laws, never changed, the Earth and the stars alternated
over his head during each orbit. "Up" now meant whatever was in the
direction of his head. He remembered that even during his initial orbit
when the Earth first appeared overhead he accepted the fact as normal.
He wondered if the other two had accepted it as easily.

For there had been two men hurled into orbit before he ventured into
space. Two others who had also passed the rigorous three-year training
period and were selected on the basis of over-all performance to precede
him. He had known them both well and wondered again what had happened on
their flights. Of course, they had both returned, depending upon what
your definition of return was. The capsules in which they had ventured
beyond Earth had returned them living. But this was to be expected, for
even the considerable hazards of descent through the atmosphere and the
terrible heating which occurred were successfully surmounted by the
capsule.

Naturally, it had not been expected that the satellites would have to be
brought down by command from the ground. But this, too, was part of the
careful planning--radio control of the retro-rockets that move the
satellite out of orbit by reducing its velocity. Of course, ground
control was to be used only if the astronaut failed to ignite the
retro-rockets himself. He remembered everyone's surprise and relief when
the first capsule was recovered and its occupant found to be alive. They
had assumed that in spite of all precautions he was dead because he had
not fired the rockets on the fiftieth orbit and it was necessary to
bring him down on the sixty-fifth.

Recovery alive only partially solved the mystery, for the rescuers and
all others were met by a haughty, stony silence from the occupant.
Batteries of tests confirmed an early diagnosis: complete and utter
withdrawal; absolute refusal to communicate. Therapy was unsuccessful.

       *       *       *       *       *

