Slashaway opened blurred eyes, "Phew!" he muttered. "You sure socked me
hard, sir."

"You went out like a light," explained Lawton gently. "A minute before
the ship lurched."

"The ship _lurched_, sir?"

"Something's very wrong, Slashaway. The ship isn't moving. There are no
vibrations and--Slashaway, are you hurt? Your skull thumped against that
bulkhead so hard I was afraid--"

"Naw, I'm okay. Whatd'ya mean, the ship ain't moving? How could it
stop?"

Lawton said. "I don't know, Slashaway." Helping the gym slugger to his
feet he stared apprehensively about him. Captain Forrester was kneeling
on the resin testing his hocks for sprains with splayed fingers, his
features twitching.

"Hurt badly, sir?"

The Commander shook his head. "I don't think so. Dave, we are twenty
thousand feet up, so how in hell could we be stationary in space?"

"It's all yours, skipper."

"I must say you're helpful."

Forrester got painfully to his feet and limped toward the athletic
compartment's single quartz port--a small circle of radiance on a level
with his eyes. As the port sloped downward at an angle of nearly sixty
degrees all he could see was a diffuse glimmer until he wedged his brow
in the observation visor and stared downward.

Lawton heard him suck in his breath sharply. "Well, sir?"

"There are thin cirrus clouds directly beneath us. They're not moving."

Lawton gasped, the sense of being in an impossible situation swelling to
nightmare proportions within him. What could have happened?

                *       *       *       *       *

Directly behind him, close to a bulkhead chronometer, which was clicking
out the seconds with unabashed regularity, was a misty blue visiplate
that merely had to be switched on to bring the pilots into view.

The Commander hobbled toward it, and manipulated a rheostat. The two
pilots appeared side by side on the screen, sitting amidst a spidery
network of dully gleaming pipe lines and nichrome humidification units.
They had unbuttoned their high-altitude coats and their stratosphere
helmets were resting on their knees. The Jablochoff candle light which
flooded the pilot room accentuated the haggardness of their features,
which were a sickly cadaverous hue.

The captain spoke directly into the visiplate. "What's wrong with the
ship?" he demanded. "Why aren't we descending? Dawson, you do the
talking!"

One of the pilots leaned tensely forward, his shoulders jerking. "We
don't know, sir. The rotaries went dead when the ship started gyrating.
We can't work the emergency torps and the temperature is rising."

"But--it defies all logic," Forrester muttered. "How could a metal ship
weighing tons be suspended in the air like a balloon? It is stationary,
but it is not buoyant. We seem in all respects to be _frozen in_."

"The explanation may be simpler than you dream," Lawton said. "When
we've found the key."

The Captain swung toward him. "Could _you_ find the key, Dave?"

"I should like to try. It may be hidden somewhere on the ship, and then
again, it may not be. But I should like to go over the ship with a
fine-tooth comb, and then I should like to go over _outside_,
thoroughly. Suppose you make me an emergency mate and give me a carte
blanche, sir."

Lawton got his carte blanche. For two hours he did nothing spectacular,
but he went over every inch of the ship. He also lined up the crew and
pumped them. The men were as completely in the dark as the pilots and
the now completely recovered Slashaway, who was following Lawton about
like a doting seal.

"You're a right guy, sir. Another two or three cracks and my noggin
would've split wide open."

"But not like an eggshell, Slashaway. Pig iron develops fissures under
terrific pounding but your cranium seems to be more like tempered steel.
Slashaway, you won't understand this, but I've got to talk to somebody
and the Captain is too busy to listen.

"I went over the entire ship because I thought there might be a hidden
source of buoyancy somewhere. It would take a lot of air bubbles to
turn this ship into a balloon, but there are large vacuum chambers under
the multiple series condensers in the engine room which conceivably
could have sucked in a helium leakage from the carbon pile valves. And
there are bulkhead porosities which could have clogged."

"Yeah," muttered Slashaway, scratching his head. "I see what you mean,
sir."

"It was no soap. There's nothing _inside_ the ship that could possibly
keep us up. Therefore there must be something outside that isn't air. We
know there _is_ air outside. We've stuck our heads out and sniffed it.
And we've found out a curious thing.

"Along with the oxygen there is water vapor, but it isn't H2O. It's HO.
A molecular arrangement like that occurs in the upper Solar atmosphere,
but nowhere on Earth. And there's a thin sprinkling of hydrocarbon
molecules out there too. Hydrocarbon appears ordinarily as methane gas,
but out there it rings up as CH. Methane is CH4. And there are also
scandium oxide molecules making unfamiliar faces at us. And oxide of
boron--with an equational limp."

