wasn't using and I traded my outboard motor for, my old m ... my father
made me trade back. But it was like Skinny said ... You know, Skinny.
Skinny Thompson. He's the one you guys keep calling the boy genius, but
shucks, he's no ...

Well, yeah, it's like Skinny said, we didn't need an outboard motor, and
we did need a compressor. You've got to have a compressor on a
spaceship, everybody knows that. And that old compression chamber that
old man ... I mean _Mr._ Fields let us use didn't have a compressor.

Sure he said we could use it. Anyway he said we could play with it, and
Skinny said we were going to make a spaceship out of it, and he said go
ahead.

Well, no, he didn't say it exactly like that. I mean, well, like he
didn't take it serious, sort of.

Anyway, it made a swell spaceship. It had four portholes on it and an
air lock and real bunks in it and lots of room for all that stuff that
Skinny put in there. But it didn't have a compressor and that's why ...

What stuff? Oh, you know, the stuff that Skinny put in there. Like the
radar he made out of a TV set and the antigravity and the atomic power
plant he invented to run it all with.

He's awful smart, Skinny is, but he's not like what you think of a
genius. You know, he's not all the time using big words, and he doesn't
look like a genius. I mean, we call him Skinny 'cause he used to
be--Skinny.

But he isn't now, I mean he's maybe small for his age, anyway he's
smaller than me, and I'm the same age as he is. 'Course, I'm big for my
age, so that doesn't mean much, does it?

Well, I guess Stinker Brinker started it. He's always riding Skinny
about one thing or another, but Skinny never gets mad and it's a good
thing for Stinker, too. I saw Skinny clean up on a bunch of ninth
graders ... Well, a couple of them anyway. They were saying ... Well, I
guess I won't tell you what they were saying. Anyway, Skinny used judo,
I guess, because there wasn't much of a fight.

Anyway, Stinker said something about how he was going to be a rocket
pilot when he grew up, and I told him that Skinny had told me that there
wouldn't be any rockets, and that antigravity would be the thing as soon
as it was invented. So Stinker said it never would be invented, and I
said it would so, and he said it would not, and I said ...

Well, if you're going to keep interrupting me, how can I ...

All right. Anyway, Skinny broke into the argument and said that he could
prove mathematically that antigravity was possible, and Stinky said
suure he could, and Skinny said sure he could, and Stinky said suuure he
could, like that. Honestly, is that any way to argue? I mean it sounds
like two people agreeing, only Stinky keeps going suuure, like that, you
know? And Stinky, what does he know about mathematics? He's had to take
Remedial Arithmetic ever since ...

       *       *       *       *       *

