
The solid, stable Earth of her childhood was solid and stable no longer,
but a sphere turning through a black void. Nor was it properly called
Earth, but a planet named Rythar. The adjustment Mryna had to make was
shattering; she lost faith in everything she believed.

Yet the clock-work logic of astronomy appealed to her orderly mind. It
explained why the rain mist glowed with light during the day and turned
dark at night. Mryna had never seen a clear sky. She had no visual data
to tie her new concept to.

For six years she kept the secret. She hid the papers and the astronomy
text which she found in the Old Village. Later, after the metal men
came, she destroyed everything so none of the other women would know the
Earth-god was a man.

At first she kept the secret because she was afraid. For some reason the
man who played at being god wanted the kids to believe Rythar was Earth,
the totality of the universe enveloped in a cloud of mist. She knew that
because she once asked god what a planet was. The face on the screen in
the answer house became frigid with anger--or was it fear?--and the
Earth-god said:

"The word means nothing."

But late that night a very large god-car brought six metal men down
through the rain mist. They were huge, jointed things that clanked when
they walked. Four of them used weapons to herd the kids together in
their small settlement. The two others went to the Old Village and
blasted the ruins with high explosives.

Vaguely Mryna remembered that the metal men had been there before, when
the kids were still very small. They had built the new settlement and
they had brought food. They lived with the children for a long time, she
thought--but the memory was hazy.

As the years passed, Mryna's fear retreated and only one thing became
important: she knew the Earth-god was a man. On the fertile soil of
Rythar there were one hundred women and thirty men. All the boys had
taken mates before they reached seventeen. Seventy girls were left
unmarried, with no prospect of ever having husbands. A score or more
became second wives in polygamous homes, but plural marriage had no
appeal for Mryna. She was firmly determined to possess a man of her own.
And why shouldn't it be the Earth-god?

As her first step toward escape, Mryna volunteered for duty in the
answer house. For as long as she could remember, the answer house had
stood on a knoll some distance beyond the new settlement. It was a
square, one-room building, housing a speaking box, a glass screen and a
console of transmission machinery. Anyone in the settlement could
contact god and request information or special equipment.

God went out of his way to deluge them with information. The simplest
question produced voluminous data, transmitted over the screen and
photographed on reels of film. Someone had to be in the answer house to
handle the photography. The work was not hard, but it was monotonous.
Most of the kids preferred to farm the fields or dig the sacrificial
ore.

A request for equipment was granted just as promptly. Tools, machines,
seeds, fertilizers, packaged buildings, games, clothing--everything came
in a god-car. It was a large cylinder which hissed down from the rain
mist on a pillar of fire. The landing site was a flat, charred field
near the answer house. Unless the equipment was unusually heavy, the
attendant stationed in the house was expected to unload the god-car and
pile aboard the sacrifice ores mined on Rythar.

God asked two things from the settlement: the pieces of unusually heavy
metal which they dug from the hills, and tiny vials of soil. In an
hour's time they could mine enough ore to fill the compartment of a
god-car, and god never complained if they sometimes sent the cylinder
back empty. But he fussed mightily over the small vials of Earth. He
gave very explicit directions as to where they were to take the samples,
and the place was never the same. Sometimes they had to travel miles
from the settlement to satisfy that inexplicable whim.


For two weeks Mryna patiently ran off the endless films of new books and
unloaded the god-car when it came. She examined the interior of the
cylinder carefully and she weighed every possible risk. The compartment
was very small, but she concluded that she would be safe.

And so she made her decision. Tense and tight-lipped Mryna Brill slipped
aboard the god-car. She sealed the lock door, which automatically fired
the launching tubes. After that there was no turning back.

The dark compartment shook in a thunder of sound. The weight of the
escape speed tore at her body, pulling her tight against the confining
walls. She lost consciousness until the pressure lessened.

The metal walls became hot but the space was too confining for her to
avoid contact entirely. Four narrow light tubes came on, with a dull,
red glow, and suddenly a gelatinous liquid emptied out of ceiling vents.
The fluid sprayed every exposed surface in the cubicle, draining through
the shipment of sacrifice ores at Mryna's feet. It had a choking,
antiseptic odor; it stung Mryna's face and inflamed her eyes.

Worse still, as the liquid soaked into her clothing, it disintegrated
the fiber, tearing away the cloth in long strips which slowly dissolved
in the liquid on the floor. Before the antiseptic spray ceased, Mryna
was helplessly naked. Even her black boots had not survived.

The red lights went out and Mryna was imprisoned again in the crushing
darkness. A terror of the taboos she had defied swept her mind. She
began to scream, but the sound was lost in the roar of the motors.

Suddenly it was over. The god-car lurched into something hard. Mryna was
thrown against the ceiling--and she hung there, weightless. The pieces
of sacrifice ore were floating in the darkness just as she was. The
motors cut out and the lock door swung open.

Mryna saw a circular room, brightly lighted with a glaring, blue light.
The nature of her fear changed. This was the house of the Earth-god, but
