
"Oh, sure." Holme grimaced. "Do you a lot of good, too. Guy's working
on some production run, it helps a lot he knows why all them big guys
in the history books did them things, huh?" He laughed derisively.

"Sure it does! What they want, you should make that fabricator spit
out nice parts, see?" He swelled his chest.

"Now me, I got my mind on my business, see. I get out of here, I
oughta make out pretty good." He looked around the cell.

"Didn't get no parole, see, so I get all the training. Real good
trained machinist now, and I'm gonna walk out of here clean. Get a job
down at the space-yards.

"Machinist helper, see? Then, soon's I been there a while, I'll get my
papers and go contract machinist. Real good money. Maybe you'd do
better, you try that."

       *       *       *       *       *

From the lower bunk, Big Carl Marlo laughed softly.

"Sure, kid, sure. You got it all made, huh? Pretty quick, you own
Janzel Equipment, huh? Hah! Know what happens, you go outside?

"Sure, they give you a job. Like you said, helper. They pay enough you
get a pad and slop to keep you alive. That's all you get."

"Aw, now listen!" Holme started up.

Marlo wagged his head. "You go for papers, see? Naw! Got no papers for
jailbirds. Staffman'll give you the word. He gets through pushing you
around, you go back, 'counta you don't know nothing else."

He laughed shortly.

"Gopher, that's you. You go fer this, and you go fer that. Slop and a
pad you get." He swung out of his bunk.

"Oh, sure, maybe they put you on a fabricator. Even let you set it up
for 'em. But that don't get you no extra pins."

Holme shook his head.

"Councilor gave me the word," he said stubbornly. "They need good
machinists."

"Yeah." Marlo nodded. "Sure, they want graduates down at Talburg. But
they ain't paying 'em for no contract machinist when they can keep 'em
as helpers." He turned.

"Ain't that right, Pete?"

Karzer looked up from a bag he was packing.

"Yeah, yeah, that's right, Carl. I know a few guys once, tried playing
the legit. Got kicked around, see? Low pay. Staffman hammering on 'em
all the time. Big joke when they try to get more for themselves.

"Yeah, big joke. They get blamed, they bust something, see, so they
owe the company big money." He looked critically at a pair of socks.

"So they get smart after a while. Dusted around the corner and went
back on the make. Do better that way, see?

"Naw, they give you a lot of guff, you go to work outside, work hard,
keep your nose clean, you come out of parole and you're in the money.
It's sucker bait, is all. Don't go like that, see."

Marlo came closer to Holme.

"Naw, you go out clean, see, just like you say. Then you play it easy.
Get a good score and lay back for a while. Don't go pushing your luck.

"That's how they hook me, see. I get too hungry. Get a nice touch, it
looks so good I gotta go back for seconds, and they're waiting. I
don't make that mistake again." He shook his head.

"Got me a nice pad, way up valley. Gonna hole up there. Go out, pull a
good job, then I lay around, maybe a year and think up another. Then,
when I'm all ready, I go out, pull a can or two open and lift what
they got back to the pad. Ain't gonna be no more of this scuffling
around, hitting a quick one and running out to spend the pins quick,
so's I can get in no traps."

He looked at Holme thoughtfully.

"I just now think of something, kid. You can make yourself a nice bit,
real easy. Don't cost hardly nothing to set up and there ain't much
risk. You work more'n a year, learning all about tools, huh? They
teach you all about making tools, huh?"

"Sure." Holme laughed shortly. "Got to make all your own hand tools
before you get through. Why?"

Marlo grinned broadly.

"I could tell you a lotta guys, need real special tools. Need tools
you don't buy in no store, like maybe a good can opener a guy can
carry easy. And they pay real good, you make what they want and keep
your mouth shut." He rubbed his chin.

"Nice," he went on. "Real nice. And all you need is maybe a few tools
you can buy anywhere. And maybe you gotta build up a little forge. Guy
knew his way around, he could make a nice pile that way."

Stan looked at the man thoughtfully.

"Sounds interesting," he broke in, "but suppose they find some
fabricator operator out in the woods, heating up metal instead of
working on a regular job? They'd be curious, don't you think?
Especially if the guy's already picked up a record."

"Naw." Marlo turned toward him. "So he's a graduate--who ain't? See,
they show this guy up here, he's supposed to be a fabmeister. Only
maybe he don't like punching keys. Maybe he don't like to chase them
meters, huh? So maybe he'd rather use muscle hardware, see?" He
grinned.

"Some guy sets himself up a shack up valley, see? Starts a fixit
joint. Looks real legit. Even with muscle hardware, he can put out
jobs faster'n them people can get parts from way down Talburg way,
see.

"And he gets in with the joes, too. They got their troubles getting
things made up for 'em. So this guy gives them a hand. Even working
cheap, he picks up some change there, too, and one way or another, the
guy's got a living, see?" He glanced back at Holme.

"Only now and then, here comes a few guys in the back door, they want
a special job, see, for real special pay. And there's your ice cream
and cake. And maybe a little stack for later on."

"I don't know." Stan picked up a book. "I'd rather try playing 'em on
the table for a while. It might beat getting flashed and dropped back
in."

Big Carl shrugged and crawled back into his bunk.

"Aagh, can happen to anybody," he said. "Just keep this under your
hair. Smart kids like you can make out pretty good, you just use your
heads. Ain't nothing down Talburg way, though." He yawned.

"Well, I've had it. Got into it with that Wanzor again, out on the
pile. Give one of them joes a boost, he gets three meters high." He
yawned again and turned toward the wall.

       *       *       *       *       *

Stan flipped the pages of the book. He had still been unable to put
his finger on the point at which Kellonia had ceased to be a planet of
free citizens and become the planetary prison he had found himself on.

There had been no sudden change--no dramatic incident, such as the
high spots in the history of his native Khloris. Here, things had just
drifted from freedom to servitude, with the people dropping their
rights as a man discards outworn clothing.

He leaned back, lowering the book. Kell's planet, he remembered, had
been one of the first star colonies to be founded after the discovery
of the interstellar drive. Settlers had flocked to get passage to the
new, fertile world.

During the first three hundred years, people had spread over the
planet, but the frontier stage had passed and the land of promise had
stabilized, adopted laws, embraced the arts and sciences. One by one,
frontier farms had given way to mechanized food-producing land,
worked by trained technical teams and administered by professional
management.

Kellonia had entered the age of industrialized culture, with the large
individual owner a disappearing species.

Unnoticed and unregretted, the easy freedom of the frontier was
discarded and lost. One by one, the rights enjoyed by the original
settlers became regarded as privileges. One by one, the privileges
were restricted, limited by license, eliminated as unsuitable or even
dangerous to the new Kellonian culture.

Little by little, the large group became the individual of law and
culture, with the single person becoming a mere cipher.

Members of groups--even members of the governing council itself--found
themselves unable to make any but the most minor decisions. Precedent
dictated each move. And precedent developed into iron-hard tradition.

In fact, Stan thought, the culture seemed now to be completely
self-controlled--self-sustaining. The people were mere cells, who
conformed--or were eliminated.

Again, he picked up the book, looking casually through its pages.
Detail was unimportant here. There was, he realized with a feeling of
frustration, only a sort of dull pattern, with no significant detail
apparent.

       *       *       *       *       *

He awoke a little groggily, looked around the cell, then jumped
hastily out of his bunk. Usually he was awake before the bell rang.

Pete Karzer was coming back from the washstand. He looked over.

"You up, Graham?" he said in his whispery voice. "Hey, you know I'm
getting out this morning. Guess you'll want to swap blankets again,
huh?"

"That's right, too. No use turning in a good blanket, is there?"

"Don't make sense." Pete massaged the back of his neck.

"Never could figure that swap," he said. "Don't get me wrong, it was
real good, being able to sleep warm, but you caught me good when I
tried to swipe that blanket of yours. Ain't never seen a guy move so
quick. And I ain't so dumb I don't know when I'm licked." He grinned
ruefully.

"So I'm down, like I been hit with a singlejack. Then you go and hand
over a good blanket for that beat thing I been using. How come?"

Stan shrugged. "I told you," he said. "Where I come from, it's a lot
colder than it is here, so I don't need a blanket. I'd have offered a
