grasp."

Jordde laughed. "And Hama never seems to be able to keep hold of them
for more then ten minutes before they slip from him again."

"Yours is not to judge either Hama or Argo," stated the Priestess. "You
are kept on by us only to do your job. Do it, report, and do not trouble
either us or yourself with opinions. They are not appreciated."

"Yes, mistress," returned Jordde.

"Then farewell until next report." She flipped a switch and the picture
on the little screen went gray.

Geo turned from the big screen now, and was just about to remove the
hearing apparatus when he heard the Priestess say, "Go, prepare the
prisoners for the sacrifice of the rising moon. They have seen enough."
The woman left the room, Geo finished removing the phones, and Iimmi
looked at him.

"What's the matter?"

Geo turned the switch that darkened the screen.

"When are they coming to get us?" Iimmi asked excitedly.

"Right now, probably," Geo said. Then, as best he could, he repeated the
conversation he had overheard to Iimmi, whose expression grew more and
more bewildered as Geo went on.

At the end the bewilderment suddenly flared into frayed indignation.
"Why?" demanded Iimmi. "Why should we be sacrificed? What is it we've
seen too much of, what is it we know? This is the second time it's come
close to getting me killed, and I wish to hell I knew what I was
supposed to know?"

"We've got to find Urson and get out of here," said Geo. "Hey, what's
wrong?"

The indignation had turned into something else. Now Iimmi stood with his
eyes shut tight and his face screwed up. Suddenly he relaxed. "I just
thought out a message as loud as I could for Snake to get up here and to
bring Urson if he's anywhere around."

"But Snake's a spy for ..."

"... for Hama," said Iimmi. "And you know something? I don't care." He
closed his eyes again. After a few moments, he opened them. "Well, if
he's coming, he's coming. Let's get going."

"But why...?" began Geo, following Iimmi out the door.

"Because I have a poet's feeling that some fancy mind reading may come
in handy."

They hurried down the hall, found the stairs, ducked down, and ran along
the lower hall. Rounding a second corner, they emerged into the little
chapel simultaneously with Urson and Snake.

"I guess I got through," said Iimmi. "Which way do we go?"

"Gentlemen, gentlemen," came a voice from behind them.

Snake took off down one of the passages, and they followed, Urson
looking particularly bewildered.

The Priestess glided behind them, calling softly, "Please, my friends,
come back. Return with me."

"Find out from her how the hell to get out of this place!" Iimmi bawled
up to Snake. The four-armed boy suddenly darted up a flight of stairs,
turned a corner, and darted up another. They came out on a hall and
followed Snake to the end.

All four of the boy's hands flew at the door handle, turning it
carefully, this way, and back.

Two, three seconds.

Geo glanced back and saw the Priestess mount the top of the stairs and
begin to come toward them. She seemed to float, her white robes flaring
out from her, brushing at the walls.

The door came open, they broke through leaves, and were momentarily
standing in a huge field of grass, surrounded by woods. The night was
fully lit by the moon.

As they ran through the silver-washed grass, Geo turned to look behind
him. The blind Priestess had slowed, her white face turned to the moon.
Her hands went to her throat, she unclasped her robe, and the first
layer fell away behind her. As she came on, the second layer began to
unfold, wet, deathly white, spreading, growing to her arms, articulating
itself along the white spines; then, with a horribly familiar shriek,
she leapt from the ground and soared upward, her white wings hammering
the air.

They fled.

And other dark forms were shadowing the moon. The priestesses across
the field joined her aloft in the moon-bleached sky. She overtook the
running figures, turned above them, and swooped. The moon lanced white
along bared fangs. The night breeze touched pale furry breasts, filled
the bellying wings. Only the tiny, darting, blind eyes were red, rubied
in a whirl of white.

They crashed into the protective bushes where the winged things could
not follow. Branches raked his face as he ran behind the sound the
others made. Once he thought he had lost them, but a second later he
bumped against Iimmi, who had stopped behind Snake and Urson, in the
darkness. Above the trees was a sound like beaten cloth, diminishing,
growing, but constant as once more they began to trod through the
tangled darkness.

"What the hell ..." Iimmi finally breathed softly, after a minute of
walking.

"You know it's beginning to make sense," Geo said, his hand on Iimmi's
shoulder. "Remember that man-wolf we met, and that blob in the city? The
only thing we've met on this place that can't change shape is the
ghouls. I think most animals on this island undergo some sort of
metamorphosis."

"What about those first flying things we met?" whispered Urson. "They
didn't change into anything."

"We have probably just been guests of the female of the species," said
Geo.

"You mean those others could have changed into men too if they wanted?"
Urson asked.

"If they wanted," answered Geo.

In front of them now appeared faint shiftings of silver light. Five
minutes later, they were crouching at the edge of the forest, looking
down over the rocks at the white shimmerings over the river.

"Into the water?" Geo asked.

Snake shook his head. _Wait_ ... came the familiar sound in their heads.

Suddenly a hand raised from the water. Wet and green, it stood a foot or
so from the shore in the silver ripples. The chain and the leather thong
dangled down the wrist, and swaying there were two bright beads of
light.

Iimmi and Geo froze. Urson said, "The jewels...."

Suddenly, crouched low like an animal, the big man sprang onto the rocks
and ran toward the river's edge.

Three shadows, one white, two dark, converged above him, cutting the
moonlight away from him. If he saw them, he did not stop.

Iimmi and Geo stood up from their crouched positions.

Urson reached the shore, threw himself along the rock, and swiped at the
hand. Instantly he was covered by flailing wings. The membranous sails
splashed in the water. Two seconds later, Urson rolled from beneath the
layers of membrane that still struggled half on land and half in the
water. He started forward up the rocks. He slipped, regained his
footing, and then came on, nearly falling into Geo's and Iimmi's waiting
arms.

"The jewels," Urson breathed.

The struggle continued a minute longer on the water. Something was
holding them down, twisting at them. Then suddenly, the creatures
stilled, and like great leaves, the three forms drifted apart, caught
quietly in the current, and floated away from the rocks.

Then two more forms bobbed to the surface, faces down, rocking gently,
backs slicked wet and green, shiny under the moonlight.

"But those were the ones who--" Geo began. "Are they dead?" His face
suddenly hurt a little, with something like the pain of verging tears.

Snake nodded.

"Are you sure?" asked Iimmi. His voice came slowly.

_Their ... thoughts ... have ... stopped_, Snake said.

Crouched down in front of them, Urson opened his great hands. The
globes blazed even in the dim light through the leaves, and the chain
and the wet thong hung over his palm to the ground. "I have them," he
said, "... the jewels!"




CHAPTER IX


Snake reached down, picked the beads up from Urson's hand. The sound of
wings had stopped.

"Where do we go now?" Urson asked.

"Follow the general rule, I guess," said Iimmi. "Since we know Hama does
have a temple somewhere, we try to find it, get the third jewel, and
rescue Argo Incarnate. Then get back to the ship."

"In three days?" asked Urson. They had related the rest of what they had
found to him by now. "Well, where do we start looking?"

"The Priestess said something about a band of Hama's disciples behind
the fire mountain. That must mean the volcano we saw from the steps in
the City of New Hope." Iimmi turned to Snake. "Did you read her mind
enough to know if she was telling the truth?"

Snake nodded.

Iimmi paused for a moment. "Well, since the river is that way, we should
head," he turned and pointed, "... in that direction."

They fixed their stride now and started through the moon-brushed
foliage.

"I still don't understand what was going on back at the monastery," Geo
said. "Were they really priestesses of Argo? And what was Jordde doing?"

"I'd say yes on the first question, and guess that Jordde was a spy for
them for an answer to the second."

"But what about Argo--I mean Argo on the ship?" asked Geo. "And what
about Snake here?"

"Argo on the ship apparently doesn't know about Argo on Aptor," said
Iimmi. "That's what Jordde meant when he reported to the priestesses
that she was bewildered. She probably thinks just like we did, that
he's Hama's spy. And this one here," he gestured to Snake, "I don't
know. I just don't know."

In the distance was a red glow in which they could make out the faint
lines of the volcano's cone. Snake made lights with the jewels, and once
more they began to pick their way over the terrain, barer and barer of
vegetation. The earth became cindery and the air bore the acrid smell of
old ashes.

Soon the rim of the crater hung close above them.

Iimmi gazed up at the red haze above them. "I wonder what it's like to
look into that thing in the middle of the night?" Twenty feet later
Snake's light struck a lava cliff that sheered up into the darkness.
Going on beside it, they found a ledge that made an eighteen-inch
footpath diagonally up the face.

"We're not going to climb that in the dark, are we?" asked Geo.

"Better than in the light," said Urson. "This way you can't see how far
you have to fall."

Thirty feet on, instead of petering out and forcing them to go back, the
lip of rock broadened into a level stretch of ground and again they
could go straight forward toward the red light above them.

"This is changeable country," Urson muttered.

"Men change into animals," said Geo, "jungles turn to mountains." He
reached around and felt the stub of his arm in the dark. "I've changed
too, I guess."

Iimmi recited:

    "_Change is neither merciful nor just.
    They say Leonard of Vinci put his trust
    in faulty paints: Christ's Supper turned to dust._"

"What's that from?" Geo asked.

"That's one of my bits of original research," Iimmi explained. "It comes
from a poem dating back before the Great Fire."

"Who was Leonard of Vinci?" Geo asked.

"An artist, another poet or painter, I suppose," said Iimmi. "But I'm
not really sure."

"Who's Christ?" Urson asked.

"Another god."

       *       *       *       *       *

There were more rocks now, and Geo had to brace his stub against the
walls of fissures and hoist himself up with his good hand. The igneous
structures were sharp in his palm.

Through the night the glowing rim dropped toward them. With it came a
breeze that pushed sulfa powder through their hair and made the edges of
their nostrils sting.

The earth became scaley and rotten under their feet. Fatigue tied tiny
knots high in their guts so that their stomachs hung like stones.

"I didn't realize how big the crater was," Iimmi said. The red glow cut
off at the bottom and took up a quarter of the sky.

"Maybe it'll erupt on us," Urson muttered. He added, "I'm thirsty."

They climbed on. Once Urson looked back and saw Geo had stopped some
twenty feet behind them at a niche in the ledge. He turned around and
dropped back himself. There was sweat on the boy's up-turned face as the
big man came toward him. He could see it in the red haze from the rim.

"Here," Urson said. "Give me a hand."

"I can't," Geo said softly, "or I'll fall."

Urson reached down, now, caught the boy around the chest, and hoisted
him over the cropping of rock. "Take it easy," Urson instructed. "You
don't have to race with anybody." Together they made their way after the
others.

Iimmi and Snake cleared the crater rim first; then Urson and Geo joined
them on the pitted ledge. Together they looked into the volcano as red
and yellow light fell over their chests and faces.

Gold dribbled the internal slope. Tongues of red rock lapped the sides,
and the swirling white basin belched brown blobs of smoke which rose up
the far rocks and spilled over the brim a radion away. Light leapt in
wavering pylons of blue flame, then sank back into the pit. Winding
trails of light webbed the crater's walls, and at places ebon cavities
jeweled among the light.

Wind fingered the watchers' hair.

       *       *       *       *       *

Iimmi saw her first, two hundred feet along the rim. Her drapes, died
red and orange in the flame, blew about her as she walked toward them.
Iimmi pointed to her, and the others looked up.

As she neared, Geo saw that though she stood very straight, she was old.
Her short white hair snapped at the side of her head in the warm breeze.
Firelight and shadow fell deeply into the wrinkles of her face. As she
approached them, light running like liquid down the side of her winded
robe, she smiled and held out her hand.

"Who are you?" Geo suddenly asked.

    "_Shadows melt in light of sacred laughter,
    Hands and houses shall be one hereafter._"

recited the woman in a calm, low voice.

She paused. "I am Argo Incarnate, of Leptar."

"But I thought ..." Iimmi started.

"What did you think?" inquired the elderly woman, gently.

"Nothing," said Iimmi.
