me four-fifths of a rare flush in stud poker. But by the fourth
card Lefty had given himself a pair of jacks. That drove all the
other gamblers to cover.

Lefty raised, of course, and it cost me five hundred bucks to see
my fifth card. It was a classic kind of stand-off in stud, and
the waiter stopped with his tray of drinks to press in among the
other kibitzers and watch the pay-off.

Lefty shucked out the last two cards carelessly, as if they
didn't really matter. His own fifth card made no difference--his
jacks already had a busted flush beaten. His smile was just a
little too sharp as he tossed me my last card face up and reached
for the pot with the same left-handed gesture.

I took the poker panetella out of my teeth. "All blue," I said,
turning up my hole card with the other hand.

Lefty threw the unused part of the deck to the center of the
table. "That does it, you snake!" he swore at me.

It took a second for his accusation to sink in. I started across
the table after him. If they hadn't stopped me, I would have torn
his lying throat out. Funny, but there were kibitzers on my
shoulders before I could rise an inch out of my chair.

"Down in Texas you could get shot for a crack like that, Lefty!"
I said. I guess I really yelled it.

"And in New York you can, and probably will, get your rotten
throat slit for a trick like the one _you_ just pulled," he
replied. He turned to the other gamblers, most of whom had their
hands on the edge of the table, ready to jump to their feet if it
got any rougher.

"I stacked the deck this last deal," he said coolly. He held a
palm up at their surprised mutter. "Tex's fifth card was stacked
to be a heart, gamblers. You saw him get a spade and take the
pot. I won't sit at the same table with a guy that can do that.
Telekinesis has no place in poker."

"Pretty near as bad as stacked decks," one of the gamblers
rasped. But the others weren't with him. I only had to take one
look at Nick's face.

I stood up slowly, and the hands on my shoulders didn't hold me
down any longer. "Lefty says he stacked the deck," I told them.
"I say he lies. You know there's nothing to choose between our
statements. Lefty is a cheap grandstander, and I'll settle with
him myself. Nick, I won't embarrass you tonight. This isn't your
fault. But I'll be here tomorrow night, and you had better be
glad to see me!"

"Sure, Tex," he said uncomfortably, rising with me. "Take my
seat, Shorty," he directed one of the kibitzers. He walked around
to grab me by the elbow and steer me as far away from Lefty's
truculent face as he could. At least the sharp-chinned little rat
had quit the game, too. Both of us had left our chips on the
table.

Nick wanted me to leave. "Pay me off," I insisted. He said yes a
lot quicker than I thought he would. The other gamblers could
have squawked that my chips should go into the next pot, but
apparently none of them did.

Lefty sidled out as Nick was paying me off. "Wait outside for
me," I said to him.

"Why not?" he said, sticking his chin out at me and walking out.

Nick grabbed me again. "Don't get hot, Tex," he warned me. "I
don't want a killing on my own sidewalk. Take it some place else,
huh, kid?"

"Sure," I said.

There wasn't any danger Lefty would hang around. I was big enough
to break him in two, which is exactly what I planned if I caught
up with him.

       *       *       *       *       *

It had been dark for some hours by the time I hit the street and
waved for a skim-copter. Nick's games start late.

"You asked me to wait," somebody said. I spun around and saw
Lefty standing in the alleyway beside the building. I went for
him, charging hard. He scuttled back into the alley, out of what
little light there was that far downtown. Just as I reached for
him, somebody slugged me in the gut. I went down on a knee,
gasping. I hadn't seen his sidekick--the alley was pretty dark.
I heard Lefty's breath suck in sharply as I came up out of my
crouch, diving for him. After all, it was only pain, something
inside my head. It wasn't as though I had been really crippled.
My fingers clawed at his jacket, and would have held him. But the
other guy grabbed at my ankle and threw me down on the slippery
cobbles again.

I came up slower that time. I'd bunged up my kneecap more than I
wanted to think about. Lefty was still out of reach. I called him
a name that was always good for a fight in Texas, and started
after him, but slower than before. I wasn't fast enough to avoid
the hard thing that rammed against my spine. Even down in Texas,
a gun in the back freezes you up.

Lefty was all guts now that I was hung up on the gun barrel. It
might as well have been a meat hook.

"I warned you not to use psi in the game!" he snapped. "Now
you'll have to talk to Pete."

"One of us isn't going to live through this," I promised him,
starting to reach for his throat. The gun jabbed a reminder to
watch my manners.

"Do you come quietly?" Lefty asked shrilly. "Or do we--?"

The sudden shrillness of his voice scared me more than anything
else. He was worked up worse than I was. "Quietly," I conceded,
trying to get some saliva to flow again. The pressure against my
spine eased off.

Lefty stepped out of the alley to the curb and flagged down a
cruising 'copter. He made me get in first, which gave me a chance
to turn, when I sat down, and see who had been holding the gun on
me from behind. The gunman had sure drifted in one awful hurry.
There wasn't a soul except Lefty around.

He hopped in after me. The turbine howled as the driver gunned us up on the
air cushion and sent us skimming away. The trip lasted only four or five
minutes through the thinning traffic of late evening. We pulled up in front
of a brownstone house in the upper Eighties that reared up four stories
among a string of three-story neighbors.

I limped to the top of the steps after Lefty. He let us in with a
key. We were in a dimly-lit hall that had a staircase against its
left wall and an open door at its right, leading into a darkened
room.

A tall skinny girl was sitting about a third of the way up the
carpeted flight of steps. Her face was drawn out to a point by a
long, thin nose. "Here they are," she called up the stairway,
showing braces on her teeth. She stood up and came down the hall.
She was clad in a shortie wrapper that showed off her race-horse
legs.

"Billy Joe," she said to Lefty. "I _told_ them you were coming."

"Hi, Pheola," he said. "Good for you." He sounded pleased.

There were steps above, and two others joined us. First came a
short square man with gray hair and bushy gray eyebrows. He was
wrapped up in a flannel robe that had once been maroon and was
now rusty with age and wear. It only served to confirm that he
had just been yanked out of bed. He hadn't bothered to put
anything on his bare feet or to comb his hair. A pretty wild
looking old man.

Behind him stumped a chunky woman, crowding fifty. She was in a
worse state of dishabille. She hadn't quite made it to bed and
was still in her slip. Her stockings had been unhitched from her
garters and hung in slack transparency around her fat calves,
like the sloughed-off skin of a snake.

"I _told_ you," Pheola said to the gray-haired man.

"It's nice that you're right once in a while," he said in a
scratchy, sleepy voice, walking past her to switch on the ceiling
of the room on the right side of the hall.

She didn't like that. Lefty stopped her reply. "Will it be PC?"
he asked her.

"No," she said.

"You missed that one," Lefty said.

"Didn't neither!"

"Well, sit in with us and see," he suggested.

"What for?" she asked. "I know what's going to happen in there.
You'll be along to bed right soon, darlin' Billy!"

He looked over at me. "Go on in, Tex," he said.

"Darlin' Billy!" I sneered.

"Don't pay any attention to her," he said. "She's in another
space-time continuum." I pointedly ogled the girl's pretty legs
going up the stairs and whistled softly. "My wife," he said,
blushing. "A powerful PC, or one day will be."

"You're kidding," I said. His arm on my elbow pushed me into the
lighted room.

       *       *       *       *       *

It had been the front parlor of the old brownstone in its prime,
and was now fixed up as an office. The place held an executive
desk with several buttons and enough other controls to put it in
orbit. There were a number of cushioned straight-backed chairs
and a comfortable leather couch under the window. Only the fact
that it was getting on toward midnight made me willing to believe
that the couple who had walked down the stairs expected to be
