million credits sitting in the Terran Consulate on Altair V, just
waiting for me to walk in and pick them up. Three million credits--do
you hear? That's enough to set me up for life!"

Meyerhoff nodded grimly. "_If_ you live long enough to walk in and pick
them up, that is."

"What do you mean, if?"

Meyerhoff sank down beside the man, his voice a tense whisper in the
musty cell. "I mean that right now you are practically dead. You may not
know it, but you are. You walk into a newly opened planet with your
smart little bag of tricks, walk in here with a shaky passport and no
permit, with no knowledge of the natives outside of two paragraphs of
inaccuracies in the Explorer's Guide, and even then you're not content
to come in and sell something legitimate, something the natives might
conceivably be able to use. No, nothing so simple for you. You have to
pull your usual high-pressure stuff. And this time, buddy, you're paying
the piper."

"_You mean I'm not being extradited?_"

Meyerhoff grinned unpleasantly. "I mean precisely that. You've committed
a crime here--a major crime. The Altairians are sore about it. And the
Terran Consulate isn't willing to sell all the trading possibilities
here down the river just to get you out of a mess. You're going to stand
trial--and these natives are out to get you. Personally, I think they're
_going_ to get you."

Zeckler stood up shakily. "You can't believe anything the natives say,"
he said uneasily. "They're pathological liars. Why, you should see what
they tried to sell _me_! You've never seen such a pack of liars as these
critters." He glanced up at Meyerhoff. "They'll probably drop a little
fine on me and let me go."

"A little fine of one Terran neck." Meyerhoff grinned nastily. "You've
committed the most heinous crime these creatures can imagine, and
they're going to get you for it if it's the last thing they do. I'm
afraid, my friend, that your con-man days are over."

Zeckler fished in the other man's pocket, extracted a cigarette, and
lighted it with trembling fingers. "It's bad, then," he said finally.

"It's bad, all right."

Some shadow of the sly, elfin grin crept over the little con-man's face.
"Well, at any rate, I'm glad they sent you over," he said weakly.
"Nothing like a good lawyer to handle a trial."

"_Lawyer?_ Not me! Oh, no. Sorry, but no thanks." Meyerhoff chuckled.
"I'm your advisor, old boy. Nothing else. I'm here to keep you from
botching things up still worse for the Trading Commission, that's all. I
wouldn't get tangled up in a mess with those creatures for anything!" He
shook his head. "You're your own lawyer, Mr. Super-salesman. It's all
your show. And you'd better get your head out of the sand, or you're
going to lose a case like it's never been lost before!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Meyerhoff watched the man's pale face, and shook his head. In a way, he
thought, it was a pity to see such a change in the rosy-cheeked, dapper,
cocksure little man who had talked his way glibly in and out of more
jams than Meyerhoff could count. Trading brought scalpers; it was almost
inevitable that where rich and unexploited trading ground was uncovered,
it would first fall prey to the fast-trading boys. They spread out from
Terra with the first wave of exploration--the slick, fast-talking
con-men who could work new territories unfettered by the legal
restrictions that soon closed down the more established planets. The
first men in were the richest out, and through some curious quirk of the
Terrestrial mind, they knew they could count on Terran protection,
however crooked and underhand their methods.

But occasionally a situation arose where the civilization and social
practices of the alien victims made it unwise to tamper with them.
Altair I had been recognized at once by the Trading Commission as a
commercial prize of tremendous value, but early reports had warned of
the danger of wildcat trading on the little, musty, jungle-like planet
with its shaggy, three-eyed inhabitants--warned specifically against the
confidence tactics so frequently used--but there was always somebody,
Meyerhoff reflected sourly, who just didn't get the word.

Zeckler puffed nervously on his cigarette, his narrow face a study in
troubled concentration. "But I didn't _do_ anything!" he exploded
finally. "So I pulled an old con game. So what? Why should they get so
excited? So I clipped a few thousand credits, pulled a little fast
business." He shrugged eloquently, spreading his hands. "Everybody's
doing it. They do it to each other without batting an eye. You should
_see_ these critters operate on each other. Why, my little scheme was
peanuts by comparison."

Meyerhoff pulled a pipe from his pocket, and began stuffing the bowl
with infinite patience. "And precisely what sort of con game was it?" he
asked quietly.

Zeckler shrugged again. "The simplest, tiredest, moldiest old racket
that ever made a quick nickel. Remember the old Terran gag about the
Brooklyn Bridge? The same thing. Only these critters didn't want
bridges. They wanted land--this gooey, slimy swamp they call 'farm
land.' So I gave them what they wanted. I just sold them some land."

Meyerhoff nodded fiercely. "You sure did. A hundred square kilos at a
swipe. Only you sold the same hundred square kilos to a dozen different
natives." Suddenly he threw back his hands and roared. "Of all the
things you _shouldn't_ have done--"

"But what's a chunk of land?"

