want to face this new case worker.

But, all the same, one had to have money to live.

That they should force an old woman to travel across the city and to
speak with a girl, by appointment, solely in order to get the money
which should have been hers by right!

Cossacks! Monsters!

_Name:_ GIRONDE, JOSE R.

_Address:_ 1440 Hamilton Street

_Borough:_ New York

_Phone:_ None

_Complaint:_ Client is over fifty, without work for eight months--last
worked in October--due to recurrent difficulty regarding back. Sole
support wife and wife's sister. One child (Ramon, 27), living on West
Coast. Preliminary inquiries fail to locate child.

_Remarks:_ NPH. Examination needed. Is back injury chronic?

There was a great deal of paper work needed, Gloria realized. At first
she hadn't liked the paper work at all, but she could see now how
necessary it was. After all, everybody wasn't like her; the other
workers, she knew, didn't have her particular talent, and they had to
write things down for fear they'd forget.

Sometimes Gloria felt very sorry for the other case workers. But she
knew they were doing their very best, and they were, after all, helping
people. That was the only important thing: to help people, to make them
better members of society.

Now, Jose Gironde's back injury was certainly chronic. Gloria tried to
remember the medical term for it: it was something to do with a
lordosis. She'd paid no attention to that, since she had been trying to
fix up the back instead.

But now a doctor had to be called, and a thorough examination had to be
given, all so that the records would show what Gloria knew already. A
case worker couldn't fill out a medical report; you had to be a doctor
to do that.

And it didn't matter, Gloria knew, if you had all the information at
your fingertips, and even knew more than the doctor. (Gloria could have
cured Jose Gironde's back easily; a doctor couldn't do that.)
Examination was the doctor's job.

It was like being a member of a team, Gloria thought.

That felt good.

She got out the list of doctors which all the case workers used, and
followed it down with her finger. Dr. Willmarth was free, she knew, on
Thursday morning at eleven.

Luckily, Jose Gironde was free at the same hour. She made a note to call
the doctor and make an appointment, and to clear the appointment with
Jose Gironde, and made a duplicate note on the report sheet.

That would take care of that.

The paper work, after all, wasn't so very hard. All she had to do now
was to make the actual calls, and then wait for the written result of
the examination. When that had come through, she would be able to
recommend Jose Gironde for permanent relief, as was obviously indicated
in his case.

The back injury could not be corrected by medical science. And if Gloria
were to correct it--

"Your job as a case worker is clearly defined," a teacher had said.
"Meddling in another's province, without the permission of your
supervisor, is always uncalled-for."

In other words, Gloria thought, the _status quo_ has to be kept. And
that, too, made sense when you thought about it.

She looked up to see Harold Meedy smiling across the room at her. She
smiled back, very briefly, and went back to her own work.

"Interpersonal relationships within the office framework," a
teacher--Mr. Greystone?--had said, "are fraught with danger, and should
be handled with the greatest care."

If Harold Meedy wanted to get acquainted with her, that was his affair.
She didn't feel that she could conscientiously encourage him in the
slightest. Not only was he a fellow worker, which made the whole
situation more complicated than it would ordinarily have been, but he
was a small pudgy man with pimples and an earnest expression. He looked
as if he would be a bore, and a difficult person to get rid of.

He was.

Gloria just didn't think he was exactly her type.

And if he went on trying, she thought regretfully, she would be forced
to do something about it. Of course, Meedy would never know the
difference, but even so, Gloria didn't like to do any unnecessary work.
Changing someone's mind was a delicate job, and a responsible one, not
to be undertaken for a small motive.

Even if the person never knew his mind had been changed at all--

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Wladek, in her apartment, shrugged on an old coat and compressed
her lips with weariness. Appointment time was near, and a person had to
be punctual.

Even when a person was going to see a young girl who was strange and
frightening, and who might do--

_Well, don't be a foolish old woman_, Mrs. Wladek told herself. Rudi
would have told her that. But Rudi was out somewhere, with a girl or
with some of his friends, like a good American boy.

Don't be a foolish old woman, Rudi would have said.

But Mrs. Wladek was frightened.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was nearly ten o'clock, Gloria noticed. She did not feel in the least
tired; she was still eager and ready for work. She decided she had time
for one more folder before the first of her appointments arrived.

She reached out for it and saw Mr. Fredericksohn coming in the door. He
smiled at her, a tall, white-haired man with a square face, who radiated
enormous efficiency and a certain distant friendliness.

She did not say hello, but merely nodded. Mr. Fredericksohn liked to
take the initiative himself, in all relationships.

"How are we doing today?" he said, peering over her shoulder.

"Fine," she said happily. "Just fine."

Mr. Fredericksohn grunted. "I see Mrs. Wladek's on your schedule today."

"That's right," she said.

"Just do what you can," he said. "You've seen her before, haven't you?"

She nodded. "Once. Last week."

"She's a--problem," he said. Mr. Fredericksohn was always a little chary
of saying anything that might be construed as derogatory to a client,
even in the privacy of professional conversation.

"I'm sure we'll be able to work things out," Gloria said.

"Well," Mr. Fredericksohn said, and paused. Then he nodded. "You do what
you can," he said. His voice sounded doubtful.

She beamed up at him. "I certainly will," she said with enthusiasm.

Mr. Fredericksohn nodded and muttered something, and went on by.

Gloria smiled. Oh, she was going to show Mr. Fredericksohn, all right!
He just wasn't sure she could handle Mrs. Wladek--and the old woman
certainly did represent a problem. Her folder was full of notations by
case worker after case worker. But Gloria's smile broadened just a
trifle.

My goodness, everything was going to be all right. She was sure Mr.
Fredericksohn would be happy with her work.

Though the important thing wasn't her own success, but the people
themselves. If you could help them to be bright, and happy, and
successful, then that was the best job in the world.

And she could.

My goodness, yes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Wladek looked at the door for a long time without opening it. She
didn't want to go in--certainly not. But there was her appointment, and
money was needed; she had no choice. The cossacks of America had forced
her to this pass, and she was an old woman; what could she do? Fight
them?

