well-known to him by reputation, and soon he might be testing them out
for himself. There was absolutely no way to be sure.

That thought pleased him greatly; after all, he told himself, there was
nothing like a little danger to spice the boring business of living. By
the time he reached the bottom of the hill, he was whistling loudly.

       *       *       *       *       *

He stopped at the first house, a mud construction with a
badly-carpentered wooden door and a single bare window that looked out
on the street. It smelled, but Jonas went up to the door bravely and
knocked.

There was no answer. He went on whistling "_Fortuna plango vulnera_"
under his breath, and after a time he knocked again.

This time he heard movement inside the house, and nodded to himself in a
satisfied fashion. But almost a minute passed before the head of an old
woman showed itself at the window. She was really extraordinarily ugly,
he thought. She wore a bonnet that did nothing whatever to enhance her
doubtful, wrinkled charms, or to conceal them; and besides, it was
dirty.

"Nobody's here," she said in the voice of a very venomous toad. "Go
away."

Jonas smiled at her. It was an effort. "Madam--" he began politely.

"Nobody's home," she repeated, drawing slightly back from the window.
"You go away, now."

"Ah," Jonas said pleasantly. "But you're home, aren't you?"

The old woman frowned at him suspiciously. "Now," she said vaguely.
"Well."

"This _is_ your house?" he said. "The house where you live?"

"Never saw you before," the old woman said.

"That's right," Jonas said equably.

"You come to turn me out?" she demanded. Her eyebrows--which were almost
as big and black as her ancient mustache--came down over glittering
little eyes. "I hold this house free and proper," she said in a
determined roar, "and nobody can take it from me. It belongs to me, and
to my children, and to their children, and to the children of those
children--"

The catalogue seemed likely to go on forever. "Exactly," Jonas said
hastily.

"Well, then," the old woman said, and started to draw back.

Jonas gestured lazily with one hand. "Wait," he said. "I am not going to
take your house away from you, madam. I am only here to ask you a
question."

"Question?" she said. "You come from Herr Knupf? I'm an old woman but I
do no wrong, and there is no one can accuse me of heresy. I am in church
every week, and more than once; I keep peace with my neighbors and
there's none can say a mystery about me--"

The woman, Jonas thought, was full to the eyebrows with words. Probably,
he told himself, trying to be fair, she didn't have anyone to talk to,
until a stranger came along.

He sighed briefly. "I do not come from the Inquisitor," he said
truthfully, "nor is my question one that should cause you alarm."

The old woman pondered for a minute. She leaned her elbows on the window
sill, getting them muddy. But that, Jonas thought, didn't seem to matter
to this creature, apparently.

"Ask," she said at last.

Jonas put on his most pleasant expression. "Madam," he said, "I wish to
know if there be any family in this town to give room to a
wayfarer--understanding, of course, that the wayfarer would insist on
paying. Paying well," he added.

The old woman blinked. "You looking for an inn?" she said. "An inn in
this town?" The idea appeared to strike her as the very height of
idiocy. She covered her face with her hands and shook. After a second
Jonas discovered that she was laughing. He waited patiently until the
fit had left her.

"Not an inn," he said. "There is no inn here, I know. But a family
willing to take in a stranger--"

"Strangers are seldom here," she said. "Herr Knupf watches his flock
with zeal."

Which meant, Jonas reflected, that he was in a fair way to get himself
burned as a heretic unless he watched his step carefully. "Herr Knupf's
fame has reached my own country, far away," he said with some truth.
"Nevertheless, a family which--"

"Wait," she said. "You have said that you will pay well. Yet you do not
appear rich."

Jonas understood. Fishing in his sewn pocket, he withdrew a single,
shiny coin. "I also wish," he said smoothly, "to pay for any help I may
receive--such as the answering of an innocent question, a question in
which the respected Inquisitor Knupf can have no interest whatever."

The old woman's eyes went to the coin and stayed there. "Well," she
said. "It is said that the family called Scharpe has a house too large
for them, now that the elder son is gone; there is only the man, his
wife and a daughter. It is said that the man is in need of money; he
would accept payment, were it generous, in return for sharing room in
his house."

"I would be most grateful," Jonas murmured. He passed the coin over; the
old woman's hand snatched it and closed on it. "Where might I find this
family?" he said.

"It is now late in the afternoon," the old woman said. "Perhaps they are
at home. You will see a path which takes you to the left; follow it
until you reach the last house. Knock at the door."

"I shall," Jonas said, "and many thanks."

The old woman, still clutching her coin, disappeared from the window as
if someone had yanked her back. Jonas turned with relief and got back on
the path, but it stank quite as badly as the house had.

He endured the stench--heroically.

       *       *       *       *       *

Scharpe proved to be a barrel-shaped man who was unaccountably
cheerless, as if the inside structure had been carefully removed, and
then replaced by sawdust, Jonas thought. Even the offer of seven kroner
for a single week's stay failed to produce the delirious joy Jonas had
expected.

"The money is needed," Scharpe said in a dour, bass voice, staring off
past Jonas' left ear at the darkening sky. "And for the money, you will
be welcome. I must take your word that you are not dangerous; I can only
pray that you do not betray that trust."
