Lansing whistled.

"Aren't we wasting time?" growled the general. "Seems to me, warden, you
could be ordering your people to pack up without any conference. You're
in charge here, aren't you?"

Halloran raised his eyebrows. "In charge? Why, yes ... in the sense that
I shape the final decisions. But all of my assistants contribute to such
decisions. Further, we have an inmate's council that voices its opinion
on certain of our problems here. And we--my associates and I--listen to
them. Always."

Knox scowled and angrily shifted his big body. Lansing picked up his
cigar, relit it, using the action to unobtrusively study the warden.
Hardly a presence to cow hardened criminals, Lansing thought. Halloran
was just below middle height, with gray hair getting a bit thin, eyes
that twinkled warmly behind rimless glasses. Yet Lansing had read
somewhere that a critic of Halloran's policies had said the penologist's
thinking was far ahead of his time--too far, the critic had added.

       *       *       *       *       *

As Joe Mario closed the warden's door behind him, two inmates slowed
their typing but did not look up as he neared their desks. A guard left
his post at the outer door and walked toward Mario. The two of them
stopped beside the desks.

"What's the word, Joe?" the guard asked.

Mario held out his pass.

"Gotta round up the captain, Doc Slade and the Jew preacher," he said.

"All right. Get going."

"What do those guys want?" asked a typist as he pulled the paper from
his machine.

Mario looked quickly at the guard and as quickly away from him.

"Dunno," he shrugged.

"Somethin' about the war, I bet," grunted the typist.

"War's over, dope," said the other. "Nothin' behind the curtain now but
a nice assortment of bomb craters. All sizes."

"Go on, Joe," ordered the guard. "You heard something. Give."

"Well ... I heard that fat general say something about wanting the
warden outa here in a hour."

The typewriters stopped their clacking for a bare instant, then started
up again, more slowly. The guard frowned, then said, "On your way, Joe."
He hesitated, then, "No use to tell you to button your lip, I guess."

"I'm not causing any trouble," Mario said, as the guard opened the door
and stood aside for him to pass into the corridor.

O.K.'d for entrance into the hospital wing, Joe Mario stood outside the
railing that cut Dr. Slade's reception area off from the corridor that
led to the wards. An inmate orderly sat behind the railing, writing a
prescription for a slight, intelligent-looking man.

Mario heard the orderly say, "All right, Vukich, get that filled at the
dispensary. Take one after each meal and come back to see us when the
bottle's empty. Unless the pain gets worse, of course. But I don't think
it will."

"Thanks, doc," the patient drawled.

Both men looked up then and saw Mario.

"Hi, Joe," the orderly smiled. "What's wrong with you? You don't look
sick!"

"Nothin' wrong with me that a day outside couldn't cure."

"Or a _night_," laughed Vukich.

Mario ran a hand over his sleek, black hair. "Better a night, sure," he
grinned back. Then he sobered and said to the orderly, "Warden wants to
see the doc. Right away."

"Mr. Halloran sick?"

"Naw ... it's business. Urgent business."

"Real urgent, Joe? The doc's doing a pretty serious exam right now."

Mario paused, then said, "You guys might as well know about it. There's
a general and a civilian in the warden's office. They're talkin' about
something outside. Warden wants the doc in on it."

Sudden tension flowed out between the three men. Down the hall, a
patient screamed suddenly in the psycho ward. The three of them jerked,
then grinned feebly at each other.

Vukich said slowly, "Well, you don't start playing catch with atom bombs
without dropping a few. Wonder what it's like ... out there?"

"We haven't _heard_ that it's any different," the orderly's voice lacked
conviction.

"Don't be silly," Vukich said flatly. "Ever since they moved the dames
from Tehama into C block we've known _something_ happened."

"Get the doc," Mario said. "I've got to be on my way."

"Me, too." Vukich's thin, clever face looked thoughtful.

The others stared blankly at him and said nothing.

       *       *       *       *       *

As Alfred Court, captain of the prison, strode down the flower-bordered
path that led from the shops unit past A block to the administration
building, a side door in A block clanged open and a sergeant came out.
The sergeant turned without seeing his superior and walked hurriedly
toward the administration wing.

"Hey, sarge!" Court called. "What's the hurry?"

The sergeant whirled, recognized the captain and quickly saluted.

"Glad to see you, sir," he said. "Just the man I was looking for!"

"Good enough. What's on your mind? Better tell me as we go for the
warden's in a hurry to see me."

The two men walked abreast, both big, although Court lacked any trace of
the sergeant's paunch. As they walked and talked, their eyes darted
continually about, unconsciously checking the appearance of the
buildings, the position of the guard in the gun tower, the attitude of a
very old inmate who was meticulously weeding a flower bed.

"Captain, you going to let the men out for their yard time?"

Court's pace slowed. "Why not?"

