"Seems an odd job to give a fellow who won't drive a car or read by
electric light," the Engineer observed.

"Not so odd," the Captain said. "The Amish pretty much invented American
agriculture, you know. They've developed the finest low-energy farming
there is. Clover-growing, crop-rotation, using animal manures, those are
their inventions. Aaron, by his example, will teach the natives here
Pennsylvania farming. Before you can say Tom Malthus, there'll be steel
cities in this wilderness, filled with citizens eager to open charge
accounts for low-gravs and stereo sets."

"You expect our bearded friend to reap quite a harvest, Captain," the
Engineer said. "I just hope the natives here let him plant the seed."

"Did you get along with him, Hymie?"

"Sure," the Engineer said. "Aaron even made our smiths, those human
sharks bound for Qureysh, act friendly. For all his strange ways, he's a
nice guy."

"Nice guy, hell," the Captain said. "He's a genius. That
seventeenth-century un-scientist has more feeling for folkways in his
calloused left hand than you'd find in all the Colonial Survey. How do
you suppose the Old Order maintains itself in Pennsylvania, a tiny
Deitsch-speaking enclave surrounded by calico suburbs and ten-lane
highways? They mind their business and leave the neighbors to theirs.
The Amish have never been missionaries--they learned in 1600 that
missionaries are resented, and either slaughtered or absorbed."

"Sometimes digestively," the Engineer remarked.

"Since the Thirty Years' War, back when 'Hamlet' was opening in London,
these people have been breeding a man who can fit one special niche in
society. The failures were killed in the early days, or later went gay
and took the trappings of the majority. The successes stayed on the
farm, respected and left alone. Aaron has flirted with our century; he
and his wife learned some very un-Amish skills at the Homestead School.
The skill that makes Aaron worth his fare out here, though, is an Amish
skill, and the rarest one of all. He knows the Right Way to Live, and
lives it; but he knows, too, that your Truth-of-the Universe is
something different. And right, for you. He's quite a man, our Aaron
Stoltzfoos. That's why we dropped him here."

"Better him than me," the Engineer said.

"Precisely," the Captain said. He turned to the Exec. "As soon as we've
lifted, ask Colonel Harris to call on me in my cabin, Gene. Our Marines
had better fresh-up their swordsmanship and cavalry tactics if they're
to help our Inad Tuaregs establish that foundry on Qureysh."

"It sometimes seems you're more Ship's Anthropologist than Captain," the
Engineer remarked.

"I'm an anthro-apologist, Hymie, like Mr. Kipling," the Captain said.
"_There are nine and sixty ways of constructing tribal lays.
And--every--single--one--of--them--is--right!_" Bells rang, and the ship
surged. "Aaron and Martha, God keep you," the Captain said.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Whoa!" Aaron shouted. He peered back toward the ship, floating up into
grayness, the cavitation of her wake stirring the snow into patterns
like fine-veined marble. "_Gott saygen eich_," he said, a prayer for his
departing friends.

His wife shivered. "It's cold enough to freeze the horns off a
mooley-cow," she said. She glanced about at the snow-drifted little
trees and clutched her black cloak tighter. "I'm feared, Stoltz. There's
naught about us now but snow and black heathen."

"It's fear that is the heathen," Aaron said. "_By the word of the Lord
were the heavens made; and the host of them by the breath of His
mouth._" He kissed her. "I welcome you to our new homeland, wife," he
said.

Behind them Wutzchen--"piglet"--grunted. Martha smiled back at the giant
porker, perched amongst the cases and bags and household goods like the
victim of some bawdy chiavari. "I've never heard a pig mutter so," she
said.

"If he knew that his business here was to flatter the local lady-pigs
with farrow, Wutzchen would hop out and run," Aaron said.

"_Dummel dich_, Stoltz," Martha said. "I've got to make your supper yet,
and we don't have so much as a stove lit in our tent."

Stoltzfoos slapped the team back into motion. "What we need for our
journey home are a few of the _altie lieder_," he said, reaching back in
the wagon for his scarred guitar. He strummed and hummed, then began
singing in his clear baritone: "_In da guut alt Suumer-zeit_ ...

"... _In da guut alt Suumer-zeit_," Martha's voice joined him. As they
jolted along the path through the pine trees, heading toward
Datura-village, near which their homestead stood, they sang the other
homey songs to the music of the old guitar. "_Drawk Mich Zrick zu Alt
Virginye_," nostalgic for the black-garbed Plain-Folk left at home. Then
Aaron's fingers danced a livelier tune on the strings: "_Ich fang 'n
neie Fashun aw_," he crowed, and Martha joined in:

"A new fashion I'll begin," they sang,

"The hay I'll cut in the winter;

"When the sun-heat beats, I'll loaf in the shade.

"And feast on cherry-pie.

"I'll get us a white, smearkase cow,

"And a yard full of guinea-hen geese;

"A red-beet tree as high as the moon,

"And a patent-leather fence.

"The chickens I'll keep in the kitchen," they sang; whereupon Martha
broke down laughing.

"It's a new world, and for now a cold world; but it's God's world, with
home just up ahead," Aaron shouted. He pulled the wagon up next to the
arctic tent that was to be their temporary farmhouse, beside the wagon
loads of provision he'd brought before. He jumped down and swung Martha
to earth. "Light the stove, woman; make your little kitchen bright,
while I make our beasts feel welcome."

The Amishwoman pushed aside the entrance flap of the tent. Enclosed was
a circle some twelve feet wide. The floor was bare earth. Once warmed by
the pump-up "naptha" lantern and the gasoline hotplate, it would become
a bog. Martha went out to the wagon to get a hatchet and set out for the
nearby spinny of pines to trim off some twigs. Old Order manner forbid
decorative floor-coverings as improper worldly show; but a springy
carpet of pine-twigs could be considered as no more than a wooden floor,
keeping two Plain Folk from sinking to their knees in mud.

The pots were soon boiling atop the two-burner stove, steaming the
tent's air with onion-tangy _tzvivvele Supp_ and the savory pork-smell
of _Schnitz un Knepp_, a cannibal odor that disturbed not a bit
Wutzchen, snoring behind the cookstove. Chickens, penned beneath the
bed, chuckled in their bedtime caucus. The cow stood cheek-by-jowl with
Yonnie, warming him with platonic graciousness as they shared the hay
Aaron had spread before them. Martha stirred her soup. "When the bishop
married me to you," she told Aaron, "he said naught of my having to
sleep with a pig."

"Ah, but I thought you knew that to be the purpose of Christian
marriage, woman," Aaron said, standing close.

"It's Wutz I mean," she said. "Truly, I mind not a bit living as in one
of those automobile-wagons, since it's with you, and only for a little
while."

"I'll hire a crew of our neighbors to help with the barn tomorrow,"
Aaron said. "That done, you'll have but one pig to sleep with."

After grace, they sat on cases of tobacco to eat their meal from a table
of feed sacks covered with oilcloth. "The man in the ship's little
kitchen let me make and freeze pies, Stoltz," Martha said. "He said we'd
have a deepfreeze big as all outdoors, without electric, so use it. Eat
till it's all, _Maan_; there's more back."

Yonnie bumped against Aaron's eating-elbow. "No man and his wife have
eaten in such a zoo since Noah and his wife left the ark," Aaron said.
He cut a slice of Schnitz-pie and palmed it against the bull's big snout
to be snuffled up. "He likes your cooking," he said.

"So wash his face," Martha told him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Outside the tent there was a clatter of horse-iron on frozen ground.
"What the die-hinker is that?" Aaron demanded. He stood and picked up
the naphtha lantern.

Outside, Aaron saw a tall black stranger, astride a horse as pale as the
little Murnan moons that lighted him. "_Rankeshi dade!_" the visitor
bellowed.

"May your life be a long one!" Aaron Stoltzfoos repeated in Hausa.
Observing that his caller was brandishing a clenched fist, the Amishman
observed the same ambiguous courtesy. "If you will enter, O Welcome
