nature of _magnesia_, and especially to compare its properties with
those of the other absorbent earths, of which there plainly appeared to
me to be very different kinds, altho' commonly confounded together under
one name. I was indeed led to this examination of the absorbent earths,
partly by the hope of discovering a new sort of lime and lime-water,
which might possibly be a more powerful solvent of the stone than that
commonly used; but was disappointed in my expectations.

I have had no opportunity of seeing _Hoffman's_ first _magnesia_ or the
liquor from which it is prepared, and have therefore been obliged to
make my experiments upon the second.

In order to prepare it, I at first employed the bitter saline liquor
called _bittern_, which remains in the pans after the evaporation of sea
water. But as that liquor is not always easily procured, I afterwards
made use of a salt called _epsom-salt_, which is separated from the
bittern by crystallization, and is evidently composed of _magnesia_ and
the vitriolic acid.

There is likewise a spurious kind of Glauber salt, which yields plenty
of _magnesia_, and seems to be no other than the epsom salt of sea water
reduced to crystals of a larger size. And common salt also affords a
small quantity of this powder; because being separated from the bittern
by one hasty crystallization only, it necessarily contains a portion of
that liquor.

Those who would prepare a _magnesia_ from epsom-salt, may use the
following process.

Dissolve equal quantities of epsom-salt, and of pearl ashes separately
in a sufficient quantity of water; purify each solution from its dregs,
and mix them accurately together by violent agitation: then make them
just to boil over a brisk fire.

Add now to the mixture three or four times its quantity of hot water;
after a little agitation, allow the _magnesia_ to settle to the bottom,
and decant off as much of the water as possible. Pour on the same
quantity of cold water; and, after settling, decant it off in the same
manner. Repeat this washing with the cold water ten or twelve times: or
even oftner, if the _magnesia_ be required perfectly pure for chemical
experiments.

When it is sufficiently washed, the water may be strained and squeezed
from it in a linen cloth; for very little of the _magnesia_ passes
thro'.

The alkali in the mixture uniting with the acid, separates it from the
_magnesia_; which not being of itself soluble in water, must
consequently appear immediately under a solid form. But the powder which
thus appears is not intirely _magnesia_; part of it is the neutral salt,
formed from the union of the acid and alkali. This neutral salt is
found, upon examination, to agree in all respects with vitriolated
tartar, and requires a large quantity of hot water to dissolve it. As
much of it is therefore dissolved as the water can take up; the rest is
dispersed thro' the mixture in the form of a powder. Hence the necessity
of washing the _magnesia_ with so much trouble; for the first affusion
of hot water is intended to dissolve the whole of the salt, and the
subsequent additions of cold water to wash away this solution.

The caution given of boiling the mixture is not unnecessary; if it be
neglected, the whole of the _magnesia_ is not accurately separated at
once; and by allowing it to rest for some time, that powder concretes
into minute grains, which, when viewed with the microscope, appear to be
assemblages of needles diverging from a point. This happens more
especially when the solutions of the epsom-salt and of the alkali are
diluted with too much water before they are mixed together. Thus, if a
dram of epsom-salt and of salt of tartar be dissolved each in four
ounces of water, and be mixed, and then allowed to rest three or four
days, the whole of the _magnesia_ will be formed into these grains. Or
if we filtrate the mixture soon after it is made, and heat the clear
liquor which passes thro'; it will become turbid, and deposite a
_magnesia_.

I had the curiosity to satisfy myself of the purgative power of
_magnesia_, and of _Hoffman's_ opinion concerning it, by the following
easy experiment. I made a neutral salt of _magnesia_ and distilled
vinegar; choosing this acid as being, like that in weak stomachs, the
product of fermentation. Six drams of this I dissolved in water, and
gave to a middle-aged man, desiring him to take it by degrees. After
having taken about a third, he desisted, and purged four times in an
easy and gentle manner. A woman of a strong constitution got the
remainder as a brisk purgative, and it operated ten times without
causing any uneasiness. The taste of this salt is not disagreeable, and
it appears to be rather of the cooling than of the acrid kind.

Having thus given a short sketch of the history and medical virtues of
_magnesia_, I now proceed to an account of its chemical properties. By
my first experiments, I intended to learn what sort of neutral salts
might be obtained by joining it to each of the vulgar acids; and the
result was as follows.

Magnesia is quickly dissolved with violent effervescence, or explosion
of air, by the acids of vitriol, nitre, and of common salt, and by
distilled vinegar; the neutral saline liquors thence produced having
each their peculiar properties.

That which is made with the vitriolic acid, may be condensed into
crystals similar in all respects to epsom-salt.

That which is made with the nitrous is of a yellow colour, and yields
saline crystals, which retain their form in a very dry air, but melt in
a moist one.

That which is produced by means of spirit of salt, yields no crystals;
and if evaporated to dryness, soon melts again when exposed to the air.

That which is obtained from the union of distilled vinegar with
_magnesia_, affords no crystals by evaporation, but is condensed into a
saline mass, which, while warm, is extremely tough and viscid, very much
resembling a strong glue both in colour and consistence, and becomes
brittle when cold.

By these experiments _magnesia_ appears to be a substance very different
from those of the calcarious class; under which I would be understood to
comprehend all those that are converted into a perfect quick-lime in a
strong fire, such as _lime-stone_, _marble_, _chalk_, those _spars_ and
_marles_ which effervesce with aqua fortis, all _animal shells_ and the
bodies called _lithophyta_. All of these, by being joined with acids,
yield a set of compounds which are very different from those we have
just now described. Thus, if a small quantity of any calcarious matter
be reduced to a fine powder and thrown into spirit of vitriol, it is
attacked by this acid with a brisk effervescence; but little or no
dissolution ensues. It absorbs the acid, and remains united with it in
the form of a white powder, at the bottom of the vessel, while the
liquor has hardly any taste, and shews only a very light cloud upon the
addition of alkali.[4]

The same white powder is also formed when spirit of vitriol is added to
a calcarious earth dissolved in any other acid; the vitriolic expelling
the other acid, and joining itself to the earth by a stronger
attraction; and upon this account the _magnesia_ of sea-water seems to
be different from either of those described by _Hoffman_. He says
expressly, that the solutions of each of his powders, or, what is
equivalent, that the liquors from which they are obtained, formed a
coagulum, and deposited a white powder, when he added the vitriolic
acid;[5] which experiment I have often tried with the marine bittern,
but without success. The coagulum thus formed in the mother of nitre may
be owing to a quantity of quick-lime contained in it; for quick-lime is
used in extracting the salt-petre from its matrix. But it is more
difficult to account for the difference between _Hoffman's_ bittern and
ours, unless we will be satisfied to refer it to this, that he got his
from the waters of salt springs, which may possibly be different from
those of the sea.

Magnesia is not less remarkably distinguished from the calcarious
earths, by joining it to the nitrous and vegetable acids, than to the
vitriolic. Those earths, when combined with spirit of nitre, cannot be
reduced to a crystalline form, and if they are dissolved in distilled
vinegar, the mixture spontaneously dries up into a friable salt.

Having thus found _magnesia_ to differ from the common alkaline earths,
the object of my next inquiry was its peculiar degree of attraction for
acids, or what was the place due to it in Mr. _Geoffroy's_ table of
elective attractions.

Three drams of _magnesia_ in fine powder, an ounce of salt ammoniac, and
six ounces of water were mixed together, and digested six days in a
retort joined to a receiver.

During the whole time, the neck of the retort was pointed a little
upwards, and the most watery part of the vapour, which was condensed
there, fell back into its body. In the beginning of the experiment, a
volatile salt was therefore collected in a dry form in the receiver, and
afterwards dissolved into spirit.

When all was cool, I found in the retort a saline liquor, some
undissolved _magnesia_, and some salt ammoniac crystallized. The saline
liquor was separated from the other two, and then mixed with the
alkaline spirit. A coagulum was immediately formed, and a _magnesia_
precipitated from the mixture.

The _magnesia_ which had remained in the retort, when well washed and
dried, weighed two scruples and fifteen grains.

We learn by the latter part of this experiment, that the attraction of
the volatile alkali for acids is stronger than that of _magnesia_, since
it separated this powder from the acid to which it was joined. But it
also appears, that a gentle heat is capable of overcoming this
superiority of attraction, and of gradually elevating the alkali, while
it leaves the less volatile acid with the _magnesia_.

Dissolve a dram of any calcarious substance in the acid of nitre or of
common salt, taking care that the solution be rendered perfectly
neutral, or that no superfluous acid be added. Mix with this solution a
dram of _magnesia_ in fine powder, and digest it in the heat of boiling
water about twenty four hours; then dilute the mixture with double its
quantity of water, and filtrate. The greatest part of the earth now left
