The Director jumped angrily to his feet. "How did that happen? How can I
explain to the board?"

"I'm sorry, sir. He was just too--"

"_You're_ sorry?" He slumped back in his chair and drummed the desk top
with his fingernails, worrying his lower lip with his teeth. He exhaled
loudly and leaned forward. "Well, only one thing to do. You know the
orders."

The biophysicist squirmed uncomfortably. "Couldn't we send a squadron of
ships out to search and--"

"And what?" asked the Director, sarcastically. "You don't think I'd risk
a billion credits worth of equipment on a wild-goose chase like that, do
you? We could use up a year's appropriation of fuel and manpower and
still be unable to adequately search a sector one-tenth that size. If he
just sat still, a thousand ships couldn't find him in a thousand years,
searching at finite speeds. Add to that the fact that the target is
moving at ultra-light speed and the odds against locating him is
multiplied by a billion."

"I know, but he can't stay in space. He'll have to land somewhere,
sometime."

"True enough--but where and when?"

"Couldn't we alert all the nearby planets?"

"You know better than that. He could be halfway across the galaxy before
an ethero-gram reached the nearest planet."

"Suppose we sent scout ships to the nearer planets and asked them to
inform their neighbors in the same way. We'd soon have an expanding
circle that he _couldn't_ slip through."

The Director smiled wryly. "Maybe. But who's going to pay for all this.
By the time the circle was a thousand light-years in diameter there
would be ten thousand ships and a million clerks working on recapturing
one escaped prisoner. Another thing; I don't know offhand what he's been
sentenced for, but I'll wager there are ten thousand planets on which
his crime would not be a crime. Do you think we could ever extradite him
from such a planet? And even if by some incredible stroke of fortune one
of our agents happened to land on the right planet, in which city would
he begin his search. Or suppose our quarry lands only on uninhabited
planets? We can't very well alert the whole galaxy in the search for
just one man."

"I know, but--"

"But what?" interrupted the Director. "Any other suggestions?"

"N ... no--"

"All right, he asked for it. You have the pattern, I presume. _Feed it
to Fido!_"

"Yes, sir, but well ... I just don't--"

"Do you think _I_ like it?" asked the Director, fiercely.

In the silence that followed, they looked at each other, guiltily.

"There's nothing else we can do," said the Director. "The orders are
explicit. _No one escapes from Hades!_"

"I know," replied the biophysicist. "I'm not blaming you. Only I wish
someone else had my job."

"Well," said the Director, heavily. "You might as well get started." He
nodded his head in dismissal.

As the biophysicist went out the door, the Director looked down once
more at the pile of papers before him. He pulled the top sheet closer,
and rubber-stamped across its face--CASE CLOSED.

"Yes," he mused aloud. "Closed for us, but--" He hesitated a moment, and
then sighing once more, signed his name in the space provided.

       *       *       *       *       *

AUGUST 6, 430th Year GALACTIC ERA

Tee Ormond sat morosely at the spaceport bar, and alternately wiped his
forehead with a soggy handkerchief, and sipped at his frosted rainbow,
careful not to disturb the varicolored layers of liquid in the tall
narrow glass. Every now and then he nervously ran his fingers through
his straight black hair, which lay damply plastered to his head. His
jacket was faded and worn, and above the left pocket was emblazoned the
meteor insignia of the spaceman. A dark patch on his back showed where
the perspiration had seeped through. He blinked and rubbed the corner of
his eye as a drop of perspiration ran down and settled there.

A casual look would have classified him as a very average looking pilot
such as could be found at the bar of any spaceport; i.e. if space pilots
can ever be classified as average. Spacemen are the last true
adventurers in an age where the debilitating culture of a highly
mechanized civilization has pushed to the very borders of the galaxy.
While most men are fearful and indecisive outside their narrow
specialties the spacemen must at all times be ready to deal with the
unexpected and the unusual. The expression--"Steady as a spaceman's
nerves"--had a very real origin.

A closer look at Tee would have revealed the error of a quick
classification. He gripped his drink too tightly, and his eyes darted
restlessly from side to side, as though searching, searching; yet
dreading to find the object of their search. His expressive face
contorted in a nervous tic each time his eyes swept by the clock hanging
behind the bar. He glanced dispiritedly out the window at the
perpetually cloudy sky and idly watched a rivulet of water race down the
dirty pane. He loosened his collar and futilely mopped at his neck with
the soggy handkerchief, then irritably flung it to the floor.

"Hey, Jo," he yelled to the bartender. "What's the matter with the
air-conditioning? I'm burning up."

"Take it easy," soothed the bartender, consulting a thermometer on the
wall behind him, "it's eighty-five in here. That's as low as the law
allows. Can't have too much difference in the temperature or all my
customers'd pass out when they go outside. Why don't you go into town?
They keep it comfortable under the dome."

"Don't this planet _ever_ cool off?" asked Tee.

The bartender chuckled. "I see you don't know too much about Thymis.
Sometimes it drops to ninety at night, but not too often. You ought to
be here sometime when the clouds part for a minute. If you're caught
outside then, it's third-degree burns for sure."

He glanced down at the nearly empty glass. "How about another rainbow?
