stumble homeward.

He relaxed, to enjoy the short respite he had gained by evading the
forester. Sitting with his back to a small tree, he closed his eyes and
folded his thick arms over his head. Of course, he would soon be found,
and he would have to go back to the hunt. But this forester was a dull,
soft fellow. He could be made to believe Flor's excuse that he had
become lost for a time, and had been searching the woods for the other
beaters.

The underbrush rustled and Flor heard the sound of disturbed leaves and
heavy footfalls. A hunting charger was approaching, bearing one of the
hunters. Quickly, Flor rose to his feet, sidling farther back into the
thicket. Possibly, he might remain unseen. He peered out through the
leaves.

The mounted man was old and evidently tired from the long day's hunt. He
swayed a little in his saddle, then recovered and looked about him,
fumbling at his side for his horn. His mount raised its head and beat a
forefoot against the ground. The heavy foot made a deep, thumping noise
and leaves rustled and rose in a small cloud.

Flor sighed and started forward reluctantly. It was the Earl, himself.
It might be possible to hide from another, but Flor knew better than to
try to conceal his presence from the old nobleman. The Earl could detect
any person in his vicinity, merely by their thoughts, as Flor well knew
from past experience. He also knew how severe the punishment would be if
he failed to present himself immediately. He pushed a branch aside with
a loud rustle.

Startled by the noise, a _husa_, which had been hiding beneath a nearby
bush, raced into the open. The small animal dashed madly toward the
Earl, slid wildly almost under the charger's feet, and put on a fresh
burst of speed, to disappear into the underbrush. The huge beast
flinched away, then reared wildly, dashing his rider's head against a
tree limb.

The elderly man slipped in his saddle, reached shakily for his belt,
missed, and lost his seat, to crash heavily to the ground.

Flor rushed from his thicket. With the shock of the fall, the Earl's
coronet had become dislodged from his head and lay a short distance from
the inert form. Flor picked it up, turning it in his hands and looking
at it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Curiously, he examined the golden circlet, noting the tiny bosses inset
in the band. Many times, he had watched from a dark corner at the
hunting lodge, neglecting his scullery duties, while the Earl showed the
powers of this coronet to his elder son. Sometimes, he had been caught
by the very powers the circlet gave to the old nobleman, and he winced
as he remembered the strong arm of the kitchen master, and the skill
with which he wielded a strap. But on other occasions, the Earl had been
so engrossed in explaining the device as to neglect the presence of the
eavesdropper.

He had told of the ability given him to read the thoughts of others, and
even to strongly influence their actions. And Flor had gone back to his
labors, to dream of what he would do if he, rather than the Earl, were
the possessor of the powerful talisman.

And now, he had it in his hands.

A daring idea occurred to him, and he looked around furtively. He was
alone with the Earl. The old man was breathing stertorously, his mouth
wide open. His face was darkening, and the heavy jowls were becoming
purple. Obviously, he was capable of little violence.

In sudden decision, Flor knelt beside the body. His hand, holding the
short club above the Earl's throat, trembled uncontrollably. He wanted
to act--had to act now--but his fear made him nauseated and weak. For a
moment, his head seemed to expand and to lighten as he realized the
enormity of his intent. This was one of the great nobles of the land,
not some mere animal.

The heavily lidded eyes beneath him fluttered, started to open.

With a sob of effort, Flor dashed his club downward, as though striking
a _husa_. The Earl shivered convulsively, choked raspingly, and was
suddenly limp and still. The labored breathing stopped and his eyes
opened reluctantly, to fix Flor with a blank stare.

The serf leaped back, then hovered over the body, club poised to strike
again. But the old man was really dead. Flor shook his head. Men, he
thought in sudden contempt, died easily. It was not so with the _husa_,
or the _khada_, who struggled madly for life, often attacking their
killer and wounding him during their last efforts.

Flor consigned this bit of philosophy to his memory for future use and
set to work removing the heavy belt worn by the Earl. This, he knew, was
another potent talisman, which could guard its wearer from physical harm
when its bosses were pushed.

The murderer smiled sardonically. It was well for him that the old
nobleman had failed to press those bosses, otherwise this opportunity
probably would never have been presented. He stood up, holding the belt
in his hand. Such a thing as this, he told himself, could make him a
great man.

He examined the belt, noting the long metal case, with its engraving and
its bosses. At last, he grunted and fastened it about his own waist. He
pressed the bosses, then threw himself against a tree.

Something slowed his fall, and he seemed to be falling on a soft mat. He
caught his balance and rested against the tree, nodding in satisfaction.
Later, he could experiment further, but now he had other things to do.

He examined the coronet again, remembering that there was something
about its bosses, too. He looked closely at them, then pressed. One boss
slid a little under his finger and he felt a faint, unfamiliar sense of
awareness.

He put the coronet on his head and shuddered a little as the awareness
increased to an almost painful intensity. The forest was somehow more
clear to him than it had ever been. He seemed to understand many things
which he had heard or experienced, but which had been vague before. And
memory crowded upon him. He stood still, looking around.

At the edge of his mind was vague, uneasy wonder, obviously not his own
thought. There was a dim caricature of himself standing over the body of
the Earl. And there was a feeling of the need to do something without
understanding of what was to be done, or why.

He could remember clearly now, the Earl's explanations of the action of
the coronet. One incident stood out--a time when the old man, having
overindulged in the local wine, had demonstrated his ability to divine
the thoughts of others. Flor twitched a little in painful recollection.
The kitchen master had been especially enthusiastic in his use of the
strap that night.

The Earl's mount was eying Flor, who realized without knowing just how,
that the vague images and rudimentary thoughts were a reflection of the
beast's mind. He looked over at the thicket into which the little
animal which had started the charger, was hiding. It was still there,
and he could feel a sense of fearful wonder, a desire to be gone,
coupled with a fear of being discovered.

Again, he looked about the woods. In a way, the _husa_ and he were akin.
It would be bad if he were caught here, too. To be sure, he would be
hard to capture, with his new protection, but many men would hunt him.
And some of them would be other Earls, or possibly some of the great
abbots, who had their own coronets and belts, and possibly other things
of great power. These, he knew, might be too much for him. He slunk into
the thicket, looked down the hill, and decided on a course which would
avoid the paths of the foresters.

As he walked, he plotted methods of using his new-found powers. He
considered idea after idea--then discarded them and sought further. With
his new awareness, he could see flaws in plans which would have seemed
perfect to him only a few short hours before.

First, he realized he would have to learn to control his new powers. He
would have to learn the ways of the nobility, their manners and their
customs. And he would have to find a disguise which would allow him to
move about the land. Serfs were too likely to be questioned by the first
passer-by who noticed them. Serfs belonged on the land--part of it!

He hid in the bushes at the side of a path as a group of free swordsmen
went by. As he watched them, a plan came to him. He examined it
carefully, finally deciding it would do.

       *       *       *       *       *

The man-at-arms sauntered through the forest, swaying a little as he
walked. He sang in a gravelly voice, pausing now and then to remember a
new verse.

Flor watched him as he approached, allowing the man's thoughts to enter
his own consciousness. They were none too complicated. The man was a
free swordsman, his sword unemployed at the moment. He still had
sufficient money to enjoy the forest houses for a time, then he would
seek service with the Earl of Konewar, who was rumored to be planning a
campaign.

The man swayed closer, finally noticing Flor. He paused in mid stride,
eying the escaped serf up and down.

"Now, here's something strange indeed," he mused. He looked closely at
Flor's face.

"Tell me, my fellow, tell me this: How is it you wear the belt and
coronet of a great noble, and yet have no other garment than the shift
of a serf?"

As Flor looked at him insolently, he drew his sword.

"Come," he demanded impatiently, "I must have answer, else I take you to
a provost. Possibly his way of finding your secret would be to your
liking, eh?"

Flor drew a deep breath and waited. Here was the final test of his new
device. He had experimented, finding that even the charge of a _khada_
was harmless to him. Now, he would find if a sword could be rendered
harmless. At the approach of the man, he had pressed the boss on his
belt. The man seemed suddenly a little uncertain, so Flor spoke.

"Why, who are you," he demanded haughtily, "to question the doings of
your betters? Away with you, before I spit you with your own sword."

The man shook his head, smiling sarcastically. "Hah!" he said,
approaching Flor. "I know that accent. It stinks of the scullery. Tell
me, Serf, where did you steal that----"

He broke off, climaxing his question with an abrupt swing of the sword.
Then, he fell back in surprise. Flor had thrust a hand out to ward off
the blow, and the sword had been thrown back violently. The rebound tore
it from its amazed owner's hand, and it thudded to the ground. The
man-at-arms looked at it stupidly.

Flor sprang aside, scooping up the weapon before the man could recover.

"Now," he cried, "stand quite still. I shall have business with you."

The expression on the man's face told of something more than mere
surprise which held him quiet. Here was proof of the powers of the
coronet. Flor looked savagely at his captive.

"Take off your cap."

Reluctantly, the man's hand came up. He removed his steel cap, holding
it in his hand as he faced his captor.

"That is fine." Flor pressed his advantage. "Now, your garments. Off
with them!"

The swordsman was nearly his size. Both of them had the heavy build of
their mountain stock, and the garments of the free swordsman would do
for Flor's purpose, even though they might not fit him perfectly. Who
expected one of these roving soldiers of fortune to be dressed in the
height of style? They were fighters, not models to show off the tailor's
art.

Flor watched as his prisoner started to disrobe, then pulled off his own
single garment, carefully guiding it through the belt at his waist, so
as not to disturb the talisman's powers.

He threw the long shirt at the man before him.

"Here," he ordered. "Put this on."

He sensed a feeling of deep resentment--of hopeless rebellion. He
repeated his demand, more emphatically.

"Put it on, I say!"

As the man stood before him, dressed in the rough shift of a serf, Flor
smiled grimly.

"And now," he said, "none will worry too much about a mere serf, or look
too closely into his fate. Here."

He slashed out with the sword, awkwardly, but effectively.

"I shall have to find a new name," he told himself as he dressed in the
garments of his victim. "No free swordsman would have a name like Flor.
They all have two names."

He thought of the names he had heard used by the guards of the Earl.
Flor, he thought, could be part of a name. But one of the swordsmen
would make it Floran, or possibly Florel. They would be hunters, or
slayers of elk--not simply elk. He looked at the steel cap in his hands.
An iron hat--_deri kuna_.

[Illustration]

"So," he told himself, "I shall be Florel Derikuna."

He inspected his new garments, being sure they hid the belt, and yet
left the bosses available to easy reach. At last, he put on the iron
cap. It covered the coronet, effectively hiding it.

Taking up the sword, he replaced it in its scabbard and swaggered
through the forest, imitating the man-at-arms' song.

At one stroke, he had improved his status infinitely. Now, he could roam
the land unquestioned, so long as he had money. He smiled to himself.
There was money in his scrip, and there would be but slight problems
involved in getting more. Tonight, he would sleep in a forest house,
instead of huddling in a thicket.

