
"Yes, they do," DeCastros said. "Well, well, perhaps you are only a
poet, Mr. Wordsley. But should you happen to be a little--well, maggoty,
you positively do not have to tell me. No doubt we both have our
secrets. Naturally."

"_I_ haven't," Mr. Wordsley said desperately.

"No? Then you certainly will not mind that I am recommending an Ab Test
for you when we get home."

Mr. Wordsley's heart stopped beating for several seconds. He searched
Captain DeCastros' face for a sign that he might be fooling. He was not.
He looked too pleasant. Mr. Wordsley had always managed to pass the
Aberrations Test by the skin of his teeth, but he was sure that, like
most spiritual geniuses, he was sensitively balanced, and that the power
and seniority of a man like DeCastros must influence the Board of
Examination.

"You might be decommed. Or even committed to an institution. We wouldn't
want _that_ to happen, would we, Mr. Wordsley?"

"Why are you doing this to me?" Mr. Wordsley asked strickenly.

"To tell the truth, I do not propose to have any more of my voyages
blighted with your moon-calfing, day-dreaming and letting the
ertholaters stink up the bridge. Besides--" Captain DeCastros patted his
shoulder almost affectionately. "--besides, I can't stand you, Mr.
Wordsley."

Mr. Wordsley nodded. He went over to the screen that was like a window
of blessed outer night and sank down on his knees before it.

_Have the wish I wish tonight._

"Ah, ha!" DeCastros exclaimed with sudden ice frozen around the rim of
his voice. "What have we here?"

"A new nova," Mr. Wordsley answered sullenly.

"It is common knowledge that no engineer can tell a nova from the D.R.
blast of an Iphonian freighter. Let me see it." He shoved Mr. Wordsley
out of the way and examined the screen intently.

"You fool," he said at last, "that's a planet. It is Avis Solis."

       *       *       *       *       *

Now the name of Avis Solis tingled in Mr. Wordsley's unreliable memory,
but it would not advance to be recognized. What planet so bright, and
yet so remote from any star by angular measurement?

"Turn it off," DeCastros ordered.

Mr. Wordsley turned on him in a sudden fury. "It's mine," he cried. "I
found it! Go back to your bridge." Then, aghast at what he had said, he
clapped his hand over his mouth.

"Dear me," said Captain DeCastros silkily. Suddenly he seemed to go
quite berserk. He snatched a pile-bar from its rack and swung it at the
screen. The outer panel shattered. The screen went dead.

Mr. Wordsley grabbed at the bar and got hold of it at the expense of a
broken finger. They strained and tugged. The slippery cadmium finally
eluded both of them, bounded over the railing into the pit, struck a
nomplate far below and was witheringly consumed in a flash of blue
flame.

Then they were down and rolling over and over, clawing and gouging,
until Captain DeCastros inevitably emerged upon top.

Mr. Wordsley's eyes protruded from that unbearable weight, and he wished
that there was no such thing as artificial gravity. He struggled vainly.
A bit of broken glass crunched beneath his writhing heel. He went limp
and began to sob. It was not a very manly thing to do, but Mr. Wordsley
was exercising his poetic license.

"Now then," said DeCastros, jouncing up and down a bit. "I trust that
you have come to understand who is master of this ship, Mr. Wordsley?"

His addressee continued to weep silently.

After awhile it occurred to Captain DeCastros that what he was doing was
expressly forbidden in the Rules of the Way, Section 90-G, and might, in
fact, get him into a peck of trouble. So he got up, helped Mr. Wordsley
to his feet, and began to brush him off.

In a kindly voice he said, "You must have heard of Avis Solis."

"I don't seem to remember it," Mr. Wordsley said.

"It's a solitaire. One of those planets which depend upon dark, dwarf,
satellite suns for heat, you know. It is almost always in eclipse, and
I, for one, have always been glad of it."

"Why is that?" said Mr. Wordsley, not really caring. His chest was
giving him considerable pain.

"Because it holds the darkest of memories for me. I lost a brother on
