headquarters where the power supplies and the computer were; and the
sleeping quarters. Beyond, nose high, stood the silver scout ship that
had brought the advance exploratory party of scientists and technicians
to Waiamea three days before. Except for a few of the killer robots
rolling slowly around the camp site on their quiet treads, there was no
one about.

"So, they've finally got those things working." Alan smiled slightly.
"Guess that means I owe Pete a bourbon-and-soda for sure. Anybody who
can build a robot that hunts by homing in on animals' mind impulses ..."
He stepped forward just as a roar of blue flame dissolved the branches
of a tree, barely above his head.

Without pausing to think, Alan leaped back, and fell sprawling over a
bush just as one of the robots rolled silently up from the right,
lowering its blaster barrel to aim directly at his head. Alan froze. "My
God, Pete built those things wrong!"

Suddenly a screeching whirlwind of claws and teeth hurled itself from
the smoldering branches and crashed against the robot, clawing insanely
at the antenna and blaster barrel. With an awkward jerk the robot swung
around and fired its blaster, completely dissolving the lower half of
the cat creature which had clung across the barrel. But the back
pressure of the cat's body overloaded the discharge circuits. The robot
started to shake, then clicked sharply as an overload relay snapped and
shorted the blaster cells. The killer turned and rolled back towards the
camp, leaving Alan alone.

Shakily, Alan crawled a few feet back into the undergrowth where he
could lie and watch the camp, but not himself be seen. Though visibility
didn't make any difference to the robots, he felt safer, somehow,
hidden. He knew now what the shooting sounds had been and why there
hadn't been anyone around the camp site. A charred blob lying in the
grass of the clearing confirmed his hypothesis. His stomach felt sick.

"I suppose," he muttered to himself, "that Pete assembled these robots
in a batch and then activated them all at once, probably never living to
realize that they're tuned to pick up human brain waves, too. Damn!
Damn!" His eyes blurred and he slammed his fist into the soft earth.

When he raised his eyes again the jungle was perceptibly darker.
Stealthy rustlings in the shadows grew louder with the setting sun.
Branches snapped unaccountably in the trees overhead and every now and
then leaves or a twig fell softly to the ground, close to where he lay.
Reaching into his jacket, Alan fingered his pocket blaster. He pulled it
out and held it in his right hand. "This pop gun wouldn't even singe a
robot, but it just might stop one of those pumas."

[Illustration: They said the blast with your name on it would find you
anywhere. This looked like Alan's blast.]

Slowly Alan looked around, sizing up his situation. Behind him the dark
jungle rustled forbiddingly. He shuddered. "Not a very healthy spot to
spend the night. On the other hand, I certainly can't get to the camp
with a pack of mind-activated mechanical killers running around. If I
can just hold out until morning, when the big ship arrives ... The big
ship! Good Lord, Peggy!" He turned white; oily sweat punctuated his
forehead. Peggy, arriving tomorrow with the other colonists, the wives
and kids! The metal killers, tuned to blast any living flesh, would
murder them the instant they stepped from the ship!

       *       *       *       *       *

A pretty girl, Peggy, the girl he'd married just three weeks ago. He
still couldn't believe it. It was crazy, he supposed, to marry a girl
and then take off for an unknown planet, with her to follow, to try to
create a home in a jungle clearing. Crazy maybe, but Peggy and her green
eyes that changed color with the light, with her soft brown hair, and
her happy smile, had ended thirty years of loneliness and had, at last,
given him a reason for living. "Not to be killed!" Alan unclenched his
fists and wiped his palms, bloody where his fingernails had dug into the
flesh.

There was a slight creak above him like the protesting of a branch too
heavily laden. Blaster ready, Alan rolled over onto his back. In the
movement, his elbow struck the top of a small earthy mound and he was
instantly engulfed in a swarm of locust-like insects that beat
disgustingly against his eyes and mouth. "Fagh!" Waving his arms before
his face he jumped up and backwards, away from the bugs. As he did so, a
dark shapeless thing plopped from the trees onto the spot where he had
been lying stretched out. Then, like an ambient fungus, it slithered off
into the jungle undergrowth.

For a split second the jungle stood frozen in a brilliant blue flash,
followed by the sharp report of a blaster. Then another. Alan whirled,
startled. The planet's double moon had risen and he could see a robot
rolling slowly across the clearing in his general direction, blasting
