Do you think the Earth would remain in its orbit if this happened?"

"I don't know," Zen answered. "That would be up to the astronomers and
the astronomical physicists to decide. In any case, if the danger is
too great, we'll use ordinary weapons to touch off their super bomb.
Well get the job done before they finish."

"They are working underground, in a cavern at least three thousand feet
deep," West pointed out. "Do you have a weapon that will penetrate to
this depth?"

"We'll build one!"

"You talk very glibly, colonel."

"Somebody has got to talk!" Zen said fiercely. "Even if they are
building their bomb underground, they must have an exit for it
somewhere. We'll locate their exit and drop an H-bomb on it."

"And thus destroy their bomb and the best of their scientists and
engineers?"

"This is war. You can't have sympathy in war."

"This is my point, colonel," West said patiently. "I have no
sympathy--with either side."

"Then what do you propose--to sit here and do nothing?"

"I propose to let each side destroy the other as much as they wish and
can. Then, when they have completely demonstrated the futility of their
efforts, when it is utterly clear to the few who have survived that
warfare is not the way to the future, then the new people will emerge
to show the way to those who have survived." West's voice was calm. He
seemed to be considering a situation often pondered and to be stating a
conclusion firmly and definitely reached.

"But that involves senseless slaughter," Zen protested. "This was the
reason that lay back of the dropping of the first atom bomb--to stop
senseless slaughter."

"All slaughter is senseless, colonel, though from the viewpoint of the
individual or nation doing it, slaughter is generally considered to be
right at the time."

Zen started to comment on what the craggy man had just said, then
changed his mind. Was he dealing with a madman? This seemed possible.
West's words certainly did not fit any pattern that Zen knew. The act
of sitting by and letting two nations commit suicide went beyond the
bounds of rational thinking.

"I beg you, let me report this to the high command," Zen said, making
one last plea.

"In reply, I want to ask one question," West answered. "What would
happen to the people here, and to me, if I revealed the existence of
this instrument?"

"You would be a hero," Zen said promptly, and knew he was lying as he
spoke. "Your people would be protected."

"I dislike calling you a liar, colonel, but that is exactly what you
are," West answered. "We would all be taken care of, as long as all
of us did exactly what the high command wanted. The instant I tried
to do anything else, my actions would be called treason and I would
be considered a traitor. My equipment would be confiscated, '_for the
convenience of the government_,' and I would be lucky if I did not face
a firing squad. Tell me honestly, colonel, would not this happen?" For
the first time, West's words had a tinge of anger in them. Or was it
sorrow?

"Sam--" Nedra said. "Something--" Her voice was a whisper from some
far-off land.

"What is it, Nedra?" West asked. In an instant, he had forgotten all
about Kurt Zen.

The nurse sat up straight and stiff. All color fled from her face.
"Something--" Her voice was the faintest whisper of sound in this quiet
room.

"Nedra, what is it?" West's tones had alarm in them.

Instead of answering, the nurse slid from her chair to the floor, in a
faint.

Dim and distant in the silence that followed came a popping sound.

_Rat-tat-tat-tat-tat--_

Zen had heard this death-dealing rattle too often to mistake its
identity.

"A sub-machine gun!"

The drapes that covered the archway leading into this hidden room were
shoved aside. A man fell through them. Zen knew at a glance that he
was another of the kids who lived here in this hidden cavern inside a
mountain. Blood was spewing from a hole in his back and he was fighting
desperately for breath.

"They're--coming with guns!" he gasped.

West dropped to his knees and took the head of the youth in his lap.
His face was dark as he saw the wound on the back. Cuddling the youth's
head in his lap as one would a frightened child, he asked, "What
happened, Carl?"

"I don't know. They came out of nowhere. There was no one. Then these
men were here. They came--shooting." Blood came out of his mouth as
he spoke. He tried to cough it away, and failed. His hand went to his
mouth and wiped at the blood, then he lifted his hand to his eyes and
saw what was there.

"How many are there?" Zen asked.

Carl's eyes wandered until he found the source of this question.
"Dozens," he said, his voice dull. Blood was draining from his mouth
across West's legs and was forming a pool on the floor.

Listening, Zen could distinguish three machine guns going now. Men were
yelling. A girl was screaming. At the sounds, the colonel's lips formed
into a line as sharp as the edge of a knife.

"How did they get past your fear generators?" he said to West.

"I don't know," the craggy man answered. "Perhaps they found an
unguarded tunnel."

Zen could not see what difference it made how the intruders had secured
entry. They were here. "Where are your weapons?" he demanded. In his
mind was the thought that the new people would have weapons adequate to
defend their own citadel.

"Weapons?" West did not seem to understand the term. "We have none."

"What?" Zen said. Hadn't West understood him. Every farmer, every
rancher, and every householder had his stock of weapons. Almost all
people went armed. "No rifles?"

"No."

"Not even tear gas?"

"No, colonel."

"Then how in the hell did you expect to stay alive?" Zen burst out.
"You surely knew they would find you sometime."

"Staying alive is actually not as important as you think. Yes, son."
West bent again to listen to the youth's words.

"Good--good--" The whisper was very faint.

West understood. "Goodbye," he said. "We will meet again. But, goodbye
for now."

The youth sighed. All pain and all fear went from his face. Peace came
to him.

But when West rose to his feet, his face was bleak. "He was new here,"
he said as if this explained something that he felt needed explaining.

Somewhere a woman was screaming. West listened to the sound, then
started toward it. Zen caught his arm.

"The invaders have guns." His tone conveyed the impression that West
was at fault because no weapons existed inside the mine. "Or do you
want to go join him?" He nodded toward the body on the floor. Blood
had stopped spilling from that body now. The essence of life had gone
elsewhere and the tides of life had ceased flowing.

"Yes," West said bluntly. "I want to go with him." His face had grown
more black. Heat lightning was dancing in his eyes.

Zen caught the impulse to say that this made two of them who wanted to
join the bronze-skinned youth. He knew how to deal with this reaction.

"Okay," he said. "Good bye."

West blinked startled eyes at him.

"Run along," Zen said.

"Eh?"

"I'll take over here and fight the battle you are running from," Zen
continued.

As if he were dispelling a mist from some hidden corner of his mind,
the craggy man shook his head. "Sorry," he apologized. "However, the
call is very strong. Only the sense of a job not yet done has kept me
from going for--a long time." He shook his head again. "No, I shall not
follow him, for another while, though I am positive that he is luckier
than we are."

"I agree," Zen said.

Stooping, West picked up Nedra. She lay in his arms like a tired,
sleeping child. Had she followed the youth? Kurt Zen had a moment of
heartbreak as the thought passed through his mind before he saw that
she was still breathing regularly.

"Follow me," West said.

The heat lightning still danced in the eyes of the craggy man as he
moved across the room. The solid wall swung aside into another hidden
door. "None of my people know this is here," he explained. "The
combination lock is actuated only by my body."

As Kurt Zen went through the door he could hear the girl still
screaming somewhere.

The passage was narrow. To one side, another passage led into a room
where Zen caught a glimpse of some kind of electrical equipment in
operation, the technical guts of the super-radar, he suspected.

Ahead, West growled, a sound that came from deep in his throat. He had
stopped and was staring down into a hidden opening in the wall. Zen saw
that the opening, through some hidden arrangement of mirrors, revealed
the interior of the big gallery where he had spent the night.

Hell was loose in there now.




XI


Jake, Ed, and Cal were part of that hell. Each carried a smoking weapon
in his hands. A body lay on the floor. Somewhere in one of the small
rooms a woman was screaming. In the middle of the room stood the man
who was obviously in charge of the situation. At the sight of this man,
Kurt Zen felt his breath draw into his body so heavily that it whistled
through his nostrils.

Cuso's lieutenant!

The others in the room were the Asians who had been with the lieutenant
the night before.

"I should have slit their throats while they were asleep and in my
power last night," Zen raged.

The only sound in the passage was that of West breathing heavily, like
a man who had run a marathon and had lost. No, there were two men!
Additional shock came up in Kurt Zen when he realized he was the second
man. He seized the craggy man by the shoulder.

"West! They can't have that super radar. If we lose that, we have lost
the war."

The craggy man did not move.

Anguish grew in Zen's voice. "If we lose this one, it will be the first
war we have ever lost. And the last one. Nothing will remain to come
after us except death and desolation."

"I know," West said. "The race soul will have to start over, in the
swamps and on the mud flats, trying to rebuild the race with tools long
since worn out and out of place in time." Again the tones of a bell
were in his voice. But now the bell was tolling the death of a people,
wailing that the glory that once had been was truly gone, wailing that
the brave world that some men had tried to build was going into ashes
and into doom.

"Do you believe in the race soul too?" West gasped.

"_Belief_ is too weak a word. I _know_ it exists."

Nedra sighed in West's arms and opened her eyes. Seeing who was holding
her, she lay back in the arms of the craggy man, more than ever like a
tired child. "What was it?" she whispered. "What's wrong? I--I took a
little nap."

West set her on her feet and pointed at the opening. She clutched at
the stone wall as she saw what was happening inside.

Running, the bronze girl who had danced to the slow music the night
before, came fleeing from a room. One of Cuso's soldiers was pursuing
her. She fled like a deer before some great hound that was interested
in pulling her down but she did not flee fast enough. The soldier
caught her and dragged her back into a room.

"West, how many of these kids did you have here?" Zen asked.

"About fifty," the craggy man answered. "I don't know how many are
left nor can I guess how many will choose to stay alive if they are
conquered before their training is completed."

"And no weapons?"

"None."

"What about my gun that was taken from me while I slept?"

"What good would one gun do now?"

"None, I guess," Zen said, helplessly. "But as they try to run me down,
I'd like to have it in my hands. I'd at least take a few of them with
me before they got me."

"We will survive," West said, his voice a mumble.

Zen pointed through the opening to the bodies lying on the floor below
