why he was a Spacer instead of an Earther, condemned to live in filthy
Spacertown when Yawk was just across the river.

They were looking at his shabby clothes, at the dirty brownstone hovel
he lived in--an antique of a house four or five centuries old.

"You mean you're rich?" the Earther said.

"Sure," Rolf said. "Every Spacer is. So what? What can I spend it on? My
money's banked on Mars and Venus. Thanks to the law I can't legally get
it to Earth. So I live in Spacertown."

"Have you ever seen an Earther city?" the earless one asked, looking
around at the quiet streets of Spacertown with big powerful men sitting
idly in front of every house.

"I used to live in Yawk," Rolf said. "My grandmother was an Earther; she
brought me up there. I haven't been back there since I left for space."
_They forced me out of Yawk_, he thought. _I'm not part of their
species. Not one of them._

       *       *       *       *       *

The two Earthers exchanged glances.

"Can we interest you in a suggestion?" They drew in their breath as if
they expected to be knocked sprawling.

Kanaday appeared at the door of the shack again.

"Rolf. Hey! You turning into an Earther? Get rid of them two cuties
before there's trouble."

Rolf turned and saw a little knot of Spacers standing on the other side
of the street, watching him with curiosity. He glared at them.

"I'll do whatever I damn well please," he shouted across.

He turned back to the two Earthers. "Now, what is it you want?"

"I'm giving a party next week," the earless one said. "I'd like you to
come. We'd like to get the Spacer slant on life."

"Party?" Rolf repeated. "You mean, dancing, and games, and stuff like
that?"

"You'll enjoy it," the Earther said coaxingly. "And we'd all love to
have a real Spacer there."

"When is it?"

"A week."

"I have ten days left of my leave. All right," he said. "I'll come."

He accepted the Earther's card, looked at it mechanically, saw the
name--Kal Quinton--and pocketed it. "Sure," he said. "I'll be there."

The Earthers moved toward their little jetcar, smiling gratefully. As
Rolf crossed the street, the other Spacers greeted him with cold,
puzzled stares.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kanaday was almost as tall as Rolf, and even uglier. Rolf's eyebrows
were bold and heavy; Kanaday's, thick, contorted, bushy clumps of hair.
Kanaday's nose had been broken long before in some barroom brawl; his
cheekbones bulged; his face was strong and hard. More important, his
left foot was twisted and gnarled beyond hope of redemption by the most
skillful surgeon. He had been crippled in a jet explosion three years
before, and was of no use to the Spacelines any more. They had pensioned
him off. Part of the deal was the dilapidated old house in Spacertown
which he operated as a boarding-house for transient Spacers.

"What do you want to do that for?" Kanaday asked. "Haven't those
Earthers pushed you around enough, so you have to go dance at one of
their wild parties?"

"Leave me alone," Rolf muttered.

"You like this filth you live in? Spacertown is just a ghetto, that's
all. The Earthers have pushed you right into the muck. You're not even
a human being to them--just some sort of trained ape. And now you're
going to go and entertain them. I thought you had brains, Rolf!"

"Shut up!" He dashed his glass against the table; it bounced off and
dropped to the floor, where it shattered.

Kanaday's girl Laney entered the room at the sound of the crash. She was
tall and powerful-looking, with straight black hair and the strong
cheekbones that characterized the Spacers. Immediately she stooped and
began shoveling up the broken glass.

"That wasn't smart, Rolf," she said. "That'll cost you half a credit.
Wasn't worth it, was it?"

Rolf laid the coin on the edge of the table. "Tell your pal to shut up,
then. If he doesn't stop icing me I'll fix his other foot for him and
you can buy him a dolly."

She looked from one to the other. "What's bothering you two now?"

"A couple of Earthers were here this morning," Kanaday said. "Slumming.
They took a fancy to our young friend here and invited him to one of
their parties. He accepted."

"He _what_? Don't go, Rolf. You're crazy to go."

"Why am I crazy?" He tried to control his voice. "Why should we keep
ourselves apart from the Earthers? Why shouldn't the two races get
together?"

       *       *       *       *       *

She put down her tray and sat next to him. "They're more than two
races," she said patiently. "Earther and Spacer are two different
species, Rolf. Carefully, genetically separated. They're small and weak,
we're big and powerful. You've been bred for going to space; they're the
castoffs, the ones who were too weak to go. The line between the two
groups is too strong to break."

"And they treat us like dirt--like animals," Kanaday said. "But
_they're_ the dirt. They were the ones who couldn't make it."

"Don't go to the party," Laney said. "They just want to make fun of you.
Look at the big ape, they'll say."

Rolf stood up. "You don't understand. Neither of you does. I'm part
Earther," Rolf said. "My grandmother on my mother's side. She raised me
as an Earther. She wanted me to be an Earther. But I kept getting bigger
and uglier all the time. She took me to a plastic surgeon once, figuring
he could make me look like an Earther. He was a little man; I don't know
what he looked like to start with but some other surgeon had made him
