which had been allowed to slide through the hands at the completion of
the down-slice.

I almost regretted that we would not find ourselves opposed to the
Delaware ax-men in this campaign, so curious was I to compare the
efficiency of the two bodies.

But both the Delawares and my own men were elated at the news that the
Hans intended to fight it out on the ground at last, and the prospect
that we might in consequence come to close quarters with them.

Many of the Gang Bosses were dubious about our Wyoming policy of
providing our fighters with no inertron armor as protection against the
disintegrator ray of the Hans. Some of them even questioned the value of
all weapons intended for hand-to-hand fighting.

As Warn, of the Sandsnipers put it: "You should be in a better position
than anyone, Rogers, with your memories of the Twentieth Century, to
appreciate that between the superdeadliness of the rocket gun and of the
disintegrator ray there will never be any opportunity for hand-to-hand
work. Long before the opposing forces could come to grips, one or the
other will be wiped out."

But I only smiled, for I remembered how much of this same talk there was
five centuries ago, and that it was even predicted in 1914 that no war
could last more than six months.

       *       *       *       *       *

That there would be hand-to-hand work before we were through, and in
plenty, I was convinced, and so every able-bodied youth I could muster
was enrolled in my infantry battalion and spent most of his time in
vigorous bayonet practice. And for the same reason I had discarded the
idea of armor. I felt it would be clumsy, and questioned its value.
True, it was an absolute bar against the disintegrator ray, but of what
use would that be if a Han ray found a crevice between overlapping
plates, or if the ray was used to annihilate the very earth beneath the
wearer's feet?

The only protective equipment that I thought was worth a whoop was a
very peculiar device with which a contingent of five hundred Altoonas
was supplied. They called it the "umbra-shield." It was a bell-shaped
affair of inertron, counterweighted with ultron, about eight feet high.
The gunner, who walked inside it, carried it easily with two shoulder
straps. There were handles inside too, by which the gunner might more
easily balance it when running, or lift it to clear any obstructions on
the ground.

In the apex of the affair, above his head, was a small turret,
containing an automatic rocket gun. The periscopic gun sight and the
controls were on a level with the operator's eyes. In going into action
he could, after taking up his position, simply stoop until the rim of
the umbra-shield rested on the ground, or else slip off the shoulder
straps, and stand there, quite safe from the disintegrator ray, and work
his gun.

But again, I could not see what was to prevent the Hans from slicing
underneath it, instead of directly at it, with their rays.

       *       *       *       *       *

As I saw it, any American who was unfortunate enough to get in the
direct path of a "dis" ray, was almost certain to "go out," unless he
was locked up tight in a complete shell of inertron, as for instance, in
an inertron swooper. It seemed to me better to concentrate all our
efforts on tactics of attack, trusting to our ability to get the Hans
before they got us.

I had one other main unit besides my bayonet battalion, a long-gun
contingent composed entirely of girls, as were my scout units and most
of my auxiliary contingents. These youngsters had been devoting
themselves to target practice for months, and had developed a fine
technique of range-finding and the various other tactics of Twentieth
Century massed artillery, to which was added the scientific perfection
of the rocket guns and an average mental alertness that would have put
the artilleryman of the First World War to shame.

From the information our contact guard had obtained, it appeared that
the Hans had developed a type of "groundship" completely protected by a
disintegrator ray "canopy" that was operated from a short mast, and
spread down around it as a cone.

These ships were merely adaptations of their airships, and were designed
to travel but a few feet above the ground. Their repeller rays were
relatively weak; just strong enough to lift them about ten or twelve
feet from the surface. Hence they would draw but lightly upon the power
broadcast from the city, and great numbers of them could be used. A
special ray at the stern propelled them, and an extra-lift ray in the
bow enabled them to nose up over ground obstacles. Their most formidable
feature was the cone-shaped "canopy" of short-range disintegrator rays
designed to spread down around them from a circular generator at the tip
of a twenty-foot mast amidship. This would annihilate any projectile
shot at it, for they naturally could not reach the ship without passing
through the cone of rays.

It was instantly obvious that the "ground ships" would prove to be the
"tanks" of the Twenty-fifth Century, and with due allowance for the fact
that they were protected with a sheathing of annihilating rays instead
of with steel, that they would have about the same handicaps and
advantages as tanks, except that since they would float lightly on short
repeller rays, they could hardly resort to the destructive crushing
tactics of the tanks of the First World War.

       *       *       *       *       *

As soon as our first supplies of inertron-sheathed rockets came through,
their invulnerability would be at an end, as indeed would be that of the
Han cities themselves. But these projectiles were not yet out of the
factories.

In the meantime, however, the groundships would be hard to handle. Each
of them we understood would be equipped with a thin long-range "dis"
ray, mounted in a turret at the base of the mast.

We had no information as to the probable tactics of the Hans in the use
of these ships. One sure method of destroying them would be to bury
mines in their path, too deep for the penetration of their protecting
canopy, which would not, our engineers estimated, cut deeper than about
three feet a second. But we couldn't ring Nu-Yok with a continuous mine
on a radius of from five to fifteen or twenty miles. Nor could we be
certain beforehand of the direction of their attack.

In the end, after several hours' discussion, we agreed on a flexible
defense. Rather than risk many lives, we would withdraw before them,
test their effectiveness and familiarize ourselves with the tactics they
adopted. If possible, we would send engineers in behind them from the
flanks, to lay mines in the probable path of their return, providing
their first attack proved to be a raid and not an advance to consolidate
new positions.




CHAPTER III

We "Sink" the "Ground Ships"


Boss Handan, of the Winslows, a giant of a man, a two-fisted fighter and
a leader of great sagacity, had been selected by the council as our Boss
_pro tem_, and having given the scatter signal to the council, he
retired to our general headquarters, which we had established on Second
Mountain a few miles in the rear of the fighting front in a deep ravine.

There, in quarters cut far below the surface, he would observe every
detail of the battle on the wonderful system of viewplates our ultrono
engineers had constructed through a series of relays from ultroscope
observation posts and individual "_cameramen_."

Two hours before dawn our long distance _scopemen_ reported a squadron
of "ground ships" leaving the enemy's disintegrator wall, and heading
rapidly somewhat to the south of us, toward the site of the ancient city
of Newark. The ultroscopes could detect no canopy operation. This in
itself was not significant, for they were penetrating hills in their
lines of vision, most of them, which of course blurred their pictures to
a slight extent. But by now we had a well-equipped electronoscope
division, with instruments nearly equal to those of the Hans themselves;
and these could detect no evidence of _dis_ rays in operation.

Handan appreciated our opportunity instantly, for no sooner had the
import of the message on the Bosses' channel become clear than we heard
his personal command snapped out over the long-gunners' general channel.

Nine hundred and seventy long-gunners on the south and west sides of the
city, concealed in the dark fastnesses of the forests and hillsides,
leaped to their guns, switched on their dial lights, and flipped the
little lever combinations on their pieces that automatically registered
them on the predetermined position of map section HM-243-839, setting
their magazines for twenty shots, and pressing their fire buttons.

For what seemed an interminable instant nothing happened.

Then several miles to the southeast, an entire section of the country
literally blew up, in a fiery eruption that shot a mile into the air.
The concussion, when it reached me, was terrific. The light was
blinding.

And our _scopemen_ reported the instant annihilation of the squadron.

       *       *       *       *       *

What happened, of course, was this; the Hans knew nothing of our ability
to see at night through our ultroscopes. Regarding itself as invisible
in the darkness, and believing our instruments would pick up its
location when its _dis_ rays went into operation, the squadron made the
fatal error of not turning on its canopies.

To say that consternation overwhelmed the Han high command would be
putting it mildly. Despite their use of code and other protective
expedients, we picked up enough of their messages to know that the
incident badly demoralized them.

Their next attempt was made in daylight. I was aloft in my swooper at
the time, hanging motionless about a mile up. Below, the groundships
looked like a number of oval lozenges gliding across a map, each
surrounded by a circular halo of luminescence that was its _dis_ ray
canopy.

They had nosed up over the spiny ridge of what once had been Jersey
City, and were moving across the meadowlands. There were twenty of them.

Coming to the darker green that marked the forest on the "map" below me,
they adopted a wedge formation, and playing their pencil rays ahead of
them, they began to beam a path for themselves through the forest. In my
ears sounded the ultrophone instructions of my executives to the
long-gunners in the forest, and one by one I heard the girls report
their rapid retirement with their guns and other inertron-lightened
equipment. I located several of them with my scopes, with which I could,
of course, focus through the leafy screen above them, and noted with
satisfaction the unhurried speed of their movements.

On ploughed the Han wedge, while my girls separated before it and
retired to the sides. With a rapidity much greater than that of the
ships themselves, the beams penetrated deeper and deeper into the
forest, playing continuously in the same direction, literally melting
their way through, as a stream of hot water might melt its way through a
snow bank.

Then a curious thing happened. One of the ships near one wing of the
wedge must have passed over unusually soft ground, or perhaps some
irregularity in the control of its canopy generator caused it to dig
deeper into the earth ahead of it, for it gave a sudden downward lurch,
and on coming up out of it, swerved a bit to one side, its offense beam
slicing full into the ship echeloned to the left ahead of it. That ship,
all but a few plates on one side, instantly vanished from sight. But the
squadron could not stop. As soon as a ship stood still, its canopy ray
playing continuously in one spot, the ground around it was annihilated
to a continuously increasing depth. A couple of them tried it, but
within a space of seconds, they had dug such deep holes around
themselves that they had difficulty in climbing out. Their commanders,
however, had the foresight to switch off their offense rays, and so
damaged no more of their comrades.

       *       *       *       *       *

I switched in with my ultrophone on Boss Handan's channel, intending to
report my observation, but found that one of our swooper scouts, who,
like myself, was hanging above the Hans, was ahead of me. Moreover, he
was reporting a suddenly developed idea that resulted in the untimely
end of the Hans' groundship threat.

"Those ships can't climb out of deep holes, Boss," he was saying
excitedly. "Lay a big barrage against them--no, not on them--in front of
them--always in front of them. Pull it back as they come on. But churn
h--l out of the ground in front of them! Get the rocketmen to make a
penetrative time rocket. Shoot it into the ground in front of them, deep
enough to be below their canopy ray, see, and detonate under them as
they go over it!"

I heard Handan's roar of exultation as I switched off again to order a
barrage from my Wyoming girls. Then I threw my rocket motor to full
speed and shot off a mile to one side, and higher, for I knew that soon
there would be a boiling eruption below.

No smoke interfered with my view of it, for our atomic explosive was
smokeless in its action. A line of blinding, flashing fire appeared in
front of the groundship wedge. The ships ploughed with calm
determination toward it, but it withdrew before them, not steadily, but
jerkily intermittent, so that the ground became a series of gigantic
humps, ridges and shell holes. Into these the Han ships wallowed,
plunging ponderously yet not daring to stop while their protective
canopy rays played, not daring to shut off these active rays.

One overturned. Our observers reported it. The result was a hail of
rocket shells directly on the squadron. These could not penetrate the
canopies of the other ships, but the one which had turned turtle was
blown to fragments.

The squadron attempted to change its course and dodge the barrier in
front of it. But a new barrier of blazing detonations and churned earth
appeared on its flanks. In a matter of minutes it was ringed around,
thanks to the skill of our fire control.

One by one the wallowing ships plunged into holes from which they could
not extricate themselves. One by one their canopy rays were shut off, or
the ships somersaulted off the knolls on which they perched, as their
canopies melted the ground away from around them. So one by one they
were destroyed.

Thus the second ground sortie of the Hans was annihilated.




CHAPTER IV

Han Electrono-Ray Science


At this period the Hans of Nu-Yok had only one airship equipped with
their new armored repeller ray, their latest defense against our tactics
of shooting rockets into the repeller rays and letting the latter hurl
them up against the ships. They had developed a new steel alloy of
tremendous strength, which passed their _rep_ ray with ease, but was
virtually impervious to our most powerful explosives. Their supplies of
this alloy were limited, for it could be produced only in the Lo-Tan
shops, for it was only there that they could develop the degree of
electronic power necessary for its manufacture.

This ship shot out toward our lines just as the last of the groundships
turned turtle and was blown to pieces. As it approached, the rockets of
our invisible and widely scattered gunners in the forest below began to
explode beneath its _rep_ ray plates. The explosions caused the great
ship to plunge and roll mightily, but otherwise did it no serious harm
that I could see, for it was very heavily armored.

Occasionally rockets fired directly at the ship would find their mark
and tear gashes in its side and bottom plates, but these hits were few.
The ship was high in the air, and a far more difficult target than were
its _rep_ ray columns. To hit the latter, our gunners had only to gauge
their aim vertically. Range could be practically ignored, since the
_rep_ ray at any point above two-thirds the distance from the earth to
the ship would automatically hurl the rocket upward against the _rep_
ray plate.

As the ship sped toward us, rocking, plunging and recovering, it began
to beam the forest below. It was equipped with a superbeam too, which
cut a swathe nearly a hundred feet wide wherever it played.

With visions of many a life snuffed out below me, I surrendered to the
impulse to stage a single-handed attack on this ship, feeling quite
secure in my floating shell of inertron. I nosed up vertically, and
rocketed for a position above the ship. Then as I climbed upward, as yet
unobserved in my tiny craft that was scarcely larger than myself, I
trained my telultroscope on the Han ship, focussing through to a view of
its interior.

Much as I had imbibed of this generation's hatred for the Hans, I was
forced to admire them for the completeness and efficiency of this
marvelous craft of theirs.

Constantly twirling the controls of my scope to hold the focus, I
examined its interior from nose to stern.

       *       *       *       *       *

It may be of interest at this point to give the reader a layman's
explanation of the electronic or ionic machinery of these ships, and of
their general construction, for today the general public knows little of
the particular application of the electronic laws which the Hans used,
although the practical application of ultronics are well understood.

Back in the Twentieth Century I had, like literally millions of others,
dabbled a bit in "radio" as we called it then; the science of the Hans
was simply the superdevelopment of "electricity," "radio," and
"broadcasting."

It must be understood that this explanation of mine is not technically
accurate, but only what might be termed an illustrative approximation.

The Hans' power-stations used to broadcast three distinct "_powers_"
simultaneously. Our engineers called them the "_starter_," the
"_pullee_" and the "_sub-disintegrator_." The last named had nothing to
do with the operation of the ships, but was exclusively the powerizer of
the disintegrator generators.

The "_starter_" was not unlike the "radio" broadcasts of the Twentieth
Century. It went out at a frequency of about 1,000 kilocycles, had an
amperage of approximately zero, but a voltage of two billion. Properly
amplified by the use of _inductostatic_ batteries (a development of the
principle underlying the earth induction compass applied to the control
of static) this current energized the _"A" ionomagnetic_ coils on the
airships, large and sturdy affairs, which operated the _Attractoreflex
Receivers_, which in turn "pulled in" the second broadcast power known
as the "_pullee_," absorbing it from every direction, literally
exhausting it from surrounding space. The "_pullee_" came in at about a
half-billion volts, but in very heavy amperage, proportional to the
capacity of the receiver, and on a long wave--at audio frequency in
fact. About half of this power reception ultimately actuated the
_repeller ray_ generators. The other half was used to energize the _"B"
ionomagnetic_ coils, peculiarly wound affairs, whose magnetic fields
constituted the only means of insulating and controlling the circuits of
the three "powers."

The repeller ray generators, operating on this current, and in
conjunction with "twin synchronizers" in the power broadcast plant,
developed two rhythmically variable ether-ground circuits of opposite
polarity. In the "X" circuit, the negative was grounded along an
ultraviolet beam from the ship's repeller-ray generator. The positive
connection was through the ether to the "X synchronizer" in the power
plant, whose opposite pole was grounded. The "Y" circuit travelled the
same course, but in the opposite direction.

The rhythmic variables of these two opposing circuits, as nearly as I
can understand it, in heterodyning, created a powerful material "push"
from the earth, up along the violet ray beam against the _rep_ ray
generator and against the two synchronizers at the power plant.
