looking for it, dreaming of it. You wouldn't understand how I feel, but
nothing else--nothing else--matters, Ann. Go home. Leave these people
alone. Don't try to make them over."

The last lines rang in sympathy with Lord's own feelings, and he knew that
was absurd. Changes would have to be made when the trade city was built.
That was Lord's business. Expansion and progress: the lifeblood of the
Federation.

"What do you want me to do?" he demanded.

"Go after Don and bring him back."

"And if he refuses--"

"I won't leave him here."

"I have no authority to force him against his will, Ann."

"I'm sure you can get help from this--" her lip curled "--this native girl
of yours. What's her name?"

"Niaga."

"Oh, yes; Niaga. Quaint, isn't it?" She smiled flatly.

He felt an almost irresistible urge to smash his fist into her jaw.
Straight-laced, hopelessly blind to every standard but her own--what right
did Ann have to pass judgment on Niaga? It was a rhetorical question.
Ann Howard represented the Federation no less than Lord did himself. By
law, the teachers rode every trading ship; in the final analysis, their
certification could make or break any new planetary franchise.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Niaga has been very helpful, Ann; cooperative and--"

"Oh, I'm sure she has, Mr. Lord."

"I could threaten to cut off Don's bonus pay, I suppose, but it wouldn't do
much good; money has no meaning to these people and, if Don intends to stay
here, it won't mean much to him, either."

"How you do it, Mr. Lord, is not my concern. But if Don doesn't go home
with us--" She favored him with another icy smile. "I'm afraid I'll have to
make an adverse report when you apply for the franchise."

"You can't, Ann!" Lord was more surprised than angry. "Only in the case of
a primitive and belligerent culture--"

"I've seen no evidence of technology here." She paused. "And not the
slightest indication that these people have any conception of moral
values."

"Not by our standards, no; but we've never abandoned a planet for that
reason alone."

"I know what you're thinking, Mr. Lord. Men like you--the traders and
the businessmen and the builders--you've never understood a teacher's
responsibility. You make the big noise in the Federation; but we hold it
together for you. I'm not particularly disturbed by the superficials I've
seen here. The indecent dress of these people, their indolent villages,
their congenital irresponsibility--all that disgusts me, but it has not
affected my analysis. There's something else here--something far more
terrible and more dangerous for us. I can't put it in words. It's horrible
and it's deadly; it's the reason why our men have deserted. They've had
attractive women on other worlds--in the trade cities, anything money
could buy--but they never jumped ship before."

"A certain percentage always will, Ann." Lord hoped he sounded reassuring,
but he felt anything but reassured himself. Not because of what she said.
These naive, altogether delightful people were harmless. But could the
charming simplicity of their lives survive the impact of civilization? It
was this world that was in danger, not by any stretch of the imagination
the Federation.

       *       *       *       *       *

As the thought occurred to him, he shrank from it with a kind of inner
terror. It was heresy. The Federation represented the closest approximation
of perfection mortal man would ever know: a brotherhood of countless
species, a union of a thousand planets, created by the ingenuity and the
energy of man. The Pax Humana; how could it be a threat to any people
anywhere?

"That would be my recommendation." Suddenly Ann's self-assurance collapsed.
She reached for his hand; her fingers were cold and trembling. "But, if you
bring Don back, I--I won't report against a franchise."

"You're offering to make a deal? You know the penalty--"

"Collusion between a trade agent and the teacher assigned to his ship--yes,
I know the law, Mr. Lord."

"You're willing to violate it for Don? Why? Your brother's a big boy now;
he's old enough to look after himself."

Ann Howard turned away from him and her voice dropped to a whisper. "He
isn't my brother, Mr. Lord. We had to sign on that way because your company
prohibits a man and wife sailing in the same crew."

In that moment she stripped her soul bare to him. Poor, plain,
conscientious Ann Howard! Fighting to hold her man; fighting the unknown
odds of an alien world, the stealthy seduction of an amoral people. Lord
understood Ann, then, for the first time; he saw the shadow of madness
that crept across her mind; and he pitied her.

"I'll do what I can," he promised.

As he left the schoolroom she collapsed in a straight-backed chair--thin
and unattractive, like Ann herself--and her shoulders shook with silent,
bitter grief.

       *       *       *       *       *

Martin Lord took the familiar path to Niaga's village. The setting sun
still spread its dying fire across the evening sky, but he walked slowly
through the deep, quiet shadows of the forest. He came to the stream where
he had met Niaga; he paused to dip his sweat-smeared face into the cool
water cascading over a five foot fall.

A pleasant flood of memory crowded his mind. When he had first met Niaga,
almost a week before, she had been lying on the sandy bank of the stream,
idly plaiting a garland of red and blue flowers. Niaga! A copper-skinned
goddess, stark naked and unashamed in the bright spot light of sun filtered
through the trees. Languorous, laughing lips; long, black hair loosely
caught in a net of filmy material that hung across her shoulder.

The feeling of guilt and shame had stabbed at Lord's mind. He had come,
unasked, into an Eden. He didn't belong here. His presence meant pillage, a
rifling of a sacred dream. The landing had been a mistake.

Oddly enough, the _Ceres_ had landed here entirely by chance, the result of
a boyish fling at adventure.

Martin Lord was making a routine tour of representative trade cities before
