
Clayton retreated fast. The trackers ignored anyone walking away from
the desk; they were set only to spot threatening movements toward it.

Outside the Rehabilitation Service Building, Clayton could feel the
tears running down the inside of his face mask. He'd asked again and
again--God only knew how many times--in the past fifteen years. Always
the same answer. No.

When he'd heard that this new administrator was a woman, he'd hoped she
might be easier to convince. She wasn't. If anything, she was harder
than the others.

The heat-sucking frigidity of the thin Martian air whispered around him
in a feeble breeze. He shivered a little and began walking toward the
recreation center.

There was a high, thin piping in the sky above him which quickly became
a scream in the thin air.

He turned for a moment to watch the ship land, squinting his eyes to see
the number on the hull.

Fifty-two. Space Transport Ship Fifty-two.

Probably bringing another load of poor suckers to freeze to death on
Mars.

That was the thing he hated about Mars--the cold. The everlasting damned
cold! And the oxidation pills; take one every three hours or smother in
the poor, thin air.

The government could have put up domes; it could have put in
building-to-building tunnels, at least. It could have done a hell of a
lot of things to make Mars a decent place for human beings.

But no--the government had other ideas. A bunch of bigshot scientific
characters had come up with the idea nearly twenty-three years before.
Clayton could remember the words on the sheet he had been given when he
was sentenced.

"Mankind is inherently an adaptable animal. If we are to colonize the
planets of the Solar System, we must meet the conditions on those
planets as best we can.

"Financially, it is impracticable to change an entire planet from its
original condition to one which will support human life as it exists on
Terra.

"But man, since he is adaptable, can change himself--modify his
structure slightly--so that he can live on these planets with only a
minimum of change in the environment."

       *       *       *       *       *

So they made you live outside and like it. So you froze and you choked
and you suffered.

Clayton hated Mars. He hated the thin air and the cold. More than
anything, he hated the cold.

Ron Clayton wanted to go home.

The Recreation Building was just ahead; at least it would be warm
inside. He pushed in through the outer and inner doors, and he heard the
burst of music from the jukebox. His stomach tightened up into a hard
cramp.

They were playing Heinlein's _Green Hills of Earth_.

There was almost no other sound in the room, although it was full of
people. There were plenty of colonists who claimed to like Mars, but
even they were silent when that song was played.

Clayton wanted to go over and smash the machine--make it stop reminding
him. He clenched his teeth and his fists and his eyes and cursed
mentally. _God, how I hate Mars!_

       *       *       *       *       *

When the hauntingly nostalgic last chorus faded away, he walked over to
the machine and fed it full of enough coins to keep it going on
something else until he left.

At the bar, he ordered a beer and used it to wash down another oxidation
tablet. It wasn't good beer; it didn't even deserve the name. The
atmospheric pressure was so low as to boil all the carbon dioxide out
of it, so the brewers never put it back in after fermentation.

He was sorry for what he had done--really and truly sorry. If they'd
only give him one more chance, he'd make good. Just one more chance.
He'd work things out.

He'd promised himself that both times they'd put him up before, but
things had been different then. He hadn't really been given another
chance, what with parole boards and all.

Clayton closed his eyes and finished the beer. He ordered another.

He'd worked in the mines for fifteen years. It wasn't that he minded
work really, but the foreman had it in for him. Always giving him a bad
time; always picking out the lousy jobs for him.

Like the time he'd crawled into a side-boring in Tunnel 12 for a nap
during lunch and the foreman had caught him. When he promised never to
do it again if the foreman wouldn't put it on report, the guy said,
"Yeah. Sure. Hate to hurt a guy's record."

Then he'd put Clayton on report anyway. Strictly a rat.

Not that Clayton ran any chance of being fired; they never fired
anybody. But they'd fined him a day's pay. A whole day's pay.

He tapped his glass on the bar, and the barman came over with another
beer. Clayton looked at it, then up at the barman. "Put a head on it."

The bartender looked at him sourly. "I've got some soapsuds here,
Clayton, and one of these days I'm gonna put some in your beer if you
keep pulling that gag."

