"Twenty years ago," Turner mused. "What a crazy week that was. I guess
you were glad to get back to the Space Force."

"In a way," Harmon agreed. "I've often wondered where you were since
then. I never dreamed you'd be Dean of the Genetics Faculty when I came
to the Space Engineering School."

"I hope you'll like it here," George said. "They couldn't have picked a
better Director."

       *       *       *       *       *

The senator from Alaska had the floor. He had had it for several hours
now and the chamber was almost empty as he droned on.

"And so, gentlemen, I feel that the greatest state in the union, the
only state that can afford to increase its population because there is
still some unoccupied space, the only state where anti-conception
vaccination is not compulsory until after four children instead of two,
the state where ordinary people will have room to get out and exercise
instead of being spectators, this state of Alaska, I say, is the only
state that should be considered when we select a fine, virile American
male as the father of America's Child of the Year. I would dare to go
farther and say we should also provide the female, Mother America of
1995, except that our President, my fellow Alaskan, has generously
decided that no one state can have both mother and father. Alaska is a
man's country. It should provide the man ..."

Wearily George Turner got up and turned off the colorvision. The
political pressures were increasing rapidly; that was obvious. What had
started as a national search for the most suitable future parents in
America would soon be a free-for-all. He would have to give the
committee his choice, and quickly! Back to his work he went; calculating
possibilities, eliminating entrants one by one. The National Genetics
Laboratory had been given the task of screening the finalists from each
state and Turner, much against his will, had been selected by the
Director to do the work.

"George," he'd said one fateful morning, "I have a job for you."

"What's that, sir?"

"You've seen the report of this new contest being run by Dee Lish Baby
Foods, haven't you?"

"Can't say I have, sir. I've been working on that new sex gene. Haven't
had time to read the papers."

"Oh? Well it all started on their colorvision program, the one where
they select the All American babies. You've seen it haven't you?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Turner shook his head.

"Sputtering sputniks! I know you're all wrapped up in your work but it
doesn't have to be a shroud. You'd better get out into the world a
little." The Director laid a friendly arm on George's shoulder. "This
job will be just the thing."

"What job?"

"Why, the contest! Dee Lish separate the babies into three groups.
There's the natural All American baby selected from families in the
two-baby group; then there's a prize for best baby in the unlimited
family section. Naturally, since those parents are in the genetically
superior group, it wouldn't be fair to pit them against the two-baby
families. Then there's a class for babies of artificially impregnated
mothers, both married and single. It's a very popular program. The
prizes are wonderful and the winners in the limited family class are
allowed to have more children than their quota, all expenses paid of
course."

"I can see why it's popular all right," George said, "but where do I
come in?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Three months ago the Dee Lish scenario writers had a brainstorm. They
reasoned that if they began a new contest to pick the most suitable
mother in America and then had her impregnated, artificially of course,
by the most suitable donor, they would stir up all sorts of excitement
for the next nine months and produce a baby that should be a
worldbeater. The mother would be given a tremendous annuity, for life,
and the babe assured of all expenses right through college."

"It all sounds faintly nauseating to me."

"George, you're impossible. A geneticist who still believes in
fortuitous breeding!"

"I'm not so darn sure we can pick 'em better any other way. We certainly
haven't got all the answers."

"I agree, George, I agree," the Director's smile was still friendly, if
a little strained. "This is a National Laboratory, however, and the
President rang me up the other day and asked that we do the final
screening."

"The President? But this is a commercial gag!"

"Not any longer, my boy. You see the Russians recently came out with a
wonder drug, a sort of gene stimulator, that they claim produces highly
intelligent and well-proportioned children. The Chinese now claim that,
by using a controlled environment in their communes, they are producing
a super race. We had to do something! Our side is going to claim that
the union of a red-blooded American male and a modern capitalist female
will produce offspring far superior to anything else in the world, thus
demonstrating the supremacy of the American way of life."

"Dear God! Why pick me?"
