
"Why, I've been looking out for an airship said to be cruising
around this neighborhood.  Truck farmer said he saw one early this
morning.  Then I noticed you in town.  I think you'll understand me,
young man," continued the stranger, "when I say that I'm on the hunt
for a chap about your size running a stolen airship, and whose name
is Jerry Dawson."

"Why," exclaimed Dave with a quick start, "so are we!"





CHAPTER XVII

ON THE WING


Hiram stared his hardest at the stranger, Dave's eyes quickened with
sudden intelligence.  Almost in a flash he took in the situation.

"You just mentioned a name," he said.  "I would like to mention
another one."

"All right, what?"

"James Price."

"Hello!"

The stranger looked flabbergasted, as the saying goes.  He furrowed
his brow as if puzzled.

"You have made a mistake," continued Dave.  "You think one of us two
is Jerry Dawson."

"I did think it, yes," admitted the man, a trifle less self assured
than at first.

"Wrong."

"Is that so, now?"

"Yes.  You know Mr. Price, don't you?"

"Perhaps I do."

"And you are on the lookout for an airship, but not this machine.
Let me explain briefly, and see if we cannot come to an
understanding."

Dave surmised that the stranger must be one of the assistants of Mr.
Price, the revenue officer.  In a very few minutes he knew that this
was true.  Assured from Dave's talk that he was not the Dawson boy, and
that the hydro-aeroplane before him was not the Drifter, the man became
very friendly.

It seemed that he was one of the agents of the revenue service.  He
made his headquarters at Millville, and had received a telegram from
Mr. Price the day previous to look out for the stolen airship.  This
was before Mr. Price had met Dave at Bolton, but immediately after
Mr. King at Columbus had told him of the discovery that the Dawsons
had made away with the Drifter.

So far as the man knew, none of the many assistants of Mr. Price had
found any traces of the missing aero-hydroplane.  Dave did not
enlighten him as to his plans and destination, for the man's present
duties were simply those of a lookout at Millville.

The stranger stayed and chatted with the boys for over two hours,
and then went away.  Dave had told him that they would not start out
again with the Monarch II until after dark.  About six o'clock the
man drove up with a wagon.

"Thought you might be getting tired of cold dry fare," he said, "so
I've brought you a real supper for a change."

"Why, say, you're a prince!" cried the impetuous Hiram, as the man
lifted a gas oven from the wagon, and then a shallow box, and the
contents of both receptacles were revealed.

The oven contained two heaping dishes of lamb chops, and potatoes,
still quite warm.  From the box the stranger produced all the
trimmings for a first class meal.

"This is pretty kind and thoughtful of you," said Dave.

"Nothing too good for friends of Mr. Price," insisted the man.
"Besides, I remember how good the present of a meal has been when
I've got stranded on duty myself."

The speaker, it seemed, had been a member of the Canadian mounted
police.  The boys whiled the time away interestingly during the next
two hours, listening to some of, his exciting experiences with
Indians and outlaws in the Winnipeg wilds.

It was just after dark when the Monarch started on the second stage
of the journey.  Three stops were made during the ensuing six,
hours.  Dave was very tired and Hiram pretty sleepy, when, at three
o'clock in the morning, the machine came to rest on a little
reed-covered island in the center of a swampy stretch.

"We may stay here for several days, I don't know exactly how long,"
the young aviator told his assistant.

"You don't suppose that the Dawsons and the Drifter are anywhere
near here, do you?" inquired Hiram.

"Perhaps not, but we are near Ironton, on the American side of Lake
Superior.  If Mr. Price's theories are all right, that fellow,
Ridgely, will begin his new operations somewhere in this district."

"I see," nodded Hiram.  "What are we to do now--sleep?"

"As much as we like for the next eight or ten hours."

"I'm ready," announced Hiram.  "It's been fine and dandy up aloft
there, but I notice that when it doesn't make a fellow hungry it
does make him good and sleepy."

"All right, we'll bunk down, Hiram.  I don't think any one is likely
to run across us in this out-of-the-way place."

"I don't think so, either," responded Hiram, and was soon asleep and
snoring.

The breakfast programme of the previous morning was repeated later.
Hiram called the whole thing a picnic, and was jolly and happy.

"One thing, though," he said; "isn't something exciting going to
happen soon, Dave?"

"We ought to be pretty well satisfied with the splendid cruise of
the Monarch II," suggested Dave.

"Yes, but I'm getting anxious to run across some of the smugglers.
I've read a lot about them in the papers and books.  They must be
great fellows to tackle, with their cutlasses, and walking the
plank, and treasure hoards."

"Why, Hiram," laughed Dave, "you're not thinking of smugglers."

"What am I then?"

"Pirates."

"Oh, yes, that's so," agreed Hiram.  "Well, the Dawsons are worse
than pirates.  They won't give up that airship without a tussle, I
can tell you."

"All I want to do is to locate them," said Dave.  "The government
will do the rest."

Dave left the camp, as they called it, about noon.  He had some
difficulty in getting from the island to the mainland, as the soil
was soggy and at places two feet deep with water.  He accomplished
the task, however, with only a slight wetting.

The young aviator had been given the address, of one of Mr. Price's
men at Ironton.  He visited his office, but found him absent for the
day.  Then he wired his progress to the Interstate people and told
them if necessary to reach, him at the Northern Hotel.

Dave went to the hotel and made arrangement with the clerk as to
mail and telegrams.  He decided to remain in the vicinity of Ironton
till he got in touch with the revenue officer's agent there.  He was
just leaving the hotel when one placed a hand on his shoulder, with
the friendly words:

"Why, hello, Dashaway."

Dave turned quickly, startled for a moment.  Then his face broke
into smiles of warm welcome.

"Mr. Alden," he said, and returned the friendly hand clasp of his
companion.

The chance meeting took Dave's mind back instantly to a most
pleasant period of his experience since leaving his guardian's home
at Brookville.

It was Mr. Alden, the moving picture man, who had given Dave what
might be called his first start in business life.  Dave had posed
for the "movies," and later he and Mr. King had taken a prominent
part in some motion pictures bringing in the monoplane, the Aegis.

"I didn't expect to see you way up here, Dashaway," spoke Mr. Alden.
"How are you getting along?"

"First class, thanks to the friendly help you gave me in the first
place," responded the young aviator.

"I'm glad of that.  Come up to my room and tell me all about it,
Dashaway.  Now then, for a talk over old times," resumed the moving
picture man, as they were comfortably seated in his room at the
hotel.

Dave parried a good many questions.  He did not exactly wish to tell
Mr. Alden about his business, which in the present case was also
that of his employers.  He managed to lead Mr. Alden to talk of his
own affairs.

"Oh, I've had the actors up here on a lot of marine scenarios,"
explained the moving picture man.  "They went away only this
morning.  We've been picturing 'The Island Hermit of Lake Superior,'
'Iron Miners' Revenge,' 'Flight Across the Border,' and 'The
Mystery of the Pineries.'  Great scenery around here for fittings,
you see.  There are some of my key negatives on the table there,
look them over."

Dave examined some of the films with interest.  The former kindness
of Mr. Alden and his party had left a warm spot in the heart of the
young aviator for anything concerning the movies.

"There's some plain slides we made to catch the costumes and
figures," added Mr. Alden, pointing to a rack containing about a
dozen glass negatives.

Dave began holding them up to the light in turn.  He had inspected
perhaps one half of them, when he somewhat startled the moving
picture man with a sharp sudden exclamation.

"Mr. Alden," he asked quite excitedly, "where did you take that
slide?"





CHAPTER XVIII

ON DESERT ISLAND


The young aviator might well ask the question he put to the moving
picture man, for the negative in Dave's hand showed plainly the face
and figure of Jerry Dawson.

There could be no mistake.  The boy who had run away with the
Drifter had features strongly marked and not readily forgotten.  The
picture had been taken in the open street.  Jerry was standing there
talking to a Chinaman.

"Some scene you know, Dashaway?" asked Mr. Alden.

"No, somebody I know--and am very anxious to find," replied Dave.

"So?  Let me have a look at it."

Dave handed the plate to the moving picture man, who slanted it
against the light and nodded intelligently.

"Oh, that?" he said.  "Yes, I remember all about it."

"Where did you take it, Mr. Alden?" pressed Dave.

"At Anseton.  There's a sort of foreign quarter there, and I was
catching up some street scenes.  It was the Chinaman I shot.  Wanted
the costume, you know."

"When was that?" asked Dave.

"Yesterday morning."

Dave asked a score of questions.  The moving picture man saw that
Dave had some important motive in his inquiries.  He did not ask
what it was, and was patient and careful in his replies.

Dave left Mr. Alden feeling that he had learned a good deal.  The
presence of Jerry Dawson in Anseton, and that, too, with a Chinaman,
verified many of the theories of the young aviator.  Dave lost no
time in getting to a telegraph office, to send a dispatch that would
reach Mr. Price.  It told briefly of the progress of the Monarch II
and of the definite clew Dave had just discovered.

That afternoon our hero hired a hand cart he saw in a blacksmith's
yard labeled "For Sale."  He drove it as near to the swamp island as
he could, without getting stuck in the mud.  Then, he called to
Hiram, who put himself in wading trim.  The empty gasoline cans were
over to the cart by Hiram.  Dave trundled them to the town, got them
filled and to the island, and, returning the cart, was ready to
prepare for a new night journey.

"It's less than sixty miles that we have to go, Hiram," he advised
his assistant.

"Then you've found out something definite?" guessed Hiram.

"Yes, I have got a trace of Jerry Dawson."

"You don't say so!"

"I do, and I'll tell you how," and Dave recited the story of his
meeting with the moving picture man.

"Why, that's just grand," commented Hiram in his exuberant way.
"You've good as run down the Drifter."

"Not quite, Hiram."

"Oh, you'll find the stolen airship.  I feel it in my bones.  I've
felt it ever since I saw the way you took hold of this affair."

"Well, I've had good help and a splendid machine, you must
remember."

"I don't go much on the help," declared Hiram modestly.  "As to the
Monarch II, though, I never saw such a well-behaved machine.  If she
does in the water what she's done in the air, she's a record
breaker, sure."

The machine was put in the best possible trim.  It lacked two hours
of nightfall but Dave had plenty to occupy his mind.  For over an
hour he sat looking over maps and memoranda, and blocking out his
course.  He had been very explicit and painstaking in questioning
the moving picture man.  He had made inquiries concerning Anseton
and its vicinity down to the smallest detail.  From all this Dave
had decided on a permanent landing place, a sort of headquarters
from which he could branch out in his personal investigations in the
day time and sally forth on an air hunt in the dark.

The aviators could distinctly hear a bell in some tower tolling the
hour of nine as they circled a busy city that lay beyond and below,
them, a blur of light.  Dave at the levers kept the Monarch II at a
fair height, constantly scanning an expanse to the north dotted only
here and there with lights.  Once past the outskirts of the city he
