"Don't let it happen again. On this ship we are prompt."

"Aye, sir," I muttered.

He smiled, a thin quirk of thin lips. "Now let me outline your duties,
Marsden. You are posted to my ship as Executive Officer. An Executive
Officer is the Captain's right hand."

"So I have heard," I said drily.

"Belay that, Mr. Marsden. I do not appreciate humor during duty hours."

You wouldn't, I thought.

"As I was saying, Marsden, Executive Officer, you will be responsible
for--" He went on and on, covering the Code--chapter, book and verse on
the duties of an Executive Officer. It made no difference that I had
been Exec under Andy Royce, the skipper of the "Clotho," the ship with
the biggest confirmed kill in the entire Fleet Scouting Force. I was
still a new Exec, and the book said I must be briefed on my duties. So
"briefed" I was--for a solid hour.

Feeling angry and tired, I finally managed to get away from Rule Book
Charley and find my quarters which I shared with the Engineer. I knew
him casually, a glum reservist named Allyn. I had wondered why he always
seemed to have a chip on his shoulder. Now I knew.

He was lying in his shock-couch as I came in. "Welcome, sucker," he
greeted me. "Glad to have you aboard."

"The feeling's not mutual," I snapped.

"What's the matter? Has the Lieutenant Commander been rolling you out on
the red carpet?"

"You could call it that," I said. "I've just been told the duties of an
Exec. Funny--no?"

He shook his head. "Not funny. I feel for you. He told me how to be an
engineer six months ago." Allyn's thin face looked glummer than usual.

"Did I ever tell you about our skip--captain?" Allyn went on. "Or do I
have to tell you? I see you're wearing an Academy ring."

"You can't tell me much I haven't already heard," I said coldly. I don't
like wardroom gossips as a matter of policy. A few disgruntled men on a
ship can shoot morale to hell, and on a ship this size the Exec is the
morale officer. But I was torn between two desires. I wanted Allyn to go
on, but I didn't want to hear what Allyn had to say. I was like the
proverbial hungry mule standing halfway between two haystacks of equal
size and attractiveness. And like the mule I would stand there turning
my head one way and the other until I starved to death.

But Allyn solved my problem for me. "You haven't heard _this_," he said
bitterly. "The whole crew applied for transfer when we came back to base
after our last cruise. Of course, they didn't get it, but you get the
idea. Us reservists and draftees get about the same consideration as the
Admiral's dog--No! dammit!--Less than the dog. They wouldn't let a mangy
cur ship out with Gutless Gus."

Gutless Gus! that was a new one. I wondered how Chase had managed to
acquire that sobriquet.

       *       *       *       *       *

"It was on our last patrol," Allyn went on, answering my question before
I asked it. "We were out at maximum radius when the detectors showed a
disturbance in normal space. Chase ordered us down from Cth for a quick
look--and so help me, God, we broke out right in the middle of a Rebel
supply convoy--big, fat, sitting ducks all around us. We got off about
twenty Mark VII torpedoes before Chase passed the word to change over.
We scooted back into Cth so fast we hardly knew we were gone. And then
he raises hell with Detector section for not identifying every class of
ship in that convoy!

"And when Bancroft, that's the Exec whom you've relieved, asked for a
quick check to confirm our kills, Chase sat on him like a ton of brick.
'I'm not interested in how many poor devils we blew apart back there,'
our Captain says. 'Our mission is to scout, to obtain information about
enemy movements and get that information back to Base. We cannot
transmit information from a vaporized ship, and that convoy had a naval
escort. Our mission cannot be jeopardized merely to satisfy morbid
curiosity. Request denied. And, Mr. Bancroft, have Communications
contact Fleet. This information should be in as soon as possible.' And
then he turned away leaving Bancroft biting his fingernails. He wouldn't
even push out a probe--scooted right back into the blue where we'd be
safe!

"You know, we haven't had one confirmed kill posted on the list since
we've been in space. It's getting so we don't want to come in any more.
Like the time--the 'Atropos' came in just after we touched down. She was
battered--looked like she'd been through a meat grinder, but she had ten
confirmed and six probable, and four of them were escorts! Hell! Our
boys couldn't hold their heads up. The 'Lachesis' didn't have a mark on
her and all we had was a few possible hits. You know how it
goes--someone asks where you're from. You say the 'Lachesis' and they
say 'Oh, yes, the cruise ship.' And that's that. It's so true you don't
even feel like resenting it."

I didn't like the bitter note in Allyn's voice. He was a reservist,
which made it all the worse. Reservists have ten times the outside
contacts we regulars do. In general when a regular and reservist tangle,
the Academy men close ranks like musk-oxen and meet the challenge with
an unbroken ring of horns. But somehow I didn't feel like ringing up.

I kept hoping there was another side to the story. I'd check around and
find out as soon as I got settled. And if there was another side, I was
going to take Allyn apart as a malicious trouble-maker. I felt sick to
my stomach.

       *       *       *       *       *

We spent the next three days taking on stores and munitions, and I was
too busy supervising the stowage and checking manifests to bother about
running down Allyn's story. I met the other officers--Lt. Pollard the
gunnery officer, Ensign Esterhazy the astrogator, and Ensign Blakiston.
Nice enough guys, but all wearing that cowed, frustrated look that
seemed to be a "Lachesis" trademark. Chase, meanwhile, was up in Flag
Officer's Country picking up the dope on our next mission. I hoped that
Allyn was wrong but the evidence all seemed to be in his favor. Even
more than the officers, the crew was a mess underneath their clean
uniforms. From Communications Chief CPO Haskins to Spaceman Zelinski
there was about as much spirit in them as you'd find in a punishment
detail polishing brightwork in Base Headquarters. I'm a cheerful soul,
and usually I find no trouble getting along with a new command, but this
one was different. They were efficient enough, but one could see that
their hearts weren't in their work. Most crews preparing to go out are
nervous and high tempered. There was none of that here. The men went
through the motions with a mechanical indifference that was frightening.
I had the feeling that they didn't give a damn whether they went or
not--or came back or not. The indifference was so thick you could cut it
with a knife. Yet there was nothing you could put your hand on. You
can't touch people who don't care.

Four hours after Chase came back, we lifted gravs from Earth. Chase was
sitting in the control chair, and to give him credit, we lifted as
smooth as a silk scarf slipping through the fingers of a pretty woman.
We hypered at eight miles and swept up through the monochromes of Cth
until we hit middle blue, when Chase slipped off the helmet, unfastened
