were the skeletons and shells of departed life. Fossils of the animal
and the vegetable kingdoms greeted one on every hand. Great fronds of
palms of the deep, draped with weird remains of marine life long
extinct, stood gaunt and desolate and rust-covered in the hollows and on
the hills. Long tresses of sea weed and moss, now crisp and dead as
desert sands, still clung in wreaths and festoons to rock and tree and
plant just as they had done in that far-off age, when washed by the
waters of the sea. Great forests of coral, once white and pink and red
with teeming life but now drab and dead, still thrust their arms upward,
their former beauty covered and distorted by the dust of the ages.
Whales and sharks and serpents and fish of divers species and sizes,
together with great eels and monsters of the deep, lay thickly over the
land, their mummified remains shriveled by the intense heat, their
ghastliness softened by the ashes of the years.

Millions of ages had rolled away since the struggle began--the battle of
life on earth against the encroachments of death. And now death stalked
everywhere, grinning with malicious triumph, for he had but one more
battle to fight. Already his grisly clutch was closing on the standard
of victory. Man had mastered life but he had not conquered death. With
the magic wand of science he had reached out into space and viewed the
life of far-off worlds. He had routed superstition and fear and
selfishness. He had banished disease and learned all nature's secrets;
had even visited other worlds and had come to know and understand his
God, but still death had marched grimly on. For even the abysmal moment
of creation had marked the world for his prey. Slowly but surely death
had closed his cold hands about the earth. The sun flung forth his hot
rays and drew more and more of the earth's moisture and dissipated it in
space. Gradually the forests vanished and then the streams and lakes
dwindled and disappeared. By this time the atmosphere had thinned almost
imperceptibly--and only by the aid of his scientific instruments had man
been able to detect its thinning. Less and less rain fell, and finally
even the ice-caps about the poles trickled away. Cold and gaunt and
shadowy those regions lay silent and lifeless throughout the long
nights, and loomed like gray ghosts in the hushed light of the summer.
The sun blazed on relentlessly and the shores of the seven seas receded
age after age, but with his science and his machines man had doggedly
followed the retreating waters, husbanded and harnessed them and thus
retained his grip on life.

But now at last life on earth had come to its final battlefield. The
plans of the battle were sharply drawn, but there could be no doubt of
the issue. No one knew this better than Omega, for the sun shone on with
undiminished power. Yet the rotation of the earth had slackened until
twenty-five hours constituted a day, while the year was 379 days and a
fraction in length. Man, gradually adjusting himself to the new
conditions and environment, had triumphed even in the face of a losing
fight. For he had learned to smile into the hollow sockets of death, to
laugh at the empty promises of life.

       *       *       *       *       *

Back in their ship Omega and Thalma gazed out over the dead world, where
the salt crystals gleamed and sparkled in the sunshine.

"Will all this ever become green again and full of joy and life?" asked
Thalma wearily.

"Why not?" asked Omega. "Although the race has come to its last stand,
water is here and before it is gone who knows what may happen?"

Omega spoke only to please his wife, for well he knew in his heart that
the star of hope had forever set. And always he was thinking of that
commotion in the waters of the lake. What could have caused it? What did
it portend? He was sure that the answer was to be one of tragedy.

"We know that for uncounted ages the world was green and beautiful, was
vibrant with life and joy," he went on. "And why may it not be so again,
even though now it is garbed in the clothes of the sepulchre? Let us
trust in the power of our son."

Thalma did not answer, and Omega, seeing that she was terribly
depressed, fell silent. So they sat in their great airship, strangely
dejected despite the close proximity of the life-giving water, while the
sun flamed through the cloudless sky and set in a crimson flood beyond
the lifeless plains. Night fell but still they sat brooding. The stars
shone out in the purple heavens, but they noticed not their glory. The
ship was wrapped in an awful silence. No night wind whispered its
message nor warmed the cold, desolate earth, stretching down from the
poles, nor cooled the hot wastes about the equator. The naked mountains
rose stark and forbidding into the sky, which hung like a great,
bejeweled bowl over the sun-scorched plains, where the dust of many ages
lay undisturbed. The shadows lay deep and dark over the valleys and
among the streets of cities dead and silent for many ages, and searched
out deep chasms which when the world was young had felt the surge of the
restless seas. No form of life winged its way through the darkness and
called to its mate. No beast of prey rent the air with its challenge. No
insect chirped. No slimy shape crawled over the rocks. Dark and solemn,
mysterious and still, the earth sped on through the night.

       *       *       *       *       *

Morning found them in much better spirits. Over their breakfast, which
consisted almost wholly of food in tablet form, they discussed their
plans. After which they went to the lookout in the bow of the ship and
gazed out at the gray world. There was no change. The same
heart-breaking monotony of death confronted them. But despite it all
they finally smiled into each other's eyes.

"It is home," said Omega proudly. "The last home we shall ever know."

"My God, look!" suddenly gasped Thalma, clutching his arm and pointing a
trembling finger toward the lake. "What--is that?"

Following her gesture he stared in terror and stupefaction. Rising above
the center of the lake where the day before they had beheld the agitated
waters, was an enormous, scale-covered neck surmounted by a long,
snake-like head whose round, red eyes were sheltered beneath black,
horny hoods. The horrible creature's head was swaying back and forth as
its black tongue darted in and out between wide-open jaws displaying
single rows of sharp teeth. Fully fifteen feet above the lake the awful
eyes looked toward the land. And as the neck moved in unison with the
swaying head the scales seemed to slide under and over one another a
perfect armor for the neck.

"A plesiosaurian!" exclaimed Omega, leveling his glasses at the beast.
"No--how can that be?" he added in bewilderment. "Those monsters were
supposed to be extinct ages ago. And they had a smooth skin, while this
thing has scales, like those of a brontosaurus, which was really a land
animal. This must be a cross between the two that through the process of
evolution has been developed. Anyway it is the last of the species and
it has come here--to die."

"Like us it has followed the water and come here to die," said Thalma as
she also leveled glasses.

For several minutes they watched the swaying head which every little
while twisted from side to side, as the blazing eyes seemed to be
searching for prey, while a whitish saliva dripped from the jaws. The
body of the beast, which they knew to be enormous, was hidden beneath
the water, but the agitation on the surface showed that powerful feet
and legs were stirring.

"Yes, it has come here to die," repeated Omega, "to fight for the last
drop of earth's water. It now has possession of the lake, and unless we
kill it, it will kill us or drive us away."

Almost with the words Omega seized an atomic gun and pointed it at the
brute's head. But before he could sight the weapon and pull the trigger
the monster, as though sensing danger, suddenly jerked down its head and
a moment later it had disappeared beneath the surface.

"It has gone!" cried Thalma. She was trembling as with a chill, and her
eyes were wide with terror.

"It will appear again," said Omega, "and then we will kill it, for the
water belongs to man. Doubtless that huge beast is all that remains of
life on earth save ourselves. To-night while you sleep here in the ship,
I will take a gun, take position behind a rock on the shore of the lake
and watch for its appearance. I think shortly after nightfall when the
rocks are cool it leaves the water and comes on land in a vain search
for food, for beyond a doubt it has devoured everything in the lake,
save marine mosses and the like. Yet as it has survived all contemporary
life except man, it may live for centuries unless we destroy it."

"But there are not centuries of water out there," Thalma said. "As to
your hunting this monster alone, I will not hear of it. I shall go with
you. Together we will destroy this menace of our new home."

       *       *       *       *       *

All Omega's eloquence could not dissuade her. So, after the sun had set
and the dry cold had chilled the hot rocks, they set out along the shore
of the lake and looked eagerly out over the still water for a sight of
their enemy. Nothing disturbed the silvery surface of the water.
Crouching behind a mass of coral they waited, but throughout the long,
still night they watched without reward, for nothing moved within their
range of vision. The stars, wonderfully large and brilliant in that
rarefied atmosphere, seemed to be the only link between them and the
unknown. Only their own hurried breathing and the muffled thumps of
their wildly beating hearts broke the silence. And as the sun rose again
above the dead plains, weary and discouraged they returned to the ship.

While keeping up a bold front for Thalma's sake, Omega's heart was sad,
for he well knew that unless they could vanquish that marine monster
they were doomed. That such a dreadful creature had come to them from
the mists of antiquity, as it were, was incredible. Yet he had seen it,
Thalma had seen it, and it resembled some of the sea-monsters he had
heard of in the past. They could not doubt its existence and must
prepare for the worst.

Omega's name had been conferred on him by an ironical whim of fate. When
he was born there were still many people on earth inhabiting the low
valleys of the Pacific's floor where much water still remained. But the
