
Barrow's first appointment was on Tuesday morning, and Friday found him
climbing the same stairs. He watched the papers but there had been no
repetition of the advertisement. Evidently the strange man had all the
applicants he wanted.

The outer office was empty, but when he opened the inner door, the queer
man was smiling just as Dick remembered him.

"Come in, Mr. Barrow. I'm glad to see you. I was surprised to hear of
your use of the money, but was pleased rather than disappointed. You did
well."

For a moment Dick was taken back, then he smiled sheepishly. "I don't
know just what to say, Sir, I did so many things. But I didn't know I
was being watched."

"Every move you made was watched carefully, and reported to me. I know
where you spent every hour since you left here the other morning. I
wanted to know how you would act with money enough to do as you pleased
for a few days. You acted wisely, and I'm glad that you spent so much of
it on men who need it. You bought twenty-two pairs of shoes, thirty-six
shirts and forty-five suits of underwear. You also bought cheap suits
for nine men and several odd and end accessories as well.

"Out of the total sum you spent less than one hundred dollars for
yourself, and yet you have only forty-two dollars of the sum I handed
you. The remainder you used for meals and cheap lodging for the men you
have taken care of in the past three days. You have gone through a lot
of money since you were here."

Dick stammered as he spoke, "I'm sorry, sir, but I thought--"

"You thought _just right_! I _did_ give you the money to use as you
pleased and I'm proud of the way you spent it. But I want to know the
answer. You must have decided by this time. If the answer is yes, you
will bind yourself to a lifetime of work. If it is no, we will say
goodbye."

Dick's face lighted with a smile. "The answer is _yes_. I am proud to
leave my future in your hands--even to my marriage. I made up my mind to
do as you desire, and am prepared to leave any time you are ready. I
hope you have hired every one you need and that we will all enjoy our
new work."

"You're a brave man, Dick Barrow." There was admiration in the voice of
the stranger. "If you remained here I believe you would make your mark
in life, but you will have even greater opportunity where you are going.
I believe your decision will prove to be a happy one.

"You must stay at a good hotel. Reasonable if you want, although it is
not important. I will send the girl to you within a few days. You will
be married as soon as possible after you meet her.

"She will bring a letter and will do exactly as you say. I will allow
time for you to get acquainted before I have further orders. From that
time you will obey my orders explicitly and follow every instruction
without question. Every member of the party will take orders from you,
and _you must give them_!"

Once more Dick was handed a handful of bills as he prepared to leave,
and knew there was even more than the first time. But he would live in
constant dread of meeting the girl he was to marry. As he started to
open the door, the man spoke again.

"Use the money as you desire. It will be your last chance of spending
any and I want you to enjoy yourself as much as possible during the time
remaining. Do what you like for the men in the park or any others you
wish to help. If you need more money send a messenger to this room, but
don't come yourself. Don't contact me again until my orders require it.
Have a good time."

Dick felt that he was living a dream, but a very pleasant one. Just one
thought disturbed him. Who the girl would be--and what she would be
like?




CHAPTER II

_Out to Sea_


The following morning an advertisement appeared in the papers, under the
heading of help wanted: woman. It was the same address on Morgan Avenue.
His heart sank! The man was _advertising_ for a wife! Now Barrow _knew_
he was in for a tough streak of luck. He read it carefully.

    _Opportunity for young lady. Must be of age, single, brilliant, with
    good family background. Higher education not necessary. Must be
    willing to travel long distance. Must not be averse to marriage with
    brilliant young man; give up all former associations, with no
    possibility of return; live life in small community of own race,
    with no possibility of communication with former home. Must be
    without close family ties, or relationship. Opportunity to live life
    of luxury and ease, with amiable group far from present home and
    civilization. Young lady who fits qualifications will not regret
    applying for position. Honor, love and security will be her reward.
    OPPORTUNITY! Room 36, 18 West Morgan Avenue, City._

       *       *       *       *       *

While Dick was eating dinner on Tuesday evening, a young lady fell
headlong in front of his table. A moment later she was seated in the
chair opposite his own. Ten minutes later he was ordering her dinner.

Afterward, as they walked toward a movie, Dick felt as if he was
committing a crime. He was supposed to meet his future wife--and instead
was entertaining this young lady who had fallen into his life. When he
learned that she was staying at the same hotel, they made a date for
breakfast the next morning.

Dolores Dunbar was good company, and seemed willing to spend most of her
time in Dick's company. He learned that she was as friendless as
himself, and wondered why they couldn't have met before he made the
strange bargain. But as the third day drew to a close she appeared
apprehensive.

When she kept glancing around, as if expecting someone, Dick became
curious, and felt rather hurt to think she was looking for someone else.
Finally she spoke.

"I'm sorry, Dick, that I've made use of you the way I have, but I was
ordered to do it. You see, my employer told me to meet you and spend
every possible moment in your company. He also said that I would become
acquainted with someone through you, and that you would know who he was,
when I said I came from the large-headed man on Morgan Avenue--with a
letter."

For a moment Dick was stunned. Then he laughed, a sickly, half-hearted
laugh. When he found his voice it squeaked.

"I think we had better go to my room. We have some very private things
to say."

The queer man had succeeded in their being together for three days
before either knew _they_ were the central figures in the drama. Now
they felt farther apart than at any moment since they had met, but
nervously admitted they had fared better than they expected.

       *       *       *       *       *

They were married in the morning, to keep the agreement, but didn't
consider it part of the bargain to live as man and wife.

Dick found only one order in the letter, to be at the office at ten
o'clock on Tuesday morning. That left five days to enjoy themselves.

In spite of the stiffness between them Dick noticed how the light caught
in Dolores' dark hair, and how her brown eyes sparkled at each new
sight. Her head reached just above his shoulder, and he had never danced
with a better partner. She enjoyed his company, and admitted to herself
that he was a perfect gentleman.

During the five days they saw every good show, and visited every popular
night club. Things they had always wanted to do were packed into the
short time to themselves. Dick hired a car, and they drove for hours
through the country. When Tuesday morning came they were tired, and it
was hard to get up in time to keep the appointment.

When they opened the door, the big-headed man laughed at their yawns. "I
see that you've either _been_ enjoying yourselves, or have been _trying_
mighty hard. You can make up your sleep from now on, as it will be a
long time before we reach our destination. How do you like each other
for permanent companions?"

Their faces grew crimson. Finally Dick found his voice. "I'm perfectly
satisfied, Sir. I think Dolores is very pretty, and is _very_ good
company!"

He looked the other way to hide his embarrassment, as the girl spoke.

"I feel the same way. We have enjoyed being together, and perhaps when
we are better acquainted the stiffness will disappear. We both feel odd,
because we were required to marry!"

The strange man laughed out loud at this. "In other words you _might_
have fallen in love, if you had been allowed time to do it. But _having_
to marry creates an entirely different feeling. I believe it will work
out well, even though you feel cheated at the moment. But we haven't any
time to lose. Everyone is at the dock and we sail in two hours.

"Here are your instructions, Dick. From now on _you_ give the orders,
and I remain in the background. They will all feel more comfortable
under the command of one of their own race. Study everything carefully
on the way to the dock, then give them as your own orders."

Dick had little time for anything except to look through the sheaf of
papers. On one sheet was a list of seven couples, with stateroom numbers
beside each. His own was on the top, with number three room. This he
dropped in a side pocket where it would be easy to find. The remainder
was in connection with sailing.

Dick, Dolores and the big-headed man occupied one cab, while the baggage
followed in another. Dolores had obtained quite a wardrobe, much to the
amusement of her employer. But the man spoke only once during the trip.

"Everyone in the party must consider that they work for you, Dick. You
must hear all complaints and settle all differences. They must not
approach me for any reason. I am known as Morquil, of section one, which
you will understand when we reach our destination."

The crew was hurrying back and forth on the deck of the small ship,
taking care of last-minute details. A group of people were gathered
beside a huge stack of baggage, and Dick walked toward them without
waiting for the others.

Dolores went up the gangplank beside Morquil, helping him slightly. He
seemed to have difficulty in supporting his enormous head with the
slight body.

As Dick reached the group, he read the names from the list in his hand.
"Mr. and Mrs. John McCarthy. You are in stateroom number seven. Take
what baggage you can carry, the rest will be put on board." He called
each name and stateroom; they headed for the ship. John McCarthy he
found was the man he had met in the office, and he _still_ had his
perpetual grin. Evidently his fiancee had agreed to the pact for they
were now man and wife.

When Dick started toward the ship, after watching the baggage put on
board, he was stopped by a tap on the shoulder. The cab drivers were
still waiting for their money. Morquil had left everything in his hands,
even to paying for the motor trip to the dock.

It was a strange departure, with only a few people on the dock to say
goodbye. Even they were just neighbors of the passengers. Most of the
women on board were crying as the _Primrose_ nosed out through the
harbor toward the open sea.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dick was still at the rail when the captain approached. "I'm sorry to
bother you, Mr. Barrow, but I must know our destination so I can set the
course."

The young leader's day dreaming was cut short, to jerk him back to his
duties. He felt that the lives and hopes of everyone on the ship had
been thrust into his hands.

Even the captain didn't know where they were going. The ship had been
chartered for a voyage of several months, to an unknown destination. He
and the crew were well paid, and didn't care where they went.

Dick drew a sealed envelope from his pocket, detached a slip of paper
and handed it to the captain. He read the note, then repeated it. "You
are to keep the destination to yourself. No one on the ship is to know
where we are going, and you will not mention it to me again. I hope that
we have good weather, Captain, and a fast trip."

Barrow felt like a fool. Repeating messages as if they were his
own--without the slightest knowledge of what they were about. _He_ was
supposedly charting the course--and didn't have the slightest idea where
they were going.

When Dick reached his stateroom (after answering questions from everyone
on board--and telling them nothing) he found Dolores sobbing. She had
kept her smile until the boat sailed. Now she was crying her eyes out.
It was not a new sight, as every woman on the ship seemed occupied in
the same way, with the men trying to comfort them.

As Dick sat down beside her, he could feel the throb of the diesel
motor. It seemed to carry the rhythm of adventure through the walls of
the cabin, giving the feeling of the unknown. For a long time there was
