shattered window. He clawed at the door, trying to open it, but it was
jammed in the crash-bent frame, and he couldn't fight against the force
of that incoming water. The welt, left by the blow he had received on
his forehead, put a thickening mist over his brain, so that he could not
think clearly. Presently, when he could no longer hold his breath,
bitter liquid was sucked into his lungs.

His last thoughts were those of a drowning man. The machine-shop he and
his dad had had in Harwich. Betty Moore, with the smiling Irish
eyes--like in the song. Betty and he had planned to go to the State
University this Fall. They'd planned to be married sometime.... Goodbye,
Betty ...

The ripples that had ruffled the surface waters in the Pit, quieted
again to glassy smoothness. The eternal stars shone calmly. The geologic
Dakota hills, which might have seen the dinosaurs, still bulked along
the highway. Time, the Brother of Death, and the Father of Change,
seemed to wait....

       *       *       *       *       *

"Kaalleee! Tik!... Tik, tik, tik!... Kaalleee!..."

The excited cry, which no human throat could quite have duplicated
accurately, arose thinly from the depths of a powder-dry gulch,
water-scarred from an inconceivable antiquity. The noon-day Sun was red
and huge. The air was tenuous, dehydrated, chill.

"Kaalleee!... Tik, tik, tik!..."

At first there was only one voice uttering those weird, triumphant
sounds. Then other vocal organs took up that trilling wail, and those
short, sharp chuckles of eagerness. Other questioning, wondering notes
mixed with the cadence. Lacking qualities identifiable as human, the
disturbance was still like the babble of a group of workmen who have
discovered something remarkable.

The desolate expanse around the gulch, was all but without motion. The
icy breeze tore tiny puffs of dust from grotesque, angling drifts of
soil, nearly waterless for eons. Patches of drab lichen grew here and
there on the up-jutting rocks, but in the desert itself, no other life
was visible. Even the hills had sagged away, flattened by incalculable
ages of erosion.

       *       *       *       *       *

At a mile distance, a crumbling heap of rubble arose. Once it had been a
building. A gigantic, jagged mass of detritus slanted upward from its
crest--red debris that had once been steel. A launching catapult for the
last space ships built by the gods in exodus, perhaps it was--half a
million years ago. Man was gone from the Earth. Glacial ages, war,
decadence, disease, and a final scattering of those ultimate superhumans
to newer worlds in other solar systems, had done that.

"Kaalleee!... Tik, tik, tik!..." The sounds were not human. They were
more like the chatter and wail of small desert animals.

But there was a seeming paradox here in the depths of that gulch, too.
The glint of metal, sharp and burnished. The flat, streamlined bulk of a
flying machine, shiny and new. The bell-like muzzle of a strange
excavator-apparatus, which seemed to depend on a blast of atoms to clear
away rock and soil. Thus the gulch had been cleared of the accumulated
rubbish of antiquity. Man, it seemed, had a successor, as ruler of the
Earth.

Loy Chuk had flown his geological expedition out from the far lowlands
to the east, out from the city of Kar-Rah. And he was very happy
now--flushed with a vast and unlooked-for success.

He crouched there on his haunches, at the dry bottom of the Pit. The
breeze rumpled his long, brown fur. He wasn't very different in
appearance from his ancestors. A foot tall, perhaps, as he squatted
there in that antique stance of his kind. His tail was short and furred,
his undersides creamy. White whiskers spread around his inquisitive,
pink-tipped snout.

But his cranium bulged up and forward between shrewd, beady eyes,
betraying the slow heritage of time, of survival of the fittest, of
evolution. He could think and dream and invent, and the civilization of
his kind was already far beyond that of the ancient Twentieth Century.

Loy Chuk and his fellow workers were gathered, tense and gleeful, around
the things their digging had exposed to the daylight. There was a gob of
junk--scarcely more than an irregular formation of flaky rust. But
imbedded in it was a huddled form, brown and hard as old wood. The dry
mud that had encased it like an airtight coffin, had by now been chipped
away by the tiny investigators; but soiled clothing still clung to it,
after perhaps a million years. Metal had gone into decay--yes. But not
this body. The answer to this was simple--alkali. A mineral saturation
that had held time and change in stasis. A perfect preservative for
organic tissue, aided probably during most of those passing eras by
