types which we have constructed for some of the leading observatories as
mentioned in the text. We feel that this series of illustrations may not
only be of general interest, but also of service in helping to determine
further developments of modern astronomical and astrophysical equipment. We
have not thought it advisable to describe in detail the various instruments
of precision, which we have been called upon to construct from time to time
for the scientists in the astronomical as well as other branches of science
during the last ten years. As a rule every astronomer is interested in some
special line of research, which for a successful investigation requires a
special adaptation of the instrument he proposes to use, and in such cases
we are confident we can fill the requirements and shall be happy to
correspond with interested parties. We are in position to undertake the
design of special apparatus and can furnish sketches and estimates in
accordance with the suggestions of the customer on short notice in such
cases, where the importance of the prospective business will warrant it.
Among the various instruments which we have built, but which are not
included in this catalogue, we wish to mention, spectroheliographs,
planetary cameras, photographic plate holders, domes for observatories,
etc.

The optical parts which we furnish are of the highest degree of excellence
and are made for us by several of the most reliable firms in this line.

Mr. O. L. Petitdidier is closely located to our works, and during the last
ten years has supplied most of our objectives, etc.

It is and has been the aim of our firm to produce apparatus of the highest
grade and the constant growth of our business is a mute but eloquent
testimonial that our efforts have been appreciated by our customers.

We are glad to acknowledge our indebtedness to many of the foremost
astronomers, who have greatly assisted us by suggestions as to their
particular requirements, and by supplying certain of the photographs here
reproduced.

We take this opportunity to thank our customers for the favors rendered us
in the past, and trust that in the future these mutually pleasant relations
may be renewed.

[Illustration: A 101]

#A101. Alt-Azimuth Mounting# on strong hardwood tripod. The vertical and
horizontal axis have large bearing surfaces, assuring stability and
steadiness of motion. All parts excepting the tripod head are made of brass
and are nicely finished. The telescope is fitted with long rack and pinion
motion. Three celestial eye pieces are included. Price with 2 1/2"
telescope                                                          #$90.00#

#A102.# The same as above with 3" telescope. Price                #$110.00#

#A103.# The same as above with 3 1/2" telescope. Price            #$140.00#

#A104.# The same as above with 4" telescope. Price                #$200.00#

#Note.#--All our astronomical telescope have objectives of the standard
focal length (focus = to about 15 times diameter of aperture). The
objective is mounted in the most approved manner and is provided with
adjustment for collimation.

#Note.#--For accessories to these telescopes see page 11.

[Illustration: A 110]

#A110. Universal Equatorial Mounting.# This form of mounting can be used
equally well for celestial and terrestrial observations. The mounting is
made to swivel on the tripod head, in order to set the instrument in the
meridian. The polar axis can be set at any latitude and a graduated arc
gives the exact position. The instrument is set level by means of two small
levels attached to the tripod top. The polar axis is fitted with worm wheel
and worm for slow motion. The handle with the universal joint can be
clamped on either side of the worm shaft. Telescope of 3" aperture and
three eye pieces. Price                                           #$165.00#

#A111.# Same as above with 3 1/2" telescope. Price                #$190.00#

#A112.# Same as above with 4" telescope. Price                    #$250.00#

For accessories see page 11.

[Illustration: A 120]

#A120. Portable Equatorial Mounting with Driving Clock.# This instrument
was designed to meet the demand for portable low priced telescope suitable
for the study of astronomy in the college, high school or for the amateur
astronomer. Every observer and teacher in astronomy will appreciate the
great usefulness of a driving mechanism, which will keep the star in the
field during observation. After several years of experimenting we have
succeeded in constructing a reliable clock which can easily be attached to
our portable telescope mounting.

The instrument is mounted on strong hardwood tripod fitted with iron shoes.
It is attached to the tripod top by a single screw which holds it firmly
and allows adjustment in azimuth. The clock case carrying the bearing for
the polar axis is made to swivel in the base casting, so that the polar
axis may be easily set and firmly clamped at an angle from horizontal to
vertical. A level is fitted to the tripod top and a graduated arc is
fastened to the clock case. If the polar axis is set vertical and the worm
wheel unclamped, the instrument is transformed into an alt-azimuth
mounting. This feature will be found to be a great convenience especially
for terrestrial observations.

Both the polar and declination axes are carefully fitted to their bearings
and carry finding circles. The right ascension circle reads to 5 min., the
declination circle to single degrees. The declination axis is fitted with
clamp screw which is within convenient reach.

The clock has ample power and is enclosed in a heavy case which protects it
from dust and injury. It is driven by two strong springs and will run about
12 hours without rewinding. A lever for starting or stopping is provided.
