
       *       *       *       *       *

Sometime near dawn he gave up trying to sleep, dressed, and began
composing orders. Presently Jezef came in with cups of steaming amber
liquid. They sipped in silence for a while, then Jezef asked "You've
heard about Grefen?"

Tulan felt something knot inside him. He shook his head, dreading what
he knew was coming.

"He killed himself last night," Jezef said.

Tulan remembered the agony in the old Minister of War's eyes when he'd
voted for surrender. Grefen had been Admiral in his day; the prototype
of integrity and a swift sledgehammer in a fight; and Tulan's first
combat had been under him. A symbol of the Fleet, Tulan reflected; and
his death, yes, that too was a symbol--what was there but shame in
surrender, for a man or a fleet or a world?

His hand clenched, crumpling the paper it was resting on. He smoothed
the paper and re-read the order he'd been writing. He visualized the
proud ranks of his crewmen, reduced to ragged lines shuffling toward
prison or execution.

It seemed impossible, against the laws of nature, that men should strive
mightily and win, then be awarded the loser's prize. His anger began to
return. "I've a mind to defy the Government and only take skeleton
crews," he said. "Leave the married men, at least."

Jezef shrugged. "They'd only be bundled into transports and sent after
us."

"Yes. Damn it, I won't be a party to it! All they did was carry out
their orders, and superbly, at that!"

Jezef watched him with something like curiosity. "You'd disobey the
Council? You?"

Tulan felt himself flush. "I've told you before, discipline's a
necessity to me, not a religion!" Nevertheless, Jezef's question wasn't
unfair; up to now it really hadn't occurred to him that he might
disobey.

His inward struggle was brief. He grabbed the whole pad of orders and
ripped them across. "What's the Council, with Grefen gone, but three
trembling old men? Get some guns manned, in case they get suspicious and
try to interfere."

Blood began to surge faster in his veins; he felt a vast relief. How
could he have ever seen it differently? He jabbed at a button. "All
ships' Duty Officers; scramble communication circuits. This is the
Admiral. Top Secret Orders...."

       *       *       *       *       *

Shortly before noon the four-hundred-odd ships lifted out of Sennech's
frosty atmosphere, still ignoring the furious demands from the radio.
Fully armed, they couldn't be stopped.

Tulan's viewer gave a vivid picture of the receding fifth planet. The
white mantle of ice and snow was a backdrop for blue artificial lakes
and the dark green of forest-strips (hardy conifers from Teyr)
alternated with the lighter shades of surface farms. The ice had been
almost unbroken until men came, bringing more heat than Sennech had ever
received from a far-off sun.

That had been before the First Solar War, when Teyr (the race of Aum had
originated there) ruled. That awful struggle had bludgeoned the home
planet back to savagery, and left Coar and Sennech little better off.

With recovery, Coar had taken over and prospered immensely. Teyr stayed
wild except for small colonies planted there by the other two planets,
and Sennech lagged for a while.

Within Tulan's lifetime his world had found itself ready to rise against
the lax but profit-taking rule of Coar, and that rebellion had grown
into the present situation.

Sennech's wounds were plainly visible in the viewscreen; great man-made
craters spewing incandescent destruction blindly over farm, city, or
virgin ice. The planet was in three-quarters phase from here, and Tulan
could see the flecks of fire in the darkness beyond the twilight zone.
Near the edge of that darkness he made out the dimmer, diffused glow of
Capitol City, where Anatu would be giving two small boys their supper.

He checked altitude, found they were free of the atmosphere, and ordered
an acceleration that would take them halfway to the sun in fifty hours.
It was uncomfortable now, with Sennech's gravity added, but that would
fall off fast.

Jezef hauled himself in and dropped to a pad. "I wish I had your build,"
he said. "Do you really think we can pull this off?"

Tulan, in a good mood, grinned at him. "Have I ever led you into defeat
yet, pessimist?"

"No; and more than once I'd have bet ten to one against us. That's why
the Fleet fights so well for you; we have the feeling we're following a
half-god. Gods, however, achieve defeats as terrible as their
victories."

Tulan laughed and sat down beside Jezef with some charts. "I think I'll
appoint you Fleet Poet. Here's the plan. No one knows what I intend; we
could be on our way around the sun to overtake Coar and either fight or
surrender, or we might be diving into the sun in a mass suicide. That's
why I broke off the siege and pulled all units away from Coar; the fact
that they're coming back around to meet us will suggest something like
that."

"Are they going to join up?"

"No; I want them on this side of the sun but behind us. I have a use for
them later that depends on their staying hidden. Incidentally, I'm
designating them Group Three.

"In a few hours we're going to turn hard, this side of the sun, and
intercept Teyr. I want to evacuate our forces from the moon, then decoy
whatever the enemy has there into space where we can get at them. That's
their last fleet capable of a sortie, and with that gone we can combine
our whole strength and go around to Coar. She'll probably give up
immediately, on the spot."

       *       *       *       *       *

Jezef thought it over. "Will they be foolish enough to leave the moon?
As long as they're safely grounded there, they constitute a
fleet-in-being and demand attention."
