cent of the light incident and the absorption of the two per cent colors
those reflectors as copper or gold or chromium. But the imperm wire
within that force field that had been flame a moment before, was
reflecting _all_ light.

He had cut the wire with a pair of shears and it had still hung,
unsupported, in the air, unchanging within the shimmer that constituted
something no man had ever seen before.

"You can't put energy in," said Page, talking to himself, chewing the
bit of his pipe. "You can't take energy out. It's still as hot as it
was at the moment the change came. But it can't radiate any of that
heat. It can't radiate any kind of energy."

Why, even the wire was reflective, so that it couldn't absorb energy and
thus disturb the balance that existed within that bit of space. Not only
energy itself was preserved, but the very form of energy.

But why? That was the question that hammered at him. Why? Before he
could go ahead, he had to know why.

Perhaps the verging of the field toward Field 349? Somewhere in between
those two fields of force, somewhere within that almost non-existent
borderline which separated them, he might find the secret.

Rising to his feet, he knocked out his pipe.

"Harry," he announced, "we have work to do."

Smoke drooled from Wilson's nostrils.

"Yeah," he said.

Page had a sudden urge to lash out and hit the man. That eternal
drooling of smoke out of his nostrils, that everlasting cigarette
dangling limply from one corner of his mouth, the shifty eyes, the dirty
fingernails, got on his nerves.

But Wilson was a mechanical genius. His hands were clever despite the
dirty nails. They could fashion pinhead cameras and three-gram
electroscopes or balances capable of measuring the pressure of
electronic impacts. As a laboratory assistant he was unbeatable. If only
he wouldn't answer every statement or question with that nerve-racking
'yeah'!

Page stopped in front of a smaller room, enclosed by heavy quartz.
Inside that room was the great bank of mercury-vapor rectifiers. From
them lashed a blue-green glare that splashed against his face and
shoulders, painting him in angry, garish color. The glass guarded him
from the terrific blast of ultra-violet light that flared from the pool
of shimmering molten metal, a terrible emanation that would have flayed
a man's skin from his body within the space of seconds.

       *       *       *       *       *

The scientist squinted his eyes against the glare. There was something
in it that caught him with a deadly fascination. The personification of
power--the incredibly intense spot of incandescent vapor, the tiny
sphere of blue-green fire, the spinning surge of that shining pool, the
intense glare of ionization.

Power ... the breath of modern mankind, the pulse of progress.

In an adjacent room were the accumulators. Not Interplanetary
accumulators, which he would have had to rent, but ones he had bought
from a small manufacturer who turned out only ten or fifteen thousand a
year ... not enough to bother Interplanetary.

Gregory Manning had made it possible for him to buy those accumulators.
Manning had made many things possible in this little laboratory hidden
deep within the heart of the Sierras, many miles from any other
habitation.

Manning's grandfather, Jackson Manning, had first generated the
curvature field and overcome gravity, had left his grandson a fortune
that approached the five-billion mark. But that had not been all. From
his famous ancestor, Manning had inherited a keen, sharp, scientific
mind. From his mother's father, Anthony Barret, he had gained an astute
business sense. But unlike his maternal grandfather, he had not turned
his attention entirely to business. Old Man Barret had virtually ruled
Wall Street for almost a generation, had become a financial myth linked
with keen business sense, with an uncanny ability to handle men and
money. But his grandson, Gregory Manning, had become known to the world
in a different way. For while he had inherited scientific ability from
one side of the family, financial sense from the other, he likewise had
inherited from some other ancestor--perhaps remote and unknown--a
wanderlust that had taken him to the farthest outposts of the Solar
System.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was Gregory Manning who had financed and headed the rescue expedition
which took the first Pluto flight off that dark icebox of a world when
the exploration ship had crashed. It was he who had piloted home the
winning ship in the Jupiter derby, sending his bulleting craft screaming
around the mighty planet in a time which set a Solar record. It was
Gregory Manning who had entered the Venusian swamps and brought back,
alive, the mystery lizard that had been reported there. And he was the
one who had flown the serum to Mercury when the lives of ten thousand
men depended upon the thrumming engines that drove the shining ship
inward toward the Sun.

Russell Page had known him since college days. They had worked out their
experiments together in the school laboratories, had spent long hours
arguing and wondering ... debating scientific theories. Both had loved
the same girl, both had lost her, and together they had been bitter over
it ... drowning their bitterness in a three-day drunk that made campus
history.

After graduation Gregory Manning had gone on to world fame, had roamed
over the face of every planet except Jupiter and Saturn, had visited
every inhabited moon, had climbed Lunar mountains, penetrated Venusian
swamps, crossed Martian deserts, driven by a need to see and experience
that would not let him rest. Russell Page had sunk into obscurity, had
buried himself in scientific research, coming more and more to aim his
effort at the discovery of a new source of power ... power that would be
cheap, that would destroy the threat of Interplanetary dictatorship.

Page turned away from the rectifier room.

"Maybe I'll have something to show Greg soon," he told himself. "Maybe,
after all these years...."

       *       *       *       *       *

Forty minutes after Page put through the call to Chicago, Gregory
Manning arrived. The scientist, watching for him from the tiny lawn that
surrounded the combined home and laboratory, saw his plane bullet into
sight, scream down toward the little field and make a perfect landing.

Hurrying toward the plane as Gregory stepped out of it, Russell noted
that his friend looked the same as ever, though it had been a year or
more since he had seen him. The thing that was discomfiting about Greg
was his apparently enduring youthfulness.

He was clad in jodhpurs and boots and an old tweed coat, with a
brilliant blue stock at his throat. He waved a hand in greeting and
hurried forward. Russ heard the grating of his boots across the gravel
of the walk.

Greg's face was bleak; it always was. A clean, smooth face, hard, with
something stern about the eyes.

His grip almost crushed Russ's hand, but his tone was crisp. "You
sounded excited, Russ."

"I have a right to be," said the scientist. "I think I have found
something at last."

"Atomic power?" asked Manning. There was no flutter of excitement in his
voice, just a little hardening of the lines about his eyes, a little
tensing of the muscles in his cheeks.

Russ shook his head. "Not atomic energy. If it's anything, it's material
energy, the secret of the energy of matter."

They halted before two lawn chairs.

"Let's sit down here," invited Russ. "I can tell it to you out here,
show it to you afterward. It isn't often I can be outdoors."

"It is a fine place," said Greg. "I can smell the pines."

The laboratory perched on a ledge of rugged rock, nearly 7,000 feet
above sea level. Before them the land swept down in jagged ruggedness
to a valley far below, where a stream flashed in the noonday sun. Beyond
climbed pine-clad slopes and far in the distance gleamed shimmering
spires of snow-capped peaks.

From his leather jacket Russ hauled forth his pipe and tobacco, lighted
up.

"It was this way," he said. Leaning back comfortably he outlined the
first experiment. Manning listened intently.

"Now comes the funny part," Russ added. "I had hopes before, but I
believe this is what put me on the right track. I took a metal rod, a
welding rod, you know. I pushed it into that solidified force field, if
that is what you'd call it ... although that doesn't describe it. The
rod went in. Took a lot of pushing, but it went in. And though the field
seemed entirely transparent, you couldn't see the rod, even after I had
pushed enough of it in so it should have come out the other side. It was
as if it hadn't entered the sphere of force at all. As if I were just
telescoping the rod and its density were increasing as I pushed, like
pushing it back into itself, but that, of course, wouldn't have been
possible."

He paused and puffed at his pipe, his eyes fixed on the snowy peaks far
in the purple distance. Manning waited.

"Finally the rod came out," Russ went on. "Mind you, it came out, even
after I would have sworn, if I had relied alone upon my eyes, that it
hadn't entered the sphere at all. _But it came out ninety degrees
removed from its point of entry!_"

"Wait a second," said Manning. "This doesn't check. Did you do it more
than once?"

"I did it a dozen times and the results were the same each time. But you
haven't heard the half of it. When I pulled that rod out--yes, I could
pull it out--it was a good two inches shorter than when I had pushed it
in. I couldn't believe that part of it. It was even harder to believe
than that the rod should come out ninety degrees from its point of
entry. I measured the rods after that and made sure. Kept an accurate
record. Every single one of them lost approximately two inches by being
shoved into the sphere. Every single one of them repeated the phenomenon
of curving within the sphere to come out somewhere else than where I had
inserted them."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Any explanation of it?" asked Manning, and now there was a cold chill
of excitement in his voice.

"Theories, no real explanations. Remember that you can't see the rod
after you push it into the sphere. It's just as if it isn't there.
Well, maybe it isn't. You can't disturb anything within that sphere or
you'd change the sum of potential-kinetic-pressure energies within it.
The sphere seems dedicated to that one thing ... it cannot change. If
the rod struck the imperm wire within the field, it would press the wire
down, would use up energy, decrease the potential energy. So the rod
simply had to miss it somehow. I believe it _moved into some higher
plane of existence and went around_. And in doing that it had to turn so
many corners, so many fourth-dimensional corners, that the length was
used up. Or maybe it was increased in density. I'm not sure. Perhaps no
one will ever know."

"Why didn't you tell me about this sooner?" demanded Manning. "I should
have been out here helping you. Maybe I wouldn't be much good, but I
might have helped."

"You'll have your chance," Russ told him. "We're just starting. I wanted
to be sure I had something before I troubled you. I tried other things
with that first sphere. I found that metal pushed through the sphere
will conduct an electrical current, which is pretty definite proof that
the metal isn't within the sphere at all. Glass can be forced through it
without breaking. Not flexible glass, but rods of plain old brittle
glass. It turns without breaking, and it also loses some of its length.
Water can be forced through a tube inserted in the sphere, but only when
terrific pressure is applied. What that proves I can't even begin to
guess."

"You said you experimented on the first sphere," said Manning. "Have you
made others?"

Russ rose from his chair.

"Come on in, Greg," he said, and there was a grin on his face. "I have
something you'll have to see to appreciate."

       *       *       *       *       *

The apparatus was heavier and larger than the first in which Russ had
created the sphere of energy. Fed by a powerful accumulator battery,
five power leads were aimed at it, centered in the space between four
great copper blocks.

Russ's hand went out to the switch that controlled the power. Suddenly
the power beams flamed, changed from a dull glow into an intense, almost
intolerable brilliance. A dull grumble of power climbed up to a steady
wail.

The beams had changed color, were bluish now, the typical color of
ionized air. They were just power beams, meeting at a common center, but
somehow they were queer, too, for though they were capable of slashing
far out into space, they were stopped dead. Their might was pouring into
a common center and going no farther. A splash of intensely glowing
light rested over them, then began to rotate slowly as a motor somewhere
hummed softly, cutting through the mad roar and rumble of power that
surged through the laboratory.

The glowing light was spinning more swiftly now. A rotating field was
being established. The power beams began to wink, falling and rising in
intensity. The sphere seemed to grow, almost filling the space between
the copper blocks. It touched one and rebounded slightly toward another.
It extended, increased slightly. A terrible screaming ripped through the
room, drowning out the titanic din as the spinning sphere came in
contact with the copper blocks, as force and metal resulted in weird
friction.

With a shocking wrench the beams went dead, the scream cut off, the roar
was gone. A terrifying silence fell upon the room as soon as the
suddenly thunking relays opened automatically.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sphere was gone! In its place was a tenuous refraction that told
where it had been. That and a thin layer of perfectly reflective
copper ... colorless now, but Manning knew it was copper, for it
represented the continuation of the great copper blocks.

His mind felt as if it were racing in neutral, getting nowhere. Within
that sphere was the total energy that had been poured out by five
gigantic beams, turned on full, for almost a minute's time. Compressed
energy! Energy enough to blast these mountains down to the primal rock
were it released instantly. Energy trapped and held by virtue of some
peculiarity of that little borderline between Force Fields 348 and 349.

Russ walked across the room to a small electric truck with rubber
caterpillar treads, driven by a bank of portable accumulators.
Skillfully the scientist maneuvered it over to the other side of the
room, picked up a steel bar four inches in diameter and five feet long.
Holding it by the handler's magnetic crane, he fixed it firmly in the
armlike jaws on the front of the machine, then moved the machine into a
position straddling the sphere of force.

With smashing momentum the iron jaws thrust downward, driving the steel
bar into the sphere. There was a groaning crash as the handler came to a
halt, shuddering, with only eight inches of the bar buried in the
sphere. The stench of hot insulation filled the room while the electric
motor throbbed, the rubber treads creaked, the machine groaned and
strained, but the bar would go no farther.

Russ shut off the machine and stood back.

"That gives you an idea," he said grimly.

"The trick now," Greg said, "is to break down the field."

Without a word, Russ reached for the power controls. A sudden roar of
thunderous fury and the beams leaped at the sphere ... but this time the
sphere did not materialize again. Again the wrench shuddered through the
laboratory, a wrench that seemed to distort space and time.

Then, as abruptly as it had come, it was gone. But when it ended,
something gigantic and incomprehensibly powerful seemed to rush
soundlessly by ... something that was felt and sensed. It was like a
great noiseless, breathless wind in the dead of night that rushed by
them and through them, all about them in space and died slowly away.

But the vanished steel did not reappear with the disappearance of the
sphere and the draining away of power. Almost grotesquely now, the
handler stood poised above the place where the sphere had been and in
its jaws it held the bar. But the end of the bar, the eight inches that
had been within the sphere, was gone. It had been sliced off so sharply
that it left a highly reflective concave mirror on the severed surface.

"Where is it?" demanded Manning. "In that higher dimension?"

Russ shook his head. "You noticed that rushing sensation? That may have
been the energy of matter rushing into some other space. It may be the
key to the energy of matter!"

Gregory Manning stared at the bar. "I'm staying with you, Russ. I'm
seeing this thing through."

"I knew you would," said Russ.

Triumph flamed briefly in Manning's eyes. "And when we finish, we'll
have something that will break Interplanetary. We'll smash their
stranglehold on the Solar System." He stopped and looked at Page. "Lord,
Russ," he whispered, "do you realize what we'll have?"

"I think I do, Greg," the scientist answered soberly. "Material energy
engines. Power so cheap that you won't be able to give it away. More
power than anybody could ever need."




_CHAPTER THREE_


Russ hunched over the keyboard set in the control room of the _Comet_
and stared down at the keys. The equation was set and ready. All he had
to do was tap that key and they would know, beyond all argument, whether
or not they had dipped into the awful heart of material energy; whether,
finally, they held in their grasp the key to the release of energy that
would give the System power to spare.

