In the small room shown at the south side of the laboratory is placed a
powerful electric fan which draws the air from above the floor of the
calorimeter laboratory, draws it over brine coils, and sends it out into
a large duct suspended on the ceiling of the laboratory. This duct has a
number of openings, each of which can be controlled by a valve, and an
unlimited supply of cold air can be directed to any portion of the
calorimeter room at will. To provide for more continuous operation and
for more exact temperature control, a thermostat has been placed in the
duct and is so constructed as to operate some reheater coils beneath the
brine-coils in the refrigerating room. This thermostat is set at 60 deg.
F., and when the temperature of the air in the duct falls below this
point, the reheater system is automatically opened or closed. The
thermostat can be set at any point desired. Up to the present time it has
been unnecessary to utilize this special appliance, as the control by
hand regulation has been most satisfactory.

Two vertical sections through the refrigerating coils are shown in fig.
6. Section A-B shows the entrance near the floor of the calorimeter
room. The air is drawn down over the coils, passes through the blower,
and is forced back again to the top of the calorimeter room into the
large duct. If outdoor air is desired, a special duct can be connected
with the system so as to furnish outdoor air to the chamber. This has
not as yet been used. Section C-D shows the fan and gives a section
through the reheater. The brine coils, 400 meters long, are in
triplicate. If one set becomes covered with moisture and is somewhat
inefficient, this can be shut off and the other two used. When the
frozen moisture melts and drops off, the single coil can be used again.
It has been found that the system so installed is most readily
controlled.

The degree of refrigeration is varied in two ways: (1) the area of brine
coils can be increased or decreased by using one, two, or all three of
the coils; or (2) the amount of air passing over the cooling pipes may
be varied by changing the speed of the blower. In practice substantially
all of the regulation is effected by varying the position of the
controlling lever on the regulating rheostat. The apparatus functionates
perfectly and the calorimeter room can be held at 20 deg. C. day in and
day out, whether the temperature outdoors is 40 deg. below or 100 deg.
above 0 deg. F.

It can be seen, also, that this system provides a very satisfactory
regulation of the humidity, for as the air passes over the brine coils
the moisture is in large part frozen out. As yet, no hygrometric study
has been made of the air conditions over a long period, but the
apparatus is sufficiently efficient to insure thorough electrical
insulation and absence of leakage in the intricate electrical
connections on the calorimeters.

The calorimeters employ the thermo-electric element with its low
potential and a D'Arsonval galvanometer of high sensibility, and in
close proximity it is necessary to use the 110-volt current for heating,
consequently the highest degree of insulation is necessary to prevent
disturbing leakage of current.

The respiration calorimeter laboratory is so large, the number of
assistants in the room at any time is (relatively speaking) so small,
seldom exceeding ten, and the humidity and temperature are so very
thoroughly controlled, that as yet it has been entirely unnecessary to
utilize even the relatively small amount of indirect ventilation
provided in the original plans.

During the greater part of the winter it is necessary to use only one of
the thermostats and the radiators connected with the other can be shut
off, since each radiator can be independently closed by the valves on
the steam supply and return which go through the floor to the basement.
The temperature control of this room is therefore very satisfactory and
economical.

It is not necessary here to go into the advantages of temperature
control of the working rooms during the summer months. Every one seems
to be thoroughly convinced that it is necessary to heat rooms in the
winter, but our experience thus far has shown that it is no less
important to cool the laboratory and control the temperature and
moisture during the summer months, as by this means both the efficiency
and endurance of the assistants, to say nothing of the accuracy of the
scientific measurements, are very greatly increased. Arduous scientific
observations that would be wholly impossible in a room without
temperature control can be carried on in this room during the warmest
weather.

FOOTNOTES:

[4] As this report goes to press, this calorimeter is well on the way to
completion.




THE CALORIMETER.


In describing this apparatus, for the sake of clearness, the
calorimetric features will be considered before the appliances for the
determination of the respiratory products.


FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF THE APPARATUS.

The measurements of heat eliminated by man, as made by this apparatus,
are based upon the fact that the subject is inclosed in a heat-proof
chamber through which a current of cold water is constantly passing. The
amount of water, the flow of which, for the sake of accuracy, is kept at
a constant rate, is carefully weighed. The temperatures of the water
entering and leaving the chamber are accurately recorded at frequent
intervals. The walls of the chamber are held adiabatic, thus preventing
a gain or loss of heat by arbitrarily heating or cooling the outer metal
walls, and the withdrawal of heat by the water-current is so controlled,
by varying the temperature of the ingoing water, that the heat brought
away from the calorimeter is exactly equal in amount to the heat
eliminated by radiation and conduction by the subject, thus maintaining
a constant temperature inside of the chamber. The latent heat of the
water vaporized is determined by measuring directly the water vapor in
the ventilating air-current.

In the construction of the new calorimeters a further and fundamental
change in construction has been made in that all the thermal junctions,
heating wires, and cooling pipes have been attached directly to the zinc
wall of the calorimeter, leaving the outer insulating panels free from
incumbrances, so that they can be removed readily and practically all
parts inspected whenever desired without necessitating complete
dismantling of the apparatus. This arrangement is possible except in
those instances where connections pass clear through from the interior
of the chamber to the outside, namely, the food-aperture, air-pipes,
water-pipes, electrical connections, and tubes for connections with
pneumograph and stethoscope; but the apparatus is so arranged as to have
all of these openings in one part of the calorimeter. It is possible,
therefore, to remove all of the outer sections of the calorimeter with
the exception of panels on the east side.

This fundamental change in construction has proven highly advantageous.
It does away with the necessity of rolling the calorimeter out of its
protecting insulating house and minimizes the delay and expense
incidental to repairs or modifications. As the calorimeter is now
constructed, it is possible to get at all parts of it from the outside,
with the exception of one small fixed panel through which the above
connections are passed. This panel, however, is made as narrow as
possible, so that practically all changes can be made by taking out the
adjacent panels.


THE CALORIMETER CHAMBER.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.--Horizontal cross-section of chair calorimeter,
showing cross-section of copper wall at A, zinc wall at B, hair-felt at
E, and asbestos outer wall at F; also cross-section of all upright
channels in the steel construction. At the right is the location of the
ingoing and outgoing water and the thermometers. At C is shown the food
aperture, and D is a gasket separating the two parts. The ingoing and
outcoming air-pipes are shown at the right inside the copper wall. The
telephone is shown at the left, and in the center of the drawing is the
chair with its foot-rest, G. In dotted line is shown the opening where
the man enters.]

[Illustration: FIG. 8.--Vertical cross-section of chair calorimeter,
showing part of rear of calorimeter and structural-steel frame. N,
cross-section of bottom horizontal channel supporting asbestos floor J;
H, H, upright channels (at the right is a side upright channel and to
the left of this is an upright rear channel); M horizontal 8-inch
channel supporting calorimeter; Zn, zinc wall; Cu, copper wall; J,
insulating asbestos.]

The respiration chamber used in Middletown, Connecticut, was designed to
permit of the greatest latitude in the nature of the experiments to be
made with it. As a result, it was found at the end of a number of years
of experimenting that this particular size of chamber was somewhat too
small for the most satisfactory experiments during muscular work and, on
the other hand, somewhat too large for the best results during so-called
rest experiments. In the earlier experiments, where no attempt was made
to determine the consumption of oxygen, these disadvantages were not so
apparent, as carbon dioxide could be determined with very great
accuracy; but with the attempts to measure the oxygen it was found that
the large volume of residual air inside the chamber, amounting to some
4,500 liters, made possible very considerable errors in this
determination, for, obviously, the subject could draw upon the oxygen
residual in the air of the chamber, nearly 1,000 liters, as well as upon
the oxygen furnished from outside sources. The result was that a very
careful analysis of the residual air must be made frequently in order to
insure that the increase or decrease in the amount of oxygen residual in
the air of the chamber was known accurately at the end of each period.
Analysis of this large volume of air could be made with considerable
accuracy, but in order to calculate the exact total of oxygen residual
in the air it was necessary to know the total volume of air inside the
chamber under standard conditions. This necessitated, therefore, a
careful measurement of temperature and pressure, and while the
barometric pressure could be measured with a high degree of accuracy,
it was found to be very difficult to determine exactly the average
temperature of so large a mass of air. The difficulties attending this
measurement and experiments upon this point are discussed in detail
elsewhere.[5] Consequently, as a result of this experience, in planning
the calorimeters for the Nutrition Laboratory it was decided to design
them for special types of experiments. The first calorimeter to be
constructed was one which would have general use in experiments during
rest and, indeed, during experiments with the subject sitting quietly in
the chair.

[Illustration: FIG. 9.--Vertical cross-section of chair calorimeter from
front to back, showing structural steel supporting the calorimeter and
the large balance above for weighing the subject inside the calorimeter.
The chair, method of suspension, and apparatus for raising and lowering
are shown. Part of the heat-absorbers is shown, and their general
direction. The ingoing and outgoing air-pipes and direction of
ventilation are also indicated. The positions of the food-aperture and
wire mat and asbestos support are seen. Surrounding the calorimeter are
the asbestos outside and hair-felt lining.]

It may well be asked why the first calorimeter was not constructed of
such a type as to permit the subject assuming a position on a couch or
sofa, such as is used by Zuntz and his collaborators in their research
on the respiratory exchange, or the position of complete muscular rest
introduced by Johansson and his associates. While the body positions
maintained by Zuntz and Johansson may be the best positions for
experiments of short duration, it was found, as a result of a large
number of experiments, that subjects could be more comfortable and quiet
for periods of from 6 to 8 hours by sitting, somewhat inclined, in a
comfortable arm-chair, provided with a foot-rest. With this in mind the
first calorimeter was constructed so as to hold an arm-chair with a
foot-rest so adjusted that the air-space between the body of the subject
and the walls of the chamber could be cut down to the minimum and thus
increase the accuracy of the determination of oxygen. That the volume
has been very materially reduced may be seen from the fact that the
total volume of the first calorimeter to be described is less than 1,400
liters, or about one-third that of the Middletown apparatus.


GENERAL CONSTRUCTION.

A horizontal cross-section of the apparatus is shown in fig. 7, and a
vertical cross-section facing the front is given in fig. 8. Other
details of structural steel are seen in fig. 9.

In constructing the new chambers, the earlier wood construction, with
its tendency to warp and its general non-rigidity, was avoided by the
use of structural steel, and hence in this calorimeter no use whatever
is made of wood other than the wood of the chair.

To avoid temperature fluctuations due to possible local stratification
of the air in the laboratory, the calorimeter is constructed so as to be
practically suspended in the air, there being a large air-space of some
76 centimeters between the lowest point of the calorimeter and the
floor, and the top of the calorimeter is some 212 centimeters below the
ceiling of the room. Four upright structural-steel channels (4-inch)
were bolted through the floor, so as to secure great rigidity, and were
tied together at the top with structural steel. As a solid base for the
calorimeter chamber two 3-inch channels were placed parallel to each
other 70 centimeters from the floor, joined to these uprights. Upon
these two 3-inch channels the calorimeter proper was constructed. The
steel used for the most part in the skeleton of the apparatus is
standard 2-1/2-inch channel. This steel frame and its support are shown
in fig. 10, before any of the copper lining was put into position. The
main 4-inch channels upon which the calorimeter is supported, the
tie-rods and turn-buckles anchoring the framework to the ceiling, the
I-beam construction at the top upon which is subsequently installed the
large balance for weighing the man, the series of small channels set on
edge upon which the asbestos floor is laid, and the upright row of
channel ribs are all clearly shown.

[Illustration: FIG. 10

Photograph of framework of chair calorimeter. In the photograph are
shown four upright channels and the channels at the top for supporting
the calorimeter. The smaller upright 2-1/2 inch channels and angles are
shown inside of this frame. In the lower part of the figure is seen the
asbestos board for the bottom of the calorimeter and underneath this a
sheet of zinc.]

[Illustration: FIG. 11

Photograph of portion of framework and copper shell. The finished copper
shell is seen in position with some of the thermal junction thimbles
soldered into it. A portion of the food aperture and the four brass
ferrules for conducting the water pipes and air pipes are shown. A
section of the zinc outside is shown in the lower part of the figure.]

A photograph taken subsequently, showing the inner copper lining in
position, is given in fig. 11.

The floor of the chamber is supported by 7 pieces of 2-1/2-inch channel
(N, N, N, fig. 8), laid on top and bolted to the two 3-inch channels (M,
fig. 8). On top of these is placed a sheet of so-called asbestos lumber
(J', fig. 8) 9.5 millimeters thick, cut to fit exactly the bottom of the
chamber. Upright 2-1/2-inch channels (H, fig. 8) are bolted to the two
outside channels on the bottom and to the ends of three of the long
channels between in such a manner as to form the skeleton of the walls.
The upper ends of these channels are fastened together by pieces of
piping (P, P, P, fig. 8) with lock-nuts on either side, thus holding the
whole framework in position.

The I-beams and channels used to tie the four upright channels at the
top form a substantial platform upon which is mounted a large balance
(fig. 9). This platform is anchored to the ceiling at four points by tie
rods and turn-buckles, shown in fig. 4. The whole apparatus, therefore,
is extremely rigid and the balance swings freely.

The top of the chamber is somewhat restricted near the edges (fig. 8)
and two lengths of 2-1/2-inch channel support the sides of the opening
through which the subject enters at the top (fig. 7).

Both the front and back lower channels upon which the bottom rests are
extended so as to provide for supports for the outer walls of asbestos
wood, which serve to insulate the calorimeter. Between the channels
beneath the calorimeter floor and the 3-inch channels is placed a sheet
of zinc which forms the outer bottom metallic wall of the chamber.

In order to prevent conduction of heat through the structural steel all
contact between the inner copper wall and the steel is avoided by having
strips of asbestos lumber placed between the steel and copper. These are
shown as J in fig. 8 and fig. 12. A sheet of asbestos lumber beneath the
copper bottom likewise serves this purpose and also serves to give a
solid foundation for the floor. The supporting channels are placed near
enough together to reinforce fully the sheet of asbestos lumber and
enable it to support solidly the weight of the man. The extra strain on
the floor due to tilting back a chair and thus throwing all the weight
on two points was taken into consideration in planning the asbestos and
the reinforcement by the steel channels. The whole forms a very
satisfactory flooring.

_Wall construction and insulation._--The inner wall of the chamber
consists of copper, preferably tinned on both sides, thus aiding in
soldering, and the tinned inner surface makes the chamber somewhat
lighter. Extra large sheets are obtained from the mill, thus reducing to
a minimum the number of seams for soldering, and seams are made tight
only with difficulty. The copper is of standard gage, the so-called
14-ounce copper, weighing 1.1 pounds per square foot or 5.5 kilograms
per square meter. It has a thickness of 0.5 millimeter. The whole
interior of the skeleton frame of the structural steel is lined with
these sheets; fig. 11 shows the copper shell in position.

For the outer metallic wall, zinc, as the less expensive metal, is used.
One sheet of this material perforated with holes for the attachment of
bolts and other appliances is shown in position on the outside of the
wall in fig. 11. The sheet zinc of the floor is obviously put in
position before the channels upon which it rests are laid. The zinc is
obtained in standard size, and is the so-called 9-ounce zinc, or 0.7
pound to the square foot, or 3.5 kilograms to the square meter. The
sheet has a thickness of 0.5 millimeter.

[Illustration: FIG. 12.--Cross-section in detail of walls of
calorimeter, showing zinc and copper walls and asbestos outside (A);
hair-felt lining (B); cross-section of channel iron (H); brass washer
soldered to copper (K); asbestos insulation between channel iron and
copper (J); bolt holding the whole together (I); heating wire (W) and
insulator holding it (F) shown in air-space between zinc and hair-felt;
section of one of the cooling pipes (C) and its brass support (G);
threaded rod (E) fastened into H at one end and passing through asbestos
wall with a nut on the outside; and iron pipe (D) used as spacer between
asbestos and zinc.]

In the cross-section, fig. 7, A represents the copper wall and B the
zinc wall. Surrounding this zinc wall and providing air insulation is a
series of panels constructed of asbestos lumber, very fire-resisting,
rigid, and light. The asbestos lumber used for these outer panels is 6.4
millimeters (0.25 inch) thick. To further aid in heat insulation we have
glued to the inner face of the different panels a patented material
composed of two layers of sheathing-paper inclosing a half-inch of
hair-felt. This material is commonly used in the construction of
refrigerators. This is shown as E in fig. 7, while the outer asbestos
panels are shown as F.

A detail of the construction of the walls, showing in addition the
heating and cooling devices, is given in fig. 12, in which the copper is
shown held firmly to the upright channel H by means of the bolt I,
screwing into a brass or copper disk K soldered to the copper wall. The
bolt I serves the purpose of holding the copper to the upright channel
and likewise by means of a washer under the head of the screw holds the
zinc to the channel. In order to hold the asbestos-lumber panel A with
the hair-felt lining B a threaded rod E is screwed into a tapped hole in
the outer part of the upright channel H. A small piece of brass or iron
tubing, cut to the proper length, is slipped over this rod and the
asbestos lumber held in position by a hexagonal nut with washer on the
threaded rod E. In this manner great rigidity of construction is
secured, and we have two air-spaces corresponding to the dead air-spaces
indicated in fig. 7, the first between the copper and zinc and the
second between the zinc and hair-felt.


PREVENTION OF RADIATION.

As can be seen from these drawings the whole construction of the
apparatus is more or less of the refrigerator type, _i. e._, there is
little opportunity for radiation or conduction of heat. Such a
construction could be multiplied a number of times, giving a greater
number of insulating walls, and perhaps reducing radiation to the
minimum, but for extreme accuracy in calorimetric investigations it is
necessary to insure the absence of radiation, and hence we have retained
the ingenious device of Rosa, by which an attempt is made arbitrarily to
alter the temperature of the zinc wall so that it always follows any
fluctuations in the temperature of the copper wall. To this end it is
necessary to know _first_ that there is a temperature difference between
zinc and copper and, _second_, to have some method for controlling the
temperature of the zinc. Leaving for a moment the question of measuring
the temperature differences between zinc and copper, we can consider
here the methods for controlling the temperature of the zinc wall.

If it is found necessary to warm the zinc wall, a current of electricity
is passed through the resistance wire W, fig. 12. This wire is
maintained approximately in the middle of the air-space between the zinc
wall and hair-felt by winding it around an ordinary porcelain insulator
F, held in position by a threaded rod screwed into a brass disk soldered
to the zinc wall. A nut on the end of the threaded rod holds the
insulator in position. Much difficulty was had in securing a resistance
wire that would at the same time furnish reasonably high resistance and
would not crystallize or become brittle and would not rust. At present
the best results have been obtained by using enameled manganin wire. The
wire used is No. 28 American wire-gage and has resistance of
approximately 1.54 ohms per foot. The total amount of wire used in any
one circuit is equal to a resistance of approximately 92 ohms. This
method of warming the air-space leaves very little to be desired. It can
be instantaneously applied and can be regulated with the greatest ease
and with the greatest degree of refinement.

If, on the other hand, it becomes necessary to cool the air-space next
to the zinc and in turn cool the zinc, we must resort to the use of cold
water, which is allowed to flow through the pipe C suspended in the
air-space between the zinc and hair-felt at approximately the same
distance as is the heating wire. The support of these pipes is
accomplished by placing them in brass hangers G, soldered to the zinc
and provided with an opening in which the pipe rests.

In the early experimenting, it was found impracticable to use piping of
very small size, as otherwise stoppage as a result of sediment could
easily occur. The pipe found best adapted to the purpose was the
so-called standard one-eighth inch brass pipe with an actual internal
diameter of 7 millimeters. The opening of a valve allowed cold water to
flow through this pipe and the considerable mass of water passing
through produced a very noticeable cooling effect. In the attempt to
minimize the cooling effect of the mass of water remaining in the pipe,
provision was made to allow water to drain out of this pipe a few
moments after the valve was closed by a system of check-valves. In
building the new apparatus, use was made of the compressed-air service
in the laboratory to remove the large mass of cold water in the pipe. As
soon as the water-valve was closed and the air-cock opened, the
compressed air blew all of the water out of the tube.

[Illustration: FIG. 13.--Detail of drop-eight feed-valve and arrangement
of outside cooling circuit. The water enters at A, and the flow is
regulated by the needle-valve at left-hand side. Rate of flow can be
seen at end of exit tube just above the union. The water flows out at C
and compressed air is admitted at B, regulated by the pet-cock.]

The best results have been obtained, however, with an entirely new
principle, namely, a few drops of water are continually allowed to pass
into the pipe, together with a steady stream of compressed air. This
cold water is forcibly blown through the pipe, thus cooling to an amount
regulated by the amount of water admitted. Furthermore, the relatively
dry air evaporates some of the water, thereby producing a somewhat
greater cooling effect. By adjusting the flow of water through the pipe
a continuous cooling effect of mild degree may be obtained. While
formerly the air in the space next the zinc wall was either cooled or
heated alternately by opening the water-valve or by passing a current
through the heating coil, at present it is found much more advantageous
to allow a slow flow of air and water through the pipes continuously,
thus having the air-space normally somewhat cooler than is desired. The
effect of this cooling, therefore, is then counterbalanced by passing an
electric current of varying strength through the heating wire. By this
manipulation it is unnecessary that the observer manipulate more than
one instrument, namely, the rheostat, while formerly he had to
manipulate valves, compressed-air cocks, and rheostat. The arrangement
for providing for the amount of compressed air and water is shown in
fig. 13, in which it is seen that a small drop-sight feed-water valve is
attached to the pipe C leading into the dead air-space surrounding the
calorimeter chamber. Compressed air enters at B and the amount entering
can be regulated by the pet-cock. The amount of water admitted is
readily observed by the sight feed-valve. When once adjusted this form
of apparatus produces a relatively constant cooling effect and
facilitates greatly the manipulation of the calorimetric apparatus as a
whole.


THE THERMO-ELECTRIC ELEMENTS.

In order to detect differences in temperature between the copper and
zinc walls, some system for measuring temperature differences between
these walls is essential. For this purpose we have found nothing that is
as practical as the system of iron-German-silver thermo-electric
elements originally introduced in this type of calorimeter by E. B.
Rosa, of the National Bureau of Standards, formerly professor of physics
at Wesleyan University. In these calorimeters the same principle,
therefore, has been applied, and it is necessary here only to give the
details of such changes in the construction of the elements, their
mounting, and their insulation as have been made as a result of
experience in constructing these calorimeters. An element consisting of
four pairs of junctions is shown in place as T-J in fig. 25.

One ever-present difficulty with the older form of element was the
tendency for the German-silver wires to slip out of the slots in which
they had been vigorously crowded in the hard maple spool. In thus
slipping out of the slots they came in contact with the metal thimble in
the zinc wall and thus produced a ground. In constructing the new
elements four pairs of iron-German-silver thermal junctions were made on
essentially the same plan as that previously described,[6] the only
modification being made in the spool. While the ends of the junctions
nearest the copper are exposed to the air so as to take up most rapidly
the temperature of the copper, it is somewhat difficult to expose the
ends of the junctions nearest the zinc and at the same time avoid
short-circuiting. The best procedure is to extend the rock maple spool
which passes clear through the ferule in the zinc wall and cut a wide
slot in the spool so as to expose the junctions to the air nearest the
ferule. By so doing the danger to the unprotected ends of the junctions
is much less. The two lead-wires of German silver can be carried through
the end of the spool and thus allow the insulation to be made much more
satisfactorily. In these calorimeters free use of these thermal
junctions has been made. In the chair calorimeter there are on the top
16 elements consisting of four junctions each, on the rear 18, on the
front 8, and on the bottom 13. The distribution of the elements is made
with due reference to the direction in which the heat is most directly
radiated and conducted from the surface of the body.

While the original iron-German-silver junctions have been retained in
two of these calorimeters for the practical reason that a large number
of these elements had been constructed beforehand, we believe it will be
more advantageous to use the copper-constantin couple, which has a
thermo-electric force of 40 microvolts per degree as against the 25 of
the iron-German-silver couple. It is planned to install the
copper-constantin junctions in the calorimeters now building.


INTERIOR OF THE CALORIMETER.

Since the experiments to be made with this chamber will rarely exceed 6
to 8 hours, there is no provision made for installing a cot bed or other
conveniences which would be necessary for experiments of long duration.
Aside from the arm-chair with the foot-rest suspended from the balance,
there is practically no furniture inside of the chamber, and a shelf or
