
Celino was watching him closely. Raising his cup in salute, he also
drank.

"Good, good. Now eat. Fresh roasted. Pork."

Daoud's fingers, poised over the meat, stopped short. Already made ill
by hunger, by the vile odor of the room in which he had been confined,
and by the wine that made his stomach churn, he felt himself on the
point of vomiting. For nearly twenty years the prohibition against
eating the flesh of pigs had been impressed upon him until the very
thought of pork made him sick. He knew he should have prepared himself
by eating it before he left El Kahira, but he had never found time for
that. So now, a prisoner of the enemy, he faced for the first time the
test of pork.

Celino was watching him with a half smile.

_He would not test me with wine and pig's meat unless he suspected I am
a Muslim._

Daoud's fingers grasped a slice of the hot meat. He tore it in half,
using both his clean right hand and his unclean left as a non-Muslim
would.

He stuffed a slice of pork into his mouth. It had smelled good until he
found out what it was. Now it seemed slimy and tasteless. His stomach
clenched, but he held himself rigid, expressionless. He started to chew,
and found that his mouth was dry. His life might depend on his giving a
convincing imitation of pleasure. He chewed the meat to fragments and,
as though savoring it, swallowed the abomination crumb by crumb.

He realized he was still holding the other scrap of pork in his left
hand. To give himself a respite, he tossed it to the flagstone floor
before Lorenzo's hound.

Unclean to the unclean, he thought.

Scipio looked at Daoud with an almost human look of surprise, then bent
to devour the meat.

"Friday, Scipio," said Celino sharply. "You are forbidden meat."

The dog looked sadly up at Celino, licked its chops, and sat back on its
haunches, leaving the meat untouched. In spite of his predicament, Daoud
laughed.

"You see?" said Celino. "Even a dog can learn to obey the commandments."

Celino gestured to the dog. "All right, Scipio, the bishop of Palermo
gives you a dispensation."

The dog stood and struck at the meat with his long muzzle. It vanished
to the accompaniment of loud gulping sounds.

"He likes it better than you do," Celino said. "You do not act very
hungry for a man who has not eaten all day. Come on, man, fill your
belly."

Realizing that the pork would taste worse as it cooled, Daoud braced
himself and stuffed piece after piece into his mouth, chewing and
swallowing as rapidly as he could.

"And," said Celino, watching him with narrowed eyes, "a dog can be
trained to break the commandments when permitted."

From time to time Daoud threw a scrap to Scipio, grateful for the
hound's help. But as he ate, Daoud noticed that the meat began to taste
better to him, and the juices of his mouth began to flow. The familiar
feeling of sorrow came over him, and he looked around at the white walls
and ceiling, the wooden beams overhead painted blue. In his mind's eye
he saw in their place yellow stone walls and a vaulted ceiling, and
remembered that he had last tasted the flesh of pig at table with his
father and mother.

He wiped his mouth with his sleeve and sat back. "Thank you. I feel
better now."

Celino stood up, took the stale disk of bread, and dropped it to the
floor. Scipio picked it up in his mouth.

"Then have the goodness to accompany me to the Hall of Mars, Messer
David," he said, and turned.

_He shows me that he is not afraid to turn his back_, Daoud thought,
picking up his pack and following Celino. The Hall of Mars, he
remembered, was an indoor exercise hall for Manfred's troops. They
climbed stairs and walked through rooms in which Muslim soldiers were
cleaning and polishing helmets, coats of mail, and weapons. In one room,
men were painting shields. All the shields were yellow and bore the
black two-headed eagle of the Hohenstaufens.

Daoud followed Lorenzo into a very large, bare room with a floor of
polished hardwood. Ropes and chains hung from the walls and the beamed
ceiling. Tall windows cut high up in smooth walls--too high to jump
to--let in afternoon sunlight and fresh air that did not quite dispel a
heavy odor of sweat. Opposite the doorway through which they passed was
another and larger entrance, with double doors. The room was not square;
the walls were of differing lengths and set at angles. Daoud recalled
the octagonal shape of Castello Lucera's central tower.

He reviewed the plan of the castle he had committed to memory in El
Kahira. He was sure that behind the double doors was the great royal
audience hall. The wide doorway would allow troops assembled in the Hall
of Mars to march into the audience chamber for a review.

Daoud noticed a group of Muslim guards lounging in one corner. At
Lorenzo's entrance they touched their hands to their turbans in salute.
Lorenzo responded with the same gesture. Scipio carried the trencher in
his mouth to a corner of the room, where he lay down and began pushing
the hard bread around with his forepaws and, working at it with his
formidable teeth, making loud crunching noises.

Celino led Daoud to the center of the room. He turned suddenly on Daoud.

"Now, spy, you will tell me exactly who you are and exactly where you
come from," he said rapidly. "You will tell me the truth, or you will
die here and now."

Daoud came within a breath of answering, then realized Lorenzo had
spoken in Arabic. Relieved laughter bubbled up toward his throat--he had
not been caught. He choked it down and assumed a puzzled expression.

"I do not understand," Daoud said in Italian. "What tongue are you
speaking, Messer Lorenzo?"

"Liar," said Lorenzo, still in Arabic, his eyes narrowing.

"I understand Italian, Greek, and, of course, the speech of Scythia,"
said Daoud. "If you would question me, speak in one of those tongues."
Daoud sensed that the Sicilian's sudden shifts of mood were calculated.
While his mouth uttered accusations, Celino's eyes watched him with a
calm intelligence that reminded Daoud of an emir examining a
fine-looking horse for hidden flaws.

Daoud saw, at the edge of his vision, that the guards who had been
lounging in the corner of the hall were now in motion. He glanced
quickly left and right. Three men, about fifty paces away, were coming
at him, curved swords drawn. The dog, Scipio, had abandoned the trencher
and risen to his feet, and he, too, was advancing on Daoud, fangs bared.

Lorenzo stepped away from Daoud, still pointing at him.

"Spegni! Kill!"

Tension crackled across Daoud's stomach like a lash. Three swords, and a
dog that looked capable of killing a man. None of the weapons he had
hidden on him would do for this. He slung his pack toward the wall
behind him, leaving both hands free.

He half turned, to keep Lorenzo in sight while watching the advancing
men. The Sicilian had a long dagger in a scabbard hung by his right
side, but he did not draw it.

Facing the three swords, Daoud had not yet raised his hands. But his
legs tensed. He bent at the knees, shifted his weight to the balls of
his feet.

He whirled and sprang at Lorenzo. The Sicilian jumped backward, and
Daoud could hear behind him the pounding of booted feet on the wooden
floor. The dog barked furiously.

Daoud grappled with Lorenzo. The Sicilian grabbed his forearms, trying
to hold him at a distance, and his strength was almost a match for
Daoud's. But Daoud twisted his arms free, drove in, and caught Celino's
neck in the bend of his left arm. He swung him around so that the
Sicilian's body was between himself and the three attacking soldiers.
While Lorenzo stumbled, Daoud plucked the man's dagger out of its
scabbard. It had two sharp edges and came to a diamond-bright point.

Scipio leapt at him, but Daoud shifted Lorenzo between himself and the
hound, and Scipio fell back. His enraged barking was deafening, like the
roar of a lion. His fangs were a row of bone spear-points. He danced
right and left, seeking a way to get past Lorenzo to Daoud.

The joy of battle, the weapon in his hand, made Daoud feel the power
coursing through his arms. But that damned dog had to be stopped. His
teeth were as dangerous to Daoud as the curving blades of the three
Muslim soldiers. Those fangs could rip through his boots, tear the
muscles of his legs, and cripple him. He would prefer death.

Releasing Lorenzo's neck, Daoud gripped Lorenzo's wrist and twisted,
hard and fast. Biting his lip, Lorenzo resisted, but he had to turn and
bend, or the pressure on his arm would break it. Daoud laid the edge of
Lorenzo's dagger against his throat.

"Call off your dog or I cut your throat." Daoud glanced over his
shoulder to make sure no one was behind him.

"By all means cut my throat," Lorenzo flung back at him. "And Scipio
will tear _your_ throat out."

"If the dog jumps at me, I will gut him."

"The devil roast your balls," Lorenzo growled. "Scipio, sit!"

The hound stopped barking and stared at Lorenzo.

"Down, Scipio!" Lorenzo said. "He will not hurt me." To Daoud he said,
"If you do hurt me, you will suffer such things that you will beg us to
kill you."

Scipio reluctantly crouched, murder in his brown eyes and a steady, low
growling issuing from his throat. The three Muslim guards were still
moving forward, far more warily.

Daoud felt strong and able now to deal with these four men, but he could
almost feel the weight of the overwhelming trap he was in. The thick
walls. The thousands of soldiers. It was hopeless. He could fight on
only until he died. And that was not what he had come here for at all.

Daoud stepped back toward the farther doorway, pulling Lorenzo with him.
He glanced over his shoulder to be sure no one was behind him.

"For my part," said Daoud, "I will hurt you till you beg _them_ to put
down their swords. I will start by breaking your arm." He gave the
twisted arm a vicious upward push till he could almost feel the agony of
the tendons. Lorenzo grunted, and Scipio barked angrily. Most men, Daoud
thought, would have screamed aloud at that.

"No matter what you do to me, it will not help you," said Lorenzo.

Three more turbaned Muslim soldiers joined those coming at Daoud. They
spread out in a wide circle, some of them trying to slip around to his
rear.

"Stand where you are, or I'll kill him," Daoud shouted. To show he meant
it, he pressed the knife edge hard against Celino's throat and sliced
with it just enough to draw blood.

"I hope you will enjoy the taste of your own intestines," Lorenzo said.
He dug his boot heels into the wooden floor, trying to slow down Daoud's
effort to drag him to the door. Daoud pushed up harder on his arm to
make him move faster.

Daoud felt no fear of death, and he would not let them take him prisoner
to torture him. He would die fighting. And go straight to paradise.

But how foolish all this was. A waste of his own life and the lives he
would take with him. And many of those he would kill were Muslims, like
himself.

"You must know that you will be the first to die here," he said. "And
believe me I will take many of your men with me. I may even manage to
kill your precious dog. I did not come here to fight with King Manfred's
men. Why are you doing this?"

Celino, who had been struggling against Daoud, now relaxed and turned
his head. "You are too dangerous to live."

"Dangerous to whom?"

"To me," said a deep voice behind Daoud.




III


Daoud turned, dragging Celino. A blond man stood, hands on hips, eyeing
him with a faint smile. One of the big doors leading into the royal
audience chamber was slightly ajar. Daoud was angry at himself for
letting someone slip up behind him unnoticed.

"Sire, get back!" Lorenzo shouted.

_Sire._ Daoud knew at once who this was. The same height as Lorenzo, as
Daoud now saw, the man had the very broad shoulders Christian knights
developed from wielding their huge two-handed swords. Daoud guessed his
age at a little over thirty. His hair, so blond it was almost silver,
hung in soft waves below his ears, curling at the ends. His silver-blond
mustache was carefully trimmed. His eyelids crinkled with amusement. He
wore a tunic of lime-colored silk under a short forest-green cloak
trimmed with white fur. His hose and boots were also shades of green.
From a chain around his neck hung a five-pointed silver star with a
spherical ruby in its center. In every point he fit the description
Daoud had been given.

The despair Daoud had been feeling a moment before gave way to a
profound relief. It had seemed that everything stood in the way of his
meeting this man, and now at last they were face-to-face.

"Sire," Daoud said in Italian, "I know who you are, and you must know
who I am."

"I do indeed," said Manfred von Hohenstaufen, still smiling. "Please
release Messer Lorenzo."

Daoud hesitated only a moment. But if Manfred allowed Lorenzo to hurt
him now, the mission was a failure anyway. Tensed for attack, he let go
of Lorenzo, who sprang away.

In an instant the Sicilian had taken a curving Islamic sword from a
soldier.

"Sire, at least move back from him," Lorenzo said. "You know what we are
dealing with here."

"Quiet, Lorenzo," snapped Manfred. "What we are dealing with is a
peddler from some misty land beyond the Black Sea who happens to be
infernally nimble. That is all."

Daoud was pleased to hear Manfred go along with his disguise. He relaxed
a bit and eyed the king of southern Italy and Sicily. A splendid-looking
man with a charm that Daoud felt after only a moment's acquaintance.

"Will the peddler be so kind as to return my dagger?" Lorenzo asked with
heavy irony. "This side of the Black Sea it is considered discourteous
to stand in the king's presence holding a naked weapon."

"Of course," said Daoud, holding the dagger by its guard and handing it
hilt-first to Lorenzo, who in turn gave the Saracen soldier back his
sword.

Daoud was glad he had not had to kill Lorenzo. The Sicilian, like his
master, Manfred, was clearly a man above the common run. His behavior
toward Daoud so far had been a series of clever pretenses. Indeed, Daoud
was sure he had not gotten to the bottom of Lorenzo yet.

"I thank you for entertaining us with this display of your fighting
skills, Messer David," said King Manfred. "Now let us talk of the silk
trade. Join us, Lorenzo."

Manfred led the way into the audience chamber beyond the Hall of Mars.
Walking beside Daoud, Celino snapped his fingers at Scipio. The big gray
hound rose and followed, casting a hostile look at Daoud.

_Why did they try to kill me?_

In the audience hall, marble pillars supported a vaulted ceiling pierced
by circular glazed windows. A dozen or more men and women stood around,
staring at Daoud. His glance quickly took in the feathered caps of the
men, the pale rose and violet gowns of the women, and the gilded nets
that held their hair.

He tried not to stare at the women, whose faces were bare in the manner
of unbelievers. But they were all, he noted, beautiful in varying
degrees. Several had striking blond hair and blue eyes. Though it was
his own coloring, he was not used to seeing fair women, and his
heartbeat quickened.

But the gaze of a darker woman met his. Her amber-colored eyes seemed to
burn. Her nose was small, the nostrils flaring, her lips full and dark
red. The face was carefully without expression, revealing as little as
if it were indeed covered with a veil.

The dark woman's black hair was coiled on top of her head in braids
intertwined with ropes of pearls. Her scarlet gown was decorated with
long strips of satin embroidered in floral designs. Over her narrow
shoulders she wore a shawl of flame-colored silk. Having been to
Constantinople, Daoud recognized her style of dress as Byzantine. She
made the other women of Manfred's court look like barbarians.

She held his gaze steadily. He bowed his head courteously, and she
responded with a faint nod. Then he was past her.

Standing on a dais at the end of the hall was a large chair of black
wood with painted panels; to the left of the dais sat a small group of
purple-robed men holding string and wind instruments. On the right was a
small doorway. A servant leapt to fling open the door for Manfred, who
strode briskly toward it, tossing pleasantries to his courtiers.

The door led through a series of rooms where clerks wrote busily, and
Daoud noticed with surprise that they went right on scribbling as their
king walked through. Obviously Manfred preferred their work to their
homage.

Daoud sensed that their path was taking them on a circuit of the great
eight-sided structure. They passed through a small kitchen where bakers
were preparing fruit pastries. Manfred plucked a freshly baked cherry
tart from a tray, bit into it, and nodded to the bowing cook.

To his surprise, Daoud noticed a small figure in one corner, the little
bent man who had earlier looked on him with pity. The dwarf lay curled
up on his side with closed eyes on his empty firewood cart. Not a bad
occupation, Daoud thought, supplying firewood to the king's pastry
kitchen.

Beyond the kitchen the three men entered another great hall, so brightly
lit that Daoud's eyes hurt for a moment. The afternoon sun streamed
through arched windows of white glass set, as in the Hall of Mars, high
in the walls. The walls were lined with shelves loaded with books and
compartments filled with scrolls. Walkways at three levels ran around
the walls, and ladders were spaced along them. Men in long gray tunics
browsed at the shelves or sat at tables in the center of the room
reading books and scrolls and making notes on parchment.

A servant opened a wrought-iron grill in the shortest wall of the
library, and the three men stepped out under the sky into an octagonal
space filled with trees and plants, enclosed on all sides by a
colonnaded gallery. In the center of the garden a small fountain played,
topped by a small bronze statue of a naked woman straddling a dolphin,
the water spurting from the dolphin's mouth. Daoud was momentarily
shocked. The most powerful and corrupt emir in Egypt would not dare to
have such a statue where strangers might see it.

Manfred beckoned, and Daoud followed him down a pebble path to the basin
of the fountain. Small dark green fish flickered through the water. The
king seated himself on a marble bench, and the two men stood before him.
At a gesture from Lorenzo, Scipio lay down in the sun beside a bush
bearing dozens of dark-red roses.

The sun gleamed on Manfred's pale hair. "What does your sultan want of
me?" he asked.

"I am ordered to speak openly only to you and your secretary Aziz," said
Daoud, his glance shifting to Lorenzo.

"Ah, you did not know, then, that Aziz is the name Lorenzo Celino uses
when he writes to the Sultan of Cairo for me?"

Lorenzo Celino--Aziz? Daoud turned to Celino and laughed with delighted
surprise.

"You write excellent Arabic. I would never have guessed that you were
not one of us."

Lorenzo accepted Daoud's compliment with a small bow.

"One of _us_?" said Manfred. "And what are you, then, Messere? I see
before me a strapping man, blond enough to be one of my Swabian knights,
yet who claims to come from the Sultan of Cairo. You are no Arab or
Turk."

"Indeed not, Sire," said Daoud. "I am a Mameluke."

"A blond Mameluke." Manfred nodded. "Where are you from, then, Russia or
Circassia?"

Without emotion Daoud told the king of his descent from crusaders and
his capture by the Muslims.

"What a strange world this is," said Manfred. "And when did this happen
to you?"

"Twenty years ago, Sire. For most of those years I have served my lord
Baibars al-Bunduqdari, who is now Sultan of Cairo."

"And you are a Muslim?"

"Of course, Sire."

Manfred stood up and came close to him. "Of course? You say that so
firmly. Do you not remember the Christian teachings of your childhood?"

The question made Daoud angry. _My soul is undivided. King or not, how
dare this infidel question that!_

"God willed that I find the truth, Sire," he said simply.

Manfred shrugged. "It is all the same to me. I have lived among Muslims
all my life."

"May I know, Sire, why your secretary, to whom my master sent me in good
faith, tried to kill me?" Daoud asked.

Manfred turned his back on Daoud and strolled a short distance down the
pebble path. "Lorenzo is neither my secretary nor does he normally
command my gate guards. He performs for me _unusual_ tasks that require
a man of uncommon courage, loyalty, and wit. Such as testing you--first,
by taking you prisoner, then by giving you pork and wine and speaking to
you in Arabic, finally by trying to kill you."

"But I might have killed him."

"I did not realize how much of a risk I was taking," said Lorenzo.

"We did not think Baibars could find anywhere in his empire a man who
could go to the papal court undetected. We hoped to show him his error
and send you back. But you are quite a remarkable man, David."

_Show Baibars his error!_ Manfred might be a brilliant man, but he
evidently underestimated Baibars. Daoud sensed himself feeling a bit
superior and warned himself not to make the same mistake and
underestimate Manfred.

"Perhaps now that you have tested my ability, Sire, you might be more
inclined to help me."

"Help you to do what?" There was a note of irritation in Manfred's
voice. "Your Sultan Baibars has asked me only to help you carry out a
mission in the Papal States. What is your mission?"

Daoud said, "Sire, my master chose not to entrust his plan to writing,
but sent me to tell it to you instead. I am here for one purpose, to
prevent the forming of an alliance between Christians and Tartars."

Manfred looked surprised, and stared intently at Daoud. "Tartars? Those
barbarians who invaded Europe--how long ago, Lorenzo?"

Lorenzo frowned. "Over twenty years, Sire."

Daoud said, "Fifty years ago they were nothing. A scattering of
herdsmen, like the Bedouin. Now they are the most powerful people on
earth."

Manfred nodded. "Yes, I remember now. When they rode into Poland and
Hungary I was just a boy. Everyone was in terror of them. Their emperor
sent letters to all the monarchs of Europe demanding that they
surrender. He contemptuously offered them positions in his court." He
grinned at Daoud. "My father showed me the letter he was sending back.
If Tartar emperor succeeded in conquering Europe, my father said, he
would be well qualified to serve as his falconer."

Daoud inclined his head. "Your family's love of falconry is well known
to your admirers in the lands of Islam. My lord the sultan considers you
an old friend and hopes that you will see fit to help him in his time of
need."

Manfred held out his hands, palms up. "If I can."

"Now the Tartars have fallen upon the lands of Islam," Daoud said. "They
have conquered Persia. They have a hundred thousand mounted warriors in
the field, and allies and auxiliaries. They have leveled our holy city
of Baghdad, destroyed it utterly, and killed every man, woman, and child
who lived there, even the Commander of the Faithful, our caliph himself.
These are no fanciful tales, Sire. I have fought against the Tartars. I
have seen with my own eyes the ashes of Baghdad and the heaps of its
dead."

The scene of desolation arose in his mind as it had so many times
before, the gray plain where a city had been, the unbelievable sight of
a landscape strewn with rotting, headless corpses as far as the eye
could see. To put it out of his mind, he hurried on with what he had to
say.

"Now their armies advance through Syria, threatening the realm of my
lord, the Sultan of Cairo. We have had word that Hulagu Khan, commander
of the Tartar armies in Persia, has sent two high-ranking emissaries to
the pope. They are sailing across the Middle Sea now, from the island of
Cyprus to Venice. Hulagu Khan wants to form an alliance with the
Christian rulers of Europe to attack us from both directions at once,
east and west. Our whole people, our whole Muslim faith, could be
utterly wiped out."

Manfred nodded grimly. "And all of Christian Europe would rejoice at
your destruction. Not I, certainly, but the rest of them. What do you
propose to do about these Tartar emissaries to the pope?"

"For that I will need your help, Sire. I, too, will go to the pope's
court. I understand that he resides at Orvieto, a small town north of
Rome."

"Yes," Lorenzo put in, "and there he will stay. He has not set foot in
Rome since he galloped in to be crowned at Saint Peter's and galloped
out again. He is terrified of the Roman mob. As well he should be, since
most of their leaders are in our pay."

"Trade secrets, Celino," said Manfred, raising a cautioning finger. "So,
you will go to Orvieto. And then?"

"I will present myself at the pope's court as I have here, as David, a
merchant of Trebizond. I will take up residence with--friends--who can
help me reach the ears of men of influence. I will spread stories
throughout Orvieto--true stories--of the horrors the Tartars have
perpetrated everywhere they have gone, of their determination to conquer
the entire world."

Manfred shook his head. "What you plan to do is very dangerous. You've
proven to us that you are a skilled and resourceful man, but still, what
if you are discovered?" He shook his head. "Have you any idea of how
your people are _hated_ in Europe, David? If it were known that I helped
a Muslim spy to steal into the court of the pope, all the kingdoms of
Christendom would turn against me. The pope need but snap his fingers
and I and my little realm would be swept away. No, David. You ask me to
risk too much."

Daoud was momentarily surprised, then angry. He had expected that
Manfred would cooperate with him. If the young king vacillated, Daoud
might have journeyed from Egypt to Italy for nothing.

And then a ripple of fear crept up his spine. If he failed to persuade
Manfred, the Tartars might destroy the world he had come to love and
believe in.

_God, help me to stop them. I must not go back to El Kahira a failure._

He must choose his words with care. He was dealing here with a king, and
one did not argue with kings. Better to ask questions than offer
arguments.

"Does not the pope wish even now to take your throne from you, Sire?" he
said. "How can matters between you and him be any worse?"

Manfred nodded. "True, Pope Urban keeps offering my crown to this prince
and that, claiming that I had no right to inherit it from my father. And
that he had no right to have it in the first place." Manfred bit his
lip, and the light pink of his cheeks reddened. "But only the French are
powerful enough to take it from me. And King Louis of France is kindly
disposed to me and will not permit any of his great barons to make war
on me. I rely on Louis's continued goodwill."

"But the man who wants to join with the Tartars to annihilate Islam is
that same King Louis of France," Daoud said. "France, as you said, is
the only kingdom with the power to help the pope dethrone you. Should
the pope decide against allying with the Tartars, King Louis will
continue to prohibit his subjects from joining the pope's war against
you. Help me, and you come between King Louis and the pope."

"Intrigue requires gold," said Manfred. "Does your master expect me to
pay for your activities?"

"What I have brought with me will pay for all," Daoud replied. He
unbuckled his belt and undid the laces that held his hose tight around
his waist. Celino moved closer, tense, ready in case Daoud should reach
for a weapon. Daoud slipped his fingers into the breeches he wore under
his hose and found the bag tied to the drawstring.

"What is the man doing?" said Manfred with a wondering smile. Celino
shook his head.

Daoud pulled out a bag of heavy red silk, full and round with what it
held. He felt a childlike delight in mystifying the two men.

"Pay me from your royal treasury what this is worth," said Daoud, "and I
shall have gold enough for all I need to do." He pulled apart the mouth
of the silk bag and drew out of it a globe of green fire. He held it out
to Manfred. Celino gasped.

Daoud was gratified at their wonderment.

"Are you not afraid I will steal this from you and dump you in an
unmarked grave?" said Manfred with a bright grin.

"The Hohenstaufen family have been friends of the sultans of Egypt since
your father's day," said Daoud. "We have learned to trust you."

"Just listen to that, Lorenzo," said Manfred. "The Saracens think better
of me than the pope does."

Besides, Daoud thought, Manfred knew that Baibars's arm was long.
Manfred, Daoud was sure, knew that Baibars would not permit anyone, even
a distant head of state, to betray him so flagrantly.

His eyes wide, Manfred extended his palm, and Daoud unhesitatingly
placed the emerald in it. Manfred raised it close to his face, peering
through the dark depths into its glowing heart. The jewel, irregular in
shape but nearly spherical, reflected little spots of pale green light
on his cheeks. He shook his head.

"Green, the color I love best in all the world. The color of hope." He
encircled it with thumb and forefinger. "Look, Lorenzo, I cannot get my
fingers around it. I am amazed that your master is willing to part with
such a wonder. How did he come by it?"

"It has been through many hands, Sire," said Daoud. "It once belonged to
Emir Fakr ad-Din, who commanded the army of Egypt when King Louis
invaded our land."

"To think Baibars let you take this emerald from him, and you came all
this way from Alexandria with it and delivered it to me. And Baibars
trusted you."

"As he trusts you, Sire," Daoud put in quickly.

"_You_ are like a falcon, are you not?" said Manfred, smiling into
Daoud's eyes. "Released to fly far afield for your sultan."

Manfred strode to Daoud suddenly and clapped him on the shoulder. "Let
it be done as your master wishes, then. The trader from Trebizond will
go to Orvieto with my help."

A surge of joy sprang up within Daoud and almost burst past his lips. He
bowed, his heart pounding.

_God be thanked!_

Manfred said, "We must see about turning this jewel of yours into gold
coins. Or smaller jewels. They would be easier to carry than gold."
Manfred looked lovingly at the emerald again, then carefully dropped it
into his belt pouch and smiled at Daoud.

"You should not go alone into the Papal States, David. You may have
studied Europe from afar, but you do not know Italy firsthand. Lorenzo
here shall go with you. I trust Lorenzo to travel far and secretly in my
service, even as your master trusts you."

Celino sighed. Daoud and Celino eyed each other.

Daoud began searching for ways to dissuade Manfred. A short while
earlier he and Celino had been trying to kill each other. And Celino
would be putting Manfred's interests first, not those of Islam.

Obviously aware of his hesitation, Manfred took his arm. "Listen to me,
Mameluke. You will be wise to accept every bit of help that is offered
to you. I have powerful allies in northern Italy, in Florence, Pisa,
Siena, and other cities. But you do not know them and they do not know
you. Lorenzo speaks for me. He knows who the key Ghibellini are in the
north, and they know him. Do not object to taking him with you."

Manfred would not let him go, Daoud realized, unless Celino went with
him. And the argument that Celino could put him in touch with the
Ghibellini of the north was a strong one.

_Lorenzo is perhaps twenty years older than I, but he is quick-witted
and quick on his feet. And, yes, I would rather not go alone. I could
easily make a mistake from ignorance. I am better off with a man like
this to guide me._

A tentative smile played under Celino's grizzled mustache. "My royal
master is determined in this. What do you say?"

Daoud bowed. "I accept. With gratitude. We shall travel this road
together."

"Whatever happens to the two of you," Manfred said, "no one must ever
know that I am involved."

"I guarantee that, Sire," said Celino.

Manfred rubbed the palms of his hands together. "There is one other
person I propose to send with you. She can be a great help to you."

Celino turned quickly to Manfred. "I do not advise it, Sire."

"Why not?" said Manfred. "She will be perfect."

"Because she will not want to go." There was censure in Celino's dark
stare--and a boyish defiance in Manfred's answering look.

"Do not question me," said Manfred. "I have no choice. For her good and
for my own, she must leave here. And she _will_ be useful to you."

Instead of replying, Celino only sighed again.

"A woman?" Daoud was thunderstruck. In El Kahira women left their homes
only to visit other women. He felt anxiety claw at his belly. Any
mistake in planning might wreck the mission and doom him, and Celino, to
a horrible death. And to send a woman to the court of the pope on such a
venture seemed not just a mistake, but utter madness.

"A very beautiful woman," said Manfred, a grin stretching his blond
mustache. "One who has had a lifetime's schooling in intrigue. She is
from Constantinople, and her name is Sophia, which means wisdom in
Greek."

_There are no more treacherous people on this earth than the
Byzantines_, Daoud thought, _and they have ever been enemies of Islam_.

Argument surged up in him, but he saw a hardness in Manfred's eyes that
told him nothing he might say would sway the king. He looked at Celino,
and saw in the dark, mustached face the same reluctant acceptance he had
heard in the sigh.

Whoever this Sophia might be, he would have to take her with him.




IV


Sophia pressed her head back against the pillow and screamed with
pleasure. Her loins dissolved into rippling liquid gold. Her fingers dug
into the man's back and her legs clenched around his hips, trying to
crush him against her.

"Oh--oh--oh--" she moaned. The warmth spread to her toes, her
fingertips, her scalp, filling her with joy. She was so happy that she
wanted to cry.

As the blaze of ekstasia died down, she felt Manfred driving deep inside
her. She felt his hardness, his separateness, as she could not feel it a
moment ago when she was at her peak and they seemed to melt together,
one being.

His rhythm was insistent, inexorable, like a heartbeat. His hands under
her back were tense. He was fighting for his climax.

She delighted in the sight of his massive shoulders overshadowing her.
It was almost like being loved by a god.

Manfred's face was pressed against her shoulder, his open mouth on her
collarbone. She turned toward him and saw the light in his white-gold
hair. She slid one hand up to his hair and stroked it, while with the
other she rubbed his back in a circular motion.

She felt the muscles in his body tighten against her. He drew in a
shuddering breath.

"Yes--yes--good," she whispered, still stroking his hair, still
caressing his back.

