
  94. URANUS' AND NEPTUNE'S RELATIVE POSITIONS                         325

  95. METEORITE                                                        333

  96. METEOR STREAM CROSSING FIELD OF TELESCOPE                        334

  97. DIAGRAM OF DIRECTION OF EARTH'S ORBITAL MOTION                   335

  98. PARABOLIC AND ELLIPTIC ORBITS                                    340

  99. ORBIT OF HALLEY'S COMET                                          341

  100. VARIOUS APPEARANCES OF HALLEY'S COMET WHEN LAST SEEN            342

  101. HEAD OF DONATI'S COMET OF 1858                                  343

  102. COMET                                                           344

  103. ENCKE'S COMET                                                   345

  104. BIELA'S COMET AS LAST SEEN IN TWO PORTIONS                      346

  105. RADIANT POINT PERSPECTIVE                                       348

  106. PRESENT ORBIT OF NOVEMBER METEORS                               349

  107. ORBIT OF NOVEMBER METEORS BEFORE AND AFTER ENCOUNTER
       WITH URANUS                                                     351

  108. THE MERSEY                                                      355

  109. CO-TIDAL LINES, SHOWING THE WAY THE TIDAL WAVE
       REACHES THE BRITISH ISLES FROM THE ATLANTIC                     359

  110. WHIRLING EARTH MODEL                                            364

  111. EARTH AND MOON MODEL                                            365

  112. EARTH AND MOON (EARTH'S ROTATION NEGLECTED)                     366

  113. MAPS SHOWING HOW COMPARATIVELY FREE FROM LAND OBSTRUCTION
       THE OCEAN IN THE SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE IS                         369

  114. SPRING AND NEAP TIDES                                           370

  115. TIDAL CLOCK                                                     371

  116. SIR WILLIAM THOMSON (LORD KELVIN)                               373

  117. TIDE-GAUGE FOR RECORDING LOCAL TIDES                            375

  118. HARMONIC ANALYZER                                               375

  119. TIDE-PREDICTER                                                  376

  120. WEEKLY SHEET OF CURVES                                          377




PIONEERS OF SCIENCE




PART I

_FROM DUSK TO DAYLIGHT_




DATES AND SUMMARY OF FACTS FOR LECTURE I


_Physical Science of the Ancients._ Thales 640 B.C., Anaximander 610
B.C., PYTHAGORAS 600 B.C., Anaxagoras 500 B.C., Eudoxus 400 B.C.,
ARISTOTLE 384 B.C., Aristarchus 300 B.C., ARCHIMEDES 287 B.C.,
Eratosthenes 276 B.C., HIPPARCHUS 160 B.C., Ptolemy 100 A.D.

_Science of the Middle Ages._ Cultivated only among the Arabs; largely
in the forms of astrology, alchemy, and algebra.

_Return of Science to Europe._ Roger Bacon 1240, Leonardo da Vinci 1480,
(Printing 1455), Columbus 1492, Copernicus 1543.

_A sketch of Copernik's life and work._ Born 1473 at Thorn in Poland.
Studied mathematics at Bologna. Became an ecclesiastic. Lived at
Frauenburg near mouth of Vistula. Substituted for the apparent motion of
the heavens the real motion of the earth. Published tables of planetary
motions. Motion still supposed to be in epicycles. Worked out his ideas
for 36 years, and finally dedicated his work to the Pope. Died just as
his book was printed, aged 72, a century before the birth of Newton. A
colossal statue by Thorwaldsen erected at Warsaw in 1830.




PIONEERS OF SCIENCE




LECTURE I

COPERNICUS AND THE MOTION OF THE EARTH


The ordinary run of men live among phenomena of which they know nothing
and care less. They see bodies fall to the earth, they hear sounds, they
kindle fires, they see the heavens roll above them, but of the causes
and inner working of the whole they are ignorant, and with their
ignorance they are content.

"Understand the structure of a soap-bubble?" said a cultivated literary
man whom I know; "I wouldn't cross the street to know it!"

And if this is a prevalent attitude now, what must have been the
attitude in ancient times, when mankind was emerging from savagery, and
when history seems composed of harassments by wars abroad and
revolutions at home? In the most violently disturbed times indeed, those
with which ordinary history is mainly occupied, science is quite
impossible. It needs as its condition, in order to flourish, a fairly
quiet, untroubled state, or else a cloister or university removed from
the din and bustle of the political and commercial world. In such places
it has taken its rise, and in such peaceful places and quiet times true
science will continue to be cultivated.

The great bulk of mankind must always remain, I suppose, more or less
careless of scientific research and scientific result, except in so far
as it affects their modes of locomotion, their health and pleasure, or
their purse.

But among a people hurried and busy and preoccupied, some in the pursuit
of riches, some in the pursuit of pleasure, and some, the majority, in
the struggle for existence, there arise in every generation, here and
there, one or two great souls--men who seem of another age and country,
who look upon the bustle and feverish activity and are not infected by
it, who watch others achieving prizes of riches and pleasure and are not
disturbed, who look on the world and the universe they are born in with
quite other eyes. To them it appears not as a bazaar to buy and to sell
in; not as a ladder to scramble up (or down) helter-skelter without
knowing whither or why; but as a fact--a great and mysterious fact--to
be pondered over, studied, and perchance in some small measure
understood. By the multitude these men were sneered at as eccentric or
feared as supernatural. Their calm, clear, contemplative attitude seemed
either insane or diabolic; and accordingly they have been pitied as
enthusiasts or killed as blasphemers. One of these great souls may have
been a prophet or preacher, and have called to his generation to bethink
them of why and what they were, to struggle less and meditate more, to
search for things of true value and not for dross. Another has been a
poet or musician, and has uttered in words or in song thoughts dimly
possible to many men, but by them unutterable and left inarticulate.
Another has been influenced still more _directly_ by the universe around
him, has felt at times overpowered by the mystery and solemnity of it
all, and has been impelled by a force stronger than himself to study it,
patiently, slowly, diligently; content if he could gather a few crumbs
of the great harvest of knowledge, happy if he could grasp some great
generalization or wide-embracing law, and so in some small measure enter
into the mind and thought of the Designer of all this wondrous frame of
things.

These last have been the men of science, the great and heaven-born men
of science; and they are few. In our own day, amid the throng of
inventions, there are a multitude of small men using the name of science
but working for their own ends, jostling and scrambling just as they
would jostle and scramble in any other trade or profession. These may be
workers, they may and do advance knowledge, but they are never pioneers.
Not to them is it given to open out great tracts of unexplored
territory, or to view the promised land as from a mountain-top. Of them
we shall not speak; we will concern ourselves only with the greatest,
the epoch-making men, to whose life and work we and all who come after
them owe so much. Such a man was Thales. Such was Archimedes,
Hipparchus, Copernicus. Such pre-eminently was Newton.

Now I am not going to attempt a history of science. Such a work in ten
lectures would be absurd. I intend to pick out a few salient names here
and there, and to study these in some detail, rather than by attempting
to deal with too many to lose individuality and distinctness.

We know so little of the great names of antiquity, that they are for
this purpose scarcely suitable. In some departments the science of the
Greeks was remarkable, though it is completely overshadowed by their
philosophy; yet it was largely based on what has proved to be a wrong
method of procedure, viz the introspective and conjectural, rather than
the inductive and experimental methods. They investigated Nature by
studying their own minds, by considering the meanings of words, rather
than by studying things and recording phenomena. This wrong (though by
no means, on the face of it, absurd) method was not pursued exclusively,
else would their science have been valueless, but the influence it had
was such as materially to detract from the value of their speculations
and discoveries. For when truth and falsehood are inextricably woven
into a statement, the truth is as hopelessly hidden as if it had never
been stated, for we have no criterion to distinguish the false from the
true.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--Archimedes.]

Besides this, however, many of their discoveries were ultimately lost to
the world, some, as at Alexandria, by fire--the bigoted work of a
Mohammedan conqueror--some by irruption of barbarians; and all were
buried so long and so completely by the night of the dark ages, that
they had to be rediscovered almost as absolutely and completely as
though they had never been. Some of the names of antiquity we shall have
occasion to refer to; so I have arranged some of them in chronological
order on page 4, and as a representative one I may specially emphasize
Archimedes, one of the greatest men of science there has ever been, and
the father of physics.

The only effective link between the old and the new science is afforded
by the Arabs. The dark ages come as an utter gap in the scientific
history of Europe, and for more than a thousand years there was not a
scientific man of note except in Arabia; and with the Arabs knowledge
was so mixed up with magic and enchantment that one cannot contemplate
it with any degree of satisfaction, and little real progress was made.
In some of the _Waverley Novels_ you can realize the state of matters in
these times; and you know how the only approach to science is through
some Arab sorcerer or astrologer, maintained usually by a monarch, and
consulted upon all great occasions, as the oracles were of old.

In the thirteenth century, however, a really great scientific man
appeared, who may be said to herald the dawn of modern science in
Europe. This man was Roger Bacon. He cannot be said to do more than
herald it, however, for we must wait two hundred years for the next name
of great magnitude; moreover he was isolated, and so far in advance of
his time that he left no followers. His own work suffered from the
prevailing ignorance, for he was persecuted and imprisoned, not for the
commonplace and natural reason that he frightened the Church, but merely
because he was eccentric in his habits and knew too much.

The man I spoke of as coming two hundred years later is Leonardo da
Vinci. True he is best known as an artist, but if you read his works you
will come to the conclusion that he was the most scientific artist who
ever lived. He teaches the laws of perspective (then new), of light and
shade, of colour, of the equilibrium of bodies, and of a multitude of
other matters where science touches on art--not always quite correctly
according to modern ideas, but in beautiful and precise language. For
clear and conscious power, for wide-embracing knowledge and skill,
Leonardo is one of the most remarkable men that ever lived.

About this time the tremendous invention of printing was achieved, and
Columbus unwittingly discovered the New World. The middle of the next
century must be taken as the real dawn of modern science; for the year
1543 marks the publication of the life-work of Copernicus.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--Leonardo da Vinci.]

Nicolas Copernik was his proper name. Copernicus is merely the Latinized
form of it, according to the then prevailing fashion. He was born at
Thorn, in Polish Prussia, in 1473. His father is believed to have been a
German. He graduated at Cracow as doctor in arts and medicine, and was
destined for the ecclesiastical profession. The details of his life are
few; it seems to have been quiet and uneventful, and we know very little
about it. He was instructed in astronomy at Cracow, and learnt
mathematics at Bologna. Thence he went to Rome, where he was made
Professor of Mathematics; and soon afterwards he went into orders. On
his return home, he took charge of the principal church in his native
place, and became a canon. At Frauenburg, near the mouth of the Vistula,
he lived the remainder of his life. We find him reporting on coinage for
the Government, but otherwise he does not appear as having entered into
the life of the times.

He was a quiet, scholarly monk of studious habits, and with a reputation
which drew to him several earnest students, who received _viva voce_
instruction from him; so, in study and meditation, his life passed.

He compiled tables of the planetary motions which were far more correct
than any which had hitherto appeared, and which remained serviceable for
long afterwards. The Ptolemaic system of the heavens, which had been the
orthodox system all through the Christian era, he endeavoured to improve
and simplify by the hypothesis that the sun was the centre of the system
instead of the earth; and the first consequences of this change he
worked out for many years, producing in the end a great book: his one
life-work. This famous work, "De Revolutionibus Orbium Coelestium,"
embodied all his painstaking calculations, applied his new system to
each of the bodies in the solar system in succession, and treated
besides of much other recondite matter. Towards the close of his life it
was put into type. He can scarcely be said to have lived to see it
appear, for he was stricken with paralysis before its completion; but a
printed copy was brought to his bedside and put into his hands, so that
he might just feel it before he died.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--Copernicus.]

That Copernicus was a giant in intellect or power--such as had lived in
the past, and were destined to live in the near future--I see no reason
whatever to believe. He was just a quiet, earnest, patient, and
God-fearing man, a deep student, an unbiassed thinker, although with no
specially brilliant or striking gifts; yet to him it was given to effect
such a revolution in the whole course of man's thoughts as is difficult
to parallel.

You know what the outcome of his work was. It proved--he did not merely
speculate, he proved--that the earth is a planet like the others, and
that it revolves round the sun.

Yes, it can be summed up in a sentence, but what a revelation it
contains. If you have never made an effort to grasp the full
significance of this discovery you will not appreciate it. The doctrine
is very familiar to us now, we have heard it, I suppose, since we were
four years old, but can you realize it? I know it was a long time before
I could. Think of the solid earth, with trees and houses, cities and
countries, mountains and seas--think of the vast tracts of land in Asia,
Africa, and America--and then picture the whole mass spinning like a
top, and rushing along its annual course round the sun at the rate of
nineteen miles every second.

Were we not accustomed to it, the idea would be staggering. No wonder it
was received with incredulity. But the difficulties of the conception
are not only physical, they are still more felt from the speculative and
theological points of view. With this last, indeed, the reconcilement
cannot be considered complete even yet. Theologians do not, indeed, now
_deny_ the fact of the earth's subordination in the scheme of the
universe, but many of them ignore it and pass it by. So soon as the
Church awoke to a perception of the tremendous and revolutionary import
of the new doctrines, it was bound to resist them or be false to its
traditions. For the whole tenor of men's thought must have been changed
had they accepted it. If the earth were not the central and
all-important body in the universe, if the sun and planets and stars
were not attendant and subsidiary lights, but were other worlds larger
and perhaps superior to ours, where was man's place in the universe?
and where were the doctrines they had maintained as irrefragable? I by
no means assert that the new doctrines were really utterly
irreconcilable with the more essential parts of the old dogmas, if only
theologians had had patience and genius enough to consider the matter
calmly. I suppose that in that case they might have reached the amount
of reconciliation at present attained, and not only have left scientific
truth in peace to spread as it could, but might perhaps themselves have
joined the band of earnest students and workers, as so many of the
higher Catholic clergy do at the present day.

But this was too much to expect. Such a revelation was not to be
accepted in a day or in a century--the easiest plan was to treat it as a
heresy, and try to crush it out.

Not in Copernik's life, however, did they perceive the dangerous
tendency of the doctrine--partly because it was buried in a ponderous
and learned treatise not likely to be easily understood; partly,
perhaps, because its propounder was himself an ecclesiastic; mainly
because he was a patient and judicious man, not given to loud or
intolerant assertion, but content to state his views in quiet
conversation, and to let them gently spread for thirty years before he
published them. And, when he did publish them, he used the happy device
of dedicating his great book to the Pope, and a cardinal bore the
expense of printing it. Thus did the Roman Church stand sponsor to a
system of truth against which it was destined in the next century to
hurl its anathemas, and to inflict on its conspicuous adherents torture,
imprisonment, and death.

To realize the change of thought, the utterly new view of the universe,
which the Copernican theory introduced, we must go back to preceding
ages, and try to recall the views which had been held as probable
concerning the form of the earth and the motion of the heavenly bodies.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.--Homeric Cosmogony.]

The earliest recorded notion of the earth is the very natural one that
it is a flat area floating in an illimitable ocean. The sun was a god
who drove his chariot across the heavens once a day; and Anaxagoras was
threatened with death and punished with banishment for teaching that the
sun was only a ball of fire, and that it might perhaps be as big as the
country of Greece. The obvious difficulty as to how the sun got back to
the east again every morning was got over--not by the conjecture that he
went back in the dark, nor by the idea that there was a fresh sun every
day; though, indeed, it was once believed that the moon was created once
a month, and periodically cut up into stars--but by the doctrine that in
the northern part of the earth was a high range of mountains, and that
the sun travelled round on the surface of the sea behind these.
Sometimes, indeed, you find a representation of the sun being rowed
round in a boat. Later on it was perceived to be necessary that the sun
should be able to travel beneath the earth, and so the earth was
supposed to be supported on pillars or on roots, or to be a dome-shaped
body floating in air--much like Dean Swift's island of Laputa. The
elephant and tortoise of the Hindu earth are, no doubt, emblematic or
typical, not literal.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.--Egyptian Symbol of the Universe.

The earth a figure with leaves, the heaven a figure with stars, the
principle of equilibrium and support, the boats of the rising and
setting sun.]

Aristotle, however, taught that the earth must be a sphere, and used all
the orthodox arguments of the present children's geography-books about
the way you see ships at sea, and about lunar eclipses.

To imagine a possible antipodes must, however, have been a tremendous
difficulty in the way of this conception of a sphere, and I scarcely
suppose that any one can at that time have contemplated the possibility
of such upside-down regions being inhabited. I find that intelligent
children invariably feel the greatest difficulty in realizing the
existence of inhabitants on the opposite side of the earth. Stupid
children, like stupid persons in general, will of course believe
anything they are told, and much good may the belief do them; but the
kind of difficulties felt by intelligent and thoughtful children are
most instructive, since it is quite certain that the early philosophers
must have encountered and overcome those very same difficulties by their
own genius.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.--Hindoo Earth.]

However, somehow or other the conception of a spherical earth was
gradually grasped, and the heavenly bodies were perceived all to revolve
round it: some moving regularly, as the stars, all fixed together into
one spherical shell or firmament; some moving irregularly and apparently
anomalously--these irregular bodies were therefore called planets [or
wanderers]. Seven of them were known, viz. Moon, Mercury, Venus, Sun,
Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, and there is little doubt that this number seven,
so suggested, is the origin of the seven days of the week.

     The above order of the ancient planets is that of their supposed
     distance from the earth. Not always, however, are they thus quoted
     by the ancients: sometimes the sun is supposed nearer than Mercury
     or Venus. It has always been known that the moon was the nearest of
     the heavenly bodies; and some rough notion of its distance was
     current. Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn were placed in that order
     because that is the order of their apparent motions, and it was
     natural to suppose that the slowest moving bodies were the furthest
     off.

     The order of the days of the week shows what astrologers considered
     to be the order of the planets; on their system of each successive
     hour of the day being ruled over by the successive planets taken in
     order. The diagram (fig. 7) shows that if the Sun rule the first
