

"In one fell swoop," declared Professor C. Cydwick Ohms, releasing a
thin blue ribbon of pipe-smoke and rocking back on his heels, "--I
intend to solve the greatest problem facing mankind today. Colonizing
the Polar Wastes was a messy and fruitless business. And the Enforced
Birth Control Program couldn't be enforced. Overpopulation still remains
the thorn in our side. Gentlemen--" He paused to look each of the
assembled reporters in the eye. "--there is but _one_ answer."

"Mass annihilation?" quavered a cub reporter.

"Posh, boy! Certainly not!" The professor bristled. "The answer
is--TIME!"

"Time?"

"Exactly," nodded Ohms. With a dramatic flourish he swept aside a red
velvet drape--to reveal a tall structure of gleaming metal. "As
witness!"

"Golly, what's _that_ thing?" queried the cub.

"This _thing_," replied the professor acidly, "--is the C. Cydwick Ohms
Time Door."

"Whillikers, a Time Machine!"

"Not so, not so. _Please_, boy! A Time Machine, in the popular sense,
is impossible. Wild fancy! However--" The professor tapped the dottle
from his pipe. "--by a mathematically precise series of infinite
calculations, I have developed the remarkable C. Cydwick Ohms Time Door.
Open it, take but a single step--and, presto! The Past!"

"But, _where_ in the past, Prof.?"

Ohms smiled easily down at the tense ring of faces. "Gentlemen, beyond
this door lies the sprawling giant of the Southwest--enough land to
absorb Earth's overflow like _that_!" He snapped his fingers. "I speak,
gentlemen, of Texas, 1957!"

"What if the Texans _object_?"

"They have no choice. The Time Door is strictly a one-way passage. I saw
to that. It will be utterly impossible for anyone in 1957 to re-enter
our world of 2057. And now--the Past awaits!"

He tossed aside his professorial robes. Under them Cydwick Ohms wore an
ancient and bizarre costume: black riding boots, highly polished and
trimmed in silver; wool chaps; a wide, jewel-studded belt with an
immense buckle; a brightly checked shirt topped by a blazing red
