
There were five in the delegation--by their collars or robes, a priest,
a rabbi, a lama, a dark-skinned Watusi witchman and a white robed abbess
draped in chaste, flowing white. Automatically, he surveyed them,
checking. The priest's right shoe was twice as broad as his left, the
rabbi's head, beneath the black cap that covered it, was long and thin
as a zucchini squash. The witchman, defiantly bare and black as ebony
from the waist up, had a tiny duplicate of his own handsome head
sprouting from the base of his sternum. The visible deformities of the
lama and abbess were concealed beneath their flowing robes. But they
were there--they had to be there.

Bliss rose as they entered and said, waving a gloved hand at the chairs
on their side of the desk, "Greetings, sirs and madam--please be
seated." And, when they were comfortable, "Now, to what do I owe the
honor of this visit?"

He knew, of course--sometimes he thought he knew more than any man
should be allowed or able to know--but courtesy and custom demanded the
question. It was the witchman who answered. Apparently he was spokesman
for the group.

He said, speaking beautiful Cantabrigian English, "Honorable sir, we
have come as representatives of the religions of the world, not to
protest but in a spirit of enquiry. Our flocks grow increasingly
restive, when they are not leaving us altogether, our influence grows
less. We wish to know what steps, if any, are being taken toward
modification or abrogation of the sterility program. Without hope of
posterity, mankind is lost."

While the others murmured their agreement, Bliss focused his gaze on the
sealed lids of the tiny face sprouting from the Watusi's breastbone. He
wondered if there were eyes behind them, if there were a tongue behind
those tiny clamped lips, and what words such a tongue would utter if it
could speak.

"We are waiting, honorable sir," the spokesman said.

Shaking himself free of the absorption, Bliss glanced at the
teleprompter on his desk. Efficient as ever, Myra had their names there
before him. He said, "Gentle R'hau-chi, I believe a simple exposition
of our situation, and of what programs we are seeking to meet and
mitigate it with, will give you the answers. Not, perhaps, the answers
you seek, but the answers we must accept ..."

Although the reports from World Laboratories changed from day to day, he
knew the speech by heart. For the problem remained. Humanity, like
virtually all other organic life on Earth, was dying. Where it spawned,
it spawned monsters. On three-dimensional vidar rolls, he showed them
live shots of what the laboratories were doing, what they were trying to
do--in the insemination groups, the incubators, the ray-bombardment
chambers, the parthenogenesis bureau.

Studying them, he could see by their expressions, hear by the prayers
they muttered, how shocking these revelations were. It was one thing to
know what was going on--another for them to see for themselves. It was
neither pretty--nor hopeful.

When it was over, the rabbi spoke. He said, in deep, slightly guttural,
vastly impressive intonations, "What about Mars, honorable sir? Have you
reached communication with our brothers and sisters on the red planet?"

Bliss shook his head. He glanced at the alma-calendar at his elbow and
told them, "Mars continues to maintain silence--as it has for two
hundred and thirty-one years. Ever since the final war."

They knew it, but they had to hear it from him to accept it even
briefly. There was silence, long wretched silence. Then the abbess
spoke. She said, "Couldn't we send out a ship to study conditions first
hand, honorable sir?"

Bliss sighed. He said, "The last four spaceships on Earth were sent to
Mars at two-year intervals during the last perihelions. Not one of them
came back. That was more than a half century ago. Since I accepted this
office, I have had some of our ablest remaining scientific brains
working on the problem of building a new ship. They have not been
successful." He laid his gloved hands, palms upward, on the desk, added,
"It appears that we have lost the knack for such projects."

When they were gone, he walked to the broad window and looked out over
the World Capital buildings at the verdant Sahara that stretched
hundreds of miles to the foot of the faintly purple Atlas Mountains on
the northwestern horizon. A blanket of brilliant green, covering what
