twenty feet overhead. The ends of the vast room were cluttered with
electrical and chemical apparatus; but Larry's eye was caught at once
by a strange and complex device, which loomed across from him, in the
center of the floor.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two pillars of intense light, a ray of crimson flame and another of
deeply violet radiance, beat straight down from a complicated array of
enormous, oddly shaped electron tubes, of mirrors and lenses and
prisms, of coils and whirling disks, which reached almost to the roof.
Upright, a yard in diameter and almost a yard apart, the strange
columns of light were sharp-edged as two transparent cylinders filled
with liquid light of ruby and of amethyst. Each ray poured down upon a
circular platform of glass or polished crystal.

Hanging between those motionless cylinders of red and violet light was
a strange-looking, greenish globe. A round ball, nearly a yard in
diameter, hung between the rays, almost touching them. Its surface was
oddly splotched with darker and lighter areas. It was spinning
steadily, at a low rate of speed. Larry did not see what held it up;
it seemed hanging free, several feet above the crystal platforms.

Reluctantly he withdrew his eyes from the mysterious sphere and looked
about the room once more. No, the laboratory was vacant of human
occupants. No one was hidden among the benches that were cluttered
with beakers and test tubes and stills, or among the dynamos and
transformers in the other end of the room.

A confusion of questions beat through Larry's brain.

What danger could be haunting this quiet laboratory? Was this the
blood of Agnes Sterling or the scientist who employed her that was now
clotting on the floor? What terrific force had crumpled up the
revolver? What had become of Agnes and Dr. Whiting? And of whatever
had attacked them? Had Agnes called him after the attack, or before?

       *       *       *       *       *

Despite himself, his attention was drawn back to the little globe
spinning so regularly, floating in the air between the pillars of red
and violet flame. Floating alone, like a little world in space,
without a visible support, it might be held up by magnetic attraction,
he thought.

A tiny planet!

His mind quickened at the idea, and he half forgot the weird mystery
gathering about him. He stepped nearer the sphere. It was curiously
like a miniature world. The irregular bluish areas would be seas; the
green and the brown spaces land. In some parts, the surface appeared
mistily obscured--perhaps, by masses of cloud.

Larry saw an odd-looking lamp, set perhaps ten feet behind the slowly
spinning, floating ball, throwing upon it a bright ray of vividly blue
light. Half the strange sphere was brilliantly illuminated by it; the
rest was in comparative darkness. That blue lamp, it came to Larry,
lit the sphere as the sun lights the earth.

"Nonsense!" he muttered. "It's impossible!"

Aroused by the seeming wonder of it, he was drawn nearer the ball. It
spun rather slowly, Larry noted, and each rotation consumed several
seconds. He could distinguish green patches that might be forests, and
thin, silvery lines that looked like rivers, and broad, red-brown
areas that must be deserts, and the broad blue stretches that
suggested oceans.

"A toy world!" he cried. "A laboratory planet! What an experiment--"

Then his eyes, looking up, caught the glistening, polished lens of a
powerful magnifying glass which hung by a black ribbon from a hook on
one of the heavy steel beams which supported the huge mass of silently
whirring apparatus.

       *       *       *       *       *

Eagerly, he unfastened the magnifier. Holding it before his eyes, he
bent toward the strange sphere spinning steadily in the air.

"Suffering shades of Caesar!" he ejaculated.

Beneath the lens a world was racing. He could see masses of vividly
green forest; vast expanses of bare, cracked, ocherous desert; wastes
of smooth blue ocean.

Then he was gazing at--a city?

Larry could not be sure that he had seen correctly. It had slipped
very swiftly beneath his lens. But he had a momentary impression of
tiny, fantastic buildings, clustered in an elflike city.

A pygmy planet, spinning in the laboratory like a world in the gulf of
space! What could it mean? Could it be connected with the strange call
from Agnes, with the blood on the floor, with the strange and ominous
silence that shrouded the deserted room?

"Oh, Larry!" a clear, familiar voice rang suddenly from the door. "You
came!"

Startled, Larry leaped back from the tiny, whirling globe and turned
to the door. A girl had come silently into the room. It was Agnes
Sterling. Her dark hair was tangled. Her small face was flushed, and
her brown eyes were wide with fear! In a white hand, which shook a
little, she carried a small, gold-plated automatic pistol.

She ran nervously across the wide floor to Larry, with relief dawning
in her eyes.

"I'm so glad you came!" she gasped, panting with excitement. "I
started to call you on the phone, but then I was afraid it would kill
you if you came! Please be careful! It may come back, any minute!
You'd better go away! It just took Dr. Whiting!"

"Wait a minute," Larry put in. "Just one thing at a time. Let's get
this straight. To begin with, what is it that might kill me, and that
got the doctor?"

"It's terrible!" she gasped, trembling. "A monster! You must go away
before it comes back!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Larry drew a tall stool from beside one of the crowded tables and
placed it beside her.

"Don't get excited," he urged. "I'm sure everything will be all
right. Just sit down, and tell me about it. The whole story. Just what
is going on here, and what happened to Dr. Whiting."

He helped her upon the stool. She looked up at him gratefully, and
began to speak in a rapid voice.

"You see that little planet? The monster came from that and carried
the doctor back there. And I know it will soon be back for another
victim--for sacrifice!"

She had pointed across the great room, toward the strange little globe
which hung between the pillars of red and violet light.

"Please go slow!" Larry broke in. "You're too fast for me. Are you
trying to tell me that that spinning ball is really a planet?"

Agnes seemed a little more composed, though she was still flushed and
breathing rapidly. Her small hand still gripped the bright automatic.

"Yes, it is a planet. The Pygmy Planet, Dr. Whiting called it. He said
it was the great experiment of the century. You see, he was testing
evolution. We began with the planet, young and hot, and watched it
until it is now almost as old as Mars. We watched the change and
development of life upon it. And the rise and decay of a strange
civilization. Until now its people are strange things, with human
brains in mechanical bodies, worshiping a rusty machine like a god--"

"Go slow!" Larry pleaded again. "I don't see--Did the doctor
build--create--that planet himself?"

"Yes. It began with his work on atomic structure. He discovered that
certain frequencies of the X-ray--so powerful that they are almost
akin to the cosmic ray--have the power of altering electronic orbits.
Every atom, you know, is a sort of solar system, with electrons
revolving about a proton.

"And these rays would cause the electrons to fall into incredibly
smaller orbits, causing vast reduction in the size of the atoms, and
