lot of it already. They told us just after we landed on Mars.

"You're _home_, children," the Head Teacher told us after we had gone
into the glassite dome they'd built for us there. And he told us there'd
be a special lecture for us that evening, an important one that we
must all attend.

And that evening he told us the whole story and the whys and wherefores.
He stood up before us. He had to wear a heated space suit and helmet, of
course, because the temperature in the dome was comfortable for us but
already freezing cold for him and the air was already too thin for him
to breathe. His voice came to us by radio from inside his helmet.

"Children," he said, "you are home. This is Mars, the planet on which
you will spend the rest of your lives. You are Martians, the first
Martians. You have lived five years on Earth and another five in space.
Now you will spend ten years, until you are adults, in this dome,
although toward the end of that time you will be allowed to spend
increasingly long periods outdoors.

"Then you will go forth and make your own homes, live your own lives, as
Martians. You will intermarry and your children will breed true. They
too will be Martians.

"It is time you were told the history of this great experiment of which
each of you is a part."

Then he told us.

Man, he said, had first reached Mars in 1985. It had been uninhabited by
intelligent life (there is plenty of plant life and a few varieties of
non-flying insects) and he had found it by terrestrial standards
uninhabitable. Man could survive on Mars only by living inside glassite
domes and wearing space suits when he went outside of them. Except by
day in the warmer seasons it was too cold for him. The air was too thin
for him to breathe and long exposure to sunlight--less filtered of rays
harmful to him than on Earth because of the lesser atmosphere--could
kill him. The plants were chemically alien to him and he could not eat
them; he had to bring all his food from Earth or grow it in hydroponic
tanks.

       *       *       *       *       *

For fifty years he had tried to colonize Mars and all his efforts had
failed. Besides this dome which had been built for us there was only one
other outpost, another glassite dome much smaller and less than a mile
away.

It had looked as though mankind could never spread to the other planets
of the solar system besides Earth for of all of them Mars was the least
inhospitable; if he couldn't live here there was no use even trying to
colonize the others.

And then, in 2034, thirty years ago, a brilliant biochemist named
Waymoth had discovered daptine. A miracle drug that worked not on the
animal or person to whom it was given, but on the progeny he conceived
during a limited period of time after inoculation.
