bombs and tested and tested while the cycle went up and up beyond human
tolerance--not the death level, but the level where nothing was sure
again, the level that made cancer a thing of epidemic proportions,
replacing statistically all of the insane multitude of things that man
could do to kill himself. Even the good things that the atom had brought
were destroyed in the panic that ensued. No matter that you quit. You
are still one of the guilty. You have seen it hidden in her eyes and you
have seen it in the milky eyes of the twins.

_Worse than dead._

Dusk became night and finally the doctor came. It had begun to lightning
and a few large drops of rain stroked Rush's cheek. Not a good year for
the farming he had retreated to. Not a good year for anything. He stood
to greet the doctor and the other man with him.

"Good evening, doctor," he said.

"Mr. Rush--" the doctor shook hands gingerly, "I hope you don't mind me
bringing someone along--this is Mr. North. He is with the County
Juvenile Office." The young doctor smiled. "How is the patient this
evening?"

"She is the same," John Rush said to the doctor. He turned to the other
man, keeping his face emotionless, hands at his side. He had expected
this for some time. "I think you will be wanting to look at the twins.
They are by her bed." He opened the door and motioned them in and then
followed.

He heard the Juvenile man catch his breath a little. The twins were
playing again. They had left their vigil at the bedside and they were
moving swiftly around the small living room, their hands and arms and
legs moving in some synchronized game that had no meaning--their
movements quick and sure--their faces showing some intensity, some
purpose. They moved with grace, avoiding obstructions.

"I thought these children were blind," Mr. North said.

John smiled a little. "It is unnerving. I have seen them play like this
before--though they have not done so for a long time--since my wife has
been ill." He lowered his head. "They are blind, deaf, and dumb."

"How old are they?"

"Twelve."

"They do not seem to be more than eight--nine at the most."

"They have been well fed," John said softly.

"How about schooling, Mr. Rush? The teaching of handicapped children is
not something that can be done by a person untrained in the field."

"I have three degrees, Mr. North. When my wife became ill and I began to
care for them I taught them to read braille. They picked it up very
quickly, though they showed little continued interest in it. I read a
number of books in the field of teaching handicapped children ..." He
let it trail off.

"Your degrees were in physics, were they not, Mr. Rush?" Now the touch
of malice came.

"That is correct." He sat down in one of the wooden chairs. "I quit
working long before the witch hunts came. I was never indicted."

"Nevertheless your degrees are no longer bona fide. All such degrees
have been stricken from the records." He looked down and John saw that
his eyes no longer hid the hate. "If your wife dies I doubt that any
court would allow you to keep custody of these children."

A year before--even six months and John would not have protested. Now he
had to make the effort. "They are my children--such as they are--and I
will fight any attempt to take them from me."

The Juvenile Man smiled without humor. "My wife and I had a child last
year, Mr. Rush. Or perhaps I should say that a child was born to us. I
am glad that child was born dead--I think my wife is even glad. Perhaps
we should try again--I understand that you and your kind have left us an
even chance on a normal birth." He paused for a moment. "I shall file a
petition with the circuit court asking that the Juvenile Office be
appointed guardians of your children, Mr. Rush. I hope you do not choose
to resist that petition--feeling would run pretty high against an
ex-physicist who tried to prove he _deserved_ children." He turned away
stiffly and went out the front door. In a little while Rush heard the
car door slam decisively.

The doctor was replacing things in the black bag. "I'm sorry, John. He
