anyone had noticed. The room was a flurry of men busy at routine tasks
and none of them seemed particularly interested in anything that was
going on at his table.

Sam checked his own machine and found the tester in perfect working
order. He hesitated a brief moment, then flipped the switch again. He
was prepared for the whir of the dial now but still it frightened him a
little. There must be something wrong; no atomic engine could have that
much Comparative Thrust. Yet--the tester was perfect.

Sam Meecham shut off the tester and stood very still for a minute and
thought about it. His glance fell on the intricate wiring within the
atomic engine and he saw with a start that it looked different from
usual. Wires were where wires had never been before, where wires were
not supposed to be.

With another quick glance about him Sam began copying the wiring pattern
on a sheet of paper. He thrust the paper into his pocket as the foreman
came up to him.

"Say, Meecham," the foreman said, "that last engine okay?"

Sam Meecham hesitated briefly, then said, "The wiring was a little
fouled up. Busted the dial on the tester."

The foreman shook his head. "I was afraid of that. Some wireman on the
third floor came in half drunk a few minutes ago. That was only his
first machine, so the others ought to be okay." He jabbed a finger at
the engine. "You'd better send it back up."

When the foreman was gone Sam checked the wiring with his diagram to
make certain he hadn't made any mistakes, and then he disconnected some
of the wires--just in case.

For the first time in years Sam Meecham felt a new freedom. He'd always
been a dreamer hampered by cold reality--a man with his head in the
stars and his feet chained to solid earth. He'd wanted to go to the Moon
when the government first started colonizing; but Dorothy, his wife,
talked him out of it.

At various times he had felt that secret longing, that beckoning of the
stars, but each time he had shelved the desire and turned to attaching
his two wires of the tester to their proper terminals on each atomic
engine, and then when his shift was up he turned homeward to face an
existence equally uninspiring.

The moment he had seen that needle pass into the hundreds, Sam Meecham
knew what he was going to do. He had planned it years ago, when he first
stood alone in the night and gazed upward at the glittering diamonds
that lay beyond reach. Even then he had known what he would do if ever
the opportunity presented itself. In those moments of self-pity that
came too often, however, he had told himself that it was only wishful
thinking and cursed himself for being a weakling and a dreamer who did
nothing about his dreams. But he had resolved that someday he _would_ go
out among the stars.

That day had come, and as Sam Meecham went homeward that evening he felt
his heart beat in time with the pulsing light of the stars overhead. But
with this new exultation he felt a desperate fear. A fear that he might
again bypass his opportunity as he had done so often before. Yet he knew
that this was his greatest chance, perhaps his last chance. He must be
brave and strong, and above all confident that his intense longing would
make his venture successful.

"How did everything go?" Dorothy asked when he came in.

It was a mechanical question and he answered it mechanically, "Okay.
Everything went as usual."

He didn't want to look at her. She had grown plump since they had
married eight years ago, and by not looking at her he could somehow
pretend she was still slim and attractive.

She was lying on a couch, wearing a housecoat, and didn't look up from
the magazine in front of her. "Supper's on the table," she said.

For eight years he'd had flat, uninspiring meals, meals that kept one
from starving and no more. His complaints had met with more hostility
than he cared to cope with, and always, meekly he had retired from
the scene of battle wishing he had submitted and thus avoided the
tongue-lashing before which he felt so helpless.

Once more in the surroundings that bred it, a familiar, distasteful
helplessness rose to envelop Sam Meecham. It came across him as a
