
"Never mind now," he said ironically. "You are a guest of the
government." Then to the driver he added:

"Get on, now! Get on! File your claim at the divisional office."

The driver departed, outwardly meek before the power of the military,
and Sime was hustled into an official car. He had little hope that his
demand to see the terrestrial consul would be complied with, and this
opinion was verified when the car rose into the air and sped over the
waters of the canal to South Tarog. It did not pause when it came over
the military camps there--the massive ordnance depots in which were
stored new and improved killing tools that had long been idle in that
irksome interplanetary peace.

They flew on, over the desert, until the Gray Mountains loomed on the
horizon. On, over the tumbled rocks, interspersed with the strange red
thorny vegetation common in the Martian desert.

Far below them, in a ravine, a cylindrical building was now visible,
and toward this the car began to drop. It landed on a level space
before the structure. A sliding gate opened, and the car wheeled into
a sort of courtyard, protected from the cold of night by an arching
roof of glass.

Sime was hustled out and led into an office located on the lower floor
of the fortification, or whatever the structure was.

As he saw the man who sat at the desk he gave a startled explanation.

"Colonel Barkins!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The elderly, white-haired man smiled. He brushed back his hair with a
characteristic gesture, and his twinkling blue eyes bored into those
of the I. F. P. special officer. The colonel wore the regular uniform
of the service; his little skullcap, with the conventionalized sun
symbol denoting his rank, was on the table before him. He put out his
lean, strong hand.

"Surprised to see me, eh, Hemingway?" he inquired pleasantly.

Sime managed an awkward salute. "I don't quite understand, sir. You
gave me my instructions at the Philadelphia space port just before I
made the _Pleadisia_. She's the fastest passenger liner in the solar
system: I've barely landed here, and it seems you got here before me.
It don't seem right!"

Sime watched the colonel narrowly, a vague suspicion in his mind, and
he thought he saw a slight flicker in the man's eye when Sime spoke.

But the colonel answered smoothly, with a hint of reproof.

"Never mind questioning me now, Hemingway. The mission is important. I
want to know if you remember every detail of what I told you." He
nodded to the men, and they filed out of the room. "Repeat your
orders."

"Nothing doing, Colonel!" Sime replied promptly and respectfully. "In
fact, Colonel, you can go to hell! This is the first time that a man
of the I. F. P. has turned traitor, and if your men hadn't so
thoughtfully taken my neuro I'd be pleased to finish you right now!"

"But you observe I have a neuro in my hand," remarked the colonel
pleasantly, "and so you will remain standing where you are."

       *       *       *       *       *

So saying, he slipped off the white wig he was wearing, wiped his face
so that the brown powder came off, and sat, obviously pleased with
the success of his masquerade, useless though it was. He was a typical
Martian, dark, sleek-haired, coral-skinned.

"I hate to send a man to his death mystified," said the Martian after
a moment, "so I'll explain that I am Scar Balta!"

"Scar Balta!"

"You've heard of me?"

"Uh--yes and no," Sime suddenly remembered the girl of the evening
before--the imperious little Martian. She had warned him of Scar
Balta.

"If I do say it," said the Martian, "I am the best impersonator in the
service of the interests I represent. I did not expect to get
information of great value from you, but we do not neglect even the
most unpromising leads."

He pressed a button; two Martian soldiers answered promptly.

"Take this man to the cell," Balta ordered. "Provide him with writing
materials so that he can write a last message to his family. In the
morning take him to the end of the ravine and finish him with your
short sword."

"Yes, Colonel!"

"The fellow's a colonel, anyway," Sime thought as they led him away.

They led him downward, along a straight corridor that evidently went
far beyond the boundaries of the ravine fortress. In places the walls,
adequately lit by the glow-wands the guards carried, were plainly cut
out of the solid rock; in others they were masonry, as though the
channel were passing through pockets of earth; or--the thought
electrified him--through faults or natural caverns.

At last they came to the end. One of the guards unlocked a metal door,
motioned his prisoner into the prison cell. A light-wand, badly run
down and feeble, with only a few active cells left, gave the only
light. As the door slammed behind him, Sime took in the depressing
scene.

       *       *       *       *       *

The stone walls were mildewed, leprous. The only ventilation was
through small holes in the door. Chains, fastened to huge staples in
the uneven stone floor, with smooth metal wrist and ankle cuffs, were
spaced at regular intervals, and musty piles of canal rushes showed
where some forgotten prisoner had dragged out his melancholy last
days. Sime was glad they had not chained him down. Probably didn't
consider it necessary unless there were many prisoners, who might rush
the guards.

"Ho, there, sojer!"

The voice was startling, so hearty and natural in this sad place. Sime
saw something coming out of a far corner. It was a man in the blouse
and trousers of civilian wear; a bald and good-natured man, with a
shocking growth of beard.

"Murray's the name," said this apparition with mock ceremony. "And
you?"

"I'm Hemingway, Sime Hemingway. Sergeant Sime Hemingway, to be exact.
Suppose you'd like to hear my orders?"

"I don't get you," said Murray, shaking hands.

"I mean," Sime explained elaborately, "that I'd like to know if you're
Scar Balta, or really Murray, as you say you are."

The other laughed.

"I'm Murray, all right. Feel this scalp. Natural, ain't it? That's one
thing Balta won't do--shave off his hair. Too vain. He'd hate to have
the Princess Sira see him that way. Ever hear of her? Say, she's a
raving beauty. This Balta'd like to be elected planetary president,
see--to succeed Wilcox, who has bigger plans. There's always been a
strong sentiment for the old monarchy, anyway. The oligarchy never did
go big. Follow me?"

"Yeh; go on."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well, this Princess Sira has ideas. She wouldn't mind sitting on the
throne again. Her great-great-grandpa was jobbed and murdered, and the
nobles who did it formed a closed corporation and called it a
republican government. So Sira started holding audiences, and gained a
lot of power. Among the people--even among some of the nobles.

"Get the idea? Scar Balta is one of the electors. If he married Sira
he'd have the backing of the monarchists, and of course he's done a
lot for the bosses. They'd elect him to head off the monarchists,
anyway. Then heigh-ho for a war with the Earth, to kill off a lot of
the kickers--and soft pickins in a lot of ways. Neat, huh?"

"Very neat!" Sime assented drily. "But we won't live to see it.
Anyway, I won't. They're going to bump me off in the morning."

"As they have a lot of our men," Murray agreed. "But they won't do it
in the morning. Or for several days. Look here!"

He held up his hand. On the back of it was what appeared to be a boil.

"But it isn't a boil," Murray explained. "That was done by a stream of
water, fine as a needle, under a thousand pounds pressure. They held
it there for a minute at a time--I don't know how many times, because
I keeled over. Any time I was willing to give them the information
they wanted they'd turn it off. Wasn't important info, either. But
what is it to them, how much they make me suffer for a trifle?"

Sime couldn't help the lump that rose in his throat. Men like Murray
certainly justified the world's faith in the service.

"Listen, old man," Sime said in a low voice, "out in the corridor--"

But Murray squeezed his hand warningly, pulled him to the floor.

"Might as well get some sleep," the old man said in ordinary tones.
"Plenty cool here. Let's lie together."

He kept his hold on Sime's wrist, and, by alternately squeezing and
releasing, began to talk in a silent telegraphic code.

"Don't say anything of importance," he spelled out. "They have mikes
in here to pick up all we say. Probably infra-red telenses too, so
they can see what we do."

So Sime told him, as they huddled together in simulated sleep, about
the walled passages, and they speculated on the possibility of felling
the guards and breaking their way to freedom through some underground
cavern. But at last they slept soundly to await the tortures of the
next morning.




CHAPTER III

_The Price of Monarchy_


Had Sime been able to follow and watch the girl he had kissed under
such unusual circumstances on the night of his arrival on Mars, he
would have been both puzzled and enlightened. After her final warning
about Scar Balta she dashed into the luxurious gloom of the passage.
At an intersection a maid was awaiting her. She curtseyed as she threw
a cape over the girl's shoulder, and together they hurried out into
the night.

A magnificently uniformed hotel servant called a private car, drew the
vitrine curtains, and saluted as the car lifted sharply into the
chilly night air. The car sped across the canal to the jeweled city
across the water, to a residence district whose magnificence even the
pale night light revealed.

The two women entered a mansion of glittering metal and came to a
private apartment.

"Everybody's gone to bed," said the girl, addressing her maid.
"That's one thing we can be thankful for."

"Yes, Your Highness. Did you discover anything of importance in the
man's room?"

"No. Draw me a bath, Mellie. He--he caught me--and kissed me!"

The maid, with flasks of perfume and aromatic oils in her hand,
paused, discreetly impudent.

"You seem not displeased, Your Highness."

"But of that he had no inkling." And Princess Sira laughed. "I left
him standing, utterly at a loss. He took me for a common assassin, and
yet he wanted to kiss me. That pleased me. But if he had valuable
information he kept it. And I promised him death for his kiss."

       *       *       *       *       *

As Princess Sira, claimant to the throne of a planet, slipped into the
tepid waters of her bath, Mellie stood by, her smooth little Martian's
face disturbed. For she loved her mistress, and could not comprehend
the things she did under ambition's sway.

"Your Highness, couldn't you let your royal friends do these dangerous
things for you?"

"For what? For fear? And how could a Martian princess who knows fear
lay claim to a throne? No, Mellie, one gets used to it. The enemies of
the house of Sira are ever alert. Didn't they murder my father and my
mother, and my only brother? My peril in this palace is as great as in
the room of a terrestrial detective. Only their fear of the people--"

She was interrupted by the tinkling of a bell. The maid left the
alcove, and returned a moment later with the news that Joro, Prince of
Hanlon, awaited the princess's pleasure in the ante-room.

"At this hour!" exclaimed the princess. "Did he say what brought him
here?"

"Something about a new plot."

"Plots! They fall thicker than rain on Venus. Bid him wait."

Fifteen minutes later, swathed in a trailing orange silk robe that
made her look like a Venus orchid, she greeted the prince.

"Greetings, Joro. We seem to have the unusual this night."

The prince, a thin, elderly man of medium stature, smiled admiringly.
His sharp features and bright little button eyes gave some hint of the
energy which suffused him. Here was a man both ruthless and loyal to
his royal house. He addressed her by her given name.

"The hour seems to make no difference with you; Phobos has set, but as
long as you are awake there is loveliness enough. I have come, dear
one, to tell you that success is ours at last!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Sira smiled. "I will restrain my joy, my good Joro, until I hear the
price."

"Always the same!" Joro chuckled. "A price, 'tis true, but not too
heavy, since you are, in a manner, fond of him."

"I've had vague promises from Wilcox," Sira said, with a wry smile. "I
would rather trade places with Mellie than be espoused by that
madman."

"Not Wilcox, but Scar Balta. He is badly smitten, for which I can not
blame him. He has great political power, and the backing of the
military. He could have dictated better terms, but for love of you has
yielded, point after point. He wants nothing now but your hand in
marriage, and is prepared to cede to the royal cause all the
advantages he has gained--"

"Not to mention," Sira interjected, "the royal prestige he will gain
with the common people."

Joro laughed, a little impatiently.

"True, true! But after all, what does the support of the people amount
to? They are powerless. If you are ever to establish your royal house
you must have other help."

"And I suppose," Sira continued sweetly, "that you have also arranged
a deal with the central banks and the secret war interests?"

Joro coughed uncomfortably.

"As a matter of fact--you see, my dear princess, there are certain
commercial interests--transportation, mining, and so forth. They have
defied the power of the bankers. They are likely to upset our whole
order of society. They need a set-back. And the military men are
chafing at their inaction. The war will be ended before too much harm
is done, by agreement of the interplanetary bankers. You see--"

"No!" Sira interrupted him coldly. "No! No! No! Oh, I'm sick of the
whole thing! I'm sick of the men I know! I hate Scar Balta, and you
too. I would rather be the wife of a common interplanetary patrolman
than queen of Mars! I withdraw, now!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Joro, struck by her vehemence, paled. The muscles of his jaw lumped.
From a pocket he took a portable disk-radio, an inch in diameter, and
spoke a few words. From outside there was a sudden uproar, shouts and
curses. The draperies moved, as with an outrush of air caused by the
careless handling of an airlock, and the temperature dropped suddenly.

Sira was irresolute only a split second. With a cat-like leap she
seized a short sword from the wall, made a lunge at the prince. But
Joro, the veteran of many a battle of wits and arms, parried the
stroke with the thick barrel of his neuro-pistol, caught the girl's
wrist and disarmed her. The screams of the maid went unheeded.

From the other parts of the palace came sounds of struggle, the
clashing of sword on sword.

"Sira! Sira!" Joro panted, struggling to hold the girl. "You must
give up your impractical ideas! Take the world as it is. Do as I tell
you and you'll not be sorry."

"I relinquish my claims!" the girl cried fiercely. "To-morrow I will
publicly announce that decision. All my life has been spent feeding
that hopeless ambition. Now I will be free!"

"I am loyal to the monarchy," Joro grunted, pinioning her arms at
last. "I will guard your interest against yourself."

He began to shout:

"Hendricks, Mervin, Carpender, Nassus! Here, to the princess's
chamber."

Several men, after further delay and fighting, responded. They wore
civilian blouses and trousers, but there was that something in their
alert carriage that proclaimed them trained fighting men. One of them
sat down with a grunt on the threshold, holding his hand to a bleeding
wound under his armpit. He appeared to be mortally wounded.

       *       *       *       *       *

Most of the others carried minor wounds, showing that the palace
guards had put up a good battle in the sword-play. Both sides had
refrained from using the neuro-pistols for fear that the beams, which
readily penetrated walls at short range, might injure the princess.

"Let go!" Sira wrenched herself free. "Where is Tolto? Has Tolto
turned traitor? How did you get past Tolto?"

"Do not use that ugly word against me. I implore you!" Joro protested.
"What we are doing is out of loyalty to the monarchy--not treason. The
monarchy is of greater importance than individuals. Consider your duty
to the rule of your fathers! As for Tolto--"

He issued a curt command, and there was the sound of movement.
Presently four men staggered in, one to each leg, each arm, of the
most impressive giant Mars had ever produced--Tolto, to whom there was
no god but the one divinity: and Princess Sira was she. Slow of
perception, mighty of limb, he had come into her service from some
outlying agricultural region of the red planet. His tremendous muscles
were hers to command or destroy, as she wished. He would not have
consented to this invasion of her home, she knew!

And he had not. Joro had been too wise to try. A dose of _marchlor_ in
a glass of wine had done what fifty men could not have accomplished by
main strength. Tolto was in a drugged sleep.

Joro said: "He isn't hurt. We will simply send him back to his valley,
and you, my dear princess, will do your duty to your subjects!"

And there, though he probably did not know it, Prince Joro harked back
to the youth of the human race--the compensatory, atavistic principle
that gods, rulers, kings, must hold themselves in readiness as
sacrifices for the good of their subjects. Joro might have been a
