raising it, he had disappeared. One of the emergency space-suits
beside the air-lock was missing. Penrun sprang to a nearby port-hole.

Far back in space he saw the tiny figure shining in the sunlight,
while the long flame of his Sextle rocket-pistol showed that he was
checking his forward momentum as rapidly as possible. Unquestionably
he would be picked up by some craft now trailing the liner, for the
murder and theft of the paper must have been carefully planned. Penrun
turned from the port-hole thoughtfully.

The liner was in an uproar. News of the murder had spread like
wild-fire. Women were screaming hysterically and men shouting as they
rushed about in terror, believing that the ship was in the hands of
pirates. A squad of sailors passed on the double to take charge of the
buffet. There would be an inquest shortly. Penrun started for his
stateroom. He wanted to be alone a few minutes before the inquest took
place.

His room was on the deck above. The sight of the empty passage
relieved him, but he was surprised to discover that he had not locked
the door when he left an hour ago. He stepped into the room.

Instantly his hands shot upward. Something was prodding him in the
back.

"One move or a sound, and I shoot," warned a sharp whisper. "Stand as
you are till I find what I want."

His billfold was opened and dropped with an exclamation of
disappointment. The searcher hurried. Penrun calmly noted that the
fingers seemed to fumble and were not at all deft at this sort of
work. He glanced down, and smiled grimly. A woman! He jerked his body
away from the prodding pistol, gripped the slender hand that was about
to plunge into his coat pocket, and whirled round, catching the
intruder in his arms.

Big, terrified dark eyes stared up at him out of a pale, heart-shaped
face. Then with a sob the girl wrenched free, ran out of the door and
was gone.

       *       *       *       *       *

He did not follow, but instead carefully locked the door and placed a
chair against it. Things had been moving too rapidly for him to feel
sure he was safe even now. Opening his left hand, he gazed down at a
bit of crumpled yellow paper he was holding there. That much he had
saved of the message from his long dead grandfather when the murderer
grabbed the folded paper from the buffet table and fled.

It proved to be the bottom third of a sheet of heavy paper, and on it
was drawn a piece of a map, showing a large semi-circle, which might
have been a lake, and leading off from it were what might be a number
of crooked canals. At the end of one of these was an "X" and the word
"Here."

Below the sketch were some words that had not been torn off. He read
them with growing amazement. "... aves of Titan. I swear this to be the
true and correct place of concealment of ... may he who comes to possess
it do much good and penance, for it is drenched in blood and ... Captain
Orion Halkon."

Penrun sat for a long time in thought. Titan, the sixth moon of
Saturn! Nightmare of killing heat, iron cold, and monstrous spiders!
How many men had died trying to explore it! And who knew it better
than Penrun himself, the only one who had ever escaped from that
hellish cavern of the Living Dead? Old Halkon had hidden his treasure
well indeed.

Penrun had never found the Caves. Legend described them as the one
safe place on the satellite where a man might live without danger of
being attacked by the spiders because the Caves were too cold for
them.

Penrun doubted if there was any place that would be safe from the
monstrous insects.

At any rate old Halkon had hidden his treasure there, and that part of
the map that Penrun had thought was a lake was apparently the main
cavern, and the canals, side passages. Old Halkon believed that he had
hidden his treasure well, but he could not foresee just how well. Two
thirds of the map, showing the location of the entrance to the Caves,
had been taken by the murderer of the Martian, Lozzo. The remaining
third, which showed the location of the treasure inside the Caves, was
in Penrun's possession.

The murderer could find the Caves, but not the treasure inside; and
Penrun could find the treasure inside, but not the Caves.

Penrun folded up the crumpled bit of paper and placed it carefully in
his shoe. Unless his guess was wrong, another attempt to get it would
be made shortly. Undoubtedly the girl had by now reported her failure
to the rest of the gang.

       *       *       *       *       *

The inquest was brief. The white-sheeted body of the Martian lay on
the table where he had been slain. The captain of the liner called
Penrun as the chief witness. He told a straightforward story of a
chance acquaintance with Lozzo who, he said, seemed to be afraid of
something. He had declared, so Penrun testified, that he was being
hounded for a map of some kind and he wanted Penrun to see it. Then
the murder had been committed, the map was stolen, and the murderer
had fled. That was all, Penrun concluded, he knew about the matter.

Other passengers corroborated his story and he was dismissed.

Throughout the inquest Penrun studied the crowd of passengers that
jammed the buffet, hoping he might catch a glimpse of the slender,
dark-eyed girl who had tried to rob him. She was nowhere to be seen.
He thought of telling the captain about her, but decided not to. She
might make another attempt to get the map, and thereby give him the
opportunity of rounding up the whole gang, or at least of learning who
they were. He told himself grimly that if he could lay hold of her
again, she would not escape so easily.

If Penrun didn't realize before that he was a marked man, it was
impressed on him more forcefully three hours later on the lower deck
when two men attacked him in the darkened passage near the stern.
There was no time for pistols. A series of hurried fist-blows. He
slugged his way free and fled to the safety of his stateroom.

Once there he locked the door and sat down to consider his position.
It was obvious now that he would be followed to the outposts of space,
if necessary, in an attempt to get the map from him.

       *       *       *       *       *

After half an hour's hard thinking he tossed away his fourth
cigarette, loosened the pistol in his armpit holster, and slipped out
of the room. He went to the captain.

"You think, then, that your life is in danger because you happened to
be talking to that old Martian when he was murdered?" asked the
captain, when Penrun had finished.

"No question about it," declared Penrun. "Two attempts have been made
already."

"Hmm," said the captain, frowning. "A most remarkably strange
business. I've never had anything like it aboard my ship in the twenty
years I've been traveling the Void."

"I can pay for the space-sphere," urged Penrun. "My certificate of
credit will take care of it with funds to spare. All you have to do is
to let me cast off at once. If any questions are asked, you can say it
was my wish."
