wasn't ugly. She smelled nice--while I could still smell, you know--and
she didn't talk much. I liked that. Only--

Well, did you ever meet somebody with a nervous cough? Like when you say
something funny--a little funny, not a big yock--they don't laugh and
they don't stop with just smiling, but they sort of cough? She did that.
I began to itch. I couldn't help it. I asked her to stop it.

She spilled her drink and looked at me almost as though she was
scared--and I had tried to say it quietly, too.

"Sorry," she said, a little angry, a little scared. "_Sorry._ But you
don't have to--"

"Forget it."

"Sure. But you asked me to sit down here with you, remember? If you're
going to--"

"_Forget it!_" I nodded at the bartender and held up two fingers. "You
need another drink," I said. "The thing is," I said, "Gilvey used to do
that."

"What?"

"That cough."

She looked puzzled. "You mean like this?"

"_Goddam it, stop it!_" Even the bartender looked over at me that time.
Now she was really mad, but I didn't want her to go away. I said,
"Gilvey was a fellow who went to Mars with me. Pat Gilvey."

"_Oh._" She sat down again and leaned across the table, low. "_Mars._"

       *       *       *       *       *

The bartender brought our drinks and looked at me suspiciously. I said,
"Say, Mac, would you turn down the air-conditioning?"

"My name isn't Mac. No."

"Have a heart. It's too cold in here."

"Sorry." He didn't sound sorry.

I was cold. I mean that kind of weather, it's always cold in those
places. You know around New York in August? It hits eighty, eighty-five,
ninety. All the places have air-conditioning and what they really want
is for you to wear a shirt and tie.

But I like to walk a lot. You would, too, you know. And you can't walk
around much in long pants and a suit coat and all that stuff. Not around
there. Not in August. And so then, when I went into a bar, it'd have one
of those built-in freezers for the used-car salesmen with their dates,
or maybe their wives, all dressed up. For what? But I froze.

"_Mars_," the girl breathed. "_Mars._"

I began to itch again. "Want to dance?"

"They don't have a license," she said. "Byron, _I_ didn't know you'd
been to _Mars_! Please _tell_ me about it."

"It was all right," I said.

That was a lie.

She was interested. She forgot to smile. It made her look nicer. She
said, "I knew a man--my brother-in-law--he was my husband's brother--I
mean my ex-husband--"

"I get the idea."

"He worked for General Atomic. In Rockford, Illinois. You know where
that is?"

"Sure." I couldn't go there, but I knew where Illinois was.

"He worked on the first Mars ship. Oh, fifteen years ago, wasn't it? He
always wanted to go himself, but he couldn't pass the tests." She
stopped and looked at me.

I knew what she was thinking. But I didn't always look this way, you
know. Not that there's anything wrong with me now, I mean, but I
couldn't pass the tests any more. Nobody can. That's why we're all
one-trippers.

I said, "The only reason I'm shaking like this is because I'm cold."

It wasn't true, of course. It was that cough of Gilvey's. I didn't like
to think about Gilvey, or Sam or Chowderhead or Wally or the captain. I
didn't like to think about any of them. It made me shake.

You see, we couldn't kill each other. They wouldn't let us do that.
