
"Flanglers," said the little man eagerly. "Oscilloscopes. Portable
force-field generators. A neural distorter." Melinda's face was blank.
The little man frowned. "You use them, of course? This _is_ a Class IV
culture?" Melinda essayed a weak shrug and the little man sighed with
relief. His eyes fled past her to the blank screen of the TV set. "Ah, a
monitor." He smiled. "For a moment I was afraid--May I come in?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Melinda shrugged, opened the door. This might be interesting, like a
vacuum-cleaner salesman who had cleaned her drapes last week for free.
And Kitty Kyle Battles Life wouldn't be on for almost an hour.

"My name is Porteous," said the little man with an eager smile. "I'm
doing a thematic on Class IV cultures." He whipped out a stylus, began
jotting down notes. The TV set fascinated him.

"It's turned off right now," Melinda said.

Porteous's eyes widened impossibly. "You mean," he whispered in horror,
"that you're exercising Class V privileges? This is terribly confusing.
I get doors slammed in my face, when Class Fours are supposed to have a
splendid gregarian quotient--you _do_ have atomic power, don't you?"

"Oh, sure," said Melinda uncomfortably. This wasn't going to be much
fun.

"Space travel?" The little face was intent, sharp.

"Well," Melinda yawned, looking at the blank screen, "they've got Space
Patrol, Space Cadet, Tales of Tomorrow ..."

"Excellent. Rocket ships or force-fields?" Melinda blinked. "Does your
husband own one?" Melinda shook her blonde head helplessly. "What are
your economic circumstances?"

Melinda took a deep rasping breath, said, "Listen, mister, is this a
demonstration or a quiz program?"

"Oh, my excuse. Demonstration, certainly. You will not mind the
questions?"

"Questions?" There was an ominous glint in Melinda's blue eyes.

"Your delightful primitive customs, art-forms, personal habits--"

"Look," Melinda said, crimsoning. "This is a respectable neighborhood,
and I'm not answering any Kinsey report, understand?"

The little man nodded, scribbling. "Personal habits are tabu? I so
regret. The demonstration." He waved grandly at the tray. "Anti-grav
sandals? A portable solar converter? Apologizing for this miserable
selection, but on Capella they told me--" He followed Melinda's
entranced gaze, selected a tiny green vial. "This is merely a
regenerative solution. You appear to have no cuts or bruises."

"Oh," said Melinda nastily. "Cures warts, cancer, grows hair, I
suppose."

Porteous brightened. "Of course. I see you can scan. Amazing." He
scribbled further with his stylus, glanced up, blinked at the obvious
scorn on Melinda's face. "Here. Try it."

"You try it." Now watch him squirm!

Porteous hesitated. "Would you like me to grow an extra finger, hair--"

"Grow some hair." Melinda tried not to smile.

The little man unstopped the vial, poured a shimmering green drop on his
wrist, frowning.

"Must concentrate," he said. "Thorium base, suspended solution. Really
jolts the endocrines, complete control ... see?"

