examine these fragments a little. Bill," he went on to one of the two
guides who had accompanied them from Fallon, "you and Walter scout
around the ground and see what you can find out. I especially wish to
know whether anyone has visited the scene of the wreck."

       *       *       *       *       *

The guides consulted a moment and started out. Carnes drove up the burro
the Doctor had indicated and Dr. Bird unpacked it. He opened a mahogony
case and took from it a high powered microscope. Setting the instrument
up on a convenient rock, he subjected portions of the wreck, including
several fragments of flesh, to a careful scrutiny. When he had completed
his observations he fell into a brown study, from which he was aroused
by Carnes.

"What did you find out about the cause of the wreck, Doctor?"

"I don't know what to think. The immediate cause was that everything was
frozen. The plane ran into a belt of cold which froze up the motor and
which probably killed the crew instantly. It was undoubtedly the
aftermath of that cold which you felt when you swooped down over the
wreck."

"It seems impossible that it could have suddenly got cold enough to
freeze everything up like that."

"It does, and yet I am confident that that is what happened. It was no
ordinary cold, Carnes; it was cold of the type that infests interstellar
space; cold beyond any conception you have of cold, cold near the range
of the absolute zero of temperature, nearly four hundred and fifty
degrees below zero on the Fahrenheit scale. At such temperatures, things
which are ordinarily quite flexible and elastic, such as rubber, or
flesh, become as brittle as glass and would break in the manner which
these bodies have broken. An examination of the tissues of the flesh
shows that it has been submitted to some temperature that is very low in
the scale, probably below that of liquid air. Such a temperature would
produce instant death and the other phenomena which we can observe."

"What could cause such a low temperature, Doctor?"

"I don't know yet, although I hope to find out before we are finished.
Cold is a funny thing, Carnes. Ordinarily it is considered as simply the
absence of heat; and yet I have always held it to be a definite negative
quantity. All through nature we observe that every force has its
opposite or negative force to oppose it. We have positive and negative
electrical charges, positive and negative, or north and south, magnetic
poles. We have gravity and its opposite apergy, and I believe cold is
really negative heat."

"I never heard of anything like that, Doctor. I always thought that
things were cold because heat was taken from them--not because cold was
added. It sounds preposterous."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Such is the common idea, and yet I cannot accept it, for it does not
explain all the recorded phenomena. You are familiar with a searchlight,
are you not?"

"In a general way, yes."

"A searchlight is merely a source of light, and of course, of heat,
which is placed at the focus of a parabolic reflector so that all of the
rays emanating from the source travel in parallel lines. A searchlight,
of course, gives off heat. If we place a lens of the same size as the
searchlight aperture in the path of the beam and concentrate all the
light, and heat, at one spot, the focal point of the lens, the
temperature at that point is the same as the temperature of the source
of the light, less what has been lost by radiation. You understand that,
do you not?"

"Certainly."

"Suppose that we place at the center of the aperture of the searchlight
a small opaque disc which is permeable neither to heat nor light, in
such a manner as to interrupt the central portion of the beam. As a
result, the beam will go out in the form of a hollow rod, or pipe, of
heat and light with a dark, cold core. This core will have the
temperature of the surrounding air plus the small amount which has
radiated into it from the surrounding pipe. If we now pass this beam of
light through a lens in order to concentrate the beam, both the pipe of
heat and the cold core will focus. If we place a temperature measuring
device near the focus of the dark core, we will find that the
temperature is lower than the surrounding air. This means that we have
focused or concentrated cold."

"That sounds impossible. But I can offer no other criticism."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Nevertheless, it is experimentally true. It is one of the facts which
lead me to consider cold as negative heat. However, this is true of
cold, as it is of the other negative forces; they exist and manifest
themselves only in the presence of the positive forces. No one has yet
concentrated cold except in the presence of heat, as I have outlined.
How this cold belt which the T. A. C. plane encountered came to be there
is another question. The thing which we have to determine is whether it
was caused by natural or artificial forces."

"Both of the packets which the plane carried are gone, Doctor," observed
Carnes.

"Yes, and that seems to add weight to the possibility that the cause was
artificial, but it is far from conclusive. The packets might not have
been on the men when the plane fell, or someone may have passed later
and taken them for safekeeping."

The doctor's remarks were interrupted by the guides.

"Someone has been here since the wreck, Doctor," said Bill. "Walter and
I found tracks where two men came up here and prowled around for some
time and then left by the way they came. They went off toward the
northwest, and we followed their trail for about forty rods and then
lost it. We weren't able to pick it up again."

"Thanks, Bill," replied the doctor. "Well, Carnes, that seems to add
more weight to the theory that the spot of cold was made and didn't just
happen. If a prospecting party had just happened along they would either
have left the wreck alone or would have made some attempt to inter the
bodies. That cold belt must have been produced artificially by men who
planned to rob this plane after bringing it down and who were near at
hand to get their plunder. Is there any chance of following that
trail?"

"I doubt it, Doc. Walter and I scouted around quite a little, but we
couldn't pick it up again."

"Is there any power line passing within twenty miles of here?"

"None that Walter and I know of, Doc."

"Funny! Such a device as must have been used would need power and lots
of it for operation. Well, I'll try my luck. Carnes, help me unpack and
set up the rest of my apparatus."

       *       *       *       *       *

With the aid of the operative, Dr. Bird unpacked two of the burros and
extracted from cases where they were carefully packed and padded some
elaborate electrical and optical apparatus. The first was a short
telescope of large diameter which he mounted on a base in such a manner
that it could be elevated or depressed and rotated in any direction. At
the focal point of the telescope was fastened a small knot of wire from
which one lead ran to the main piece of apparatus, which he sat on a
flat rock. The other lead from the wire knot ran into a sealed container
surrounded by a water bath under which a spirit lamp burned. From the
container another lead led to the main apparatus. This main piece
consisted of a series of wire coils mounted on a frame and attached to
the two leads. The doctor took from a padded case a tiny magnet
suspended on a piece of wire of exceedingly small diameter which he
fastened in place inside the coils. Cemented to the magnet was a tiny
mirror.

"What is that apparatus?" asked Carnes as the doctor finished his set-up
and surveyed it with satisfaction.

"Merely a thermocouple attached to a D'Arsonval galvanometer," replied
the doctor. "This large, squat telescope catches and concentrates on the
thermocouple and the galvanometer registers the temperature."

"You're out of my depth. What is a thermocouple?"

"A juncture of two wires made of dissimilar metals, in this case of
platinum and of platinum-iridium alloy. There is another similar
junction in this case, which is kept at a constant temperature by the
water bath. When the temperatures of the two junctions are the same, the
system is in equilibrium. When they are at different temperatures, an
electrical potential is set up, which causes a current to flow from one
to the other through the galvanometer. The galvanometer consists of a
magnet set up inside coils through which the current I spoke of flows.
This current causes the magnet to rotate and by watching the mirror, the
rotation can be detected and measured.

"This device is one of the most sensitive ever made, and is used to
measure the radiation from distant stars. Currents as small as
.000000000000000000000000001 ampere have been detected and measured.
This particular instrument is not that sensitive to begin with, and has
its sensitivity further reduced by having a high resistance in one of
the leads."

"What are you going to use it for?"

"I am going to try to locate somewhere in these hills a patch of local
cold. It may not work, but I have hopes. If you will manipulate the
telescope so as to search the hills around here, I will watch the
galvanometer."

       *       *       *       *       *

For several minutes Carnes swung the telescope around. Twice Dr. Bird
stopped him and decreased the sensitiveness of his instrument by
introducing more resistance in the lines in order to keep the magnet
from twisting clear around, due to the fluctuations in the heats
received on account of the varying conditions of reflection. As Carnes
swung the telescope again the magnet swung around sharply, nearly to a
right angle to its former position.

"Stop!" cried the doctor. "Read your azimuth."

Carnes read the compass bearing on the protractor attached to the frame
which supported the telescope. Dr. Bird took a pair of binoculars and
looked long and earnestly in the indicated direction. With a sigh he
laid down the glasses.

"I can't see a thing, Carnesy," he said. "We'll have to move over to the
next crest and make a new set-up. Plant a rod on the hill so that we can
get an azimuth bearing and get the airline distance with a range
finder."

On the hilltop which Dr. Bird had pointed out the apparatus was again
set up. For several minutes Carnes swept the hills before an exclamation
from the doctor told him to pause. He read the new azimuth, and the
doctor laid off the two readings on a sheet of paper with a protractor
and made a few calculations.

"I don't know," he said reflectively when he had finished his
computations. "This darned instrument is still so sensitive that you may
have merely focused on a deep shadow or a cold spring or something of
that sort, but the magnet kicked clear around and it may mean that we
have located what we are looking for. It should be about two miles away
and almost due west of here."

"There is no spring that I know of, Doc, and I think I know of every
water hole in this country," remarked Bill.

"There could hardly be a spring at this elevation, anyway," replied the
doctor. "Maybe it is what we are seeking. We'll start out in that
direction, anyway. Bill, you had better take the lead, for you know the
country. Spread out a little so that we won't be too bunched if anything
happens."

       *       *       *       *       *

For three-quarters of an hour the little group of men made their way
through the wilderness in the direction indicated by the doctor.
Presently Bill, who was in the lead, held up his hand with a warning
gesture. The other three closed up as rapidly as cautious progress would
allow.

"What is it, Bill?" asked the doctor in an undertone.

"Slip up ahead and look over that crest."

The doctor obeyed instructions. As he glanced over he gave vent to a low
whistle of surprise and motioned for Carnes to join him. The operative
crawled up and glanced over the crest. In a hollow before them was a
crude one-storied house, and erected on an open space before it was a
massive piece of apparatus. It consisted of a number of huge metallic
cylinders, from which lines ran to a silvery concave mirror mounted on
an elaborate frame which would allow it to be rotated so as to point in
any direction.

"What is it?" whispered Carnes.

"Some kind of a projector," muttered the doctor. "I never saw one quite
like it, but it is meant to project something. I can't make out the
curve of that mirror. It isn't a parabola and it isn't an ellipse. It
must be a high degree subcatenary or else built on a transcendental
function."

He raised himself to get a clearer view, and as he did so a puff of
smoke came from the house, to be followed in a moment by a sharp crack
as a bullet flattened itself a few inches from his head. The doctor
tumbled back over the crest out of sight of the house. Bill and Walter
hurried forward, their rifles held ready for action.

"Get out on the flanks, men," directed the doctor. "The man we want is
in a house in that hollow. He's armed, and he means business."

       *       *       *       *       *

Bill and Walter crawled under the shelter of the rocks to a short
distance away and then, rifles ready, advanced to the attack. A report
came from the hollow and a bullet whined over Bill's head. Almost
instantly a crack came from Walter's rifle and splinters flew from the
building in the hollow a few inches from a loophole, through which
projected the barrel of a rifle.

The rifle barrel swung rapidly in a circle and barked in Walter's
direction; but as it did so, Bill's gun spoke and again splinters flew
from the building.

"Good work!" ejaculated Dr. Bird as he watched the slow advance of the
two guides. "If we just had rifles we could join in the party, but it's
a little far for effective pistol work. Let's go ahead, and we may get
close enough to do a little shooting."

Pistols in hand, Carnes and the doctor crawled over the crest and joined
the advance. Again and again the rifle spoke from the hollow and was
answered by the vicious barks of the rifles in the hands of the guides,
Carnes and the doctor resting their pistols on rocks and sending an
occasional bullet toward the loophole. The conditions of light and the
moving target were not conducive to good marksmanship on the part of the
besieged man, and none of the attackers were hit. Presently Walter
succeeded in sending a bullet through the loophole. The rifle barrel
suddenly disappeared. With a shout the four men rose from their cover
and advanced toward the building at a run.

As they did so an ominous whirring sound came from the apparatus in
front of the house and a sudden chill filled the air.

"Back!" shouted Dr. Bird. "Back below the hill if you value your
lives!"

He turned and raced at full speed toward the sheltering crest of the
hill, the others following him closely. The whirring sound continued,
and the concave reflector turned with a grating sound on its gears. As
the path of its rays struck the ground the rocks became white with frost
and one rock split with a sharp report, one fragment rolling down the
slope, carrying others in its trail.

       *       *       *       *       *

With panic-stricken faces the four men raced toward the sheltering
crest, but remorselessly the reflector swung around in their direction.
The intense cold numbed the racing men, cutting off their breath and
impeding their efforts for speed.

"Stop!" cried the doctor suddenly. "Fire at that reflector! It's our
only chance!"

He set the example by turning and emptying his pistol futilely at the
turning mirror. Bill, Walter and Carnes followed his example. Nearer
and nearer to them came the deadly ray. Bill was the nearest to its
path, and he suddenly stiffened and fell forward, his useless gun still
grasped in his hands. As his body struck the ground it rolled down hill
for a few feet, the deadly ray following it. His head struck a rock, and
Carnes gave a cry of horror as it broke into fragments.

Walter threw his rifle to his shoulder and fired again and again at the
rotating disc. The cold had became intense and he could not control the
actions of his muscles and his rifle wavered about. He threw himself
flat on the ground, and, with an almost superhuman effort, steadied
himself for a moment and fired. His aim was true, and with a terrific
crash the reflector split into a thousand fragments. Dr. Bird staggered
to his feet.

"It's out of order for a moment!" he cried. "To the house while we
can!"
