still-thick blond hair. Yet, though past youth, he was far from being an
old man. "I've made my decision," he said, remembering that anger now
was pointless.

"If it's--if you're just too proud to change your mind," the young
commander said, less certainly, "I'm sure everyone will understand
if ... if ..."

Johnson smiled. "No, it's just that I want to stay--that's all."

But the commander's clear blue eyes were still baffled, uneasy, as
though he felt he had not done the utmost that duty--not duty to the
service but to humanity--required. That was the trouble with people,
Johnson thought: when they were most well-meaning they became most
troublesome.

Clifford lowered his voice to an appropriately funeral hush, as a fresh
thought obviously struck him. "I know, of course, that your loved ones
are buried here and perhaps you feel it's your duty to stay with
them...?"

At this Johnson almost forgot that anger no longer had any validity. By
"loved ones" Clifford undoubtedly had meant Elinor and Paul. It was true
that Johnson had had a certain affection for his wife and son when they
were alive; now that they were dead they represented an episode in his
life that had not, perhaps, been unpleasant, but was certainly over and
done with now.

Did Clifford think _that_ was his reason for remaining? Why, he must
believe Johnson to be the most sentimental man on Earth. "And, come to
think of it," Johnson said to himself, amused, "I am--or soon will
be--just that."

The commander was still unconsciously pursuing the same train of
thought. "It does seem incredible," he said in a burst of boyish candor
that did not become him, for he was not that young, "that you'd want to
stay alone on a whole planet. I mean to say--entirely alone.... There'll
never be another ship, you know--at least not in your lifetime."

Johnson knew what the other man was thinking. If there'd been a woman
with Johnson now, Clifford might have been able to understand a little
better how the other could stick by his decision.

Johnson wriggled, as sweat oozed stickily down his back. "For God's
sake," he said silently, "take your silly ship and get the hell off my
planet." Aloud he said, "It's a good planet, a little worn-out but still
in pretty good shape. Pity you can't trade in an old world like an old
car, isn't it?"

"If it weren't so damned far from the center of things," the young man
replied, defensively assuming the burden of all civilization, "we
wouldn't abandon it. After all, we hate leaving the world on which we
originated. But it's a long haul to Alpha Centauri--you know that--and a
tremendously expensive one. Keeping up this place solely out of
sentiment would be sheer waste--the people would never stand for the tax
burden."

"A costly museum, yes," Johnson agreed.

How much longer were these dismal farewells going to continue? How much
longer would the young man still feel the need to justify himself? "If
only there were others fool enough--if only there were others with
you.... But, even if anybody else'd be willing to cut himself off
entirely from the rest of the civilized universe, the Earth won't
support enough of a population to keep it running. Not according to our
present living standards anyway.... Most of its resources are gone, you
know--hardly any coal or oil left, and that's not worth digging for when
there are better and cheaper fuels in the system."

He was virtually quoting from the _Colonial Officer's Manual_. Were
there any people left able to think for themselves, Johnson wondered.
Had there ever been? Had he thought for himself in making his decision,
or was he merely clinging to a childish dream that all men had had and
lost?

"With man gone, Earth will replenish herself," he said aloud. First the
vegetation would begin to grow thick. Already it had released itself
from the restraint of cultivation; soon it would be spreading out over
the continent, overrunning the cities with delicately persistent green
tendrils. Some the harsh winters would kill, but others would live on
and would multiply. Vines would twist themselves about the tall
buildings and tenderly, passionately squeeze them to death ...
eventually send them tumbling down. And then the trees would rear
themselves in their places.

The swamps that man had filled in would begin to reappear one by one, as
