
"No," Phoebe shook her blonde head. "Don Manton loved me and he was
famous. I like to be reminded of the days when my picture was in all the
telepapers and my face on so many telescreens."

She might just as well have called him a tattered nonentity, though
Henry was doing pretty well as a foreman in the local humandroid
factory. He was stopped from reminding her by Phoebe's saying that she'd
leave for a bit of shopping. She left abruptly.

Henry watched her takeoff from the roof of their two-story fibroid house
and went back to the dining room. Now, even his warmest admirers would
give in that he had a streak of stubbornness in him a mile wide and six
miles deep. Henry took the three-dimensional monstrosity off the wall,
holding it hard by thumb and forefinger on its luminex frame, and
prepared to say good-by to the picture of Don Manton.

A foreman at one of the humandroid shops has to be able to consider
alternatives and Henry had done this. If he only hid the picture there'd
be a domestic crisis and the picture would sooner or later be back on
the wall; if he destroyed it there'd also be a crisis, but one that
would eventually blow over.

Unluckily for him, these three-dimensional wall pictures were made out
of glaseine, and when he tried setting fire to it he nearly burned down
the house. Upon feeding it to the old-fashioned fireplace nothing grew
hot except his temper. Ripping the picture to shreds would have been the
next step, but you can't rip glaseine.

For maybe the six millionth time he cursed out Don Manton, the
well-known explorer in the realm of outer space. Henry understood in a
general way that Don Manton had been among the first to chart the cities
of Mars and Venus, and had accidentally died on a planet named Immel;
but Henry had no intention of living in Don Manton's shadow.

The picture, which showed the late explorer talking with three
Venusians, had been hung up again when Phoebe came through the ceiling
door along the extension stairway which flicked up to meet her.

"You've been trying to get rid of Don's picture!"

He'd hung it crookedly, and a diagonal slash of white wallpaper had
given him away.

"Just this one. You've got cans of telefilm in the cellar, but them I
don't mind. This," he flicked it with a thumbnail, "I do mind."

"As long as I stay," Phoebe said quietly, "my darling Don's picture
stays."

"But what about your darling Henry? Am I just a humandroid who looks and
behaves and talks like a human being? Haven't I got feelings?" Henry
strode around the room, hitting the fibroid floor like a prehistoric
monster on a sandpaper bridge. "Either that picture goes," he said
finally, definitely, "or I go!"

