passion. He hated her for her money, the money she kept securely from
him. He hated her for the paltry allowance she doled out to him, as if
he were an irresponsible child. It was as if she were constantly
reminding him in every glance and gesture, "I made a bad bargain when I
married you. You wanted me, my money, everything, and had nothing to
give in return except your own doltish self. You set a trap for me,
baited with lies and a false front. Now you are caught in your own trap
and will remain there like a mouse to eat from my hand whatever crumbs I
stoop to give you."

But some day his hate would be appeased. Yes, some day soon he would
kill her!

He shot a sideways glance at her, wondering if by chance she
suspected.... She hadn't moved. Her lips were pouted into a half smile;
the sex-opera had probably reached one of its more pleasurable moments.

Hyrel let his eyes shift back to the fireplace again. Yes, he would kill
her. Then he would claim a rightful share of her money, be rid of her
debasing dominance.

       *       *       *       *       *

He let the thought run around through his head, savoring it with mental
taste buds. He would not kill her tonight. No, nor the next night. He
would wait, wait until he had sucked the last measure of pleasure from
the thought.

It was like having a bottle of rare old wine on a shelf where it could
be viewed daily. It was like being able to pause again and again before
the bottle, hold it up to the light, and say to it, "Some day, when my
desire for you has reached the ultimate, I shall unstopper you quietly
and sip you slowly to the last soul-satisfying drop." As long as the
bottle remained there upon the shelf it was symbolic of that pleasurable
moment....

He snapped out of his reverie and realized he had been wasting precious
moments. There would be time enough tomorrow for gloating. Tonight,
there were other things to do. Pleasurable things. He remembered the
girl he had met the night before, and smiled smugly. Perhaps she would
be awaiting him even now. If not, there would be another one....

He settled himself deeper into the chair, glanced once more at his wife,
then let his head lean comfortably back against the chair's headrest.
His hand upon his thigh felt the thin mesh that cloaked his body beneath
his clothing like a sheer stocking. His fingers went again to the tiny
switch. Again he hesitated.

Herbert Hyrel knew no more about the telporter suit he wore than he did
about the radio in the corner, the TV set against the wall, or the
personalized telovis his wife was wearing. You pressed one of the
buttons on the radio; music came out. You pressed a button and clicked a
dial on the TV; music and pictures came out. You pressed a button and
made an adjustment on the telovis; three-dimensional, emotion-colored
pictures leaped into the room. You pressed a tiny switch on the
telporter suit; you were whisked away to a receiving set you had
previously set up in secret.

He knew that the music and the images of the performers on the TV and
telovis were brought to his room by some form of electrical impulse
or wave while the actual musicians and performers remained in the
studio. He knew that when he pressed the switch on his thigh something
within him--his ectoplasm, higher self, the thing spirits use for
materialization, whatever its real name--streamed out of him along an
invisible channel, leaving his body behind in the chair in a conscious
but dream-like state. His other self materialized in a small cabin in a
hidden nook between a highway and a river where he had installed the
receiving set a month ago.

He thought once more of the girl who might be waiting for him, smiled,
and pressed the switch.

       *       *       *       *       *

The dank air of the cabin was chill to Herbert Hyrel's naked flesh. He
fumbled through the darkness for the clothing he kept there, found his
shorts and trousers, got hurriedly into them, then flicked on a pocket
lighter and ignited a stub of candle upon the table. By the wavering
light, he finished dressing in the black satin clothing, the white
shirt, the flowing necktie and tam. He invoiced the contents of his
billfold. Not much. And his monthly pittance was still two weeks
away....

He had skimped for six months to salvage enough money from his allowance
to make a down payment on the telporter suit. Since then, his
