understand it and were afraid of damaging it.

Let us begin with the first verse of chapter one:


_The Book of The Prophet EZEKIEL_


803.       Chapter 1


_Now it came to pass in the thirtieth year, in the fourth month, in
the fifth day of the month, as I was among the captives by the river
of Chebar, that the heavens were opened, and I saw visions of God._


_2. In the fifth day of the month, which was the fifth year of king
Jehoiachin's captivity._


_3. The word of the Lord came expressly unto Ezekiel the priest, the
son of Buzi, in the Land of the Chaldeans by the river Chebar; and the
hand of the Lord was there upon him._

This fixes the location of this incident on the outskirts of Bagdad.
The Chebar is sometimes called "The Grand Canal of Bagdad." Although
the entire book was supposed to have been written by Ezekiel, the
second and third verses sound like an editor's note, inserted by a
later writer.


_4. And I looked, and, behold, a whirlwind came out of the north, a
great cloud, and a fire infolding itself, and a brightness was about
it, and out of the midst thereof as the colour of amber, out of the
midst of the fire._

Here is a man who had lived most of his life in arid desert country.
He had probably seen whirlwinds of all kinds, from dust-devils to
full-scale tornadoes. He was an accurate and honest observer, as we
shall see later. If he said it was a whirlwind, it must have really
been one, or at least it looked enough like one to fool him for a
while. Notice that he does not say that it was high in the air, or
that it came out of the sky, but, "... out of the north," or toward
him from the north.

The first thing that he noticed was that it had fire associated with
it, a strange companion for a whirlwind. There is something strange
about the fire itself. He says that it "infolds itself," which
suggests a fire of more active nature than Ezekiel would be accustomed
to. The association of fire and whirlwind must have struck him as
peculiar.

Also something amber colored was associated with the cloud and fire.
He said that this color came "out of the midst," which might mean that
it was above the cloud and flame, or appeared as the fire and cloud
subsided, or blew to one side. Considering the detail he gives in
later verses, this is quite vague, as it might be if he saw it from a
distance.


_5. Also out of the midst thereof came the likeness of four living
creatures. And this was their appearance; they had the likeness of a
man._

Why didn't he say that out came four men? Remember that he is telling
this to very primitive, superstitious people. He was himself bred in a
time when the supernatural was taken for granted. Under these
conditions he has gone about as far as he could by saying that they
certainly looked like four men. He does not say here that he took them
for angels or any other kind of supernatural beings.


_6. And every one had four faces, and every one had four wings._

This short verse is very clear, yet you wonder how a creature with
four faces and four wings could possibly be taken for a man, even by
you or me.

Although he does not say so, we can imply that these creatures must
have advanced much closer to him after they got out of the fire and
cloud, for him to be able to see so much detail.

Imagine the courage it took for him to stay put in order to observe
these creatures. Notice also how objective he is, never mentioning his
own feelings.


_7. And their feet were straight feet; and the sole of their feet was
like the sole of a calf's foot; and they sparkled like the colour of
burnished brass._

Each verse of the description covers one or two parts of the
creatures. When Ezekiel mentions more than one part it becomes
confusing, so that one verse seems to contradict another. These can
usually be sorted out however. Nowhere will you find a direct
contradiction.

Here he is describing the feet only. The word "straight" can be taken
several ways. Does he mean _regular feet_, or feet that point straight
forward, or feet that are straight up and down, like an elephant's?
Probably he means regular, forward-pointing feet because he does not
dwell on the point. In other places he leans heavily on simile to
describe some unusual feature of the beings.

The sole of the foot sounds as if it was heavily cleated. What then
has he described in this verse? For a person living in a warm climate
who had never seen any footwear more complicated than a sandal, he has
described a highly polished leather, plastic or metal boot very well.


_8. And they had the hands of a man under their wings on their four
sides; and they four had their faces and their wings._

Notice carefully that he is _not_ saying that each creature had four
man-like hands, one on each of four sides. He is saying that each has
the normal number of hands and they are located _below_ their wings.
Remember that he was a careful observer and he had probably noticed
that birds have wings _instead_ of arms. These had both. In addition,
he has given us another bit of information about the distribution of
the wings. They do not appear to be arranged like a biplane, but each
wing is at a ninety-degree angle from its neighboring wing like a
helicopter.

