
Jordan nearly dropped the pipe from his lips as he jerked upright to
peer sharply at the younger man. "Are you crazy? Do you seriously expect
me to get an order to exhume him now? What would it get us, other than
lawsuits? Even if we could get the order without cause--which we can't!"

Then the pipe did fall as he gaped open-mouthed. "My God, you believe
all that stuff. You expected us to publish it _straight_!"

"No," Dane said thickly. The hope was gone now, as if it had never
existed, leaving a numb emptiness where nothing mattered. "No, I guess I
didn't really expect anything. But I believe the facts. Why shouldn't
I?"

He reached for the papers with hands he could hardly control and began
stuffing them back into the folder. All the careful documentation, the
fingerprints--smudged, perhaps, in some cases, but still evidence enough
for anyone but a fool--

"Phillips?" Jordan said questioningly to himself, and then his voice was
taking on a new edge. "Phillips! Wait a minute, I've got it now! _Dane_
Phillips, not _Arthur_! Two years on the _Trib._ Then you turned up on
the _Register_ in Seattle? Phillip Dean, or some such name there."

"Yeah," Dane agreed. There was no use in denying anything now. "Yeah,
Dane Arthur Phillips. So I suppose I'm through here?"

Jordan nodded again and there was a faint look of fear in his
expression. "You can pick up your pay on the way out. And make it
quick, before I change my mind and call the boys in white!"

       *       *       *       *       *

It could have been worse. It had been worse before. And there was enough
in the pay envelope to buy what he needed--a flash camera, a little
folding shovel from one of the surplus houses, and a bottle of good
scotch. It would be dark enough for him to taxi out to Oakhaven
Cemetery, where Blanding had been buried.

It wouldn't change the minds of the fools, of course. Even if he could
drag back what he might find, without the change being completed, they
wouldn't accept the evidence. He'd been crazy to think anything could
change their minds. And they called _him_ a fanatic! If the facts he'd
dug up in ten years of hunting wouldn't convince them, nothing would.
And yet he had to see for himself, before it was too late!

He picked a cheap hotel at random and checked in under an assumed name.
He couldn't go back to his room while there was a chance that Jordan
still might try to turn him in. There wouldn't be time for Sylvia's
detectives to bother him, probably, but there was the ever-present
danger that one of the aliens might intercept the message.

He shivered. He'd been risking that for ten years, yet the likelihood
was still a horror to him. The uncertainty made it harder to take than
any human-devised torture could be. There was no way of guessing what an
alien might do to anyone who discovered that all men were not
human--that some were ... zombies.

There was the classic syllogism: _All men are mortal; I am a man;
therefore, I am mortal._ But not Blanding--or Corporal Harding.

It was Harding's "death" that had started it all during the fighting on
Guadalcanal. A grenade had come flying into the foxhole where Dane and
Harding had felt reasonably safe. The concussion had knocked Dane out,
possibly saving his life when the enemy thought he was dead. He'd come
to in the daylight to see Harding lying there, mangled and twisted, with
his throat torn. There was blood on Dane's uniform, obviously spattered
from the dead man. It hadn't been a mistake or delusion; Harding had
been dead.

It had taken Dane two days of crawling and hiding to get back to his
group, too exhausted to report Harding's death. He'd slept for twenty
hours. And when he awoke, Harding had been standing beside him, with a
whole throat and a fresh uniform, grinning and kidding him for running
off and leaving a stunned friend behind.

It was no ringer, but Harding himself, complete to the smallest personal
memories and personality traits.

       *       *       *       *       *

The pressures of war probably saved Dane's sanity while he learned to
face the facts. All men are mortal; Harding is not mortal; therefore,
Harding is not a man! Nor was Harding alone--Dane found enough evidence
to know there were others.

The _Tribune_ morgue yielded even more data. A man had faced seven
firing squads and walked away. Another survived over a dozen attacks by
professional killers. Fingerprints turned up mysteriously "copied" from
