"That is not true! We committed no crime, harmed no living thing...."

The hard, cold words of Y'Nor cut off his protest:

"This world it now a Vogarian possession. Every man, woman, and child
upon it is a prisoner of the Vogarian State. There will be no
resistance. This cruiser's disintegrators can destroy a town within
seconds, your race within hours. Do you understand what I mean?"

The visible portion of old Brenn's face turned pale. He spoke at last
in the bitter tones of frightened, stubborn determination:

"I offered you our friendship; I hoped you would accept, for we are a
peaceful race. I should have known that you came only to persecute and
enslave us. But the hand of God will reach down to help us and--"

Y'Nor laughed, a raucous sound like the harsh caw of the Vogarian
vulture, and held up a hairy fist.

"This, old man, is the hand for you to center your prayers around. I
want full-scale fuel production commenced within twenty-four hours. If
this is done, and if you continue to unquestioningly obey all my
commands, I will for that long defer your punishment as an escaped
criminal. If this is not done, I will destroy a town exactly
twenty-five hours from now--and as many more as may be necessary. And
you will be publicly executed as a condemned criminal and an enemy of
the Vogarian State."

Y'Nor turned to Dalon. "Take him away."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Scared sheep," Y'Nor said when Brenn was gone. "Tomorrow he'll say
that he prayed and his god told him what to do--which will be to save
his neck by doing as I command."

"I don't know--" Kane said doubtfully. "I think you're wrong about his
conscience folding so easily."

"_You_ think?" Y'Nor asked. "Perhaps I should remind you that the
ability to think is usually characteristic of commanders rather than
sub-ensigns. You will not be asked to try to think beyond the small
extent required to comprehend simple commands."

Kane sighed with weary resignation. An unexpected encounter with an
Alkorian battleship had sent the Vogarian cruiser fleeing through the
unexplored Whirlpool star cluster--Y'Nor and Kane the two surviving
commissioned officers--with results of negative value to those most
affected: the world of the Saint had been accidentally discovered and
he, Kane, had risen from sub-ensign to the shakily temporary position
of second-in-command.

Y'Nor spoke again:

"Since Vogarian commanders do not go out and mingle with the natives
of a subject world, you will act as my representative. I'll let Brenn
sweat until tomorrow, then you will go see him. In that, and in all
subsequent contacts with the natives, you will keep in mind the fact
that I shall hold you personally responsible for any failure of my
program."

       *       *       *       *       *

The next afternoon, two hours before the deadline, Kane went out into
the sweet spring air of the world the Saints had named Sanctuary.

It was a virgin world, rich in the resources needed by Vogar, with
twenty thousand Saints as the primary labor supply. It was also, he
thought, a green and beautiful world; almost a familiar world. The
cruiser stood at the upper edge of the town and in the late afternoon
sun the little white and brown houses were touched with gold, half
hidden in the deep azure shadows of the tall trees and flowering vines
that bordered the gently curving streets.

Restlessness stirred within him as he looked at them. It was like
going back in time to the Lost Islands, that isolated little region of
Vogar that had eluded collectivization until the year he was sixteen.
It had been at the same time of year, in the spring, that the State
Unity forces had landed. The Lost Island villages had been drowsing in
the sun that afternoon, as this town was drowsing now--

He forced the memories from his mind, and the futile restlessness they
brought, and went on past a golden-spired church to a small cottage
that was almost hidden in a garden of flowers and giant silver ferns.

Brenn met him at the door, his manner very courteous, his eyes
dark-shadowed with weariness as though he had not slept for many
hours, and invited him inside.

When they were seated in the simply-furnished room, Brenn said, "You
came for my decision, sir?"

"The commander sent me for it."

Brenn folded his thin hands, which seemed to have the trembling
sometimes characteristic of the aged.

"Yesterday evening when I came from the ship, I prayed for guidance
and I saw that I could only abide by the Golden Rule: _Do unto others
as you would have them do unto you._"

"Which means," Kane asked, "that you will do what?"

"Should we of the Church be stranded upon an alien world, our fuel
supply almost gone, we would ask for help. By our own Golden Rule we
can do no less than give it."

"Eighteen hours ago I issued the order for full-scale, all-out fuel
production. I've been up all night and day checking the operation."

Kane stared, surprised that Y'Nor should have so correctly predicted
Brenn's reaction. He tried to see some change in the old man, some
evidence of the personal fear that must have broken him so quickly,
but there was only weariness, and a gentleness.

"So much fuel--" Brenn said. "Is Vogar still at war with Alkoria?"

Kane nodded.

"Once I saw some Alkorian prisoners of war on Vogar," Brenn said.
"They are a peaceful, doglike race. They never wanted to go to war
with Vogar."

Well--they still didn't want war but on Alkoria were Elusium ores and
other resources that the Vogarian State had to have before it could
carry out its long-frustrated ambition of galactic conquest.

"I'll go, now," Kane said, getting out of his chair, "and see what
you're having done. The commander doesn't take anybody's word for
anything."

       *       *       *       *       *

Brenn called a turbo-car and driver to take him to the multi-purpose
factory, which was located a short distance beyond the other side of
town. The driver stopped before the factory's main office, where a
plump, bald man was waiting, his scalp and glasses gleaming in the
sunshine.

"I'm Dr Larue, sir," he greeted Kane. He had a face that under normal
circumstance would have been genial. "Father Brenn said you were
coming. I'm at your service, to show you what we're doing."

They went inside the factory, where the rush of activity was like a
beehive. Machines and installations not needed for fuel production
were being torn out as quickly as possible, others taking their place.
The workers--he craned his neck to verify his astonished
first-impression.

All of them were women.

"Father Brenn's suggestion," Larue said. "These girls are as competent
as men for this kind of work and their use here permits the release of
men to the outer provinces to procure the raw materials. As you know,
our population is small and widely scattered--"

A crash sounded as a huge object nearby toppled and fell. Kane took an
instinctive backward step, and bumped into something soft.
