internal political, socioeconomic or religious institutions of any other
member planet._" He looked at the department head. "But what's that got to
do with the fact that I was unfamiliar with even the existence of Monet?"

"Suppose one of the advanced planets, or even Earth itself," Metaxa
growled, "openly discussed in magazines, on newscasts, or wherever, the
religious system of Monet. A howl would go up among the liberals, the
progressives, the do-gooders. And the howl would be heard on the other
advanced planets. Eventually, the citizen in the street on Monet would
hear about it and be affected. And before you knew it, a howl would go up
from Monet's government. Why? Because the other planets would be
interfering with her internal affairs, simply by discussing them."

"So what you mean is," Ronny said, "part of our job is to keep information
about Monet's government and religion from being discussed at all on other
member planets."

"That's right," Metaxa nodded. "And that's just one of our dirty little
jobs. One of many. Section G, believe me, gets them all. Which brings us
to your first assignment."

                  -------------------------------------

Ronny inched forward in his chair. "It takes me into space?"

"It takes you into space all right," Metaxa snorted. "At least it will
after a few months of indoctrination. I'm sending you out after a legend,
Ronny. You're fresh, possibly you'll get some ideas older men in the game
haven't thought of."

"A legend?"

"I'm sending you to look for Tommy Paine. Some members of the department
don't think he exists. I do."

"Tommy Paine?"

"A pseudonym that somebody hung on him way back before even my memory in
this Section. Did you ever hear of Thomas Paine in American history?"

"He wrote a pamphlet during the Revolutionary War, didn't he?"

" 'Common Sense,' " Metaxa nodded. "But he was more than that. He was born
in England but went to America as a young man and his writings probably
did as much as anything to put over the revolt against the British. But
that wasn't enough. When that revolution was successful he went back to
England and tried to start one there. The government almost caught him,
but he escaped and got to France where he participated in the French
Revolution."

"He seemed to get around," Ronny Bronston said.

"And so does this namesake of his. We've been trying to catch up with him
for some twenty years. How long before that he was active, we have no way
of knowing. It was some time before we became aware of the fact that half
the revolts, rebellions, revolutions and such that occur in the United
Planets have his dirty finger stirring around in them."

"But you said some department members don't believe in his existence."

Metaxa grunted. "They're working on the theory that no one man could do
all that Tommy Paine has laid to him. Possibly it's true that he sometimes
gets the blame for accomplishments not his. Or, for that matter, possibly
he's more than one person. I don't know."

"Well," Ronny said hesitantly, "what's an example of his activity?"

Metaxa picked up another report from the confusion of his desk. "Here's
one only a month old. Dictator on the planet Megas. Kidnapped and forced
to resign. There's still confusion but it looks as though a new type of
government will be formed now."

"But how do they know it wasn't just some dissatisfied citizens of Megas?"

"It seems as though the kidnap vehicle was an old fashioned Earth-type
helicopter. There were no such on Megas. So Section G suspects it's a
possible Tommy Paine case. We could be wrong, of course. That's why I say
the man's in the way of being a legend. Perhaps the others are right and
he doesn't even exist. I think he does, and if so, it's our job to get him
and put him out of circulation."

Ronny said slowly, "But why would that come under our jurisdiction? It
seems to me that it would be up to the police of whatever planet he was
on."

Ross Metaxa looked thoughtfully at his brown bottle, shook his head and
returned it to its drawer. He looked at a desk watch. "Don't read into the
United Planets organization more than there is. It's a fragile institution
with practically no independent powers to wield. Every member planet is
jealous of its prerogatives, which is understandable. It's no mistake that
Articles One and Two are the basic foundation of the Charter. No member
planet wants to be interfered with by any other or by United Planets as an
organization. They want to be left alone.

"Within our ranks we have planets with every religion known to man
throughout the ages. Everything ranging from primitive animism to the most
advanced philosophic ethic. We have every political system ever dreamed
of, and every socio-economic system. It can all be blamed on the crack-pot
manner in which we're colonizing. Any minority, no matter how
small--religious, political, racial, or whatever--if it can collect the
funds to buy or rent a spacecraft, can dash off on its own, find a new
Earth-type planet and set up in business.

"Fine. One of the prime jobs of Section G is to carry out, to enforce,
Articles One and Two of the Charter. A planet with Buddhism as its state
religion, doesn't want some die-hard Baptist missionary stirring up
controversy. A planet with a feudalistic socio-economic systems doesn't
want some hot-shot interplanetary businessman coming in with some big deal
that would eventually cause the feudalistic nobility to be tossed onto the
ash heap. A planet with a dictatorship doesn't want subversives from some
democracy trying to undermine their institutions--and vice versa."

"And its our job to enforce all this, eh?" Ronny said.

"That's right," Metaxa told him sourly. "It's not always the nicest job in
the system. However, if you believe in United Planets, an organization
attempting to co-ordinate in such manner as it can, the efforts of its
member planets, for the betterment of all, then you must accept Section G
and Interplanetary Security."

Ronny Bronston thought about it.

Metaxa added, "That's why one of the requirements of this job is that you
yourself be a citizen of United Planets, rather than of any individual
planet, have no religious affiliations, no political beliefs, and no
racial prejudices. You've got to be able to stand aloof."

"Yeah," Ronny said thoughtfully.

Ross Metaxa looked at his watch again and sighed wearily. "I'll turn you
over to one of my assistants," he said. "I'll see you again, though,
before you leave."

"Before I leave?" Ronny said, coming to his feet. "But where do I start
looking for this Tommy Paine?"

"How the hell would I know?" Ross Metaxa growled.

                  -------------------------------------

In the outer office, Ronny said to the receptionist, "Commissioner Metaxa
said for me to get in touch with Sid Jakes."

She said, "I'm Irene Kasansky. Are you with us?"

Ronny said, "I beg your pardon?"

She said impatiently, "Are you going to be with the Section? If you are,
I've got to clear you with your old job. You were in statistics over in
New Copenhagen, weren't you?"

Somehow it seemed far away now, the job he'd held for more than five
years. "Oh, yes," he said. "Yes, Commissioner Metaxa has given me an
appointment."

She looked up at him. "Probably to look for Tommy Paine."

He was taken aback. "That's right. How did you know?"

"There was talk. This Section is pretty well integrated." She grimaced,
but on her it looked good. "One big happy family. High interdepartmental
morale. That sort of jetsam." She flicked some switches. "You'll find
Supervisor Jakes through that door, one to your left, two to your right."

He could have asked one _what_ to his left and two _what_ to his right,
but evidently Irene Kasansky thought he had enough information to get him
to his destination. She'd gone back to her work.

                             [Illustration.]

It was one turn to his left and two turns to his right. The door was
lettered simply _Sidney Jakes_. He knocked and a voice shouted happily,
"It's open. It's always open."

Supervisor Jakes was as informal as his superior. His attire was on the
happy-go-lucky side, more suited for sports wear than a fairly high
ranking job in the ultra-staid Octagon.

He couldn't have been much older than Ronny Bronston but he had a nervous
vitality about him that would have worn out the other in a few hours. He
jumped up and shook hands. "You must be Bronston. Call me Sid." He waved a
hand at a typed report he'd been reading. "Now I've seen them all. They've
just applied for entry to United Planets. Republic. What a name, eh?"

"What?" Ronny said.

"Sit down, sit down." He rushed Ronny to a chair, saw him seated, returned
to the desk and flicked an order box switch. "Irene," he said, "do up a
badge for Ronny, will you? You've got his code, haven't you? Good. Send it
over. Bronze, of course."

Sid Jakes turned back to Ronny and grinned at him. He motioned to the
report again. "What a name for a planet. Republic. Bunch of screw-balls,
again. Out in the vicinity of Sirius. Based their system on Plato's
_Republic_. Have to go the whole way. Don't even speak Basic. Certainly
not. They speak Ancient Greek. That's going to be a neat trick, finding
interpreters. How'd you like the Old Man?"

Ronny said, dazed at the conversational barrage, "Old Man? Oh, you mean
Commissioner Metaxa."

"Sure, sure," Sid grinned, perching himself on the edge of the desk. "Did
he give you that drink of tequila during working hours routine? He'd like
to poison every new agent we get. What a character."

The grin was infectious. Ronny said carefully, "Well, I did think his
method of hiring a new man was a little--cavalier."

"Cavalier, yet," Sid Jakes chortled. "Look, don't get the Old Man wrong.
He knows what he's doing. He always knows what he's doing."

"But he took me on after only two or three minutes conversation."

Jakes cocked his head to one side. "Oh? You think so? When did you first
apply for interplanetary assignment, Ronny?"

"I don't know, about three years ago."

Jakes nodded. "Well, depend on it, you've been under observation for that
length of time. At any one period, Section G is investigating possibly a
thousand potential agents. We need men but qualifications are high."

He hopped down from his position, sped around to the other side of the
desk and lowered himself into his chair. "Don't get the wrong idea,
though. You're not in. You're on probation. Whatever the assignment the
Old Man gave you, you've got to carry it out successfully before you're
full fledged." He flicked the order-box switch and said, "Irene, where the
devil's Ronny's badge?"

Ronny Bronston heard the office girl's voice answer snappishly.

"All right, all right," Jakes said. "I love you, too. Send it in when it
comes." He turned to Ronny. "What _is_ your assignment?"

"He wants me to go looking for some firebrand nicknamed Tommy Paine. I'm
supposed to arrest him. The commissioner said you'd give me details."

                  -------------------------------------

Sid Jakes' face went serious. He puckered up his lips. "Wow, that'll be a
neat trick to pull off," he said. He flicked the order-box switch again.
Irene's voice snapped something before he could say anything and Sid Jakes
grinned and said, "O.K., O.K., darling, but if this is the way you're
going to be I won't marry you. Then what will the children say? Besides,
that's not what I called about. Have ballistics do up a model H gun for
Ronny, will you? Be sure it's adjusted to his code."

He flicked off the order box and turned back to Ronny. "I understand
you're familiar with hand guns. It's in this report on you."

Ronny nodded. He was just beginning to adjust to this free-wheeling
character. "What will I need a gun for?"

Jakes laughed. "Heavens to Betsy, you babe in the woods. Do you realize
this Tommy Paine character has supposedly stirred up a couple of score
wars, revolutions and revolts? Not to speak of having laid in his lap two
or three dozen assassinations. He's a quick lad with a gun. A regular
Nihilist."

"Nihilist?"

Jakes chuckled. "When you've been in this Section for a while, you'll be
familiar with every screwball outfit man has ever dreamed up. The
Nihilists were a European group, mostly Russian, back in the Nineteenth
Century. They believed that by bumping off a few Grand Dukes and a Czar or
so they could force the ruling class to grant reforms. Sometimes they were
pretty ingenious. Blew up trains, that sort of thing."

"Look here," Ronny said, "what motivates this Paine fellow? What's he get
out of all this trouble he stirs up?"

"Search me. Nobody seems to know. Some think he's a mental case. For one
thing, he's not consistent."

"How do you mean?"

"Well, he'll go to one planet and break his back trying to overthrow, say,
feudalism. Then, possibly after being successful, he goes to another
planet and devotes his energies to establishing the same socio-economic
system."

Ronny assimilated that. "You're one of those who believes he exists?"

"Oh, he exists all right, all right," Sid Jakes said happily. "Matter of
fact, I almost ran into him a few years ago."

Ronny leaned forward. "I guess I ought to know about it. The more
information I have, the better."

"Sure, sure," Jakes said. "This deal of mine was on one of the Aldebaran
planets. A bunch of nature boys had settled there."

"Nature boys?"

"Um-m-m. Back to nature. The trouble with the human race is that it's got
too far away from nature. So a whole flock of them landed on this planet.
They call it Mother, of all things. They landed and set up a primitive
society. Absolute stone age. No metals. Lived by the chase and by picking
berries, wild fruit, that sort of thing. Not even any agriculture. Wore
skins. Bows and arrows were the nearest thing they allowed themselves in
the way of mechanical devices."

"Good grief," Ronny said.

"It was a laugh," Jakes told him. "I was assigned there as Section G
representative with the UP organization. Picture it. We had to wear skins
for clothes. We had to confine ourselves to two or three long houses.
Something like the American Iroquois lived in before Columbus. Their
society on Mother was based on primitive communism. The clan, the phratry,
the tribe. Their religion was mostly a matter of knocking into everybody's
head that any progress was taboo. Oh, it was great."

"Well, were they happy?"

"What's happiness? I suppose they were as happy as anybody ever averages.
Frankly, I didn't mind the assignment. Lots of fishing, lots of hunting."

Ronny said, "Well, where does Tommy Paine come in?"

"He snuck up on us. Started way back in the boondocks away from any of the
larger primitive settlements. Went around putting himself over as a holy
man. Cured people of various things from gangrene to eye diseases. Given
antibiotics and such, you can imagine how successful he was."

"Well, what harm did he do?"

"I didn't say he did any harm. But in that manner he made himself awfully
popular. Then he'd pull some trick like showing them how to smelt iron,
and distribute some corn and wheat seed around and plant the idea of
agriculture. The local witch doctors would try to give him a hard time,
but the people figured he was a holy man."

"Well, what happened finally?" Ronny wasn't following too well.

"Communications being what they were, before he'd been discovered by the
central organization--they had a kind of Council of Tribes which met once a
year--he'd planted so many ideas that they couldn't be stopped. The young
people'd never go back to flint knives, once introduced to iron. We went
looking for friend Tommy Paine, but he got wind of it and took off. We
even found where he'd hidden his little space cruiser. Oh, it was Paine,
all right, all right."

"But what harm did he do? I don't understand," Ronny scowled.

"He threw the whole shebang on its ear. Last I heard, the planet had
broken up into three main camps. They were whaling away at each other like
the Assyrians and Egyptians. Iron weapons, chariots, domesticated horses.
Agriculture was sweeping the planet. Population was exploding. Men were
making slaves out of each other, to put them to work. Oh, it was a mess
from the viewpoint of the original nature boys."

A red light flickered on his desk and Sid Jakes opened a delivery drawer
and dipped his hand into it. It emerged with a flat wallet. He tossed it
to Ronny Bronston.

"Here you are. Your badge."

Ronny opened the wallet and examined it. He'd never seen one before, but
for that matter he'd never heard of Section G before that morning. It was
a simple enough bronze badge. It said on it, merely, _Ronald Bronston,
Section G, Bureau of Investigation, United Planets_.

Sid Jakes explained. "You'll get co-operation with that through the
Justice Department anywhere you go. We'll brief you further on procedure
during indoctrination. You in turn, of course, are to co-operate with any
other agent of Section G. You're under orders of anyone with"--his hand
snaked into a pocket and emerged with a wallet similar to Ronny's--"a
silver badge, carried by a First Grade Agent, or a gold one of Supervisor
rank."

Ronny noted that his badge wasn't really bronze. It had a certain sheen, a
brightness.

Jakes said, "Here, look at this." He tossed his own badge to the new man.
Ronny looked down at it in surprise. The gold had gone dull.

Jakes laughed. "Now give me yours."

Ronny got up and walked over to him and handed it over. As soon as the
other man's hand touched it, the bronze lost its sheen.

Jakes handed it back. "See, it's tuned to you alone," he said. "And mine
is tuned to my code. Nobody can swipe a Section G badge and impersonate an
agent. If anybody ever shows you a badge that doesn't have its sheen, you
know he's a fake. Neat trick, eh?"

"Very neat," Ronny admitted. He returned the other's gold badge. "Look, to
