
"Hi, brute. Nedda Marsh. Alone?" She ran soft hands along the hard
biceps under his short jacket sleeves. The motion threw open her
shriekingly bright orange cloak, displaying saucy breasts, creamy
abdomen and, beneath her brief jeweled skirt, long smooth thighs. And
the perfume assailed his nostrils with almost physical force.

"Hi, Nedda. Allen Kinderwood. Alone, natch." Natch, hell. But what could
any male do to combat Government perfume? He smiled, his pulse suddenly
quickening. "Date, darling?" She _was_ a beautiful thing.

Her large, sparkling eyes showed pleasure. "Take me, Al." She touched
vivid red lips lightly against his. And the formula was complete.
Private citizens Allen Kinderwood and Nedda Marsh were dated at least
until dawn--or a better man did them part.

He squeezed her arm where she'd snuggled it against his side, starting
with her away from the fountain. "How come the most gorgeous thing in
Kansas City wasn't dated earlier?"

She looked up at him, and the passion in her gaze made his heart skip
like a teener's. "Could be I'm very particular, darling, but," her look
was suddenly beseeching, "the truth is, I'm protected."

A slow, tiny fire of distaste fanned itself alive in Allen's brain. Why
in the name of World Government did every other girl who made first play
with him have to be protected? But there was his out. By unwritten
social code he could declare the date off. Except that he had grown to
increasingly hate the spiteful practice of 'protection'. It meant Nedda
had peeved some local lothario who, along with other males in his
clique, was going to damn well see she wasn't intimate with anyone else
until she begged another date with the original one. If you had a
sadistic turn of mind, it meant you could keep a delectable bit in
freeze until her natural inclinations forced her into your arms. But
you'd have to fight any man who tried to date her in the meantime.

Fighting was legal, of course, as long as the loser was surgically
repairable, and it was considered a normal catharsis for strained
relationships between males.

Not, Allen thought glumly, that he had any stake in the future of
frantically weary society, but he had reached the conclusion long ago
that a man without the courage to back up his personal convictions
wasn't worth the energy it took to down him.

He stopped and held Nedda against him protectively. "I still want the
date, sprite," he said. "I have to leave early tomorrow, but I'll try
to get you out of protection--okay?"

Her lips trembled. "Oh, yes. If you knew how it's been, these last few
days--"

He shook her again, but more tenderly. "Deal. We'll try to reach your
compartment." Living quarters were a sanctuary no one but a medic could
legally enter without invitation. He removed his stainless
identification plaque and slipped its chain about her throat. "If you
see any of the guys who're watching for you, tell me but don't look at
them." He took her arm again and alertly began to work through the
throng. "Describe your protector."

"Jeff Neal-Hayne. He's big, Al. Bigger than you. Heavier, but you've got
muscles like he never saw. You look faster, too."

Allen didn't know him, but the name was revealing. Not that anything but
your Earth society number was official, but use of a double surname
meant your father had elected to stay with your mother for at least a
while after you were born. Most babies, of course, were immediately
turned over to a Government creche, but it had always seemed to Allen
that kids raised by one or more parents had other advantages too,
although he had never been able to figure out just what they were. Maybe
it was only his imagination.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the edge of the park they chose the nearest double scooter which
showed full battery charge.

Allen leaned against the forward rail. "Herd it, will you, Nedda? Every
time I think of the hundreds of hours I've spent plowing air with one of
these gut-weighted things I want to break one. Hell, I can run faster.
Anyway, you know where we're going."

The girl smiled, pushed the power lever into forward range and steered
into slow-moving traffic. "I saw a man lift a single, once, but that's
all he was able to do with it."

The lighted street seemed intensely bright after the dimmer reaches of
the park. "Ever think of running one into the river?"

She looked at him in amazement. "Fright, no. Why--you'd have to drive
along a pedestrian path for at least a block to reach the bank!" Nedda
spun the steering wheel to avoid a long string of solemn teeners playing
follow the leader on singles. "You have funny thoughts, Al."

"I'm laughing." He flexed his muscles, impatient, as usual, with another
citizen's sluggish mentation. "I suppose the damn music never gets on
your nerves, either?"

"Music? Oh--the music." She listened as though for the first time to the
muted strains which played continuously throughout the city--calming,
soothing, lulling. "Of course not. Why should it?"

"They've got it synchronized," said Allen. "Government's got it
synchronized so you hear it just the same volume no matter where you are
outside. You _have_ to listen to it."
