"Sure," I said, walking out. "Religious contribution. Thirty pieces of
silver."

       *       *       *       *       *

Keys Crescas is the kind of odd-ball you can't find till after dark.
Good looking in a romantic, off-beat sort of way. No visible means of
support--a typical Psi. Renner made one white-jowled attempt to read
me the riot act for failing to plead him guilty when Passarelli had
tapped me as Public Defender. I came close to throwing the meat-ball
out of my private office.

What could I have done? Sure, Crescas has the Stigma--he doesn't try
to hide it. It's only TK, though, and I don't suppose much of that.
Just enough, the cops will tell you, to make him a good man at picking
locks and earn his nickname--Keys.

People like Crescas run to a pattern. I left my number in about ten of
the spots he might turn up, and around six o'clock one of them hit pay
dirt.

I pressed the "Accept" key when the phone rang, and Keys Crescas'
olive face and curly black hair filled the screen. His black eyes had
that lively watchfulness you associate with Psis. He had the gain way
down and the aperture wide, so that he wasn't in focus any farther
back than his ears. And that scope setting hid from where he was
calling as effectively as a veil. Did you ever know a Psi who didn't
seem to be harboring a secret?

"Hi, Mouthpiece," he grinned, showing even white teeth. "How'd you
know where to find me?"

"Best place for worms is under a manure pile," I said. "I used
parallel logic."

That took that smug, Stigma grin off his puss. "What do you want?" he
asked, sullen now.

"A lead to a Psi who's gone into hiding."

You know what he told me to do. "Mary Hall," I added. "She's got
Stigma Troubles."

"Not even counting you, eh?" Crescas sneered. He made the same
suggestion again. I let it ride. "Go on," he dared me. "Make your
pitch. I'll laugh later."

"That 'Not Guilty' verdict doesn't mean a thing, Crescas," I told him.
"That was a National Bank she tried to rob. There's a Federal rap
still to be settled. She has big Stigma troubles and needs
counsel--and not one of those shysters who hang around the Criminal
Courts building sniffing for Psi business."

"She's in no trouble till they find her," he said accurately, and I
could see his hand come up to cut the image. "For my dough they've
given up trying to find her and are using you for a stalking horse,"
he added with fiendish accuracy.

"So don't trust me," I snarled. "You can send her saw blades baked in
a cake." I reached up, too.

"Hold it."

I stopped, trying to keep my glower going.

"Passarelli would have to be in on it, too," he decided. "And I can't
figure _him_ for a louse. O.K., Maragon. I'll pick you up at your
office at about eight o'clock."

       *       *       *       *       *

With nearly two hours to kill, I went out to eat. I still felt glum
and lousy. Part of it was the knifelike penetration of Crescas'
intuition--his knowing that I was just a stalking horse so that the
big guns could zero in on Mary Hall. And there was that little tremor
of fear that comes from knowing that a Psi may think you've
doublecrossed him. They have some powerful abilities when it comes to
exacting vengeance. Well, if everything about the deal was as much
screwed up as the part I had heard so far, I decided, I might get out
with a whole skin at that.

That was my attempt at consolation--that and an order of sweet-breads,
Financiere, which is a ridiculous dish for a sawed-off shyster tending
toward overweight.

I was back in the law library by ten minutes of eight, trying to
occupy my mind with the latest _Harvard Law Review_, when the 'phone
rang. Keys' face, a little tight-lipped and bright-eyed, peered at me
from the screen, which it completely filled. He must have darned near
swallowed the 'scope.

"Ready?" he asked softly.

"Sure. You picking me up?"

His lip curled in half a smile. "What do I look like?" he sneered.
"Grab a cab. You know a bar called the Moldy Fig?" I nodded. "That's
where." He cut the image.

Well, this was more like it. You can't deal with Psis without the
whole affair acting like something out of E. Phillips Oppenheim. I
closed up the office, turned out the ceiling, and rode the elevator
down to the street.

The night howled and shrieked with air-borne traffic. A hot-rodding
kid gunned his fans up the street a way and ripped what silence might
have remained to the night into shreds as he streaked past me. The
jerk wasn't forty feet off the ground, and was pouring the coal to his
turbine. The whine of his impellers sounded a strong down-Doppler as
his ripped past me, nose dropped a good thirty degrees and dragging
every knot he could get out of his 'copter.

I waved to a cab standing at the rank up the block a way and watched
the skim-copter rise a couple inches off the ground as the hacker
skimmed on the ground-cushion toward me. City grit cut at my ankles
from the air blast before I could hop into the bubble and give him my
destination. He looked the question at me hopefully, over his
shoulder, his hand on the arm of his meter.

"Oh, what the hell," I said, still sore at the world, and a little
worried about what I was trying to do. "Let's 'copter!" He grinned and
swung the arm over to the "fly" position with its four-times-higher
rate. His turbine screamed to a keener pitch with wide throttle, and
he climbed full-bore into the down-town slow lane.

       *       *       *       *       *

The swift ride down to the Village was long enough to induce that odd
motion-hypnosis so common in night flight over a metropolitan area.
The dizzy blur of red and green running lights from air-borne traffic
at levels above and below us, the shapes of 'copters silhouetted
beneath us against the lambent glow of the city's well-lit streets,
all wove into a numbing pattern.

[Illustration]

"Here's the _Fig_, Mac," the hacker said as we grounded. I stuck my
credit card in the meter and hopped out, not fast enough to duck the
fan-driven pin-pricks of sand as he pulled away.

Crescas appeared as if by magic--Psis act like that--and had me by the
arm. "Quick!" he said, pushing me back into the spot he had appeared
from. It was a doorway beside the Moldy Fig, opening on a flight of
steps running to an apartment above the bar. As we climbed the clean
and well-lit stairs, I reminded myself that I was probably entering a
den of Psis--and clamped down tight on my thoughts. There was plenty
they had better not peep.

Keys didn't have to knock on the door--there's always a telepath
hanging around these Stigma hideouts who knows who's coming. A husky
young man, quite blond and pink of face, opened the door. A soft
rustle of music spilled out around his big shoulders. He wore a
T-shirt, and his powerful forearms were bare.

"Hey!" he said to Keys, spotting himself as a Southerner as surely as
if he'd had the Stars and Bars tattooed on his forehead. We followed
him down a short hall into a room furnished, with a couple of couches,
an easy-chair, several small but delightful tables, and a piano. Here
was the music. A blond bombshell was drumming box chords on the
ivories, and grouped around her on side chairs were four young men,
playing with her. It was jazz, if that's what you call the quiet
racket that comes out of a wooden recorder, a very large pottery
ocharina that hooted like a gallon jug, a steel guitar and a pair of
bongo drums played discreetly with the fingertips.

My appearance stopped them right in the middle of a chorus of "Muskrat
Ramble." I'd have liked to hear more--it was Dixieland times two--what
the Psis call Psixieland. That's jazz played by a gang of telepaths.
Each one knows what the others are about to play. The result is
extemporaneous counterpoint, but without the clinkers we associate
with jazz. Almost too perfect, yet untrammeled.

My eyes ran around the room as the four men who had been playing with
the girl got up and prepared to leave. The place was spotless. Oh, the
furnishings weren't costly, but they were chosen with that sense of
fitness, of refinement of color and decor that is curiously Psi. I
suppose that's one of the little things that annoys Normals so much.
Stigma powers seem to go beyond telepathy, clairvoyance and
telekinesis--they extend in some hard to define way into the
aesthetic. A chaste kind of cleanliness is only part of it. _Taste_, I
guess that's the word. Their attire, their homes, everything about
Psis, seems tasteful.

       *       *       *       *       *
