On the seventh day after Raphael Poe's arrival in Moscow, the other four
men met in Blair House, across the street from the White House, in a room
especially prepared for the purpose. No one but the President knew the
exact purpose of the meeting, although they had an idea that he wanted
more information of some kind.

The President himself was the last to arrive. Leaving two Secret Service
men standing outside the room, he carefully closed the door and turned to
face the Secretary of Defense, Colonel Spaulding, and Leonard Poe. "Sit
down, gentlemen," he said, seating himself as he spoke.

"Gentlemen, before we go any further, I must conduct one final experiment
in order to justify Operation Mapcase. I will not explain it just yet." He
looked at Lenny Poe, a small, dark-haired man with a largish nose. "Mr.
Poe, can you contact your brother at this moment?"

Lenny Poe was a man who was not overawed by anyone, and had no inclination
to be formal, not even toward the President. "Yeah, sure," he said
matter-of-factly.

[Illustration]

The President glanced at his watch. "It is now five minutes of ten. That
makes it five minutes of six in the evening in Moscow. Is your brother
free to move around? That is, can he go to a certain place in the city?"

Lenny closed his eyes for a moment, then opened them. "Rafe says he can go
any place that the average citizen would be allowed to go."

"Excellent," said the President. He gave Lenny an address--an intersection
of two streets not far from Red Square. "Can he get there within fifteen
minutes?"

"Make it twenty," said Lenny.

"Very well. Twenty minutes. When he gets there, I'll ask you to relay
further instructions."

Lenny Poe closed his eyes, folded his arms, and relaxed in his chair. The
other three men waited silently.

Nineteen minutes later, Lenny opened his eyes and said: "O.K. He's there.
Now what?"

"There is a lamppost on that corner, I believe," said the President. "Can
your brother see it?"

Lenny closed his eyes again. "Sure. There's a guy leaning against it."

The President's eyes brightened. "Describe him!"

Lenny, eyes still closed, said: "Five feet ten, heavy set, gray hair,
dark-rimmed glasses, brown suit, flashy necktie. By the cut of his
clothes, I'd say he was either British or American, probably American.
Fifty-five or fifty-six years old."

It was obvious to the Secretary of Defense and to Colonel Spaulding that
the President was suppressing some inward excitement.

"Very good, Mr. Poe!" he said. "Now, you will find a box of colored
pencils and a sketch pad in that desk over there. Can you draw me a fairly
accurate sketch of that man?"

"Yeah, sure." Lenny opened his eyes, moved over to the desk, took out the
pencils and sketch pad, and went to work. He had to close his eyes
occasionally, but his work was incredibly rapid and, at the same time,
almost photographically accurate.

As the picture took form, the President's inward excitement increased
perceptibly. When it was finally finished, Lenny handed the sketch to the
President without a word.

The President took it eagerly and his face broke out in his famous grin.
"Excellent! Perfect!" He looked at Lenny. "Your brother hasn't attracted
the man's attention in any way, has he?"

"Nope," said Lenny.

"Fine. The experiment is over. Relay my thanks to your brother. He can go
ahead with whatever he was doing now."

"I don't quite understand," said the Secretary of State.

"I felt it necessary to make one final experiment of my own devising," the
President said. "I wanted Raphael Poe to go to a particular place at a
particular time, with no advance warning, to transmit a picture of
something he had never seen before. I arranged this test myself, and I am
positive that there could be no trickery."

"Never seen before?" the Secretary repeated bewilderedly. He gestured at
the sketch. "Why, that's obviously Bill Donovan, of the Moscow delegation.
Poe could have seen a photograph of him somewhere before."

"Even so," the President pointed out, "there would be no way of knowing
that he would be at that spot. But that's beside the point. Look at that
necktie!"

"I had noticed it," the Defense Secretary admitted.

It was certainly an outstanding piece of neckwear. As drawn by Leonard
Poe, it was a piece of brilliant chartreuse silk, fully three and a half
inches wide at its broadest. Against that background, rose-pink nude girls
were cavorting with pale mauve satyrs.

"That tie," said the President, "was sent to me fifteen years ago by on of
my constituents, when I was in Congress. I never wore it, of course, but
it would have been criminal to have thrown away such a magnificently
obscene example of bad taste as that.

"I sent it to Donovan in a sealed diplomatic pouch by special courier,
with instructions to wear it at this time. He, of course, has no idea why
he is standing there. He is merely obeying orders.

"Gentlemen, this is completely convincing to me. Absolutely no one but
myself knew what I had in mind. It would have required telepathy even to
cheat.

"Thank you very much, Mr. Poe. Colonel Spaulding, you may proceed with
Operation Mapcase as planned."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Dr. Malekrinova, will you initial these requisition forms, please."

Dr. Sonya Malekrinova, a dowdy-looking, middle-aged woman with unplucked
eyebrows and a mole on her chin, adjusted her steel-rimmed glasses, took
the proffered papers from the clerk, ran her eyes over them, and then put
her initials on the bottom of each page.

"Thank you, Comrade Doctor," said the clerk when she handed back the sheaf
of papers.

"Certainly, Comrade."

And the two of them went about their business.

Not far away, in the Cathedral of St. Basil, Vladimir Turenski, alias
Raphael Poe, was also apparently going about his business. The cathedral
had not seen nor heard the Liturgy of the Russian Orthodox Church or any
other church, for a good many decades. The Bolsheviks, in their zeal to
protect the citizens of the Soviet Unions from the pernicious influence of
religion, had converted it into a museum as soon as possible.

It was the function of _Tovarishch_ Turenski to push a broom around the
floors of the museum, and this he did with great determination and
efficiency. He also cleaned windows and polished metalwork when the
occasion demanded. He was only one of a large crew of similarly employed
men, but he was a favorite with the Head Custodian, who not only felt
sorry for the simple-minded deaf-mute, but appreciated the hard work he
did. If, on occasion, Comrade Turenski would lean on his broom and fall
into a short reverie, it was excusable because he still managed to get all
his work done.

Behind Comrade Turenski, a guide was explaining a display to a group of
tourists, but Turenski ignored the distraction and kept his mind focused
on the thoughts of Dr. Sonya Malekrinova.

After nearly ten months of patient work, Raphael Poe had hit upon
something that was, to his way of thinking, more important than all the
information he had transmitted to Washington thus far.

Picking brains telepathically was not, even for him, an easy job. He had
the knack and the training but, in addition, there was the necessity of
establishing a rapport with the other mind. Since he was a physicist and
not a politician, it was much easier to get information from the mind of
Sonya Malekrinova than to get it from the Premier. The only person with
whom he could keep in contact over any great distance was his brother, and
that only because the two of them had grown up together.

He could pick up the strongest thoughts of any nearby person very easily.
He did not need to hear the actual words, for instance, of a nearby
conversation in order to follow it perfectly, because the words of verbal
communication were strong in a person's mind.

But getting deeper than that required an increasing amount of
understanding of the functioning of the other person's mind.

His ability to eavesdrop on conversations had been of immense benefit to
Washington so far, but is was difficult for him to get close enough to the
higher-ups in the Soviet government to get all the data that the President
of the United States wanted.

But now that he had established a firm mental linkage with one of the
greatest physicists in the Soviet Union, he could begin to send
information that would be of tremendous value to the United States.

He brushed up a pile of trash, pushed it into a dust pan, and carried it
off toward the disposal chute that led to the trash cans. In the room
where the brooms were kept, he paused and closed his eyes.

_Lenny! Are picking this up?_

_Sure, Rafe. I'm ready with the drawing board anytime you are._

As Dr. Sonya Malekrinova stood in her laboratory looking over the
apparatus she was perfecting for the glory of the Soviet State, she had no
notion that someone halfway around the world was also looking at it over
