forms _ten'dons_, (white cords,) by which the muscles are attached
to the bones.

_Observation._ In the disease called rheumatism, the fibrous tissue is
the part principally affected; hence the joints, where this tissue is
most abundant, suffer most from this affection.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

34. Describe the dermoid tissue. What is said of the sympathy between
the functions of the skin and mucous membrane? Give another instance
of the sympathy between these membranes. 35. Of what does the fibrous
tissue consist? How do these appear in some situations? How in others?
What tissue is generally affected in rheumatism?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

36. The ADIPOSE TISSUE is so arranged as to form distinct bags, or
cells. These contain a substance called _fat_. This tissue is
principally found beneath the skin, abdominal muscles, and around the
heart and kidneys; while none is found in the brain, eye, ear, nose,
and several other organs.

_Observation._ In those individuals who are corpulent, there is in
many instances, a great deposit of this substance. This tissue
accumulates more readily than others when a person becomes gross, and
is earliest removed when the system emaciates, in acute or chronic
diseases. Some of the masses become, in some instances, enlarged.
These enlargements are called _adipose_, or _fatty tumors_.

[Illustration: Fig. 4. 1, A portion of the adipose tissue. 2, 2, 2,
Minute bags containing fat. 3, A cluster of these bags, separated and
suspended.]

37. The CARTILAGINOUS TISSUE is firm, smooth, and highly elastic.
Except bone, it is the hardest part of the animal frame. It tips the
ends of the bones that concur in forming a joint. Its use is to
facilitate the motion of the joints by its smooth surface, while its
elastic character diminishes the shock that would otherwise be
experienced if this tissue were inelastic.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

36. Describe the adipose tissue. Where does this tissue principally
exist? Give observation in regard to the adipose tissue. 37. Describe
the cartilaginous tissue. What is its use?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

38 The OSSEOUS TISSUE, in composition and arrangement of matter,
varies at different periods of life, and in different bones. In some
instances, the bony matter is disposed in plates, while in other
instances, the arrangement is cylindrical. Sometimes, the bony matter
is dense and compact; again, it is spongy, or porous. In the centre of
the long bones, a space is left which is filled with a fatty
substance, called _mar'row_.

_Observation._ Various opinions exist among physiologists in regard to
the use of marrow. Some suppose it serves as a reservoir of
nourishment, while others, that it keeps the bones from becoming dry
and brittle. The latter opinion, however, has been called in question,
as the bones of the aged man contain more marrow than those of the
child, and they are likewise more brittle.

[Illustration: Fig. 5. A section of the femur, (thigh-bone.) 1, 1, The
extremities, showing a thin plate of compact texture, which covers small
cells, that diminish in size, but increase in number, as they approach
the articulation. 2, 2, The walls of the shaft, which are very firm and
solid. 3, The cavity that contains the marrow.]

39. The MUSCULAR TISSUE is composed of many fibres, that unite to form
fasciculi, each of which is enclosed in a delicate layer of cellular
tissue. Bundles of these fasciculi constitute a muscle.

_Observation._ A piece of boiled beef will clearly illustrate the
arrangement of muscular fibre.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

38. What is said of the osseous tissue? How is the bony matter
arranged in different parts of the animal frame? What is said of the
use of marrow? 39. Of what is the muscular tissue composed? How may
the arrangement of muscular fibre be illustrated?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

40. The MUCOUS TISSUE differs from the serous by its lining all
the cavities which communicate with the air. The nostrils, the
mouth, and the stomach afford examples. The external surface of this
membrane, or that which is exposed to the air, is soft, and bears some
resemblance to the downy rind of a peach. It is covered by a viscid
fluid called _mu'cus_. This is secreted by small _gland-cells_,
called _ep-i-the'li-a_, or secretory cells of the mucous membrane.
The use of this membrane and its secreted mucus is to protect the
inner surface of the cavities which it lines.

_Observation._ A remarkable sympathy exists between the remote parts
of the mucous membrane. Thus the condition of the stomach may be
ascertained by an examination of the tongue.

41. The NERVOUS TISSUE consists of soft, pulpy matter, enclosed in
a sheath, called _neu-ri-lem'a_. This tissue consists of two
substances. The one, of a pulpy character and gray color, is called
_cin-e-ri'tious_, (ash-colored.) The other, of a fibrous character and
white, is named _med'ul-la-ry_, (marrow-like.) In every part of the
nervous system both substances are united, with the exception of the
nervous fibres and filaments, which are solely composed of the
medullary matter enclosed in a delicate sheath.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

40. How does the mucous differ from the serous tissue? What is the
appearance of the external surface of this membrane? Where is the
mucus secreted? What is the use of this membrane? 41. Of what does the
nervous tissue consist? Describe the two substances that enter into
the composition of the nervous tissue.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=




CHAPTER III

CHEMISTRY OF THE HUMAN BODY.


42. An ULTIMATE ELEMENT is the simplest form of matter with which we
are acquainted; as gold, iron, &c.

43. These elements are divided into _metallic_ and _non-metallic_
substances. The metallic substances are _Po-tas'si-um_, _So'di-um_,
_Cal'ci-um_, _Mag-ne'si-um_, _A-lu'min-um_, _I'ron_, _Man'ga-nese_, and
_Cop'per_. The non-metallic substances are _Ox'y-gen_, _Hy'dro-gen_,
_Car'bon_, _Ni'tro-gen_, _Si-li'-ci-um_, _Phos'phor-us_, _Sul'phur_,
_Chlo'rine_, and a few others.

44. POTASH (potassium united with oxygen) is found in the blood, bile,
perspiration, milk, &c.

45. SODA (sodium combined with oxygen) exists in the muscles, and in
the same fluids in which potash is found.

46. LIME (calcium combined with oxygen) forms the principal ingredient
of the bones. The lime in them is combined with phosphoric and
carbonic acid.

47. MAGNESIA (magnesium combined with oxygen) exists in the bones,
brain, and in some of the animal fluids; as milk.

48. SILEX (silicium combined with oxygen) is contained in the hair and
in some of the secretions.

49. IRON forms the coloring principle of the red globules of the
blood, and is found in every part of the system.

_Observation._ As metallic or mineral substances enter into the
ultimate elements of the body, the assertion that all minerals are
poisonous, however small the quantity, is untrue.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

42. What is an ultimate element? Give examples. 43. How are they
divided? Name the metallic substances. Name the non-metallic
substances. 44. What is said of potash? 45. Of soda? 46. Of lime? 47.
Of magnesia? 48. Of silex? 49. What forms the coloring principle of
the blood? What is said of mineral substances?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

50. OXYGEN is contained in all the fluids and solids of the body. It
is almost entirely derived from the inspired air and water. It is
expelled in the form of carbonic acid and water from the lungs and
skin. It is likewise removed in the other secretions.

51. HYDROGEN is found in all the fluids and in all the solids of
the body. It is derived from the food, as well as from water and
other drinks. It exists in the greatest abundance in the impure,
dark-colored blood of the system. It is removed by the agency of the
kidneys, skin, lungs, and other excretory organs.

52. CARBON is an element in the oil, fat, albumen, fibrin, gelatin,
bile, and mucus. This element likewise exists in the impure blood in
the form of carbonic acid gas. Carbon is obtained from the food, and
discharged from the system by the secretions and respiration.

53. NITROGEN is contained in most animal matter, but is most abundant
in fibrin. It is not contained in fat and a few other substances.

_Observation._ The peculiar smell of animal matter when burning is
owing to nitrogen. This element combined with hydrogen forms
_am-mo'ni-a_, (hartshorn,) when animal matter is in a state of
putrefaction.

54. PHOSPHORUS is contained in many parts of the system, but more
particularly in the bones. It is generally found in combination with
oxygen, forming _phosphoric acid_. The phosphoric acid is usually
combined with alkaline bases; as lime in the bones, forming phosphate
of lime.

55. SULPHUR exists in the bones, muscles, hair, and nails. It is
expelled from the system by the skin and intestines.

56. CHLORINE is found in the blood, gastric juice, milk, perspiration,
and saliva.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

50. What is said of oxygen? 51. Of hydrogen? 52. What is said of
carbon? 53. Of nitrogen? How is ammonia formed? 54. What is said of
phosphorus? 55. What is said of sulphur? 56. Of chlorine?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

57. PROXIMATE ELEMENTS are forms of matter that exist in organized
bodies in abundance, and are composed chiefly of oxygen, hydrogen,
carbon, and nitrogen, arranged in different proportions. They exist
already formed, and may be separated in many instances, by heat or
mechanical means. The most important compounds are _Al-bu'men_,
_Fi'brin_, _Gel'a-tin_, _Mu'cus_, _Fat_, _Ca'se-ine_, _Chon'drine_,
_Lac'tic acid_, and _Os'ma-zome_.

58. ALBUMEN is found in the body, both in a fluid and solid form. It
is an element of the skin, glands, hair, and nails, and forms the
principal ingredient of the brain. Albumen is without color, taste, or
smell, and it coagulates by heat, acids, and alcohol.

_Observation._ The white of an egg is composed of albumen, which can
be coagulated or hardened by alcohol. As albumen enters so largely
into the composition of the brain, is not the impaired intellect and
moral degradation of the inebriate attributable to the effect of
alcohol in hardening the albumen of this organ?

59. FIBRIN exists abundantly in the blood, chyle, and lymph. It
constitutes the basis of the muscles. Fibrin is of a whitish color,
inodorous, and insoluble in cold water. It differs from albumen by
possessing the property of coagulating at all temperatures.

_Observation._ Fibrin may be obtained by washing the thick part of
blood with cold water; by this process, the red globules, or coloring
matter, are separated from this element.

60. GELATIN is found in nearly all the solids, but it is not known to
exist in any of the fluids. It forms the basis of the cellular tissue,
and exists largely in the skin, bones, ligaments, and cartilages.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

57. What are proximate elements? Do they exist already formed in
organized bodies? Name the most important compounds. 58. What is said
of albumen? Give observation relative to this element. 59. Of fibrin?
How does albumen differ from fibrin? How can fibrin be obtained? 60.
What is said of gelatin?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

_Observation._ Gelatin is known from other organic principles by its
dissolving in warm water, and forming "jelly." When dry, it forms the
hard, brittle substance, called _glue_. Isinglass, which is used in
the various mechanical arts, is obtained from the sounds of the
sturgeon.

61. MUCUS is a viscid fluid secreted by the gland-cells, or epithelia.
Various substances are included under the name of mucus. It is
generally alkaline, but its true chemical character is imperfectly
understood. It serves to moisten and defend the mucous membrane. It is
found in the cuticle, brain, and nails; and is scarcely soluble in
water, especially when dry. (Appendix C.)

62. OSMAZOME is a substance of an aromatic flavor. It is of a
yellowish-brown color, and is soluble both in water and alcohol, but
does not form a jelly by concentration. It is found in all the fluids,
and in some of the solids; as the brain.

_Observation._ The characteristic odor and taste of soup are owing to
osmazome.

63. There are several acids found in the human system; as the
_A-ce'tic_, _Ben-zo'ic_, _Ox-al'ic_, _U'ric_, and some other
substances, but not of sufficient importance to require a particular
description.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

How is it known from other organic principles? 61. What is said of
mucus? 62. Of osmazome? To what are the taste and odor of soup owing?
63. What acids are found in the system?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=




CHAPTER IV.

THE BONES.


64. The bones are firm and hard, and of a dull white color. In all the
higher orders of animals, among which is man, they are in the interior
of the body, while in lobsters, crabs, &c., they are on the outside,
forming a case which protects the more delicate parts from injury.

65. In the mechanism of man, the variety of movements he is called to
perform requires a correspondent variety of component parts, and the
different bones of the system are so admirably adapted to each other,
that they admit of numerous and varied motions.

66. When the bones composing the skeleton are united by natural
ligaments, they form what is called a _natural skeleton_, when united
by wires, what is termed an _artificial skeleton_.

67. The elevations, or protuberances, of the bones are called
_proc'es-ses_, and are, generally, the points of attachment for the
muscles and ligaments.


ANATOMY OF THE BONES.

68. The BONES are composed of both animal and earthy matter. The
earthy portion of the bones gives them solidity and strength, while
the animal part endows them with vitality.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

64. What is said of the bones? 65. Is there an adaptation of the bones
of the system to the offices they are required to perform? 66. What is
a natural skeleton? What an artificial? 67. What part of the bones are
called processes? 68-73. _Give the structure of the bones._ 68. Of
what are the bones composed? What are the different uses of the
component parts of the bones?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

_Experiments._ 1st. To show the earthy without the animal matter, burn
a bone in a clear fire for about fifteen minutes, and it becomes white
and brittle, because the gelatin, or animal matter of the bone, has
been destroyed.

2d. To show the animal without the earthy matter of the bones, immerse
a slender bone for a few days in a weak acid, (one part muriatic acid
and six parts water,) and it can then be bent in any direction. In
this experiment, the acid has removed the earthy matter, (carbonate
and phosphate of lime,) yet the form of the bone is unchanged.

69. The bones are formed from the blood, and are subjected to several
changes before they are perfected. At their early formative stage,
they are cartilaginous. The vessels of the cartilage, at this period,
convey only the _lymph_, or white portion of the blood; subsequently,
they convey red blood. At this time, true ossification (the deposition
of phosphate and carbonate of lime) commences at certain points, which
are called _the points of ossification_.

70. Most of the bones are formed of several pieces, or centres of
ossification. This is seen in the long bones which have their
extremities separated from the body by a thin partition of cartilage.
It is some time before these separate pieces are united to form one
bone.

71. When the process of ossification is completed, there is still a
constant change in the bones. They increase in bulk, and become less
vascular, until middle age. In advanced life, the elevations upon
their surface and near the extremities become more prominent,
particularly in individuals accustomed to labor. As a person advances
in years, the vitality diminishes, and in extreme old age, the earthy
substance predominates; consequently, the bones are extremely
brittle.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

How can the earthy matter of the bones be shown? The animal? 69.
What is the appearance of the bones in their early formative stage?
When does true ossification commence? 70. How are most of the bones
formed? 71. What is said of the various changes of the bones after
ossification?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

72. The fibrous membrane that invests the bones is called
_per-i-os'te-um_; that which covers the cartilages is called
_per-i-chon'dri-um_. When this membrane invests the skull, it is
called _per-i-cra'ni-um_.

[Illustration: Fig. 6. A section of the knee-joint. The lower part of the
femur, (thigh-bone,) and upper part of the tibia, (leg-bone,) are seen
ossified at 1, 1. The cartilaginous extremities of the two bones are seen
at _d_, _d_. The points of ossification of the extremities, are seen at
2, 2. The patella, or knee-pan, is seen at _c_. 3, A point, or centre of
ossification.]

73. The PERIOSTEUM is a firm membrane immediately investing the bones,
except where they are tipped with cartilage, and the crowns of the
teeth, which are protected by enamel. This membrane has minute nerves,
and when healthy, possesses but little sensibility. It is the
nutrient membrane of the bone, endowing its exterior with vitality; it
also gives insertion to the tendons and connecting ligaments of the
joints.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

72. What is the membrane called that invests the bones? That covers
the cartilage? That invests the skull? Explain fig. 6. 73. Describe
the periosteum.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

74. There are two hundred and eight[3] bones in the human body,
beside the teeth. These, for convenience, are divided into four
parts: 1st. The bones of the _Head_. 2d. The bones of the _Trunk_.
3d. The bones of the _Upper Extremities_. 4th. The bones of the
_Lower Extremities_.

   [3] Some anatomists reckon more than this number, others less, for
       the reason that, at different periods of life, the number of
       pieces of which one bone is formed, varies. _Example._ The
       breast-bone, in infancy, has _eight_ pieces; in youth, _three_;
       in old age, but _one_.

75. The bones of the HEAD are divided into those of the _Skull_,
_Ear_, and _Face_.

76. The SKULL is composed of eight bones. They are formed of two
plates, or tablets of bony matter, united by a porous portion of bone.
The external tablet is fibrous and tough; the internal plate is dense
and hard, and is called the _vit're-ous_, or glassy table. These
tough, hard plates are adapted to resist the penetration of sharp
instruments, while the different degrees of density possessed by the
two tablets, and the intervening spongy bone, serve to diminish the
vibrations that would occur in falls or blows.

77. The skull is convex externally, and at the base much thicker than
at the top or sides. The most important part of the brain is placed
here, completely out of the way of injury, unless of a very serious
nature. The base of the cranium, or skull, has many projections,
depressions, and apertures; the latter affording passages for the
nerves and blood-vessels.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

74. How many bones in the human body? How are they divided? 75-81.
_Give the anatomy of the bones of the head._ 75. How are the bones of
the head divided? 76. Describe the bones of the skull. 77. What is the
form of the skull? What does the base of the skull present?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

78. The bones of the cranium are united by ragged edges, called
_sut'ures_. The edges of each bone interlock with each other,
producing a union, styled, in carpentry, _dovetailing_. They
interrupt, in a measure, the vibrations produced by external blows,
and also prevent fractures from extending as far as they otherwise
would, in one continued bone. From infancy to the twelfth year, the
sutures are imperfect; but, from that time to thirty-five or forty,
they are distinctly marked; in old age, they are nearly obliterated.

[Illustration: Fig. 7. 1, 1, The coronal suture at the front and upper
part of the skull, or cranium. 2, The sagittal suture on the top of the
skull. 3, 3, The lambdoidal suture at the back part of the cranium.]

79. We find as great a diversity in the form and texture of the
skull-bone, as in the expression of the face. The head of the New
Hollander is small; that of the African is compressed; while the
Caucasian is distinguished for the beautiful oval form of the head.
The Greek skulls, in texture, are close and fine, while the Swiss are
softer and more open.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

78. How are the bones of the skull united? What are the uses of the
sutures? Mention the appearance of the sutures at different ages. What
does fig. 7 represent? 79. What is said respecting the form and
texture of the skull in different nations?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

80. In each EAR are four very small bones. They aid in hearing.

81. In the FACE are fourteen bones, some of which serve for the
attachment of powerful muscles, which are more or less called into
action in masticating food; others retain in place the soft parts of
the face.

[Illustration: Fig. 8. 1, The frontal, or bone of the forehead. 2. The
parietal bone. 3, The temporal bone. 4, The zygomatic process of the
temporal bone. 5, The malar (cheek) bone. 6, The superior maxillary bone,
(upper jaw.) 7, The vomer, that separates the cavities of the nose. 8,
The inferior maxillary bone, (lower jaw.) 9. The cavity for the eye.]

82. The TRUNK has fifty-four bones--twenty-four _Ribs_; twenty-four
bones in the _Spi'nal Col'umn_, (back-bone;) four in the _Pel'vis_;
the _Ster'num_, (breast-bone;) and the _Os hy-oid'es_, (the bone at
the base of the tongue.) They are so arranged as to form, with the
soft parts attached to them, two cavities, called the _Tho'rax_
(chest) and _Ab-do'men_.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

80. How many bones in the ear? 81. How many bones in the face? What is
their use? Explain fig. 8. 82-94. _Give the anatomy of the bones of
the trunk._ 82. How many bones in the trunk? Name them. What do they
form by their arrangement?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

83. The THORAX is formed by the sternum in front; the ribs, at the
sides; and the twelve dorsal bones of the spinal column, posteriorly.
The natural form of the chest is a cone, with its apex above; but
fashion, in many instances, has nearly inverted this order. This
cavity contains the lungs, heart, and large blood-vessels.

[Illustration: Fig. 9. 1, The first bone of the sternum, (breast-bone.)
2. The second bone of the sternum. 3, The cartilage of the sternum. 4,
The first dorsal vertebra, (a bone of the spinal column.) 5, The last
dorsal vertebra. 6, The first rib. 7, Its head. 8, Its neck. 9, Its
tubercle. 10, The seventh, or last true rib. 11, The cartilage of the
third rib. 12, The floating ribs.]

84. The STERNUM is composed of eight pieces in the child. These unite
and form but three parts in the adult. In youth, the two upper
portions are converted into bone, while the lower portion remains
cartilaginous and flexible until extreme old age, when it is often
converted into bone.

85. The RIBS are connected with the spinal column, and increase in
length as far as the seventh. From this they successively become
shorter. The direction of the ribs from above, downward, is oblique,
and their curve diminishes from the first to the twelfth. The external
surface of each rib is convex; the internal, concave. The inferior, or
lower ribs, are, however, very flat.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

83. Describe the thorax. Explain fig. 9. 84. Describe the sternum. 85.
Describe the ribs.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

86. The seven upper ribs are united to the sternum, through the medium
of cartilages, and are called the _true ribs_. The cartilages of the
next three are united with each other, and are not attached to the
sternum; these are called _false ribs_. The lowest two are called
_floating ribs_, as they are not connected either with the sternum or
the other ribs.

87. The SPINAL COLUMN is composed of twenty-four pieces of bone. Each
piece is called a _vert'e-bra_. On examining one of the bones, we find
seven projections, called _processes_; four of these, that are
employed in binding the bones together, are called _articulating_
processes; two of the remaining are called the _transverse_; and the
other, the _spinous_. The last three give attachment to the muscles of
the back.

88. The large part of the vertebra, called the body, is round and
spongy in its texture, like the extremity of the round bones. The
processes are of a more dense character. The projections are so
arranged that a tube, or canal, is formed immediately behind the
bodies of the vertebrae, in which is placed the _me-dul'la spi-na'lis_,
(spinal cord,) sometimes called the pith of the back-bone.

89. Between these joints, or vertebrae, is a peculiar and highly
elastic substance, which much facilitates the bending movements of the
back. This compressible cushion of cartilage also serves the important
purpose of diffusing and diminishing the shock in walking, running, or
leaping, and tends to protect the delicate texture of the brain.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

86. How are the ribs united to the sternum? 87. Describe the spinal
column. 88. Give the structure of the vertebra. Where is the spinal
cord placed? 89. What is placed between each vertebra? What is its
use?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

90. Another provision for the protection of the brain, which bears
convincing proof of the wisdom and beneficence of the Creator, is the
antero-posterior, or forward and backward curve of the spinal column.
Were it a straight column, standing perpendicularly, the slightest
jar, in walking, would cause it to recoil with a sudden jerk; because,
the weight bearing equally, the spine would neither yield to the one
side nor the other. But, shaped as it is, we find it yielding in the
direction of the curves, and thus the force of the shock is diffused.

[Illustration: Fig. 10. A vertebra of the neck. 1, The body of the
vertebra. 2, The spinal canal. 4, The spinous process, cleft at its
extremity. 5, The transverse process. 7, The inferior articulating
process. 8, The superior articulating process.]

[Illustration: Fig. 11. 1, The cartilaginous substance that connects the
bodies of the vertebrae. 2, The body of the vertebra. 3, The spinous
process. 4, 4, The transverse processes. 5, 5, The articulating
processes. 6, 6, A portion of the bony bridge that assists in forming the
spinal canal, (7.)]

_Observation._ A good idea of the structure of the vertebrae may be
obtained by examining the spinal column of a domestic animal, as the
dog, cat, or pig.

91. The PELVIS is composed of four bones; the two _in-nom-i-na'ta_,
(nameless bones,) the _sa'crum_, and the _coc'cyx_.

92. The INNOMINATUM, in the child, consists of three pieces. These,
in the adult, become united, and constitute but one bone. In the sides
of these bones is a deep socket, or depression, like a cup, called the
_ac-e-tab'u-lum_, in which the round head of the thigh-bone is
placed.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

90. What is said of the curves of the spinal column? What is
represented by fig. 10? By fig. 11? How can the structure of the
vertebrae be seen? 91. Of how many bones is the pelvis composed? 92.
What is said of the innominatum in the child?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

93. The SACRUM, so called because the ancients offered it in
sacrifices, is a wedge-shaped bone, that is placed between the
innominata, and to which it is bound by ligaments. Upon its upper
surface it connects with the lower vertebra. At its inferior, or lower
angle, it is united to the coccyx. It is concave upon its anterior,
and convex upon its posterior surface.

[Illustration: Fig. 12. 1, 1, The innominata, (nameless bones.) 2, The
sacrum. 3, The coccyx. 4, 4, The acetabulum. a, a, The pubic portion of
the innominata. d, The arch of the pubes; e, The junction of the sacrum
and lower lumbar vertebra.]

94. The COCCYX, in infants, consists of several pieces, which, in
youth, become united and form one bone. This is the terminal extremity
of the spinal column.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

In the adult? Describe the acetabulum. 93. Describe the sacrum.
Explain fig. 12. 94. Describe the coccyx.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=




CHAPTER V.

ANATOMY OF THE BONES, CONTINUED


95. The bones of the upper and lower limbs are enlarged at each
extremity, and have projections, or processes. To these, the tendons
of muscles and ligaments are attached, which connect one bone with
another. The shaft of these bones is cylindrical and hollow, and in
structure, their exterior surface is hard and compact, while the
interior portion is of a reticulated character. The enlarged
extremities of the round bones are more porous than the main shaft.

96. The UPPER EXTREMITIES contain sixty-four bones--the _Scap'u-la_,
(shoulder-blade;) the _Clav'i-cle_, (collar-bone;) the _Hu'mer-us_,
