"You can forget the doctor part," I said uncomfortably. I had heard
that Cleary was sensitive about having no advanced degree. When he
went to work for the Western, college was plenty. You did your
post-graduate work on the job. He sure had--and he had a string of
patents as long as your arm to prove it.

"That's good," he said. "I'd hate to think I was competing with you in
the field of knowledge where you are the world's specialist."

I grinned at him a little sickly. "COMCORP has never made any use of
my specialty," I conceded. "You already had about ten guys around here
who had learned twice as much as I had simply by doing it every day
for a living. They could have written rings around my thesis."

"Sure," he said contentedly, puffing more smoke. "So we made a testing
engineer out of you. And you may amount to something, to hear Fred
Stone tell it."

"Thanks," I said.

"Now let me hear what you've been doing for Fred," Cleary suggested,
in a sort of avuncular tone. "I'd like to measure you myself."

"You mean the tests I ran on the switching gate?" I asked.

"Why, yes, we can start there," he nodded, squinting his blue eyes
more and blowing a real screen up between us.

       *       *       *       *       *

"When Telstar One packed up, they sent me down the whole gate from
that sector," I said. "Dr. Stone asked me to run destruct tests on the
whole assembly, which I did. The only failures I have induced so far
are failures in M1537, the solenoid that all the shouting is about."

"What kind of failures did you get?"

"Armature froze on the field," I said. "I guess the bearings really
went. When there was enough load on them, they couldn't maintain
concentricity."

"What kind of loads?" he growled, sinking down lower in his chair. He
put his elbows on the arm and laced hairy-backed fingers together
under his chin.

"I put the whole gate on the centrifuge and swung it up to twelve
gees" I said. "Switching was normal there for the twenty thousand
cycles I gave the gate. But when I added undamped vibration at twelve
thousand to fifteen thousand cycles per second, I could induce failure
pretty quickly. Say an hour or so."

"You had to apply the vibration throughout the whole test period to
get these failures?"

"Yes, Mr. Cleary."

"Then how do you explain how vibration during no more than six or
eight minutes of blast-off and launch could have the same effect on
the actual installation on M1537 in a satellite, Mr. Seaman?" Smoke
poured from the curve-stem.

"I don't have to explain it," I said, beginning to get a little hot.
"All I have done is find a way to make one part quit. I haven't said
it did quit in use, or that it could be made to quit in use."

"Then what the hell are you good for?" Cleary growled.

I didn't have any answer for that.

He repeated his question, blue eyes glittering. "I asked you what the
hell you were good for, Seaman!" he said, much more loudly.

"For putting in the middle," I snapped back.

"That's how you interpret this affair, then?"

"Yes."

"All right," Cleary said, straightening up. "We'll stop talking about
your work as if it were scientific study and talk about it as a play
in office politics. Is that what you want?"

"I don't want any part of it," I said, hoping I wasn't plaintive. "I
work under orders. The director of assembly asked me to test the part
to destruction. I tested it. I'm sorry that it wasn't a soldered joint
that failed. It wasn't. It was a solenoid. What has that got to do
with me?"

"Nothing, maybe," Cleary conceded, pushing himself up out of his
chair. He went to his window to stare out at the parking lot. "You can
be a test engineer all your life, if that's what you want."

"It isn't."

"And what do you want, Mike?" he said, turning back to face me.

"Your job," I said. "In time."

       *       *       *       *       *

He nodded. "Well said," he decided. "But if you want it, you'll have
to learn that business is about ninety per cent people and about ten
per cent operations. You know, as you have clearly shown, that Fred
Stone is pushing to get me out of here a little before my time, and
pushing to make sure that he gets this spot, for which there are other
claimants of equal rank in the organization. Oh no," he said, holding
up his hand. "Don't tell me that is none of your affair. Right now you
are in the unusual position of being able to cast a vote that will
decide just how soon Fred Stone can make his move for the top spot.
And as long as you sit there and try that smug line of 'I just test
'em and let the chips fall where they may,' you are really siding with
Fred Stone. I need something else out of you, and you know it. What's
it going to be? Are you a wise enough head at your years to pick a
winner in this scrap? And what if it _isn't_ Fred? I'll have your
hide, young man."

[Illustration]

"That's what your snippy little brunette said," I told him. "She told
me that you'd eat me for breakfast, and she was right." I got to my
feet.

"Where are you going," he growled. He was still standing behind his
chair.

"To look for another job, Mr. Cleary. There must be some place where
the honest result of a test will be assessed as the honest result of a
test rather than a move in a political fight."

"Honest result?" he echoed, and snorted. "_Was_ your test honest? What
_really_ happened out there in space?"

"Nobody asked me," I said hotly. "My assignment was to test that gate
until a part failed."

"A dishonest assignment," Cleary said. "Sit down a minute." We both
calmed down and took our seats. I got a cigar out of my coat, peeled
the wrapper and made counter-smoke. "Here, I'll give you an honest
assignment, Seaman. You're a test engineer. Tell me what happened _out
there in space_. Why did that switching operation fail?"

"I haven't the faintest idea," I said.

"Then find out!"

I chewed my cigar. "Without duplicating the conditions?" I protested.
"And how can we? There's zero gravity--zero pressure--all sorts of
things going on out there we can't duplicate in a lab."

"I really don't care how you do it," he said. "But if it were my job
I'd just light my pipe and sit here and think for a week or so. Why
don't _you_ try it?"

I got up again. "Yes, sir," I said. "I suppose it would help to have
the original telemetry data so that I could evaluate for myself what
went wrong."

"I thought you'd get to that," he said, passing me a fat file-folder.
"Here it is." He stood up, too, and led me to the door. "And other
data you might want?" he asked, now a good deal more kindly. His hand
was on my elbow.

I looked at him. "How about the phone number of the brunette out
there?" I asked without taking the stogey from my teeth.

"Sylvia? That's pretty valuable information," he said, beginning to
grin in a sleepy old fashion. "But she only dates astronauts. If you
haven't made at least three orbits, she won't even have dinner with
you."

[Illustration]

I stopped at Sylvia's desk with half an idea of asking her for a date.
"Well, Dr. Seaman," she demanded as I chewed on my pacifier. "What did
you learn?"

I thought about it. "That a lot depends on knowing where to put your
feet," I said, puffing smoke. "And my name is Mike."

She sniffed. "If you think Paul Cleary hasn't been around long enough
to catch Fred Stone trying to fake him out of position with a
meaningless test," she said, "you have another think coming!"

"He'd never have tried it," I told her, "if he'd known Cleary had you
to look after him." That got me a much louder sniff and toss of the
dark curly head, which broke up my plans to ask her to dinner.

The telemetry results had been decoded, of course, so that a mere
mortal could read them. I didn't have a pipe, which probably meant I'd
be a failure as a physicist, so I chewed cigars ragged for about three
days and did some serious thinking. When I got a result, I looked up
Shouff, Sylvia, Secy./Mgr./Dsgn., in the phone directory, and talked
to my favorite brunette.

"Mr. Cleary's office," she said.

"When would he like to see Mike Seaman?" I tried.

"Probably never," she told me. "But I suppose he'll have to. Isn't
Fred Stone going to run your errand for you?"

"I'm running Fred Stone's errands, isn't that what you really think,
Sylvia?" I asked her.

Sniff! "He can see you at eleven." Click.

Paul Cleary had his coat off and was poring over a large
black-on-white schematic when I was shown in by sniffin' Sylvia.
"Hello, Mike," he growled. "Here, Sylvia. Mike's not supposed to see
this stuff. Drag it away, honey. Drag it away!"

With quick motions she rolled up the drawings, snapped a rubber binder
around them and went out. Cleary wagged his hairy old paw to the chair
beside his desk.
