gravity of the asteroid was only two millionths of a Standard Gee,
which is hardly enough to give any noticeable impression to the human
nervous system.

"Surface at two meters," said the pilot. "Holding."

       *       *       *       *       *

The instrument man opened the outer door and saw the surface of the
gigantic rock a couple of yards in front of him. And projecting from
that surface was the eye of an eyebolt that had been firmly anchored
in the depths of the asteroid, a nickel-steel shaft thirty feet long
and eight inches in diameter, of which only the eye at the end showed.

The instrument man checked to make sure that his safety line was
firmly anchored and then pushed himself across the intervening space
to grasp the eye with a space-gloved hand.

This was the anchor.

Moving a nickel-iron asteroid across space to nearest processing plant
is a relatively simple job. You slap a powerful electromagnet on her,
pour on the juice, and off you go.

The stony asteroids are a different matter. You have to have something
to latch on to, and that's where the anchor-setter comes in. His job
is to put that anchor in there. That's the first space job a man can
get in the Belt, the only way to get space experience. Working by
himself, a man learns to preserve his own life out there.

Operating a space tug, on the other hand, is a two-man job because a
man cannot both be on the surface of the asteroid and in his ship at
the same time. But every space tug man has had long experience as an
anchor setter before he's allowed to be in a position where he is
capable of killing someone besides himself if he makes a stupid
mistake in that deadly vacuum.

"On contact, Jack," the instrument man said as soon as he had a firm
grip on the anchor. "Release safety line."

"Safety line released, Harry," Jack's voice said in his earphones.

Jack had pressed a switch that released the ship's end of the safety
line so that it now floated free. Harry pulled it towards himself and
attached the free end to the eye of the anchor bolt, on a loop of
nickel-steel that had been placed there for that purpose. "Safety line
secured," he reported. "Ready for tug line."

In the pilot's compartment, Jack manipulated the controls again. The
ship moved away from the asteroid and yawed around so that the "tail"
was pointed toward the anchor bolt. Protruding from a special port was
a heavy-duty universal joint with special attachments. Harry reached
out, grasped it with one hand, and pulled it toward him, guiding it
toward the eyebolt. A cable attached to its other end snaked out of
the tug.

Harry worked hard for some ten or fifteen minutes to get the universal
joint firmly bolted to the eye of the anchor. When he was through, he
said: "O.K., Jack. Try 'er."

The tug moved gently away from the asteroid, and the cable that bound
the two together became taut. Harry carefully inspected his handiwork
to make sure that everything had been done properly and that the
mechanism would stand the stress.

"So far so good," he muttered, more to himself than to Jack.

Then he carefully set two compact little strain gauges on the anchor
itself, at ninety degrees from each other on the circumference of the
huge anchor bolt. Two others were already in position in the universal
joint itself. When everything was ready, he said: "Give 'er a try at
length."

The tug moved away from the asteroid, paying out the cable as it
went.

Hauling around an asteroid that had a mass on the order of one hundred
seventy-four million metric tons required adequate preparation. The
nonmagnetic stony asteroids are an absolute necessity for the Belt
Cities. In order to live, man needs oxygen, and there is no trace of
an atmosphere on any of the little Belt worlds except that which Man
has made himself and sealed off to prevent it from escaping into
space. Carefully conserved though that oxygen is, no process is or can
be one hundred per cent efficient. There will be leakage into space,
and that which is lost must be replaced. To bring oxygen from Earth in
liquid form would be outrageously expensive and even more outrageously
inefficient--and no other planet in the System has free oxygen for the
taking. It is much easier to use Solar energy to take it out of its
compounds, and those compounds are much more readily available in
space, where it is not necessary to fight the gravitational pull of a
planet to get them. The stony asteroids average thirty-six per cent
oxygen by mass; the rest of it is silicon, magnesium, aluminum,
nickel, and calcium, with respectable traces of sodium, chromium,
phosphorous manganese, cobalt, potassium, and titanium. The metallic
nickel-iron asteroids made an excellent source of export products to
ship to Earth, but the stony asteroids were for home consumption.

This particular asteroid presented problems. Not highly unusual
problems, but problems nonetheless. It was massive and had a high rate
of spin. In addition, its axis of spin was at an angle of eighty-one
degrees to the direction in which the tug would have to tow it to get
it to the processing plant. The asteroid was, in effect, a huge
gyroscope, and it would take quite a bit of push to get that axis
tilted in the direction that Harry Morgan and Jack Latrobe wanted it
to go. In theory, they could just have latched on, pulled, and let the
thing precess in any way it wanted to. The trouble is that that would
not have been too good for the anchor bolt. A steady pull on the
anchor bolt was one thing: a nickel-steel bolt like that could take a
pull of close to twelve million pounds as long as that pull was along
the axis. Flexing it--which would happen if they let the asteroid
precess at will--would soon fatigue even that heavy bolt.

The cable they didn't have to worry about. Each strand was a fine wire
of two-phase material--the harder phase being borazon, the softer
being tungsten carbide. Winding these fine wires into a cable made a
flexible rope that was essentially a three-phase material--with the
vacuum of space acting as the third phase. With a tensile strength
above a hundred million pounds per square inch, a half inch cable
could easily apply more pressure to that anchor than it could take.
There was a need for that strong cable: a snapping cable that is
suddenly released from a tension of many millions of pounds can be
dangerous in the extreme, forming a writhing whip that can lash
through a spacesuit as though it did not exist. What damage it did to
flesh and bone after that was of minor importance; a man who loses all
his air in explosive decompression certainly has very little use for
flesh and bone thereafter.

"All O.K. here," Jack's voice came over Harry's headphones.

"And here," Harry said. The strain gauges showed nothing out of the
ordinary.

"O.K. Let's see if we can flip this monster over," Harry said,
satisfied that the equipment would take the stress that would be
applied to it.

He did not suspect the kind of stress that would be applied to him
within a few short months.


II

The hotel manager was a small-minded man with a narrow-minded outlook
and a brain that was almost totally unable to learn. He was, in short,
a "normal" Earthman. He took one look at the card that had been
dropped on his desk from the chute of the registration computer and
reacted. His thin gray brows drew down over his cobralike brown eyes,
and he muttered, "Ridiculous!" under his breath.

The registration computer wouldn't have sent him the card if there
hadn't been something odd about it, and odd things happened so rarely
that the manager took immediate notice of it. One look at the title
before the name told him everything he needed to know. Or so he
thought.

The registration robot handled routine things routinely. If they were
not routine, the card was dropped on the manager's desk. It was then
the manager's job to fit everything back into the routine. He grasped
the card firmly between thumb and forefinger and stalked out of his
office. He took an elevator down to the registration desk. His trouble
was that he had seized upon the first thing he saw wrong with the card
and saw nothing thereafter. To him, "out of the ordinary" meant
"wrong"--which was where he made his mistake.

There was a man waiting impatiently at the desk. He had put the card
that had been given him by the registration robot on the desk and was
