He waved--being half the nominal ownership of this place didn't
justify snobbery, when everyone must work together or die--and stepped
off toward the nearest entry lock with that flowing spaceman's pace
which always keeps one foot on the ground. Even so, he didn't
unshackle his inward-reeling lifeline till he was inside the chamber.

On the way he topped a gaunt ridge and had a clear view of the balloons
that were attached to the completed receptors. Those that were still
full bulked enormous, like ghostly moons. The Jovian gases that
strained their tough elastomer did not much blur the stars seen
through them; but they swelled high enough to catch the light of the
hidden sun and shimmer with it. The nearly discharged balloons hung
thin, straining outward. Two full ones passed in slow orbit against
the constellations. They were waiting to be hauled in and coupled
fast, to release their loads into the Station's hungry chemical plant.
But there were not yet enough facilities to handle them at once--and
the _Pallas Castle_ would soon be arriving with another--Blades found
that he needed a few extra curses.

Having cycled through the air lock, he removed his suit and stowed it,
also the heavy gloves which kept him from frostbite as he touched its
space-cold exterior. Tastefully clad in a Navy surplus Long John, he
started down the corridors.

Now that the first stage of burrowing within the asteroid had been
completed, most passages went through its body, rather than being
plastic tubes snaking across the surface. Nothing had been done thus
far about facing them. They were merely shafts, two meters square,
lined with doorways, ventilator grilles, and fluoropanels. They had no
thermocoils. Once the nickel-iron mass had been sufficiently warmed
up, the waste heat of man and his industry kept it that way. The dark,
chipped-out tunnels throbbed with machine noises. Here and there a
girlie picture or a sentimental landscape from Earth was posted. Men
moved busily along them, bearing tools, instruments, supplies. They
were from numerous countries, those men, though mostly North
Americans, but they had acquired a likeness, a rangy leathery look and
a free-swinging stride, that went beyond their colorful coveralls.

"Hi, Mike.... How's she spinning?... Hey, Mike, you heard the latest
story about the Martian and the bishop?... Can you spare me a minute?
We got troubles in the separator manifolds.... What's the hurry, Mike,
your batteries overcharged?" Blades waved the hails aside. There was
need for haste. You could move fast indoors, under the low weight
which became lower as you approached the axis of rotation, with no
fear of tumbling off. But it was several kilometers from the gas
receptor end to the people end of the asteroid.

He rattled down a ladder and entered his cramped office out of breath.
Avis Page looked up from her desk and wrinkled her freckled snub nose
at him. "You ought to take a shower, but there isn't time," she said.
"Here, use my antistinker." She threw him a spray cartridge with a
deft motion. "I got your suit and beardex out of your cabin."

"Have I no privacy?" he grumbled, but grinned in her direction. She
wasn't much to look at--not ugly, just small, brunette, and
unspectacular--but she was a supernova of an assistant. Make somebody
a good wife some day. He wondered why she hadn't taken advantage of
the situation here to snaffle a husband. A dozen women, all but two of
them married, and a hundred men, was a ratio even more lopsided than
the norm in the Belt. Of course with so much work to do, and with
everybody conscious of the need to maintain cordial relations, sex
didn't get much chance to rear its lovely head. Still--

She smiled back with the gentleness that he found disturbing when he
noticed it. "Shoo," she said. "Your guests will be here any minute.
You're to meet them in Jimmy's office."

       *       *       *       *       *

Blades ducked into the tiny washroom. He wasn't any 3V star himself,
he decided as he smeared cream over his face: big, homely, red-haired.
_But not something you'd be scared to meet in a dark alley, either,_
he added smugly. In fact, there had been an alley in Aresopolis....
Things were expected to be going so smoothly by the time they
approached conjunction with Mars that he could run over to that sinful
ginful city for a vacation. Long overdue ... whooee! He wiped off his
whiskers, shucked the zipskin, and climbed into the white pants and
high-collared blue tunic that must serve as formal garb.

Emerging, he stopped again at Avis' desk. "Any message from the
_Pallas_?" he asked.

"No," the girl said. "But she ought to be here in another two watches,
right on sked. You worry too much, Mike."

"Somebody has to, and I haven't got Jimmy's Buddhist
ride-with-the-punches attitude."

"You should cultivate it." She grew curious. The brown eyes lingered
on him. "Worry's contagious. You make me fret about you."

"Nothing's going to give me an ulcer but the shortage of booze on this
rock. Uh, if Bill Mbolo should call about those catalysts while I'm
gone, tell him--" He ran off a string of instructions and headed for
the door.

Chung's hangout was halfway around the asteroid, so that one chief or
the other could be a little nearer the scene of any emergency. Not
that they spent much time at their desks. Shorthanded and
undermechanized, they were forever having to help out in the actual
construction. Once in a while Blades found himself harking wistfully
back to his days as an engineer with Solar Metals: good pay,
interesting if hazardous work on flying mountains where men had never
trod before, and no further responsibilities. But most asterites had
the dream of becoming their own bosses.

When he arrived, the _Altair_ officers were already there, a score of
correct young men in white dress uniforms. Short, squat, and placid
looking, Jimmy Chung stood making polite conversation. "Ah, there," he
said, "Lieutenant Ziska and gentlemen, my partner, Michael Blades,
Mike, may I present--"

Blades' attention stopped at Lieutenant Ziska. He heard vaguely that
she was the head quartermaster officer. But mainly she was tall and
blond and blue-eyed, with a bewitching dimple when she smiled, and
filled her gown the way a Cellini Venus doubtless filled its casting
mold.

"Very pleased to meet you, Mr. Blades," she said as if she meant it.
Maybe she did! He gulped for air.

"And Commander Leibknecht," Chung said across several light-years.
"Commander Leibknecht. _Commander Leibknecht._"

"Oh. Sure. 'Scuse." Blades dropped Lieutenant Ziska's hand in
reluctant haste. "Hardjado, C'mander Leibfraumilch."

Somehow the introductions were gotten through. "I'm sorry we have to
be so inhospitable," Chung said, "but you'll see how crowded we are.
About all we can do is show you around, if you're interested."

"Of course you're interested," said Blades to Lieutenant Ziska. "I'll
show you some gimmicks I thought up myself."

Chung scowled at him. "We'd best divide the party and proceed along
alternate routes," he said, "We'll meet again in the mess for coffee,
Lieutenant Ziska, would you like to--"

"Come with me? Certainly," Blades said.

Chung's glance became downright murderous. "I thought--" he began.

"Sure." Blades nodded vigorously. "You being the senior partner,
you'll take the highest ranking of these gentlemen, and I'll be in
Scotland before you. C'mon, let's get started. May I?" He offered the
quartermistress his arm. She smiled and took it. He supposed that
eight or ten of her fellows trailed them.

       *       *       *       *       *

The first disturbing note was sounded on the verandah.

[Illustration]

They had glanced at the cavelike dormitories where most of the
personnel lived; at the recreation dome topside which made the life
tolerable; at kitchen, sick bay, and the other service facilities; at
the hydroponic tanks and yeast vats which supplied much of the
Station's food; at the tiny cabins scooped out for the top engineers
and the married couples. Before leaving this end of the asteroid,
Blades took his group to the verandah. It was a clear dome jutting
from the surface, softly lighted, furnished as a primitive officers'
lounge, open to a view of half the sky.

"Oh-h," murmured Ellen Ziska. Unconsciously she moved closer to
Blades.

Young Lieutenant Commander Gilbertson gave her a somewhat jaundiced
look. "You've seen deep space often enough before," he said.

"Through a port or a helmet." Her eyes glimmered enormous in the dusk.
"Never like this."

The stars crowded close in their wintry myriads. The galactic belt
glistened, diamond against infinite darkness. Vision toppled endlessly
outward, toward the far mysterious shimmer of the Andromeda Nebula;
silence was not a mere absence of noise, but a majestic presence, the
seething of suns.

"What about the observation terrace at Leyburg?" Gilbertson
challenged.

"That was different," Ellen Ziska said. "Everything was safe and
civilized. This is like being on the edge of creation."

Blades could see why Goddard House had so long resisted the inclusion of
female officers on ships of the line, despite political pressure at home
and the Russian example abroad. He was glad they'd finally given in. Now
if only he could build himself up as a dashing, romantic type ... But how
long would the _Altair_ stay? Her stopover seemed quite extended already,
for a casual visit in the course of a routine patrol cruise. He'd have to
work fast.

"Yes, we are pretty isolated," he said. "The Jupiter ships just unload
their balloons, pick up the empties, and head right back for another
cargo."

"I don't understand how you can found an industry here, when your raw
materials only arrive at conjunction," Ellen said.

"Things will be different once we're in full operation," Blades
assured her. "Then we'll be doing enough business to pay for a steady
input, transshipped from whatever depot is nearest Jupiter at any
given time."

"You've actually built this simply to process ... gas?" Gilbertson
interposed. Blades didn't know whether he was being sarcastic or
asking a genuine question. It was astonishing how ignorant
Earthsiders, even space-traveling Earthsiders, often were about such
matters.

"Jovian gas is rich stuff," he explained. "Chiefly hydrogen and
helium, of course; but the scoopships separate out most of that during
a pickup. The rest is ammonia, water, methane, a dozen important
organics, including some of the damn ... doggonedest metallic
complexes you ever heard of. We need them as the basis of a
chemosynthetic industry, which we need for survival, which we need if
we're to get the minerals that were the reason for colonizing the Belt
in the first place." He waved his hand at the sky. "When we really get
going, we'll attract settlement. This asteroid has companions, waiting
for people to come and mine them. Homeships and orbital stations will
be built. In ten years there'll be quite a little city clustered
around the Sword."

"It's happened before," nodded tight-faced Commander Warburton of
Gunnery Control.

"It's going to happen a lot oftener," Blades said enthusiastically.
"The Belt's going to grow!" He aimed his words at Ellen. "This is the
real frontier. The planets will never amount to much. It's actually
harder to maintain human-type conditions on so big a mass, with a
useless atmosphere around you, than on a lump in space like this. And
the gravity wells are so deep. Even given nuclear power, the energy
cost of really exploiting a planet is prohibitive. Besides which, the
choice minerals are buried under kilometers of rock. On a metallic
asteroid, you can find almost everything you want directly under your
feet. No limit to what you can do."

"But your own energy expenditure--" Gilbertson objected.

"That's no problem." As if on cue, the worldlet's spin brought the sun
into sight. Tiny but intolerably brilliant, it flooded the dome with
harsh radiance. Blades lowered the blinds on that side. He pointed in
the opposite direction, toward several sparks of equal brightness that
had manifested themselves.

"Hundred-meter parabolic mirrors," he said. "Easy to make; you spray a
thin metallic coat on a plastic backing. They're in orbit around us,
each with a small geegee unit to control drift and keep it aimed
directly at the sun. The focused radiation charges heavy-duty
accumulators, which we then collect and use for our power source in
all our mobile work."

"Do you mean you haven't any nuclear generator?" asked Warburton.

He seemed curiously intent about it. Blades wondered why, but nodded.
"That's correct. We don't want one. Too dangerous for us. Nor is it
necessary. Even at this distance from the sun, and allowing for
assorted inefficiencies, a mirror supplies better than five hundred
kilowatts, twenty-four hours a day, year after year, absolutely free."
