sweat stood out upon his forehead. "It's stuffy, somehow, in this
forest."

Then with an abrupt transition to unreasonable anger: "What is the
good of waiting here all the day? Lend a hand, I say! You have done
nothing but moon since we saw the dead Chinaman."

Hooker was looking steadfastly at his companion's face. He helped
raise the coat bearing the ingots, and they went forward perhaps a
hundred yards in silence. Evans began to breathe heavily. "Can't you
speak?" he said.

"What's the matter with you?" said Hooker.

Evans stumbled, and then with a sudden curse flung the coat from
him. He stood for a moment staring at Hooker, and then with a groan
clutched at his own throat.

"Don't come near me," he said, and went and leant against a tree. Then
in a steadier voice, "I'll be better in a minute."

Presently his grip upon the trunk loosened, and he slipped slowly down
the stem of the tree until he was a crumpled heap at its foot. His
hands were clenched convulsively. His face became distorted with pain.
Hooker approached him.

"Don't touch me! Don't touch me!" said Evans in a stifled voice. "Put
the gold back on the coat."

"Can't I do anything for you?" said Hooker.

"Put the gold back on the coat."

As Hooker handled the ingots he felt a little prick on the ball of
his thumb. He looked at his hand and saw a slender thorn, perhaps two
inches in length.

Evans gave an inarticulate cry and rolled over.

Hooker's jaw dropped. He stared at the thorn for a moment with dilated
eyes. Then he looked at Evans, who was now crumpled together on the
ground, his back bending and straitening spasmodically. Then he looked
through the pillars of the trees and net-work of creeper stems, to
where in the dim grey shadow the blue-clad body of the Chinaman was
still indistinctly visible. He thought of the little dashes in the
corner of the plan, and in a moment he understood.

"God help me!" he said. For the thorns were similar to those the
Dyaks poison and use in their blowing-tubes. He understood now
what Chang-hi's assurance of the safety of his treasure meant. He
understood that grin now.

"Evans!" he cried.

But Evans was silent and motionless now, save for a horrible spasmodic
twitching of his limbs. A profound silence brooded over the forest.

Then Hooker began to suck furiously at the little pink spot on the
ball of his thumb--sucking for dear life. Presently he felt a strange
aching pain in his arms and shoulders, and his fingers seemed
difficult to bend. Then he knew that sucking was no good.

Abruptly he stopped, and sitting down by the pile of ingots, and
resting his chin upon his hands and his elbows upon his knees, stared
at the distorted but still stirring body of his companion. Chang-hi's
grin came in his mind again. The dull pain spread towards his throat
and grew slowly in intensity. Far above him a faint breeze stirred the
greenery, and the white petals of some unknown flower came floating
down through the gloom.


PRINTED BY

TURNBULL AND SPEARS, EDINBURGH




A LIST OF NEW BOOKS AND ANNOUNCEMENTS OF

METHUEN AND COMPANY PUBLISHERS: LONDON

36 ESSEX STREET

W.C.




CONTENTS


FORTHCOMING BOOKS

POETRY

ENGLISH CLASSICS

HISTORY

BIOGRAPHY

GENERAL LITERATURE

THEOLOGY

LEADERS OF RELIGION

WORKS BY S. BARING GOULD

FICTION

BOOKS FOR BOYS AND GIRLS

THE PEACOCK LIBRARY

UNIVERSITY EXTENSION SERIES

SOCIAL QUESTIONS OF TO-DAY

CLASSICAL TRANSLATIONS


SEPTEMBER 1895.



MESSRS. METHUEN'S ANNOUNCEMENTS



Poetry and Belles Lettres


RUDYARD KIPLING

BALLADS. By RUDYARD KIPLING. _Crown 8vo. Buckram_. 6_s._

Also 200 copies on hand-made paper. 21s.

Also 35 copies on Japanese vellum. 42s.

The exceptional success of 'Barrack-Room Ballads,' with which this
volume will be uniform, justifies the hope that the new book too will
obtain a wide popularity.


W.E. HENLEY

ENGLISH LYRICS. Selected and Edited by W.E. HENLEY. _Crown 8vo.
Buckram_. 6_s_.

Also 30 copies on hand-made paper _Demy 8vo_. 21_s._

Few announcements will be more welcome to lovers of English verse than
the one that Mr. Henley is bringing together into one book the finest
lyrics in our language. The book will be produced with the same care
that made 'Lyra Heroica' delightful to the hand and eye.


ANDREW LANG

THE POEMS OF ROBERT BURNS. Edited, with Introduction, etc., by ANDREW
LANG. With Portraits. _Crown 8vo_. 6_s._

Also 75 copies on hand-made paper. _Demy 8vo_. 21s.

This edition will contain a carefully collated Text and Notes on the
Text, a critical and Biographical Introduction, Introductory Notes to
the Poems, and a Glossary.


ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON

VAILIMA LETTERS. By ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON. With an Etched Portrait by
WILLIAM STRANG, and other Illustrations. _Crown 8vo. Buckram. 7s. 6d_.

Also 125 copies on hand-made paper. _Demy 8vo. 25s._

A series of long journal letters written from Samoa to Mr. Sidney
Colvin during the last five years. They form an autobiography of Mr.
Stevenson during this period, giving a full account of his daily life
and literary work and ambitions. Mr. Colvin has written a Prologue and
Epilogue, and has added numerous notes.


ENGLISH CLASSICS

Edited by W.E. HENLEY.

The books, which are designed and printed by Messrs. Constable, are
issued in two editions--(1) A small edition, on the finest Japanese
vellum, limited in most cases to 25 copies, demy 8vo, 21s. a volume
nett; (2) The popular edition on laid paper, crown 8vo, buckram, 3s.
6d. a volume.


NEW VOLUMES.

THE LIVES OF DONNE, WOTTON, HOOKER, HERBERT, AND SANDERSON. By IZAAK
WALTON. With an Introduction by VERNON BLACKBURN, and a Portrait.

THE LIVES OF THE ENGLISH POETS. By SAMUEL JOHNSON, LL.D. With an
Introduction by JOHN HEPBURN MILLAR, and a Portrait. 3 _vols_.


W.M. DIXON

A PRIMER OF TENNYSON. By W.M. DIXON, M.A., Professor of English
Literature at Mason College. _Cr. 8vo. 2s. 6d._

This book consists of (1) a succinct but complete biography of
Lord Tennyson; (2) an account of the volumes published by him in
chronological order, dealing with the more important poems separately;
(3) a concise criticism of Tennyson in his various aspects as lyrist,
dramatist, and representative poet of his day; (4) a bibliography.
Such a complete book on such a subject, and at such a moderate price,
should find a host of readers.



FICTION


MARIE CORELLI

THE SORROWS OF SATAN. By MARIE CORELLI, Author of 'Barabbas,' 'A
Romance of Two Worlds,' etc. _Crown 8vo. 6s_.


ANTHONY HOPE

THE CHRONICLES OF COUNT ANTONIO. By ANTHONY HOPE, Author of 'The
Prisoner of Zenda,' 'The God in the Car,' etc. _Crown 8vo. 6s._

A romance of mediaeval Italy.


GILBERT PARKER

AN ADVENTURER OF THE NORTH. By GILBERT PARKER, Author of 'Pierre and
his People,' 'The Translation of a Savage,' etc. _Crown 8vo. 6s_.

This book consists of more tales of the Far North, and contains the
last adventures of 'Pretty Pierre.' Mr. Parker's first volume of
Canadian stories was published about three years ago, and was received
with unanimous praise.


EMILY LAWLESS

HURRISH. By the Honble. EMILY LAWLESS, Author of 'Maelcho,' 'Grania,'
etc. _Crown 8vo. 6s._ A reissue of Miss Lawless' most popular novel.


S. BARING GOULD

NOEMI. By S. BARING GOULD, Author of 'Mehalah,' 'In the Roar of the
Sea,' etc. Illustrated by R. CATON WOODVILLE. _Crown 8vo. 6s._

A Romance of Old France.


MRS. CLIFFORD

A FLASH OF SUMMER. By MRS.W.K. CLIFFORD, Author of 'Aunt Anne.' _Crown
8vo. 6s_.


J. MACLAREN COBBAN

THE KING OF ANDAMAN. By J. MACLAREN COBBAN, Author of 'The Red
Sultan,' etc. _Crown 8vo. 6s._


G. MANVILLE FENN

AN ELECTRIC SPARK. By G. MANVILLE FENN, Author of 'The Vicar's Wife,'
'A Double Knot,' etc. _Crown 8vo. 6s_.


C. PHILLIPS WOOLLEY

THE QUEENSBERRY CUP. A Tale of Adventure. By CLIVE PHILLIPS WOOLLEY,
Author of 'Snap,' Part Author of 'Big Game Shooting.' Illustrated.
_Crown 8vo. 6s_.

This is a story of amateur pugilism and chivalrous adventure, written
by an author whose books on sport are well known.


H.G. WELLS

THE STOLEN BACILLUS, AND OTHER STORIES. By H.G. WELLS, Author of 'The
Time Machine.' _Crown 8vo. 6s_.


MARY GAUNT

THE MOVING FINGER: chapters from the Romance of Australian Life. By
MARY GAUNT, Author of 'Dave's Sweetheart.' _Crown 8vo._. 3s. 6d_.


ANGUS EVAN ABBOTT

THE GODS GIVE MY DONKEY WINGS. By ANGUS EVAN ABBOTT. _Crown 8vo. 3s.
6d_.



ILLUSTRATED BOOKS


S. BARING GOULD

OLD ENGLISH FAIRY TALES collected and edited by S. BARING GOULD. With
numerous illustrations by F.D. BEDFORD. _Crown 8vo, 6s_.

This volume consists of some of the old English stories which have
been lost to sight, and they are fully illustrated by Mr. Bedford.


A BOOK OF NURSERY SONGS AND RHYMES. Edited by S. BARING GOULD, and
illustrated by the Students of the Birmingham Art School. _Crown 8vo.
6s_.

A collection of old nursery songs and rhymes, including a number which
are little known. The book contains some charming illustrations,
borders, etc., by the Birmingham students under the superintendence of
Mr. Gaskin, and Mr. Baring Gould has added numerous notes. This book
and the next have been printed in a special heavy type by Messrs.
Constable.


H.C. BEECHING

A BOOK OF CHRISTMAS VERSE. Edited by H.C. BEECHING, M.A., and
Illustrated by WALTER CRANE. _Crown 8vo. 5s_.

A collection of the best verse inspired by the birth of Christ from
the Middle Ages to the present day. Mr. Walter Crane has designed
several illustrations, and the cover. A distinction of the book is the
large number of poems it contains by modern authors, a few of which
are here printed for the first time.


JOHN KEBLE

THE CHRISTIAN YEAR. By JOHN KEBLE. With an Introduction and Notes by
W. LOCK, M.A., Sub-Warden of Keble College, Author of 'The Life of
John Keble.' Illustrated by R. ANNING BELL. _Fcap. 8vo. 3s. 6d._

A new edition of a famous book, illustrated and printed in black and
red, uniform with the 'Imitation of Christ.'



Theology and Philosophy


E.C. GIBSON

THE XXXIX. ARTICLES OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND. Edited with an
Introduction by E.C. GIBSON, M.A., Principal of Wells Theological
College. _In two volumes. Demy 8vo. 7s. 6d. each. Vol. I_.

