normal solution of a silver salt. The number of coulombs required to
deposit 107.94 grams is 107.94/0.001118 or 96,550 and the same number
of coulombs will also cause the separation of 1.008 grams of hydrogen,
8 grams of oxygen or 31.78 grams of copper. While it might at first
appear that Faraday's law could thus be used as a basis for the
calculation of the time required for the deposition of a given
quantity of an electrolyte from solution, it must be remembered that
the law expresses what occurs when the concentration of the ions in
the solution is kept constant, as, for example, when the anode in
a silver salt solution is a plate of metallic silver. Under the
conditions of electro-analysis the concentration of the ions is
constantly diminishing as deposition proceeds and the time actually
required for complete deposition of a given weight of material by
a current of constant strength is, therefore, greater than that
calculated on the basis of the law as stated above.

The electrodes employed in electro-analysis are almost exclusively
of platinum, since that metal alone satisfactorily resists chemical
action of the electrolytes, and can be dried and weighed without
change in composition. The platinum electrodes may be used in the
form of dishes, foil or gauze. The last, on account of the ease of
circulation of the electrolyte, its relatively large surface in
proportion to its weight and the readiness with which it can be washed
and dried, is generally preferred.

Many devices have been described by the use of which the electrode
upon which deposition occurs can be mechanically rotated. This has an
effect parallel to that of greatly increasing the electrode surface
and also provides a most efficient means of stirring the solution.
With such an apparatus the amperage may be increased to 5 or even 10
amperes and depositions completed with great rapidity and accuracy. It
is desirable, whenever practicable, to provide a rotating or stirring
device, since, for example, the time consumed in the deposition of the
amount of copper usually found in analysis may be reduced from the
20 to 24 hours required with stationary electrodes, and unstirred
solutions, to about one half hour.




DETERMINATION OF COPPER AND LEAD


PROCEDURE.--Weigh out two portions of about 0.5 gram each (Note 1)
into tall, slender lipless beakers of about 100 cc. capacity. Dissolve
the metal in a solution of 5 cc. of dilute nitric acid (sp. gr. 1.20)
and 5 cc. of water, heating gently, and keeping the beaker covered.
When the sample has all dissolved (Note 2), wash down the sides of the
beaker and the bottom of the watch-glass with water and dilute the
solution to about 50 cc. Carefully heat to boiling and boil for a
minute or two to expel nitrous fumes.

Meanwhile, four platinum electrodes, two anodes and two cathodes,
should be cleaned by dipping in dilute nitric acid, washing with water
and finally with 95 per cent alcohol (Note 3). The alcohol may be
ignited and burned off. The electrodes are then cooled in a desiccator
and weighed. Connect the electrodes with the binding posts (or other
device for connection with the electric circuit) in such a way that
the copper will be deposited upon the electrode with the larger
surface, which is made the cathode. The beaker containing the solution
should then be raised into place from below the electrodes until the
latter reach nearly to the bottom of the beaker. The support for the
beaker must be so arranged that it can be easily raised or lowered.

If the electrolytic apparatus is provided with a mechanism for the
rotation of the electrode or stirring of the electrolyte, proceed as
follows: Arrange the resistance in the circuit to provide a direct
current of about one ampere. Pass this current through the solution
to be electrolyzed, and start the rotating mechanism. Keep the beaker
covered as completely as possible, using a split watch-glass (or other
device) to avoid loss by spattering. When the solution is colorless,
which is usually the case after about 35 minutes, rinse off the cover
glass, wash down the sides of the beaker, add about 0.30 gram of urea
and continue the electrolysis for another five minutes (Notes 4 and
5).

If stationary electrodes are employed, the current strength should be
about 0.1 ampere, which may, after 12 to 15 hours, be increased to 0.2
ampere. The time required for complete deposition is usually from 20
to 24 hours. It is advisable to add 5 cc. of nitric acid (sp. gr. 1.2)
if the electrolysis extends over this length of time. No urea is added
in this case.

When the deposition of the copper appears to be complete, stop the
rotating mechanism and slowly lower the beaker with the left hand,
directing at the same time a stream of water from a wash bottle on
both electrodes. Remove the beaker, shut off the current, and, if
necessary, complete the washing of the electrodes (Note 6). Rinse the
electrodes cautiously with alcohol and heat them in a hot closet until
the alcohol has just evaporated, but no longer, since the copper is
likely to oxidize at the higher temperature. (The alcohol may be
removed by ignition if care is taken to keep the electrodes in motion
in the air so that the copper deposit is not too strongly heated at
any one point.)

Test the solution in the beaker for copper as follows, remembering
that it is to be used for subsequent determinations of iron and zinc:
Remove about 5 cc. and add a slight excess of ammonia. Compare the
mixture with some distilled water, holding both above a white surface.
The solution should not show any tinge of blue. If the presence of
copper is indicated, add the test portion to the main solution,
evaporate the whole to a volume of about 100 cc., and again
electrolyze with clean electrodes (Note 7).

After cooling the electrodes in a desiccator, weigh them and from the
weight of copper on the cathode and of lead dioxide (PbO_{2}) on the
anode, calculate the percentage of copper (Cu) and of lead (Pb) in the
brass.

[Note 1: It is obvious that the brass taken for analysis should be
untarnished, which can be easily assured, when wire is used, by
scouring with emery. If chips or borings are used, they should be well
mixed, and the sample for analysis taken from different parts of the
mixture.]

[Note 2: If a white residue remains upon treatment of the alloy with
nitric acid, it indicates the presence of tin. The material is not,
therefore, a true brass. This may be treated as follows: Evaporate the
solution to dryness, moisten the residue with 5 cc. of dilute nitric
acid (sp. gr. 1.2) and add 50 cc. of hot water. Filter off the
meta-stannic acid, wash, ignite in porcelain and weigh as SnO_{2}.
This oxide is never wholly free from copper and must be purified for
an exact determination. If it does not exceed 2 per cent of the alloy,
the quantity of copper which it contains may usually be neglected.]

[Note 3: The electrodes should be freed from all greasy matter before
using, and those portions upon which the metal will deposit should not
be touched with the fingers after cleaning.]

[Note 4: Of the ions in solution, the H^{+}, Cu^{++}, Zn^{++}, and
Fe^{+++} ions tend to move toward the cathode. The NO_{3}^{-} ions and
the lead, probably in the form of PbO_{2}^{--} ions, move toward the
anode. At the cathode the Cu^{++} ions are discharged and plate out as
metallic copper. This alone occurs while the solution is relatively
concentrated. Later on, H^{+} ions are also discharged. In the
presence of considerable quantities of H^{+} ions, as in this acid
solution, no Zn^{++} or Fe^{+++} ions are discharged because of their
greater deposition potentials. At the anode the lead is deposited as
PbO_{2} and oxygen is evolved.

For the reasons stated on page 141 care must be taken that the
solution does not become alkaline if the electrolysis is long
continued.]

[Note 5: Urea reacts with nitrous acid, which may be formed in the
solution as a result of the reducing action of the liberated hydrogen.
Its removal promotes the complete precipitation of the copper. The
reaction is

CO(NH_{2})_{2} + 2HNO_{2} --> CO_{2} + 2N_{2} + 3H_{2}O.]

[Note 6: The electrodes must be washed nearly or quite free from
the nitric acid solution before the circuit is broken to prevent
re-solution of the copper.

If several solutions are connected in the same circuit it is obvious
that some device must be used to close the circuit as soon as the
beaker is removed.]

[Note 7: The electrodes upon which the copper has been deposited
may be cleaned by immersion in warm nitric acid. To remove the lead
dioxide, add a few crystals of oxalic acid to the nitric acid.]




DETERMINATION OF IRON


Most brasses contain small percentages of iron (usually not over 0.1
per cent) which, unless removed, is precipitated as phosphate and
weighed with the zinc.

PROCEDURE.--To the solution from the precipitation of copper and
lead by electrolysis, add dilute ammonia (sp. gr. 0.96) until the
precipitate of zinc hydroxide which first forms re-dissolves, leaving
only a slight red precipitate of ferric hydroxide. Filter off the
iron precipitate, using a washed filter, and wash five times with hot
water. Test a portion of the last washing with a dilute solution of
ammonium sulphide to assure complete removal of the zinc.

The precipitate may then be ignited and weighed as ferric oxide, as
described on page 110.

Calculate the percentage of iron (Fe) in the brass.




DETERMINATION OF ZINC


PROCEDURE.--Acidify the filtrate from the iron determination with
dilute nitric acid. Concentrate it to 150 cc. Add to the cold solution
dilute ammonia (sp. gr. 0.96) cautiously until it barely smells of
ammonia; then add !one drop! of a dilute solution of litmus (Note 1),
and drop in, with the aid of a dropper, dilute nitric acid until the
blue of the litmus just changes to red. It is important that this
point should not be overstepped. Heat the solution nearly to boiling
and pour into it slowly a filtered solution of di-ammonium hydrogen
phosphate[1] containing a weight of the phosphate about equal
to twelve times that of the zinc to be precipitated. (For this
calculation the approximate percentage of zinc is that found by
subtracting the sum of the percentages of the copper, lead and iron
from 100 per cent.) Keep the solution just below boiling for fifteen
minutes, stirring frequently (Note 2). If at the end of this time the
amorphous precipitate has become crystalline, allow the solution to
cool for about four hours, although a longer time does no harm (Note
3), and filter upon an asbestos filter in a porcelain Gooch crucible.
The filter is prepared as described on page 103, and should be dried
to constant weight at 105 deg.C.

[Footnote 1: The ammonium phosphate which is commonly obtainable
contains some mono-ammonium salt, and this is not satisfactory as a
precipitant. It is advisable, therefore, to weigh out the amount of
the salt required, dissolve it in a small volume of water, add a drop
of phenolphthalein solution, and finally add dilute ammonium hydroxide
solution cautiously until the solution just becomes pink, but do not
add an excess.]

Wash the precipitate until free from sulphates with a warm 1 per cent
solution of the di-ammonium phosphate, and then five times with 50 per
cent alcohol (Note 4). Dry the crucible and precipitate for an hour at
105 deg.C., and finally to constant weight (Note 5). The filtrate should
be made alkaline with ammonia and tested for zinc with a few drops of
ammonium sulphide, allowing it to stand (Notes 6, 7 and 8).

From the weight of the zinc ammonium phosphate (ZnNH_{4}PO_{4})
calculate the percentage of the zinc (Zn) in the brass.

[Note 1: The zinc ammonium phosphate is soluble both in acids and in
ammonia. It is, therefore, necessary to precipitate the zinc in a
nearly neutral solution, which is more accurately obtained by adding
a drop of a litmus solution to the liquid than by the use of litmus
paper.]

[Note 2: The precipitate which first forms is amorphous, and may have
a variable composition. On standing it becomes crystalline and then
has the composition ZnNH_{4}PO_{4}. The precipitate then settles
rapidly and is apt to occasion "bumping" if the solution is heated to
boiling. Stirring promotes the crystallization.]

[Note 3: In a carefully neutralized solution containing a considerable
excess of the precipitant, and also ammonium salts, the separation
of the zinc is complete after standing four hours. The ionic changes
connected with the precipitation of the zinc as zinc ammonium
phosphate are similar to those described for magnesium ammonium
phosphate, except that the zinc precipitate is soluble in an excess of
ammonium hydroxide, probably as a result of the formation of complex
ions of the general character Zn(NH_{3})_{4}^{++}.]

[Note 4: The precipitate is washed first with a dilute solution of the
phosphate to prevent a slight decomposition of the precipitate (as a
result of hydrolysis) if hot water alone is used. The alcohol is added
to the final wash-water to promote the subsequent drying.]

[Note 5: The precipitate may be ignited and weighed as
Zn_{2}P_{2}O_{7}, by cautiously heating the porcelain Gooch crucible
within a nickel or iron crucible, used as a radiator. The heating
must be very slow at first, as the escaping ammonia may reduce the
precipitate if it is heated too quickly.]

[Note 6: If the ammonium sulphide produced a distinct precipitate,
this should be collected on a small filter, dissolved in a few cubic
centimeters of dilute nitric acid, and the zinc reprecipitated as
phosphate, filtered off, dried, and weighed, and the weight added to
that of the main precipitate.]

[Note 7: It has been found that some samples of asbestos are acted
upon by the phosphate solution and lose weight. An error from this
source may be avoided by determining the weight of the crucible
and filter after weighing the precipitate. For this purpose the
precipitate may be dissolved in dilute nitric acid, the asbestos
washed thoroughly, and the crucible reweighed.]

[Note 8. The details of this method of precipitation of zinc are fully
discussed in an article by Dakin, !Ztschr. Anal. Chem.!, 39 (1900),
273.]




DETERMINATION OF SILICA IN SILICATES


Of the natural silicates, or artificial silicates such as slags and
some of the cements, a comparatively few can be completely decomposed
by treatment with acids, but by far the larger number require fusion
with an alkaline flux to effect decomposition and solution
for analysis. The procedure given below applies to silicates
undecomposable by acids, of which the mineral feldspar is taken as a
typical example. Modifications of the procedure, which are applicable
to silicates which are completely or partially decomposable by acids,
are given in the Notes on page 155.


PREPARATION OF THE SAMPLE

Grind about 3 grams of the mineral in an agate mortar (Note 1) until
no grittiness is to be detected, or, better, until it will entirely
pass through a sieve made of fine silk bolting cloth. The sieve may be
made by placing a piece of the bolting cloth over the top of a small
beaker in which the ground mineral is placed, holding the cloth in
place by means of a rubber band below the lip of the beaker. By
inverting the beaker over clean paper and gently tapping it, the fine
particles pass through the sieve, leaving the coarser particles within
the beaker. These must be returned to the mortar and ground, and the
process of sifting and grinding repeated until the entire sample
passes through the sieve.

[Note 1: If the sample of feldspar for analysis is in the massive or
crystalline form, it should be crushed in an iron mortar until the
pieces are about half the size of a pea, and then transferred to a
steel mortar, in which they are reduced to a coarse powder. A wooden
mallet should always be used to strike the pestle of the steel mortar,
and the blows should not be sharp.

It is plain that final grinding in an agate mortar must be continued
until the whole of the portion of the mineral originally taken has
been ground so that it will pass the bolting cloth, otherwise the
sifted portion does not represent an average sample, the softer
ingredients, if foreign matter is present, being first reduced to
powder. For this reason it is best to start with not more than the
quantity of the feldspar needed for analysis. The mineral must be
thoroughly mixed after the grinding.]


FUSION AND SOLUTION

PROCEDURE.--Weigh into platinum crucibles two portions of the ground
feldspar of about 0.8 gram each. Weigh on rough balances two portions
of anhydrous sodium carbonate, each amounting to about six times the
weight of the feldspar taken for analysis (Note 1). Pour about three
fourths of the sodium carbonate into the crucible, place the latter on
a piece of clean, glazed paper, and thoroughly mix the substance and
the flux by carefully stirring for several minutes with a dry glass
rod, the end of which has been recently heated and rounded in a flame
and slowly cooled. The rod may be wiped off with a small fragment of
filter paper, which may be placed in the crucible. Place the remaining
fourth of the carbonate on the top of the mixture. Cover the crucible,
heat it to dull redness for five minutes, and then gradually increase
the heat to the full capacity of a Bunsen or Tirrill burner for
twenty minutes, or until a quiet, liquid fusion is obtained (Note 2).
Finally, heat the sides and cover strongly until any material which
may have collected upon them is also brought to fusion.

Allow the crucible to cool, and remove the fused mass as directed on
page 116. Disintegrate the mass by placing it in a previously prepared
mixture of 100 cc. of water and 50 cc. of dilute hydrochloric acid
(sp. gr. 1.12) in a covered casserole (Note 3). Clean the crucible and
lid by means of a little hydrochloric acid, adding this acid to the
main solution (Notes 4 and 5).

[Note 1: Quartz, and minerals containing very high percentages of
silica, may require eight or ten parts by weight of the flux to insure
a satisfactory decomposition.]

[Note 2: During the fusion the feldspar, which, when pure, is a
silicate of aluminium and either sodium or potassium, but usually
contains some iron, calcium, and magnesium, is decomposed by the
alkaline flux. The sodium of the latter combines with the silicic acid
of the silicate, with the evolution of carbon dioxide, while about two
thirds of the aluminium forms sodium aluminate and the remainder
is converted into basic carbonate, or the oxide. The calcium and
magnesium, if present, are changed to carbonates or oxides.

The heat is applied gently to prevent a too violent reaction when
fusion first takes place.]

[Note 3: The solution of a silicate by a strong acid is the result of
the combination of the H^{+} ions of the acid and the silicate ions
of the silicate to form a slightly ionized silicic acid. As a
consequence, the concentration of the silicate ions in the solution is
reduced nearly to zero, and more silicate dissolves to re-establish
the disturbed equilibrium. This process repeats itself until all of
the silicate is brought into solution.

Whether the resulting solution of the silicate contains ortho-silicic
acid (H_{4}SiO_{4}) or whether it is a colloidal solution of some
other less hydrated acid, such as meta-silicic acid (H_{2}SiO_{3}),
is a matter that is still debatable. It is certain, however, that the
gelatinous material which readily separates from such solutions is of
the nature of a hydrogel, that is, a colloid which is insoluble in
water. This substance when heated to 100 deg.C., or higher, is completely
dehydrated, leaving only the anhydride, SiO_{2}. The changes may be
represented by the equation:

SiO_{3}^{--} + 2H^{+} --> [H_{2}SiO_{3}] --> H_{2}O + SiO_{2}.]

[Note 4: A portion of the fused mass is usually projected upward by
the escaping carbon dioxide during the fusion. The crucible must
therefore be kept covered as much as possible and the lid carefully
cleaned.]

[Note 5: A gritty residue remaining after the disintegration of
the fused mass by acid indicates that the substance has been but
imperfectly decomposed. Such a residue should be filtered, washed,
dried, ignited, and again fused with the alkaline flux; or, if the
quantity of material at hand will permit, it is better to reject the
analysis, and to use increased care in grinding the mineral and in
mixing it with the flux.]


DEHYDRATION AND FILTRATION

PROCEDURE.--Evaporate the solution of the fusion to dryness, stirring
frequently until the residue is a dry powder. Moisten the residue with
5 cc. of strong hydrochloric acid (sp. gr. 1.20) and evaporate again
to dryness. Heat the residue for at least one hour at a temperature
of 110 deg.C. (Note 1). Again moisten the residue with concentrated
hydrochloric acid, warm gently, making sure that the acid comes into
contact with the whole of the residue, dilute to about 200 cc. and
bring to boiling. Filter off the silica without much delay (Note 2),
and wash five times with warm dilute hydrochloric acid (one part
dilute acid (1.12 sp. gr.) to three parts of water). Allow the filter
to drain for a few moments, then place a clean beaker below the funnel
and wash with water until free from chlorides, discarding these
washings. Evaporate the original filtrate to dryness, dehydrate at
110 deg.C. for one hour (Note 3), and proceed as before, using a second
filter to collect the silica after the second dehydration. Wash this
filter with warm, dilute hydrochloric acid (Note 4), and finally with
hot water until free from chlorides.

[Note 1: The silicic acid must be freed from its combination with
a base (sodium, in this instance) before it can be dehydrated.
The excess of hydrochloric acid accomplishes this liberation. By
disintegrating the fused mass with a considerable volume of dilute
