successful, getting most of his programs through Congress, avoiding
embarrassment, and heading off political difficulty before it gained
impetus.  No matter what the circumstance, he always managed to appear
calm and well informed, with just enough below-the-surface anger to let
everyone know, especially the Soviets, that the Commonwealth was not to
be made sport of or taken lightly (which of course appealed to the
current patriotic mood of his countrymen).

He was neither smarter, shrewder, nor more capable than his recent
predecessors.  If anything, he was less qualified than most.  But he
did have one skill they lacked.  He knew how to play the game, and he
lied (to no one more than to himself) with great conviction.

Because in the Commonwealth politicians were judged not so much by what
they did, as by the way they appeared to be doing it.  Lincoln, Kennedy
and Reagan were remembered as the greatest of men, though they
seriously mishandled important matters of state, largely because, as
the poetic put it, "They captured the spirit of their countrymen."
More cynically, they gave good speeches.  Edgar Stone, though
considerably less moral than any but the third, understood this (or
something like it), and with the aid of the power groups he
represented, had modeled his administration accordingly.

He did this by surrounding himself with strong and intelligent men who
understood the inner workings of government, economy and diplomacy,
concentrating his own energies---with the help of various acting
coaches and speech writers---on the subtleties of image and
appearances.  His was the mask worn by those who had elected him, and
those who held real power.  Not only did he fail to question the
morality of the policies they had him put forward, but in truth, was
not particularly interested.  He had for nearly twenty years made his
living as a front-man for conservative causes, knew his job and stuck
to it.  And having for so long been immersed in right wing-propaganda
(it also appealed to his ego and warped sense of patriotism), he really
did, or certainly appeared, to believe it himself.  Thus the last and
most important element of the facade fell into place:  'sincerity'.

Any seasoned political observer (who cared to look with his eyes) could
see this, and yet few with any authority chose to attack the graven
image.  Why?  Because he SEEMED to be doing a good job, and was (in the
persona that had so been carefully been constructed) a pleasant,
hard-working and respectable family man.  The fact that he had changed
professions (a former salesman), parties (a former Democrat), and wives
(a divorcee), was routinely shouted down as liberal mud-slinging.  The
press was cowed by his popularity, the opposition by the power it gave
him.  The middle class LIKED Edgar Stone, and big business stood behind
him.  It was a formidable combination.  No chink had yet been found in
his armor, and the political sharks that arise within any system,
democratic or otherwise, could not yet smell blood in the water.

But all that careful work and planning was now being swept away by a
single, unforeseeable mistake.  Over the years Stone had accumulated
numerous political debts, especially to those who had kept him going
during the lean years of 'progressive humanism', one of which he had
repaid by appointing a pompous, self-indulging and wholly unqualified
'hero' of the Nibian Wars (like Ulysses S. Grant, he had sent tens of
thousands to their graves without blinking), and a man he personally
disliked, as his Secretary of State.  Charles William Hayes.

Like Douglas Macarthur before him, Hayes had given innumerable signs of
the obsession he now sought to enact.  But like so many other men of
history who are not taken at their word (Adolph Hitler being perhaps
the clearest, and most horrific example), people had always assumed
that he took such a hard line against socialism (as Hitler had done
against the Jews) simply to encourage those who could elevate him to
power, and to tap into the volatile anger and frustration of his
countrymen.

But the truly frightening thing about such men, Hayes included, was
that THEY MEANT EVERY WORD THEY SAID.  "Better dead than Red," an
expression borrowed from the Cold War days of the mid twentieth
century, was not just a slogan to him, but unwritten Holy Scripture,
handed down to him by the righteous God who ruled the Universe and
called men of courage and action to his service, in the unending war
against this modern day Satan.  Etc.  In his mind, too simple or too
stubborn to possess any clear sense of perspective, this same God
directed his every footstep, living within him and guiding his
thoughts.  And anyone who stood in his way, or questioned his narrow
vision, was either weak, blind, or the enemy.  As he had intimated in
his letter to Stone, so far as he was concerned, there was no 'middle
ground' in anything.

And in classic Shakespearean form, the inevitably tragic events of his
life had only served to bear out his convictions, and reinforce his
Messianic image of himself.  Indeed, given the power of his obsession
and the unyielding pursuit of an aggressive, self-chosen destiny, they
could hardly have done otherwise.




So Edgar Stone brooded, and listened to his advisers argue, and tried
to think.  While the winds of war swirled around him.





II


On the three socialist planets now occupied by the Belgians and Swiss,
the process of political arrest, judgment and exile had already begun.
The process was especially swift and unyielding on Athena, where nearly
eighty percent of the inhabitants, considered either dangerous or
unnecessary to the occupation, were to be transported to the newly
constructed facilities of the Belgian prison planet, Dracus IIa.

True to their word, the arrests were made without violence.  Families
were kept together whenever possible (except where a father, husband or
wife was needed to operate high-tech equipment, thought-controlled
machinery or the like), and all were given suitable quarters while
awaiting the transport ships that would take them to Dracus.  They were
told that upon arrival they would be given the resources to feed,
clothe, and govern themselves, and that no harm would come to those who
cooperated.  The Alliance had no intention of turning public opinion
against itself, or calling to anyone's mind (especially their own) the
barbarities and prison-camp horrors of previous wars.

Their plan was simple.  Send all undesirables and non-essential
personnel to secretly located prison planets deep within their
boundaries, give them the tools they needed to survive, cut off all
communication, and simply leave them there.  When the war was over
there would be time to consider a more permanent solution.

And at the moment there were more pressing matters at hand.  First they
had to ascertain exactly who it was they were fighting, and why---since
clearly they didn't share Hayes' obsession, and intended to act wholly
independent of him.

Here were the facts as they saw them.

The Dutch Provinces, long coveted, were now in their possession, along
with the Athena colonies.  Their strength, especially monetary, had
grown because of it.  There was no substantial inter-galactic outcry
against them, their own activities being largely overshadowed by the
possibility of a full-scale offensive push by the Commonwealth.  And
their losses to date, though somewhat more substantial than they had
hoped, could not outweigh their ambition.  Except for the German-made
carrier, which they had not expected to lose, the fleet sent against
Dubcek had been manned by robot crews only, the idea being to exchange
hardware, which could be replaced, for the bounty of Athena.  They had
even taken a new, bi-national symbol, the pouncing leopard, and had it
emblazoned on their ships, and on the sleeves of all their flyers.

But what they should have known, what every leopard does know, is that
they were not the only, nor indeed the most powerful predator in the
bush.  The stir created by a kill may be tolerated once by the pride of
lions living nearby.  But soon both predator and prey are aware of
their existence, ready to act upon it, and even the distraction of a
rogue elephant, crashing blindly through the brush, can't hide its
presence for long.

Their fight had only just begun.




III


The morning of June 17, on the eve of his scheduled press conference to
address the issue, Edgar Stone sat behind his desk in the Oval Office,
staring blankly at his fourth attempt to draft a reply to General
Hayes.  Dark circles pulled at his eyes and sinuses; his head felt like
a warm stone that wouldn't think.  Half an hour earlier, after
listening to his top advisers swear at each other with the same
arguments they had been postulating for months, he had done something
he would not have dreamed of in other circumstances.  He had told them
all to "Shut up," and unceremoniously shown them the door.

For the first time in his presidency he was taking matters into his own
hands, with more than a few regrets and second thoughts.  He had slept
badly or not at all for three nights running, and felt neither brave,
nor noble, nor even competent to make such a choice.  In his current
frame of mind he was incapable of realizing the human or historical
significance of the crisis that lay before him, and at the moment this
was not what mattered.  Unlike Hayes, he didn't give a damn what people
thought once he was dead, or even out of office.  What mattered now was
that his tolerance for bullshit had been long since used up---that he
was furious at being put in such a position.

And somewhere, very deep inside himself he knew, though he shrank from
the knowledge, that something very wrong had happened, that the damage
was far from over, and that he was partly to blame.  And he knew one
more thing, despite the rhetoric that he had spouted for two decades:
offensive war, unduly considered, was the basest and most shameful of
human endeavors, never justifiable, and rarely, in the end,
accomplishing anything.

Because for all his faults, and these he possessed in abundance, Edgar
Stone was not insane.

He bowed very low, crumpling the paper before him in both hands.  Shook
his head mournfully.  He pushed the com-button on his desk and summoned
a secretary, to whom he dictated his answer to Hayes.


*


The press conference was postponed without a future date being set, on
the pretext that new information had just come to light, which must be
relayed to the Secretary of State before further action could be taken.
 But even the impassable Bill Miller, Stone's Press Secretary, could
not pull off this announcement without incurring a barrage of stupefied
questions and dissatisfied remarks.

And when news of the postponement spread, along with the undercurrent
of confusion and subdued alarm which accompanied it, even the dullest
Americans began to sense that something was amiss---that real life had
somehow crept onto the peaceful shores of their island.  And nearly all
were aware of a strange thrill of fear as their President finally
stepped before the cameras on July 15, looking not at all like himself.



*                        *                        *


On June 24, the day that Hayes received the President's reply, the
Third Fleet was once again preparing to go into action.  The
coordinates (and victim) of their next attack had already been decided
upon, known only to the General Staff, and to the scientists in charge
of constructing the star gate.  All the myriad ships---destroyer
groups, flotillas and task forces, still intact---were once more
huddled within the massive body of the Supercarrier 'Dreadnought',
itself nearly forty kilometers from stem to stern.

The mother vessel, with all its destructive children tucked up inside,
and therefore vulnerable (relatively speaking) to sudden attack, had
been positioned by her masters in the place that this was least likely
to occur---a distant orbit around the sea planet Goethe, where Alliance
ships moved constantly, ready to repel any attempt at a counter-stroke
by the Coalition.  The entrance to the star gate was being constructed
outside the extremities of the system, far beyond the considerable pull
of the massive star, Athena.

Though the two capitalist fleets remained in constant contact, it was
understood that there would be no mutual effort or coordinated defense
once the Dreadnought left the system.  The two sides had gotten what
they wanted:  the Belgians and Swiss the riches of the colonies, as
well as the threat of a powerful ally, and the Commonwealth, an easy
victory with a minimum of casualties.  Thus the thief and the bully
would part.

Both sides, meanwhile, were concerned (at least Hayes pretended to be)
by the external calm and relative inaction on the part of the
Coalition, and the still more ominous silence of Soviet Space.  In his
more lucid moments the Secretary realized the strength of his ultimate
foe:  that a great bear waited for him deep in the woods, and that
killing it, even with the full weight of the Commonwealth behind him,
would be no easy task.  But for now he feared nothing and no one.

ONE STEP AT A TIME, he told himself.  One step at a time.


*


It was late afternoon, U.C. Earth time, though that measure seemed
quite meaningless while circling a planet of turbulent seas two hundred
times Earth's mass, dotted with tiny islands rising thousands of feet
above the wrack, itself revolving around a sun not to be spoken in the
same breath with our own.

Leif Janson felt this lapse of human significance acutely, as he paced
back and forth in Communications Room One, waiting for the approaching
message from the diminutive planet which had spawned him.  Even aboard
the Dreadnought, dwarfed as it was by everything around it, this
feeling of smallness and mock importance would not leave him.

He recalled the words of Joseph Conrad, describing the way the primeval
forests of Africa must have looked upon the coming of the white man to
steal its ivory.  "Fantastic invasion."  And so it seemed to him now.
How could man even pretend to dominate such a Universe, in which his
unnoticed presence, lasting but the blink of an eye, could not begin to
compare with the Infinity which his mind could not even comprehend?
All that a man could ever hope to do was live in peace with himself,
and understanding with his neighbors.  And of late the Commonwealth had
done a damned poor job of that.  To find love, and to pass that love on
to his children.....

"Major Janson."  He turned.  "Message coming in."

"Good.  Get it recorded then go below.  Lieutenant Frye, contact the
Secretary and ask him to come down right away.  Tell him the message is
in, and that I've cleared the com room.  Then report to your quarters
and await further instructions."

"Yes sir."

Several minutes later Janson stood alone beside the main decoding
computer, listening to the drum of approaching footsteps.  General
Hayes strode into the room with the same expression of confident,
aggressive attention that he always wore, perhaps pulled a bit tighter
about the cheekbones by tension and desire.

With him were two other men:  Brigadier General Michael Calder, his
right-hand man for the last twenty years, and Gen-Admiral Frank,
commander of the Third Fleet, also a long-time associate.  The
Secretary, choosing for the moment to don civilian clothes, addressed
the middle-aged (and therefore to his eyes, young) Communications
Officer directly.

"Well, Major.  Is the message fully recorded?  Have you followed my
instructions to the letter?"

"Yes sir.  Shall I begin decoding?"

Janson held this important, sensitive post because of his high security
clearance, his steady, if not outstanding career, and most of all, his
ability not to speak of his work to anyone, anytime, under any
circumstances.  Frank, therefore, saw nothing unusual in the question.
But Hayes looked hard at the man, as if searching for some tell-tale
flaw.

"What is your security clearance, major?"

"1-A, to military level Five, sir."

"And how many years have you served with us?"

"Twenty-three, sir."

"Then you saw action in the Manxsome conflict?"

"Yes sir."

"Decorated?"

"No sir."

Hayes turned to the Fleet Commander.

"Can you vouch for this man?"

"Yes, General."  Hayes gave the man a last, hard look, almost a threat.

Very well then, Major.  Begin decoding."

Frightened and annoyed, Janson sealed the enclosure, shut down all
outside terminal linkage, and programmed the series of computers for
self-erase.  There would be but a single copy of the transcript,
printed on thin, white computer paper.  He worked the fingerboards
rapidly, knowing the codes and counter-codes by rote, until a soft blue
light indicated that the signal had been translated and was ready to
print.

And then he made the mistake of his life.  Simply not thinking to do
otherwise, he touched the print button, and the machine began to feed
out paper.  It stopped.

"Is that the reply from Stone?" asked Hayes severely.  Janson, who had
been walking towards him with the paper in hand, stopped suddenly, and
his limbs were awash in adrenalin.

"Why, yes sir.....  I never thought.  That is.  Anyone could have
pushed the print button.  I merely assumed.....  I haven't read a word,
Mr. Secretary, I swear it."  Hayes lowered his head, assumed a more
natural expression.  Took the paper from him.

"Very well, major.  That will be all."

Janson saluted and left the room.  Hayes, inclining his head as a
signal for his two subordinates to go stand by the door, sat down and
began to read.





Secretary Hayes:

I have agonized over the wording of my response to you, though I knew
right away what my answer should be.  As you asked, though you may not
believe it, I have silenced my advisers and listened to my own
thoughts.  Perhaps you don't think much of me as a leader, or even a
man.  But as you yourself said, I am the President, and I see now that
a great deal depends on my dealings with you.  It is also clear that I
must carry the brunt of this responsibility myself.  At such a time I
feel very small and unprepared.  But whatever else you may think of me,
I am not a coward.

I have made my decision, Charles, and I ask in turn that you consider
your next move very carefully.  Much more depends on it than your ego
or mine.  AT THIS POINT HAYES SCOWLED, AND UNCONSCIOUSLY WORKED THE
MUSCLES AT THE BACK OF HIS JAW.  I have not revealed to the public any
aspect of the rift between us, nor will I do so in the future, so long
as we can now resolve our differences.

I'm trying to be diplomatic.  But since I know you take that as a sign
of weakness, I will come to the point.

You have overstepped your authority as Secretary of State, attacking on
your own the colonies of two nations with whom we are not at war, and
deliberately lied in the process, saying that you did so under my
orders.  To view the matter harshly, as you have done to others in the
