Sheckly grunted, for he had no ready answer to deny this truth. While he
didn't like the reference to his inability to get along in the world
without Harding's help, the man was right about other things. It did
take imagination, all right, mixed with a generous supply of plain
ordinary guts; that, plus an eye focused unfalteringly on the good old
credit sign.

He certainly could not get along without Harding's timing. The man knew
just when Patrol Ships would be at certain spots, knew their schedules
for visiting these small otherworlds, and always he was several steps
ahead of them. They went into a planet, their rocket ship loaded with
gambling devices--cards, dice, roulette wheels, and other cultural
refinements--and set up shop which could be folded at a moment's notice
if necessary. Natives seemed almost eager to be skinned of their riches,
and he and Harding happily obliged them.

"Listen to them out there," Harding marveled, leaning forward to hear
the sharp scrapings that represented music. "They must be having some
kind of ceremony."

Sheckly nodded, shivering slightly, though the air was hot and humid. He
wished again, as he often had in the past, he could have some of
Harding's assurance, some of that unrelenting optimism that insisted
everything would turn out favorably. But he didn't like these strange
primitive worlds, he didn't trust them or their inhabitants. The
lizard-people had seemed friendly enough, but by looking at a strange
reptile you couldn't tell how far it would jump. When the Earth ship
landed, the creatures had come slithering to them with all but a brass
band, welcoming the Earthlings with the hissings that composed their
language. One of them--the official interpreter, he proclaimed
himself--knew a peculiarly good brand of English, and welcomed them in a
more satisfactory manner, but still Sheckly didn't like it. Harding had
called him chicken-hearted, and he felt a certain amount of justified
indignance at the description. Cautious would be a better word, he
decided.

       *       *       *       *       *

These people appeared friendly to the Earthlings, but so did the
Earthlings give the appearance of friendliness to the natives; that was
proof in itself that you couldn't trust actions to indicate purpose. But
even more than that, their basic alienness troubled Sheckly more than he
dared admit aloud. Differences in skin color and modified body shapes
were one thing, but when a race was on a completely different
evolutionary track it was a time for caution. These were a different
people, on a different planet under a different star. Their customs
were strange, how strange he could yet only guess, though he preferred
not to. This ceremony now, for example, what did it mean? A rite for
some serpent god perhaps. A dance in honor of the Earthmen's arrival. Or
it might just as easily be a preliminary to a feast at which the
visitors would be the main course.

"I just wish we knew more about the creatures," he complained, trying to
shove that last thought from his mind.

Harding looked annoyed, as he drew his attention from the alien music
which had fascinated him. "Stop worrying, will you? They're probably
among the friendliest creatures in the universe, even if they do look
like serpents out of Eden. And the friendly ones rate A-1 on my
sucker-list."

Sheckly shuddered and cast an annoyed glance into the night. "How can
anybody concentrate with that infernal racket going on out there? Don't
they ever sleep?"

"Patience," Harding advised calmly, "is a noble virtue. Ah, here comes
our interpreter."

Sheckly started involuntarily, as a scaley head thrust itself into the
hut. The serpentman had a long sharp knife gleaming in one hand.
"Pardon, sirs," the head said slurringly, as a forked tongue sorted over
the unfamiliar syllables. "The leader wishes to know will you join us?"

"No, thanks," Sheckly said, staring at the knife.

Harding said, "We should join them. We don't want to offend these
creatures, and if we're real friendly we might make out better."

"_You_ go out then. I'm going to see if I can get some sleep."

Harding shrugged, his glance making it plain he knew Sheckly lacked
nerve more than sleep. To the serpentman he said, "Tell your leader my
companion is tired from our long journey and would rest now. However, I
