I opened the yellow envelope. "Get me a good dog with points," was the
laconic message; and it irritated me to receive such idiotic
instructions at such a time and in such a place. A good dog? Where the
mischief could I find a dog in a town consisting of ten houses and a
water-tank? I said as much to the bald-headed operator, who smiled
wearily and replaced his hat: "Dawg? They's moh houn'-dawgs in Citron
City than they's wood-ticks to keep them busy. I reckon a dollah 'll
do a heap foh you, suh."

"Could you get me a dog for a dollar?" I asked;--"one with points?"

"Points? I sholy can, suh;--plenty of points. What kind of dawg do yoh
requiah, suh?--live dawg? daid dawg? houn'-dawg? raid-dawg? hawg-dawg?
coon-dawg?--"

The locomotive emitted a long, lazy, softly modulated and thoroughly
Southern toot. I handed the operator a silver dollar, and he presently
emerged from his office and slouched off up the street, while I walked
with Miss Barrison to the station platform, where I resumed the
discussion of her future movements.

"You are very young to take such a risk," I said, gravely. "Had I not
better buy your ticket back to New York? The north-bound train meets
this one. I suppose we are waiting for it now--" I stopped, conscious
of her impatience.

Her face flushed brightly: "Yes; I think it best. I have embarrassed
you too long already--"

"Don't say that!" I muttered. "I--I--shall be deadly bored without
you."

"I am not an entertainer, only a stenographer," she said, curtly.
"Please get me my ticket, Mr. Gilland."

She gazed at me from the car-platform; the locomotive tooted two
drawling toots.

"It is for your sake," I said, avoiding her gaze as the far-off
whistle of the north-bound express came floating out of the blue
distance.

She did not answer; I fished out my watch, regarding it in silence,
listening to the hum of the approaching train, which ought presently
to bear her away into the North, where nothing could menace her except
the brilliant pitfalls of a Christian civilization. But I stood
there, temporizing, unable to utter a word as her train shot by us
with a rush, slower, slower, and finally stopped, with a long-drawn
sigh from the air-brakes.

At that instant the telegraph-operator appeared, carrying a dog by the
scruff of the neck--a sad-eyed, ewe-necked dog, from the four corners
of which dangled enormous, cushion-like paws. He yelped when he beheld
me. Miss Barrison leaned down from the car-platform and took the
animal into her arms, uttering a suppressed exclamation of pity as she
lifted him.

"You have your hands full," she said to me; "I'll take him into the
car for you."

She mounted the steps; I followed with the valises, striving to get a
good view of my acquisition over her shoulder.

"That isn't the kind of dog I wanted!" I repeated again and again,
inspecting the animal as it sprawled on the floor of the car at the
edge of Miss Barrison's skirt. "That dog is all voice and feet and
emotion! What makes it stick up its paws like that? I don't want that
dog and I'm not going to identify myself with it! Where's the
operator--"

I turned towards the car-window; the operator's bald head was visible
on a line with the sill, and I made motions at him. He bowed with
courtly grace, as though I were thanking him.

"I'm not!" I cried, shaking my head. "I wanted a dog with points--not
the kind of points that stick up all over this dog. Take him away!"

The operator's head appeared to be gliding out of my range of vision;
then the windows of the north-bound train slid past, faster and
faster. A melancholy grace-note from the dog, a jolt, and I turned
around, appalled.

"This train is going," I stammered, "and you are on it!"

Miss Barrison sprang up and started towards the door, and I sped after
her.

"I can jump," she said, breathlessly, edging out to the platform;
"please let me! There is time yet--if you only wouldn't hold me--so
tight--"

A few moments later we walked slowly back together through the car and
took seats facing one another.

Between us sat the hound-dog, a prey to melancholy unutterable.




XV


It was on Sunday when I awoke to the realization that I had quitted
civilization and was afloat on an unfamiliar body of water in an open
boat containing--

    One light steel cage,
    One rifle and ammunition,
    One stenographer,
    Three ounces rosium oxide,
    One hound-dog,
    Two valises.

A playful wave slopped over the bow and I lost count; but the pretty
stenographer made the inventory, while I resumed the oars, and the dog
punctured the primeval silence with staccato yelps.

A few minutes later everything and everybody was accounted for; the
sky was blue and the palms waved, and several species of dicky-birds
tuned up as I pulled with powerful strokes out into the sunny waters
of Little Sprite Lake, now within a few miles of my journey's end.

From ponds hidden in the marshes herons rose in lazily laborious
flight, flapping low across the water; high in the cypress yellow-eyed
ospreys bent crested heads to watch our progress; sun-baked
alligators, lying heavily in the shoreward sedge, slid open, glassy
eyes as we passed.

"Even the 'gators make eyes at you," I said, resting on my oars.

We were on terms of badinage.

"Who was it who shed crocodile tears at the prospect of shipping me
North?" she inquired.

"Speaking of tears," I observed, "somebody is likely to shed a number
when Professor Farrago is picked up."

"Pooh!" she said, and snapped her pretty, sun-tanned fingers; and I
resumed the oars in time to avoid shipwreck on a large mud-bar.

She reclined in the stern, serenely occupied with the view, now and
then caressing the discouraged dog, now and then patting her hair
where the wind had loosened a bright strand.

"If Professor Farrago didn't expect a woman stenographer," she said,
abruptly, "why did he instruct you to bring a complete outfit of
woman's clothing?"

"I don't know," I said, tartly.

"But you bought them. Are they for a young woman or an old woman?"

"I don't know; I sent a messenger to a department store. I don't know
what he bought."

"Didn't you look them over?"

"No. Why? I should have been no wiser. I fancy they're all right,
because the bill was eighteen hundred dollars--"

The pretty stenographer sat up abruptly.

"Is that much?" I asked, uneasily. "I've always heard women's clothing
was expensive. Wasn't it enough? I told the boy to order the
best;--Professor Farrago always requires the very best scientific
instruments, and--I listed the clothes as scientific accessories--that
being the object of this expedition--_What_ are you laughing at?"

When it pleased her to recover her gravity she announced her desire to
inspect and repack the clothing; but I refused.

"They're for Professor Farrago," I said. "I don't know what he wants
of them. I don't suppose he intends to wear 'em and caper about the
jungle, but they're his. I got them because he told me to. I bought a
cage, too, to fit myself, but I don't suppose he means to put me in
it. Perhaps," I added, "he may invite you into it."

"Let me refold the gowns," she pleaded, persuasively. "What does a
clumsy man know about packing such clothing as that? If you don't,
they'll be ruined. It's a shame to drag those boxes about through mud
and water!"

So we made a landing, and lifted out and unlocked the boxes. All I
could see inside were mounds of lace and ribbons, and with a vague
idea that Miss Barrison needed no assistance I returned to the boat
and sat down to smoke until she was ready.

When she summoned me her face was flushed and her eyes bright.

"Those are certainly the most beautiful things!" she said, softly.
"Why, it is like a bride's trousseau--absolutely complete--all except
the bridal gown--"

"Isn't there a dress there?" I exclaimed, in alarm.

"No--not a day-dress."

"Night-dresses!" I shrieked. "He doesn't want women's night-dresses!
He's a bachelor! Good Heavens! I've done it this time!"

"But--but who is to wear them?" she asked.

"How do I know? I don't know anything; I can only presume that he
doesn't intend to open a department store in the Everglades. And if
any lady is to wear garments in his vicinity, I assume that those
garments are to be anything except diaphanous!... Please take your
seat in the boat, Miss Barrison. I want to row and think."

I had had my fill of exercise and thought when, about four o'clock in
the afternoon, Miss Barrison directed my attention to a point of palms
jutting out into the water about a mile to the southward.

"That's Farrago!" I exclaimed, catching sight of a United States flag
floating majestically from a bamboo-pole. "Give me the megaphone, if
you please."

She handed me the instrument; I hailed the shore; and presently a man
appeared under the palms at the water's edge.

"Hello!" I roared, trying to inject cheerfulness into the hollow
bellow. "How are you, professor?"

The answer came distinctly across the water:

"_Who_ is that with you?"

My lips were buried in the megaphone; I strove to speak; I only
produced a ghastly, chuckling sound.

"Of course you expect to tell the truth," observed the pretty
stenographer, quietly.

I removed my lips from the megaphone and looked around at her. She
returned my gaze with a disturbing smile.

"I want to mitigate the blow," I said, hoarsely. "Tell me how."

"I'm sure I don't know," she said, sweetly.

"Well, _I_ do!" I fairly barked, and seizing the megaphone again, I
set it to my lips and roared, "My fiancee!"

"Good gracious!" exclaimed Miss Barrison, in consternation, "I thought
you were going to tell the truth!"

"Don't do that or you'll upset us," I snapped--"I'm telling the truth;
I've engaged myself to you; I did it mentally before I bellowed."

"But--"

"You know as well as I do what engagements mean," I said, picking up
the oars and digging them deep in the blue water.

She assented uncertainly.

A few minutes more of vigorous rowing brought us to a muddy landing
under a cluster of tall palmettos, where a gasoline launch lay.
Professor Farrago came down to the shore as I landed, and I walked
ahead to meet him. He was the maddest man I ever saw. But I was his
match, for I was desperate.

"What the devil--" he began, under his breath.

"Nonsense!" I said, deliberately. "An engaged woman is practically
married already, because marriages are made in heaven."

"Good Lord!" he gasped, "are you mad, Gilland? I sent for a
stenographer--"

"Miss Barrison is a stenographer," I said, calmly; and before he could
recover I had presented him, and left them face to face, washing my
hands of the whole affair.

Unloading the boat and carrying the luggage up under the palms, I
heard her saying:

"No, I am not in the least afraid of snakes, and I am quite ready to
begin my duties."

And he: "Mr. Gilland is a young man who--er--lacks practical
experience."

And she: "Mr. Gilland has been most thoughtful for my comfort. The
journey has been perfectly heavenly."

And he, clumsily: "Ahem!--the--er--celestial aspect of your journey
has--er--doubtless been colored by--er--the prospect of
your--er--approaching nuptials--"

She, hastily: "Oh, I do not think so, professor."

"Idiot!" I muttered, dragging the dog to the shore, where his yelps
brought the professor hurrying.

"Is _that_ the dog?" he inquired, adjusting his spectacles.

"That's the dog," I said. "He's full of points, you see?"

"Oh," mused the professor; "I thought he was full of--" He hesitated,
inspecting the animal, who, nose to the ground, stood investigating a
smell of some sort.

"See," I said, with enthusiasm, "he's found a scent; he's trailing it
already! Now he's rolling on it!"

"He's rolling on one of our concentrated food lozenges," said the
professor, dryly. "Tie him up, Mr. Gilland, and ask Mrs. Gilland to
come up to camp. Your room is ready."

"Rooms," I corrected; "she isn't Mrs. Gilland yet," I added, with a
forced smile.

"But you're practically married," observed the professor, "as you
pointed out to me. And if she's practically Mrs. Gilland, why not say
so?"

"Don't, all the same," I snarled.

"But marriages are made in--"

I cast a desperate eye upon him.

From that moment, whenever we were alone together, he made a target of
me. I never had supposed him humorously vindictive; he was, and his
apparently innocent mistakes almost turned my hair gray.

But to Miss Barrison he was kind and courteous, and for a time
over-serious. Observing him, I could never detect the slightest
symptom of dislike for her sex--a failing which common rumor had
always credited him with to the verge of absolute rudeness.

On the contrary, it was perfectly plain to anybody that he liked her.
There was in his manner towards her a mixture of business formality
and the deferential attitude of a gentleman.

We were seated, just before sunset, outside of the hut built of
palmetto logs, when Professor Farrago, addressing us both, began the
explanation of our future duties.

Miss Barrison, it appeared, was to note everything said by himself,
