compact, but most of the material forming the ends is porous and spongy.
These materials are usually referred to as the _compact substance_ and the
_cancellous_, or _spongy, substance_ of the bones (Fig. 93).

The arrangement of the compact and spongy substance varies with the
different bones. In the short bones (wrist and ankle bones, vertebrae,
etc.) and also in the flat bones (skull bones, ribs, shoulder blades,
etc.) there is no cavity for the yellow marrow, all of the interior space
being filled with the spongy substance. The _red marrow_, relations of
which to the red corpuscles of the blood have already been noted (page
27), occupies the minute spaces in the spongy substance.

                                [Fig. 94]


 Fig. 94--*Cross section of bone showing minute structure.* Magnified. 1.
 Surface layer of bone. 2. Deeper portion. 3. Haversian canals from which
pass the canaliculi. 4. A lacuna. Observe arrangement of lacunae at surface
                          and in deeper portion.


*Minute Structure of Bone.*--A microscopic examination of a thin slice of
bone taken from the compact substance shows this to be porous as well as
the spongy substance. Two kinds of small channels are found running
through it in different directions, known as the Haversian canals and the
canaliculi (Fig. 94). These serve the general purpose of distributing
nourishment through the bone. The _Haversian canals_ are larger than the
canaliculi and contain small nerves and blood vessels, chiefly capillaries
(Fig. 95). They extend lengthwise through the bone. The _canaliculi_ are
channels for conveying lymph. They pass out from the Haversian canals at
right angles, going to all portions of the compact substance except a thin
layer at the surface. In the surface layer of the bone the canaliculi are
in communication with the periosteum.

                                [Fig. 95]


 Fig. 95--*Section showing Haversian canal and contents*, highly magnified
  (after Schaefer). 1. Arterial capillary. 2. Venous capillary. 3. Nerve
                         fibers. 4. Lymph vessel.


*The Bone Cells.*--Surrounding the Haversian canals are thin layers of bone
substance called the _laminae_, and within these are great numbers of
irregular bodies, known as the _lacunae_. The walls of the lacunae are hard
and dense, but within each is an open space. In this lies a flattened
body, having a nucleus, which is recognized as the _bone cell_, or the
bone corpuscle (Fig. 96). It appears to be the work of the bone cells to
deposit mineral matter in the walls surrounding them and in this way to
supply the properties of hardness and stiffness to the bones. The
canaliculi connect with the lacunae in all parts of the bone, causing them
to appear under the microscope like so many burs fastened together by
their projecting spines (Fig. 94).

                                [Fig. 96]


  Fig. 96--*Bone cell* removed from the lacuna and very highly magnified.
                        (From Quain's _Anatomy_.)


*How the Bone Cells are Nourished.*--The bone cells, like all the other
cells of the body, are nourished by the lymph that escapes from the blood.
This passes through the canaliculi to the cells in the different parts of
the bone, as follows:

1. The cells in the surface layer of the bone receive lymph from the
capillaries in the periosteum.(79) It gets to them through the short
canaliculi that run out to the surface.

2. The cells within the interior of the bone receive their nourishment
from the small blood vessels in the Haversian canals. Lymph from these
vessels is conveyed to the cells through the canaliculi that connect with
the Haversian canals.

*Plan and Purpose of the Skeleton.*--The framework of the body is such as
to adapt it to a _movable_ structure. Obviously the different parts of the
body cannot be secured to a foundation, as are those of a stationary
building, but must be arranged after a plan that is conducive to motion. A
moving structure, as a wagon or a bicycle, has within it some strong
central part to which the remainder is joined. The same is true of the
skeleton. That part to which the others are attached is a long, bony axis,
known as the _spinal column_. Certain parts, as the ribs and the skull,
are attached directly to the spinal column, while others are attached
indirectly to it. The arrangement of all the parts is such that the spinal
column is made the central, cohering portion of the skeleton and also of
the whole body.

Besides the general arrangement of the parts of the skeleton, there is
such a grouping of the bones in each of its main divisions as will enable
them to serve definite purposes. In most places they form mechanical
devices for supplying special movements, and in certain places they
provide for the support or protection of important organs. In most cases
there is a definite combination of different bones, forming what is called
the bone group.

                                [Fig. 97]


                       Fig. 97--The human skeleton.


*Bone Groups.*--On account of the close relation between the bones of the
same group, they cannot profitably be studied as individual bones, but
each must be considered as a part of the group to which it belongs. By
first making out the relation of a given bone to its group, its value to
the whole body can be determined. The most important of the groups of
bones are as follows:

1. _The Spinal Column._--This group consists of twenty-four similarly
shaped bones, placed one above the other, called the _vertebrae_, and two
bones found below the vertebrae, known as the sacrum and the coccyx (Fig.
98). These twenty-six bones supply the central axis of the body, support
the head and upper extremities, and inclose and protect the spinal cord.

                                [Fig. 98]


                        Fig. 98--The spinal column.


The upper seven vertebrae form the neck and are called the _cervical_
vertebrae. They are smaller and have greater freedom of motion than the
others. The first and second cervical vertebrae, known as the _atlas_ and
the _axis_, are specially modified to form a support for the head and
provide for its movements. The head rests upon the atlas, forming with it
a hinge joint (used in nodding to indicate "yes"); and the atlas turns
upon an upward projection of the axis forming a pivot joint (used in
shaking the head to indicate "no").

The next twelve vertebrae, in order below the cervical, are known as the
_thoracic_ vertebrae. They form the back part of the framework of the
thorax and have little freedom of motion. The five vertebrae below the
thoracic are known as the _lumbar_ vertebrae. These bones are large and
strong and admit of considerable motion. Below the last lumbar vertebra is
a wedge-shaped bone which has the appearance of five vertebrae fused
together. This bone, known as the _sacrum_, connects with the large bones
which form the pelvic girdle. Attached to the lower end of the sacrum is a
group of from two to four small vertebrae, more or less fused, called the
_coccyx_.

                                [Fig. 99]


 Fig. 99--*Two views of a lumbar vertebra.* _A._ From above. _B._ From the
       side. 1. Body. 2, 3, 4, 5. Projections from the neural arch.


*The Joining of the Vertebrae.*--A typical vertebra consists of a heavy,
disk-shaped portion in front, called the _body_, which is connected with a
ring-like portion behind, called the _neural arch_. The body and the
neural arch together encircle a round opening which is a part of the canal
that contains the spinal cord (Fig. 99). From the neural arch are seven
bony projections, or processes, three of which serve for the attachment of
muscles and ligaments, while the other four, two above and two below, are
for the interlocking of the vertebrae with each other. The separate
vertebrae are joined together in the spinal column, as follows:

_a._ Between the bodies of adjacent vertebrae are disks of elastic
cartilage. Each disk is about one fourth of an inch thick and is grown
tight onto the face of the vertebra above and also onto the face of the
vertebra below. By means of these disks a very close connection is secured
between the vertebrae on the front side of the column.

_b._ On the back of the column, the downward projections from the neural
arch of each vertebra above fit into depressions found in the neural arch
of the vertebra below. This _interlocking_ of the vertebrae, which is most
marked in the lumbar region, strengthens greatly the back portion of the
column.

_c._ To further secure one bone upon the other, numerous ligaments pass
from vertebra to vertebra on all sides of the column.

2. _The Skull._--The skull is formed by the close union of twenty-two
irregular bones. These fall naturally into two subgroups--the cranium and
the face (Fig. 100). The _cranium_ consists of eight thin, curved bones
which inclose the space, called the _cranial cavity_, that holds the
brain. The _face group_, consisting of fourteen bones, provides cavities
and supports for the different organs of the face, and supplies a movable
part (the inferior maxillary) which, with the bones above (superior
maxillary), forms the machine for masticating the food.

                                [Fig. 100]


Fig. 100--*The skull (Huxley).* The illustration shows most of the bones of
                                the skull.


3. _The Thorax._--This group contains twenty-four bones of similar form,
called _ribs_, and a straight flat bone, called the _sternum_, or
breastbone (Fig. 101). The ribs connect with the spinal column behind, and
all but the two lowest ones connect with the sternum in front, and, by so
doing, inclose the thoracic cavity. As already stated (page 85), the bones
of the thorax form a mechanical device, or machine, for breathing. The
ribs are so arranged that the volume of the thorax is increased by
elevating them and diminished by depressing them, enabling the air to be
forced into and out of the lungs.

                                [Fig. 101]


                     Fig. 101--*Bone groups of trunk.*


4. _The Shoulder and Pelvic Girdles._--These groups form two bony
supports--one at the upper and the other at the lower portion of the
trunk--which serve for the attachment of the arms and legs (Fig. 101). The
_shoulder girdle_ is formed by four bones--two clavicles, or collar bones,
and two scapulae, or shoulder blades. The clavicle on either side connects
with the upper end of the sternum and serves as a _brace_ for the
shoulder, while the scapula forms a socket for the humerus (the large bone
of the arm) and supplies many places for the attachment of muscles.

The _pelvic girdle_ consists of two large bones of irregular shape, called
the _innominate_ bones. They connect behind with the sacrum and in front
they connect, through a small pad of cartilage, with each other. On the
inside of the girdle is a smooth, basin-shaped support for the contents of
the abdomen, but on the outside the bones are rough and irregular and
provide many places for the attachment of muscles and ligaments. Each
innominate bone has a deep, round socket into which the end of the femur
(the long bone of the leg) accurately fits.

5. _The Arm and Hand Groups._--A long bone, the _humerus_, connects the arm
with the shoulder and gives form to the upper arm. In the forearm are two
bones, the _radius_ and the _ulna_, which connect at one end with the
humerus and at the other with the bones of the wrist (Fig. 102).

                                [Fig. 102]


                  Fig. 102--*Bone groups of arm and leg.*


A group of eight small, round bones is found in the wrist, known as the
_carpal_ bones. These are arranged in two rows and are movable upon one
another. Five straight bones, the _metacarpals_, connect with the wrist
bones and form the framework for the palm of the hand. Attached to the
metacarpals are the bones of the fingers and thumb. These form an
interesting group of fourteen bones, called the _phalanges of the fingers_
(Fig. 102).

The bones of the hand provide a mechanical device, or machine, for
grasping, and the arm serves as a device for moving this grasping machine
from place to place. The work of the arm, in this respect, is not unlike
that of a revolving crane upon the end of which is a grab-hook. The hand
without the arm to move it about would be of little use.

6. _The Leg and Foot Groups._--These correspond in form and arrangement to
the bones of the arm and hand. Since, however, the leg and foot are used
for purposes different from those of the arm and hand, certain differences
in structure are to be found. The _patella_, or kneepan, has no
corresponding bone in the arm; and the _carpus_, or ankle, which
corresponds to the wrist, contains seven instead of eight bones. The bones
of the foot and toes are the same in number as those of the hand and
fingers, but they differ greatly in size and form and have less freedom of
motion. The _femur_, which gives form to the thigh, is the longest bone of
the body. The _tibia_, or shin bone, and the _fibula_, the slender bone by
its side, give form to the lower part of the leg (Fig. 102).

The legs are mechanical devices (walking machines) for moving the body
from place to place. The feet serve both as supports for the body and as
levers for pushing the body forward. By their attachment to the legs they
may be placed in all necessary positions for supporting and moving the
body.

The different bone groups are shown in Fig. 97 and named in Table IV.

*Adaptation to Special Needs.*--When any single bone is studied in its
relation to the other members of the group to which it belongs or with
particular reference to its purpose in the body, its adaptation to some
special place or use is at once apparent. Each bone serves some special
purpose, and to this purpose it is adapted by its form and structure. Long
bones, like the humerus and femur, are suited to giving strength, form,
and stiffness to certain parts, while irregular bones, like the vertebrae
and the pelvic bones, are fitted for supporting and protecting organs.
Others, like the wrist and ear bones, make possible a peculiar kind of
motion, and still others, like the ribs, are adapted to more than one
purpose. The vast differences in shape, size, structure, and surface among
the various bones are but the conditions that adapt them to particular
forms of service in the body.

TABLE IV - THE PRINCIPAL BONES AND THEIR GROUPING IN THE BODY

      I. AXIAL SKELETON

            A. _Skull_, 28.

                  1. Cranium, 8.

                  _      a._ Frontal, forehead 1
                  _      b._ Parietal 2
                  _      c._ Temporal, temple 2
                  _      d._ Occipital 1
                  _      e._ Sphenoid 1
                  _      f._ Ethmoid 1

                  2. Face, 14.

                  _      a._ Inferior maxillary 1
                  _      b._ Superior maxillary 2
                  _      c._ Palatine, palate 2
                  _      d._ Nasal bones 2
                  _      e._ Vomer 1
                  _      f._ Inferior turbinated 2
                  _      g._ Lachrymal 2
                  _      h._ Malar, cheek bones 2

                  3. Bones of the Ears, 6.

                  _      a._ Malleus 2
                  _      b._ Incus 2
                  _      c._ Stapes 2

            B. _Spinal Column_, 26.

                  1. Cervical, or neck, vertebrae 7
                  2. Dorsal, or thoracic, vertebrae 12
                  3. Lumbar vertebrae 5
                  4. Sacrum 1
                  5. Coccyx 1

            C. _Thorax_, 25.

                  1. Ribs 24
                  2. Sternum 1

            D. _Hyoid_, 1 (at base of tongue).

      II. APPENDICULAR SKELETON

            A. _Shoulder girdle_ 4.

                  1. Clavicle, collarbone. 2
                  2. Scapula, shoulder blade 2

            B. _Upper extremities_, 60.

                  1. Humerus 2
                  2. Radius 2
                  3. Ulna 2
                  4. Carpal, wrist bones 16
                  5. Metacarpal 10
                  6. Phalanges of fingers 28

            C. _Pelvic girdle_, 2.

                  1. Osinnominatum 2

            D. _Lower extremities_, 60.

                  1. Femur, thigh bone 2
                  2. Tibia, shin bone 2
                  3. Fibula 2
                  4. Patella, kneepan 2
                  5. Tarsal, ankle bones 14
                  6. Metatarsal, instep bones 10
                  7. Phalanges of toes 28



ARTICULATIONS


Any place in the body where two or more bones meet is called an
articulation, or joint. At the place of meeting the bones are firmly
attached to each other, thereby securing the necessary coherence of the
skeleton. The large number of bones, and consequently of articulations,
are necessary for the different movements of the body and also on account
of the manner in which the skeleton develops, or grows. Articulations are
classed with reference to their freedom of motion, as _movable_, _slightly
movable_, and _immovable_ articulations.

Most of the _immovable_ articulations are found in the skull. Here
irregular, tooth-like projections from the different bones enable them to
interlock with one another, while they are held firmly together by a thin
layer of connective tissue. The wavy lines formed by articulations of this
kind are called _sutures_ (Fig. 100).

The best examples of joints that are _slightly_, but not freely, _movable_
are found in the front of the spinal column. The cartilaginous pads
between the vertebrae permit, by their elasticity, of a slight bending of
the column in different directions. These movements are caused, not by one
bone gliding over another, but by compressions and extensions of the
cartilage. Between the vertebrae in the back of the spinal column, however,
there is a slight movement of the bone surfaces upon one another.

*Structure of the Movable Joints.*--By far the most numerous and important
of the joints are those that are freely movable. Such joints are strongly
constructed and endure great strain without dislocation, and yet their
parts move over each other easily and without friction. The ends of the
bones are usually enlarged and have specially formed projections or
depressions which fit into corresponding depressions or elevations on the
bones with which they articulate. In addition to this the articular
surfaces are quite smooth and dense, having no Haversian canals, and they
are covered with a layer of cartilage. Strong ligaments pass from one bone
to the other to hold each in its place (_A, _Fig. 103). Some of these
consist simply of bands, connecting the joint on its different sides,
while others form continuous sheaths around the joint.

                                [Fig. 103]


     Fig. 103--*Outside and inside view of knee joint.* 1. Tendons. 2.
Ligaments. 3. Cartilage. 4. Space containing synovial fluid. This space is
   lined, except upon the articular surfaces, by the synovial membrane.


The interior of the joint, except where the bone surfaces rub upon each
other, is covered with a serous lining, called the _synovial membrane_
(_B_, Fig. 103). This secretes a thick, viscid liquid, the _synovial
fluid_, which prevents friction. The synovial membrane does not cover the
ends of the bones, but passes around the joint and connects with the bones
at their edges so as to form a closed sac in which the fluid is retained.

*Kinds of Movable Joints.--*The different kinds of movable joints are the
ball and socket joint, the hinge joint, the pivot joint, the condyloid
joint, and the gliding joint. These are constructed and admit of motion,
as follows:

1. In the _ball and socket_ joint the ball-shaped end of one bone fits
into a cup-shaped cavity in another bone, called the socket. The best
examples of such joints are found at the hips and shoulders. The ball and
socket joint admits of motion in all directions.

2. In the _hinge_ joint the bones are grooved and fit together after the
manner of a hinge. Hinge joints are found at the elbows and knees and also
in the fingers. The hinge joint gives motion in but two directions--forward
and backward.

3. A _pivot_ joint is formed by the fitting of a pivot-like projection of
one bone into a ring-like receptacle of a second bone, so that one, or the
other, is free to turn. A good example of the pivot joint is found at the
elbow, where the radius turns upon the humerus. Another example is the
articulation of the atlas with the axis vertebra as already noted. The
pivot joint admits of motion around an axis.

4. The _condyloid_ joint is formed by the fitting of the ovoid
(egg-shaped) end of one bone into an elliptical cavity of a second bone.
Examples of condyloid joints are found at the knuckles and where the wrist
bones articulate with the radius and ulna. They move easily in two
directions, like hinge joints, and slightly in other directions.

5. _Gliding_ joints are formed by the articulation of plain (almost flat)
surfaces. Examples of gliding joints are found in the articulations
between the bones of the wrist and those of the ankle. They are the
simplest of the movable joints and are formed by one bone gliding, or
slipping, upon the surface of another.

*The Machinery of the Body.*--A machine is a contrivance for directing
energy in doing work. A sewing machine, for example, so directs the energy
of the foot that it is made to sew. Through its construction the machine
is able to produce just that form of motion needed for its work, and no
other forms, so that energy is not wasted in the production of useless
motion. The places in machines where parts rub or turn upon each other are
called _bearings_, and extra precautions are taken in the construction and
care of the bearings to prevent friction.

The body cannot properly be compared to any single machine, but must be
looked upon as a complex organization which employs a number of different
kinds of machines in carrying on its work. The majority of these machines
are found in the skeleton. The bones are the parts that are moved, and the
joints serve as bearings. Connected with the bones are the muscles that
supply energy, and attached to the muscles are the nerves that control the
motion. Other parts also are required for rendering the machines of the
body effective in doing work. These are supplied by the tissues connected
with the bones and the muscles.



HYGIENE OF THE SKELETON


Of chief concern in the hygiene of the skeleton is the proper _adjustment_
of its parts. The efficiency of any of the body machines is impaired by
lack of proper adjustment. Not only this, but because of the fact that the
skeleton forms the groundwork of the whole body--muscles, blood vessels,
nerves, everything in fact, being arranged with reference to it--any lack
of proper adjustment of the bones interferes generally with the
arrangement and work of tissues and organs. The displaced bones may even
compress blood vessels and nerves and interfere, in this way, with the
nourishment and control of organs remote from the places where the
displacements occur. For these reasons the proper adjustment of the
different parts of the skeleton supplies one of the essential conditions
for preserving the health.

*Hygienic Importance of the Spinal Column.*--What has been said about the
adjustment of the skeleton in general applies with particular force to the
spinal column. The spinal column serves both as the central axis of the
body and as the container of the spinal cord. Thirty-one pairs of nerves
pass between the vertebrae to connect the spinal cord with different parts
of the body, and two important arteries (the vertebral) pass through a
series of small openings in the bones of the neck to reach the brain.
Unnatural curves of the spine throw different parts of the body out of
their natural positions, diminish the thoracic and abdominal cavities,
and, according to the belief of certain physicians, compress the nerves
that pass from the cord to other parts of the body. Slightly misplaced
vertebrae in the neck, by compressing the vertebral arteries, may also
interfere with the supply of blood

                                [Fig. 104]


        Fig. 104--A tendency toward spinal curvature (after Mosher)


                                [Fig. 105]


 Fig. 105--Effect on spinal column of improper position in writing. (From
                       Pyle's _Personal Hygiene._)


*How the Skeleton becomes Deformed*--We are accustomed to look upon the
skeleton as a rigid framework which can get out of its natural form only
through severe strain or by violence. This view is far from being correct.
On account of their necessary freedom of motion, the bones, especially
those of the spinal column, are easily slipped from their normal
positions; and where improper attitudes are frequently assumed, or
continued through long periods of time, the skeleton gradually becomes
deformed (Fig. 104). For example, the habit of always sleeping on the same
side with a high pillow may develop a bad crook in the neck; and the ugly
curves, assumed so frequently in writing (80) (Fig. 105), and also in
standing, when the weight is shifted too much on one foot, may become
permanent. Then the habit of reclining in a chair with the hips resting on
the front of the seat often deforms the back and causes a drooping of the
shoulders. In fact, slight displacements of the vertebrae come about so
easily _through incorrect positions_, that they may almost be said to
"occur of themselves" where active measures are not taken to preserve the
natural form of the body. The very few people who have perfectly formed
bodies show to what an extent has been overlooked an essential law of
hygiene.

*Prevention of Skeletal Deformities.*--Those deformities of the skeleton
that are acquired through improper positions are prevented by giving
sufficient attention to the positions assumed in sitting, standing, and
sleeping, and also to the posture in various kinds of work. In sitting the
trunk should be erect and the hips should touch the back of the chair. One
should not lounge in the ordinary chair. In standing the body should be
erect, the shoulders back and down, the chest pushed slightly up and
forward, and the chin slightly depressed, while the weight should, as a
rule, rest about equally on the two feet. The habit of leaning against
some object when standing (the pupil in reciting often leans on his desk)
