CHAPTER VIII

THE MOON, CHILD OF THE EARTH AND THE SUN


Very naturally the moon has always been a great favorite with those who,
either in a scientific or in a literary spirit, have speculated about
the plurality of inhabited worlds. The reasons for the preference
accorded to the moon in this regard are evident. Unless a comet should
brush us--as a comet is suspected of having done already--no celestial
body, of any pretensions to size, can ever approach as near to the earth
as the moon is, at least while the solar system continues to obey the
organic laws that now control it. It is only a step from the earth to
the moon. What are 240,000 miles in comparison with the distances of the
stars, or even with the distances of the planets? Jupiter, driving
between the earth and the moon, would occupy more than one third of the
intervening space with the chariot of his mighty globe; Saturn, with
broad wings outspread, would span more than two thirds of the distance;
and the sun, so far from being able to get through at all, would overlap
the way more than 300,000 miles on each side.

In consequence, of course, of its nearness, the moon is the only member
of the planetary system whose principal features are visible to the
naked eye. In truth, the naked eye perceives the larger configurations
of the lunar surface more clearly than the most powerful telescope shows
the details on the disk of Mars. Long before the time of Galileo and the
invention of the telescope, men had noticed that the face of the moon
bears a resemblance to the appearance that the earth would present if
viewed from afar off. In remote antiquity there were philosophers who
thought that the moon was an inhabited world, and very early the
romancers took up the theme. Lucian, the Voltaire of the second century
of our era, mercilessly scourged the pretenders of the earth from an
imaginary point of vantage on the moon, which enabled him to peer down
into their secrets. Lucian's description of the appearance of the earth
from the moon shows how clearly defined in his day had become the
conception of our globe as only an atom in space.

"Especially did it occur to me to laugh at the men who were quarreling
about the boundaries of their land, and at those who were proud because
they cultivated the Sikyonian plain, or owned that part of Marathon
around Oenoe, or held possession of a thousand acres at Acharnae. Of
the whole of Greece, as it then appeared to me from above, being about
the size of four fingers, I think Attica was in proportion a mere speck.
So that I wondered on what condition it was left to these rich men to be
proud."[14]

[Footnote 14: Ikaromenippus; or, Above the Clouds. Prof. D.C. Brown's
translation.]

Such scenes as Lucian beheld, in imagination, upon the earth while
looking from the moon, many would fain behold, with telescopic aid,
upon the moon while looking from the earth. Galileo believed that the
details of the lunar surface revealed by his telescope closely resembled
in their nature the features of the earth's surface, and for a long
time, as the telescope continued to be improved, observers were
impressed with the belief that the moon possessed not only mountains and
plains, but seas and oceans also.

It was the discovery that the moon has no perceptible atmosphere that
first seriously undermined the theory of its habitability. Yet, as was
remarked in the introductory chapter, there has of late been some change
of view concerning a lunar atmosphere; but the change has been not so
much in the ascertained facts as in the way of looking at those facts.

But before we discuss this matter, it will be well to state what is
known beyond peradventure about the moon.

Its mean distance from the earth is usually called, for the sake of a
round number, 240,000 miles, but more accurately stated it is 238,840
miles. This is variable to the extent of more than 31,000 miles, on
account of the eccentricity of its orbit, and the eccentricity itself is
variable, in consequence of the perturbing attractions of the earth and
the sun, so that the distance of the moon from the earth is continually
changing. It may be as far away as 253,000 miles and as near as 221,600
miles.

Although the orbit of the moon is generally represented, for
convenience, as an ellipse about the earth, it is, in reality, a varying
curve, having the sun for its real focus, and always concave toward the
latter. This is a fact that can be more readily explained with the aid
of a diagram.

[Illustration: THE MOON'S PATH WITH RESPECT TO THE SUN AND THE EARTH.]

In the accompanying cut, when the earth is at _A_ the moon is between it
and the sun, in the phase called new moon. At this point the earth's
orbit about the sun is more curved than the moon's, and the earth is
moving relatively faster than the moon, so that when it arrives at _B_
it is ahead of the moon, and we see the latter to the right of the
earth, in the phase called first quarter. The earth being at this time
ahead of the moon, the effect of its attraction, combined with that of
the sun, tends to hasten the moon onward in its orbit about the sun, and
the moon begins to travel more swiftly, until it overtakes the earth at
_C_, and appears on the side opposite the sun, in the phase called full
moon. At this point the moon's orbit about the sun has a shorter radius
of curvature than the earth's. In traveling from _C_ to _D_ the moon
still moves more rapidly than the earth, and, having passed it, appears
at _D_ to the left of the earth, in the phase called third quarter. Now,
the earth being behind the moon, the effect of its attraction combined
with the sun's tends to retard the moon in its orbit about the sun,
with the result that the moon moves again less rapidly than the earth,
and the latter overtakes it, so that, upon reaching _E_, the two are
once more in the same relative positions that they occupied at _A_, and
it is again new moon. Thus it will be seen that, although the real orbit
of the moon has the sun for its center of revolution, nevertheless, in
consequence of the attraction of the earth, combined in varying
directions with that of the sun, the moon, once every month, makes a
complete circuit of our globe.

The above explanation should not be taken for a mathematical
demonstration of the moon's motion, but simply for a graphical
illustration of how the moon appears to revolve about the earth while
really obeying the sun's attraction as completely as the earth does.

There is no other planet that has a moon relatively as large as ours.
The moon's diameter is 2,163 miles. Its volume, compared with the
earth's, is in the ratio of 1 to 49, and its density is about six
tenths of the earth's. This makes its mass to that of our globe about as
1 to 81. In other words, it would take eighty-one moons to
counterbalance the earth. Before speaking of the force of gravity on the
moon we will examine the character of the lunar surface.

To the naked eye the moon's face appears variegated with dusky patches,
while a few points of superior brilliance shine amid the brighter
portions, especially in the southern and eastern quarters, where immense
craters like Tycho and Copernicus are visible to a keen eye, gleaming
like polished buttons. With a telescope, even of moderate power, the
surface of the moon presents a scene of astonishing complexity, in which
strangeness, beauty, and grandeur are all combined. The half of the moon
turned earthward contains an area of 7,300,000 square miles, a little
greater than the area of South America and a little less than that of
North America. Of these 7,300,000 square miles, about 2,900,000 square
miles are occupied by the gray, or dusky, expanses, called in lunar
geography, or selenography, _maria_--i.e., "seas." Whatever they may
once have been, they are not now seas, but dry plains, bordered in many
places by precipitous cliffs and mountains, varied in level by low
ridges and regions of depression, intersected occasionally by immense
cracks, having the width and depth of our mightiest river canons, and
sprinkled with bright points and crater pits. The remaining 4,400,000
square miles are mainly occupied by mountains of the most extraordinary
character. Owing partly to roughness of the surface and partly to more
brilliant reflective power, the mountainous regions of the moon appear
bright in comparison with the dull-colored plains.

Some of the lunar mountains lie in long, massive chains, with towering
peaks, profound gorges, narrow valleys, vast amphitheaters, and beetling
precipices. Looking at them with a powerful telescope, the observer
might well fancy himself to be gazing down from an immense height into
the heart of the untraveled Himalayas. But these, imposing though they
are, do not constitute the most wonderful feature of the mountain
scenery of the moon.

Appearing sometimes on the shores of the "seas," sometimes in the midst
of broad plains, sometimes along the course of mountain chains, and
sometimes in magnificent rows, following for hundreds of miles the
meridians of the lunar globe, are tremendous, mountain-walled, circular
chasms, called craters. Frequently they have in the middle of their
depressed interior floors a peak, or a cluster of peaks. Their inner and
outer walls are seamed with ridges, and what look like gigantic streams
of frozen lava surround them. The resemblance that they bear to the
craters of volcanoes is, at first sight, so striking that probably
nobody would ever have thought of questioning the truth of the statement
that they are such craters but for their incredible magnitude. Many of
them exceed fifty miles in diameter, and some of them sink two, three,
four, and more miles below the loftiest points upon their walls! There
is a chasm, 140 miles long and 70 broad, named Newton, situated about
200 miles from the south pole of the moon, whose floor lies 24,000 feet
below the summit of a peak that towers just above it on the east! This
abyss is so profound that the shadows of its enclosing precipices never
entirely quit it, and the larger part of its bottom is buried in endless
night.

One can not but shudder at the thought of standing on the broken walls
of Newton, and gazing down into a cavity of such stupendous depth that
if Chimborazo were thrown into it, the head of the mighty Andean peak
would be thousands of feet beneath the observer.

A different example of the crater mountains of the moon is the
celebrated Tycho, situated in latitude about 43 deg. south, corresponding
with the latitude of southern New Zealand on the earth. Tycho is nearly
circular and a little more than 54 miles across. The highest point on
its wall is about 17,000 feet above the interior. In the middle of its
floor is a mountain 5,000 or 6,000 feet high. Tycho is especially
remarkable for the vast system of whitish streaks, or rays, which
starting from its outer walls, spread in all directions over the face of
the moon, many of them, running, without deviation, hundreds of miles
across mountains, craters, and plains. These rays are among the greatest
of lunar mysteries, and we shall have more to say of them.

[Illustration: THE LUNAR ALPS, APENNINES, AND CAUCASUS.
Photographed with the Lick Telescope.]

Copernicus, a crater mountain situated about 10 deg. north of the equator,
in the eastern hemisphere of the moon, is another wonderful object, 56
miles in diameter, a polygon appearing, when not intently studied, as a
circle, 11,000 or 12,000 feet deep, and having a group of relatively low
peaks in the center of its floor. Around Copernicus an extensive area of
the moon's surface is whitened with something resembling the rays of
Tycho, but more irregular in appearance. Copernicus lies within the edge
of the great plain named the _Oceanus Procellarum_, or "Ocean of
Storms," and farther east, in the midst of the "ocean," is a smaller
crater mountain, named Kepler, which is also enveloped by a whitish
area, covering the lunar surface as if it were the result of extensive
outflows of light-colored lava.

In one important particular the crater mountains of the moon differ from
terrestrial volcanoes. This difference is clearly described by Nasmyth
and Carpenter in their book on The Moon:

"While the terrestrial crater is generally a hollow on a mountain top,
with its flat bottom high above the level of the surrounding country,
those upon the moon have their lowest points depressed more or less
deeply below the general surface of the moon, the external height being
frequently only a half or one third of the internal depth."

It has been suggested that these gigantic rings are only "basal wrecks"
of volcanic mountains, whose conical summits have been blown away,
leaving vast crateriform hollows where the mighty peaks once stood; but
the better opinion seems to be that which assumes that the rings were
formed by volcanic action very much as we now see them. If such a crater
as Copernicus or the still larger one named Theophilus, which is
situated in the western hemisphere of the moon, on the shore of the "Sea
of Nectar," ever had a conical mountain rising from its rim, the height
attained by the peak, if the average slope were about 30 deg., would have
been truly stupendous--fifteen or eighteen miles!

There is a kind of ring mountains, found in many places on the moon,
whose forms and surroundings do not, as the craters heretofore described
do, suggest at first sight a volcanic origin. These are rather level
plains of an oval or circular outline, enclosed by a wall of mountains.
The finest example is, perhaps, the dark-gray Plato, situated in 50 deg. of
north latitude, near an immense mountain uplift named the Lunar Alps,
and on the northern shore of the _Mare Imbrium_, or "Sea of Showers."
Plato appears as an oval plain, very smooth and level, about 60 miles in
length, and completely surrounded by mountains, quite precipitous on the
inner side, and rising in their highest peaks to an elevation of 6,000
to 7,000 feet. Enclosed plains, bearing more or less resemblance to
Plato--sometimes smooth within, and sometimes broken with small peaks
and craters or hilly ridges--are to be found scattered over almost all
parts of the moon. If our satellite was ever an inhabited world like the
earth, while its surface was in its present condition, these valleys
must have presented an extraordinary spectacle. It has been thought that
they may once have been filled with water, forming lakes that recall the
curious Crater Lake of Oregon.

[Illustration: THE MOON AT FIRST AND LAST QUARTER (WESTERN AND EASTERN
HEMISPHERES). Photographed with the Lick Telescope.]

It is not my intention to give a complete description of the various
lunar features, and I mention but one other--the "clefts" or "rills,"
which are to be seen running across the surface like cracks. One of the
most remarkable of these is found in the _Oceanus Procellarum_, near the
crater-mountain Aristarchus, which is famed for the intense brilliance
of its central peak, whose reflective power is so great that it was once
supposed to be aflame with volcanic fire. The cleft, or crack, in
question is very erratic in its course, and many miles in length, and
it terminates in a ringed plain named Herodotus not far east of
Aristarchus, breaking through the wall of the plain and entering the
interior. Many other similar chasms or canons exist on the moon, some
crossing plains, some cleaving mountain walls, and some forming a
network of intersecting clefts. Mr. Thomas Gwyn Elger has this to say on
the subject of the lunar clefts:

"If, as seems most probable, these gigantic cracks are due to
contractions of the moon's surface, it is not impossible, in spite of
the assertions of the text-books to the effect that our satellite is now
a 'changeless world,' that emanations may proceed from these fissures,
even if, under the monthly alternations of extreme temperatures, surface
changes do not now occasionally take place from this cause also. Should
this be so, the appearance of new rills and the extension and
modification of those already existing may reasonably be looked for."

Mr. Elger then proceeds to describe his discovery in 1883, in the
ring-plain Mersenius, of a cleft never noticed before, and which seems
to have been of recent formation.[15]

[Footnote 15: The Moon, a Full Description and Map of its Principal
Features, by Thomas Gwyn Elger, 1895.

Those who desire to read detailed descriptions of lunar scenery may
consult, in addition to Mr. Elger's book, the following: The Moon,
considered as a Planet, a World, and a Satellite, by James Nasmyth and
James Carpenter, 1874; The Moon, and the Condition and Configurations of
its Surface, by Edmund Neison, 1876. See also Annals of Harvard College
Observatory, vol. xxxii, part ii, 1900, for observations made by Prof.
William H. Pickering at the Arequipa Observatory.]

We now return to the question of the force of lunar gravity. This we
find to be only one sixth as great as gravity on the surface of the
earth. It is by far the smallest force of gravity that we have found
anywhere except on the asteroids. Employing the same method of
comparison that was made in the case of Mars, we compute that a man on
the moon could attain a height of thirty-six feet without being
relatively more unwieldy than a six-foot descendant of Adam is on the
earth.

Whether this furnishes a sound reason for assuming that the lunar
inhabitants, if any exist or have ever existed, should be preposterous
giants is questionable; yet such an assumption receives a certain degree
of support from the observed fact that the natural features of the moon
are framed on an exaggerated scale as compared with the earth's. We have
just observed that the moon is characterized by vast mountain rings,
attaining in many cases a diameter exceeding fifty miles. If these are
volcanic craters, it is evident, at a glance, that the mightiest
volcanoes of the earth fall into insignificance beside them. Now, the
