Detective Agency.

I went down to the floor below with him and got him my lighter
gas-projector and a couple of spare fills for it, and found the bottle
of Baldur honey-rum that Dad had been sure was around somewhere. I was
kind of doubtful about that, and he noticed my hesitation in giving it
to him and laughed.

"Don't worry, Walt," he said. "This is strictly for protective
coloration--and odoration. I shall be quite sparing with it, I assure
you."

I shook hands with him, trying not to be too solemn about it, and he
went down in the elevator and I went up the stairs to the floor above.
By this time, the Port Sandor Vigilance Committee had gotten itself
sorted out. The rank-and-file Vigilantes were standing around yacking
at one another, and a smaller group--Dad and Sigurd Ngozori and the
Reverend Sugitsuma and Oscar and Joe and Corkscrew and Nip and the
Mahatma--were in a huddle around Dad's editorial table, discussing
strategy and tactics.

"Well, we'd better get back to the docks before it starts," Corkscrew
was saying. "No hunter crew will follow anybody but their own ships'
officers."

"We'll have to have somebody the uptown people will follow," Oscar
said. "These people won't take orders from a woolly-pants hunter
captain. How about you, Sigurd?"

The banker shook his head. "Ralph Boyd's the man for that," he said.

"Ralph's needed right here; this is G.H.Q.," Oscar said. "This is a
job that's going to have to be run from one central command. We've got
to make sure the demonstration against Hallstock and the operation
against Hunters' Hall are synchronized."

"I have about a hundred and fifty workmen, and they all have or can
get something to shoot with," another man said. I looked around, and
saw that it was Casmir Oughourlian, of Rodriguez & Oughourlian
Shipyards. "They'll follow me, but I'm not too well known uptown."

"Hey, Professor Hartzenbosch," Mohandas Feinberg said. "You're a
respectable-looking duck; you ever have any experience leading a
lynch mob?"

Everybody laughed. So, to his credit, did the professor.

"I've had a lot of experience with children," the professor said.
"Children are all savages. So are lynch mobs. Things that are equal to
the same thing are equal to one another. Yes, I'd say so."

"All right," Dad said. "Say I'm Chief of Staff, or something. Oscar,
you and Joe and Corkscrew and the rest of you decide who's going to
take over-all command of the hunters. Casmir, you'll command your
workmen, and anybody else from the shipyards and engine works and
repair shops and so on. Sigurd, you and the Reverend, here, and
Professor Hartzenbosch gather up all the uptown people you can. Now,
we'll have to decide on how much force we need to scare Mort
Hallstock, and how we're going to place the main force that will
attack Hunters' Hall."

"I think we ought to wait till we see what Bish Ware can do," Oscar
said. "Get our gangs together, and find out where we're going to put
who, but hold off the attack for a while. If he can get inside
Hunters' Hall, we may not even need this demonstration at the
Municipal Building."

Joe Kivelson started to say something. The rest of his fellow ship
captains looked at him severely, and he shut up. Dad kept on jotting
down figures of men and 50-mm guns and vehicles and auto weapons we
had available.

He was still doing it when the fire alarm started.




16

CIVIL WAR POSTPONED


The moaner went on for thirty seconds, like a banshee mourning its
nearest and dearest. It was everywhere, Main City Level and the four
levels below. What we have in Port Sandor is a volunteer fire
organization--or disorganization, rather--of six independent
companies, each of which cherishes enmity for all the rest. It's the
best we can do, though; if we depended on the city government, we'd
have no fire protection at all. They do have a central alarm system,
though, and the _Times_ is connected with that.

Then the moaner stopped, and there were four deep whistle blasts for
Fourth Ward, and four more shrill ones for Bottom Level. There was an
instant's silence, and then a bedlam of shouts from the hunter-boat
captains. That was where the tallow-wax that was being held out from
the Co-operative was stored.

"Shut up!" Dad roared, the loudest I'd ever heard him speak. "Shut up
and listen!"

"Fourth Ward, Bottom Level," a voice from the fire-alarm speaker said.
"This is a tallow-wax fire. It is not the Co-op wax; it is wax stored
in an otherwise disused area. It is dangerously close to stored 50-mm
cannon ammunition, and it is directly under the pulpwood lumber plant,
on the Third Level Down, and if the fire spreads up to that, it will
endanger some of the growing vats at the carniculture plant on the
Second Level Down. I repeat, this is a tallow-wax fire. Do not use
water or chemical extinguishers."

About half of the Vigilantes, businessmen who belonged to one or
another of the volunteer companies had bugged out for their fire
stations already. The Buddhist priest and a couple of doctors were
also leaving. The rest, mostly hunter-ship men, were standing around
looking at one another.

Oscar Fujisawa gave a sour laugh. "That diversion idea of mine was all
right," he said. "The only trouble was that Steve Ravick thought of it
first."

"You think he started the fire?" Dad began, and then gave a sourer
laugh than Oscar's. "Am I dumb enough to ask that?"

I had started assembling equipment as soon as the feint on the
Municipal Building and the attack on Hunters' Hall had gotten into the
discussion stage. I would use a jeep that had a heavy-duty audiovisual
recording and transmitting outfit on it, and for situations where I'd
have to leave the jeep and go on foot, I had a lighter outfit like the
one Oscar had brought with him in the Pequod's boat. Then I had my
radio for two-way conversation with the office. And, because this
wasn't likely to be the sort of war in which the rights of
noncombatants like war correspondents would be taken very seriously,
I had gotten out my Sterberg 7.7-mm.

Dad saw me buckling it on, and seemed rather distressed.

"Better leave that, Walt," he said. "You don't want to get into any
shooting."

Logical, I thought. If you aren't prepared for something, it just
won't happen. There's an awful lot of that sort of thinking going on.
As I remember my Old Terran history, it was even indulged in by
governments, at one time. None of them exists now.

"You know what all crawls into the Bottom Level," I reminded him. "If
you don't, ask Mr. Murell, here. One sent him to the hospital."

Dad nodded; I had a point there. The abandoned sections of Bottom
Level are full of tread-snails and other assorted little nasties, and
the heat of the fire would stir them all up and start them moving
around. Even aside from the possibility that, having started the fire,
Steve Ravick's gang would try to take steps to keep it from being put
out too soon, a gun was going to be a comforting companion, down
there.

"Well, stay out of any fighting. Your job's to get the news, not play
hero in gun fights. I'm no hero; that's why I'm sixty years old. I
never knew many heroes that got that old."

It was my turn to nod. On that, Dad had a point. I said something
about getting the news, not making it, and checked the chamber and
magazine of the Sterberg, and then slung my radio and picked up the
audiovisual outfit.

Tom and Joe Kivelson had left already, to round up the scattered
Javelin crew for fire fighting. The attack on the Municipal Building
and on Hunters' Hall had been postponed, but it wasn't going to be
abandoned. Oscar and Professor Hartzenbosch and Dad and a couple of
others were planning some sort of an observation force of a few men
for each place, until the fire had been gotten out or under control.
Glenn Murell decided he'd go out with me, at least as far as the fire,
so we went down to the vehicle port and got the jeep out. Main City
Level Broadway was almost deserted; everybody had gone down below
where the excitement was. We started down the nearest vehicle shaft
and immediately got into a jam, above a lot of stuff that was going
into the shaft from the First Level Down, mostly manipulators and that
sort of thing. There were no police around, natch, and a lot of
volunteers were trying to direct traffic and getting in each other's
way. I got some views with the jeep camera, just to remind any of the
public who needed reminding what our city administration wasn't doing
in an emergency. A couple of pieces of apparatus, a chemical tank and
a pumper marked SALAMANDER VOLUNTEER FIRE COMPANY NO. 3 came along,
veered out of the jam, and continued uptown.

"If they know another way down, maybe we'd better follow them," Murell
suggested.

"They're not going down. They're going to the lumber plant, in case
the fire spreads upward," I said. "They wouldn't be taking that sort
of equipment to a wax fire."

"Why not?"

I looked at him. "I thought you were in the wax business," I said.

"I am, but I'm no chemist. I don't know anything about how wax burns.
All I know is what it's used for, roughly, and who's in the market for
it."

"Well, you know about those jumbo molecules, don't you?" I asked.
"They have everything but the kitchen sink in them, including enough
oxygen to sustain combustion even under water or in a vacuum. Not
enough oxygen to make wax explode, like powder, but enough to keep it
burning. Chemical extinguishers are all smothering agents, and you
just can't smother a wax fire. And water's worse than useless."

He wanted to know why.

"Burning wax is a liquid. The melting point is around 250 degrees
Centigrade. Wax ignites at 750. It has no boiling point, unless that's
the burning point. Throw water on a wax fire and you get a steam
explosion, just as you would if you threw it on molten metal, and that
throws the fire around and spreads it."

"If it melts that far below the ignition point, wouldn't it run away
before it caught fire?"

"Normally, it would. That's why I'm sure this fire was a touch-off. I
think somebody planted a thermoconcentrate bomb. A thermoconcentrate
flame is around 850 Centigrade; the wax would start melting and
burning almost instantaneously. In any case, the fire will be at the
bottom of the stacks. If it started there, melted wax would run down
from above and keep the fire going, and if it started at the top,
burning wax would run down and ignite what's below."

"Well, how in blazes do you put a wax fire out?" he wanted to know.

"You don't. You just pull away all the wax that hasn't caught fire
yet, and then try to scatter the fire and let it burn itself out....
Here's our chance!"

All this conversation we had been screaming into each other's ears, in
the midst of a pandemonium of yelling, cursing, siren howling and bell
clanging; just then I saw a hole in the vertical traffic jam and edged
the jeep into it, at the same time remembering that the jeep carried,
and I was entitled to use, a fire siren. I added its howls to the
general uproar and dropped down one level. Here a string of big
manipulators were trying to get in from below, sprouting claw hooks
and grapples and pusher arms in all directions. I made my siren
imitate a tail-tramped tomcat a couple of times, and got in among
them.

Bottom Level Broadway was a frightful mess, and I realized that we had
come down right between two units of the city power plant, big
mass-energy converters. The street was narrower than above, and ran
for a thousand yards between ceiling-high walls, and everything was
bottlenecked together. I took the jeep up till we were almost scraping
the ceiling, and Murell, who had seen how the audiovisual was used,
took over with it while I concentrated on inching forward. The noise
was even worse down here than it had been above; we didn't attempt to
talk.

Finally, by impudence and plain foolhardiness, I got the jeep forward
a few hundred yards, and found myself looking down on a big derrick
with a fifty-foot steel boom tipped with a four-clawed grapple,
shielded in front with sheet steel like a gun shield. It was painted
with the emblem of the Hunters' Co-operative, but the three men on it
looked like shipyard workers. I didn't get that, at all. The thing had
been built to handle burning wax, and was one of three kept on the
Second Level Down under Hunters' Hall. I wondered if Bish Ware had
found a way for a gang to get in at the bottom of Hunters' Hall. I
simply couldn't see Steve Ravick releasing equipment to fight the fire
his goons had started for him in the first place.

I let down a few feet, gave a polite little scream with my siren, and
then yelled down to the men on it:

"Where'd that thing come from?"

"Hunters' Hall; Steve Ravick sent it. The other two are up at the fire
already, and if this mess ahead doesn't get straightened out...." From
there on, his remarks were not suitable for publication in a family
journal like the _Times_.

I looked up ahead, rising to the ceiling again, and saw what was the
matter. It was one of the dredgers from the waterfront, really a
submarine scoop shovel, that they used to keep the pools and the inner
channel from sanding up. I wasn't surprised it was jammed; I couldn't
see how they'd gotten this far uptown with it. I got a few shots of
that, and then unhooked the handphone of my radio. Julio Kubanoff
answered.

"You getting everything I'm sending in?" I asked.

"Yes. What's that two-em-dashed thing up ahead, one of the harbor
dredgers?"

"That's right. Hey, look at this, once." I turned the audiovisual down
on the claw derrick. "The men on it look like Rodriguez &
Oughourlian's people, but they say Steve Ravick sent it. What do you
know about it?"

"Hey, Ralph! What's this Walt's picked up about Ravick sending
equipment to fight the fire?" he yelled.

Dad came over, and nodded. "It wasn't Ravick, it was Mort Hallstock.
He commandeered the Co-op equipment and sent it up," he said. "He
called me and wanted to know whom to send for it that Ravick's gang
wouldn't start shooting at right away. Casmir Oughourlian sent some of
his men."

Up front, something seemed to have given way. The dredger went
lurching forward, and everything moved off after it.

"I get it," I said. "Hallstock's getting ready to dump Ravick out the
airlock. He sees, now, that Ravick's a dead turkey; he doesn't want to
go into the oven along with him."

"Walt, can't you ever give anybody credit with trying to do something
decent, once in a while?" Dad asked.

"Sure I can. Decent people. There are a lot of them around, but Mort
Hallstock isn't one of them. There was an Old Terran politician named
Al Smith, once. He had a little saying he used in that kind of case:
'Let's look at the record.'"

"Well, Mort's record isn't very impressive, I'll give you that," Dad
admitted. "I understand Mort's up at the fire now. Don't spit in his
eye if you run into him."

"I won't," I promised. "I'm kind of particular where I spit."

Things must be looking pretty rough around Municipal Building, I
thought. Maybe Mort's afraid the people will start running Fenris
again, after this. He might even be afraid there'd be an election.

By this time, I'd gotten the jeep around the dredger--we'd come to the
end of the nuclear-power plant buildings--and cut off into open
country. That is to say, nothing but pillar-buildings two hundred
yards apart and piles of bagged mineral nutrients for the hydroponic
farms. We could see a blaze of electric lights ahead where the fire
must be, and after a while we began to run into lorries and
lifter-skids hauling ammunition away from the area. Then I could see a
big mushroom of greasy black smoke spreading out close to the ceiling.
The electric lights were brighter ahead, and there was a confused roar
of voices and sirens and machines.

And there was a stink.

There are a lot of stinks around Port Sandor, though the ventilation
system carries most of them off before they can spread out of their
own areas. The plant that reprocesses sewage to get organic nutrients
for the hydroponic farms, and the plant that digests hydroponic
vegetation to make nutrients for the carniculture vats. The
carniculture vats themselves aren't any flower gardens. And the pulp
plant where our synthetic lumber is made. But the worst stink there is
on Fenris is a tallow-wax fire. Fortunately, they don't happen often.




17

TALLOW-WAX FIRE
