like. I hope for your sake that you're telling the truth. If you're
not--" The voice stopped but the threat was plain.

"Do as they say, Tom," said Connel.

The cadet closed his eyes and he heard the shuffle of feet around them.
Suddenly there was a flash of light on his face but he kept his eyes
tightly closed. The light moved away, but he could tell that it was
still burning.

"It's Connel, I think," said a high-pitched voice directly over them.

"Are you sure?"

"Pretty sure. I met him once in Atom City at a scientific meeting. He
was making a speech with a Professor Sykes."

"That's right," said Connel, hearing the remark. "I was there."

"Do you remember meeting a man from Venus wearing a long red robe?"
asked the high-pitched voice.

Connel hesitated. "No," he said. "I only remember talking to three men.
Two were from Venus and one was from Mars. But neither of the two from
Venus wore a red robe. They wore purple--"

"He's right," acknowledged the voice. "This is Connel."

"Open your eyes," said the first voice.

Connel and Tom opened their eyes and in the light of a small hand torch
they saw two gaunt faces before them. The tallest of the men stuck out a
bony hand. "My name is Carson." They recognized his voice as the one
that had spoken first. "And this is Bill Jensen," he added.

"This is Tom Corbett, Space Cadet," said Connel. He glanced around the
room, and in the weak reflected light of the torch, saw almost fifty men
crouched against the walls, each of them holding a crude weapon.

"You'll understand our caution, Major," said Carson. "Once before we had
a plan to escape and a spy was sent in. As you see, we didn't escape."

"Neither did the spy," commented Jensen grimly.

"How long have you been here?" asked Connel.

"The oldest prisoner has been here for three years," replied Carson. And
as the other men began to gather around them, Connel and Tom saw that
they were hardly more than walking skeletons. Their cheeks were hollow,
eyes sunk in their sockets, and they wore little more than rags.

"And there's no way to escape?" asked Tom.

"Three guards with blasters are stationed on the other side of that
door," said Carson. "There is no other entrance or exit. We tried a
tunnel, but it caved in and after that they put in a wooden floor." He
stamped on it. "Teak. Hard as steel. We couldn't cut through."

"But why are you being held prisoners?" asked Connel.

"All of us joined the Nationalists believing it was just a sort of
good-neighbor club, where we could get together and exchange ideas for
our own improvement. And when we found out what Lactu and the Division
Chiefs were really up to, we tried to quit. As you see, we couldn't. We
knew too much."

"Blasted rebels!" muttered Connel. "The Solar Guard will cool them off!"

"I'm afraid it's too late," said Carson. "They're preparing to strike
now. I've been expecting it for some time. They have enough ships and
arms to wipe out the entire Solar Guard garrison here on Venus in one
attack!" He shook his head. "After that, with Solar Guard ships and
complete control of the planet--" He paused and sighed. "It will mean a
long, bloody space war."

Tom and Connel plied the prisoners with questions and soon began to get
a complete picture of the scope of the Nationalist movement.

"Lactu and his commanders should be sent to a prison asteroid for life,"
said Carson, "for what they have done to former Nationalists."

"Hundreds of unsuspecting Venusians have been brought here under the
guise of helping to free Venus. But when they come and recognize what
Lactu really intends to do, they want to quit. But it's too late, and
they're sent to the caves."

Tom looked at the gaunt man fearfully. There was something in his voice
that sent a chill down his spine.

"They are driven like cattle into the canyon walls," continued Carson.
"There they are forced to dig the huge underground vaults for storage
dumps. They are beaten and whipped and starved."

"Why aren't you in the caves then?" asked Connel.

"Some of us were," replied Carson. "But each of us here owns land and it
is necessary to keep us alive to send back directives to our bankers and
foremen to give aid in one form or another to Sharkey and the Division
Chiefs."

"I see," said Connel. "If you were to die, then your property would be
out of their reach."

"Exactly," said Carson.

"Is Sharkey the real leader of the movement?"

"I don't believe so. But then, no one knows. That's the idea of the
frosted helmets. If you don't know who a man is, you can liquidate him
without conscience. He may be your closest friend, but you would never
know it."

"The blasted space crawlers!" growled Connel. "Well, they'll pay!"

"You have a plan?" asked Carson eagerly.

"No," said Connel slowly, "but at least we all have more of a chance
now."

"How?" asked Carson.

"The Solar Guard sent us here to find this base. If we don't return, or
send some sort of message back within a reasonable time, this jungle
will be swarming with guardsmen!"

Carson looked a little disappointed. "We shall see," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

There were three things on Astro's mind as twilight darkened into night
over the canyon. One, he had to find out why Roger wasn't with Tom and
Connel when they were taken into the building; two, he had to figure out
a way to contact Tom and Connel; and finally, he had to escape himself,
or help Tom and Connel escape.

The big cadet finished the last job in the machine shop. It had taken
very little time, but the big cadet had lingered over it, trying to find
answers to his three problems. Around him, the workers were leaving
their benches and lathes, to be replaced by still others. A twelve-hour
shift was being used by the Nationalists in their frantic preparations
for an attack on the Venusport garrison of the Solar Guard. Astro
finally dropped the last wrench into the tool kit and straightened up.
He stretched leisurely and glanced over at his guard. The man was still
rubbing his stomach where Astro had hit him, and he watched the big
cadet with a murderous gleam in his eye.

"All finished," said Astro. "Where and when do I eat?"

"If I had my way, you wouldn't," sneered the guard.

"Either I knock off and eat," said Astro confidently, "or I call the
foreman and you talk to Lactu."

"Feeling pretty big, aren't you?" growled the guard. "I haven't
forgotten that punch in the stomach."

"Why, I hardly touched you," said Astro in mock surprise.

The guard glared at him, muttered an oath, and turned away. Astro could
see that he was boiling, almost out of his mind with helpless,
frustrated anger, and suddenly the young cadet realized how he would be
able to move about the base freely. Grinning, he walked arrogantly in
front of the guard and out of the shop into the dark Venusian night. It
was very warm and many of the workers had stripped down to their
trousers. He passed the open doorway of a large tool shop and glanced
inside. It was empty. The men had apparently gone to eat. He suddenly
stopped, turned to the guard, and growled, "If you want to settle our
differences now, we can step inside."

The guard hesitated and glared at Astro. "When I settle with you, big
boy, you'll know about it."

"What's the matter with right now?" asked Astro. "Yellow?" He turned and
walked into the tool shop without looking back. The guard rushed after
him. But the big cadet had carefully gauged the distance between them,
and when he heard the rushing steps of the guard immediately behind him,
he suddenly spun around, swinging a roundhouse right, catching the guard
in the pit of the stomach again. The man stopped dead in his tracks. His
eyes bulged and glazed, and he dropped to the floor like a stone. Astro
pulled the man to the corner of the empty shop, removed the plastic
helmet, and then tied and gagged him. He pulled the helmet over his own
head, nearly tearing one ear off, grabbed the gun and stepped back
outside. He stood in front of the door and glanced up and down the area
between the buildings. Fifty feet away a group of men were working over
a tube casing, but they didn't even look up.

[Illustration]

Staying in the shadows, he walked down the lane, moving carefully. The
plastic helmet would keep him from being recognized right away, but to
complete his plan, he needed one of the green uniforms of the guards.

Deciding it would be too risky to walk around the base, he crouched
behind a huge crate of machinery at the head of the lane. Sentries were
constantly patrolling the area and he was certain that one would pass by
soon. He only hoped the man would be big enough. Fifteen minutes later
the cadet heard footsteps in a slow measured tread. He peered around the
edge of the crate and silently breathed a thankful prayer. It was a
green-clad guard, and luckily, almost as big as he was.

Crouching in the shadow of the crate, Astro tensed for the attack. It
had to be quick and it had to be silent. He couldn't club the guard
because of his helmet. He would have to get him around the throat to
choke off any outcry.

The slow steps came nearer and the big cadet raised himself on the balls
of his feet, ready to spring. When the guard's shadow fell across him,
Astro leaped forward like a striking tiger.

The guard didn't have a chance. Astro's arm coiled around his throat and
the cry of alarm that welled up within him died down in a choking gasp.
Within seconds he was unconscious and the big cadet had dragged him
behind the crate. He stripped him of his uniform, bound and gagged him
with his own rags, and crammed him into the crate. Then, protected by
the helmet and green uniform and carrying the blaster, the cadet stepped
out confidently and strode down the lane.

He went directly to the building he had seen Tom and Connel enter, and
walked boldly up to the guard lounging in front of the door.

"You're relieved," said Astro in the Venusian dialect. "They want you up
in the caves." The cadet had no idea where the caves were, but he knew
that they couldn't be near by and it would be some time before an alarm
could be sounded.

"The caves?" asked the guard. "Who said so?"

"The chief. He wants you to identify somebody."

"Me? Identify someone? I don't understand." The guard was puzzled. "What
section of the caves?"

"The new section," said Astro quickly, figuring there must be a new and
an old section because he had heard a guard refer to the old one.

"Up by the jungle tunnels?"

Astro nodded.

"Must be more of those Solar Guardsmen," said the guard, relaxing. "We
have two of them in here, another in the hospital, and one of them
working in the machine shop."

Hospital! Astro gulped. That would be Roger. But he dared not ask too
many questions. "What's going to happen to them?" he asked casually.

"I don't know," said the guard, "but I wish we'd hurry up and attack
Venusport. I'm getting tired of living out here in the jungle."

"Me too," said Astro. "Well, you'd better get going."

The guard nodded and started to walk away. Suddenly Astro stiffened. Two
other guards were rounding the corner of the building. He called to the
departing guard quickly. "Who's on duty with you tonight?"

"Maron and Teril," replied the guard, and then strode off into the
darkness.

"So long," said Astro, turning to face the two men walking toward him.
He would have to get rid of them.

"Hello, Maron, Teril," he called casually. "Everything quiet?"

"Yes," replied the shorter of the two, as they stopped in front of
Astro, "no trouble tonight."

"Well, there's trouble now!" growled Astro. He brought up the blaster
and cocked it. "Make one wrong move, and you're dead little space birds!
Get over there and open that door!"

Stunned, both men turned to the door without a protest and Astro took
their guns. "Open up!" he growled.

The men slid the heavy bar back and pushed the door open.

"Get inside!" ordered Astro. The two men stumbled inside. Astro stepped
to the door. "Tom! Major!"

There was a cry of joy from the blackness within and Astro recognized
Tom.

"Astro!" roared Connel, rushing up. "What in the stars--?"

"Can't talk now," said Astro. "Here. Take these blasters and then tie
these two up. Close the door, but leave it open a crack. We can talk
while I stay outside and keep watch. If there isn't a guard out here, it
might mean trouble."

"Right," said Connel. He took the blasters, tossing one over to Tom.
"Blast it, I never felt anything so good in my life!" He closed the
door, leaving it open an inch.

"Why is Roger in the hospital?" asked Astro quickly.

Connel told him of the fight with the tyrannosaurus and Roger's injury,
ending with their capture by the patrol.

"You know what's going on here, Major?" asked Astro.

"I sure do," said Connel. "And the sooner we blast them, the happier
I'll be."

"One of us will have to escape and get back to the _Polaris_ to contact
Commander Walters," said Astro. "But they've got radar here as good as
ours. That has to be put out of commission or they can blast any
attacking fleet."

"You're right," said Connel grimly, and turned back into the room.
"Tom!" he called.

"Yes, sir," replied Tom, coming up to the door.

"Since Astro and I speak Venusian--" said Connel, and then added when
Tom gasped, "Yes, I speak it fluently, but I kept it a secret. That
means you're the one to go. Astro and I will have more of a chance here.
You escape and return to the _Polaris_. Contact Commander Walters. Tell
him everything that's happened. We'll give you thirty-six hours to make
it. At exactly noon, day after tomorrow, we'll knock out their radar."

"But how, sir?" asked Tom.

"Never mind. We'll figure out something. Just get back to the _Polaris_
and tell the Solar Guard to attack at noon, day after tomorrow. If you
don't and the fleet attacks earlier, or later, they'll be wiped out."

"What about you, sir?" asked Tom.

"If you get back in time, we'll be all right. If not, then this is
good-by. We'll hold out as long as we can, but that can't be forever.
We're fighting smart, determined men, Tom. And it's a fight to the
finish. Now hurry up and get into one of those uniforms."

While Tom turned back inside to put on the uniform, Connel returned to
Astro outside the door. "Think we can do it, Astro?"

"I don't see why not, sir," replied the big cadet.

A moment later Tom returned, dressed in one of the guard's green uniform
and wearing a helmet. Carson was with him, similarly clad. "Astro better
show me the way out of the base," said Tom. "Carson will stand guard
until he gets back."

"Good idea," said Connel. Tom and Carson slipped out the door.

"All set, Astro?" asked Tom.

"Yeah, there's only one thing wrong," replied the big cadet.

"What's the matter?" asked Connel.

"I don't know the way out of the base."

[Illustration]




CHAPTER 15


"I can tell you the way out of the base."

Adjusting the plastic helmet over his head, Carson stepped up close to
Astro and Tom and spoke confidently. "It's very simple."

"Whew!" exclaimed Tom. "I thought we'd have to go fumbling around."

Carson pointed through the darkness. "Follow this lane straight down
until you come to a large repair lock. There's a space freighter on the
maintenance cradle outside. You can't miss it. Turn left and follow a
trail to the base of the canyon wall. There are jungle creepers and
vines growing up the side and you can climb them easily."
