
"Get to your work," Moa told him sharply.

He retreated, joining the bustle and confusion which now was beginning
on the deck. It struck me--could I turn that confusion to account?
Would it be possible, now at the last moment, to attack these
brigands? Snap still sat outside the radio room doorway. But his guard
was alert with upraised projector. And that guard, I saw, in his
position, commanded all the deck.

And I saw too, as the passengers now were herded in a line from the
lounge oval, that Miko had roped and bound all of the men, a clanking
chain connected them. They came like a line of convicts, marching
forward, and stopped on the open deck near the base of the turret. Dr.
Frank's grim face gazed up at me.

Miko ordered the women and children in a group beside the chained men.
His words to them reached me: "You are in no danger. When we land, be
careful. You will find gravity very different--this is a very small
world."

I flung on the landing lights; the deck glowed with the blue radiance;
the searchbeams shot down beside our hull. We hung now a thousand feet
above the forest glade. I cut off the electronic streams. We poised,
with the gravity plates set at normal, and only a gentle night breeze
to give us a slight side drift. This I could control with the lateral
propeller rudders.

For all my busy landing routine, my mind was on other things. Venza's
swift words back there in the lounge. I was to create a commotion
while the passengers were landing. Why? Had she and Dr. Frank some
last minute desperate purposes?

I determined I would do what she said. Shout, or mis-order the lights.
That would be easy.

I was glad it was night. I had, indeed, calculated our descent so that
the landing would be in darkness. But to what purpose? These brigands
were very alert. There was nothing I could think of to do which would
avail us anything more than a probable swift death under Miko's anger.

"Well done, Gregg!" said Moa.

I cut off the last of the propellers. With scarcely a perceptible jar,
the _Planetara_ grounded, rose like a feather, and settled to rest in
the glade. The deep purple night with stars overhead was around us. I
hissed out our interior air through the dome and hull ports, and
admitted the night air of the asteroid. My calculations--of necessity
mere mathematical approximations--proved fairly accurate. In
temperature and pressure there was no radical change as the dome
windows slid back.

We had landed. Whatever Venza's purpose, her moment was at hand. I was
tense. But I was aware also, that beside me Moa was very alert. I had
thought her unarmed. She was not. She sat back from me; in her hand
was a long thin knife blade.

She murmured tensely, "You have done your part, Gregg. Well and
skillfully done. Now we will sit here quietly and watch them land."

Snap's guard was standing, keenly watching. The lookouts in the
forward and stern towers were also armed; I could see them both gazing
keenly down at the confusion of the blue lit deck.

The incline went over the hull side and touched the ground.

"Enough!" Miko roared. "The men first. Hahn, move the women back!
Coniston, pile those caskets to the side. Get out of the way, Prince."

Anita was down there. I saw her at the edge of the group of women.
Venza was near her.

Miko shoved her. "Get out of the way, Prince. You can help Coniston.
Have the things ready to throw off."

Five of the steward crew were at the head of the incline. Miko shouted
up at me:

"Haljan, hold our shipboard gravity normal."

"Yes."

The line of men were first to descend. Dr. Frank led them. He flashed
a look of farewell up at me and Snap as he went down the incline with
the chained men passengers after him.

Motley procession! Twenty odd, disheveled, half-clothed men of these
worlds. The changing, lightening gravity on the incline caught them.
Dr. Frank bounded up to the rail under the impetus of his step; caught
and held himself. Drew himself back. The line swayed. In the dim, blue
lit glare it seemed unreal, crazy. A grotesque dream of men descending
a plank.

They reached the forest glade. Stood swaying, afraid at first to move.
The purple night crowded them; they stood gazing at this strange
world, their new prison.

"Now the women."

Miko was shoving the women to the head of the incline. I could feel
Moa's gaze upon me. Her knife gleamed in the turret light.

She murmured again, "In a few moments you can bring us away, Gregg."

I felt like an actor awaiting his cue in the wings of some turgid
drama the plot of which he did not know. Venza was near the head of
the incline. Some of the women and children were on it. A woman
screamed. Her child had slipped from her hand; bounded up over the
rail and fallen. Hardly fallen--floated down to the ground, with
flailing arms and legs, landing in the dark ferns unharmed. Its
terrified wail came up.

There was a confusion on the incline. Venza, still on the deck, seemed
to send a look of appeal to the turret. My cue?

I slid my hand to the light switchboard. It was near my knees. I
pulled a switch. The blue lit deck beneath the turret went dark.

I recall an instant of horrible, tense silence, and in the gloom
beside me I was aware of Moa moving. I felt a thrill of instinctive
fear--would she plunge that knife into me?

The silence of the darkened deck was broken with a confusion of
sounds. A babble of voices; a woman passenger's scream; shuffling
feet; and above it all, Miko's roar:

"Stand quiet! Everyone! No movement!"

On the descending incline there was chaos. The disembarking women were
clinging to the gang rail; some of them had evidently surged forward
and fallen. Down on the ground in the purple-shadowed starlight, I
could vaguely see the chained line of men. They too, were in
confusion, trying to shove themselves toward the fallen women.

Miko roared: "Light those tubes! Gregg Haljan! By the Almighty, Moa,
are you up there? What is wrong? The light tubes--"

Dark drama of unknown plot! I wondered if I should try and leave the
turret. Where was Anita? She had been down there on the deck when I
flung out the lights.

I think twenty seconds would have covered it all. I had not moved. I
thought, "Is Snap concerned with this?"

Moa's knife could have stabbed me. I felt her lunge against me. And
suddenly I was gripping her, twisting her wrist. But she flung the
knife away. Her strength was almost the equal of my own. Her hand went
for my throat, and with the other hand she was fumbling.

The deck abruptly sprang into light again. Moa had found the switch
and threw it back.

She fought me as I tried to reach the switch. I saw down on the deck.
Miko was gazing up at us. Moa panted, "Gregg--stop! If he sees you
doing this, he'll kill you."

The scene down there was almost unchanged. I had answered my cue. To
what purpose? I saw Anita near Miko. The last of the women were on the
plank.

I had stopped struggling with Moa. She sat back, panting. And then she
called:

"Sorry, Miko. It will not happen again."

Miko was in a towering rage. But he was too busy to bother with me;
his anger swung on those nearest him. He shoved the last of the women
violently at the incline. She bounded over. Her body, with the gravity
pull of only a few Earth pounds, sailed in an arc and dropped near
the swaying line of men.

Miko swung back. "Get out of my way!" A sweep of his huge arm knocked
Anita sidewise. "Prince, damn you, help me with those boxes!"

The frightened stewards were lifting the boxes, square metal storage
chests each as long as a man, packed with food, tools, and equipment.

"Here, get out of my way! All of you!"

My breath came again; Anita nimbly retreated before Miko's angry rush.
He dashed at the stewards. Three of them held a box. He took it from
them; raised it at the top of the incline, poised it over his head an
instant, with his massive arms like gray pillars beneath it; and flung
it. The box catapulted, dropped; and then passing the _Planetara's_
gravity area, it sailed in a long flat arc over the forest glade and
crashed into the purple underbrush.

"Give me another!"

The stewards pushed another at him. Like an angry Titan, he flung it.
And another. One by one the chests sailed out and crashed.

"There is your food. Go pick it up! Haljan, make ready to ring us
away!"

On the deck lay the dead body of Rance Rankin, which the stewards had
carried out. Miko seized it: flung it.

"There! Go to your last resting place!"

And the other bodies, Balch, Blackstone, Captain Carter, Johnson--Miko
flung them all. And the course masters and those of our crew who had
been killed.

The passengers were all on the ground now. It was dim down there. I
tried to distinguish Venza, but could not. I could see Dr. Frank's
figure at the end of the chained line of men. The passengers were
gazing in horror at the bodies hurtling over them.

"Ready, Haljan?"

Moa prompted me. "Tell him yes!"

I called, "Yes!" Had Venza failed in her unknown purpose? It seemed
so. On the radio room bridge Snap and his guard stood like silent
statues in the blue lit gloom.

The disembarkation was over.

"Close the ports!" Miko commanded.

The incline came folding up with a clatter. The port and dome windows
slid closed. Moa hissed against my ear:

"If you want life, Gregg Haljan, you will start your duties!"

Venza had failed. Whatever it was, it had come to nothing. Down in the
purple forest, disconnected now from the ship, the last of our friends
stood marooned. I could distinguish them through the blur of the
closed dome--only a swaying, huddled group was visible. But my fancy
pictured this last sight of them, Dr. Frank, Venza, Shac and Dud
Ardley.

They were gone. There were left only Snap, Anita and myself.

I was mechanically ringing us away. I heard my sirens sounding down
below, with the answering clangs here in the turret. The _Planetara's_
respiratory controls started; the pressure equalizers began operating;
and the gravity plates began shifting into lifting combinations.

The ship was hissing and quivering with it, combined with the grating
of the last of the dome ports. And Miko's command:

"Lift, Haljan!"

Hahn had been mingling with the confusion of the deck though I had
hardly noticed him. Coniston had remained below with the crew
answering my signals. Hahn stood now with Miko, gazing down through a
deck window. Anita was alone at another.

"Lift, Haljan!"

I lifted up gently, bow first, with a repulsion of the bow plates. And
started the central electronic engine. Its thrust from the stern moved
us diagonally over the purple forest trees.

The glade slid downward and away. I caught a last vague glimpse of
the huddled group of marooned passengers, staring up at us. Left to
their fate, alone on this deserted world.

With the three engines going, we slid smoothly upward. The forest
dropped, a purple spread of treetops edged with starlight and
Earthlight. The sharply curving horizon seemed to follow us upward. I
swung on all the power. We mounted at a forty degree angle, slowly
circling, with a bank of clouds over us to the side and the shining
little sea beneath.

"Very good, Gregg." In the turret light Moa's eyes blazed at me. "I do
not know what you meant by darkening the deck lights." Her fingers dug
at my shoulders. "I will tell my brother it was an error."

I said, "An error--yes."

"I didn't know what it was. But you have me to deal with now. You
understand? I will tell my brother so. You said, 'On Earth a man may
kill the thing he loves.' A woman of Mars may do that! Beware of me,
Gregg Haljan."

Her passion-filled eyes bored into me. Love? Hate? The venom of a
woman scorned--a mingling of turgid emotions....

I twisted back from her grip and ignored her. She sat back, silently
watching my busy activities: the calculations of the shifting
conditions of gravity, pressures, temperatures; a checking of the
instruments on the board before me.

Mechanical routine. My mind went to Venza, back there on the asteroid.
The wandering little world was already shrinking to a convex surface
beneath us. Venza, with her last unknown play, gone to failure. Had I
missed my cue? Whatever my part, it seemed now that I must have
horribly misacted it.

The crescent Earth was presently swinging over our bow. We rocketed
out of the asteroid's shadow. The glowing, flaming Sun appeared,
making a crescent of the Earth. With the glass I could see our tiny
Moon, visually seeming to hug the limb of its parent Earth.

We were on our course to the Moon. My mind flung ahead. Grantline
with his treasure, unsuspecting this brigand ship. And suddenly,
beyond all thought of Grantline, there came to me a fear for Anita. In
God's truth I had been, so far, a very stumbling, inept champion,
doomed to failure with everything I tried. Why had I not contrived to
have Anita desert at the asteroid? Would it not have been far better
for her there, taking her chance for rescue with Dr. Frank, Venza and
the others?

But no! I had, like a fool, never thought of that! Had let her remain
here on board at the mercy of these outlaws.

And I swore now, that beyond everything, I would protect her.

Futile oath! If I could have seen ahead a few hours! But I sensed the
catastrophe. There was a shudder within me as I sat in that turret,
docilely guiding us out through the asteroid's atmosphere, heading us
upon our course for the Moon.




XIX


"Try again. By the infernal, Snap Dean, if you do anything to balk us,
you die!"

Miko scanned the apparatus with keen eyes. How much technical
knowledge of signaling instruments did this brigand leader have? I was
tense and cold with apprehension as I sat in a corner of the radio
room, watching Snap. Could Miko be fooled? Snap, I knew, was trying to
fool him.

The Moon spread close beneath us. My log-chart, computed up to thirty
minutes past, showed us barely some thirty thousand miles over the
Moon's surface. A silver quadrant. The sunset caught the Lunar
mountains, flung slanting shadows over the Lunar plains. All the disc
was plainly visible. The mellow Earthlight glowed serene and pale to
illumine the Lunar night.

The _Planetara_ was bathed in silver. A brilliant silver glare swept
the forward deck, clean white and splashed with black shadows. We had
