  be, when examined in longitudinal section, sieve tubes (Fig. 76,
  _E_) with numerous lateral sieve plates quite similar to those found
  in the stems of ferns.

[Illustration: FIG. 76.--Scotch pine. _A_, cross-section of a
two-year-old branch, x 3. _p_, pith. _c_, bark. The radiating lines
are medullary rays. _r_, resin ducts. _B_, part of the same, x 150.
_cam._ cambium cells. _x_, tracheids. _C_, cross-section of a
two-year-old branch at the point where the two growth rings join: _I_,
the cells of the first year's growth; _II_, those of the second year.
_m_, a medullary ray, x 150. _D_, longitudinal section of a branch,
showing the form of the tracheids and the bordered pits upon their
walls. _m_, medullary ray, x 150. _E_, part of a sieve tube, x 300.
_F_, cross-section of a tracheid passing through two of the pits in
the wall (_p_), x 300. _G_, longitudinal section of a branch, at right
angles to the medullary rays (_m_). At _y_, the section has passed
through the wall of a tracheid, bearing a row of pits, x 150. _H_,
cross-section of a resin duct, x 150. _I_, cross-section of a leaf,
x 20. _fb._ fibro-vascular bundle. _r_, resin duct. _J_, section of a
breathing pore, x 150. _i_, the air space below it.]

  The growing tissue (cambium), separating the phloem from the wood,
  is made up of cells quite like those of the phloem, into which they
  insensibly merge, except that their walls are much thinner, as is
  always the case with rapidly growing cells. These cells (_B_,
  _cam._) are arranged in radial rows and divide, mainly by walls, at
  right angles to the radii of the stem. If we examine the inner side
  of the ring, the change the cells undergo is more marked. They
  become of nearly equal diameter in all directions, and the walls
  become woody, showing at the same time distinct stratification (_B_,
  _x_).

  On examining the xylem, where two growth rings are in contact, the
  reason of the sharply marked line seen when the stem is examined
  with the naked eye is obvious. On the inner side of this line (_I_),
  the wood cells are comparatively small and much flattened, while the
  walls are quite as heavy as those of the much larger cells (_II_)
  lying on the outer side of the line. The small cells show the point
  where growth ceased at the end of the season, the cells becoming
  smaller as growth was feebler. The following year when growth
  commenced again, the first wood cells formed by the cambium were
  much larger, as growth is most vigorous at this time, and the wood
  formed of these larger cells is softer and lighter colored than that
  formed of the smaller cells of the autumn growth.

  The wood is mainly composed of tracheids, there being no vessels
  formed except the first year. These tracheids are characterized by
  the presence of peculiar pits upon their walls, best seen when thin
  longitudinal sections are made in a radial direction. These pits
  (Fig. 76, _D_, _p_) appear in this view as double circles, but if
  cut across, as often happens in a cross-section of the stem, or in a
  longitudinal section at right angles to the radius (tangential),
  they are seen to be in shape something like an inverted saucer with
  a hole through the bottom. They are formed in pairs, one on each
  side of the wall of adjacent tracheids, and are separated by a very
  delicate membrane (_F_, _p_, _G_, _y_). These "bordered" pits are
  very characteristic of the wood of all conifers.

  The structure of the root is best studied in the seedling plant, or
  in a rootlet of an older one. The general plan of the root is much
  like that of the pteridophytes. The fibro-vascular bundle (Fig. 75,
  _M_, _fb._) is of the so-called radial type, there being three xylem
  masses (_x_) alternating with as many phloem masses (_ph._) in the
  root of the seedling. This regularity becomes destroyed as the root
  grows older by the formation of a cambium ring, something like that
  in the stem.

  The development of the sporangia is on the whole much like that of
  the club mosses, and will not be examined here in detail. The
  microspores (pollen spores) are formed in groups of four in
  precisely the same way as the spores of the bryophytes and
  pteridophytes, and by collecting the male flowers as they begin to
  appear in the spring, and crushing the sporangia in water, the
  process of division may be seen. For more careful examination they
  may be crushed in a mixture of water and acetic acid, to which is
  added a little gentian violet. This mixture fixes and stains the
  nuclei of the spores, and very instructive preparations may thus be
  made.[11]

[11] See the last chapter for details.

[Illustration: FIG. 77.--Scotch pine (except _E_ and _F_). _A_, end of
a branch bearing a cluster of male flowers ([Male]), x 1/2. _B_, a similar
branch, with two young female flowers ([Female]), natural size. _C_, a
scale from a male flower, showing the two sporangia (_sp._); x 5. _D_,
a single ripe pollen spore (microspore), showing the vegetative cell
(_x_), x 150. _E_, a similar scale, from a female flower of the
Austrian pine, seen from within, x 4. _o_, the sporangium (ovule).
_F_, the same, seen from the back, showing the scale (_sc._) attached
to the back. _G_, longitudinal section through a full-grown ovule of
the Scotch pine. _p_, a pollen spore sending down its tube to the
archegonia (_ar._). _sp._ the prothallium (endosperm), filling up the
embryo sac, x 10. _H_, the neck of the archegonium, x 150.]

  The ripe pollen spores (Fig. 77, _D_) are oval cells provided with
  a double wall, the outer one giving rise to two peculiar
  bladder-like appendages (_z_). Like the microspores of the smaller
  club mosses, a small cell is cut off from the body of the spore
  (_x_). These pollen spores are carried by the wind to the ovules,
  where they germinate.

  The wall of the ripe sporangium or pollen sac is composed of a
  single layer of cells in most places, and these cells are provided
  with thickened ridges which have to do with opening the pollen sac.

  We have already examined in some detail the structure of the
  macrosporangium or ovule. In the full-grown ovule the macrospore,
  which in the seed plants is generally known as the "embryo sac," is
  completely filled with the prothallium or "endosperm." In the upper
  part of the prothallium several large archegonia are formed in much
  the same way as in the pteridophytes. The egg cell is very large,
  and appears of a yellowish color, and filled with large drops that
  give it a peculiar aspect. There is a large nucleus, but it is not
  always readily distinguished from the other contents of the egg
  cell. The neck of the archegonium is quite long, but does not
  project above the surface of the prothallium (Fig. 77, _H_).

The pollen spores are produced in great numbers, and many of them fall
upon the female flowers, which when ready for pollination have the
scales somewhat separated. The pollen spores now sift down to the base
of the scales, and finally reach the opening of the ovule, where they
germinate. No spermatozoids are produced, the seed plants differing in
this respect from all pteridophytes. The pollen spore bursts its
outer coat, and sends out a tube which penetrates for some distance
into the tissue of the ovule, acting very much as a parasitic fungus
would do, and growing at the expense of the tissue through which it
grows. After a time growth ceases, and is not resumed until the
development of the female prothallium and archegonia is nearly
complete, which does not occur until more than a year from the time
the pollen spore first reaches the ovule. Finally the pollen tube
penetrates down to and through the open neck of the archegonium, until
it comes in contact with the egg cell. These stages can only be seen
by careful sections through a number of ripe ovules, but the track of
the pollen tube is usually easy to follow, as the cells along it are
often brown and apparently dead (Fig. 77, _G_).


CLASSIFICATION OF THE GYMNOSPERMS.

There are three classes of the gymnosperms: I., cycads (_Cycadeae_);
II., conifers (_Coniferae_); III., joint firs (_Gnetaceae_). All of the
gymnosperms of the northern United States belong to the second order,
but representatives of the others are found in the southern and
southwestern states.

The cycads are palm-like forms having a single trunk crowned by a
circle of compound leaves. Several species are grown for ornament in
conservatories, and a few species occur native in Florida, but
otherwise do not occur within our limits.

[Illustration: FIG. 78.--Illustrations of gymnosperms. _A_, fruiting
leaf of a cycad (_Cycas_), with macrosporangia (ovules) (_ov._), x 1/4.
_B_, leaf of _Gingko_, x 1/2. _C_, branch of hemlock (_Tsuga_), with a
ripe cone, x 1. _D_, red cedar (_Juniperus_), x 1. _E_, _Arbor-vitae_
(_Thuja_), x 1.]

The spore-bearing leaves usually form cones, recalling somewhat in
structure those of the horse-tails, but one of the commonest
cultivated species (_Cycas revoluta_) bears the ovules, which are very
large, upon leaves that are in shape much like the ordinary ones
(Fig. 78, _A_).

Of the conifers, there are numerous familiar forms, including all our
common evergreen trees. There are two sub-orders,--the true conifers
and the yews. In the latter there is no true cone, but the ovules are
borne singly at the end of a branch, and the seed in the yew (_Taxus_)
is surrounded by a bright red, fleshy integument. One species of yew,
a low, straggling shrub, occurs sparingly in the northern states, and
is the only representative of the group at the north. The European yew
and the curious Japanese _Gingko_ (Fig. 78, _B_) are sometimes met
with in cultivation.

Of the true conifers, there are a number of families, based on
peculiarities in the leaves and cones. Some have needle-shaped leaves
and dry cones like the firs, spruces, hemlock (Fig. 78, _C_). Others
have flattened, scale-like leaves, and more or less fleshy cones, like
the red cedar (Fig. 78, _D_) and _Arbor-vitae_ (_E_).

A few of the conifers, such as the tamarack or larch (_Larix_) and
cypress (_Taxodium_), lose their leaves in the autumn, and are not,
therefore, properly "evergreen."

The conifers include some of the most valuable as well as the largest
of trees. Their timber, especially that of some of the pines, is
particularly valuable, and the resin of some of them is also of much
commercial importance. Here belong the giant red-woods (_Sequoia_) of
California, the largest of all American trees.

The joint firs are comparatively small plants, rarely if ever reaching
the dimensions of trees. They are found in various parts of the world,
but are few in number, and not at all likely to be met with by the
ordinary student. Their flowers are rather more highly differentiated
than those of the other gymnosperms, and are said to show some
approach in structure to those of the angiosperms.




CHAPTER XV.

SPERMAPHYTES.


CLASS II.--ANGIOSPERMS.

The angiosperms include an enormous assemblage of plants, all those
ordinarily called "flowering plants" belonging here. There is almost
infinite variety shown in the form and structure of the tissues and
organs, this being particularly the case with the flowers. As already
stated, the ovules, instead of being borne on open carpels, are
enclosed in a cavity formed by a single closed carpel or several
united carpels. To the organ so formed the name "pistil" is usually
applied, and this is known as "simple" or "compound," as it is
composed of one or of two or more carpels. The leaves bearing the
pollen spores are also much modified, and form the so-called
"stamens." In addition to the spore-bearing leaves there are usually
other modified leaves surrounding them, these being often brilliantly
colored and rendering the flower very conspicuous. To these leaves
surrounding the sporophylls, the general name of "perianth" or
"perigone" is given. The perigone has a twofold purpose, serving both
to protect the sporophylls, and, at least in bright-colored flowers,
to attract insects which, as we shall see, are important agents in
transferring pollen from one flower to another.

When we compare the embryo sac (macrospore) of the angiosperms with
that of the gymnosperms a great difference is noticed, there being
much more difference than between the latter and the higher
pteridophytes. Unfortunately there are very few plants where the
structure of the embryo sac can be readily seen without very skilful
manipulation.

  There are, however, a few plants in which the ovules are very small
  and transparent, so that they may be mounted whole and examined
  alive. The best plant for this purpose is probably the "Indian pipe"
  or "ghost flower," a curious plant growing in rich woods, blossoming
  in late summer. It is a parasite or saprophyte, and entirely
  destitute of chlorophyll, being pure white throughout. It bears a
  single nodding flower at the summit of the stem. (Another species
  much like it, but having several brownish flowers, is shown in
  Figure 115, _L_.)

  If this plant can be had, the structure of the ovule and embryo sac
  may be easily studied, by simply stripping away the tissue bearing
  the numerous minute ovules, and mounting a few of them in water, or
  water to which a little sugar has been added.

[Illustration: FIG. 79.--_A_, ripe ovule of _Monotropa uniflora_, in
optical section, x 100. _m_, micropyle. _e_, embryo sac. _B_, the
embryo sac, x 300. At the top is the egg apparatus, consisting of the
two synergidae (_s_), and the egg cell (_o_). In the centre is the
"endosperm nucleus" (_k_). At the bottom, the "antipodal cells" (_g_).]

  The ovules are attached to a stalk, and each consists of about two
  layers of colorless cells enclosing a central, large, oblong cell
  (Fig. 79, _A_, _E_), the embryo sac or macrospore. If the ovule is
  from a flower that has been open for some time, we shall find in the
  centre of the embryo sac a large nucleus (_k_) (or possibly two
  which afterward unite into one), and at each end three cells. Those
  at the base (_g_) probably represent the prothallium, and those at
  the upper end a very rudimentary archegonium, here generally called
  the "egg apparatus."

  Of the three cells of the "egg apparatus" the lower (_o_) one is the
  egg cell; the others are called "synergidae." The structure of the
  embryo sac and ovules is quite constant among the angiosperms, the
  differences being mainly in the shape of the ovules, and the degree
  to which its coverings or integuments are developed.

  The pollen spores of many angiosperms will germinate very easily in
  a solution of common sugar in water: about fifteen per cent of sugar
  is the best. A very good plant for this purpose is the sweet pea,
  whose pollen germinates very rapidly, especially in warm weather.
  The spores may be sown in a little of the sugar solution in any
  convenient vessel, or in a hanging drop suspended in a moist
  chamber, as described for germinating the spores of the slime
  moulds. The tube begins to develop within a few minutes after the
  spores are placed in the solution, and within an hour or so will
  have reached a considerable length. Each spore has two nuclei, but
  they are less evident here than in some other forms (Fig. 79).

[Illustration: FIG. 80.--Germinating pollen spores of the sweet pea,
x 200.]

The upper part of the pistil is variously modified, having either
little papillae which hold the pollen spores, or are viscid. In either
case the spores germinate when placed upon this receptive part
(stigma) of the pistil, and send their tubes down through the tissues
of the pistil until they reach the ovules, which are fertilized much
as in the gymnosperms.

The effect of fertilization extends beyond the ovule, the ovary and
often other parts of the flower being affected, enlarging and often
becoming bright-colored and juicy, forming the various fruits of the
angiosperms. These fruits when ripe may be either dry, as in the case
of grains of various kinds, beans, peas, etc.; or the ripe fruit may
be juicy, serving in this way to attract animals of many kinds which
feed on the juicy pulp, and leave the hard seeds uninjured, thus
helping to distribute them. Common examples of these fleshy fruits are
offered by the berries of many plants; apples, melons, cherries, etc.,
are also familiar examples.

The seeds differ a good deal both in regard to size and the degree to
which the embryo is developed at the time the seed ripens.


CLASSIFICATION OF THE ANGIOSPERMS.

The angiosperms are divided into two sub-classes: I. _Monocotyledons_
and II. _Dicotyledons_.

The monocotyledons comprise many familiar plants, both ornamental and
useful. They have for the most part elongated, smooth-edged leaves
with parallel veins, and the parts of the flower are in threes in the
majority of them. As their name indicates, there is but one cotyledon
or seed leaf, and the leaves from the first are alternate. As a rule
the embryo is very small and surrounded by abundant endosperm.

The most thoroughly typical members of the sub-class are the lilies
and their relatives. The one selected for special study here, the
yellow adder-tongue, is very common in the spring; but if not
accessible, almost any liliaceous plant will answer. Of garden
flowers, the tulip, hyacinth, narcissus, or one of the common lilies
may be used; of wild flowers, the various species of _Trillium_
(Fig. 83, _A_) are common and easily studied forms, but the leaves are
not of the type common to most monocotyledons.

The yellow adder-tongue (_Erythronium americanum_) (Fig. 81) is one of
the commonest and widespread of wild flowers, blossoming in the
northern states from about the middle of April till the middle of May.
Most of the plants found will not be in flower, and these send up but
a single, oblong, pointed leaf. The flowering plant has two similar
leaves, one of which is usually larger than the other. They seem to
come directly from the ground, but closer examination shows that they
are attached to a stem of considerable length entirely buried in the
ground. This arises from a small bulb (_B_) to whose base numerous
roots (_r_) are attached. Rising from between the leaves is a slender,
leafless stalk bearing a single, nodding flower at the top.

The leaves are perfectly smooth, dull purplish red on the lower side,
and pale green with purplish blotches above. The epidermis may be very
easily removed, and is perfectly colorless. Examined closely,
longitudinal rows of whitish spots may be detected: these are the
breathing pores.

[Illustration: FIG. 81.--_A_, plant of the yellow adder-tongue
(_Erythronium americanum_), x 1/3. _B_, the bulb of the same, x 1/2. _r_,
roots. _C_, section of _B_. _st._ the base of the stem bearing the
bulb for next year (_b_) at its base. _D_, a single petal and stamen,
x 1/2. _f_, the filament. _an._ anther. _E_, the gynoecium (pistil), x 1.
_o_, ovary. _st._ style. _z_, stigma. _F_, a full-grown fruit, x 1/2.
_G_, section of a full-grown macrosporangium (ovule), x 25: i, ii, the
two integuments. _sp._ macrospore (embryo sac). _H_, cross-section of
the ripe anther, x 12. _I_, a single pollen spore, x 150, showing the
two nuclei (_n_, _n'_). _J_, a ripe seed, x 2. _K_, the same, in
longitudinal section. _em._ the embryo. _L_, cross-section of the
stem, x 12. _fb._ fibro-vascular bundle. _M_, diagram of the flower.]

A cross-section of the stem shows numerous whitish areas scattered
through it. These are the fibro-vascular bundles which in the
monocotyledons are of a simple type. The bulb is composed of thick
scales, which are modified leaves, and on cutting it lengthwise, we
shall probably find the young bulb of next year (Fig. _C_, _b_)
already forming inside it, the young bulb arising as a bud at the
base of the stem of the present year.

The flower is made up of five circles of very much modified leaves,
three leaves in each set. The two outer circles are much alike, but
the three outermost leaves are slightly narrower and strongly tinged
with red on the back, completely concealing the three inner ones
before the flower expands. The latter are pure yellow, except for a
ridge along the back, and a few red specks near the base inside. These
six leaves constitute the perigone of the flower; the three outer are
called sepals, the inner ones petals.

