Since E. T., Inc., was one of our better accounts, the old man told me
to take as long as was needed, so I moved in to my assigned office, in
the twelve-story E. T. building, secretary, Scotch supply, ice-bags,
ulcer pills and all, and went to work setting up my survey staff. This
product engineering is a matter of "cut and try" in some fields. You
get some ideas, knock together some samples, try them on the public
with a staff of interviewers, tabulate the results, draw your
conclusions and hand them over to Production with a prayer. If your ad
budget is large enough your prayer is usually answered, because the
American Public buys principally on the "we know what we like, and we
like what we know" principle. Make them "know it" and they'll buy it.
Maybe in love, absence makes the heart grow fonder, but in this
business, familiarity breeds nothing but sales.

Madame Elaine had a fair staff of idea boys, herself. In fact, every
other department head had some gimmick he was trying to push to get
personal recognition. The Old Hag liked this spirit of initiative and
made it plain to me I was to give everyone a thorough hearing.

This is one of the crosses you have to bear. Everyone but the janitor
was swarming into my office with suggestions, and more than half of
them had nothing to do with the lipstick campaign at all. So I
dutifully listened to each one, had my girl take impressive notes and
then lifted my left or my right eyebrow at her. My left eyebrow meant
file them in the wastebasket. This is how the Atummyc Afterbath
Dusting Powder got lost in the shuffle, and later I was credited with
launching a new item on which I didn't even have a record.

It came about this way:

       *       *       *       *       *

Just before lunch one day, one of the Old Hag's promotion-minded
pixies flounced her fanny into my interview chair, crossed her knees
up to her navel and began selling me her pet project. She was a
relative of the Madame as well as a department head, so I had to
listen.

Her idea was corny--a new dusting powder with "Atummion" added, to be
called, "Atummyc Afterbath Dusting Powder"--"Atummyc", of course,
being a far-fetched play on the word "atomic". What delighted her
especially was that the intimate, meaningful word "tummy" occurred in
her coined trade name, and this was supposed to do wonders in
stimulating the imaginations of the young females of man-catching-age.

[Illustration]

As I said, the idea was corny. But the little hazel-eyed pixie was
not. She was about 24, black-haired, small-waisted and bubbling with
hormones. With her shapely knees and low-cut neckline she was a
pleasant change of scenery from the procession of self-seeking
middle-agers I had been interviewing--not that her motive was any
different.

I stalled a little to feast my eyes. "This _Atummion Added_ item," I
said, "just what is _Atummion_?"

"That's my secret," she said, squinching her eyes at me like a
fun-loving little cobra. "My brother is assistant head chemist, and
he's worked up a formula of fission products we got from the Atomic
Energy Commission for experimentation."

"Fission products!" I said. "That stuff's dangerous!"

"Not this formula," she assured me. "Bob says there's hardly any
radiation to it at all. Perfectly harmless."

"Then what's it supposed to do?" I inquired naively.

She stood up, placed one hand on her stomach and the other behind her
head, wiggled and stretched. "Atummyc Bath Powder will give milady
that wonderful, vibrant, _atomic_ feeling," she announced in a voice
dripping with innuendo.

"All right," I said, "that's what it's supposed to do. Now what does
it really do?"

"Smells good and makes her slippery-dry, like any other talcum," she
admitted quite honestly. "It's the name and the idea that will put it
across."

"And half a million dollars," I reminded her. "I'm afraid the whole
thing is a little too far off the track to consider at this time. I'm
here to make a new lipstick go. Maybe later--"

"I appreciate that, but honestly, don't you think it's a terrific
idea?"

"I think you're terrific," I told her, raising my left eyebrow at my
secretary, "and we'll get around to you one of these days."

"Oh, Mr. Sanders!" she said, exploding those big eyes at me and
shoving a half-folded sheet of paper at me. "Would you please sign my
interview voucher?"

In Madame Elaine's organization you had to have a written "excuse" for
absenting yourself from your department during working hours. I
supposed that the paper I signed was no different from the others.
