
"Thorvald! This is Lantee--Lantee----" His name echoed in the mist-walled
void like an unhuman wail.

"Lantee----? No, Throg! Lantee--Throg--killed my brother!"

Sand puffed out with the breath, which expelled that indictment. But
Thorvald no longer fought, and Shann believed him close to collapse.

Shann relaxed his hold, rolling the other man over. Thorvald obeyed his
pull limply, lying face upward, sand in his hair and eyebrows, crusting
his slack lips. The younger man brushed the dirt away gently as the
other opened his eyes to regard Shann with his old impersonal stare.

"You're alive," Thorvald stated bleakly. "Garth's dead. You ought to be
dead too."

Shann drew back, rubbed sand from his hands, his concern dampened by the
other's patent hostility. Only that angry accusation vanished in a blink
of those gray eyes. Then there was a warmer recognition in Thorvald's
expression.

"Lantee!" The younger man might just have come into sight. "What are you
doing here?"

Shann tightened his belt. "Just about what you are." He was still aloof,
giving no acknowledgment of difference in rank now. "Running around in
this fog hunting the way out."

Thorvald sat up, surveying the billowing walls of the hole which
contained them. Then he reached out a hand to draw fingers down Shann's
forearm.

"You _are_ real," he observed simply, and his voice was warm, welcoming.

"Don't bet on it," Shann snapped. "The unreal can be mighty real--here."
His hand went up to the smarting brand on his shoulder.

Thorvald nodded. "Masters of illusion," he murmured.

"Mistresses," Shann corrected. "This place is run by a gang of pretty
smart witches."

"Witches? You've seen them? Where? And what--who are they?" Thorvald
pounced with a return of his old-time sharpness.

"They're females right enough, and they can make the impossible happen.
I'd say that classifies them as witches. One of them tried to take me
over back on the island. I set a trap and caught her; then somehow she
transported me----" Swiftly he outlined the chain of events leading from
his sudden awakening in the river tunnel to his present penetration of
this fog-world.

Thorvald listened eagerly. When the story was finished, he rubbed his
hands across his drawn face, smearing away the last of the sand. "At
least you have some idea of who they are and a suggestion of how you got
here. I don't remember that much about my own arrival. As far as I can
remember I went to sleep on the Island and woke up here!"

Shann studied him and knew that Thorvald was telling the truth. He could
remember nothing of his departure in the outrigger, the way he had
fought Shann in the lagoon. The Survey officer must have been under the
control of the Warlockians then. Quickly he gave the older man his
version of the other's actions in the outer world and Thorvald was
clearly astounded, though he did not question the facts Shann presented.

"They just _took_ me!" Thorvald said in a husky half whisper. "But why?
And why are we here? Is this a prison?"

Shann shook his head. "I think all this"--a wave of his hand encompassed
the green wall, what lay beyond it, and in it--"is a test of some kind.
This dream business.... A little while ago I got to thinking that I
wasn't here at all, that I might be dreaming it all. Then I met you."

Thorvald understood. "Yes, but this _could_ be a dream meeting. How can
we tell?" He hesitated, almost diffidently, before he asked: "Have you
met anyone else here?"

"Yes." Shann had no desire to go into that.

"People out of your past life?"

"Yes." Again he did not elaborate.

"So did I." Thorvald's expression was bleak; his encounters in the fog
must have proved no more pleasant than Shann's. "That suggests that we
do trigger the hallucinations ourselves. But maybe we can really lick it
now."

"How?"

"Well, if these phantoms are born of our memories there are about only
two or three we could see together--maybe a Throg on the rampage, or
that hound we left back in the mountains. And if we do sight anything
like that, we'll know what it is. On the other hand, if we stick
together and one of us sees something that the other can't ... well,
that fact alone will explode the ghost."

There was sense in what he said. Shann aided the officer to his feet.

"I must be a better subject for their experiments than you," the older
man remarked ruefully. "They took me over completely at the first."

"You were carrying that disk," Shann pointed out. "Maybe that acted as a
focusing lens for whatever power they use to make us play trained
animals."

"Could be!" Thorvald brought out the cloth-wrapped bone coin. "I still
have it." But he made no move to pull off the bit of rag about it.
"Now"--he gazed at the wall of green--"which way?"

Shann shrugged. Long ago he had lost any idea of keeping a straight
course through the murk. He might have turned around any number of times
since he first walked blindly into this place. Then he pointed to the
packet Thorvald held.

"Why not flip that?" he asked. "Heads, we go that way--" he indicated
the direction in which they were facing--"tails, we do a
rightabout-face."

There was an answering grin on Thorvald's lips. "As good a guide as any
we're likely to find here. We'll do it." He pulled away the twist of
cloth and with a swift snap, reminiscent of that used by the Warlockian
witch to empty the bowl of sticks, he tossed the disk into the air.

It spun, whirled, but--to their open-jawed amazement--it did not fall to
the sand. Instead it spun until it looked like a small globe instead of
a disk. And it lost its dead white for a glow of green. When that glow
became dazzling for Terran eyes the miniature sun swung out, not in
orbit but in straight line of flight, heading to their right.

With a muffled cry, Thorvald started in pursuit, Shann running beside
him. They were in a tunnel of the fog now, and the pace set by the
spinning coin was swift. The Terrans continued to follow it at the best
pace they could summon, having no idea of where they were headed, but
each with the hope that they finally did have a guide to lead them
through this place of confusion and into a sane world where they could
face on more equal terms those who had sent them there.




14. ESCAPE


"Something ahead!" Thorvald did not slacken the pace set by the
brilliant spot of green they trailed. Both of the Terrans feared to fall
behind, to lose touch with that guide. Their belief that somehow the
traveling disk would bring them to the end of the mist and its attendant
illusions had grown firmer with every foot of ground they traversed.

A dark, fixed point, now partly veiled by mist, lay beyond, and it was
toward that looming half-shadow that the spinning disk hurtled. Now the
mist curled away to display its bulk--larger, blacker and four or five
times Thorvald's height. Both men stopped short, for the disk no longer
played pathfinder. It still whirled on its axis in the air, faster and
faster, until it appeared to be throwing off sparks, but the sparks
faded against a monolith of dark rock unlike the native stone they had
seen elsewhere. For it was neither red nor warmly brown, but a dull,
dead black. It could have been a huge stone slab, trimmed, smoothed, set
up on end as a monument or marker, except that only infinite labor could
have accomplished such a task, and there was no valid reason for such
toil as far as the Terrans could perceive.

"This is it." Thorvald moved closer.

By the disk's action, they deduced that their guide had drawn them to
this featureless black steel with the precision of a beam-controlled
ship. However, the purpose still eluded them. They had hoped for some
exit from the territory of the veil, but now they faced a solid slab of
dark stone, neither a conventional exit or entrance, as they proved by
circling its base. Beneath their boots was the eternal sand, around
them the fog.

"Now what?" Shann asked. They had made their trip about the slab and
were back again where the disk whirled with unceasing vigor in a shower
of emerald sparks.

Thorvald shook his head, scanning the rock face before them glumly. The
eagerness had gone out of his expression, a vast weariness replacing it.

"There must have been some purpose in coming here," he replied, but his
tone had lost the assurance of moments earlier.

"Well, if we strike away from here, we'll just get right back in again."
Shann waved a hand toward the mist, waiting as if with a hunter's watch
upon them. "And we certainly can't go down." He dug a boot toe into the
sand to demonstrate the folly of that. "So, what about up?"

He ducked under the spinning disk to lay his hands against the surface
of the giant slab. And in so doing he made a discovery, revealed to his
touch although hidden from sight. For his fingers, running aimlessly
across the cold, slightly uneven surface of the stone, slipped into a
hollow, quite a deep hollow.

Excited, half fearing that his sudden guess might be wrong, Shann slid
his hand higher in line with that hollow, to discover a second. The
first had been level with his chest, the second perhaps eighteen inches
or so above. He jumped, to draw his fingers down the rock, with damage
to his nails but getting his proof. There _was_ a third niche, deep
enough to hold more than just the toe of a boot, and a fourth above
that....

"We've a ladder of sorts here," he reported. Without waiting for any
answer from Thorvald, Shann began to climb. The holds were so well
matched in shape and size that he was sure they could not be natural;
they had been bored there for use--the use to which he was now putting
them--a ladder to the top of the slab. Though what he might find there
was beyond his power to imagine.

The disk did not rise. Shann passed that core of light, climbing above
it into the greater gloom. But the holes did not fail him; each was
waiting in a direct line with its companion. And to an active man the
scramble was not difficult. He reached the summit, glanced around, and
made a quick grab for a secure handhold.

Waiting for him was no level platform such as he had confidently
expected to find. The surface up which he had just made his way
fly-fashion was the outer wall of a well or chimney. He looked down now
into a pit where black nothingness began within a yard of the top, for
the radiance of the mist did not penetrate far into that descent.

Shann fought an attack of giddiness. It would be very easy to lose
control, to tumble over and be swallowed up in what might well be a
bottomless chasm. And what was the purpose of this well? Was it a trap
to entice a prisoner into an unwary climb and then let gravity drag him
over? The whole setup was meaningless. Perhaps meaningless only to him,
Shann conceded, with a flash of level thinking. The situation could be
quite different as far as the natives were concerned. This structure did
have a reason, or it would never have been erected in the first place.

"What's the matter?" Thorvald's voice was rough with impatience.

"This thing's a well." Shann edged about a fraction to call back. "The
inside is open and--as far as I can tell--goes clear to the planet's
core."

"Ladder on the inside too?"

Shann squirmed. That was, of course, a very obvious supposition. He kept
a tight hold with his left hand, and with the other, he did some
exploring. Yes, here was a hollow right enough, twin to those on the
outside. But to swing over that narrow edge of safety and begin a
descent into the black of the well was far harder than any action he had
taken since the morning the Throgs had raided the camp. The green mist
could hold no terrors greater than those with which his imagination
peopled the depths now waiting to engulf him. But Shann swung over,
fitted his boot into the first hollow, and started down.

The only encouragement he gained during that nightmare ordeal was that
those holes were regularly spaced. But somehow his confidence did not
feed on that fact. There always remained the nagging fear that when he
searched for the next it would not be there and he would cling to his
perch lacking the needful strength in aching arms and legs to reclimb
the inside ladder.

He was fast losing that sense of well being which had been his during
his travels through the fog; a fatigue tugged at his arms and weighed
leaden on his shoulders. Mechanically he prospected for the next hold,
and then the next. Above, the oblong of half-light grew smaller and
smaller, sometimes half blotted out by the movements of Thorvald's body
as the other followed him down that interior way.

How far _was_ down? Shann giggled lightheadedly at the humor of that, or
what seemed to be humor at the moment. He was certain that they were now
below the level of the sand floor outside the slab. And yet no end had
come to the well hollow.

No break of light down here; he might have been sightless. But just as
the blind develop an extra perceptive sense of unseen obstacles, so did
Shann now find that he was aware of a change in the nature of the space
about him. His weary arms and legs held him against the solidity of a
wall, yet the impression that there was no longer another wall at his
back grew stronger with every niche which swung him downward. And he was
as sure as if he could see it, that he was now in a wide-open space,
another cavern; perhaps, but this one totally dark.

Deprived of sight, he relied upon his ears. And there was a sound,
faint, distorted perhaps by the acoustics of this place, but keeping up
a continuous murmur. Water! Not the wash of waves with their persistent
beat, but rather the rippling of a running stream. Water must lie below!

And just as his weariness had grown with his leaving behind the fog, so
now did both hunger and thirst gnaw at Shann, all the sharper for the
delay. The Terran wanted to reach that water, could picture it in his
mind, putting away the possibility--the probability--that it might be
sea-born and salt, and so unfit to drink.

The upper opening to the cavern of the fog was now so far above him that
he had to strain to see it. And that warmth which had been there was
gone. A dank chill wrapped him here, dampened the holds to which he
clung until he was afraid of slipping. While the murmur of the water
grew louder, until its _slap-slap_ sounded within arms' distance. His
boot toe skidded from a niche. Shann fought to hold on with numbed
fingers. The other foot went. He swung by his hands, kicking vainly to
regain a measure of footing.

Then his arms could no longer support him, and he cried out as he fell.
Water closed about him with an icy shock which for a moment paralyzed
him. He flailed out, fighting the flood to get his head above the
surface where he could gasp in precious gulps of air.

There was a current here, a swiftly running one. Shann remembered the
one which had carried him into that cavern in which the Warlockians had
their strange dwelling. Although there were no clusters of crystals in
this tunnel to supply him with light, the Terran began to nourish a
faint hope that he was again in that same stream, that those light
crystals would appear, and that he might eventually return to the
starting point of this meaningless journey.

So he strove only to keep his head above water. Hearing a splashing
behind him, he called out: "Thorvald?"

"Lantee?" The answer came back at once; the splashing grew louder as the
other swam to catch up.

Shann swallowed a mouthful of the water lapping against his chin. The
taste was brackish, but not entirely salt, and though it stung his lips,
the liquid relieved a measure of his thirst.

Only no glowing crystals appeared to stud these walls, and Shann's hope
that they were on their way to the cavern of the island faded. The
current grew swifter, and he had to fight to keep his head above water,
his tired body reacting sluggishly to commands.

The murmur of the racing flood drummed louder in his ears, or was that
sound the same? He could no longer be sure. Shann only knew that it was
close to impossible to snatch the necessary breath as he was rolled over
and over in the hurrying flood.

In the end he was ejected into blazing, blinding light, into a
suffocation of wild water as the bullet in an ancient Terran rifle might
have been fired at no specific target. Gasping, beaten, more than
half-drowned, Shann was pummeled by waves, literally driven up on a
rocky surface which skinned his body cruelly. He lay there, his arms
moving feebly until he contrived to raise himself in time to be
wretchedly sick. Somehow he crawled on a few feet farther before he
subsided again, blinded by the light, flinching from the heat of the
rocks on which he lay, but unable to do more for himself.

His first coherent thought was that his speculation concerning the
reality of this experience was at last resolved. This could not possibly
be an hallucination; at least this particular sequence of events was
not. And he was still hazily considering that when a hand fell on his
shoulder, fingers biting into his raw flesh.

Shann snarled, rolled over on his side. Thorvald, water dripping from
his rags--or rather steaming from them--his shaggy hair plastered to his
skull, sat there.

"You all right?"

Shann sat up in turn, shielding his smarting eyes. He was bruised,
battered badly enough, but he could claim no major injuries.

"I think so. Where are we?"

Thorvald's lips stretched across his teeth in what was more a grimace
than a smile. "Right off the map, any map I know. Take a look."

They were on a scrap of beach--beach which was more like a reef, for it
lacked any covering comparable to sand except for some cupfuls of coarse
gravel locked in rock depressions. Rocks, red as the rust of dried
blood, rose in fantastic water-sculptured shapes around the small
semi-level space they had somehow won.

