bosom becomes huge enough to carry any burden, even the burden of my
alleged hate. This she bears bravely, even gratefully. I might resent
this needless pain the psychiatrist gives her, except that it really
seems to make her happier in some obscure way.

Perhaps she has some kind of guilt complex, and I am her deserved
punishment? Aunt Mattie with a guilt complex? Never! Aunt Mattie knows
she is right, and goes ahead.

So all his nonsense is completely ridiculous. I love my Aunt Mattie. I
adore my Aunt Mattie. I would never do anything to hurt my Aunt
Mattie.

Or, well, I didn't mean to hurt her, anyway. All I did was wink. I
only meant....

       *       *       *       *       *

We were met at the space port of Capella IV by the planet
administrator, himself, one John J. McCabe.

It was no particular coincidence that I knew him. My school was
progressive. It admitted not only the scions of the established
families but those of the ambitious families as well. Its graduates,
naturally, went into the significant careers. Johnny McCabe was one of
the ambitious ones. We hadn't been anything like bosom pals at school;
but he'd been tolerant of me, and I'd admired him, and fitfully told
myself I should be more like him. Perhaps this was the reason Aunt
Mattie had insisted on this particular school, the hope that some of
the ambition would rub off on me.

Capella IV wasn't much of a post, not even for the early stages in a
young man's career, although, socially, it was perhaps the best
beginning Johnny's family could have expected. It was a small planet,
entirely covered by salt. Even inside the port bubble with its
duplication of Earth atmosphere, the salt lay like a permanent snow
scene. Actually it was little more than a way station along the space
route out in that direction, and Johnny's problems were little more
than the problems of a professional host at some obscure resort. But
no doubt his dad spoke pridefully of "My son, a planet administrator,"
and when I called on the family to tell them I'd visited their son, I
wouldn't be one to snitch.

There was doubt in my mind that even Johnny's ambition could make the
planet into anything more than it was already. It had nothing we
wanted, or at least was worth the space freight it would cost to ship
it. The natives had never given us any trouble, and, up until now, we
hadn't given them any. So Earth's brand upon it was simply a small
bubble enclosing a landing field, a hangar for checkup and repair of
ships requiring an emergency landing, some barracks for the men and
women of the port personnel, a small hotel to house stranded space
passengers while repairs were made to their ship, or stray V.I.P.'s.

A small administration building flying Federated Earth flag, and a
warehouse to contain supplies, which had to be shipped in, completed
the installation. The planet furnished man nothing but water pumped
from deep in the rock strata beneath the salt, and even that had to be
treated to remove enough of the saline content to make it usable. At
the time, I didn't know what the natives, outside our bubble, lived
on. The decision to come had been a sudden one, and I hadn't had more
than enough time to call the State Department to find out who the
planet administrator might be.

I was first out of the yacht and down the landing steps to the salt
covered ground. Aunt Mattie was still busy giving her ship captain his
instructions, and possibly inspecting the crew's teeth to see if
they'd brushed them this morning. The two members of her special
committee of the D.T.'s who'd come along, a Miss Point and a Mrs.
Waddle, naturally would be standing at her sides, and a half pace to
the rear, to be of assistance should she need them in dealing with
males.

There was a certain stiff formality in the way McCabe, flanked by his
own two selected subordinates, approached the ship--until I turned
around at the foot of the steps and he recognized me.

"Hap!" he yelled, then. "Happy Graves, you old son of a gun!" He broke
into a run, dignity forgotten, and when he got to me he grabbed both
my shoulders in his powerful hands to shake me as if he were some sort
of terrier--and I a rat. His joy seemed all out of proportion until I
remembered he probably hadn't seen anybody from school for a long
time; and until I further remembered that he would have been alerted
by the State Department to Aunt Mattie's visit and would have been
looking forward to it with dread and misgivings.

To realize he had a friend at court must really have overjoyed him.

"Johnny," I said. "Long time." It had been. Five-six years anyway. I
held out my hand in the old school gesture. He let loose my shoulders
and grabbed it in the traditional manner. We went through the ritual,
which my psychiatrist would have called juvenile, and then he looked
at me pointedly.

"You remember what it means," he said, a little anxiously I thought,
and looked significantly at my hand. "That we will always stand by
each other, through thick and thin." His eyes were pulled upward to
the open door of the yacht.

"You can expect it to be both thick and thin," I said drily. "If you
know my Aunt Mattie."

"She's your aunt?" he asked, his eyes widening. "Matthewa H. Tombs is
_your_ aunt. I never knew. To think, all those years at school, and I
never knew. Why, Hap, Happy, old boy, this is wonderful. Man, have I
been worried!"

"Don't stop on my account," I said, maybe a little dolefully.
"Somebody reported to the Daughters of Terra that you let the natives
run around out here stark naked, and if Aunt Mattie says she's going
to put mother hubbards on them, then that's exactly what she's going
to do. You can depend on that, old man."

"Mother Hub...." he gasped. He looked at me strangely. "It's a joke,"
he said. "Somebody's pulled a practical joke on the D.T.'s. Have you
ever seen our natives? Pictures of them? Didn't anybody check up on
what they're like before you came out here? It's a joke. A practical
joke on the D.T.'s. It has to be."

"I wouldn't know," I said. "But if they're naked they won't be for
long, I can tell you that. Aunt Mattie...."

His eyes left my face and darted up to the door of the ship which was
no longer a black oval. The unexplained bewilderment of his expression
was not diminished as Aunt Mattie came through the door, out on the
loading platform, and started down the steps. He grew a little white
around the mouth, licked his lips, and forgot all his joy at meeting
an old school mate. His two subordinates who had remained standing
just out of earshot, as if recognizing a crisis now, stepped briskly
up to his sides.

Aunt Mattie's two committee women, as if to match phalanx with
phalanx, came through the door and started down the steps behind her.
I stepped to one side as the two forces met face to face on the
crunching salt that covered the ground. It might look like a Christmas
scene, but under Capella's rays it was blazing hot, and I found myself
in sympathy with the men's open necked shirts and brief shorts. Still,
they should have known better than to dress like that. Somebody in the
State Department had goofed.

Aunt Mattie and her two committee women were dressed conservatively in
something that might have resembled an English Colonel's wife's idea
of the correct tweeds to wear on a cold, foggy night. If they were
already sweltering beneath these coverings, as I was beginning to in
my lighter suit, they were too ladylike to show it. Their acid glance
at the men's attire showed what they thought of the informality of
dress in which they'd been received. But they were too ladylike to
comment. After that first pointed look at bare knees, they had no need
of it.
