nothing. Well, let the others worry about it. They did the planning.
Ellaby was only the executioner.

       *       *       *       *       *

The house was like all the others on the block, all the others in the
Capitol, a grimly solid structure of lets-pretend brick fronting on a
street which faded into distant haze, straight as a ruled line, to
north and south, crossing the east-west avenues at precise right
angles every five hundred feet. The grid pattern city, Ellaby
remembered from his rights course in school, (every man has the right
to a room and bath in any city as long as he is employed) made the
best use of available space for houses. The strip city is unnecessary
in time of peace--was there ever, had there ever been any other time?
the radial city is preferred for rapid transportation, being the
accepted pattern in the great economic hubs and ports like Greater New
York and Hampton Roads.

"You will have to live here with me" Dorcas Sinclair told Ellaby,
"until you pass your tests for employment. I don't have to tell you
how much depends on the outcome of those tests, Ellaby."

"But I can't fail them. I thought you knew my record."

With an unnerving unmodal violence, Dorcas Sinclair's strong fingers
dug into the flabby muscle of Ellaby's upper arm. "Well, you had
better not," she said, her large teeth hardly parting to let the
sounds out.

Ellaby was suddenly alarmed. He had had very little truck with people
of this sort. They were as unpredictable as the weather in High Falls
which having a population under twenty-five thousand, had never
qualified for weather control. Unlike modal man, they had never been
exhaustively studied. Their likes and dislikes were not catered to,
but their passions couldn't be predicted, either.

"Ease up, Dorcas," a deep voice said from the doorway leading to the
kitchen.

Ellaby stared in that direction gratefully. It was indecent for a
woman, for anyone, to expose her emotions that way. Ellaby was almost
inclined to thank the stranger.

"Stranger, nothing!" Ellaby blurted aloud. Ellaby's face reddened and
he apologized. "I didn't mean to raise my voice," he explained. "You
surprised me."

"I guess you didn't expect to find me here, at that. You haven't
changed much, Ellaby."

Automatically, Ellaby mumbled his thanks for the compliment. Sam
Mulden, though, had changed. He'd always been a radical. He wore his
hair cropped too short. He was tall and thin, his elbows and knees
exposed by the tunic he wore like knots on gnarled, living wood.
Mulden looked older. He hadn't bothered to dye his graying hair, or
to smooth the premature wrinkles on his long-nosed, thin-lipped face.
He was smiling sardonically at Ellaby now, as if he could read
Ellaby's mind. "I might have known it would be you," he said. "As soon
as they said the assassin was coming from High Falls, I should have
guessed."

"Why?" asked Ellaby. It was a question which had nudged for ten years
at his docile patience. When people go out of their way to train you,
though, to spend ten years teaching you every inch of Capitol
territory without once taking you there, to make you proficient with
various deadly weapons although your reflexes are splendidly modal, to
teach you meaningless phrases like democratic inequality (?) and
individuality (?) and the right to live a self-directed (?) life, to
make your own decisions (?), when people act, in short, like a very
thorough government school, even if their motives seem strangely
misdirected, you don't question them.

"For two reasons," Mulden said. "You can understand the first, Ellaby.
If the second one bothers you, forget it. In the first place, you're
so perfectly modal, the government would never suspect you. In the
second place, you're so well adjusted you're bound to follow our
instructions."

"Or any instructions," Dorcas Sinclair said. "That's what I'm afraid
of, Mulden."

       *       *       *       *       *

Ellaby still couldn't get over it. He never expected to find poor,
unfortunate Sam Mulden in such a high position in the organization or
anywhere. He remembered Mulden clearly from their school days
together. Mulden was a character, a real character. Physically, he was
barely acceptable: more than eighty percent of the men and some
sixty-five percent of the women were able to knock Mulden down in the
High Falls gymnasium classes. But mentally Mulden was a misfit. His I.
Q. was in the neighborhood of a hundred and fifty. His gangling,
ineffectual physique wasn't too far below the mode, but mentally he
soared intolerably above it.

Now Mulden told Dorcas Sinclair, "Don't worry about that. We've had
ten years to work on him. They can't undo it in a few days. Ellaby,
you are quite sure you know what you must do?"

"Oh, yes. Tomorrow morning I will take my security tests. According to
the record of my previous physical and mental testing, I should make
top secret classification. I will work here in the capitol. I will
find the Dictator and kill him. The only thing that bothers me is I
don't know who to look for. What does the Dictator look like?"

