Washing machine, L. Sternberger                                234,438
Watch, acoustic, G. A. Bowen                                   234,455
Watch case, W. Calame                                          234,530
Watches, roller abstractor for, B. Frese (r)                     9,467
Water closet, S. S. Hellyer                                    234,570
Water elevator, J. R. Cluxton                                  234,538
Wells, drilling machine for Artesian and oil, F. Knowlan       234,586
Whiffletree hook, C. Wright                                    234,449
Wind wheel, J. Sander                                          234,617
Windmill, Coriell & Adams                                      234,392
Windmill, W. C. Jacob                                          234,580
Wood, ornamenting, Pruyn & Hyatt                               234,610
Wood turning machine, F. Hanson                                234,472
Wrench and screw driver, comb'd, J. K. Collins                 234,540

       *       *       *       *       *


DESIGNS.

Coffin screw, E. A. Cuppers                                     12,033
Gem setting, Vennin & Peltier                                   12,037
Lamp bracket, F. R. Seidensticker                               12,036
Stove, cooking, H. L. Fennell                                   12,034
Type, font of printing, J. K. Rogers                            12,035

       *       *       *       *       *


TRADE MARKS.

Fish, manufactured, Ferguson, Walker & Co                        8,091
Hats, gentlemen's and boys' and ladies' and misses'
soft felt, Topping Maynard & Hobron                              8,096
Tobacco, plug, G. Wittler                                        8,097
Jewelry, comprising lace pins, scarf pins, earrings, ear drops,
brooches studs, sleeve buttons, and scarf rings.
Howard & Scherrieble                                             8,095
Soap, J. Oakley & Co.                                            8,094
Tobacco, smoking and chewing, Wilson & McCallay           8,092, 8,093
Yarn, cotton and woolen darning, H. C. Conkle                    8,090

       *       *       *       *       *




ADVERTISEMENTS.


Inside page, each insertion--75 cents a line. Back page, each
insertion--$1.00 a line.

_Engravings may head advertisements at the same rate per line, by
measurement, as the letter press. Advertisements must be received at
publication office as early as Thursday morning to appear in next
issue._

The publishers of this paper guarantee to advertisers a circulation of
not less than 50,000 copies every weekly issue.

       *       *       *       *       *


A SPLENDID HOLIDAY GIFT.

DR. SCOTT'S ELECTRIC HAIR BRUSH.

A REMARKABLE INVENTION,

Which has won its way to Royal favor in England, been cordially indorsed
by the Prince and Princess of Wales, and written upon by the Rt. Hon. W.
E. Gladstone, is now brought to the notice of the American public. It
cures by natural means, will always do good, never harm, and is a remedy
lasting for many years. It should be used daily in place of the ordinary
Hair Brush. The Brush Handle is made of a new odorless composition
resembling ebony; a combination of substances PRODUCING A PERMANENT
ELECTRIC VOLTAIC CURRENT WHICH ACTS IMMEDIATELY UPON THE HAIR GLANDS AND
FOLLICLES. This power can always be tested by a silver compass which
accompanies each Brush.

IT IS WARRANTED TO CURE NERVOUS HEADACHE IN 5 MINUTES!!! CURE NEURALGIA
IN 6 MINUTES!! PREVENT FALLING HAIR AND BALDNESS!! CURE DANDRUFF &
DISEASES OF THE SCALP!! PROMPTLY ARRESTS PREMATURE GRAYNESS!! MAKES THE
HAIR GROW LONG & GLOSSY!! IMMEDIATELY SOOTHES THE WEARY BRAIN MONEY
RETURNED IF NOT AS REPRESENTED.

IT RARELY FAILS TO PRODUCE A RAPID GROWTH OF HAIR ON BALD HEADS, WHERE
THE GLANDS and FOLLICLES ARE NOT TOTALLY DESTROYED.

Proprietors: The Pall Mall Electric Association of London.

5th New York Branch: 842 Broadway.

[From the Mayor of Saratoga.]

August 12, 1880.

"I cheerfully testify to the merits of Dr. Scott's Electric Hair Brush.
It cures my headaches within a few minutes. I am so pleased with it I
purchased another for my wife. It is an excellent Hair Brush, well worth
the price, aside from its curative powers."

JAS. B. CHAPMAN.

[From Rev. Dr. Bridgeman.]

Brooklyn, June 1st, 1880.

"Gents: I have never before given a testimonial, but am willing to
encourage the use of an honest remedy. I am so Pleased with your Hair
Brush that I deem it my duty to write you recommending it most
cordially. My hair, about a year since, commenced falling out, and I was
rapidly becoming bald; but since using the Brush a thick growth of hair
has made its appearance, quite equal to that which I had previous to its
falling out. I have tried other remedies, but with no success. After
this remarkable result I purchased one for my wife, who has been a great
sufferer from headache, and she finds it a prompt and infallible
remedy."

A. C. Bridgeman, D. D.

[Illustration]

218 Pulton Street, New York, August 31, 1880.

"I would Not take $1,000 for my Brush If I could not replace it."

PLINY F. SMITH.

Mr. Smith is a gentleman well known in this City as a Law Publisher, and
also as a Director in several Public Institutions of New York.

"Domestic" Sewing Machine Co., New York, August 16, 1880.

DR. GEO. A. SCOTT--Dear Sir: Permit me to add the testimony of my wife
to that of the many others who have been benefited by the use of your
Electric Brush. She has for years been a sufferer from Neuralgia in an
acute form, but since I obtained for her one of your Brushes, she has
experienced entire relief. Please accept her sincere thanks.--HENRY
BARTLETT.

Round Lake Camp-Meeting Grounds, Saratoga Co., N. Y., June 8, 1880.

Your Brush is certainly a remarkable cure. I am highly pleased with it.
Its effect is most wonderful, and you may be sure I shall recommend it
heartily among my friends. It is also a splendid Hair Brush, well worth
the money, and will last me for years.--Rev. J. D. ROGERS,
Superintendent.

Mention this Paper. Over 7,000 similar Testimonials can be seen at our
office.

Remember that this is NOT a "metallic" wire brush, but made of PURE
BRISTLES.

A BEAUTIFUL BRUSH, LASTING FOR YEARS.

We will send it, postpaid, on receipt of $3.00; or by Express C. O. D.
at your expense, with privilege of opening and examining. Or request
your nearest Druggist or Fancy Store to obtain one for you, FROM US.

MONEY RETURNED IF NOT AS REPRESENTED.

As soon as you receive the Brush, if not well satisfied with your
bargain, write us, and we will return the money. What can be fairer?

This paper will not knowingly publish any humbug, and I have placed a
Brush in the hands of Mayor Cooper and Postmaster James of New York, as
a guarantee of my good faith.

UP Remittances should be made payable to GEO. A. SCOTT, 842A Broadway,
New York. Agents wanted in every town.

They can be made in checks, drafts, post office orders, or currency.
Inclose 10 cents for registration, and we guarantee safe delivery of
Brush.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SWISS WARBLER OR MOCKING-BIRD WHISTLE

IT IMITATES EVERY SOUND IN THE ANIMAL KINGDOM FROM THE THRILL OF THE
NIGHTINGALE TO THE HOWL OF THE WOLF

AFTER A LITTLE PRACTICE YOUR MOUTH WILL SEEM TO BE A COMPLETE MENAGERIE

YOU can raise a laugh or pierceing cry of horror at pleasure. Sample by
mail, only 10 cts., 6 for 25 cts., 15 for 50cts. Valuable catalogue of
agent's goods free.

WORLD MANUFACTURING CO., 122 Nassau Street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


STEAM BOILERS;

THEIR DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION, AND MANAGEMENT. BY WILLIAM M. SHOCK, Chief
of Bureau of Steam Engineering, United States Navy.

In one large quarto volume of 480 pages, and illustrated with 150
wood-cuts and 36 full-page plates (20 of which are double). Bound in
half crimson Morocco, gilt tops.

Price $15

D. VAN NOSTRAND. Publisher, 23 Murray and 27 Warren Sts., New York.

*** Copies sent by mail, postpaid, on receipt of price.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE HOLLY SYSTEM OF STEAM HEATING FOR CITIES AND VILLAGES, HOLLY STEAM
COMBINATION CO. LIMITED LOCKPORT, N. Y. SEE ILLUSTRATED AD IN LAST
NUMBER

       *       *       *       *       *


TOOPE'S PAT. FELT AND ASBESTOS

Non-Conducting, Removable Covering, as manufactured by Toope's Asbestos
Covering Co., Limited, London, England. Awarded a Medal of Excellence at
the late American Institute Fair. For steam Boilers and Pipes, Steam
Pans and Coppers, Hot and Cold Water Pipes, Refrigerators, Meat Cars,
etc. Samples free. A few first-class agents wanted. Address CHS. TOOPE,
Sole Manufacturing Agent in U. S. Office and Works, 353 East 78th
Street, New York City.

       *       *       *       *       *


Agents Wanted Sells rapidly. Particulars _free_.

S. M. Spencer, 112 Wash'n St., Boston, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *


FOR SALE-LARGE MACHINE SHOP, WITH Machinery, Tools, Engine, etc., _ready
for running_. Inquire of A. MONNETT & CO., Bucyrus, Ohio.

       *       *       *       *       *


50 A Elegant, All New, Chromo & Scroll Cards, no 2 alike, Name Nicely
printed, 10c. Card Mills, Morthford, Ct.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

PATENT BENDING ROLLS,

For Heavy Punches, Shears, Boiler Shop Rolls, Radial Drills, etc., send
to

HILLES & JONES, Wilmington, Del.

       *       *       *       *       *


NO MORE USE FOR OIL ON MACHINERY

Oline Lubricating Compound, manuf'd by HOLLAND & THOMPSON, Troy, N. Y.
Avoids hot journals, dripping, and waste. Send for catalogue of Grease
and Cups for all kinds of machinery.

       *       *       *       *       *


PLAYS! PLAYS! PLAYS! PLAYS!

For Reading Clubs, for Amateur Theatricals, Temperance Plays, Drawing
Room Plays, Fairy Plays, Ethiopian Plays, Guide Books, Speakers,
Pantomimes, Tableaux Lights, Magnesium Lights, Colored Fire, Burnt Cork,
Theatrical Face Preparations, Jarley's Wax Works, Wigs, Beards, and
Moustaches at reduced prices. Costumes, Scenery, Charades. New
catalogues sent free containing full description and prices. Samuel
French & Son, 38 E. 14th Street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


ICE AND ICE HOUSES--HOW TO MAKE

ice ponds; amount of ice required, etc., and full directions for
building ice-house, with illustrated plan. Contained in Scientific
American Supplement, No. 55. Price 10 cents. To be had at this office
and of all newsdealers.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

