
"The neurological examination is essentially negative, Mr. Bennett. In
other words, there is no organic reason that I can find for your
headaches. That leaves only one other possibility--an emotional
disturbance. I'm a neurologist, remember, not a psychoanalyst. I can
only give an opinion about the cause of your complaint."

Bennett waited expectantly.

"Headaches without organic causes are generally the result of
repressed anger," Hall went on. "That anger can stem from any number
of traumatic situations or attitudes, all deeply buried in the
unconscious, of course, or they would not have the power to hurt us.
From what we know of you, however, it seems to be the result of
frustration. In other words, you have created a fantasy image of a
completely unattainable woman, and therefore none of the women you
meet can fulfill your expectations. Since she is unattainable, you
naturally feel a sense of frustration."

"But who could she be?" Bennett asked anxiously.

"Someone you knew in childhood, perhaps. A composite of real and
imaginary women. Usually, it is an idealized image of your own
mother."

Bennett sat frowning. "All right, let's say that's so. But where do
the hallucinations of the city of Thone fit in?"

"This is something that has to be tracked down in a series of
analytical sessions, so all I can do is guess. If one is unable to
reach a goal in a real environment, the obvious answer is to create a
fantasy world. That's what you appear to be doing. It's a dangerous
situation, Mr. Bennett. Potentially, at least."

"How so?" Bennett asked, alarmed.

"The general tendency is toward greater and greater divorcement from
reality. I suggest immediate treatment by a competent analyst. If you
don't know of one, I can recommend several."

"I'd like to think it over."

"Do that," Hall said. "And call me when you've decided."

       *       *       *       *       *

The third day after he consulted the neurologist, Bennett's headache
returned. As before, drugs were of no help. When the pain became
blinding, he lay back on his bed, placed a cold cloth on his forehead,
and closed his eyes.

Suddenly the realities he knew were gone and he was back in the
dream-city of Thone.

Persons and objects were much clearer now. Bennett saw that he lay in
a receptacle shaped like a rectangular metal box. It was padded,
reminding him unpleasantly of a coffin. The woman he had seen before
was again with him, but now he knew that her name was Lima. Behind her
stood a man; a tall, dark man whose eyebrows joined over the bridge of
his nose, and whose forehead was creased in a permanent frown. The
woman held out her arms to Bennett. Her lips moved, but no sound came
from them.

Bennett's spirit seemed to rise from the flesh--he could see his body
still lying there--and he followed the woman. As he approached she
retreated and, try as he would to reach her, she remained just beyond
his grasp.

After what seemed hours of futile pursuit, a cloud formed between him
and the woman. When it dissipated, he had left the world of Thone. He
was in a trolley-bus, in his own world, and vaguely he recalled having
left his room, gone down to the street, and boarded the
trolley--during the time he had followed Lima, in his hallucination.
It seemed that he had a definite destination then, but now he could
not recall what it had been.

His attention was drawn to the outside by the flickering of lights
that flashed in through the bus windows. Bennett looked out and saw
that he was in the Pleasure Section of the city, traveling through the
Street of Carnivals. He watched the fronts of the amusement buildings
pass before him and he read their advertisements listlessly.

Suddenly one sign seemed to spring out from all the others:

LIMA
MYSTIC OF THE MIND

He left the trolley at the next corner and made his way through the
crowd to the brightly lit carnival building.

Inside, he found a chair and seated himself. The show's act appeared
about half over. It was pretty evidently charlatan stuff, Bennett
decided, but the black-hooded mystic on the stage held his attention.
She was a tall woman, with a slender figure and fair flesh. She was
poised, or perhaps it was indifference to the crowd.

A runner went through the audience touching articles of clothing or
ornaments, and the woman without hesitation named each one he touched.
The act was slightly different from most Bennett had seen in that the
runner said nothing, merely touching the articles to be named.

The next portion of the show consisted of a mind-reading act. Bennett
expected the usual routine of writing a question on paper, which would
be sealed in an envelope and placed in a container on the stage.

He was surprised when the runner returned to the crowd and asked for
volunteers for thought-reading.

A short man with a bright yellow necktie raised his hand. The runner
made his way through the crowd to the man and touched him on the
shoulder before turning back to the mystic. He still said nothing.

"This man is thinking that he should have stayed at home tonight," the
mystic said. "There are wrestling matches on the teletone, and he
would have enjoyed them more than this show. Besides, he would have
spent less money that way than he has tonight. And he does not like
to spend money unless he must."

A titter of amusement went through the crowd as the man blushed a dull
crimson.

The runner touched a second man.

