"Of course it wasn't entirely the kitchen's fault. There had to be some
damn fool at the banquet who'd place the bomb where it would do some
good. And of course I had to be it." Lanceford grinned. "About the only
thing I have to say in my defense is that I didn't know it was loaded!"

Perkins looked at him expectantly as Lanceford paused. "Well, don't stop
there," he said. "You've got me interested."

Lanceford smiled good-naturedly and went on.

       *       *       *       *       *

We held the banquet in the central plaza of Base Alpha. It was the only
roofed area on the planet large enough to hold the crowd of high brass
that had assembled for the occasion. We don't do things that way now,
but fifty years ago we had a lot to learn. In those days, the admission
of a humanoid planet into the Confederation was quite an event. The
VIP's thought that the native population should be aware of it.

I was sitting between Kron Avar and one of the high brass from the
Bureau of Interstellar Trade, a fellow named Hartmann. I had no business
being in that rarefied air, since Kron was one of the two First
Councilors and Hartmann ranked me by a couple of thousand files on the
promotion list. But I happened to be a friend of Kron's, so protocol got
stretched a bit in the name of friendship. He and I had been through a
lot together when I was a junior explorer with the BEE some ten years
before. We'd kept contact with each other ever since. We had both come
up the ladder quite a ways, but a Planetary Director, by rights,
belonged farther down the table. So there I was, the recipient of one of
the places of honor and a lot of dirty looks.

Hartmann didn't think much of being bumped one seat away from the top.
He wasn't used to associating with mere directors, and besides, I kept
him from talking with Kron about trade relations. Kron was busy
rehashing the old days when we were opening Niobe to viscayaculture.
Trade didn't interest him very much, and Hartmann interested him less.
Niobians are never too cordial to strangers, and he had never seen the
BIT man before this meeting.

Anyway, the talk got around to the time he introduced me to vorkum, a
native dish that acts as a systemic insect repellant--and tastes like
one! And right then I got the bright idea that nearly wrecked Niobe.

As I said, there was both Niobian and Confederation food at the banquet,
so I figured that it was a good time as any to get revenge for what my
dog-headed friend did to my stomach a good decade before.

So I introduced him to Terran cooking.

Niobians assimilate it all right, but their sense of taste isn't the
same as ours. Our best dishes are just mush to their palates, which are
conditioned to sauces that would make the most confirmed spice lover on
Earth run screaming for the water tap. They have a sense of the
delicate, too, but it needs to be stimulated with something like liquid
fire before they can appreciate it. For instance, Kron liked Earth
peaches, but he spiced them with horseradish and red pepper.

I must admit that he was a good sport. He took the hors d'oeuvres in
stride, swallowing such tasteless things as caviar, Roquefort and
anchovy paste without so much as a grimace. Of course, I was taking an
unfair advantage of Kron's natural courtesy, but it didn't bother me too
much. He had rubbed that vorkum episode in for years. It was nice to
watch him squirm.

When I pressed him to try an oyster cocktail, I figured things had gone
far enough.

He took it, of course, even though anyone who knew Niobians could see
that he didn't want any part of it. There was a pleading look in his eye
that I couldn't ignore. After all, Kron was a friend. I was actually
about to stop him when he pulled an oyster from its red bath and popped
it into his mouth. There was a 'you'll be sorry' look on his face. I
gestured to a waiter to remove the cocktail as he bit into the oyster,
figuring, somewhat belatedly, that I had gone too far.

The grateful look I got from him was sufficient reward. But then it
happened. Kron stopped looking grateful and literally snatched the
cocktail back from the startled waiter!

He looked at me with an expression of disgust. "The first decent food
thus far," he said, "and you attempt to send it away!"

"Huh?" I exclaimed stupidly. "I didn't want to make you miserable."

"Miserable! Hah! This dish is wonderful! What in the name of my First
Ancestor is it?" His pleased grin was enough like a snarl to make
Hartmann cringe in his chair. Since Kron and I were both speaking
Niobian rather than Confed, he didn't understand what was happening. I
suppose he thought that Kron was about to rip my throat out. It was a
natural error, of course. You've seen a dog smile, and wondered what was
going on behind the teeth? Well, Kron looked something like that. A
Niobian with his dog-headed humanoid body is impressive under any
conditions. When he smiles he can be downright frightening.

I winked at Hartmann. "Don't worry, sir," I said. "Everything's all
right."

"It certainly is," Kron said in Confed. "This dish is delicious.
Incidentally, friend Lanceford, what is it? It tastes something like our
Komal, but with a subtle difference of flavor that is indescribable!"

"It's called an oyster cocktail, Kron," I said.

"This is a product of your world we would enjoy!" Kron said. "Although
the sauce is somewhat mild, the flavor of the meat is exquisite!" He
closed his eyes, savoring the taste. "It would be somewhat better with
vanka," he said musingly. "Or perhaps with Kala berries."

I shuddered. I had tried those sauces once. Once was enough! I could
still feel the fire.

"I wonder if you could ship them to us," Kron continued.

Hartmann's ears pricked up at the word "ship." It looked like an opening
gambit for a fast sales talk on behalf of interstellar trade, a subject
dear to his heart.

But I was puzzled. I couldn't figure it out until I tried one of the
oysters--after which I knew! Some fool had dished them up in straight
tobasco sauce! It took some time before I could talk, what with trying
to wash the fire out of my mouth, and during the conversational hiatus
Hartmann picked up the ball where I dropped it. So I sat by and
listened, my burned mouth being in no condition for use.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I'm afraid that we couldn't ship them," Hartmann said. "At least not on
a commercial basis. Interstellar freight costs are prohibitive where
food is concerned."

Kron nodded sadly. He passed the oysters to Tovan Harl, his fellow First
Councilor. Harl went through the same reaction pattern Kron had shown.

"However," Hartmann continued, "we could send you a few dozen. Perhaps
you could start a small oyster farm."

"Is this a plant?" Kron asked curiously.

"No, it's a marine animal with a hard outer shell."

"Just like our Komal. We could try planting some of them in our oceans.
If they grow, we will be very obliged to you Terrans for giving us a new
taste sensation."

"Since my tribe is a seafaring one," Harl interjected, "they can be
raised under my supervision until we find the exact methods to propagate
them in our seas."

Hartmann must have been happy to get off the hook. It was a small
request, one that was easy to fulfill. It was a good thing that the
