"What did you say?" Elza looked up to meet Tarrano's steady gaze.

"I said it is wonderful to be thus alone with you, my Elza."

"Oh." She looked away.

He persisted; but his voice was gentle and earnest. "Soon we will be at
my home, Lady Elza. And now--there are some things I would like to say
while I have the opportunity.... You will listen?"

"Yes," she said; and tried to keep from him the trembling within her.
"I'll listen, of course."

He nodded. "Thank you.... My Elza, you have heard me talk of conquering
the world. My dream--my destiny. It will come to pass, of course. Yet--"
A smile pulled at his lips. "Do you know, my Elza, what you and I are
doing now?"

She stared, and he did not wait for her to answer.

"We're making my first retreat. I wonder if you can realize how I feel,
having to admit that? Tarrano in retreat!... Our escape from Venia?
Pouf! That was a jest. I was there on Earth merely to get you, and the
Brende model. I had no thought of conquering the Earth just then. I
accomplished my two purposes--and left.... It was not a retreat, merely
a planned departure.

"But this, my Elza, is very different. I did not wish to do what I am
doing now. I had planned--I had thought, had actually hoped, that I
might maintain myself in the Great City. You see, I tell you this,
little girl, because--well I am a lonely man. I walk alone--and because
I am human--it does me good to have someone to talk to. I had hoped I
might maintain myself in the Great City. Last night--at the start of the
Water Festival--I began to realize it was impossible. I should have
enlisted the _Rhaals_--the men of science, Elza. But I had no time, and
they are very aloof. I could have won them to me had I tried." He
shrugged. "I must confess I was over-confident of my strength--the
strength of my position. The _Rhaals_ stayed out of the affair--stayed
in their own city, which has always been their policy. That was what I
expected, but now I see I should have had their aid. I did--well what I
did to guard against the unhappy outcome you witnessed--what I did was
wrongly planned. You see, I take all the blame. I alone am responsible
for my destiny. There are some who in defeat cry bitterly, 'Luck! That
cursed luck was against me!' Not so! Leadership is not a matter of luck.
Destiny is what you make it. You see?

"And so now I am making my first retreat. A set-back, nothing more. I
shall launch my forces from the City of Ice, instead of marshalling them
from the Central State as I had planned. And Mars is still mine. I still
control Mars, little Elza.... A set-back just now--and it bothers me. It
hurts my pride--and as you know, my Elza, Tarrano is very proud."

She had been listening to him, her fingers plucking idly at her robe. He
bent closer to her; his voice turned tender. "I was thinking that
perhaps--just perhaps you would scorn Tarrano in his triumphs, you might
feel differently toward him now--in his first retreat. Do you?"

She forced her eyes up to his again. "I'm--sorry--from your viewpoint, I
mean--that things are going wrong."

He smiled gently. "You are very conservative, Lady Elza. You want very
much to avoid hypocrisy, don't you?"

"Yes," she said frankly. "You could hardly expect me to be sorry at your
defeat."

"Defeat?" He rasped out the word, and his laugh was harsh. "You are too
optimistic. Defeat? Things going wrong? That is not so. A slight
set-back. A strategic retreat--and in a week I will have regained more
than I have lost.... Oh, Lady Elza! I who would now--and always--be so
gentle with you--why we are almost quarreling! That is not right. For
the lives of a thousand of my servants, I would not have used that tone
to you just now. Forgive me....

"I was saying, my Elza--could not you feel more kindly to me now. A
little hope from those gentle eyes of yours--a little word from those
red lips--a word of hope for what some day might be for us--you and
me--"

She dared to try and turn the subject. "You mentioned the Brende
model--where is it? Have you it in the Cold Country?"

He frowned. "Yes. And I will use it--for you and me alone. You've always
known that, haven't you? Just for you and me, my Elza." He took her
hand. "Won't you try and love me--just a trifle?"

She did not move. "I--don't know." Then she faced him squarely. "I do
not love you, Tarrano." Something in his eyes--a quality of pleading; a
wistful smile upon his lips--suddenly struck her as pathetic. Strange
and queerly pathetic that such a man as he should be reduced to
wistfulness. Emotion swept her. Not love. A feeling of sympathy; a
womanly desire to lighten his sorrow; to sympathize and yet to withhold
from him the happiness he sought.

"I do not love you, Tarrano. But I do respect you. And I am sorry--"

"Respect! I have told you I can command that from everyone. But
love--your love--"

"I would give it if I could, Tarrano."

"You mean--you're trying to love me--and cannot?"

"I mean--Oh, I don't know what I mean, save that I do not love you yet."

He smiled. "I think you speak the truth when you say you do not know
what you mean. Your love! If I had it, I should know that I would have
it always. But--having it not--" He was very sincere, but his smile
broadened. "Having it not, my Elza, there is no power in all the heavens
that can tell me how to get it. It may be born in a moment from now--or
never. Who can tell?"

She was silent; and after a moment, he added: "Enough of this. I would
ask you just one thing. You are not afraid of me, are you?"

"No," she said; and at that moment she meant it.

"I would not have you ever be afraid, Lady Elza. Love is not conceived
by fear. And you must know I could never force my love upon you. For if
I did--I should withhold forever the birth of this love of yours which
is all I seek--this love I am trying to breathe into life.... Enough!"

He did not mention the subject again. For hours--eating what meager
stock of tabloid food with which their vehicle was provisioned--they
flew onward. Rising now to top the line of jagged mountains. Over them
the platform swept. In the crisp air the snow down there gleamed
blue-white; the ice with an age-old look filled the valleys between the
peaks.

The arctic! It was nothing like the Polar regions of Earth. Stark
desolation. A naked land seemingly upheaved by some gigantic cataclysm
of nature, lying tumbled and broken where it had fallen in convulsive
agony; and then congealed forever in a grip of ice.

The Sun hung level as the vehicle advanced. In these latitudes it would
swing side-wise in a slow, low arc, to dip again below the horizon and
vanish. Here in the Cold Country it was morning of the Long Day. Summer!

On over the crags and glaciers Tarrano guided their frail flying
platform. Houses occasionally showed now--huts of ice, congealed
dwellings, blue-white in the flat sunlight.

And then at last, over the horizon came the ramparts of a city. The City
of Ice! The size of it--the evidences of civilization here in this
brittle land of deadly cold--made Elza gasp with wonderment.




CHAPTER XXIV

_Attack on the Palace_


I must take you back now to the Water Festival and the events in the
Great City which followed it. _Slaans_ in murderous frenzy were plunging
through the throng of erstwhile revelers. Maida could not quell them.
The revolt which she had started against Tarrano seemed now a
self-created monster to destroy us all.

But there were Earth men among us. A hundred of them, no more. They had
come from Washington that same day; had landed, I learned later,
secretly near the Great City, sent with our Earth Council's plans to
communicate with Maida. Beneath the water, coming individually, they had
entered the festival; and helping Maida's girls (the diving girls whom I
had encountered) they had made away with most of Tarrano's guards.

In those first moments of frenzy, I got to the balcony--joined Maida and
Georg. Elza was gone! My heart went cold, but in those hurried, frantic
moments, grave disaster as it was, I did not dwell upon it.

"We must get away--back to the palace!" Georg exclaimed as I joined
them.

The Earth men on the main floor were holding the _slaans_ partially in
check. Bodies were lying in a welter--I shall not describe it. Then
abruptly, upon a table a huge _slaan_ leaped--his garments blood-stained
from his victims, a blade of dripping steel in his hands. He shouted
above the tumult--words not in the universal language, but in the
dialect of the _slaans_. His command carried throughout the building.
Other _slaans_ took it up; we could hear it echoed outside as others
shouted it over the waters.

The bloodshed abruptly ceased. The _slaans_ leaped away from the Earth
men, who were glad enough to let them go--rushed for the archways of the
pavilion. Outside, we could hear the water splashing. Swimmers--and
boats scurrying off. Then comparative silence. The scream of a _slaan_
woman in the grove nearby, still desiring vengeance; the groans of the
dying at our feet; the hiss and splutter of weapons discarded, with
circuits still connected. And over it all, the great whine of a danger
whistle, which some distant official had plugged.... A lull. And around
us lay strewn stark tragedy where a few moments before had been festive
merry-making. A crimson scene, with the body of the Red Woman lying like
a symbol in its midst....

Within an hour we were back at the palace. The whole city was seething.
Boats and lights were everywhere. Control of everything seemed lost.
Warning signals shrilled in crazy fashion. Public mirrors were dark, or
turned to places and time wholly irrelevant.

In the palace itself we soon secured a semblance of order. Maida's girls
were here, with wet veils and long dank tresses clinging to their sleek
bodies. Lips painted alluring red. But eyes which now were solemn and
grim. Their demeanor alert and business-like. Unconscious of themselves
they moved about the palace, executing Maida's orders.

A dozen or so of Maida's personal retainers were here--and most of the
Earth men. Keen-eyed young men of the Washington Headquarters Staff. One
of them--Tomm Aften by name, a ruddy, blue-eyed fellow--was in command.
He stayed close by Georg and me.

The city was seething. But out of the chaos was coming a comparatively
orderly menace. We could sense it at first; and then in a few brief
minutes so swift that we had no time to prepare--the menace became
obvious and was at hand.

The _slaans_ had withdrawn from the festival for a greater, more
organized effort. Their revolt against Tarrano in which Maida had
joined, was bigger, more deep-rooted than a mere revolt. It was against
Maida herself. Trickery of the downtrodden _slaans_ against the ruling
class. Against the old order of government. Even against the _Rhaals_,
who in their distant city were all-powerful, but who obeyed the laws and
took no part in anything.

Revolution! From down the waterways of streets which converged into the
broad lagoon before the palace, boats began arriving. Boats crowded with
_slaans_. Disheveled, unkempt men and women with primitive weapons of
steel and wire brandished aloft. They surged into the lagoon. A
murderous, frenzied mob--thoughtless of itself, suicidal to attack us,
yet daring everything in its frenzy.

Soon the lagoon was crowded--a chaos of pushing, shoving boats. Then the
boats began landing, disgorging their occupants, wild-eyed _slaans_ each
a potential murderer. The gardens of the palace were presently jammed
with them. They did not at first come within our threshholds; they stood
milling about under the palms, trampling the tropic flowers, screaming
threats and epithets at us. But waiting--as a mob always does--for some
leader to advance, that they might follow him upon us.

We stood on the palace roof-top. I must confess that we were in a flurry
for the moment. There were undoubtedly weapons at hand, but I at least
did not have them, nor did I know where they were. Excusable flurry
possibly for the thing had come so quickly, and most of us were
strangers here of but a few hours.

The roof had a low railing waist-high, but broad. We stood clustered
behind it. In the garden beneath, the mob was shouting up at us. And,
before I could stop her, Maida had leaped to the top of the rail. Georg
and I clutched at her, then steadied her.

_"Slaans--"_

But they would not hear her. Shouts went up; a roar of threats. The
press of additions to the mob landing from other boats, forced the front
ranks forward. They were now on the palace steps, jammed there waving
their weapons yet still hesitating to advance.

"_Slaans_--my people--"

Maida's frail voice was lost in the uproar. Then a missle was thrown
upward--a portion of a broken generator--a heavy chunk of metal. It
barely missed Maida, and fell with a thump to the roof behind us. Then
came others--a rain of them about us. I tried to pull Maida back, but
she fought me, her voice still calling out its appeal.

With a bound, Georg was up on the rail beside her. Aften--the young
Earth man--had quietly handed him a cylinder. Georg waved it at the mob.

"_Slaans_--" His stronger voice caught their attention. A sudden hush
fell.

"_Slaans_--it is I, Georg Brende. Your Princess Maida rules you now only
under me. A new ruler, _slaans_--the man of Earth--Georg Brende who must
be obeyed--Georg Brende, soon to be husband of your Princess--"

But they would not hear him out. The din from them submerged his voice.
His lips snapped tight as abruptly he ceased talking; his brows lowered
grimly and I saw his finger press upon the cylinder.

Maida's voice screamed: "Georg! Have mercy! Do not kill them!"

She spoke barely in time. His cylinder swept upward. The rays from it
caught only the upper portions of the palms and the tree tops. The
foliage withered, shriveled before that soundless, invisible blast.

Not a blast of heat. The mob, surprised, then frightened, stared upward.
The soft tropical foliage in a great wide swath was dead, with naked
sticks of limbs. Black, then turning white. Not with heat--but cold. Ice
was forming from the moisture in the humid air. And then the sudden
condensation brought snow--a thick white fall of it sifting down into
the palm-laden garden; falling gently, then swirling in a sudden wind
which had begun.

As though itself stiffened by the cold just overhead, the mob stood
transfixed. Then a murmur of horror came. And I saw through the veil of
whirling snow, that into some of the trees _slaans_ had climbed. Their
bodies, frozen now, slid and fell--black plummets hurtling downward
through the swirling snow-flakes.




CHAPTER XXV

_Immortal Terror_


To Elza, approaching with Tarrano on the tiny flying platform the City
of Ice, the place seemed truly like a child's dream of Fairyland. The
rude snow huts of the Arctic of our Earth were all that she had ever
conceived could be built of frozen water. Here, in the outskirts of the
city, she saw indeed, quite similar huts. But further in--ornate
buildings several stories high. She caught a vague glimpse of them only,
as the platform flew above them and descended in the center of the city.

They had passed over great outer encircling ramparts--a huge wall many
_helans_ long--built entirely of ice blocks--fortifications like that
fabled wall which in the dim history of our Earth had once encircled a
portion of the domain of the Yellow Race.

The platform came down before a central building--the Palace of Ice.
Even in this dim daylight of the Cold Country summer, the great building
gleamed and glittered resplendent. A building of many levels, storied
and winged, with spider bridges and aerial arcades connecting the wings.
Frescoed everywhere! ornate with carved design chipped in ice blocks
hard as marble. Rolling terraces of snow and ice surrounded it--lawns of
smooth white, with winding paths of ice. A many balconied building;
towers, spires and minarets crowning it. All blue-white. Glittering.
Seemingly fragile; from a distance, a toy--a sample of the ultra-skill
of some master confectioner, as though the whole thing were a toy of
sugar for children to admire. But at close range--solid; in the cold of
this terrible region, as solid as though constructed of blocks of stone.

With the flying platform landed, and its warming rays cut off,
attendants rushed forward. Tarrano and Elza were wrapped in furs at
once--heavy furs which covered them from head to foot.

"Well! Well, Graten!" Tarrano greeted his subordinate smilingly. "Things
are in condition here? You got my message?"

"Yes, Master. All is in good fashion here. We welcome you."

In his furs, with face almost hidden, Elza could not see what manner of
man this was.

They entered the palace. Frescoed; carved everywhere, within as without.
The main doorway led into a palatial hall, carpeted with furs. It was
warm. Tarrano discarded his fur, and helped Elza out of hers.

"You like my home, Lady Elza?"

"It's--beautiful," she answered.

His smile showed amusement at the wonder and awe which stamped her
expression. He added very gently:

"I had in mind when I built it, the hope that you would be pleased."

A comfortable interior warmth. Elza noticed little blurs of red light
behind wire cages here and there. The warmth came from them; and a glow
of pale white light from the tubes along the wall.

A woman hurried to them. Tara! Elza recognized her at once. Tara,
looking very pretty in a pale blue robe, with her hair done high upon
her head. The woman who loved Tarrano; he had sent her on here to be rid
of her, when he went to the Great City. She came forward. Pleasure was
on her face at seeing Tarrano; but her glance as she turned it
momentarily toward Elza, held again that smouldering jealousy.

Tarrano was evidently in a mood of high good humor.

"You welcome me prettily, Tara." She had flung her arms about him.
"Tara, my dear is----"

"Master--you come but in time. They are working the Brende instrument.
Already they have----"

"They? Who?" He frowned. His words were hard and cold as the ice-blocks
around him.

"Woolff. And the son of Cretar. Many of them--using it now!"

Tarrano drew Elza with him. Tara led the way. Through glowing white
hallways, an arcade; down steps and an incline--to burst at last through
a tunnel-like passage into a room.

"So? What is this, Cretar?"

A room littered with apparatus. A dozen men were about. Men scantily
dressed in this interior heat. Short, squat men of the Cold Country;
flat-nosed, heavy faces; hair long to the base of the neck. In a corner
stood the Brende instrument, fully erected. A light from it seemed
penetrating the bared chest of a man who was at that moment standing in
its curative rays.

He whom Tarrano called Cretar, took a step forward.

"Master, we----"

"Making yourselves immortal?" The anger had left Tarrano's voice; irony
was there instead.

"Master----"

"Have you done that?"

"Master--yes! Yes! We did! Forgive us, Master."

The man before the instrument had retreated from it. Elza saw now that
all the men were shrinking back in terror. All save Cretar, who had
fallen tremblingly to his knees. Yet Tarrano showed no anger. He
laughed.

"I would not hurt you, Cretar! Get up, man! I am not angry--not even
annoyed. Why, your skin is turning orange. See the mottles!"

On the flesh of all the men--save the one who had been checked in the
act of using the instrument--a bright orange mottling was apparent.
Cretar exclaimed:

"The immunity to all diseases, master. It is itself a
disease--harmless--and it combats every other." He laughed a little
