collection of houses, close together, at the water's edge and spreading
back thinly into the hills behind. This they knew to be Arite--the city
of their destination.

At the end of the tunnel they left the sleigh, and, turning down the
gentle sloping hillside, leisurely approached the city. They were part
way across an open field separating them from the nearest houses, when
they saw a group of figures coming across the field towards them. This
group stopped when still a few hundred yards away, only two of the
figures continuing to come forward. They came onward steadily, the tall
figure of a man clothed in white, and by his side a slender, graceful
boy.

In a moment more Lao, walking in front of the Doctor and his two
companions, stopped suddenly and, turning to face them, said quietly,
"The Master."

The three travelers, with their hearts pounding, paused an instant. Then
with a shout the Very Young Man dashed forward, followed by his two
companions.

"It's Rogers--it's Rogers!" he called; and in a moment more the three
men were beside the Chemist, shaking his hand and pouring at him
excitedly their words of greeting.

The Chemist welcomed them heartily, but with a quiet, curious air of
dignity that they did not remember he possessed before. He seemed to
have aged considerably since they had last seen him. The lines in his
face had deepened; the hair on his temples was white. He seemed also to
be rather taller than they remembered him, and certainly he was stouter.

He was dressed in a long, flowing robe of white cloth, gathered in at
the waist by a girdle, from which hung a short sword, apparently of gold
or of beaten brass. His legs were bare; on his feet he wore a form of
sandal with leather thongs crossing his insteps. His hair grew long over
his ears and was cut off at the shoulder line in the fashion of the
natives.

When the first words of greeting were over, the Chemist turned to the
boy, who was standing apart, watching them with big, interested eyes.

"My friends," he said quietly, yet with a little underlying note of
pride in his voice, "this is my son."

The boy approached deferentially. He was apparently about ten or eleven
years of age, tall as his father's shoulder nearly, extremely slight of
build, yet with a body perfectly proportioned. He was dressed in a white
robe similar to his father's, only shorter, ending at his knees. His
skin was of a curious, smooth, milky whiteness, lacking the gray, harder
look of that of the native men, and with just a touch of the iridescent
quality possessed by the women. His features were cast in a delicate
mold, pretty enough almost to be called girlish, yet with a firm
squareness of chin distinctly masculine.

His eyes were blue; his thick, wavy hair, falling to his shoulders, was
a chestnut brown. His demeanor was graceful and dignified, yet with a
touch of ingenuousness that marked him for the care-free child he really
was. He held out his hands palms up as he approached.

"My name is Loto," he said in a sweet, soft voice, with perfect
self-possession. "I'm glad to meet my father's friends." He spoke
English with just a trace of the liquid quality that characterized his
mother's tongue.

"You are late getting here," remarked the Chemist with a smile, as the
three travelers, completely surprised by this sudden introduction,
gravely shook hands with the boy.

During this time the young Oroid who had guided them down from the
forest above the tunnels, had been standing respectfully behind them, a
few feet away. A short distance farther on several small groups of
natives were gathered, watching the strangers. With a few swift words
Loto now dismissed their guide, who bowed low with his hands to his
forehead and left them.

Led by the Chemist, they continued on down into the city, talking
earnestly, telling him the details of their trip. The natives followed
them as they moved forward, and as they entered the city others looked
at them curiously and, the Very Young Man thought, with a little
hostility, yet always from a respectful distance. Evidently it was
night, or at least the time of sleep at this hour, for the streets they
passed through were nearly deserted.




CHAPTER XIX

THE CITY OF ARITE


The city of Arite, as it looked to them now, was strange beyond anything
they had ever seen, but still by no means as extraordinary as they had
expected it would be. The streets through which they walked were broad
and straight, and were crossed by others at regular intervals of two or
three hundred feet. These streets paralleled each other with
mathematical regularity. The city thus was laid out most orderly, but
with one peculiarity; the streets did not run in two directions crossing
each other at right angles, but in three, each inclined to an equal
degree with the others. The blocks of houses between them, therefore,
were cut into diamond-shaped sections and into triangles, never into
squares or oblongs.

Most of the streets seemed paved with large, flat gray blocks of a
substance resembling highly polished stone, or a form of opaque glass.
There were no sidewalks, but close up before the more pretentious of the
houses, were small trees growing.

The houses themselves were generally triangular or diamond-shaped,
following the slope of the streets. They were, most of them, but two
stories in height, with flat roofs on some of which flowers and
trellised vines were growing. They were built principally of the same
smooth, gray blocks with which the streets were paved. Their windows
were large and numerous, without window-panes, but closed now, nearly
all of them by shining, silvery curtains that looked as though they
might have been woven from the metal itself. The doors were of heavy
metal, suggesting brass or gold. On some of the houses tiny low-railed
balconies hung from the upper windows out over the street.

The party proceeded quietly through this now deserted city, crossing a
large tree-lined square, or park, that by the confluence of many streets
seemed to mark its center, and turned finally into another diagonal
street that dropped swiftly down towards the lake front. At the edge of
a promontory this street abruptly terminated in a broad flight of steps
leading down to a little beach on the lake shore perhaps a hundred feet
below.

The Chemist turned sharp to the right at the head of these steps, and,
passing through the opened gateway of an arch in a low gray wall, led
his friends into a garden in which were growing a profusion of flowers.
These flowers, they noticed, were most of them blue or gray, or of a
pale silvery whiteness, lending to the scene a peculiarly wan, wistful
appearance, yet one of extraordinary, quite unearthly beauty.

Through the garden a little gray-pebbled path wound back to where a
house stood, nearly hidden in a grove of trees, upon a bluff directly
overlooking the lake.

"My home, gentlemen," said the Chemist, with a wave of his hand.

As they approached the house they heard, coming from within, the mellow
voice of a woman singing--an odd little minor theme, with a quaint,
lilting rhythm, and words they could not distinguish. Accompanying the
voice were the delicate tones of some stringed instrument suggesting a
harp.

"We are expected," remarked the Chemist with a smile. "Lylda is still
up, waiting for us." The Very Young Man's heart gave a leap at the
mention of the name.

From the outside, the Chemist's house resembled many of the larger ones
they had seen as they came through the city. It was considerably more
pretentious than any they had yet noticed, diamond-shaped--that is to
say, a flattened oblong--two stories in height and built of large blocks
of the gray polished stone.

Unlike the other houses, its sides were not bare, but were partly
covered by a luxuriant growth of vines and trellised flowers. There were
no balconies under its windows, except on the lake side. There, at the
height of the second story, a covered balcony broad enough almost to be
called a veranda, stretched the full width of the house.

A broad door of brass, fronting the garden, stood partly open, and the
Chemist pushed it wide and ushered in his friends. They found themselves
now in a triangular hallway, or lobby, with an open arch in both its
other sides giving passage into rooms beyond. Through one of these
archways the Chemist led them, into what evidently was the main
living-room of the dwelling.

It was a high-ceilinged room nearly triangular in shape, thirty feet
possibly at its greatest width. In one wall were set several
silvery-curtained windows, opening out on to the lake. On the other side
was a broad fireplace and hearth with another archway beside it leading
farther into the house. The walls of the room were lined with small gray
tiles; the floor also was tiled with gray and white, set in design.

On the floor were spread several large rugs, apparently made of grass or
fibre. The walls were bare, except between the windows, where two long,
narrow, heavily embroidered strips of golden cloth were hanging.

In the center of the room stood a circular stone table, its top a highly
polished black slab of stone. This table was set now for a meal, with
golden metal dishes, huge metal goblets of a like color, and beautifully
wrought table utensils, also of gold. Around the table were several
small chairs, made of wicker. In the seat of each lay a padded fiber
cushion, and over the back was hung a small piece of embroidered cloth.

With the exception of these chairs and table, the room was practically
devoid of furniture. Against one wall was a smaller table of stone, with
a few miscellaneous objects on its top, and under each window stood a
small white stone bench.

A fire glowed in the fireplace grate--a fire that burned without flame.
On the hearth before it, reclining on large silvery cushions, was a
woman holding in her hands a small stringed instrument like a tiny harp
or lyre. When the men entered the room she laid her instrument aside and
rose to her feet.

As she stood there for an instant, expectant, with the light of welcome
in her eyes, the three strangers beheld what to them seemed the most
perfect vision of feminine loveliness they had ever seen.

The woman's age was at first glance indeterminate. By her face, her
long, slender, yet well-rounded neck, and the slim curves of her girlish
figure, she might have been hardly more than twenty. Yet in her bearing
there was that indefinable poise and dignity that bespoke the more
mature, older woman.

She was about five feet tall, with a slender, almost fragile, yet
perfectly rounded body. Her dress consisted of a single flowing garment
of light-blue silk, reaching from the shoulders to just above her knees.
It was girdled at the waist by a thick golden cord that hung with golden
tasseled pendants at her side.

A narrower golden cord crossed her breast and shoulders. Her arms, legs,
and shoulders were bare. Her skin was smooth as satin, milky white, and
suffused with the delicate tints of many colors. Her hair was thick and
very black; it was twisted into two tresses that fell forward over each
shoulder nearly to her waist and ended with a little silver ribbon and
tassel tied near the bottom.

Her face was a delicate oval. Her lips were full and of a color for
which in English there is no name. It would have been red doubtless by
sunlight in the world above, but here in this silver light of
phosphorescence, the color red, as we see it, was impossible.

Her nose was small, of Grecian type. Her slate-gray eyes were rather
large, very slightly upturned at the corners, giving just a touch of the
look of our women of the Orient. Her lashes were long and very black. In
conversation she lowered them at times with a charming combination of
feminine humility and a touch of coquetry. Her gaze from under them had
often a peculiar look of melting softness, yet always it was direct and
honest.

Such was the woman who quietly stood beside her hearth, waiting to
welcome these strange guests from another world.

As the men entered through the archway, the boy Loto pushed quickly past
them in his eagerness to get ahead, and, rushing across the room, threw
himself into the woman's arms crying happily, "_Mita, mita._"

The woman kissed him affectionately. Then, before she had time to speak,
the boy pulled her forward, holding her tightly by one hand.

"This is my mother," he said with a pretty little gesture. "Her name is
Lylda."

The woman loosened herself from his grasp with a smile of amusement,
and, native fashion, bowed low with her hands to her forehead.

"My husband's friends are welcome," she said simply. Her voice was soft
and musical. She spoke English perfectly, with an intonation of which
the most cultured woman might be proud, but with a foreign accent much
more noticeable than that of her son.

"A very long time we have been waiting for you," she added; and then, as
an afterthought, she impulsively offered them her hand in their own
manner.

The Chemist kissed his wife quietly. In spite of the presence of
strangers, for a moment she dropped her reserve, her arms went up around
his neck, and she clung to him an instant. Gently putting her down, the
Chemist turned to his friends.

"I think Lylda has supper waiting," he said. Then as he looked at their
torn, woolen suits that once were white, and the ragged shoes upon their
feet, he added with a smile, "But I think I can make you much more
comfortable first."

He led them up a broad, curving flight of stone steps to a room above,
where they found a shallow pool of water, sunk below the level of the
floor. Here he left them to bathe, getting them meanwhile robes similar
to his own, with which to replace their own soiled garments. In a little
while, much refreshed, they descended to the room below, where Lylda had
supper ready upon the table waiting for them.

"Only a little while ago my father and Aura left," said Lylda, as they
sat down to eat.

"Lylda's younger sister," the Chemist explained. "She lives with her
father here in Arite."

The Very Young Man parted his lips to speak. Then, with heightened color
in his cheeks, he closed them again.

They were deftly served at supper by a little native girl who was
dressed in a short tunic reaching from waist to knees, with circular
discs of gold covering her breasts. There was cooked meat for the meal,
a white starchy form of vegetable somewhat resembling a potato, a number
of delicious fruits of unfamiliar variety, and for drink the juice of a
fruit that tasted more like cider than anything they could name.

At the table Loto perched himself beside the Very Young Man, for whom he
seemed to have taken a sudden fancy.

"I like you," he said suddenly, during a lull in the talk.

"I like you, too," answered the Very Young Man.

"Aura is very beautiful; you'll like her."

"I'm sure I will," the Very Young Man agreed soberly.

"What's your name?" persisted the boy.

"My name's Jack. And I'm glad you like me. I think we're friends, don't
you?"

And so they became firm friends, and, as far as circumstances would
permit, inseparable companions.

Lylda presided over the supper with the charming grace of a competent
hostess. She spoke seldom, yet when the conversation turned to the great
world above in which her husband was born, she questioned intelligently
and with eager interest. Evidently she had a considerable knowledge of
the subject, but with an almost childish insatiable curiosity she sought
from her guests more intimate details of the world they lived in.

When in lighter vein their talk ran into comments upon the social life
of their own world, Lylda's ready wit, combined with her ingenuous
simplicity, put to them many questions which made the giving of an
understandable answer sometimes amusingly difficult.

When the meal was over the three travelers found themselves very sleepy,
and all of them were glad when the Chemist suggested that they retire
almost immediately. He led them again to the upper story into the
bedroom they were to occupy. There, on the low bedsteads, soft with many
quilted coverings, they passed the remainder of the time of sleep in
dreamless slumber, utterly worn out by their journey, nor guessing what
the morning would bring forth.




CHAPTER XX

THE WORLD OF THE RING


Next morning after breakfast the four men sat upon the balcony
overlooking the lake, and prepared to hear the Chemist's narrative of
what had happened since he left them five years before. They had already
told him of events in their world, the making of the chemicals and their
journey down into the ring, and now they were ready to hear his story.

At their ease here upon the balcony, reclining in long wicker chairs of
the Chemist's own design, as he proudly admitted, they felt at peace
with themselves and the world. Below them lay the shining lake, above
spread a clear, star-studded sky. Against their faces blew the cool
breath of a gentle summer's breeze.

As they sat silent for a moment, enjoying almost with awe the beauties
of the scene, and listening to the soft voice of Lylda singing to
herself in the garden, the Very Young Man suddenly thought of the one
thing lacking to make his enjoyment perfect.

"I wish I had a cigarette," he remarked wistfully.

The Chemist with a smile produced cigars of a leaf that proved a very
good substitute for tobacco. They lighted them with a tiny metal lighter
of the flint-and-steel variety, filled with a fluffy inflammable wick--a
contrivance of the Chemist's own making--and then he started his
narrative.

"There is much to tell you, my friends," he began thoughtfully. "Much
that will interest you, shall we say from a socialistic standpoint? I
shall make it brief, for we have no time to sit idly talking.

"I must tell you now, gentlemen, of what I think you have so far not
even had a hint. You have found me living here," he hesitated and
smiled, "well at least under pleasant and happy circumstances. Yet as a
matter of fact, your coming was of vital importance, not only to me and
my family, but probably to the future welfare of the entire Oroid
nation.

"We are approaching a crisis here with which I must confess I have felt
myself unable to cope. With your help, more especially with the power of
the chemicals you have brought with you, it may be possible for us to
deal successfully with the conditions facing us."

"What are they?" asked the Very Young Man eagerly.

"Perhaps it would be better for me to tell you chronologically the
events as they have occurred. As you remember when I left you twelve
years ago----"

"Five years," interrupted the Very Young Man.

"Five or twelve, as you please," said the Chemist smiling. "It was my
intention then, as you know, to come back to you after a comparatively
short stay here."

"And bring Mrs.--er--Lylda, with you," put in the Very Young Man,
hesitating in confusion over the Christian name.

"And bring Lylda with me," finished the Chemist. "I got back here
without much difficulty, and in a very much shorter time and with less
effort than on my first trip. I tried an entirely different method; I
stayed as large as possible while descending, and diminished my size
materially only after I had reached the bottom."

