porosity] may soak up part of that water wherein the Salt was
dissolv'd, and eminently concurr with the other ingredients to give
the whole body the requisite consistence.

I perceive (sayes _Carneades_ smiling) that if it be true, as 'twas
lately rooted [Errata: noted] from the Proverb, _That good Wits have
bad Memories_, You have that Title, as well as a better, to a place
among the good Wits. For you have already more then once forgot, that
I declar'd to you that I would at this Conference Examine only the
Experiments of my Adversaries, not their Speculative Reasons. Yet 'tis
not (Subjoynes _Carneades_) for fear of medling with the Argument you
have propos'd, that I decline the examining it at present. For if when
we are more at leasure, you shall have a mind that we may Solemnly
consider of it together; I am confident we shall scarce find it
insoluble. And in the mean time we may observe, that such a way of
Arguing may, it seems, be speciously accommodated to differing
_Hypotheses_. For I find that _Beguinus_, and other Assertors of the
_Tria Prima_, pretend to make out by such a way, the requisiteness of
their Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, to constitute mixt Bodies, without
taking notice of any necessity of an Addition of Water and Earth.

And indeed neither sort of Chymists seem to have duly consider'd how
great Variety there is in the Textures and Consistences of Compound
Bodie; sand [Errata: Bodies; and] how little the consistence and
Duration of many of them seem to accommodate and be explicable by the
propos'd Notion. And not to mention those almost incorruptible
Substances obtainable by the Fire, which I have prov'd to be somewhat
compounded, and which the Chymists will readily grant not to be
perfectly mixt Bodies: (Not to mention these, I say) If you will but
recall to mind some of those Experiments, whereby I shew'd You that
out of common Water only mixt Bodies (and even living ones) of very
differing consistences, and resoluble by Fire into as many Principles
as other bodies acknowledg'd to be perfectly mixt; if you do this, I
say, you will not, I suppose, be averse from beleeving, that Nature by
a convenient disposition of the minute parts of a portion of matter
may contrive bodies durable enough, and of this, or that, or the other
Consistence, without being oblig'd to make use of all, much less of
any Determinate quantity of each of the five Elements, or of the three
Principles to compound such bodies of. And I have (pursues
_Carneades_) something wonder'd, Chymists should not consider, that
there is scarce any body in Nature so permanent and indissoluble as
Glass; which yet themselves teach us may be made of bare Ashes,
brought to fusion by the meer Violence of the Fire; so that, since
Ashes are granted to consist but of pure Salt and simple Earth,
sequestred from all the other Principles or Elements, they must
acknowledge, That even Art it self can of two Elements only, or, if
you please, one Principle and one Element, compound a Body more
durable then almost any in the World. Which being undeniable, how will
they prove that Nature cannot compound Mixt Bodies, and even durable
Ones, under all the five Elements or material Principles.

But to insist any longer on this Occasional Disquisition, Touching
their Opinion that would Establish five Elements, were to remember as
little as You did before, that the Debate of this matter is no part of
my first undertaking; and consequently, that I have already spent time
enough in what I look back upon but as a digression, or at best an
Excursion.

And thus, _Eleutherius_, (sayes _Carneades_) having at length gone
through the four Considerations I propos'd to Discourse unto you, I
hold it not unfit, for fear my having insisted so long on each of them
may have made you forget their _Series_, briefly to repeat them by
telling you, that

Since, in the first place, it may justly be doubted whether or no the
Fire be, as Chymists suppose it, the genuine and Universal Resolver of
mixt Bodies;

Since we may doubt, in the next place, whether or no all the Distinct
Substances that may be obtain'd from a mixt body by the Fire were
pre-existent there in the formes in which they were separated from it;

Since also, though we should grant the Substances separable from mixt
Bodies by the fire to have been their component Ingredients, yet the
Number of such substances does not appear the same in all mixt Bodies;
some of them being Resoluble into more differing substances than
three, and Others not being Resoluble into so many as three.

And Since, Lastly, those very substances that are thus separated are
not for the most part pure and Elementary bodies, but new kinds of
mixts;

Since, I say, these things are so, I hope you will allow me to inferr,
that the Vulgar Experiments (I might perchance have Added, the
Arguments too) wont to be Alledg'd by Chymists to prove, that their
three Hypostatical Principles do adequately compose all mixt Bodies,
are not so demonstrative as to reduce a wary Person to acquiesce in
their Doctrine, which, till they Explain and prove it better, will by
its perplexing darkness be more apt to puzzle then satisfy considering
men, and will to them appear incumbred with no small Difficulties.

And from what has been hitherto deduc'd (continues _Carneades_) we may
Learn, what to Judge of the common Practice of those Chymists, who
because they have found that Diverse compound Bodies (for it will not
hold in All) can be resolv'd into, or rather can be brought to afford
two or three differing Substances more then the Soot and Ashes,
whereinto the naked fire commonly divides them in our Chymnies, cry up
their own Sect for the Invention of a New Philosophy, some of them, as
_Helmont, &c._ styling themselves Philosophers by the Fire; and the
most part not only ascribing, but as far as in them lies, engrossing
to those of their Sect the Title of PHILOSOPHERS.

But alas, how narrow is this Philosophy, that reaches but to some of
those compound Bodies, which we find but upon, or in the crust or
outside of our terrestrial Globe, which is it self but a point in
comparison of the vast extended Universe, of whose other and greater
parts the Doctrine of the _Tria Prima_ does not give us an Account!
For what does it teach us, either of the Nature of the Sun, which
Astronomers affirme to be eight-score and odd times bigger then the
whole Earth? or of that of those numerous fixt Starrs, which, for
ought we know, would very few, if any of them, appear inferiour in
bulke and brightness to the Sun, if they were as neer us as He? What
does the knowing that Salt, sulphur and Mercury, are the Principles of
Mixt Bodies, informe us of the Nature of that vast, fluid, and
AEtherial Substance, that seemes to make up the interstellar, and
consequently much the greatest part of the World? for as for the
opinion commonly ascrib'd to _Paracelsus_, as if he would have not
only the four Peripatetick Elements, but even the Celestial parts of
the Universe to consist of his three Principles, since the modern
Chymists themselves have not thought so groundless a conceit worth
their owning, I shall not think it Worth my confuting.

But I should perchance forgive the Hypothesis I have been all this
while examining, if, though it reaches but to a very little part of
the World, it did at least give us a satisfactory account of those
things to which 'tis said to reach. But I find not, that it gives us
any other then a very imperfect information even about mixt Bodies
themselves: For how will the knowledge of the _Tria Prima_ discover to
us the Reason, why the Loadstone drawes a Needle and disposes it to
respect the Poles, and yet seldom precisely points at them? how will
this Hypothesis teach Us how a Chick is formed in the Egge, or how the
Seminal Principles of Mint, Pompions, and other Vegitables, that I
mention'd to You above, can fashion Water into Various Plants, each of
them endow'd with its peculiar and determinate shape, and with divers
specifick and discriminating Qualities? How does this Hypothesis shew
us, how much Salt, how much Sulphur, and how much Mercury must be
taken to make a Chick or a Pompion? and if We know that, what
Principle is it, that manages these Ingredients, and contrives (for
instance) such Liquors as the White and Yelk of an Egge into such a
variety of Textures as is requisite to fashion the Bones, Veines,
Arteries, Nerves, Tendons, Feathers, Blood, and other parts of a
Chick; and not only to fashion each Limbe, but to connect them
altogether, after that manner that is most congruous to the perfection
of the Animal which is to Consist of Them? For to say, that some more
fine and subtile part of either or all the Hypostatical Principles is
the Director in all this business, and the Architect of all this
Elaborate structure, is to give one occasion to demand again, what
proportion and way of mixture of the _Tria Prima_ afforded this
_Architectonick_ Spirit, and what Agent made so skilful and happy a
mixture? And the Answer to this Question, if the Chymists will keep
themselves within their three Principles, will be lyable to the same
Inconvenience, that the Answer to the former was. And if it were not
to intrench upon the Theame of a Friend of ours here present, I could
easily prosecute the Imperfections of the Vulgar Chymists Philosophy,
and shew you, that by going about to explicate by their three
Principles, I say not, all the abstruse Properties of mixt Bodies, but
even such Obvious and more familiar _Phaenomena_ as _Fluidity_ and
_Firmness_, The Colours and Figures of Stones, Minerals, and other
compound Bodies, The Nutrition of either Plants or Animals, the
Gravity of Gold or Quicksilver compar'd with Wine or Spirit of Wine;
By attempting, I say, to render a reason of these (to omit a thousand
others as difficult to account for) from any proportion of the three
simple Ingredients, Chymists will be much more likely to discredit
themselves and their _Hypothesis_, then satisfy an intelligent
Inquirer after Truth.

But (interposes _Eleutherus_) [Transcriber's Note: Eleutherius] This
Objection seems no more then may be made against the four Peripatetick
Elements. And indeed almost against any other _Hypothesis_, that
pretends by any Determinate Number of Material Ingredients to render a
reason of the _Phaenomena_ of Nature. And as for the use of the
Chymical Doctrine of the three Principles, I suppose you need not be
told by me, that The great Champion of it, The Learned _Sennertus_,[23]
assignes this noble use of the _Tria Prima_, That from Them, as the
neerest and most Proper Principles, may be Deduc'd and Demonstrated
the Properties which are in Mixt Bodies, and which cannot be
Proximately (as They speak) deduc'd from the Elements. And This, sayes
he, is chiefly Apparent, when we Inquire into the Properties and
Faculties of Medecines. And I know (continues _Eleutherius_) That the
Person You have assum'd, of an Opponent of the _Hermetick Doctrine_,
will not so far prevaile against your Native and wonted Equity, as To
keep You from acknowledging that Philosophy is much beholden to the
Notions and Discoveries of Chymists.

[Footnote 23: _Senn. de Cons. & Dissen. p. 165._]

If the Chymists You speak of (Replyes _Carneades_) had been so modest,
or so Discreet, as to propose their Opinion of the _Tria Prima_, but
as a Notion useful among Others, to increase Humane knowledge, they
had deserv'd more of our thanks; and less of our Opposition; but since
the Thing that they pretend is not so much to contribute a Notion
toward the Improvement of Philosophy, as to make this Notion attended
[Errata: (attended] by a few lesse considerable ones) pass for a New
Philosophy itself. Nay, since they boast so much of this phancie of
theirs, that the famous _Quercetanus_ scruples not to write, that if
his most certain Doctrine of the three Principles were sufficiently
Learned, Examin'd, and Cultivated, it would easily Dispel all the
Darkness that benights our minds, and bring in a Clear Light, that
would remove all Difficulties. This School affording Theorems and
Axiomes irrefragable, and to be admitted without Dispute by impartial
Judges; and so useful withal, as to exempt us from the necessity of
having recourse, for want of the knowledg of causes, to that Sanctuary
of the igorant [Transcriber's Note: ignorant], Occult Qualities;
since, I say, this Domestick Notion of the Chymists is so much
overvalued by them, I cannot think it unfit, they should be made
sensible of their mistake; and be admonish'd to take in more fruitful
and comprehensive Principles, if they mean to give us an account of
the _Phaenomena_ of Nature; and not confine themselves and (as far as
they can) others to such narrow Principles, as I fear will scarce
inable them to give an account (I mean an intelligible one) of the
tenth part (I say not) of all the _Phaenomena_ of Nature; but even of
all such as by the _Leucippian_ or some of the other sorts of
Principles may be plausibly enough explicated. And though I be not
unwilling to grant, that the incompetency I impute to the Chymical
_Hypothesis_ is but the same which may be Objected against that of the
four Elements, and divers other Doctrines that have been maintain'd by
Learned men; yet since 'tis the Chymical _Hypothesis_ only which I am
now examining, I see not why, if what I impute to it be a real
inconvenience, either it should cease to be so, or I should scruple to
object it, because either Theories are lyable thereunto, as well as
the Hermetical. For I know not why a Truth should be thought lesse a
Truth for the being fit to overthrow variety of Errors.

I am oblig'd to You (continues _Carneades_, a little smiling) for the
favourable Opinion You are pleas'd to express of my Equity, if there
be no design in it. But I need not be tempted by an Artifice, or
invited by a Complement, to acknowledge the great service that the
Labours of Chymists have done the Lovers of useful Learning; nor even
on this occasion shall their Arrogance hinder my Gratitude. But since
we are as well examining to [Errata: delete "to"] the truth of their
Doctrine as the merit of their industry, I must in order to the
investigation of the first, continue a reply, to talk at the rate of
the part I have assum'd; And tell you, that when I acknowledg the
usefulness of the Labours of _Spagyrists_ to Natural Philosophy, I do
it upon the score of their experiments, not upon that of Their
Speculations; for it seems to me, that their Writings, as their
Furnaces, afford as well smoke as light; and do little lesse obscure
some subjects, then they illustrate others. And though I am unwilling
to deny, that 'tis difficult for a man to be an Accomplisht
Naturalist, that is a stranger to Chymistry, yet I look upon the
common Operations and practices of Chymists, almost as I do on the
Letters of the Alphabet, without whose knowledge 'tis very hard for a
man to become a Philosopher; and yet that knowledge is very far from
being sufficient to make him One.

But (sayes _Carneades_, resuming a more serious Look) to consider a
little more particularly what you alledg in favour of the Chymical
Doctrine of the _Tria Prima_, though I shall readily acknowledge it
not to be unuseful, and that the Divisers [Errata: devisers] and
Embracers of it have done the Common-Wealth of Learning some service,
by helping to destroy that excessive esteem, or rather veneration,
wherewith the Doctrine of the four Elements was almost as generally as
undeservedly entertain'd; yet what has been alledg'd concerning the
usefulness of the _Tria Prima_, seems to me liable to no contemptible
Difficulties.

And first, as for the very way of Probation, which the more Learned
and more Sober Champions of the Chymical cause employ to evince the
Chymical Principles in Mixt Bodies, it seems to me to be farr enough
from being convincing. This grand and leading Argument, your
_Sennertus_ Himself, who layes Great weight upon it, and tells us,
that the most Learned Philosophers employ this way of Reasoning to
prove the most important things, proposes thus: _Ubicunque_ (sayes he)
_pluribus eaedem affectiones & qualitates insunt, per commune quoddam
Principium insint necesse est, sicut omnia sunt Gravia propter terram,
calida propter Ignem. At Colores, Odores, Sapores, esse_ [Greek:
phlogiston] _& similia alia, mineralibus, Metallis, Gemmis, Lapidibus,
Plantis, Animalibus insunt. Ergo per commune aliquod principium, &
subiectum, insunt. At tale principium non sunt Elementa. Nullam enim
habent ad tales qualitates producendas potentiam. Ergo alia principia,
unde fluant, inquirenda sunt._

In the Recital of this Argument, (sayes _Carneades_) I therefore
thought fit to retain the Language wherein the Author proposes it,
that I might also retain the propriety of some Latine Termes, to which
I do not readily remember any that fully answer in English. But as for
the Argumentation it self, 'tis built upon a precarious supposition,
that seems to me neither Demonstrable nor true; for, how does it
appear, that where the same Quality is to be met with in many Bodies,
it must belong to them upon the Account of some one Body whereof they
all partake? (For that the Major of our Authors Argument is to be
Understood of the Material Ingredients of bodies, appears by the
Instances of Earth and Fire he annexes to explain it.) For to begin
with that very Example which he is pleas'd to alledge for himself; how
can he prove, that the Gravity of all Bodies proceeds from what they
participate of the Element of Earth? Since we see, that not only
common Water, but the more pure Distill'd Rain Water is heavy; and
Quicksilver is much heavier than Earth it self; though none of my
Adversaries has yet prov'd, that it contains any of that Element. And
I the Rather make use of this Example of Quicksilver, because I see
not how the Assertors of the Elements will give any better Account of
it then the Chymists. For if it be demanded how it comes to be Fluid,
they will answer, that it participates much of the Nature of Water.
And indeed, according to them, Water may be the Predominant Element
in it, since we see, that several Bodies which by Distillation afford
Liquors that weigh more then their _Caput Mortuum_ do not yet consist
of Liquor enough to be Fluid. Yet if it be demanded how Quicksilver
comes to be so heavy, then 'tis reply'd, that 'tis by reason of the
Earth that abounds in it; but since, according to them, it must
consist also of air, and partly of Fire, which they affirm to be light
Elements, how comes it that it should be so much heavier then Earth of
the same bulk, though to fill up the porosities and other Cavities it
be made up into a mass or paste with Water, which it self they allow
to be a heavy Element. But to returne to our _Spagyrists_, we see that
Chymical Oyles and fixt Salts, though never so exquisitely purify'd
and freed from terrestrial parts, do yet remain ponderous enough. And
Experience has inform'd me, that a pound, for instance, of some of the
heaviest Woods, as _Guajacum_ that will sink in Water, being burnt to
Ashes will yield a much less weight of them (whereof I found but a
small part to be Alcalyzate) then much lighter Vegetables: As also
that the black Charcoal of it will not sink as did the wood, but swim;
which argues that the Differing Gravity of Bodies proceeds chiefly
from their particular Texture, as is manifest in Gold, the closest and
Compactest of Bodies, which is many times heavier then we can possibly
make any parcell of Earth of the same Bulk. I will not examine, what
may be argu'd touching the Gravity or Quality Analagous thereunto, of
even Celestial bodies, from the motion of the spots about the Sun, d
[Errata: and] from the appearing equality of the suppos'd Seas in the
Moon; nor consider how little those _Phaemonea_ [Transcriber's Note:
Phaenomena] would agree with what _Sennertus_ presumes concerning
Gravity. But further to invalidate his supposition, I shall demand,
upon what Chymical Principle Fluidity depends? And yet Fluidity is,
two or three perhaps excepted, the most diffused quality of the
universe, and far more General then almost any other of those that are
to be met with in any of the Chymicall Principles, or _Aristotelian_
Elements; since not only the Air, but that vast expansion we call
Heaven, in comparison of which our Terrestrial Globe (supposing it
were all Solid) is but a point; and perhaps to [Errata: too] the Sun
and the fixt Stars are fluid bodies. I demand also, from which of the
Chymical Principles Motion flowes; which yet is an affection of matter
much more General then any that can be deduc'd from any of the three
Chymical Principles. I might ask the like Question concerning Light,
which is not only to be found in the Kindl'd Sulphur of mixt Bodis
[Transcriber's Note: Bodies], but (not to mention those sorts of
rotten Woods, and rotten Fish that shine in the Dark) in the tails of
living Glow-wormes, and in the Vast bodies of the Sun and Stars. I
would gladly also know, in which of the three Principles the Quality,
we call Sound, resides as in its proper Subject; since either Oyl
falling upon Oyle, or Spirit upon Spirit, or Salt upon Salt, in a
great quantity, and from a considerable height, will make a noise, or
if you please, create a sound, and (that the objection may reach the
_Aristotelians_) so will also water upon water, and Earth upon Earth.
And I could name other qualities to be met within divers bodies, of
which I suppose my Adversaries will not in haste assign any Subject,
upon whose Account it must needs be, that the quality belongs to all
the other several bodies.

And, before I proceed any further, I must here invite you to compare
the supposition we are examining, with some other of the Chymical
Tenents. For, first they do in effect teach that more then one quality
may belong to, and be deduc'd from, one Principle. For, they ascribe
to Salt Tasts, and the power of Coagulation; to sulphur, as well
Odours as inflamableness; And some of them ascribe to Mercury,
Colours; as all of them do effumability, as they speak. And on the
other side, it is evident that Volatility belongs in common to all the
three Principles, and to Water too. For 'tis manifest, that Chymical
Oyles are Volatile; That also divers Salts Emerging, upon the Analysis
of many Concretes, are very Volatile, is plain from the figitiveness
[Errata: fugitivenesse] of Salt, of Harts-horne, flesh, &c. ascending
in the Distillation of those bodies. How easily water may be made to
ascend in Vapours, there is scarce any body that has not observ'd. And
as for what they call the Mercuriall Principle of bodies, that is so
apt to be rais'd in the form of Steam, that _Paracelsus_ and others
define it by that aptness to fly up; so that (to draw that inference
by the way) it seems not that Chymists have been accurate in their
Doctrine of qualities, and their respective Principles, since they
both derive several qualities from the same Principle, and must
ascribe the same quality to almost all their Principles and other
bodies besides. And thus much for the first thing taken for granted,
without sufficient proof, by your _Sennertus_: And to add that upon
the Bye (continues _Carneades_) we may hence learn what to judge of
the way of Argumentation, which that fierce Champion of the
_Aristotelians_ against the Chymists, _Anthonius Guntherus
Billichius_[24] employes, where he pretends to prove against
_Beguinus_, that not only the four Elements do immediately concur to
Constitute every mixt body, and are both present in it, and obtainable
from it upon its Dissolution; but that in the _Tria Prima_ themselves,
whereinto Chymists are wont to resolve mixt Bodies, each of them
clearly discovers it self to consist of four Elements. The
Ratiocination it self (pursues _Carneades_) being somewhat unusual, I
did the other Day Transcribe it, and (sayes He, pulling a Paper out of
his Pocket) it is this. _Ordiamur, cum Beguino, a ligno viridi, quod
si concremetur, videbis in sudore Aquam, in fumo Aerem, in flamma &
Prunis Ignem, Terram in cineribus: Quod si Beguino placuerit ex eo
colligere humidum aquosum, cohibere humidum oleaginosum, extrahere ex
cineribus salem; Ego ipsi in unoquoque horum seorsim quatuor Elementa
ad oculum demonstrabo, eodem artificio quo in ligno viridi ea
demonstravi. Humorem aquosum admovebo Igni. Ipse Aquam Ebullire
videbit, in Vapore Aerem conspiciet, Ignem sentiet in aestu, plus minus
Terrae in sedimento apparebit. Humor porro Oleaginosus aquam humiditate
& fluiditate per se, accensus vero Ignem flamma prodit, fumo Aerem,
fuligine, nidore & amurca terram. Salem denique ipse Beguinus siccum
vocat & Terrestrem, qui tamen nec fusus Aquam, nec caustica vi ignem
celare potest; ignis vero Violentia in halitus versus nec ab Aere se
alienum esse demonstrat; Idem de Lacte, de Ovis, de semine Lini, de
Garyophyllis, de Nitro, de sale Marino, denique de Antimonio, quod
fuit de Ligno viridi Judicium; eadem de illorum partibus, quas_
Beguinus _adducit, sententia, quae de viridis ligni humore aquoso, quae
de liquore ejusdem oleoso, quae de sale fuit._

[Footnote 24: _In Thessalo redivivo. Cap. 10. pag. 73. & 74._]

This bold Discourse (resumes _Carneades_, putting up again his Paper,)
I think it were not very difficult to confute, if his Arguments were
as considerable as our time will probably prove short for the
remaining and more necessary Part of my Discourse; wherefore referring
You for an Answer to what was said concerning the Dissipated Parts of
a burnt piece of green Wood, to what I told _Themistius_ on the like
occasion, I might easily shew You, how sleightly and superficially our
_Guntherus_ talks of the dividing the flame of Green Wood into his
four Elements; _When_ he makes that vapour to be air, which being
caught in Glasses and condens'd, presently discovers it self to have
been but an Aggregate of innumerable very minute drops of Liquor; and
_When_ he would prove the Phlegmes being compos'd of Fire by that Heat
which is adventitious to the Liquor, and ceases upon the absence of
what produc'd it (whether that be an Agitation proceeding from the
motion of the External Fire, or the presence of a Multitude of igneous
Atomes pervading the pores of the Vessel, and nimbly permeating the
whole Body of the Water) I might, I say, urge these and divers other
Weaknesses of His Discourse. But I will rather take Notice of what is
more pertinent to the Occasion of this Digression, namely, that Taking
it for Granted, that Fluidity (with which he unwarily seems to
confound Humidity) must proceed from the Element of Water, he makes a
Chymical Oyle to Consist of that Elementary Liquor; and yet in the
very next Words proves, that it consists also of Fire, by its
Inflamability; not remembring that exquisitely pure Spirit of Wine is
both more Fluid then Water it self, and yet will Flame all away
