except "dead on," for then the part round the axis would not get
ground;  this inoperative portion of the rotating tool must therefore
be allowed to distribute its incapable efforts evenly over the nest of
lenses.

Polishing is accomplished by means of the grinding tool, coated with
paper and rouge as before; or the tool may be coated with very thin
cloth and used with rouge as before--in this case the polishing goes
on fastest when the surface of the cloth is distinctly damp.  In
working by this method, each grade of emery need only be applied from
five to ten minutes.  The glass does not appear to get scratched when
the emery is changed, provided everything is well washed.  A good
polish may be got in an hour.  The lathe is run as for turning brass
of the same diameter as the tool.

One side of the lenses being thus prepared, they are reversed, and the
process gone through for the other side in a precisely similar manner.
[Footnote: Unless the radius of curvature is very short and the lenses
also convex, there is no necessity to recess the facets, provided hard
pitch is used as the cement.  See note on hard pitch.]  To save
trouble, it is usual, to make such lenses of equal curvature on both
faces;  but of course this is a matter of taste.

Fig.  56.

For very common work, bits of good plate glass are employed, and the
manufacturer's surface treated as flat (Fig.  56).  In this way
plano-convex lenses are easily and cheaply made.  Finally the lenses
have to be centred, an essential operation in this case.  This is
easily done by the reflection method--the edge being turned off by
the file and kerosene and the centering cement being used in making
the preliminary adjustment on the chuck.  I presume a lens made in
this way is worth about a shilling, so that laboratory manufacture is
not very remunerative.  Fig.  56 shows the method of mounting small
lenses for lathe grinding, when only one lens is required.  The tool
is generally rotated in the lathe and the lens held against it.

Sec. 65.  Preparing Small Mirrors for Galvanometers.

To get good mirrors for galvanometers, I have found the best plan is
to grind and polish a large number together, on a disc perhaps 8 or 10
inches in diameter.  I was led to this after inspecting and rejecting
four ounces of microscope cover slips, a most wearisome process.  That
regular cover slips should be few and far between is not unlikely,
seeing that they are made (by one eminent firm at least) simply by
"pot" blowing a huge thin bulb, and then smashing it on the floor and
selecting the fragments.  As in the case of large mirrors, it is of
course only necessary to grind one side of the glass, theoretically at
all events.  The objections to this course are:

(1) A silver surface cannot, in my experience, be polished externally
(on a minute object like a cover slip) to be anything like so bright
as the silver surface next the glass;  and,

(2) if one side only is ground, it will be found that the little
mirror hopelessly loses its figure directly it is detached from the
support on which it has been worked.  Consequently, I recommend that
these small mirrors should be ground and polished on both
sides--enough may be made at one operation to last for a very long time.

A slate back is prepared of the same radius of curvature as it is
desired to impart to the mirrors.  Bits of thin sheet glass are then
ground circular as described in the last section and cemented to this
surface by the smallest quantity of clean archangel pitch, allowed to
cool slowly and even to rest for a day before the work is proceeded
with.  The whole surface is then ground and polished as before.

The mirrors are now reversed, when they ought to nearly fit the tool
(assuming that flats are being made, and the fellow tool in all other
cases), and are recemented by pitch to the appropriate backing ground,
and polished.  If very excellent results are required, these processes
may be preceded by a preliminary rough grinding of one surface, so
that the little discs will "sit" exactly on the tool surface, and not
run the risk of being strained by capillary forces in the pitch.  We
have always found this necessary for really good results.

On removing such mirrors from the backing, they generally, more or
less lose their figure, becoming (in general fairly uniformly) more
concave or convex.  About 5 per cent of the mirrors thus prepared will
be found almost perfect if the work has been well done, and the rest
will probably be very fair, unless the diameter is very large as
compared with the thickness.  The best way of grinding and polishing
such large surfaces (nests 10 inches in diameter) is on a grinding
machine, such as will be described below.  The polishing is best done
by means of paper, as before described.

Having occasion to require hitherto unapproached lightness and optical
accuracy in such mirrors, I got my assistant to try making them of
fused quartz, slices being cut by a diamond wheel from a rod of that
material.  Chips of natural quartz were also obtained from broken
"pebble" spectacles, and these were worked at the same time.  The
resulting mirrors were certainly superior to the best we could make
from glass, but the labour of grinding was greater, and the labour of
polishing less, than in the latter case.  The pebble fragments gave
practically as good mirrors as the fused slices.  For the future it
will be better always to make galvanometer mirrors from quartz
crystals.  These may be easily sliced, as will be described in Sec. 74.
The slices are dressed on a grindstone according to instructions
already given for small lenses.

The silvering of these mirrors is a point of great importance.  After
trying nearly every formula published, we have settled down to the
following.

A solution of pure crystallised nitrate of silver in distilled water
is made up to a strength of 125 grams of the salt per litre.  This
forms the stock solution and is kept in a dark bottle.

Let the volume of silvering liquor required in any operation be
denoted by 4 v.  The liquor is prepared as follows:

I.  Measure out a volume v of the stock solution of silver nitrate,
and calculate the weight of salt which it contains;  let this be w.
In another vessel dissolve pure Rochelle salt to the amount of 2.6 w,
and make up the solution to the volume v.  These two solutions are to
be mixed together at a temperature of 55 deg. C, the vessels with their
contents being heated to this temperature on the water bath.  After
mixing the liquids the temperature is to be kept approximately
constant for five minutes, after which the liquor may be cooled.  The
white precipitate which first forms will become gray or black and very
dense as the liquid cools.  If it does not, the liquor must be
reheated to 55 deg. C, and kept at that temperature for a few minutes and
then again allowed to cool.  The solution is in good order when all
the precipitate is dense and gray or black and the liquor clear.  The
blacker and denser the precipitate the better is the solution.  The
liquor is decanted and filtered from the precipitate and brought up to
the volume 2 v by addition of some of the wash water.

II.  Measure out a volume 0.118 v of the stock solution into a
separate vessel, and add to it a 5 per cent solution of ammonium
hydrate, with proper precautions, so that the precipitate at first
formed is all but redissolved after vigorous shaking.  It is very
important that this condition should be exactly attained.  Therefore
add the latter part of the ammonia very carefully.  Make up the volume
to 2 v.

Mix the solutions I.  and II.  in a separate vessel and pour the
mixture into the depositing vessel.  The surface to be silvered should
face downwards, and lie just beneath the free surface of the liquid.
Bubbles must of course be removed.

The silver deposit obtained in this manner is exceedingly white and,
bright on the surface next to the glass, but the back is mat and
requires polishing.

The detail of the process described above was worked out in my
laboratory by Mr. A. Pollock, to whom my thanks are due.

This process gives good deposits when the solutions are freshly
prepared, but the ammonia solution will not keep; The surfaces to be
silvered require to be absolutely clean.  The process is assisted by a
summer temperature, say 70 deg. Fahr, and possibly by the action of
light.  Six or seven hours at least are required for a good deposit; a
good plan is to leave the mirrors in the bath all night.  On removal
from the bath the mirrors require to be well washed, and allowed to
dry thoroughly in sun heat for several hours before they are touched.

Care should be taken not to pull the mirrors out of shape when they
are mounted for the bath.  A single drop of varnish or paint (a mere
speck) on the centre will suffice to hold them. The back of the
deposit requires to be varnished or painted as a rule to preserve the
silver.  All paints and varnishes thus applied tend to spoil the
figure by expanding or contracting.  On the whole, I think boiled
linseed oil and white or red lead--white or red paint in fact--is
less deleterious than other things I have tried.  Shellac varnish is
the worst.

Of course, the best mirror can be easily spoiled by bad mounting.  I
have tried a great number of methods and can recommend as fairly
successful the following:-  A little pure white lead, i.e.  bought as
pure as a chemical--not as a paint--is mixed with an equal quantity
of red lead and made into a paste with a little linseed oil.  I say a
paste, not putty.  A trace of this is then worked on to the back of
the mirror at the centre as nearly as may be, and to this is attached
the support.  The only objection to this is that nearly a week is
required for the paste to set.  If people must use shellac let it be
remembered that it will go on changing its shape for months after it
has cooled (whether it has been dissolved in alcohol or not).

Sec. 66.  Preparation of Large Mirrors or Lenses for Telescopes.

So much has been written on this subject by astronomers, generally in
the English Mechanic and in the Philosophical Transactions for 1840,
that it might be thought nothing could be added.  I will only say here
that the processes already described apply perfectly to this case; but
of course I only refer to silver on glass mirrors.  For any size over
6 inches in diameter, the process of grinding and polishing by hand,
particularly the latter, will probably be found to involve too much
labour, and a machine will be required.  A description of a
modification of Mr. Nasmyth's machine--as made by my assistant, Mr.
Cook--will be found below.

There is no difficulty in constructing or working such a machine, and
considered as an all round appliance, it possesses solid advantages
over the simple double pulley and crank arrangement, which, however,
from its simplicity deserves a note.  Two pulleys, A and B, of about
18 inches diameter by 4 inches on the face, are arranged to rotate
about vertical axes, and belted together.  The shaft of one of these
pulleys is driven by a belt in any convenient manner.  Each pulley is
provided on its upper surface with a crank of adjustable length
carrying a vertical crank-pin.

Each crank-pin passes through a 3"X 2" wooden rod, say 3' 6" long, and
these rods are pinned together at their farther extremities, and this
pin carries the grinding or polishing tool, or rather engages loosely
with the back of this tool which lies below the rod.  It is clear that
if the pulleys are of commensurable diameters, and are rigidly
connected--say by belting which neither stretches nor slips--the
polishing tool will describe a closed curve.  If, however, the belt is
arranged to slip slightly, or if the pulleys are of incommensurable
diameters, the curve traced out by the grinding tool will be very
complex, and in the case of the ratio of the diameters being
incommensurable, will always remain open;  for polishing purposes the
consummation to be wished.

Mirror surfaces are ground spherical, the reduction to parabolic form
being attained in the process of polishing.  A very interesting
account of the practice of dealing with very large lenses will be
found in Nature, May 1886, or the Journal of the Society of Arts, same
date (I presume), by Sir Howard Grubb.  The author considers that the
final adjustment of surfaces by "figuring"--of which more anon--is
an art which cannot be learned by inspection, any more than a man
could learn to paint by watching an artist.  This is, no doubt, the
case to some extent;  still, a person wishing to learn how to figure a
lens could not do better than take Sir Howard at his word, and spend a
month at his works.  Meanwhile the following remarks must suffice; it
is not likely that anybody to whom these notes will be of service
would embark on such large work as is contemplated by Sir Howard
Grubb.

Fig. 57.

Description of Polishing Machine.  Power is applied through belting to
the speed cone A.  By means of a bevel pinion rotation is communicated
to the wheel D, which is of solid metal and carries a T-slot, C.  A
pedestal forming a crank-pin can be clamped so as to have any desired
radius of motion by the screw E.  A train of wheels E F G H K
(ordinary cast lathe change wheels) communicate any desired ratio of
motion to the tool-holder, which simply consists of two pins
projecting vertically downwards from the spokes of wheel K.

These pins form a fork, and each prong engages in a corresponding hole
in the back of the slate-grinding tool (not shown in figure).  The
connection with the tool is purposely loose.  The wheel E, of course,
cannot rotate about the crank-pin D.  Provision for changing the ratio
of tool rotation is achieved by mounting the wheels composing the
train on pins capable of sliding along a long slot in the bar
supporting them. The farther end of this bar is caused to oscillate
to and fro very slowly by means of an additional crank-pin S and
crank-shaft, the projecting face of the bed-plate W being placed
so as to allow V to slide about easily and smoothly.
Motion is communicated to this part of the system by means of
gears at 0 and P, and a belt working from P to Q.
Thus the vertical shaft R is set in motion and
communicates by gears with S.  A pulley placed on the axle of the
wheel carrying the crank-pin S gives a slow rotation to the work which
is mounted on the table M. A small but important feature is the tray L
below the gear K.  This prevents dirt falling from the teeth of the
wheel on to the work.  The motion of S is of course very much less
than of B--say 100 times less.  The work can be conveniently adjusted
as to height by means of the screw N.

The machine must be on a steady foundation, and in a place as free
from dust as possible.  Though it looks complicated it is quite
straight-forward to build and to operate.

It is explained in Lord Rayleigh's article on Optics in the
Encyclopaedia Britannica that a very minute change in the form of the
curvature of the surface of a lens will make a large difference in the
spherical aberration.  This is to be expected, seeing that spherical
aberration is a phenomenon of a differential sort, i.e.  a measure of
the difference between the curvature actually attained, and the
theoretical curvature at each point of the lens, for given positions
of point and image.  Sir H.  Grubb gives an illustration of the
minuteness of the abrasion required in passing from a curve of one
sort to a curve of another, say from a spherical to a parabolic curve,
consequently the process of figuring by the slow action of a polishing
tool becomes quite intelligible.  In making a large mirror or lens all
the processes hitherto described under grinding and polishing, etc,
have to be gone through and in the manner described, and when all this
is accomplished the final process of correcting to test commences.
This process is called figuring.

Sec. 67.  Of the actual operation of this process I have no personal
knowledge, and the following brief notes are drawn from the article by
Sir H.  Grubb, from my assistant's (Mr. Cook) experience, and from a
small work On the Adjustment and Testing of Telescopic Objectives, by
T.  Cook and Sons, Buckingham Works, York (printed by Ben Johnson and
Co, Micklegate, York).  This work has excellent photographs of the
interference rings of star images corresponding to various defects.
It must be understood that the following is a mere sketch.  The art
will probably hardly ever be required in laboratory practice, and
those who wish to construct large telescopes should not be above
looking up the references.

The process is naturally divided for treatment into two parts.

(1) The detection of errors, and the cause of these errors.

(2) The application of a remedy.

(1) A lens, being mounted with its final adjustments, is turned on to
a star, which must not be too bright, and should be fairly overhead.
The following appearances may be noted:-

A.  In focus, the star appears as a small disc with one or two rings
round it; inside and outside of the focus the rings increase in
number, are round, concentric with the disc, and the bright and dark
rings are apparently equally wide.  The appearance inside the focus
exactly resembles that outside when allowance is made for chromatic
effects.  Conclusion:  objective good, and correctly mounted.

B.  The rings round the star in focus are not circular, nor is the
star at the centre of the system. In bad cases the fringes are seen at
one side only.  Effects exaggerated outside and inside the focus.
Conclusion:  the lens is astigmatic, or the objective is not adjusted
to be co-axial with the eyepiece.

C.  When in focus the central disc is surrounded by an intermittent
diffraction pattern, i.e.  for instance the system of rings may appear
along, and near, three or more radii.  If these shift when the points
of support of the lens are shifted, flexure may be suspected.

D.  On observing inside and outside the focus, the rings are not
equally bright and dark.  This may be due to uncorrected spherical
aberration, particularly to a fault known as "zonal aberration," where
different zones of the lens have different foci, but each zone has a
definite focus.

E.  Irregular diffraction fringes point to bad annealing of the glass.
This may be checked by an examination of the lens in polarised light.

F.  If the disc appear blurred and coloured, however the focus be
adjusted, incomplete correction for chromatic aberration is inferred.
If in addition the colouring is unsymmetrical (in an extreme case the
star disc is drawn out to a coloured band), want of centering is to be
inferred.  This will also show itself by the interference fringes
having the characteristics described in C.

(2) The following steps may be taken in applying a remedy:

A.  The adjusting screws of the cell mounting the object glass may
be worked until the best result is attained;  this requires great
care and patience.  Any errors left over are to be attributed to
other causes than the want of collinearity of the axes of object
glass and eyepiece.

B.  Astigmatism is detected by rotating the object glass or object
glass cell.  If the oval fringes still persist and the longer axis
follows the lens, astigmatism may be inferred.  Similarly, by rotating
one lens on the other, astigmatism, or want of centering (quite a
