The evidence, however, does not carry us farther than the probability of
union by complicated groups and of large dimensions; for not only is the
lignone isolated in condensed and non-hydroxylated forms, but the
cellulose also is not hydrated or hydrolysed further than in the ratio
3C_{6}H_{10}O_{5}.H_{2}O. It is probable, therefore, that the water
combining with the residues at the moment of their resolution is
relatively small.

Lastly, we have to remember, when dealing with the statistical results
of the reactions to be described, that the approximate proportions per
cent. of the constituent groups are:

     Cellulose alpha  65
          "    beta   15  =  100 lignocellulose.
     Lignone                  20

~Jute Benzoates.~--In preparing the jute for treatment it was boiled in
alkaline solution (1 per cent. NaOH), washed with water and dilute acid,
again washed, dried, and weighed.

In the ester reaction the reagents were employed in the proportion
C_{12}H_{18}O_{9} : 3NaOH : 2C_{6}H_{5}COCl. A series of quantitative
experiments gave yields of 126-130 p.ct. of benzoate [calculated for
monobenzoate 134 p.ct.].

The results were confirmed by ultimate analysis. The monobenzoate
therefore represents a maximum, and this molecular proportion is
one-half of that observed with the normal cellulose, calculated to the
same unit.

_Localisation of Benzoyl Group._--The entrance of the ester group
affects the typical colour reactions of the lignocellulose, which are
fainter. The ferric ferricyanide reaction almost disappears. The lignone
group is unaffected, and combines with chlorine as in the original. The
lignone chloride is removed by sodium sulphite solution, and the residue
is a _cellulose benzoate_. The loss of weight due to the elimination of
the lignone was 12.7 p.ct. Calculating per 100 of the original
lignocellulose this becomes 16. These statistics further confirm the
localisation of the benzoyl group in the cellulose residue. It is to be
noted that the presence of the benzoyl group renders the cellulose more
resistant to hydrolytic actions. Thus, to bring out this fact more
prominently, we may calculate the yield of residual cellulose benzoate
p.ct. of original jute, and we find it 109 p.ct. Taking a maximum
proportion for original cellulose--viz. 85--this benzoate represents a
yield of 129 p.ct., as against the theoretical for a monobenzoate, 132
p.ct.

_Furfural Numbers._--The percentage of furfural obtained by boiling with
HCl of 1.06 sp.gr. was 3.02 and 3.29 in separate determinations.
Calculating to the original lignocellulose, the percentage, 4.21,
indicates a considerable loss of the furfural-yielding constituent. The
effect was also apparent in the cellulose (benzoate) isolated by
chlorination &c., the percentage being 1.39 p.ct., and calculated to the
original jute benzoate 1.59 p.ct. Under the conditions adopted in
dissolving away the chlorinated lignone the original non-benzoated
lignocellulose would have yielded a cellulose giving 6 to 7 p.ct.
furfural.

Since the benzoyl group is hardly calculated to produce a constitutional
change affecting the furfural constants, it was necessary to examine the
effect of the preliminary alkaline treatment, and the change in the
furfuroid group was in fact localised in this reaction. It was found
that, on washing the alkali from the mercerised jute, and further
purifying the residue, this latter yielded only 4.2 p.ct. furfural [3.4
p.ct. on original fibre]. The alkaline solution and washings were
acidified and distilled from 10 p.ct. HCl, yielding an additional 3.6
p.ct. calculated to the original lignocellulose. By treatment with the
concentrated alkali, therefore, the furfuroid of the original
lignocellulose undergoes little change, but is selectively dissolved.
This point is under further investigation.

(p. 132) ~Acetylation of Lignocelluloses.~--Acetates are readily formed by
boiling the lignocelluloses with acetic anhydride. The derivatives
obtained from jute are only generally mentioned in the 1st edition (p.
132). A further study of the reactions in regard to special points has
led to some more definite results. The _yields_ of product by the
ordinary and simple process are 114-115 p.ct. But on analysing the
product an important discrepancy is revealed.

For the saponification we employ a solution of sodium ethylate in the
cold. The following numbers were obtained:

                                       Acetic acid  Hydrocellulose residue
                                           27.2            77.8
Calc. for diacetate on C_{12}H_{18}O_{9}   30.8            78.4

The derivative is approximately a diacetate, and on the assumption of a
simple ester reaction the yield should be 127 p.ct. Assuming that the
difference of 13 p.ct. is due to loss of water by internal condensation,
it appears that for each acetyl group entering, 2 mol. H_{2}O are split
off.

The jute acetate showed the normal reaction with chlorine, and the
lignone chloride was dissolved by treatment with sodium sulphite
solution. The fibrous residue was colourless. It proved to be a
cellulose acetate. The following numbers were obtained on
saponification:

                                          Acetic acid  Cellulose
                                              31.6       70.0
                                              30.9       68.8
Calc. for diacetate on C_{12}H_{20}O_{10}     29.4       79.9

The interpretation of these numbers appears to be this: in the original
reaction with the lignocellulose it is the cellulose residue which is
acetylated, and at the same time condensed. The cellulose residue which
undergoes condensation is not of the normal constitution, since the
normal cellulose is acetylated without condensation (see p. 41). On
saponification a portion of the cellulose, in again combining with
water, is hydrolysed to soluble products. The lignone group as it exists
in the lignocellulose has no free OH groups, and probably no free
aldehydic groups such as would react with the anhydride. Such groups
may, however, be originally present, and may take part in the internal
condensations which have been shown to occur. The furfural constants of
the lignocellulose are unaffected by the acetylation and condensation.
The hygroscopic moisture of the product is lowered from 10-11 p.ct. in
the original to 4.5 p.ct. The ferric ferricyanide reaction is inhibited
by the disappearance of the reactive groups, upon which this curious and
characteristic phenomenon depends (1st ed.).

~Acetylation of Benzoates.~--The cellulose dibenzoate (C_{12} basis) and
the jute monobenzoate were acetylated under comparative conditions The
results were as follows:

                                                   C_{12} basis
                                   Cellulose dibenzoate     Jute monobenzoate
                                              Calc. for             Calc. for
                                 Found     diacetate on  Found   diacetate on
Ester reaction                              dibenzoate           monobenzoate
Yield                            111 p.ct.    115 p.ct.  124 p.ct.  120 p.ct.

Saponification  {Cellulose}
                {Lignocellulose}    53.5        52.6        59.8       61.9
                 NaOH combining     21.3        23.9        28.4       24.3

From these results it would appear that the number of acetyl groups
entering the benzoates is the same as with the unbenzoylated fibres, the
benzoyl has no influence upon the hydroxyls as against the acetyl. At
the same time the internal condensation noticed in the acetylation of
the jute appears not to occur in the case of the benzoate.

~Nitric Esters.~--The numbers resulting from the quantitative study of the
ester reaction and product (1st ed. p. 133) show a very large divergence
of the yield of product from that which would be calculated from its
composition (N p.ct.) on the assumption that the ester reaction is
simple. We have repeated the results, and find with a yield of 145 p.ct.
that the product contains 11.8 p.ct. N.

The reaction

     C_{12}H_{18}O_{9} + 4HNO_{3} - 4H_{2}O

gives a tetranitrate with 11.5 p.ct. N and a yield of 159 p.ct. The
ester reaction, therefore, is not simple. There are two sources of the
loss of weight. The first of these is evident from the occurrence of
certain secondary reactions which result in the solution of a certain
proportion of the fibre substance in the acid mixture. To determine this
quantitatively we have devised a suitable variation of the method of
combustion with chromic acid (1st ed.).

The variation is required to meet the difficulty occasioned by the
tension of the nitric acid and products of deoxidation. The mixed acids
(10 c.c.), containing the organic by-products in solution, are
carefully diluted in a small flask with an equal volume of water,
preventing rise of temperature. Nitrous fumes are evolved during the
dilution. Strong sulphuric acid (15 c.c.) is now added, and the residue
of nitrous fumes expelled by a current of air, agitating the contents of
the flask from time to time. The combustion with CrO_{3} is then
proceeded with in the ordinary way. The gases evolved are measured
(total volume) and calculated to C present in the form of products
derived from the lignocellulose; and, assuming that this contains 47
p.ct. C, we may express the result approximately in terms of the fibre
substance. The method was controlled by blank experiments, in which
citric acid was taken as a convenient carbon compound for combustion.
The C found was 34.9 p.ct. as against 34.3 p.ct. calculated. By this
method we find that with maximum yields of nitrate at 143-145 p.ct. the
organic matter in solution in the acid mixture amounted to 4.9 to 5.3
p.ct. of the original lignocellulose.

Introducing this quantity as a correction of the yield of nitrate in the
original reaction, we must express the 143 parts as obtained from 95 of
fibre substance instead of 100.

The yield per molecule C_{12}H_{18}O_{9} (= 306) is therefore 462,
whereas for a tetranitrate formed by a simple ester reaction the yield
should be 486. The difference (24) represents 1.5 mol. H_{2}O split off
by internal condensation.

The correction for total N is relatively small, raising it from 11.5 to
12.2, which remains in close agreement with the experimental numbers.

_Monobenzoate._--Treated with the acid mixture yields a mixed nitrate.
The yield is 130 p.ct., and the product contains 7.6 p.ct. O.NO_{2}
nitrogen. These numbers approximate to those required for reaction with
4HNO_{3} groups, three of the residues entering the cellulose, and one
(as NO_{2}) the benzene ring of the substituting group. For such a
reaction the calculated numbers are: Yield 144 p.ct.; O.NO_{2} nitrogen
7.1 p.ct.

The experimental numbers require correcting for the amount of loss in
the form of products soluble in the acid mixture, viz. 7.6 p.ct.; but
they remain within the range of the experimental errors sufficiently to
show that the benzoyl group limits the number of OH groups taking part
in the ester reaction to three. The corrected yield per 1 mol. of jute
benzoate (410) is 576, as against the calculated 590 for 4HNO_{3}
reacting. A loss of 1H_{2}O per molecule by internal condensation is
therefore indicated.

~Denitration.~--The removal of the nitric groups from the esters is
effected by digestion with ammonium sulphide. But the reactions are by
no means simple. There is considerable hydrolysis of the lignocellulose
to soluble products. Thus the _tetranitrate_ yields only 46.4 of
denitrated fibre in place of the calculated 66. The product is a
cellulose, yielding only 0.5 per cent. furfural. The hydrolysed
by-products, moreover, when freed from sulphur and distilled from
hydrochloric acid, yielded only an additional 2.5 p.ct. furfural,
calculated to the original lignocellulose.

These statistics confirm the evidence that the ester reaction is not
simple. Such changes take place in the lignone-beta-cellulose complex
that they revert, not to their original form, but to soluble derivatives
of different constitution. The mixed nitrate from the benzoate is
denitrated to a cellulose amidobenzoate, which confirms the localisation
of a nitro-group in the benzoyl residue.

(p. 157) ~General Characteristics of the Lignocelluloses.~--Later
investigations have somewhat modified and simplified our views of the
constitution of the typical lignocellulose (jute), so far as this can be
dealt with by the statistics of its more important decompositions
(original, pp. 157-161).

~Cellulose.~--There is little doubt that the furfural-yielding groups of
the original are isolated in the form of the beta-cellulose. Tollens
emphasises this fact in his studies of cellulose-estimation methods. We
had previously shown (original, p. 159) that the yield of furfural is
not affected by the _chlorination_, but it appears from our numbers that
only 50 p.ct. of these groups remain in the isolated cellulose, the
residue undergoing hydrolysis to soluble compounds. In a carefully
regulated hydrolysis following the chlorination it appears that the
furfuroids are almost entirely conserved in the form of a cellulose.

Moreover, an investigation of the products dissolved by sodium sulphite
solution from the chlorinated fibre has shown that they are practically
free from furfuroids. This enables us to exclude the furfural-yielding
groups from the lignone complex. At the same time, through our later
studies of the hydroxyfurfurals, it is certain that these products are
represented in the fibre substance and probably in the lignone complex.

~Chlorination Statistics.~--It has been pointed out by a correspondent--to
whom we express our indebtedness--that we have made a mistake in
calculating the proportion of lignone from the ratio of the Cl combining
with the fibre substance or lignocellulose (p.ct), to that of the Cl
_present in_ the isolated lignone chloride (p.ct.). The lignocellulose
combines with chlorine in the ratio 100 : 8, but the lignone chloride
_containing_ 26.7 of chlorine means that, neglecting the hydrogen
substituted, 73 of lignone combine with the 27 of chlorine
approximately. On the uniform percentage basis the calculated proportion
of lignone would be 8/37, or a little over 20 p.ct.

In regard to the proportion of hydration attending the resolution, we
have shown on constitutional grounds that this must be relatively small.
Assuming approximately the formula C_{19}H_{22}O_{9} for the lignone
residue as it exists in combination, and the anhydride formula for the
cellulose, these revised statistics now appear, as regards the carbon
contents of the lignocellulose:

          Cellulose, 44.4 C; lignone, 57.8.
     80 x 44.4 / 100 = 35.52
     20 x 57.8 / 100 = 11.56
                       _____

                       47.08 p.ct. C in lignocellulose.

These conclusions are in accordance with the experimental facts, and,
taken together with the new evidence we have accumulated from a study of
the lignocellulose esters, we may sum up the constitutional points as
follows: The lignocellulose is a complex of

      Cellulose alpha        Cellulose beta                  Lignone
           65 p.ct.              15 p.ct.                       20
     Allied to the normal      Yielding furfural        One-third of which
          celluloses         approximately 50 p.ct.      is of benzenoid
                                                               type

The lignone contains but little hydroxyl. The celluloses are in
condensed hydroxyl union with the lignone, but the combination occurs by
complexes of relatively large molecular weight.


DIE CHEMIE DER LIGNOCELLULOSEN--EIN NEUER TYPUS.

W. C. HANCOCK and O. W. DAHL (Berl. Ber., 1895, 1558).

~Chemistry of Lignocelluloses--A New Type.~

The stem of the aquatic _AEschynomene aspera_ offers an exceptional
instance of structural modification to serve the special function of a
'float,' 1 grm. of substance occupying an apparent volume of 40-50 c.c.
This pith-like substance is morphologically a true wood (De Bary), and
the author's investigations now establish that it is in all fundamental
points of chemical composition a lignocellulose, although from its
colour reactions it has been considered by botanists to be a cellulose
tissue containing a proportion of lignified cells. Thus the main tissue
is stained blue by iodine in presence of hydriodic acid (1.5 s.g.), and
the colour is not changed on washing. The ordinary lignocelluloses are
stained a purple brown changed to brown on washing. The reactions with
phloroglucol and with aniline salts, characteristic of these compounds,
is only faintly marked in the main tissue, though strongly in certain
individual cells.

The following quantitative determinations, however, establish the close
similarity of the product to the typical lignocelluloses:

_Elementary Analysis._--C 46.55, H 6.7. _Furfural_ 11.6 p.ct., of which
there remained in the residue from alkaline hydrolysis (71 p.ct.) 8.0,
i.e. about 70 p.ct. The distribution of the furfuroids is therefore not
affected by the alkaline treatment.

_Chlorination._--The substance (after alkaline hydrolysis) takes up 16.9
p.ct. Cl, of which approximately one-half is converted into hydrochloric
acid.

_Methoxyl._--O.CH_{3} estimated = 2.9 p.ct.

_Ferric Ferricyanide Reaction._--Increase of weight due to blue cyanide
fixed (1) 75 p.ct., (2) 96 p.ct. Ratio, Fe : CN = 1 : 2, 4.

_Hydroxyl Reactions._--In the formation of nitric esters and in the
sulphocarbonate reaction the substance gave results similar to those
obtaining for the jute fibre.

These results establish the general identity of this peculiar product of
plant life with the lignocelluloses, at the same time that they show
that certain of the colour reactions supposed to characterise the
lignocelluloses are due to by-products which may or may not be present.

(p. 172) ~Composition of Elder Pith.~--In a systematic investigation of
the celluloses in relation to function we shall have to give special
attention to the parenchymatous tissues of all kinds. These are, for
structural reasons, not easily isolated, for which reason and their
generally 'inferior' functions they do not present themselves to
chemical observation in the same obvious way as do their fibrous
relatives. The pith of the elder, however, _is_ readily obtained in
convenient masses, and a preliminary investigation of the entire tissue
has established the following points:

The _reactions_ of the tissue are in all respects those of the
lignocelluloses.

_Composition._--Ash, 2.2 p.ct.; moisture in air-dry state, 12.3 p.ct.
Alkaline hydrolysis (loss): (a) 14.77, (b) 17.84. Cellulose (yield),
52.33 p.ct. Nitrate-reaction complicated by secondary reactions and
yields low, 90.95 p.ct. _Sulphocarbonate reaction:_ Resists the
treatment, less than 10 p.ct. passes into solution.

_Furfural._--The original tissue yields 7.13 p.ct.; the residue from
alkaline hydrolysis (b) 5.40 p.ct.

This tissue is, therefore, a lignocellulose having the chemical
characteristics typical of the group, but of less resistance to
hydrolytic actions.

The investigation will be prosecuted in reference to the cause of
differentiation in this latter respect. Probably the pectocelluloses are
represented in the tissue.


~The Insoluble Carbohydrates of Wheat (grain).~
