His play competed rather well with the high average output of most
professionals I knew--not exactly terrific, but a relatively safe
gamble, as gambles go on the street of bright lights. Well, I made a
mental note to pass the script around a bit before I signed the contract
myself. After all, he might have cribbed the whole thing somewhere.

He finished reading, signed the contract and handed it back to me with
an air of expectancy. I stalled, "I, uh, will have the check for you in
a few days. Meanwhile, you'd better get yourself an agent and an
attorney and fix up that affidavit of authorship. Normally, I don't deal
with free-lance playwrights, you see."

"But I don't need any agent," he protested. "You be my agent, Mr.
Crocker--" He was studying my reaction, and after a moment he said, "You
still don't quite believe that I wrote _Updraft_, do you, sir? Now that
you've met me you want more time to check up, don't you?"

I said, "Frankly, yes, Hardy. _Updraft_ is a mature piece of writing,
and unless you are a genius--well, it's just business son."

"I don't blame you," he said smiling that fresh-air smile. "And I'll
admit I'm no genius, but I can explain everything. You see, I've read 38
books on how to write plays--"

"Tut!" I said. "Format technique is just a fraction of producing an
appealing play."

"Perhaps," he admitted. "But _I've memorized all 38 books_. What's more,
I've been reading and memorizing plays, novels, poetry and history since
I was 13. I have a storehouse of--"

"Memorizing?"

"Yes, sir. I'm a student of _mnemonics_, you know, the art of memory
perfection. My real ambition is to develop absolute recall. All my
reading and memorizing have been just exercises to expand my power of
complete recall."

"You mean that playwriting is just a hobby?"

"Not--exactly. I need money, lots of it, to continue my research.
Psychiatrists come high."

Well, I suppose good plays have been written for screwier reasons, and I
was in no mood to look a gift-author in the mouth. I did pass _Updraft_
around to a brace of critics, and none of them could hang a plagiarism
charge on Hardy. So I wrote out his check and started the wheels going
on the production.

The boy prodigy dropped out of sight for the time being, taking no
further interest in his brain-child. _Updraft_ did all right in the
sticks, but it was when we opened on Broadway that it began to coin
money.

       *       *       *       *       *

In ten performances we were playing to capacity crowds, and within a
month we had to take in the S. R. O. sign. A lucky hit? I thought so at
the time. _Updraft_ had a dash of humor, a bit of adventure, a dollop of
romance and a gentle little heart tug at the conclusion, but damned if
the critics could put their fingers on its money-making essence. They
gave it pleasant little reviews and mild compliments, but no more. The
cash customers, however, came and kept coming and _kept coming_!

The morning after the 100th performance I told Ellie to hunt up Hardy
and see what he was doing about another play. I could stand to have
another hit ready when _Updraft_ petered out.

That afternoon my secretary reported, "He's in a sanitarium over in
Hoboken."

"Nuts! I knew we should have held back on his royalties," I exclaimed.
"I suppose he's drunk himself into a--"

"It's a mental hospital," Ellie said, "but Mr. Hardy told me he is just
there for some experimental psycho-therapy. He sounded quite normal and
cheerful."

Hillary Hardy showed up next morning at my request, and he did, indeed,
appear in good spirits. I demanded, "What's this business of locking
yourself up in a looney-bin? Don't you realize that's bad public
relations?"

He chuckled. "I thought of that. So I'm going under an assumed name.
Your girl said you had something very important to tell me."

"Sure. I want another play," I told him. "_Updraft_ won't run forever,
you know."

"Oh, I have plenty of money now, so I won't have to bother. The people
at the sanitarium have become interested in my project, and all I'm
spending is board and room there. Thanks to your royalty checks I've got
quite a pile in the bank."

"Won't have to bother?" I yelled. "Here I launch you on Broadway, and
that's all the gratitude I get. Now's the time to cash in on the
reputation of your first play. It's setting attendance records."

"Sorry, Mr. Crocker," he said. "I'm in a critical stage of my
experiments. I just can't afford the time at the moment."

"Experiments! Experiments! What is this business?"

He brightened. "Would you believe it? I've contacted memories back to
three months after my birth. And at this rate I'll reach birth itself
within a few weeks."

I shuddered. What a nasty ambition! "What's the percentage?"

"You don't understand," he said warming to his subject. "The further
back I go the more nearly I approach total recall. At present I can
contact any memory in my experience back to six months, day by day,
minute by minute. I can run off these memories like colored movies,
