"Miss Loring, if it's thrills you're after, maybe I can furnish them,"
Kenniston said. "Maybe we can team up on this. How would you like to
go on a voyage after the biggest treasure in the System?"

"Treasure?" exclaimed the heiress surprisedly. "Where is it?"

They were all leaning forward, with quick interest. Kenniston saw that
his bait had caught them.

"You've heard of John Dark, the notorious space-pirate?" he asked.

Gloria nodded. "Of course. The telenews was full of his exploits until
the Patrol caught and destroyed his ship a few weeks ago."

Kenniston corrected her. "The Patrol caught up to John Dark's ship in
the asteroid, but didn't completely destroy it. They gunned the pirate
craft to a wreck in a running fight. But Dark's wrecked ship drifted
into a dangerous zone of meteor swarms where they couldn't follow."

"I remember now--that's what the telenews said," conceded the heiress.
"But Dark and his crew were undoubtedly killed, they said."

"John Dark," Kenniston went on, "looted scores of ships during his
career. He amassed a hoard of jewels and precious metals. And he kept
it right with him in his ship. That treasure's still in that lost
wreck."

"How do you know?" asked Hugh Murdock bluntly.

"Because I found the lost wreck of Dark's ship myself," Kenniston
answered. He hated to lie like this, but knew that he had no choice.

       *       *       *       *       *

He plunged on. "I'm a meteor-miner by profession. Two weeks ago my
Jovian partner and I were prospecting in the outer asteroid zone in
our little rocket. Our air-tanks got low and to replenish them, we
landed on the asteroid Vesta. That's the big asteroid they call the
World with a Thousand Moons, because it's circled by a swarm of
hundreds of meteors.

"It's a weird, jungled little world, inhabited by some very queer
forms of life. In landing, my partner and I noticed where some great
object had crashed down into the jungle. We discovered it was the
wreck of John Dark's ship. The wreck had drifted until it crashed on
Vesta, almost completely burying itself in the ground. No one was
alive on it, of course."

Kenniston concluded. "We knew Dark's treasure must still be in the
buried wreck. But it would take machinery and equipment to dig out the
wreck. So we came here to Mars, intending to get a small cruiser, load
it with the necessary equipment, and go back to Vesta and lift the
treasure. Only we haven't been able to get a ship of any kind."

He leaned toward the girl. "Here's my proposition, Miss Loring. You
take us and our equipment to Vesta in your cruiser, and we'll share
the treasure with you fifty-fifty. What do you say?"

The blonde girl beside Gloria uttered a squeal of excitement. "Pirate
treasure! Gloria, let's do it--what a thrill it would be!"

The others showed equal excitement. The romance of a treasure hunt in
the wild asteroids lured them, rather than the possible rewards.

"We'd certainly be able to take back a wonderful story to Earth if we
found John Dark's treasure," admitted Gloria, with quick, eager
interest.

Hugh Murdock was an exception to the general enthusiasm. He asked
Kenniston, "How do you know the treasure's still in the buried wreck?"

"Because the wreck was still undisturbed," Kenniston answered. "And
because we found these jewels on the body of one of John Dark's crew,
who had been flung clear somehow when the wreck crashed."

He held out a half-dozen gems he took from his pocket. They were
Saturnian moon-stones, softly shining white jewels whose brilliance
waxed and waned in perfect periodic rhythm.

"These jewels," Kenniston said, "must have been that pirate's share of
the loot. You can imagine how rich John Dark's own hoard must be."

The jewels, worth many thousands, swept away the lingering incredulity
of the others as Kenniston had known they would.

"You're sure no one else knows the wreck is there?" Gloria asked
breathlessly.

"We kept our find absolutely secret," Kenniston told her. "But since I
can't get a ship any other way, I'm willing to share the hoard with
you. If I wait too long, someone else may find the wreck."

"I accept your proposition, Mr. Kenniston!" Gloria declared. "We'll
start for Vesta just as soon as you can get the equipment you'll need
loaded on the _Sunsprite_."

"Gloria, you're being too hasty," protested Hugh Murdock. "I've heard
of this world with a Thousand Moons. There're stories of queer,
unhuman creatures they call Vestans, who infest that asteroid. The
danger--"

Gloria impatiently dismissed his objections. "Hugh, if you are going
to start worrying about dangers again, you'd better go back to Earth
and safety."

Murdock flushed and was silent. Kenniston felt a certain sympathy for
the young businessman. He knew, if these others did not, just how real
was the alien menace of those strange creatures, the Vestans.

"I'll go right down to the spaceport and see about loading the
equipment aboard your cruiser," Kenniston told the heiress. "You'd
better give me a note to your captain. We ought to be able to start
tomorrow."

"Pirate treasure on an unexplored asteroid!" exulted the enthusiastic
Robbie. "Ho for the World with a Thousand Moons!"

Kenniston felt guilty when he and Holk Or left the big hotel. These
youngsters, he thought, hadn't the faintest idea of the peril into
which he was leading them. They were as ignorant as babies of the dark
evil and unearthly danger of the interplanetary frontier.

He hardened himself against the qualms of conscience. There was that
at stake, he told himself fiercely, against which the safety of a lot
of spoiled, rich young people was absolutely nothing.

Holk Or was chuckling as they emerged into the chill Martian night. He
told Kenniston admiringly, "That was one of the smoothest jobs of
lying I ever heard, that story about finding John Dark's treasure.
Take it from me, it was slick!"

The Jovian guffawed loudly as he added, "What would their faces be
like if they knew that John Dark and his crew are still living? That
it was John Dark himself who sent us here?"

"Be quiet, you idiot!" ordered Kenniston hastily. "Do you want the
whole Patrol to hear you?"


CHAPTER II

Discovered


The _Sunsprite_ throbbed steadily through the vast, dangerous
wilderness of the asteroidal zone. To the eye, the cruiser moved in a
black void starred by creeping crumbs of light. In reality those
bright, crawling specks were booming asteroids or whirling
meteor-swarms rushing in complicated, unchartable orbits and
constantly threatening destruction.

For three days now, the cruiser had cautiously groped deeper into this
most perilous region of the System. Now a bright, tiny disk of white
light was shining far ahead like a beckoning beacon. It was the
asteroid Vesta--their goal.

Kenniston, leaning against the glassite deck-wall, somberly eyed the
distant asteroid.

"We'll reach it by tomorrow," he thought. "Then what? I suppose John
Dark will hold these rich youngsters for ransom."

Kenniston knew that the pirate leader would instantly see the chance
of extorting vast sums by holding this group of wealthy young people
as captives.

"I wish to God I hadn't had to bring them into this," Kenniston
sweated. "But what else could I do? It was the only way I could get
back to Vesta with the materials."

His mind was going back over the disastrous events since the day three
weeks before, when the Patrol had caught up to John Dark at last.

Dark's pirate ship, the _Falcon_, had been gunned to a helpless wreck.
It had, fortunately for the pirates, drifted off into a region of
perilous meteor-swarms where the Patrol cruisers dared not follow. The
Patrol thought everybody on the pirate ship dead anyway, Kenniston
knew.

But John Dark and most of his crew were still alive in the drifting
wreck. They had fought the battle wearing space-suits, and that had
saved them. They had clung grimly to the wreck as it drifted on and on
until it finally fell into the feeble gravitational pull of Vesta.

Kenniston could still remember those tense hours when the wreck had
fallen through the satellite swarm of meteors onto the World with a
Thousand Moons. They had managed to cushion their crash. John Dark,
always the most resourceful of men, had managed to jury-rig makeshift
rocket-tubes that had softened the impact of their fall.

But the wrecked _Falcon_ had been marooned there in the weird
asteroidal jungle, with the alien, menacing Vestans already gathering
around it. The ship would never fly space again until major repairs
were made. And they could not be made until quantities of material and
equipment were brought. Someone must go for those materials to Mars,
the nearest planet.

John Dark had superintended construction of a little two-man rocket
from parts of the ship. Kenniston and Holk Or were to go in it.

"You _must_ be back with that list of equipment and materials within
two weeks, Kenniston," Dark had emphasized. "If we stay castaway here
longer than that, either the Vestans will get us or the Patrol
discover us."

The pirate leader had added, "The moon-jewels I've given you will more
than pay for a small cruiser, if you can buy one at Mars. If you can't
buy one, get one any way you can--but get back here quickly!"

Well, Kenniston thought grimly, he had got a cruiser in the only way
he could. Down in its hold were the berylloy plates and spare
rocket-tubes and new cyclotrons he had had loaded aboard at Syrtis.

But he was also bringing back to Vesta with him a bunch of
thrill-seeking, rich, young people who believed they were going on a
romantic treasure-hunt. What would they think of him when they
discovered how he had betrayed them?

       *       *       *       *       *

"That's Vesta, isn't it?" spoke a girl's eager voice behind him,
interrupting his dark thoughts.

Kenniston turned quickly. It was Gloria Loring, boyish in silken
space-slacks, her hands thrust into the pockets.

There was a naive eagerness in her clear, lovely face as she looked
toward the distant asteroid, that made her look more like an excited
small girl than like the bored, jewelled heiress of that night at
Syrtis.

"Yes, that's the World with a Thousand Moons," Kenniston nodded.
"We'll reach it by tomorrow. I've just been up on the bridge, telling
your Captain Walls the safest route through the meteor swarms."

Her dark eyes studied him curiously. "You've been out here on the
frontier a long time, haven't you?"

"Twelve years," he told her. "That's a long time in the outer planets.
Most space-men don't last that long out here--wrecks, accidents or
gravitation-paralysis gets them."

"Gravitation-paralysis?" she repeated. "I've heard of that as a
terrible danger to space-travelers. But I don't really know what it
is."

"It's the most dreaded danger of all out here," Kenniston answered. "A
paralysis that hits you when you change from very weak to very strong
gravities or vice versa, too often. It locks all your muscles rigid by
numbing the motor-nerves."

Gloria shivered. "That sounds ghastly."

"It is," Kenniston said somberly. "I've seen scores of my friends
stricken down by it, in the years I've sailed the outer System."

"I didn't know you'd been a space-sailor all that time," the heiress
said wonderingly. "I thought you said you were a meteor-miner."

Kenniston woke up to the fact that he had made a bad slip. He hastily
covered up. "You have to be a good bit of a space-sailor to be a
meteor-miner, Miss Loring. You have to cover a lot of territory."

He was thankful that they were interrupted at that moment by some of
the others who came along the deck in a lively, chattering group.

Robbie Boone was the center of the group. That chubby, clownish young
man, heir to the Atomic Power Corporation millions, had garbed himself
in what he fondly believed to be a typical space-man's outfit. His
jacket and slacks were of black synthesilk, and he wore a big
