man whom I must entertain with the usual small talk about the weather,
how you have enjoyed your trip, or whether you feel very tired--as you
probably do--and all the rest of it. That is routine with most of our
visitors; it's quite a relief to feel that I can dispense with it for
once."

Lee had blushed under this frankness of compliment as if a decoration
had been pinned to his breast. "Thank you, Miss Dahlberg, you put me at
my ease. I've been out in the wilderness for so long that I've lost the
language of the social amenities. I really feel like another Rip van
Winkle. All this," he made a sweeping gesture, "is tremendously new and
surprising to me. There are so many burning questions to ask...."

The girl gave him a smile of sympathy. "Of course," she said, "and I can
imagine some of them. To begin with, we owe you an explanation and an
apology for having used the methods of deception in getting you here. As
you probably know by now the work we're doing here is closely connected
with the National defense. Whether we like it or not, military secrecy
forces us to use roundabout ways in contacting scientists who happen to
work in some context with our field, especially if they live in foreign
lands. That's why in your case we have used the good offices of the
Department of Agriculture in bringing you here. Dr. Scriven feels
terrible about this. He feels that to be lifted out from one desert just
to be dropped into the middle of another must be a fierce disappointment
to you. For this and all the disturbance of your work--can you manage to
forgive us Dr. Lee?"

The sincerity in these regrets was such that Lee hastened to reply: "You
don't owe me any apology, Miss Dahlborg," he reassured her. "Naturally
it is impossible for me to see any connection between my work with ants
and termites and the problems of National Defense. But I am an American;
I wouldn't doubt for a moment the legitimacy of your call." The girl
nodded: "Besides you have fought for your country in the second world
war," she added. "And also you are the son of General Jefferson Lee of
the Marines. You understand of course that we had you investigated
before calling you here; do you mind very much?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Again Lee blushed; this time even deeper than before. He squirmed in his
seat. "No, I guess not. I suppose it's necessary. Now that I'm going to
meet Dr. Scriven, who is he? I probably ought to know--forgive my
ignorance."

"You really don't know about him?" The girl sounded surprised. "He's a
surgeon. He's considered the foremost living brain-specialist. Remember
the Nuremberg trials of the Nazi war criminals? Dr. Scriven did the
post-mortems on their brains. He wrote a book that made him famous."

"Of course," Lee slapped his forehead. "Yes, but of course, how could I
forget."

"Yes," she answered, "He was made the head of the Braintrust over here."

"What is the Braintrust? What does it do? What am I supposed to do
here?" Lee asked eagerly.

The girl's smile was mysterious: "I think Howard would like to explain
all that to you in his own way."

"Howard". The word struck Lee like a vicious little snake. Was he a
friend, or more than a friend to her? "This is terrible," he thought,
"I've been away from normal life for overlong. Must be that I'm
emotionally unbalanced. I haven't known her for five minutes. There is
nothing between us. I've no earthly right to be jealous; it is absurd,
it's mean."

He felt deeply ashamed. Yet as he looked at her he couldn't deny the
truth before himself: that he _was_ jealous, that he _had_ fallen in
love with a girl who looked like the goddess Diana with a golden helmet
for hair.

There was a noise of footsteps on the gravel paths. A man with a
portfolio under his arm walked briskly by the stonetable; despite his
civilian clothes he had "Westpoint" written all over him. He disappeared
through the steel door.

"That was General Vandergeest", Oona said. "Dr. Scriven will see you
now; just walk in, Dr. Lee."




CHAPTER II


Inside, the cabin in the sky seemed to be built almost entirely around a
huge primeval looking fireplace. Despite the fierceness of the Arizona
sun there was a fire in it of long and bluish flames, one of those
modern inventions which reverse the processes of nature. Like the gas
refrigerators of an older period, this fire worked in combination with
the airconditioning system to _cool_ the house, lending to it in the
midst of summer heat the same attractions which it had in winter.

In front of the fire and framed by its rather ghostly light, there stood
a man with his head bowed down, pensively staring at the flames. As
Lee's steps resounded from the ancient millstones which formed the
floor, Dr. Scriven wheeled around; he approached the man from Down-Under
with outstretched hands.

Rarely had Lee seen such a distinguished looking figure of a man. He
looked more like a diplomat of the extinct old school than a scientist,
with the immaculate expanse of his white tropical suit and the dignity
of his leonine head. His width of shoulder and the smooth agility with
which he moved gave the impression of great strength. Only his fingers
were small, slender, almost like a woman's.

The reluctant softness of their pressure contrasted so much with his
heartiness of manner that Lee felt repulsed by their touch until he
remembered that a great surgeon lived and caused others to live by his
sensitivity of hand.

"Dr. Lee, I'm happy, most happy, that you have been able to come."
Scriven's voice was soft, but he spoke with an extraordinary precision
of diction which had a quality almost of command. "Over there, please,
by the fire...."

From the blue flames there came the freshness and the coolness of an
ocean breeze; the rawhide chairs, built for barbaric chieftains as they
seemed, proved to be most comfortable; the semidarkness, the roughness
of the unhewn stone, gave a sense of the phantastical and the paradox.
Lee sat and waited patiently for Scriven to explain.

"In case you're wondering a little about this setup," Scriven made a
sweeping gesture around the room, "I've long since reached the
conclusion that in these mad times a man needs above all some padded
cell, some shell in which to retire and preserve his sanity. This is my
padded cell, soundproof, lightproof, telephoneproof; a wholesome
reminder of the basic, the primeval things. Simple, isn't it?"

Lee blinked at the extravagance of this statement. "Do you really call
that simple?" he asked.

Scriven grinned: "You are right; it is of course a willed reversal from
the complex, synthetic and perhaps a little perverse. But then, not
everybody has the opportunity you had in living in the heart of nature.
Frankly I envy you; your work reflects the depth of thinking which comes
out of retirement from the world. That's why I called you here; that's
why I am so sure you'll understand."

He paused. Lee thought that he saw what was perhaps a mannerism; the
great surgeon didn't look at his visitor. With his head turned aside,
staring into the flames, stroking his chin, speaking as if to himself,
he reminded Lee of some medieval alchemist.

"It's a long story, Lee," Scriven continued. "It starts way back with a
letter I wrote to the President of the United States. In this letter I
pointed to the immense dangers which I anticipated in the event of an
atom war; dangers to which the military appeared to be blind. I am
referring to the inadequacy of the human brain and its susceptibility to
mental and psychic shock. I explained how science and technology over
the past few hundred years had developed by the _pooled_ efforts of the
_elite_ in human brains, but that the individual brain, even if
outstanding, was lagging farther and farther below the dizzy peak which
science and technology in their totality had reached. I further
explained, by the example of the Nazi and Jap States, how the collective
brains of modern masses are reverting from and are hostile to a high
level of civilization because it is beyond their mental reach. You know
all this, of course, Lee. I made it clear that not even the collective
brains of a general staff could be relied upon for normal functioning;
that no matter how carefully protected physically, they remained exposed
to psychic shock with its resultant errors of judgment. How much less
then could production and transportation workers be expected to function
effectively in the apocalyptic horrors they would have to face...."

       *       *       *       *       *

Lee's eyes had narrowed in the concentration of listening; his head
nodded approval. He wasn't conscious of it, but Scriven took note of it
by a quick glance. His voice quickened:

"That was the first part of my letter, Lee. I then came out squarely
with the project which has since become the work of my life. I told the
President that under these circumstances the most needed thing for our
country's national security would be the creation of a _mechanical_
brain, some central ganglion bigger and better than its human
counterpart, immune to shock of any kind. This ganglion to be
established in the innermost fortress of America as an auxiliary
augmenting and controlling the work of a general staff. I gave him a
fairly detailed outline of just how the thing could be done. There was
really nothing basically new involved. Personally I have held for a long
time that Man never "invents", that in fact it is constitutionally
impossible for him to do so. Being a part of nature Man merely
_discovers_ what nature has "invented" in some form of its own a long
time ago. Mechanical brains. Lord, we have had them in their rudiments
for the past hundred thousand years, at a minimum. The calendar is one;
every printed book is one; the simplest of machines incorporates one.
And ever since the first mechanical clock started its ticking we have
developed them by leaps and bounds!"

"And did the President react positively to this project?" Lee asked.

Scriven shook his head. "He did not."

Then he paused. Little beads of perspiration had appeared on his
forehead; he wiped them away with a handkerchief:

"That year, Lee," he began again, "when the decision was pending and I
could do nothing but wait, knowing that there was no other defense
against the Atom Bomb, knowing that our country's fate was at stake--it
made me grey, it came pretty close to shattering my nerve.... But
_then_...." His body tightened, the small fist pounded the rail of the
chair: "... _But then We BUILT THE BRAIN._"

He said it almost in a triumphant cry.

Mounting tension had Lee almost frozen to his seat. Now he stirred and
leaned forward.

"It actually exists? I mean it works? It is not limited to the analysis
of mathematical problems but capable of cerebrations after the manner of
the human brain?"

Scriven, with a startling change, sounded dry, very factual in a tired
way as he answered: "I appreciate your difficulty of realization, Dr.
Lee. The whole idea is new to you and I have presented it in a rather
abrupt and inadequate way. In time, and if we get together, as I hope we
will, you shall get visual impressions which are better than words. For
the moment, just to give you a general idea and to prove that this is
not a small matter, let me give you a few facts: Our first monetary
appropriation for The Brain, as an unspecified part of the military
budget, of course, was for one billion dollars. We have since received
two more appropriations of an equal size."

Lee's gasp made a sound like a low whistle. With a depreciating gesture
Scriven waved it away.

"While these funds could only cover the first stages in the construction
of The Brain," he calmly went on, "we have been able to build a
mechanical cortex mantle composed of ninety billion electronic cells.
Considering that the cortex mantle of the human brain contains over 9
billion cells, this doesn't sound like much. Our synthetic or mechanical
cells are a little better than the organic, natural cells, but not very
much. So alone and by themselves their number would indicate only a ten
times superiority of The Brain over its human counterpart. If that were
all the result of our labors, a brain of, let's say, twice genius
capacity, we would be a miserable failure. But then we _have_ achieved a
very considerable improvement in the _utilization_ of the The Brain's
cortex capacity. In the first place we have full control over the
intake of thought impulses; and more important, we use multiple wave
lengths in feeding impulses to The Brain and throughout all the
impulse-processings. Even the human brain has some capacity of
simultaneous thought on different levels of consciousness, but its range
in this respect is extremely limited. The Brain by way of contrast
operates on two thousand different wave lengths, which means that The
Brain can process at least 2000 problems at one time. Finally, the
absence of fatigue in The Brain makes operations possible for 20 out of
the 24 hours of the day--the rest of the time we need for servicing and
overhauling."

       *       *       *       *       *

With apparent effort Scriven turned his face away from the blue flames.
His dark brown eyes probed into Lee's as he summed up:

"All together, Lee, The Brain has now reached the approximate capacity
of 25,000 first class human brains. You as a man of vision will
understand what that means...."

Lee had his face upturned. The tension of thought gave to his features
something of the ecstatic or the somnambulist. Slowly he said:

"The equivalent of twenty-five-thousand human brains--there is no
comparison other than a God's...."

Striven had jumped from his chair. He started pacing the flagstones in
front of the fire, whirling his mighty frame around at every corner with
a sort of wrath, as if about to meet some attack.

"Yes, you are right," he almost shouted, "we hold that power; that power
almost of a God's. And how we are wasting it."

"What do you mean?" Lee's eye-brows shot up. "You would not waste those
powers once you have them. You would turn them to the most constructive
use--the advancement of science, of humanity!"

Scriven froze in his steps. A cruel smile parted his lips; there was a
gnashing sound of big white teeth. He pointed a finger at his visitor.

"Idealist, eh? That's what I thought I was ten years ago. That's what I
had in mind with The Brain right from the start. As it has turned out,
however, the Army, Navy, Air Force, and half a dozen other government
departments, besieged The Brain for the solution of their "problems",
some of them as destructive as warfare, others as insipid as the trend
of the popular vote in some provincial primaries. Sometimes Uncle Sam
even farms out the services of the Brain to aid some friendly foreign
government--without that government's knowledge as to where the solution
is coming from. To cut a long story short: What these fellows utterly
fail to understand is that The Brain is not a finite mechanism like any
other, but a mechanism which unendingly evolves and becomes richer in
its associations by the material which is being fed into its cells. In
other words; the Brain _learns_; consequently it must be _taught_, it
must be given the wherewithal for its own self-improvement...."

Scriven halted his impatient step by the other's chair. His nervous
fingers tapped Lee's shoulder: "And that is where you come in."

"Me?" Lee asked, startled. "What you just told me, Dr. Scriven, it will
take me weeks to comprehend. At the moment I am at a loss to see how my
work could connect...."

The surgeon's sensitive hand patted Lee's shoulder as if it were the
neck of a shy horse. "You _will_ comprehend--in just another moment."

He pressed a button; in the entrance to the cabin in the sky the girl
appeared, like an apparition. She approached, her hair a golden halo,
her tunic transparent against the glare of the summer day. "Yes?"

"Oona, _please_"

She seemed familiar with the boss' code. With a smile on her lips she
walked over to one of the pillars, opened a hidden recess and brought
out the Scotch and syphon using an Egyptian clay tablet for a tray. With
surgical exactitude Scriven poured out a good two fingers for his guest
and an exceedingly small one for himself. "Stay with us for a moment,
Oona, please," he said. "I didn't tell you the idea behind my calling
Dr. Lee; you might be interested."

Wordlessly she slid into a seat, attentive and yet fading somehow into
the background, as if trying to remain unnoticed. In that she did not
succeed. Her beauty was such that its very presence changed the
atmosphere; it put Lee under a strain to keep his eyes off her. As to
Scriven, he seemed to address her almost as much as he did Lee.

"You have met Dr. Lee, haven't you, Oona; but do you know _whom_ you
have met? He probably wouldn't admit it; nevertheless Dr. Lee is the
most successful peacemaker on earth, I think. He has just put an end to
the oldest war in this world between the two most venerable
civilizations in existence. That war between the states of the ants and
the states of the termites has been waged with never abating fury for
millions of years--until Dr. Lee came along with the perfect solution of
the eternal dispute. All he did was to crossbreed the belligerents and
now we have "united nations", _Ant-termes-pacificus-Lee_ which lives up
to the spirit of its name. Elementary, isn't it?"
