He nodded. "How have you been? You're looking fine." She was still
pretty and slender in her uniform, the blue-grey of Internal Security,
Gross' organization.

"Thanks." She smiled. "You seem to be doing all right, too. Commander
Gross tells me that you're responsible for this project, Operation
Head, as they call it. Whose head have you decided on?"

"That's the problem." Kramer lit a cigarette. "This ship is to be
equipped with a human brain instead of the Johnson system. We've
constructed special draining baths for the brain, electronic relays to
catch the impulses and magnify them, a continual feeding duct that
supplies the living cells with everything they need. But--"

"But we still haven't got the brain itself," Gross finished. They
began to walk back toward the car. "If we can get that we'll be ready
for the tests."

"Will the brain remain alive?" Dolores asked. "Is it actually going to
live as part of the ship?"

"It will be alive, but not conscious. Very little life is actually
conscious. Animals, trees, insects are quick in their responses, but
they aren't conscious. In this process of ours the individual
personality, the ego, will cease. We only need the response ability,
nothing more."

Dolores shuddered. "How terrible!"

"In time of war everything must be tried," Kramer said absently. "If
one life sacrificed will end the war it's worth it. This ship might
get through. A couple more like it and there wouldn't be any more
war."

       *       *       *       *       *

They got into the car. As they drove down the road, Gross said, "Have
you thought of anyone yet?"

Kramer shook his head. "That's out of my line."

"What do you mean?"

"I'm an engineer. It's not in my department."

"But all this was your idea."

"My work ends there."

Gross was staring at him oddly. Kramer shifted uneasily.

"Then who is supposed to do it?" Gross said. "I can have my
organization prepare examinations of various kinds, to determine
fitness, that kind of thing--"

"Listen, Phil," Dolores said suddenly.

"What?"

She turned toward him. "I have an idea. Do you remember that professor
we had in college. Michael Thomas?"

Kramer nodded.

"I wonder if he's still alive." Dolores frowned. "If he is he must be
awfully old."

"Why, Dolores?" Gross asked.

"Perhaps an old person who didn't have much time left, but whose mind
was still clear and sharp--"

"Professor Thomas." Kramer rubbed his jaw. "He certainly was a wise
old duck. But could he still be alive? He must have been seventy,
then."

"We could find that out," Gross said. "I could make a routine check."

"What do you think?" Dolores said. "If any human mind could outwit
those creatures--"

"I don't like the idea," Kramer said. In his mind an image had
appeared, the image of an old man sitting behind a desk, his bright
gentle eyes moving about the classroom. The old man leaning forward, a
thin hand raised--

"Keep him out of this," Kramer said.

"What's wrong?" Gross looked at him curiously.

"It's because _I_ suggested it," Dolores said.

"No." Kramer shook his head. "It's not that. I didn't expect anything
like this, somebody I knew, a man I studied under. I remember him very
clearly. He was a very distinct personality."

"Good," Gross said. "He sounds fine."

"We can't do it. We're asking his death!"

"This is war," Gross said, "and war doesn't wait on the needs of the
individual. You said that yourself. Surely he'll volunteer; we can
keep it on that basis."

"He may already be dead," Dolores murmured.

"We'll find that out," Gross said speeding up the car. They drove the
rest of the way in silence.

       *       *       *       *       *

For a long time the two of them stood studying the small wood house,
overgrown with ivy, set back on the lot behind an enormous oak. The
little town was silent and sleepy; once in awhile a car moved slowly
along the distant highway, but that was all.

"This is the place," Gross said to Kramer. He folded his arms. "Quite
a quaint little house."

Kramer said nothing. The two Security Agents behind them were
expressionless.

Gross started toward the gate. "Let's go. According to the check he's
still alive, but very sick. His mind is agile, however. That seems to
be certain. It's said he doesn't leave the house. A woman takes care
of his needs. He's very frail."

They went down the stone walk and up onto the porch. Gross rang the
bell. They waited. After a time they heard slow footsteps. The door
opened. An elderly woman in a shapeless wrapper studied them
impassively.

"Security," Gross said, showing his card. "We wish to see Professor
Thomas."

"Why?"

"Government business." He glanced at Kramer.

Kramer stepped forward. "I was a pupil of the Professor's," he said.
"I'm sure he won't mind seeing us."

The woman hesitated uncertainly. Gross stepped into the doorway. "All
right, mother. This is war time. We can't stand out here."

The two Security agents followed him, and Kramer came reluctantly
behind, closing the door. Gross stalked down the hall until he came to
an open door. He stopped, looking in. Kramer could see the white
corner of a bed, a wooden post and the edge of a dresser.

He joined Gross.

In the dark room a withered old man lay, propped up on endless
pillows. At first it seemed as if he were asleep; there was no motion
or sign of life. But after a time Kramer saw with a faint shock that
the old man was watching them intently, his eyes fixed on them,
unmoving, unwinking.

"Professor Thomas?" Gross said. "I'm Commander Gross of Security. This
man with me is perhaps known to you--"

The faded eyes fixed on Kramer.

"I know him. Philip Kramer.... You've grown heavier, boy." The voice
was feeble, the rustle of dry ashes. "Is it true you're married now?"

"Yes. I married Dolores French. You remember her." Kramer came toward
the bed. "But we're separated. It didn't work out very well. Our
careers--"

"What we came here about, Professor," Gross began, but Kramer cut him
off with an impatient wave.

"Let me talk. Can't you and your men get out of here long enough to
let me talk to him?"

Gross swallowed. "All right, Kramer." He nodded to the two men. The
three of them left the room, going out into the hall and closing the
door after them.

The old man in the bed watched Kramer silently. "I don't think much of
him," he said at last. "I've seen his type before. What's he want?"

"Nothing. He just came along. Can I sit down?" Kramer found a stiff
upright chair beside the bed. "If I'm bothering you--"

"No. I'm glad to see you again, Philip. After so long. I'm sorry your
marriage didn't work out."

"How have you been?"

"I've been very ill. I'm afraid that my moment on the world's stage
has almost ended." The ancient eyes studied the younger man
reflectively. "You look as if you have been doing well. Like everyone
else I thought highly of. You've gone to the top in this society."

Kramer smiled. Then he became serious. "Professor, there's a project
we're working on that I want to talk to you about. It's the first ray
of hope we've had in this whole war. If it works, we may be able to
crack the yuk defenses, get some ships into their system. If we can do
that the war might be brought to an end."
