before the population declined. Imagine having people all around you,
having to listen to them, see them, and argue to make them do what you
wanted!"

The heel of his bare right foot came down heavily on a pebble, and he
swore without awareness of the precise meaning of the ancient phrases.
He limped into the baths and beckoned a waiting robot as he stretched
out on a rubbing table.

"Call Blue One!" he ordered.

The red robot pushed a button on the wall before beginning the
massage. In a few moments, the major-domo arrived.

"Did Robert enjoy the tennis?" it inquired politely.

"I did _not_!" snapped the man. "Red Three won--and by too big a
score. Have it geared down a few feet per second."

"Yes, Robert."

"And have the lawn screened again for pebbles!"

As Blue One retired he relaxed, and turned his mind to ideas for
filling the evening. He hoped Henry would televise: Robert had news
for him.

After a short nap and dinner, he took the elevator to his three-story
tower and turned on the television robot. Seating himself in a
comfortable armchair, he directed the machine from one channel to
another. For some time, there was no answer to his perfunctory call
signals, but one of his few acquaintances finally came on.

"Jack here," said a quiet voice that Robert had long suspected of
being disguised by a filter microphone.

"I haven't heard you for some weeks," he remarked, eying the swirling
colors on the screen.

He disliked Jack for never showing his face, but curiosity as to what
lay behind the mechanical image projected by the other's transmitter
preserved the acquaintance.

"I was ... busy," said the bodiless voice, with a discreet hint of a
chuckle that Robert found chilling.

He wondered what Jack had been up to. He remembered once being favored
with a televised view of Jack's favorite sport--a battle between
companies of robots designed for the purpose, horribly reminiscent of
human conflicts Robert had seen on historical films.

       *       *       *       *       *

He soon made an excuse to break off and set the robot to scanning
Henry's channel. He had something to tell the older man, who lived
only about a hundred miles away and was as close to being his friend
as was possible in this age of scattered, self-sufficient dwellings.

"I don't mind talking to _him_," Robert reflected. "At least he
doesn't overdo this business of individual privacy."

He thought briefly of the disdainful face--seemingly on a distant
station--which had merely examined him for several minutes one night
without ever condescending to speak. Recalling his rage at this
treatment, Robert wondered how the ancients had managed to get along
together when there were so many of them. They must have had some
strict code of behavior, he supposed, or they never would have bred
so enormous a population.

"I must find out about that someday," he decided. "How did you act,
for instance, if you wanted to play tennis but someone else just
refused and went to eat dinner? Maybe that was why the ancients had so
many murders."

He noticed that the robot was getting an answer from Henry's station,
and was pleased. He could talk as long as he liked, knowing Henry
would not resent his cutting off any time he became bored with the
conversation.

       *       *       *       *       *

The robot focused the image smoothly. Henry gave the impression of
being a small man. He was gray and wrinkled compared with Robert, but
his black eyes were alertly sharp. He smiled his greeting and
immediately launched into a story of one of his youthful trips through
the mountains, from the point at which it had been interrupted the
last time they had talked.

Robert listened impatiently.

"Maybe I have some interesting news," he remarked as the other
finished. "I picked up a new station the other night."

"That reminds me of a time when I was a boy and--"

Robert fidgeted while Henry described watching his father build a
spare television set as a hobby, with only a minimum of robot help. He
pounced upon the first pause.

"A new station!" he repeated. "Came in very well, too. I can't imagine
why I never picked it up before."

"Distant, perhaps?" asked Henry resignedly.

"No, not very far from me, as a matter of fact."

"You can't always tell, especially with the ocean so close. Now that
there are so few people, you'd think there'd be land enough for all of
them; but a good many spend all their lives aboard ship-robots."

"Not this one," said Robert. "She even showed me an outside view of
her home."

Henry's eyebrows rose. "She? A woman?"

"Her name is Marcia-Joan."

"Well, well," said Henry. "Imagine that. Women, as I recall, usually
do have funny names."

He gazed thoughtfully at his well-kept hands.

"Did I ever tell you about the last woman I knew?" he asked. "About
