with the apparatus.

"These lifeboats are half buried in the ship," Meta explained. "They
have transparent front ports covered by friction shields that withdraw
automatically when the boat is launched."

"Can we pull back the shields now?"

"I think so," she said. She traced the launching circuits to a junction
box and opened the lid. When she closed the shield relay manually, the
heavy plates slipped back into the hull. There was a clear view, since
most of the viewport projected beyond the parent ship.

"Perfect," Jason said. "I'll set up here. Now how do I talk to you in
the ship?"

"Right here," she said. "There's a pre-tuned setting on this
communicator. Don't touch anything else--and particularly not this
switch." She pointed to a large pull-handle set square into the center
of the control board. "Emergency launching. Two seconds after that is
pulled the lifeboat is shot free. And it so happens this boat has no
fuel."

"Hands off for sure," Jason said. "Now have Husky there run me in a line
with ship's power and I'll get this stuff set up."

The detector was simple, though the tuning had to be precise. A
dish-shaped antenna pulled in the signal for the delicately balanced
detector. There was a sharp fall-off on both sides of the input so
direction could be precisely determined. The resulting signal was fed to
an amplifier stage. Unlike the electronic components of the first stage,
this one was drawn in symbols on white paper. Carefully glued-on input
and output leads ran to it.

When everything was ready and clamped into place, Jason nodded to Meta's
image on the screen. "Take her up--and easy please. None of your nine-G
specials. Go into a slow circle around the perimeter, until I tell you
differently."

       *       *       *       *       *

Under steady power the ship lifted and grabbed for altitude, then eased
into its circular course. They made five circuits of the city before
Jason shook his head.

"The thing seems to be working fine, but we're getting too much noise
from all the local life. Get thirty kilometers out from the city and
start a new circuit."

[Illustration]

The results were better this time. A powerful signal came from the
direction of the city, confined to less than a degree of arc. With the
antenna fixed at a right angle to the direction of the ship's flight,
the signal was fairly constant. Meta rotated the ship on its main axis,
until Jason's lifeboat was directly below.

"Going fine now," he said. "Just hold your controls as they are and keep
the nose from drifting."

After making a careful mark on the setting circle, Jason turned the
receiving antenna through one hundred eighty degrees of arc. As the ship
kept to its circle, he made a slow collecting sweep of any signals
beamed at the city. They were halfway around before he got a new signal.

It was there all right, narrow but strong. Just to be sure he let the
ship complete two more sweeps, and he noted the direction on the
gyro-compass each time. They coincided. The third time around he called
to Meta.

"Get ready for a full right turn, or whatever you call it. I think I
have our bearing. Get ready--_now_."

It was a slow turn and Jason never lost the signal. A few times it
wavered, but he brought it back on. When the compass settled down Meta
pushed on more power.

They set their course towards the native Pyrrans.

An hour's flight at close to top atmospheric speed brought no change.
Meta complained, but Jason kept her on course. The signal never varied
and was slowly picking up strength. They crossed the chain of volcanoes
that marked the continental limits, the ship bucking in the fierce
thermals. Once the shore was behind and they were over water, Skop
joined Meta in grumbling. He kept his turret spinning, but there was
very little to shoot at this far from land.

When the islands came over the horizon the signal began to dip.

"Slow now," Jason called. "Those islands ahead look like our source!"

A continent had been here once, floating on Pyrrus' liquid core.
Pressures changed, land masses shifted, and the continent had sunk
beneath the ocean. All that was left now of the teeming life of that
land mass was confined to a chain of islands, once the mountain peaks of
the highest range of mountains. These islands, whose sheer, sides rose
straight from the water, held the last inhabitants of the lost
continent. The weeded-out descendants, of the victors of uncountable
violent contests. Here lived the oldest native Pyrrans.

"Come in lower," Jason signaled. "Towards that large peak. The signals
seem to originate there."

They swooped low over the mountain, but nothing was visible other than
the trees and sun-blasted rock.

The pain almost took Jason's head off. A blast of hatred that drove
through the amplifier and into his skull. He tore off the phones, and
clutched his skull between his hands. Through watering eyes he saw the
black cloud of flying beasts hurtle up from the trees below. He had a
single glimpse of the hillside beyond, before Meta blasted power to the
engines and the ship leaped away.

"We've found them!" Her fierce exultation faded as she saw Jason through
the communicator. "Are you all right? What happened?"

"Feel ... burned out ... I've felt a psi blast before, but nothing like
that! I had a glimpse of an opening, looked like a cave mouth, just
before the blast hit. Seemed to come from there."

"Lie down," Meta said. "I'll get you back as fast as I can. I'm calling
ahead to Kerk, he has to know what happened."

       *       *       *       *       *

A group of men were waiting in the landing station when they came down.
They stormed out as soon as the ship touched, shielding their faces from
the still-hot tubes. Kerk burst in as soon as the port was cracked,
peering around until he spotted Jason stretched out on an acceleration
couch.

"Is it true?" he barked. "You've traced the alien criminals who started
this war?"

"Slow, man, slow," Jason said. "I've traced the source of the psi
message that keeps your war going. I've found no evidence as to who
started this war, and certainly wouldn't go so far as to call them
criminals--"

"I'm tired of your word-play," Kerk broke in. "You've found these
creatures and their location has been marked."

"On the chart," Meta said, "I could fly there blindfolded."

"Fine, fine," Kerk said, rubbing his hands together so hard they could
hear the harsh rasp of the callouses. "It takes a real effort to grasp
the idea that, after all these centuries, the war might be coming to an
end. But it's possible now. Instead of simply killing off these
self-renewing legions of the damned that attack us, we can get to the
leaders. Search them out, carry the war to them for a change--and blast
their stain from the face of this planet!"

"Nothing of the sort!" Jason said, sitting up with an effort. "Nothing
doing! Since I came to this planet I have been knocked around, and
risked my life ten times over. Do you think I have done this just to
satisfy your blood-thirsty ambitions? It's peace I'm after--not
destruction. You promised to contact these creatures, attempt to
negotiate with them. Aren't you a man of honor who keeps his word?"

"I'll ignore the insult--though I'd have killed you for it at any other
time," Kerk said. "You've been of great service to our people, we are
not ashamed to acknowledge an honest debt. At the same time--do not
accuse me of breaking promises that I never made. I recall my exact
words. I promised to go along with any reasonable plan that would end
this war. That is just what I intend to do. Your plan to negotiate a
peace is not reasonable. Therefore we are going to destroy the enemy."

"Think first," Jason called after Kerk, who had turned to leave. "What
is wrong with trying negotiation or an armistice? Then, if that fails,
you can try your way."

The compartment was getting crowded as other Pyrrans pushed in. Kerk,
almost to the door, turned back to face Jason.

"I'll tell you what's wrong with armistice," he said. "It's a coward's
way out, that's what it is. It's all right for you to suggest it, you're
from off-world and don't know any better. But do you honestly think I
could entertain such a defeatist notion for one instant? When I speak, I
speak not only for myself, but for all of us here. We don't mind
fighting, and we know how to do it. We know that if this war was over we
could build a better world here. At the same time, if we have the choice
of continued war or a cowardly peace--_we vote for war_. This war will
only be over when the enemy is utterly destroyed!"

The listening Pyrrans shouted in agreement, and when Kerk pushed out
through the crowd some of them patted his shoulder as he went by. Jason
slumped back on the couch, worn out by his exertions and exhausted by
the attempt to win the violent Pyrrans over to a peaceful point of view.

When he looked up they were gone--all except Meta. She had the same look
of blood-thirsty elation as the others, but it drained away when she
glanced at him.

"What about it, Meta?" he asked bitterly. "No doubts? Do you think that
destruction is the only way to end this war?"

"I don't know," she said. "I can't be sure. For the first time in my
life I find myself with more than one answer to the same question."

"Congratulations," he said. "It's a sign of growing up."




XXII.


Jason stood to one side and watched the deadly cargo being loaded into
the hold of the ship. The Pyrrans were in good humor as they stowed away
riot guns, grenades and gas bombs. When the back-pack atom bomb was put
aboard one of them broke into a marching song, and the others picked it
up. Maybe they were happy, but the approaching carnage only filled Jason
with an intense gloom. He felt that somehow he was a traitor to life.
Perhaps the life form he had found needed destroying--and perhaps it
didn't. Without making the slightest attempt at conciliation,
destruction would be plain murder.

Kerk came out of the operations building and the starter pumps could be
heard whining inside the ship. They would leave within minutes. Jason
forced himself into a foot-dragging rush and met Kerk halfway to the
ship.

"I'm coming with you, Kerk. You owe me at least that much for finding
them."

Kerk hesitated, not liking the idea. "This is an operational mission,"
he said. "No room for observers, and the extra weight-- And it's too
late to stop us Jason, you know that."

"You Pyrrans are the worst liars in the universe," Jason said. "We both
know that ship can lift ten times the amount it's carrying today.
Now ... do you let me come, or forbid me without reason at all?"

"Get aboard," Kerk said. "But keep out of the way or you'll get
trampled."

This time, with a definite destination ahead, the flight was much
faster. Meta took the ship into the stratosphere, in a high ballistic
arc that ended at the islands. Kerk was in the co-pilot's seat, Jason
sat behind them where he could watch the screens. The landing party,
twenty-five volunteers, were in the hold below with the weapons. All the
screens in the ship were switched to the forward viewer. They watched
the green island appear and swell, then vanish behind the flames of the
braking rockets. Jockeying the ship carefully, Meta brought it down on a
flat shelf near the cave mouth.

Jason was ready this time for the blast of mental hatred--but it still
hurt. The gunners laughed and killed gleefully as every animal on the
island closed in on the ship. They were slaughtered by the thousands,
and still more came.

"Do you have to do this?" Jason asked. "It's murder--carnage, just
butchering those beasts like that."

"Self-defense," Kerk said. "They attack us and they get killed. What
could be simpler? Now shut up, or I'll throw you out there with them."

It was a half an hour before the gunfire slackened. Animals still
attacked them, but the mass assaults seemed to be over. Kerk spoke into
the intercom.

"Landing party away--and watch your step. They know we're here and will
make it as hot as they can. Take the bomb into that cave and see how far
back it runs. We can always blast them from the air, but it'll do no
good if they're dug into solid rock. Keep your screen open, leave the
bomb and pull back at once if I tell you to. Now move."

       *       *       *       *       *

The men swarmed down the ladders and formed into open battle formation.
They were soon under attack, but the beasts were picked off before they
could get close. It didn't take long for the man at point to reach the
cave. He had his pickup trained in front of him, and the watchers in the
ship followed the advance.

"Big cave," Kerk grunted. "Slants back and down. What I was afraid of.
Bomb dropped on that would just close it up. With no guarantee that
anything sealed in it, couldn't eventually get out. We'll have to see
how far down it goes."

There was enough heat in the cave now to use the infra-red filters. The
rock walls stood out harshly black and white as the advance continued.

"No signs of life since entering the cave," the officer reported.
"Gnawed bones at the entrance and some bat droppings. It looks like a
natural cave--so far."

Step by step the advance continued, slowing as it went. Insensitive as
the Pyrrans were to psi pressure, even they were aware of the blast of
hatred being continuously leveled at them. Jason, back in the ship, had
a headache that slowly grew worse instead of better.

"_Watch out!_" Kerk shouted, staring at the screen with horror.

The cave was filled from wall to wall with pallid, eyeless animals. They
poured from tiny side passages and seemed to literally emerge from the
ground. Their front ranks dissolved in flame, but more kept pressing in.
On the screen the watchers in the ship saw the cave spin dizzily as the
operator fell. Pale bodies washed up and concealed the lens.

"Close ranks--flame-throwers and gas!" Kerk bellowed into the mike.

Less than half of the men were alive after that first attack. The
survivors, protected by the flame-throwers, set off the gas grenades.
Their sealed battle armor protected them while the section of cave
filled with gas. Someone dug through the bodies of their attackers and
found the pickup.

"Leave the bomb there and withdraw," Kerk ordered. "We've had enough
losses already."

A different man stared out of the screen. The officer was dead. "Sorry,
sir," he said, "but it will be just as easy to push ahead as back as
long as the gas grenades hold out. We're too close now to pull back."

"That's an order," Kerk shouted, but the man was gone from the screen
and the advance continued.

Jason's fingers hurt where he had them clamped to the chair arm. He
pulled them loose and massaged them. On the screen the black and white
cave flowed steadily towards them. Minute after minute went by this way.
Each time the animals attacked again, a few more gas grenades were used
up.

"Something ahead--looks different," the panting voice cracked from the
speaker. The narrow cave slowly opened out into a gigantic chamber, so
large the roof and far walls were lost in the distance.

"What are those?" Kerk asked. "Get a searchlight over to the right
there."

The picture on the screen was fuzzy and hard to see now, dimmed by the
layers of rock in-between. Details couldn't be made out clearly, but it
was obvious this was something unusual.

"Never saw ... anything quite like them before," the speaker said. "Look
like big plants of some kind, ten meters tall at least--yet they're
moving. Those branches, tentacles or whatever they are, keep pointing
towards us and I get the darkest feeling in my head ..."

"Blast one, see what happens," Kerk said.

The gun fired and at the same instant an intensified wave of mental
hatred rolled over the men, dropping them to the ground. They rolled in
pain, blacked out and unable to think or fight the underground beasts
that poured over them in renewed attack.

In the ship, far above, Jason felt the shock to his mind and wondered
how the men below could have lived through it. The others in the control
room had been hit by it as well. Kerk pounded on the frame of the screen
and shouted to the unhearing men below.

"Pull back, come back ..."

It was too late. The men only stirred slightly as the victorious Pyrran
animals washed over them, clawing for the joints in their armor. Only
one man moved, standing up and beating the creatures away with his bare
