Chambers was out of his chair and striding across the room. A tumult
buzzed within his skull.

Licked? Hell, he hadn't even started! He'd win yet. He'd teach the
people to revolt! He'd run Manning and Page out to the end of space and
push them through!




_CHAPTER SEVENTEEN_


It was a weird revolution. There were few battles, little blood shed.
There seemed to be no secret plots. There were no skulking leaders, no
passwords, nothing that in former years had marked rebellion against
tyranny.

It was a revolution carried out with utter boldness. Secret police were
helpless, for it was not a secret revolution. The regular police and the
troopers were helpless because the men they wanted to arrest were
shadows that flitter here and there ... large and substantial shadows,
but impossible to seize and imprison.

Every scheme that was hatched within the government circles was known
almost at once to the ghostly leaders who stalked the land. Police
detachments, armed with warrants for the arrests of men who had
participated in some action which would stamp them as active rebels,
found the suspects absent when they broke down the doors. Someone had
warned them. Troops, hurried to points where riots had broken out,
arrived to find peaceful scenes, but with evidence of recent battle. The
rioters had been warned, had made their getaway.

When the rebels struck it was always at the most opportune time, when
the government was off balance or off guard.

In the first day of the revolt, Ranthoor fell when the maddened
populace, urged on by the words of a shadowy John Moore Mallory, charged
the federation buildings. The government fled, leaving all records
behind, to Satellite City on Ganymede.

In the first week three Martian cities fell, but Sandebar, the capital,
still held out. On Venus, Radium City was taken by the rebels within
twenty-four hours after the first call to revolt had rung across the
worlds, but New Chicago, the seat of government, still was in the
government's hands, facing a siege.

Government propagandists spread the word that the material energy
engines were not safe. Reports were broadcast that on at least two
occasions the engines had blown up, killing the men who operated them.

But this propaganda failed to gain credence, for in the cities that were
in the rebel hands, technicians were at work manufacturing and setting
up the material engines. Demonstrations were given. The people saw them,
saw what enormous power they developed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Russ Page stared incredulously at the television screen. It seemed to be
shifting back and forth. One second it held the distorted view of
Satellite City on Ganymede, and the next second the view of jumbled, icy
desert somewhere outside the city.

"Look here, Greg," he said. "Something's wrong."

Greg Manning turned away from the calculator where he had been working
and stared at the screen.

"How long has it been acting that way?" he asked.

"Just started," said Russ.

Greg straightened and glanced down the row of television machines. Some
of them were dead, their switches closed, but on the screens of many of
the others was the same effect as on this machine. Their operators were
working frustratedly at the controls, trying to focus the image, bring
it into sharp relief.

"Can't seem to get a thing, sir," said one of the men. "I was working on
the fueling station out on Io, and the screen just went haywire."

"Mine seems to be all right," said another man. "I've had it on Sandebar
for the last couple of hours and there's nothing wrong."

A swift check revealed one fact. The machines, when trained on the
Jovian worlds, refused to function. Anywhere else in space, however,
they worked perfectly.

Russ stoked and lit his pipe, snapped off his machine and swung around
in the operator's chair.

"Somebody's playing hell with us out around Jupiter," he stated calmly.

"I've been expecting something like this," said Greg. "I have been
afraid of this ever since Craven blanketed us out of the Interplanetary
building."

       *       *       *       *       *

"He really must have something this time," Russ agreed. "He's blanketing
out the entire Jovian system. There's a space field of low intensity
surrounding all of Jupiter, enclosing all the moons. He keeps shifting
the intensity so that, even though we can force our way through his
field, the irregular variations make it impossible to line up anything.
It works, in principle, just as effectively as if we couldn't get
through at all."

Greg whistled soundlessly through suddenly bared teeth.

"That takes power," he said, "and I'm afraid Craven has it. Power to
burn."

"The collector field?" asked Russ.

Greg nodded. "A field that sucks in radiant energy. Free energy that he
just reaches out and grabs. And it doesn't depend on the Sun alone. It
probably makes use of every type of radiation in all of space."

Russ slumped in his chair, smoking, his forehead wrinkled in thought.

"If that's what he's got," he finally declared, "he's going to be hard
to crack. He can suck in any radiant vibration form, any space
vibration. He can shift them around, break them down and build them up.
He can discharge them, direct them. He's got a vibration plant that's
the handiest little war machine that ever existed."

Greg suddenly wheeled and walked to a wall cabinet. From it he took a
box and, opening it, lifted out a tiny mechanism.

He chuckled deep in his throat. "The mechanical shadow. The little
machine that always tells us where Craven is--as long as he's wearing
his glasses."

"He always wears them," said Russ crisply. "He's blind as a bat without
them."

Greg set the machine down on the table. "When we find Craven, we'll find
the contraption that's blanketing Jupiter and its moons."

Dials spun and needles quivered. Rapidly Russ jotted down the readings
on a sheet of paper. At the calculator, he tapped keys, depressed the
activator. The machine hummed and snarled and chuckled.

Russ glanced at the result imprinted on the paper roll.

"Craven is out near Jupiter," he announced. "About 75,000 miles distant
from its surface, in a plane normal to the Sun's rays."

"A spaceship," suggested Greg.

Russ nodded. "That's the only answer."

The two men looked at one another.

"That's something we can get hold of," said Greg.

He walked to the ship controls and lowered himself into the pilot's
chair. A hand came out and hauled back a lever.

The _Invincible_ moved.

From the engine rooms came the whine of the gigantic power plant as it
built up and maintained the gravity concentration center suddenly
created in front of the ship.

Russ, standing beside Greg at the control panel, looked out into space
and marveled. They were flashing through space, their speed building up
at a breath-taking rate, yet they had no real propulsion power. The
discovery of the gravity concentrator had outdated such a method of
driving a spaceship. Instead, they were falling, hurtling downward into
the yawning maw of an artificial gravity field. And such a method made
for speed, terrible speed.

Jupiter seemed to leap at them. It became a great crimson and yellow
ball that filled almost half the vision plate.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Invincible's_ speed was slacking off, slower and slower, until it
barely crawled in comparison to its former speed.

Slowly they circled Jupiter's great girth, staring out of the vision
port for a sight of Craven's ship. They were nearing the position the
little mechanical shadow had indicated.

"There it is," said Russ suddenly, almost breathlessly.

Far out in space, tiny, almost like a dust mote against the great bulk
of the monster planet, rode a tiny light. Slowly the _Invincible_
crawled inward. The mote of light became a gleaming silver ship, a
mighty ship--one that was fully as large as the _Invincible_!

"That's it all right," said Greg. "They're lying behind a log out here
raising hell with our television apparatus. Maybe we better tickle them
a little bit and see what they have."

Rising from the control board, he went to another control panel. Russ
remained standing in front of the vision plate, staring down at the
ship out in space.

Behind him came a shrill howl from the power plant. The _Invincible_
staggered slightly. A beam of deep indigo lashed across space, a finger
suddenly jabbing at the other ship.

Space was suddenly colored, for thousands of miles, as the beam struck
Craven's ship and seemed to explode in a blast of dazzling indigo light.
The ship reeled under the impact of the blow, reeled and weaved in space
as the beam struck it and delivered to it the mighty power of the
screaming engines back in the engine room.

"What happened?" Greg screamed above the roar.

Russ shrugged his shoulders. "You jarred him a little. Pushed him
through space for several hundred miles. Made him know something had hit
him, but it didn't seem to do any damage."

"That was pure cosmic I gave him! Five billion horsepower--and it just
staggered him!"

"He's got a space lens that absorbs the energy," said Russ. "The lens
concentrates it and pours it into a receiving chamber, probably a huge
photo-cell. Nobody yet has burned out one of those things on a closed
circuit."

Greg wrinkled his brow, perplexed. "What he must have is a special field
of some sort that lowers the wave-length and the intensity. He's getting
natural cosmics all the time and taking care of them."

"That wouldn't be much of a trick," Russ pointed out. "But when he takes
care of cosmics backed by five billion horsepower ... that's something
else!"

Greg grinned wickedly. "I'm going to hand him a long heat radiation. If
his field shortens that any, he'll have radio beam and that will blow
photo-cells all to hell."

He stabbed viciously at the keys on the board and once again the shrill
howl of the engines came from the rear of the ship. A lance of red
splashed out across space and touched the other ship. Again space was
lit, this time with a crimson glow.

       *       *       *       *       *

Russ shook his head. "Nothing doing."

Greg sat down and looked at Russ. "Funny thing about this. They just sat
there and let us throw two charges at them, took everything we gave them
and never tried to hand it back."

"Maybe they haven't anything to hand us," Russ suggested hopefully.

"They must have. Craven wouldn't take to space with just a purely
defensive weapon. He knew we'd find him and he'd have a fight on his
hands."

Russ found his pipe was dead. Snapping his lighter, he applied flame to
the blackened tobacco. Walking slowly to the wall cabinet, he lifted two
other boxes out, set them on the table and took from them two other
mechanical shadows. He turned them on and leaned close, watching the
spinning dials, the quivering needles.

"Greg," he whispered, "Chambers and Stutsman are there in that ship with
Craven! Look, their shadows register identical with the one that spotted
Craven."

"I suspected as much," Greg replied. "We got the whole pack cornered out
here. If we can just get rid of them, the whole war would be won in one
stroke."

Russ lifted a stricken face from the row of tiny mechanisms. "This is
our big chance. We may never get it again. The next hour could decide
who is going to win."

Greg rose from the chair and stood before the control board. Grimly he
punched a series of keys. The engines howled again. Greg twisted a dial
and the howl rose into a shrill scream.

From the _Invincible_ another beam lashed out ... another and another.
Space was speared with beam after beam hurtling from the great ship.

Swiftly the beams went through the range of radiation, through radio and
short radio, infra-red, visible light, ultra-violet, X-ray, the gammas
and the cosmics--a terrific flood of billions of horsepower.

Craven's ship buckled and careened under the lashing impacts of the
bombardment, but it seemed unhurt!

Greg's face was bleaker than usual as he turned from the board to look
at Russ.

"We've used everything we have," he said, "and he's stopped them all. We
can't touch him."

       *       *       *       *       *

Russ shivered. The control room suddenly seemed chilly with a
frightening kind of cold.

"He's carrying photo-cells and several thousand tons of accumulator
stacks. Not much power left in them. He could pour a billion horsepower
into them for hours and still have room for more."

Greg nodded wearily. "All we've been doing is feeding him."

The engines were humming quietly now, singing the low song of power held
in leash.

But then they screamed like a buzz saw biting into an iron-hard stick of
white oak. Screamed in a single, frightful agony as they threw into the
protecting wall that enclosed the _Invincible_ all the power they could
develop.

The air of the ship was instantaneously charged with a hazy, bluish
glow, and the sharp, stinging odor of ozone filled the ship.

       *       *       *       *       *

Outside, an enormous burst of blue-white flame splashed and spattered
around the _Invincible_. Living lightning played in solid, snapping
sheets around the vision port and ran in trickling blazing fire across
the plates.

Russ cried out and backed away, holding his arm before his eyes. It was
as if he had looked into a nova of energy exploding before his eyes.

In the instant the scream died and the splash of terrific fire had
vanished. Only a rapidly dying glow remained.

"What was it?" asked Russ dazedly. "What happened? Ten engines every one
of them capable of over five billion horsepower and every one of them
screaming!"

"Craven," said Greg grimly. "He let us have everything he had. He simply
drained his accumulator stacks and threw it all into our face. But he's
done now. That was his only shot. He'll have to build up power now and
that will take a while. But we couldn't have taken much more."

"Stalemate," said Russ. "We can't hurt him, he can't hurt us."

"Not by a damn sight," declared Greg. "I still have a trick or two in
mind."

He tried them. From the _Invincible_ a fifty-billion-horsepower bolt of
living light and fire sprang out as all ten engines thundered with an
insane voice that racked the ship.

Fireworks exploded in space when the bolt struck Craven's ship. Screen
after screen exploded in glittering, flaming sparks, but the ship rode
the lashing charge, finally halted the thrust of power. The beam glowed
faintly, died out.

Perspiration streamed down Greg's face as he bent over a calculator and
constructed the formula for a magnetic field. He sent out a field of
such unimaginable intensity that it would have drawn any beryl-steel
within a mile of it into a hard, compact mass. Even the _Invincible_, a
hundred miles away, lurched under the strain. But Craven's ship, after
the first wild jerk, did not move. A curious soft glow spread out from
the ship, veered sharply and disappeared in the magnetic field.

Greg swore softly. "He's cutting it down as fast as I try to build it
up," he explained, "and I can't move it any nearer."

From Craven's ship lashed out another thunderbolt and once again the
engines screamed in terrible unison as they poured power into the ship's
triple screen. The first screen stopped all material things. The second
stopped radiations by refracting them into the fourth dimension. The
third shield was akin to the anti-entropy field, which stopped all
matter ... and yet the ten engines bellowed like things insane as Craven
struck with flaming bolts, utilizing the power he had absorbed from the
fifty billion horsepower Greg had thrown at him.
