characteristic features of the breed, and had acquired a long, narrow head, of
large size relatively to its small body, and elongated legs. But in this case
and in some others we ought not to assume that, because certain characters are
lost, perhaps through reversion, under one course of treatment, therefore that
they were at first directly produced by an opposite treatment.

In the case of the rabbit, which has become feral on the island of Porto
Santo, we are at first strongly tempted to attribute the whole change--the
greatly reduced size, the altered tints of the fur, and the loss of certain
characteristic marks--to the definite action of the new conditions to which it
has been exposed. But in all such cases we have to consider in addition the
tendency to reversion to progenitors more or less remote, and the natural
selection of the finest shades of difference.

The nature of the food sometimes either definitely induces certain
peculiarities, or stands in some close relation with them. Pallas long ago
asserted that the fat-tailed sheep of Siberia degenerate and lose their
enormous tails when removed from certain saline pastures; and recently Erman
(23/39. 'Travels in Siberia' English translation volume 1 page 228.) states
that this occurs with the Kirgisian sheep when brought to Orenburgh.

It is well known that hemp-seed causes bullfinches and certain other birds to
become black. Mr. Wallace has communicated to me some much more remarkable
facts of the same nature. The natives of the Amazonian region feed the common
green parrot (Chrysotis festiva, Linn.) with the fat of large Siluroid fishes,
and the birds thus treated become beautifully variegated with red and yellow
feathers. In the Malayan archipelago, the natives of Gilolo alter in an
analogous manner the colours of another parrot, namely, the Lorius garrulus,
Linn., and thus produce the Lori rajah or King-Lory. These parrots in the
Malay Islands and South America, when fed by the natives on natural vegetable
food, such as rice and plaintains, retain their proper colours. Mr. Wallace
has, also, recorded (23/40. A.R. Wallace 'Travels on the Amazon and Rio Negro'
page 294.) a still more singular fact. "The Indians (of S. America) have a
curious art by which they change the colours of the feathers of many birds.
They pluck out those from the part they wish to paint, and inoculate the fresh
wound with the milky secretion from the skin of a small toad. The feathers
grow of a brilliant yellow colour, and on being plucked out, it is said, grow
again of the same colour without any fresh operation."

Bechstein (23/41. 'Naturgeschichte der Stubenvogel' 1840 s. 262, 308.) does
not entertain any doubt that seclusion from light affects, at least
temporarily, the colours of cage-birds.

It is well known that the shells of land-mollusca are affected by the
abundance of lime in different districts. Isidore Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire
(23/42. 'Hist. Nat Gen.' tome 3 page 402.) gives the case of Helix lactea,
which has recently been carried from Spain to the South of France and to the
Rio Plata, and in both countries now presents a distinct appearance, but
whether this has resulted from food or climate is not known. With respect to
the common oyster, Mr. F. Buckland informs me that he can generally
distinguish the shells from different districts; young oysters brought from
Wales and laid down in beds where "natives" are indigenous, in the short space
of two months begin to assume the "native" character. M. Costa (23/43. 'Bull.
de La Soc. Imp. d'Acclimat.' tome 8 page 351.) has recorded a much more
remarkable case of the same nature, namely, that young shells taken from the
shores of England and placed in the Mediterranean, at once altered their
manner of growth and formed prominent diverging rays, like those on the shells
of the proper Mediterranean oyster. The same individual shell, showing both
forms of growth, was exhibited before a society in Paris. Lastly, it is well
known that caterpillars fed on different food sometimes either themselves
acquire a different colour or produce moths differing in colour. (23/44. See
an account of Mr. Gregson's experiments on the Abraxus grossulariata 'Proc.
Entomolog. Soc.' January 6, 1862: these experiments have been confirmed by Mr.
Greening in 'Proc. of the Northern Entomolog. Soc.' July 28, 1862. For the
effects of food on caterpillars see a curious account by M. Michely in 'Bull.
De La Soc. Imp. d'Acclimat.' tome 8 page 563. For analogous facts from Dahlbom
on Hymenoptera see Westwood 'Modern Class. of Insects' volume 2 page 98. See
also Dr. L. Moller 'Die Abhangigkeit der Insecten' 1867 s. 70.)

It would be travelling beyond my proper limits here to discuss how far organic
beings in a state of nature are definitely modified by changed conditions. In
my 'Origin of Species' I have given a brief abstract of the facts bearing on
this point, and have shown the influence of light on the colours of birds, and
of residence near the sea on the lurid tints of insects, and on the succulency
of plants. Mr. Herbert Spencer (23/45. 'The Principles of Biology' volume 2
1866. The present chapters were written before I had read Mr. Herbert
Spencer's work, so that I have not been able to make so much use of it as I
should otherwise probably have done.) has recently discussed with much ability
this whole subject on general grounds. He argues, for instance, that with all
animals the external and internal tissues are differently acted on by the
surrounding conditions, and they invariably differ in intimate structure. So
again the upper and lower surfaces of true leaves, as well as of stems and
petioles, when these assume the function and occupy the position of leaves,
are differently circumstanced with respect to light, etc., and apparently in
consequence differ in structure. But, as Mr. Herbert Spencer admits, it is
most difficult in all such cases to distinguish between the effects of the
definite action of physical conditions and the accumulation through natural
selection of inherited variations which are serviceable to the organism, and
which have arisen independently of the definite action of these conditions.]

Although we are not here concerned with the definite action of the conditions
of life on organisms in a state of nature, I may state that much evidence has
been gained during the last few years on this subject. In the United States,
for instance, it has been clearly proved, more especially by Mr. J.A. Allen,
that, with birds, many species differ in tint, size of body and of beak, and
in length of tail, in proceeding from the North to the South; and it appears
that these differences must be attributed to the direct action of temperature.
(23/46. Professor Weismann comes to the same conclusion with respect to
certain European butterflies in his valuable essay 'Ueber den Saison-
Dimorphismus' 1875. I might also refer to the recent works of several other
authors on the present subject; for instance to Kerner's 'Gute und schlechte
Arten' 1866.) With respect to plants I will give a somewhat analogous case:
Mr. Meehan (23/47. 'Proc. Acad. Nat. Soc. of Philadelphia' January 28, 1862.),
has compared twenty-nine kinds of American trees with their nearest European
allies, all grown in close proximity and under as nearly as possible the same
conditions. In the American species he finds, with the rarest exceptions, that
the leaves fall earlier in the season, and assume before their fall a brighter
tint; that they are less deeply toothed or serrated; that the buds are
smaller; that the trees are more diffuse in growth and have fewer branchlets;
and, lastly, that the seeds are smaller--all in comparison with the
corresponding European species. Now considering that these corresponding trees
belong to several distinct orders, and that they are adapted to widely
different stations, it can hardly be supposed that their differences are of
any special service to them in the New and Old worlds; and if so such
differences cannot have been gained through natural selection, and must be
attributed to the long continued action of a different climate.

GALLS.

Another class of facts, not relating to cultivated plants, deserves attention.
I allude to the production of galls. Every one knows the curious, bright-red,
hairy productions on the wild rose-tree, and the various different galls
produced by the oak. Some of the latter resemble fruit, with one face as rosy
as the rosiest apple. These bright colours can be of no service either to the
gall-forming insect or to the tree, and probably are the direct result of the
action of the light, in the same manner as the apples of Nova Scotia or Canada
are brighter coloured than English apples. According to Osten Sacken's latest
revision, no less than fifty-eight kinds of galls are produced on the several
species of oak, by Cynips with its sub-genera; and Mr. B.D. Walsh (23/48. See
Mr. B.D. Walsh's excellent papers in 'Proc. Entomolog. Soc. Philadelphia'
December 1866 page 284. With respect to the willow see ibid 1864 page 546.)
states that he can add many others to the list. One American species of
willow, the Salix humilis, bears ten distinct kinds of galls. The leaves which
spring from the galls of various English willows differ completely in shape
from the natural leaves. The young shoots of junipers and firs, when punctured
by certain insects, yield monstrous growths resembling flowers and fir-cones;
and the flowers of some plants become from the same cause wholly changed in
appearance. Galls are produced in every quarter of the world; of several sent
to me by Mr. Thwaites from Ceylon, some were as symmetrical as a composite
flower when in bud, others smooth and spherical like a berry; some protected
by long spines, others clothed with yellow wool formed of long cellular hairs,
others with regularly tufted hairs. In some galls the internal structure is
simple, but in others it is highly complex; thus M. Lacaze-Duthiers (23/49.
See his admirable 'Histoire des Galles' in 'Annal. des Sc. Nat. Bot.' 3rd
series tome 19 1853 page 273.) has figured in the common ink-gall no less than
seven concentric layers, composed of distinct tissue, namely, the epidermic,
sub-epidermic, spongy, intermediate, and the hard protective layer formed of
curiously thickened woody cells, and, lastly, the central mass, abounding with
starch-granules on which the larvae feed.

Galls are produced by insects of various orders, but the greater number by
species of Cynips. It is impossible to read M. Lacaze-Duthiers' discussion and
doubt that the poisonous secretion of the insect causes the growth of the
gall; and every one knows how virulent is the poison secreted by wasps and
bees, which belong to the same group with Cynips. Galls grow with
extraordinary rapidity, and it is said that they attain their full size in a
few days (23/50. Kirby and Spence 'Entomology' 1818 volume 1 page 450; Lacaze-
Duthiers ibid page 284.); it is certain that they are almost completely
developed before the larvae are hatched. Considering that many gall-insects
are extremely small, the drop of secreted poison must be excessively minute;
it probably acts on one or two cells alone, which, being abnormally
stimulated, rapidly increase by a process of self-division. Galls, as Mr.
Walsh (23/51. 'Proc. Entomolog. Soc. Philadelphia' 1864 page 558.) remarks,
afford good, constant, and definite characters, each kind keeping as true to
form as does any independent organic being. This fact becomes still more
remarkable when we hear that, for instance, seven out of the ten different
kinds of galls produced on Salix humilis are formed by gall-gnats
(Cecidomyidae) which "though essentially distinct species, yet resemble one
another so closely that in almost all cases it is difficult, and in most cases
impossible, to distinguish the full-grown insects one from the other." (23/52.
Mr. B.D. Walsh ibid page 633 and December 1866 page 275.) For in accordance
with a wide-spread analogy we may safely infer that the poison secreted by
insects so closely allied would not differ much in nature; yet this slight
difference is sufficient to induce widely different results. In some few cases
the same species of gall-gnat produces on distinct species of willows galls
which cannot be distinguished; the Cynips fecundatrix, also, has been known to
produce on the Turkish oak, to which it is not properly attached, exactly the
same kind of gall as on the European oak. (23/53. Mr. B.D. Walsh ibid 1864
pages 545, 411, 495; and December 1866 page 278. See also Lacaze-Duthiers.)
These latter facts apparently prove that the nature of the poison is a more
powerful agent in determining the form of the gall than the specific character
of the tree which is acted on.

As the poisonous secretion of insects belonging to various orders has the
special power of affecting the growth of various plants; as a slight
difference in the nature of the poison suffices to produce widely different
results; and lastly, as we know that the chemical compounds secreted by plants
are eminently liable to be modified by changed conditions of life, we may
believe it possible that various parts of a plant might be modified through
the agency of its own altered secretions. Compare, for instance, the mossy and
viscid calyx of a moss-rose, which suddenly appears through bud-variation on a
Provence-rose, with the gall of red moss growing from the inoculated leaf of a
wild rose, with each filament symmetrically branched like a microscopical
spruce-fir, bearing a glandular tip and secreting odoriferous gummy matter.
(23/54. Lacaze-Duthiers ibid pages 325, 328.) Or compare, on the one hand, the
fruit of the peach, with its hairy skin, fleshy covering, hard shell and
kernel, and on the other hand one of the more complex galls with its
epidermic, spongy, and woody layers, surrounding tissue loaded with starch
granules. These normal and abnormal structures manifestly present a certain
degree of resemblance. Or, again, reflect on the cases above given of parrots
which have had their plumage brightly decorated through some change in their
blood, caused by having been fed on certain fishes, or locally inoculated with
the poison of a toad. I am far from wishing to maintain that the moss-rose or
the hard shell of the peach-stone or the bright colours of birds are actually
due to any chemical change in the sap or blood; but these cases of galls and
of parrots are excellently adapted to show us how powerfully and singularly
external agencies may affect structure. With such facts before us, we need
feel no surprise at the appearance of any modification in any organic being.

[I may, also, here allude to the remarkable effects which parasitic fungi
sometimes produce on plants. Reissek (23/55. 'Linnaea' volume 17 1843; quoted
by Dr. M.T. Masters, Royal Institution, March 16, 1860.) has described a
Thesium, affected by an Oecidium, which was greatly modified, and assumed some
of the characteristic features of certain allied species, or even genera.
Suppose, says Reissek, "the condition originally caused by the fungus to
become constant in the course of time, the plant would, if found growing wild,
be considered as a distinct species or even as belonging to a new genus." I
quote this remark to show how profoundly, yet in how natural a manner, this
plant must have been modified by the parasitic fungus. Mr. Meehan (23/56.
'Proc. Acad. Nat. Sc., Philadelphia' June 16, 1874 and July 23, 1875.) also
states that three species of Euphorbia and Portulaca olereacea, which
naturally grow prostrate, become erect when they are attacked by the Oecidium.
Euphorbia maculata in this case also becomes nodose, with the branchlets
comparatively smooth and the leaves modified in shape, approaching in these
respects to a distinct species, namely, the E. hypericifolia.]

FACTS AND CONSIDERATIONS OPPOSED TO THE BELIEF THAT THE CONDITIONS OF LIFE ACT
IN A POTENT MANNER IN CAUSING DEFINITE MODIFICATIONS OF STRUCTURE.

I have alluded to the slight differences in species naturally living in
distinct countries under different conditions; and such differences we feel at
first inclined to attribute, probably often with justice, to the definite
action of the surrounding conditions. But it must be borne in mind that there
exist many animals and plants which range widely and have been exposed to
great diversities of climate, yet remain uniform in character. Some authors,
as previously remarked, account for the varieties of our culinary and
agricultural plants by the definite action of the conditions to which they
have been exposed in the different parts of Great Britain; but there are about
200 plants (23/57. Hewett C. Watson 'Cybele Britannica' volume 1 1847 page
11.) which are found in every single English county; and these plants must
have been exposed for an immense period to considerable differences of climate
and soil, yet do not differ. So, again,, some animals and plants range over a
large portion of the world, yet retain the same character.

[Notwithstanding the facts previously given on the occurrence of highly
peculiar local diseases and on the strange modifications of structure in
plants caused by the inoculated poison of insects, and other analogous cases;
still there are a multitude of variations--such as the modified skull of the
niata ox and bulldog, the long horns of Caffre cattle, the conjoined toes of
the solid-hoofed swine, the immense crest and protuberant skull of Polish
fowls, the crop of the pouter-pigeon, and a host of other such cases--which we
can hardly attribute to the definite action, in the sense before specified, of
the external conditions of life. No doubt in every case there must have been
some exciting cause; but as we see innumerable individuals exposed to nearly
the same conditions, and one alone is affected, we may conclude that the
constitution of the individual is of far higher importance than the conditions
to which it has been exposed. It seems, indeed, to be a general rule that
conspicuous variations occur rarely, and in one individual alone out of
millions, though all may have been exposed, as far as we can judge, to nearly
the same conditions. As the most strongly marked variations graduate
insensibly into the most trifling, we are led by the same train of thought to
attribute each slight variation much more to innate differences of
constitution, however caused, than to the definite action of the surrounding
conditions.

We are led to the same conclusion by considering the cases, formerly alluded
to, of fowls and pigeons, which have varied and will no doubt go on varying in
directly opposite ways, though kept during many generations under nearly the
same conditions. Some, for instance, are born with their beaks, wings, tails,
legs, etc., a little longer, and others with these same parts a little
shorter. By the long-continued selection of such slight individual differences
which occur in birds kept in the same aviary, widely different races could
certainly be formed; and long-continued selection, important as is the result,
does nothing but preserve the variations which arise, as it appears to us,
spontaneously.

In these cases we see that domesticated animals vary in an indefinite number
of particulars, though treated as uniformly as is possible. On the other hand,
there are instances of animals and plants, which, though they have been
exposed to very different conditions, both under nature and domestication,
have varied in nearly the same manner. Mr. Layard informs me that he has
observed amongst the Caffres of South Africa a dog singularly like an arctic
Esquimaux dog. Pigeons in India present nearly the same wide diversities of
colour as in Europe; and I have seen chequered and simply barred pigeons, and
pigeons with blue and white loins, from Sierra Leone, Madeira, England, and
India. New varieties of flowers are continually raised in different parts of
Great Britain, but many of these are found by the judges at our exhibitions to
be almost identical with old varieties. A vast number of new fruit-trees and
culinary vegetables have been produced in North America: these differ from
European varieties in the same general manner as the several varieties raised
in Europe differ from one another; and no one has ever pretended that the
climate of America has given to the many American varieties any general
character by which they can be recognised. Nevertheless, from the facts
previously advanced on the authority of Mr. Meehan with respect to American
and European forest-trees it would be rash to affirm that varieties raised in
the two countries would not in the course of ages assume a distinctive
character. Dr. M. Masters has recorded a striking fact (23/58. 'Gardener's
Chronicle' 1857 page 629.) bearing on this subject: he raised numerous plants
of Hybiscus syriacus from seed collected in South Carolina and the Holy Land,
where the parent-plants must have been exposed to considerably different
conditions; yet the seedlings from both localities broke into two similar
strains, one with obtuse leaves and purple or crimson flowers, and the other
with elongated leaves and more or less pink flowers.

We may, also, infer the prepotent influence of the constitution of the
organism over the definite action of the conditions of life, from the several
cases given in the earlier chapters of parallel series of varieties,--an
important subject, hereafter to be more fully discussed. Sub-varieties of the
several kinds of wheat, gourds, peaches, and other plants, and to a limited
extent sub-varieties of the fowl, pigeon, and dog, have been shown either to
resemble or to differ from one another in a closely corresponding or parallel
manner. In other cases, a variety of one species resembles a distinct species;
or the varieties of two distinct species resemble one another. Although these
parallel resemblances no doubt often result from reversion to the former
characters of a common progenitor; yet in other cases, when new characters
first appear, the resemblance must be attributed to the inheritance of a
similar constitution, and consequently to a tendency to vary in the same
manner. We see something of a similar kind in the same monstrosity appearing
and reappearing many times in the same species of animal, and, as Dr. Maxwell
Masters has remarked to me, in the same species of plant.]

We may at least conclude, that the amount of modification which animals and
plants have undergone under domestication does not correspond with the degree
to which they have been subjected to changed circumstances. As we know the
parentage of domesticated birds far better than of most quadrupeds, we will
glance through the list. The pigeon has varied in Europe more than almost any
other bird; yet it is a native species, and has not been exposed to any
extraordinary change of conditions. The fowl has varied equally, or almost
equally, with the pigeon, and is a native of the hot jungles of India. Neither
the peacock, a native of the same country, nor the guinea-fowl, an inhabitant
of the dry deserts of Africa, has varied at all, or only in colour. The
turkey, from Mexico, has varied but little. The duck, on the other hand, a
native of Europe, has yielded some well-marked races; and as this is an
aquatic bird, it must have been subjected to a far more serious change in its
habits than the pigeon or even the fowl, which nevertheless have varied in a
much higher degree. The goose, a native of Europe and aquatic like the duck,
has varied less than any other domesticated bird, except the peacock.

Bud-variation is, also, important under our present point of view, in some few
cases, as when all the eyes on the same tuber of the potato, or all the fruit
on the same plum-tree, or all the flowers on the same plant, have suddenly
varied in the same manner, it might be argued that the variation had been
definitely caused by some change in the conditions to which the plants had
been exposed; yet, in other cases, such an admission is extremely difficult.
As new characters sometimes appear by bud-variation, which do not occur in the
parent-species or in any allied species, we may reject, at least in these
cases, the idea that they are due to reversion. Now it is well worth while to
reflect maturely on some striking case of bud-variation, for instance that of
the peach. This tree has been cultivated by the million in various parts of
the world, has been treated differently, grown on its own roots and grafted on
various stocks, planted as a standard, trained against a wall, or under glass;
yet each bud of each sub-variety keeps true to its kind. But occasionally, at
long intervals of time, a tree in England, or under the widely different
climate of Virginia, produces a single bud, and this yields a branch which
ever afterwards bears nectarines. Nectarines differ, as every one knows, from
peaches in their smoothness, size, and flavour; and the difference is so great
that some botanists have maintained that they are specifically distinct. So
permanent are the characters thus suddenly acquired, that a nectarine produced
by bud-variation has propagated itself by seed. To guard against the
supposition that there is some fundamental distinction between bud and seminal
variation, it is well to bear in mind that nectarines have likewise been
produced from the stone of the peach; and, reversely, peaches from the stone
of the nectarine. Now is it possible to conceive external conditions more
closely alike than those to which the buds on the same tree are exposed? Yet
one bud alone, out of the many thousands borne by the same tree, has suddenly,
without any apparent cause, produced a nectarine. But the case is even
stronger than this, for the same flower-bud has yielded a fruit, one-half or
one-quarter a nectarine, and the other half or three-quarters a peach. Again,
seven or eight varieties of the peach have yielded by bud-variation
nectarines: the nectarines thus produced, no doubt, differ a little from one
another; but still they are nectarines. Of course there must be some cause,
internal or external, to excite the peach-bud to change its nature; but I
cannot imagine a class of facts better adapted to force on our minds the
conviction that what we call the external conditions of life are in many cases
quite insignificant in relation to any particular variation, in comparison
with the organisation or constitution of the being which varies.

It is known from the labours of Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, and recently from
those of Dareste and others, that eggs of the fowl, if shaken, placed upright,
perforated, covered in part with varnish, etc., produce monstrous chickens.
Now these monstrosities may be said to be directly caused by such unnatural
conditions, but the modifications thus induced are not of a definite nature.
An excellent observer, M. Camille Dareste (23/59. 'Memoire sur la Production
Artificielle des Monstruosites' 1862 pages 8-12; 'Recherches sur les
Conditions, etc., chez les Monstres' 1863 page 6. An abstract is given of
Geoffroy's Experiments by his son, in his 'Vie, Travaux' etc. 1847 page 290.),
remarks "that the various species of monstrosities are not determined by
specific causes; the external agencies which modify the development of the
embryo act solely in causing a perturbation--a perversion in the normal course
of development." He compares the result to what we see in illness: a sudden
chill, for instance, affects one individual alone out of many, causing either
a cold, or sore-throat, rheumatism, or inflammation of the lungs or pleura.
Contagious matter acts in an analogous manner. (23/60. Paget 'Lectures on
Surgical Pathology' 1853 volume 1 page 483.) We may take a still more specific
instance: seven pigeons were struck by rattle-snakes (23/61. 'Researches upon
the Venom of the Rattle-snake' January 1861 by Dr. Mitchell page 67.): some
suffered from convulsions; some had their blood coagulated, in others it was
perfectly fluid; some showed ecchymosed spots on the heart, others on the
intestines, etc.; others again showed no visible lesion in any organ. It is
well known that excess in drinking causes different diseases in different men;
but in the tropics the effects of intemperance differ from those caused in a
cold climate (23/62. Mr. Sedgwick 'British and Foreign Medico-Chirurg. Review'
July 1863 page 175.); and in this case we see the definite influence of
opposite conditions. The foregoing facts apparently give us as good an idea as
we are likely for a long time to obtain, how in many cases external conditions
act directly, though not definitely, in causing modifications of structure.

SUMMARY.

There can be no doubt, from the facts given in this chapter, that extremely
slight changes in the conditions of life sometimes, probably often, act in a
definite manner on our domesticated productions; and, as the action of changed
conditions in causing indefinite variability is accumulative, so it may be
with their definite action. Hence considerable and definite modifications of
structure probably follow from altered conditions acting during a long series
of generations. In some few instances a marked effect has been produced
quickly on all, or nearly all, the individuals which have been exposed to a
marked change of climate, food, or other circumstance. This has occurred with
European men in the United States, with European dogs in India, with horses in
the Falkland Islands, apparently with various animals at Angora, with foreign
oysters in the Mediterranean, and with maize transported from one climate to
another. We have seen that the chemical compounds of some plants and the state
of their tissues are readily affected by changed conditions. A relation
apparently exists between certain characters and certain conditions, so that
if the latter be changed the character is lost--as with the colours of
flowers, the state of some culinary plants, the fruit of the melon, the tail
of fat-tailed sheep, and the peculiar fleeces of other sheep.

The production of galls, and the change of plumage in parrots when fed on
peculiar food or when inoculated by the poison of a toad, prove to us what
great and mysterious changes in structure and colour, may be the definite
result of chemical changes in the nutrient fluids or tissues.

We now almost certainly know that organic beings in a state of nature may be
modified in various definite ways by the conditions to which they have been
long exposed, as in the case of the birds and other animals in the northern
and southern United States, and of American trees in comparison with their
representatives in Europe. But in many cases it is most difficult to
distinguish between the definite result of changed conditions, and the
accumulation through natural selection of indefinite variations which have
proved serviceable. If it profited a plant to inhabit a humid instead of an
arid station, a fitting change in its constitution might possibly result from
the direct action of the environment, though we have no grounds for believing
that variations of the right kind would occur more frequently with plants
inhabiting a station a little more humid than usual, than with other plants.
Whether the station was unusually dry or humid, variations adapting the plant
in a slight degree for directly opposite habits of life would occasionally
arise, as we have good reason to believe from what we actually see in other
cases.

The organisation or constitution of the being which is acted on, is generally
a much more important element than the nature of the changed conditions, in
determining the nature of the variation. We have evidence of this in the
appearance of nearly similar modifications under different conditions, and of
different modifications under apparently nearly the same conditions. We have
still better evidence of this in closely parallel varieties being frequently
produced from distinct races, or even distinct species; and in the frequent
recurrence of the same monstrosity in the same species. We have also seen that
the degree to which domesticated birds have varied, does not stand in any
close relation with the amount of change to which they have been subjected.

To recur once again to bud-variations. When we reflect on the millions of buds
which many trees have produced, before some one bud has varied, we are lost in
wonder as to what the precise cause of each variation can be. Let us recall
the case given by Andrew Knight of the forty-year-old tree of the yellow
magnum bonum plum, an old variety which has been propagated by grafts on
various stocks for a very long period throughout Europe and North America, and
on which a single bud suddenly produced the red magnum bonum. We should also
bear in mind that distinct varieties, and even distinct species,--as in the
case of peaches, nectarines, and apricots,--of certain roses and camellias,--
although separated by a vast number of generations from any progenitor in
common, and although cultivated under diversified conditions, have yielded by
bud-variation closely analogous varieties. When we reflect on these facts we
become deeply impressed with the conviction that in such cases the nature of
the variation depends but little on the conditions to which the plant has been
exposed, and not in any especial manner on its individual character, but much
more on the inherited nature or constitution of the whole group of allied
beings to which the plant in question belongs. We are thus driven to conclude
that in most cases the conditions of life play a subordinate part in causing
any particular modification; like that which a spark plays, when a mass of
combustibles bursts into flame--the nature of the flame depending on the
combustible matter, and not on the spark. (23/63. Professor Weismann argues
strongly in favour of this view in his 'Saison-Dimorphismus der
Schmetterlinge' 1875 pages 40-43.)

No doubt each slight variation must have its efficient cause; but it is as
hopeless an attempt to discover the cause of each, as to say why a chill or a
poison affects one man differently from another. Even with modifications
resulting from the definite action of the conditions of life, when all or
nearly all the individuals, which have been similarly exposed, are similarly
affected, we can rarely see the precise relation between cause and effect. In
the next chapter it will be shown that the increased use or disuse of various
organs produces an inherited effect. It will further be seen that certain
variations are bound together by correlation as well as by other laws. Beyond
this we cannot at present explain either the causes or nature of the
variability of organic beings.


CHAPTER 2.XXIV.

LAWS OF VARIATION--USE AND DISUSE, ETC.

NISUS FORMATIVUS, OR THE CO-ORDINATING POWER OF THE ORGANISATION.
ON THE EFFECTS OF THE INCREASED USE AND DISUSE OF ORGANS.
CHANGED HABITS OF LIFE.
ACCLIMATISATION WITH ANIMALS AND PLANTS.
VARIOUS METHODS BY WHICH THIS CAN BE EFFECTED.
ARRESTS OF DEVELOPMENT.
RUDIMENTARY ORGANS.

In this and the two following chapters I shall discuss, as well as the
difficulty of the subject permits, the several laws which govern Variability.
These may be grouped under the effects of use and disuse, including changed
habits and acclimatisation--arrest of development--correlated variation--the
cohesion of homologous parts-the variability of multiple parts--compensation
of growth--the position of buds with respect to the axis of the plant--and
lastly, analogous variation. These several subjects so graduate into one
another that their distinction is often arbitrary.

It may be convenient first briefly to discuss that coordinating and reparative
power which is common, in a higher or lower degree, to all organic beings, and
which was formerly designated by physiologists as nisus formativus.

[Blumenbach and others (24/1. 'An Essay on Generation' English translation
page 18; Paget 'Lectures on Surgical Pathology' 1853 volume 1 page 209.) have
insisted that the principle which permits a Hydra, when cut into fragments, to
develop itself into two or more perfect animals, is the same with that which
causes a wound in the higher animals to heal by a cicatrice. Such cases as
that of the Hydra are evidently analogous to the spontaneous division or
fissiparous generation of the lowest animals, and likewise to the budding of
plants. Between these extreme cases and that of a mere cicatrice we have every
gradation. Spallanzani (24/2. 'An Essay on Animal Reproduction' English
translation 1769 page 79.) by cutting off the legs and tail of a Salamander,
got in the course of three months six crops of these members; so that 687
perfect bones were reproduced by one animal during one season. At whatever
point the limb was cut off, the deficient part, and no more, was exactly
reproduced. When a diseased bone has been removed, a new one sometimes
"gradually assumes the regular form, and all the attachments of muscles,
ligaments, etc., become as complete as before." (24/3. Carpenter 'Principles
of Comp. Physiology' 1854 page 479.)

This power of regrowth does not, however, always act perfectly; the reproduced
tail of a lizard differs in the form of the scales from the normal tail: with
certain Orthopterous insects the large hind legs are reproduced of smaller
size (24/4. Charlesworth 'Mag. of Nat. Hist.' volume 1 1837 page 145.): the
white cicatrice which in the higher animals unites the edges of a deep wound
is not formed of perfect skin, for elastic tissue is not produced till long
afterwards. (24/5. Paget 'Lectures on Surgical Pathology' volume 1 page 239.)
"The activity of the nisus formativus," says Blumenbach, "is in an inverse
ratio to the age of the organised body." Its power is also greater with
animals, the lower they stand in the scale of organisation; and animals low in
the scale correspond with the embryos of higher animals belonging to the same
class. Newport's observations (24/6. Quoted by Carpenter 'Comp. Phys.' page
479.) afford a good illustration of this fact, for he found that "myriapods,
whose highest development scarcely carries them beyond the larva of perfect
insects, can regenerate limbs and antennae up to the time of their last
moult;" and so can the larvae of true insects, but, except in one order, not
in the mature insect. Salamanders correspond in development with the tadpoles
or larvae of the tailless Batrachians, and both possess to a large extent the
power of regrowth; but not so the mature tailless Batrachians.

Absorption often plays an important part in the repair of injuries. When a
bone is broken and does not unite, the ends are absorbed and rounded, so that
a false joint is formed; or if the ends unite, but overlap, the projecting
parts are removed. (24/7. Prof. Marey's discussion on the power of co-
adaptation in all parts of the organisation is excellent. 'La Machine Animale'
1873 chapter 9. See also Paget 'Lectures' etc. page 257.) A dislocated bone
will form for itself a new socket. Displaced tendons and varicose veins
excavate new channels in the bones against which they press. But absorption
comes into action, as Virchow remarks, during the normal growth of bones;
parts which are solid during youth become hollowed out for the medullary
tissue as the bone increases in size. In trying to understand the many well-
adapted cases of regrowth when aided by absorption, we should remember that
almost all parts of the organisation, even whilst retaining the same form,
undergo constant renewal; so that a part which is not renewed would be liable
to absorption.

Some cases, usually classed under the so-called nisus formativus, at first
appear to come under a distinct head; for not only are old structures
reproduced, but new structures are formed. Thus, after inflammation "false
membranes," furnished with blood-vessels, lymphatics, and nerves, are
developed; or a foetus escapes from the Fallopian tubes, and falls into the
abdomen, "nature pours out a quantity of plastic lymph, which forms itself
into organised membrane, richly supplied with blood-vessels," and the foetus
is nourished for a time. In certain cases of hydrocephalus the open and
dangerous spaces in the skull are filled up with new bones, which interlock by
perfect serrated sutures. (24/8. These cases are given by Blumenbach in his
'Essay on Generation' pages 52, 54.) But most physiologists, especially on the
Continent, have now given up the belief in plastic lymph or blastema, and
Virchow (24/9. 'Cellular Pathology' translation by Dr. Chance 1860 pages 27,
441.) maintains that every structure, new or old, is formed by the
proliferation of pre-existing cells. On this view false membranes, like
cancerous or other tumours, are merely abnormal developments of normal
growths; and we can thus understand how it is that they resemble adjoining
structures; for instance, that a "false membrane in the serous cavities
acquires a covering of epithelium exactly like that which covers the original
serous membrane; adhesions of the iris may become black apparently from the
production of pigment-cells like those of the uvea." (24/10. Paget 'Lectures
on Pathology' volume 1 1853 page 357.)

No doubt the power of reparation, though not always perfect, is an admirable
provision, ready for various emergencies, even for such as occur only at long
intervals of time. (24/11. Paget ibid page 150.) Yet this power is not more
wonderful than the growth and development of every single creature, more
especially of those which are propagated by fissiparous generation. This
subject has been here noticed, because we may infer that, when any part or
organ is either greatly increased in size or wholly suppressed through
variation and continued selection, the co-ordinating power of the organisation
will continually tend to bring again all the parts into harmony with one
another.]

ON THE EFFECTS OF THE INCREASED USE AND DISUSE OF ORGANS.

It is notorious, and we shall immediately adduce proofs, that increased use or
action strengthens muscles, glands, sense-organs, etc.; and that disuse, on
the other hand, weakens them. It has been experimentally proved by Ranke
(24/12. 'Die Blutvertheilung, etc. der Organe' 1871 as quoted by Jaeger 'In
Sachen Darwin's' 1874 page 48. See also H. Spencer 'The Principles of Biology'
volume 2 1866 chapters 3-5.) that the flow of blood is greatly increased
towards any part which is performing work, and sinks again when the part is at
rest. Consequently, if the work is frequent, the vessels increase in size and
the part is better nourished. Paget (24/13. 'Lectures on Pathology' 1853
volume 1 page 71.) also accounts for the long, thick, dark-coloured hairs
which occasionally grow, even in young children, near old-standing inflamed
surfaces or fractured bones by an increased flow of blood to the part. When
Hunter inserted the spur of a cock into the comb, which is well supplied with
blood-vessels, it grew in one case spirally to a length of six inches, and in
another case forward, like a horn, so that the bird could not touch the ground
with its beak. According to the interesting observations of M. Sedillot
(24/14. 'Comptes Rendus' September 26, 1864 page 539.), when a portion of one
of the bones of the leg of an animal is removed, the associated bone enlarges
till it attains a bulk equal to that of the two bones, of which it has to
perform the functions. This is best exhibited in dogs in which the tibia has
been removed; the companion bone, which is naturally almost filiform and not
one-fifth the size of the other, soon acquires a size equal to or greater than
that of the tibia. Now, it is at first difficult to believe that increased
weight acting on a straight bone could, by alternately increasing and
diminishing the pressure, cause the blood to flow more freely in the vessels
which permeate the periosteum and thus supply more nutriment to the bone.
Nevertheless the observations adduced by Mr. Spencer (24/15. H. Spencer 'The
Principles of Biology' volume 2 page 243.), on the strengthening of the bowed
bones of rickety children, along their concave sides, leads to the belief that
this is possible.

The rocking of the stem of a tree increases in a marked manner the growth of
the woody tissue in the parts which are strained. Prof. Sachs believes, from
reasons which he assigns, that this is due to the pressure of the bark being
relaxed in such parts, and not as Knight and H. Spencer maintain, to an
increased flow of sap caused by the movement of the trunk. (24/16. Ibid volume
2 page 269. Sachs 'Text-book of Botany' 1875 page 734.) But hard woody tissue
may be developed without the aid of any movement, as we see with ivy closely
attached to an old wall. In all such cases, it is very difficult to
distinguish between the effects of long-continued selection and those which
follow from the increased action of the part, or directly from some other
cause. Mr. H. Spencer (24/17. Ibid volume 2 page 273.) acknowledges this
difficulty, and gives as an instance the thorns on trees and the shells of
nuts. Here we have extremely hard woody tissue without the possibility of any
movement, and without, as far as we can see, any other directly exciting
cause; and as the hardness of these parts is of manifest service to the plant,
we may look at the result as probably due to the selection of so-called
spontaneous variations. Every one knows that hard work thickens the epidermis
on the hands; and when we hear that with infants, long before birth, the
epidermis is thicker on the palms and soles of the feet than on any other part
of the body, as was observed with admiration by Albinus (24/18. Paget
'Lectures on Pathology' volume 2 page 209.), we are naturally inclined to
attribute this to the inherited effects of long-continued use or pressure. We
are tempted to extend the same view even to the hoofs of quadrupeds; but who
will pretend to determine how far natural selection may have aided in the
formation of structures of such obvious importance to the animal?

[That use strengthens the muscles may be seen in the limbs of artisans who
follow different trades; and when a muscle is strengthened, the tendons, and
the crests of bone to which they are attached, become enlarged; and this must
likewise be the case with the blood-vessels and nerves. On the other hand,
when a limb is not used, as by Eastern fanatics, or when the nerve supplying
it with nervous power is effectually destroyed, the muscles wither. So again,
when the eye is destroyed the optic nerve becomes atrophied, sometimes even in
the course of a few months. (24/19. Muller 'Phys.' English translation pages
54, 791. Prof. Reed has given ('Physiological and Anat. Researches' page 10) a
curious account of the atrophy of the limbs of rabbits after the destruction
of the nerve.) The Proteus is furnished with branchiae as well as with lungs:
and Schreibers (24/20. Quoted by Lecoq in 'Geograph. Bot.' tome 1 1854 page
182.) found that when the animal was compelled to live in deep water, the
branchiae were developed to thrice their ordinary size, and the lungs were
partially atrophied. When, on the other hand, the animal was compelled to live
in shallow water, the lungs became larger and more vascular, whilst the
branchiae disappeared in a more or less complete degree. Such modifications as
these are, however, of comparatively little value for us, as we do not
actually know that they tend to be inherited.

In many cases there is reason to believe that the lessened use of various
organs has affected the corresponding parts in the offspring. But there is no
good evidence that this ever follows in the course of a single generation. It
appears, as in the case of general or indefinite variability, that several
generations must be subjected to changed habits for any appreciable result.
Our domestic fowls, ducks, and geese have almost lost, not only in the
individual but in the race, their power of flight; for we do not see a young
fowl, when frightened, take flight like a young pheasant. Hence I was led
carefully to compare the limb-bones of fowls, ducks, pigeons, and rabbits,
with the same bones in the wild parent-species. As the measurements and
weights were fully given in the earlier chapters I need here only recapitulate
the results. With domestic pigeons, the length of the sternum, the prominence
of its crest, the length of the scapulae and furculum, the length of the wings
as measured from tip to tip of the radii, are all reduced relatively to the
same parts in the wild pigeon. The wing and tail feathers, however, are
increased in length, but this may have as little connection with the use of
the wings or tail, as the lengthened hair on a dog with the amount of exercise
which it has habitually taken. The feet of pigeons, except in the long-beaked
races, are reduced in size. With fowls the crest of the sternum is less
prominent, and is often distorted or monstrous; the wing-bones have become
lighter relatively to the leg-bones, and are apparently a little shorter in
comparison with those of the parent-form, the Gallus bankiva. With ducks, the
crest of the sternum is affected in the same manner as in the foregoing cases:
the furculum, coracoids, and scapulae are all reduced in weight relatively to
the whole skeleton: the bones of the wings are shorter and lighter, and the
bones of the legs longer and heavier, relatively to each other, and relatively
to the whole skeleton, in comparison with the same bones in the wild-duck. The
decreased weight and size of the bones, in the foregoing cases, is probably
the indirect result of the reaction of the weakened muscles on the bones. I
failed to compare the feathers of the wings of the tame and wild duck; but
Gloger (24/21. 'Das Abandern der Vogel' 1833 s. 74.) asserts that in the wild
duck the tips of the wing-feathers reach almost to the end of the tail, whilst
in the domestic duck they often hardly reach to its base. He remarks also on
the greater thickness of the legs, and says that the swimming membrane between
the toes is reduced; but I was not able to detect this latter difference.

With the domesticated rabbit the body, together with the whole skeleton, is
generally larger and heavier than in the wild animal, and the leg-bones are
heavier in due proportion; but whatever standard of comparison be taken,
neither the leg-bones nor the scapulae have increased in length proportionally
with the increased dimensions of the rest of the skeleton. The skull has
become in a marked manner narrower, and, from the measurements of its capacity
formerly given, we may conclude, that this narrowness results from the
decreased size of the brain, consequent on the mentally inactive life led by
these closely-confined animals.

We have seen in the eighth chapter that silk-moths, which have been kept
during many centuries closely confined, emerge from their cocoons with their
wings distorted, incapable of flight, often greatly reduced in size, or even,
according to Quatrefages, quite rudimentary. This condition of the wings may
be largely owing to the same kind of monstrosity which often affects wild
Lepidoptera when artificially reared from the cocoon; or it may be in part due
to an inherent tendency, which is common to the females of many Bombycidae, to
have their wings in a more or less rudimentary state; but part of the effect
may be attributed to long-continued disuse.]

From the foregoing facts there can be no doubt that with our anciently
domesticated animals, certain bones have increased or decreased in size and
weight owing to increased or decreased use; but they have not been modified,
as shown in the earlier chapters, in shape or structure. With animals living a
free life and occasionally exposed to severe competition the reduction would
tend to be greater, as it would be an advantage to them to have the
development of every superfluous part saved. With highly-fed domesticated
animals, on the other hand, there seems to be no economy of growth, nor any
tendency to the elimination of superfluous details. But to this subject I
shall recur.

Turning now to more general observations, Nathusius has shown that with the
improved races of the pig, the shortened legs and snout, the form of the
articular condyles of the occiput, and the position of the jaws with the upper
canine teeth projecting in a most anomalous manner in front of the lower
canines, may be attributed to these parts not having been fully exercised. For
the highly-cultivated races do not travel in search of food, nor root up the
ground with their ringed muzzles. (24/22. Nathusius 'Die Racen des Schweines'
1860 s. 53, 57; 'Vorstudien...Schweineschadel' 1864 s. 103, 130, 133. Prof.
Lucae supports and extends the conclusions of Von Nathusius: 'Der Schadel des
Maskenschweines' 1870.) These modifications of structure, which are all
strictly inherited, characterise several improved breeds, so that they cannot
have been derived from any single domestic stock. With respect to cattle,
Professor Tanner has remarked that the lungs and liver in the improved breeds
"are found to be considerably reduced in size when compared with those
possessed by animals having perfect liberty" (24/23. 'Journal of Agriculture
of Highland Soc.' July 1860 page 321.); and the reduction of these organs
affects the general shape of the body. The cause of the reduced lungs in
highly-bred animals which take little exercise is obvious; and perhaps the
liver may be affected by the nutritious and artificial food on which they
largely subsist. Again, Dr. Wilckens asserts (24/24. 'Landwirth. Wochenblatt'
No. 10.) that various parts of the body certainly differ in Alpine and lowland
breeds of several domesticated animals, owing to their different habits of
life; for instance, the neck and fore-legs in length, and the hoofs in shape.

[It is well known that, when an artery is tied, the anastomosing branches,
from being forced to transmit more blood, increase in diameter; and this
increase cannot be accounted for by mere extension, as their coats gain in
strength. With respect to glands, Sir J. Paget observes that "when one kidney
is destroyed the other often becomes much larger, and does double work."
