
Ores of Nickel                                                 65

Ores of Silver                                                 66

Ores of Tin                                                    69

Ores of Zinc                                                   70


COMPARATIVE TABLES

I. Colors of Coatings on Charcoal                              73

II. Flame Colorations                                          73

III. Colors of Borax Beads in oxidizing Flame                  74

IV. Colors of Borax Beads in reducing Flame                    75

V. Colors of Microcosmic Salt Beads in oxidizing Flame         76

VI. Colors of Microcosmic Salt Beads in reducing Flame         77


[Illustration: THE BLOWPIPE Fig. 1]

[Illustration: BUNSEN BURNER Fig. 2]

[Illustration: CHARCOAL BORERS Fig. 3]

[Illustration: AGATE MORTAR & PESTLE Fig. 4]

[Illustration: FORCEPS Fig. 5]

[Illustration: HAMMER Fig. 6]

[Illustration: 3-CORNERED FILES Fig. 7]




BLOWPIPE ANALYSIS




CHAPTER I


The blowpipe was first applied to mineral analysis in 1733 by Anton
Swab, and its applications have since been improved and extended by
various chemists, among whom may be mentioned Bergmann, Cronstedt, Gahn,
Berzelius, and Plattner.


~Blowpipe.~--The common blowpipe of the jeweller is not particularly well
suited to the operations of blowpipe analysis, since the flame has often
to be kept playing upon the assay for some time, and the condensed
moisture of the breath would seriously interfere with the passage of
the air through the jet. One of the best and least expensive forms of
blowpipe is shown in Fig. 1. This consists, as is seen from the
illustration, of a conical-shaped tube of tin closed at the wide end and
formed into a mouthpiece at the small end; soldered into the tube at the
large end, and at right angles to its axis, is a small brass tube which
terminates in a conical tip pierced with a very fine hole. With this
pipe it is possible to perform all of the operations of mineral
analysis.

Some little practice is necessary to keep the flame steady and to take
the breath at the same time.

No rule can well be given to the beginner, but his experience becomes
his best guide.


~Bunsen Flame.~--Any kind of flame can be used for the blowpipe, provided
it be not too small; but since almost every laboratory to-day is
furnished with gas and the Bunsen burner (Fig. 2), it will only be
necessary to describe the use of the flame from this source. Upon
examining the Bunsen flame with care, it will be seen that the flame
consists of three distinct parts.

A dark inner cone which consists of gas not yet raised to the ignition
point. Beyond this there is a luminous cone, where combustion is
incomplete owing to lack of oxygen, and outside of this we find the
non-luminous cone where the gas is completely burned.

This outer envelope is the hottest portion of the flame, and is known as
the "oxidizing" flame because there is an excess of oxygen which is
imparted to substances placed therein.

The luminous cone is known as the "reducing" flame, for in it metallic
oxides are reduced, the oxygen being taken up by the small incandescent
particles of carbon.

If the air-holes at the base of the Bunsen burner be opened, the two
inner cones become elongated, and the flame appears almost colorless.

The blowpipe enables us to get an oxidizing and a reducing flame of
better form and greater power. To do this we cut off the air supply at
the base of the burner and turn off the gas until the flame is about 1
cm. high; then upon introducing the blowpipe, and blowing a strong
continuous jet of air across the Bunsen flame, we produce an oxidizing
flame about 4-5 cm. in length. If the tip of the blowpipe be held
outside of the Bunsen flame, and the pressure of the stream of air be
diminished, we obtain a reducing flame.


~Supports.~--For supports, charcoal, platinum, and glass are chiefly used.
The charcoal should be made from some light wood, such as alder. It
should be well burnt, and should not scintillate or smoke.

The platinum supports are generally in the form of wire and foil.
Platinum-tipped forceps are frequently employed in blowpipe analysis.

Glass is used in the form of tubing.

Hard glass tubing, 3 mm. bore, is drawn off into ignition tubes 7-8 cm.
in length. Several dozen of these tubes should be made before commencing
the tests of the next chapter.


~Apparatus.~--A small agate mortar, 4-5 cm. in diameter, should be
provided in which to grind the samples to be examined.

The pestle, which should also be of agate, must be adapted to the
mortar in shape and size.

Two pairs of forceps will also be needed.

One pair should be of steel, and the other pair of brass, with fine
points.

Of other apparatus, the most necessary is:--

    A small hammer and anvil.

    Two three-cornered files.

    Small piece of cobalt glass, about 5 x 10 cm.

    Pocket magnifying lens.

    Several small watch glasses--for metallic beads, etc.


~Chemicals.~--A list of the principal chemicals is here given:--

    Sodium carbonate, Na_{2}CO_{3}.

    Borax, Na_{2}B_{4}O_{7} + 10 H_{2}O.

    Microcosmic salt, (HNaNH_{4}), PO_{4} + 8 H_{2}O.

    Cobalt nitrate, Co(NO_{3})_{2} + 5 H_{2}O.

    Potassium cyanide, KCN.

    Hydrochloric acid, (dilute), HCl + nH_{2}O.

    Litmus paper, red and blue.

    Brazil-wood paper.

Any other special reagents which may be needed will be mentioned as
required.




CHAPTER II

GENERAL OUTLINE OF BLOWPIPE ANALYSIS


     [ABBREVIATIONS: O. F. for oxidizing flame, R. F. for
     reducing flame, Ch. for charcoal, Ct. for coating, Bp. for
     blowpipe.]

In order to examine a substance before the blowpipe to determine the
presence or absence of certain elements, it becomes necessary to arrange
a systematic method. As with all branches of chemical work, one's
success is largely dependent upon neatness of manipulation and
carefulness of observation.

The following order of observation is essentially that given by
Berzelius:--

     1. Examination on charcoal by itself.

     2. Examination on charcoal with Na_{2}CO_{3}.

     3. Examination in ignition tube with Na_{2}CO_{3} and
     charcoal.

     4. Examination on platinum wire.

     5. Examination in borax bead.

     6. Examination with Co(NO_{3})_{2}.

After having examined a body in these six different ways, we shall be
able to say what are its principal constituents.

Before describing the method of carrying out these six different
operations, it will be necessary to give a few definitions of terms
which we shall have frequent occasion to employ.


~Definitions.~--_Ignition_ is the heating of a substance to a high
temperature.

_Fusion_ is the heating of a substance to the melting-point.

_Intumescence_ is the swelling of the substance upon heating.

_Decrepitation_ is the crackling of a substance due to the sudden
expansion of combined water upon heating.

_Deflagration_ is the burning of a substance with explosive violence,
generally due to excess of oxygen.

_Incandescence_ is the white light emitted by a substance that is
infusible when subjected to a high temperature.


~Examination on Charcoal alone.~--The size of the assay should be about
that of a mustard seed. This is sufficiently large to show all of the
reactions clearly, and though a larger piece would exhibit the
characteristic phenomena, yet much more effort is required. A very
small, shallow hole should be cut in the Ch. to receive the assay. The
Bp. flame should be directed at an angle of about 30 deg. with the
surface of the Ch. Considerable care must be taken lest the hole in the
Ch. is burned too deep and the assay lost in the coal.

The force of the air from the jet must also be borne in mind for a
strong blast, or sudden puffs may blow the substance away.

The following changes are to be looked for:--

