lead them away from Grantline and the treasure.

"Gregg, we must try it."

Heaven help me, I yielded to her persuasion!

We turned at right angles and ran toward where the distant frowning
walls of Archimedes loomed against the starlit sky.


CHAPTER XXVIII

_The Ascent of Archimedes_

The broken shaggy ramparts of the giant crater rose above us. We
toiled upward, out of the foothills, clinging now to the crags and
pitted terraces of the main ascent. An hour had passed since we turned
from the borders of the Mare Imbrium. Or was it two hours? I could not
tell. I only know that we ran with desperate frantic haste.

Anita would not admit that she was tired. She was more skilful than I
in this leaping over the broken rock masses. Yet I felt that her
slight strength must give out. It seemed miles up the undulating
slopes of the foothills with the black and white ramparts of the
massive crater close before us.

And then the main ascent. There were places where, like smooth black
frozen ice, the walls rose sheer. We avoided them, toiling aside,
plunging into gullies, crossing pits where sometimes we perforce went
downwards, and then up again; or sometimes we stood, hot and
breathless, upon ledges, recovering our strength, selecting the best
route upward.

This tumbled mass of rock! Honeycombed everywhere with caves and
passages leading into darkness impenetrable. There were pits into
which we might so easily have fallen; ravines to span, sometimes with
a leap, sometimes by a long and arduous detour.

Endless climb! We came to a ledge, with the plains of the Mare Imbrium
stretching out beneath us. We might have been upon this main ascent
for an hour; the plains were far down, the broken surface down there
smoothed now by the perspective of our height. And yet still above us
the brooding circular wall went up into the sky. Ten thousand feet
still above us--I think it was at least that, or more.

"You're tired, Anita. We'd better stay here."

"No! If we could only get to the top--the ship may land on the other
side--they would see us if we were at the top."

       *       *       *       *       *

There was as yet no sign of the brigand ship. With every stop for rest
we searched the starry vault. The Earth hung over us, flattened beyond
the full. The stars blazed to mingle with the Earthlight and illumine
these massive crags of the Archimedes walls. But no speck appeared to
tell us that the ship was up there.

We were on the curving side of the Archimedes wall which fronted the
Mare Imbrium to the North. The plains lay like a great frozen sea,
congealed ripples shining in the light of the Earth, with dark
patches to mark the hollows. Somewhere down there--six or eight
thousand feet below us now, or even more than that, for all I could
tell--Miko's encampment lay concealed. We searched for lights of it,
but could see none.

Or had Miko rejoined his party, left his camp and come here like
ourselves to climb Archimedes? Or was our assumption wholly
wrong--perhaps the brigand ship would not land near here at all?

Sweeping around from the Mare Imbrium, the plains were less
smooth--the shattered, crag-littered, crater-scarred region beyond
which the distant Apennines raised their terraced walls. The little
crater which concealed the Grantline camp was off that way. There was
nothing to mark it from here.

"Gregg, do you see anything up there? There seems to be a blur."

       *       *       *       *       *

Her sight, sharper than mine, had picked it out. The descending
brigand ship! A faintest tiny blur against the stars, a few of them
occulted as though strangely an invisible shadow were upon them. A
growing shadow, materializing into a blur--a blob, a shape faintly
defined. Then sharper until we were sure of what we saw. It was the
brigand ship. It came dropping slowly, silently down.

We crouched on the little ledge. A cave-mouth was behind us. A gully
was beside us, a break in the ledge; and at our feet the wall dropped
sheer.

We had extinguished our little lights. We crouched, silently gazing up
into the stars.

The ship, when first we distinguished it was central over Archimedes.
We thought for a while that it might descend into the crater. But it
did not; it came sailing forward.

I whispered into the audiphone--whispering by instinct, as though out
here in all this airless desolation someone might overhear us!

"It's coming over the crater."

Her hand pressed my arm in answer.

I recalled that when, from the _Planetara_, Miko had forced Snap to
signal this brigand band on Mars, Miko's only information as to the
whereabouts of the Grantline camp was that it lay between Archimedes
and the Apennines. That was Grantline's first message to us, and Miko
had relayed it to his men. The brigands from Mars now were following
that information.

A tense interval passed. We could see the ship plainly above us now, a
gray-black shape among the stars up beyond the shaggy, towering
crater-rim. The vessel came upon a level keel, hull-down, slowly
circling, looking for Miko's signal, no doubt, or for possible lights
of Grantline. They were also picking a landing place.

       *       *       *       *       *

We saw it soon as a cylindrical, cigarlike shape, rather smaller than
the _Planetara_, but similar of design. It bore lights now. The ports
of its hull were tiny rows of illumination, and the glow of light
under its rounding upper dome was faintly visible.

A bandit ship, no doubt of that. Its identification keel-plate was
empty of official pass-code lights. These brigands had not attempted
to secure official sailing lights when leaving Ferrok-Shahn. It was an
outlawed ship, unmistakably. And here upon the deserted Moon there was
no need for secrecy. Its lights were openly displayed, that Miko might
see it and join it.

It went slowly past us, only a few thousand feet higher than our
level. We could see the whole outline of its pointed cylinder-hull,
with the rounded dome on top. And under the dome was its open
deck-space, with a little cabin superstructure in the center.

I thought for a moment that by some fortunate chance it might land
quite near us. There was a wide ledge a quarter of a mile away.

"Anita, look."

But it went past. And then I saw that it was heading for a level,
plateau-like surface a few miles further on. It dropped, cautiously
floating down.

There was still no sign of Miko. But I realized that haste was
necessary. We must be the first to join the brigand ship.

I lifted Anita to her feet. "I don't think we should signal from
here."

"No. Miko might see it."

We could not tell where he was. Down on the plains, perhaps? Or up
here, somewhere in these miles of towering rocks?

"Are you ready, Anita?"

"Yes, Gregg."

       *       *       *       *       *

I stared through the visors at her white, solemn face.

"Yes, I'm ready," she repeated.

Her hand-pressure seemed to me suddenly like a farewell. Were we
plunging rashly into what was destined to mean our death? Was this a
farewell?

An instinct swept me not to do this thing. Why, in an hour or two I
could have Anita back to the comparative safety of the Grantline
buildings. The exit portes would doubtless be repaired by now. I could
get her inside.

She had bounded away from me, leaped down some thirty feet into the
broken gully, to cross it and then up on the other side. I stood for
an instant watching her fantastic shape, with the great rounded,
goggled, trunked helmet and the lump on her shoulders which held the
little Erentz motors. Then I made after her.

It did not take us long--two or three miles of circling along the
giant wall. The ship lay only a few hundred feet above our level.

We stood at last on a buttelike pinnacle. The hull-porte lights of the
ship were close over us. And there were moving lights up there, tiny
moving spots on the adjacent rocks. The brigands had come out,
prowling around to investigate their location.

No signal yet from Miko. But it might come at any moment.

"I'll flash now," I whispered.

"Yes."

The brigands had probably not yet seen us. I took the lamp from my
helmet. My hand was trembling. Suppose my signal were answered by a
shot? A flash from some giant projector mounted on the ship?

Anita crouched behind a rock, as she had promised. I stood with my
torch, and flung its switch.

My puny light-beam shot up. I waved it, touched the ship with its
faint glowing circle of illumination.

They saw me. There was a sudden movement among the lights up there.

       *       *       *       *       *

I semaphored:

"_I am from Miko. Do not fire._"

I used the open Universal Code. In Martian first, and then in English.

There was no answer, but no attack. I tried again.

"_This is Haljan, once of the_ Planetara. _George Prince's sister is
with me. There has been disaster to Miko._"

A small light-beam came down from the brink of the overhead cliff
beside the ship.

"_We read you._"

I went steadily on: "_Disaster--the_ Planetara _is wrecked. All killed
but me and George Prince's sister. We want to join you._"

I flashed off my light. The answer came: "_Where is the Grantline
camp?_"

"_Near here. The Mare Imbrium._"

As though to answer my lie, from down on the Earthlit plains, ten
miles or so from the crater-base, a tiny signal-light shot up. Anita
saw it and gripped me.

"There is Miko's light!"

It spelled in Martian, "_Come down. Land Mare Imbrium._"

Miko had seen the signalling up here and was joining it! He repeated,
"_Land Mare Imbrium._"

       *       *       *       *       *

I flashed a protest up to the ship: "_Beware! That is Grantline!
Trickery!_"

From the ship the summons came: "_Come up._"

We had won this first encounter! Miko must have realized his
disadvantage. His distant light went out.

"Come, Anita."

There was no retreat now. But again I seemed to feel in the pressure
of her hand that vague farewell.

Her voice whispered, "We must do our best, act our best to be
convincing."

In the white glow of a search-beam we climbed the crags, reached the
broad upper ledge. Helmeted figures rushed at us, searched us for
weapons, seized our helmet lights. The evil face of a giant Martian
peered at me through the visors. Two other monstrous, towering figures
seized Anita.

We were shoved toward the port-locks at the base of the ship's hull.
Above the hull bulge I could see the grids of projectors mounted in
the dome-side, and the figures of men standing on the deck, peering
down at us.

We went through the admission locks into a hull corridor, up an
incline passage, and reached the lighted deck. Our helmets were taken
off. The Martian brigands crowded around us.


CHAPTER XXIX

_On the Brigand Ship_

Anita's words echoed in my memory: "We must act our best to be
convincing." It was not her ability that I doubted as much as my own.
She had played the part of George Prince cleverly, unmasked only by an
evil chance.

I steeled myself to face the searching glances of the brigands as they
shoved around us. This was a desperate game into which we had plunged!
For all our acting, how easy it would be for some small chance thing
abruptly to undo us! I realized it, and now, as I gazed into the
peering faces of these men from Mars, I cursed my witless rashness
which had brought Anita into this!

The brigands--some ten or fifteen of them here on the deck--stood in a
ring around us. They were all big men, nearly of a seven-foot
average, dressed in leather jerkins and short leather breeches, with
bare knees and flaring leatherboots. Piratical swaggering fellows,
knife-blades mingled with small hand-projectors fastened to their
belts. Gray, heavy faces, some with scraggling, unshaved beard. They
plucked at us, jabbering in Martian.

One of them seemed the leader. I said sharply, "Are you the commander
here? I speak not Ilton[4] well. You speak the Earth English?"

[Footnote 4: Ilton, the ruling race and official language of the
Martian Union.]

"Yes," he said readily, "I am Commander here." He spoke English with
the same freedom and accent of Miko. "Is this George Prince's sister?"

"Yes. Her name is Anita Prince. Tell your men to take their hands off
her."

He waved his men away. They all seemed more interested in Anita than
in me. He added:

"I am Set Potan." He addressed Anita. "George Prince's sister? You are
called Anita? I have heard of you. I knew your brother--indeed, you
look very much like him."

He swept his plumed hat to the grid with a swaggering gesture of
homage. A courtierlike fellow this, debonair as a Venus cavalier!

He accepted us. I realized that Anita's presence was immensely
valuable in making us convincing. Yet there was about this Potan--as
with Miko--a disturbing suggestion of irony. I could not make him out.
I decided that we had fooled him. Then I remarked the steely glitter
of his eyes as he turned to me.

"You were an officer of the _Planetara_?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The insignia of my rank was visible on my white jacket-collar which
showed beneath the Erentz suit, now that my helmet was off.

"Yes, I was supposed to be. But a year ago I embarked upon this
adventure with Miko."

He was leading us to his cabin. "The _Planetara_ wrecked? Miko dead?"

"And Hahn and Coniston. George Prince, too--we are the only
survivors."

While we divested ourselves of our Erentz suits at his command, I told
him briefly of the _Planetara's_ fall. All had been killed on board
save Anita and me. We had escaped, awaited his coming. The treasure
was here; we had located the Grantline camp, and were ready to lead
him to it.

Did he believe me? He listened quietly. He seemed not shocked at the
death of his comrades. Nor yet pleased: merely imperturbable.

I added with a sly, sidelong glance, "There were too many of us on the
_Planetara_. The purser had joined us, and many of the crew. And there
was Miko's sister, the Setta Moa--too many. The treasure divides
better among less."

An amused smile played on his thin gray lips. But he nodded. The fear
which had leaped in me was allayed by his next words.

"True enough, Haljan. He was a domineering fellow, Miko. A third of it
