A friend got up quickly and hastened to the man's table.

"Weems," he said sharply, resting his hand on the man's shoulder.

Weems made no sign that he had heard, or had felt the touch. On and on
he sat there, staring at nothing, hand half raised to drink.

"Weems!" Sharp and frightened the friend's voice sounded. And all on the
roof garden heard it. For all were now silent, staring with gradually
more terrified eyes at Weems.

The friend passed his hand slowly, haltingly before Weems' staring eyes.
And those eyes did not blink.

"Weems--for God's sake--what's the matter with you?"

The friend was trembling now, with growing horror on his face as he
sensed something here beyond his power to comprehend. Hardly knowing
what he was doing, following only an instinct of fear at the unnatural
attitude, he put his hand on Weems' half-raised arm and lowered it to
the table. The arm went down like a mechanical thing. The champagne
glass touched the table.

A woman at the next table screamed and got to her feet with a rasp of
her chair that sounded like a thin shriek of fear. For Weems' arm, when
it was released, went slowly up again to the same position it had
assumed when the man suddenly ceased becoming an animate being, and
became a thing like a statue clad in dinner clothes with a glass in its
hand.

"_Weems!_" yelled the friend.

And then the orchestra began to play, loudly, with metallic
cheerfulness, as the head waiter sensed bizarre tragedy and moved to
conceal it as such matters are always concealed at such occasions.

Weems sat on, eyes wide, hand half raised to lips. He continued to hold
that posture when four men carried him to the elevators and down to the
hotel doctor's suite. He was still holding it when they sat him down in
an easy chair, bent forward a bit as though a table were still before
him, eyes staring, hand half raised to drink. The champagne glass was
empty now, with its contents spotting his clothes and the roof garden
carpets, spilled when the four had borne him from the table. But it was
still clenched in his rigid hand, and no effort to get it from his oddly
set fingers was successful....

       *       *       *       *       *

The festivities of the much-heralded opening night went on all over the
new-born town of Blue Bay. On the roof garden were several hundred
people who were still neglecting talk, drinking and dancing while their
startled minds reviewed the strange thing they had seen; but aside from
their number, the celebrants were having a careless good time, with no
thought of danger in their minds.

However, there was no sign of gayety in the tower office suite atop the
mammoth Blue Bay Hotel and just two floors beneath the garden. The three
officers of the Blue Bay Company sat in here, and in their faces was
frenzy.

"What in the world are we going to do?" bleated Chichester, thin,
nervous, dry-skinned, secretary and treasurer of the company. "Weems is
the biggest stockholder. He is nationally famous. His attack of illness
here on the very night of opening will give us publicity so unfavorable
that it might put Blue Bay in the red for months. You know how a
disaster can sometimes kill a place."

"Most unfortunate," sighed heavy-set, paunchy Martin Gest, gnawing his
lip. Gest was president of the company.

"Unfortunate, hell!" snapped Kroner, vice president. Kroner was a
self-made man, slightly overcolored, rather loud, with dinner clothes
cut a little too modishly. "It's curtains if anything more should
happen."

"Hasn't the doctor found out yet what's the matter with Weems?" quavered
Chichester.

Kroner swore. "You heard the last report, same as the rest of us. Doctor
Grays has never seen anything like it. Weems seems to be paralyzed; yet
there are none of the symptoms of paralysis save lack of movement. There
is no perceptible heart-beat--yet he certainly isn't dead; the complete
absence of rigor mortis and the fact that there is a trace of blood
circulation prove that. He simply stays in that same position. When you
move arm or hand, it moves slowly back to the same position again on
being released. He has no reflex response, doesn't apparently hear or
feel or see."

"Like catalepsy," sighed Gest.

Kroner nodded and moistened his feverish lips.

"Just like catalepsy. Only it isn't. Grays swears to that. But what it
is, he can't say."

Chichester fumbled in his pocket.

"You two laughed at me this evening when I got worried about getting
that note. You talked me down again a few minutes ago. But I'm telling
you once more, I believe there's a connection. I believe whoever wrote
the note really has made Weems like he is--not that the note was penned
by a crank and that Weems' illness is coincidence."

"Nonsense!" said Gest. "The note was either written by a madman, or by
some crook who adopted a crazy, melodramatic name."

"But he predicted what happened to Weems," faltered Chichester. "And he
says there will be more--much more--enough to ruin Blue Bay for ever if
we don't meet his demands----"

"Nuts!" said Kroner bluntly. "Weems just got sick, that's all. Something
so rare that most doctors can't spot it, but normal just the same. We
can keep it quiet, and have him treated secretly by Grays. That'll stop
publicity."

He rapped with heavy, red knuckles on the note which Chichester had laid
on the conference table. "This is a fraud, a thin-air idea of some small
shot to get money out of us."

He turned to the telephone to call Doctor Grays' suite again for a later
report on Weems' condition. The other two bent near to listen.

A breath of air came in the open window. It stirred the note on the
table, partially unfolded it.

"... disaster and horror shall be the chief, though uninvited, guests at
your opening unless you comply with my request. Mathew Weems shall be
only the first if you do not signify by one a. m. whether or not you
will meet my demand...."

The note closed as the breeze died, flipped open again so that the
signature showed, flipped shut once more.

The signature was: Doctor Satan!




_2. The Living Dead_


At two in the morning, two hours and a half after the odd seizure of
Mathew Weems, and while Gest and Kroner and Chichester were in Doctor
Grays' suite anxiously looking at the stricken man, eight people were in
the sleek, small roulette room of the Blue Bay Hotel on the fourteenth
floor.

The eight, four men and four women, were absorbed by the wheel. Their
bets were scattered over the numbered board, and some of the bets were
high.

The croupier, with all bets placed, spun the little ivory ball into the
already spinning wheel, and all watched. At the door, a woman stood. She
was tall, slender but voluptuously proportioned, with a face like a pale
flower on her long, graceful throat. Madame Sin.

She came into the room with a little smile on her red, red lips. In her
tapering fingers was held a gold-link purse. She did not open this to
buy chips, simply walked to the table. There, with a smile, two men
moved over a little to make a place for her.

"Thank you so much," she acknowledged the move. Her voice was as
exotically attractive as the rest of her; low, clear, a little throaty.
"I am merely going to watch a little while, however. I do not intend to
play."

The wheel stopped. The ball came to rest in the slot marked nineteen.
But the attention of those at the table was divided between it and the
woman who was outrageous enough, or had sense of humor enough, to call
herself Madame Sin. In the men's eyes was admiration. In the women's
eyes was the wariness that always appears when another woman comes along
whose attractions are genuinely dangerous to male peace of mind.

"Make your plays," warned the croupier dispassionately, holding the ball
between pallid thumb and forefinger while he prepared to spin the wheel
again.

The four couples placed bets. Madame Sin watched out of dark, exotic
