
521. _Individuals may have small chests from birth._ This, to the
particular individual, is natural; yet it is adverse to the great and
general law of Nature relative to the size of the human chest. Like
produces like, is a general law of the animal and vegetable kingdoms.
No fact is better established, than that which proves the hereditary
transmission from parents to children of a constitutional liability
to disease and the same may be said in regard to their conformations.
If the mother has a small, taper waist, either hereditary or acquired,
this form may be impressed on her offspring;--thus illustrating the
truthfulness of scripture, "that the sins of the parents shall be
visited upon the children unto the third and fourth generation."

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

Observation 2d. Observation 3d. 520. What is the size of the chest of
a child that has always worn loose clothing? What is said of the size
of the laboring women of Ireland, and the Indian female? How is it in
ancient statues? What is the design of the chest? 521. What is a
general law of both the animal and vegetable kingdoms? What fact in
this connection is well established?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

522. _The quantity of air inhaled is modified by the capacity of the
respiratory organs._ The necessity of voluminous lungs may he
elucidated by the following experiment: Suppose a gill of alcohol,
mixed with a gill of water, be put into a vessel having a square foot
of surface, and over the vessel a membrane be tied, and that the water
will evaporate in twenty-four hours. If the surface had been only six
inches square, only one fourth of the water would have evaporated
through the membrane in the given time. If the surface had been
extended to two square feet, the water would have evaporated in twelve
hours.

523. Apply this principle to the lungs: suppose there are two hundred
feet of carbonic acid to be carried out of the system every
twenty-four hours. This gas, in that time, will pass through a
vesicular membrane of two thousand square feet. If the lungs were
diminished in size, so that there would be only one thousand square
feet of vesicular membrane, the amount of carbonic acid would not, and
could not, be eliminated from the system. Under such circumstances,
the blood would not be purified.

524. Again; suppose the two thousand square feet of membrane would
transmit two hundred cubic feet of oxygen into the system every
twenty-four hours. If it should be diminished one half, this amount of
oxygen would not pass into the blood. From the above illustrations we
may learn the importance of well-developed chests and voluminous
lungs; for, by increasing the size of the lungs, the oxygen is more
abundantly supplied to the blood, and this fluid is more perfectly
deprived of its carbon and hydrogen.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

What does this hereditary transmission prove? 522. How is the
necessity of voluminous lungs illustrated? 525. How is this principle
applied to the interchange of products in the lungs?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

525. The chest is not only most expanded at its lower part, but the
portion of the lungs that occupies this space of the thoracic cavity
contains the greater part of the air-cells; and, from the lower two
thirds of the lungs the greatest amount of carbonic acid is abstracted
from the blood, and the greatest amount of oxygen gas is conveyed into
the circulating fluid. Hence, contracting the lower ribs is far more
injurious to the health than diminishing the size of the upper part of
the chest.

526. The question is often asked, Can the size of the chest and the
volume of the lungs be increased, when they have been injudiciously
compressed, or have inherited this unnatural form? The answer is in
the affirmative. The means for attaining this end are, a judicious
exercise of the lungs, by walking in the open air, reading aloud,
singing, sitting erect, and fully inflating the lungs at each act of
inspiration. If the exercise be properly managed and persevered in, it
will expand the chest, and give tone and health to the important
organs contained in it. But, if the exercise be ill-timed or carried
to excess, the beneficial results sought will probably not be
attained.

_Observation._ Scholars, and persons who sit much of the time, should
frequently, during the day, breathe full and deep, so that the
smallest air-cells may be fully filled with air. While exercising the
lungs, the shoulders should be thrown back and the head held erect.

527. _The movement of the ribs and diaphragm is modified by the
dress._ When the lungs are properly filled with air, the chest is
enlarged in every direction. If any article of apparel is worn so
tight as to prevent the full expansion of the chest and abdomen, the
lungs, in consequence, do not receive air sufficient to purify the
blood. The effect of firm, unyielding clothing, when worn tight, in
preventing a due supply of air to the lungs, may be shown by the
following illustration.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

525. Why is it more injurious to contract the lower part of the chest
than the upper? 526. How can the size of the chest be increased when
it is contracted? Give the observation. 527. How is the movement of
the ribs and diaphragm modified?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

_Illustration._ If the diameter of a circle is three feet, the
circumference will be nine feet. If the diameter is extended to four
feet, the circumference will be increased to twelve feet. Should a
tight band be thrown around a circle of nine feet, its diameter cannot
be increased, for the circumference cannot be enlarged.

528. Any inelastic band, drawn closely around the lower part of the
chest, or the abdomen, below the ribs, operates like the band in the
preceding illustration, in restricting the movement of the ribs. When
any article of dress encircles either the chest or abdomen, so as to
prevent an increase of its circumference, it has an injudicious
tendency, as it prevents the introduction of air in sufficient
quantities to purify the blood. The question is not, How much
restriction of the respiratory movements can be endured, and life
continue? but, Does any part of the apparel restrict the movements? If
it does, it is a violation of the organic laws; and though Nature is
profuse in her expenditures, yet sooner or later, she sums up her
account.

529. In determining whether the apparel is worn too tight, inflate the
lungs, and, if no pressure is felt, no injurious effects need be
apprehended from this cause. In testing the tightness of the dress,
some persons will contract to the utmost the abdominal muscles, and
thus diminish the size of the chest, by depressing the ribs; when
this is done, the individual exclaims, "How loose my dress is!" This
practice is both deceptive and ludicrous. A good test is, to put the
hand on the chest below the arm; if there is no movement of the ribs
during respiration, the apparel is too tight. The only reliable test,
however, is a full inflation of the lungs.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

How is the effect of unyielding clothing, when worn tight, illustrated?
528. What effect has an inelastic band upon the lower part of the
chest? What question is asked? 529. How can we determine whether the
apparel is worn too tight?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

_Observation._ Many individuals do not realize the small amount of
force that will prevent the enlargement of the chest. This can be
demonstrated by drawing a piece of tape tightly around the lower part
of the chest of a vigorous adult, and confining it with the thumb and
finger. Then endeavor fully to inflate the lungs, and the movement of
the ribs will be much restricted.

530. _The position in standing and sitting influences the movement of
the ribs and diaphragm._ When the shoulders are thrown back, and when
a person stands or sits erect, the diaphragm and ribs have more
freedom of motion, and the abdominal muscles act more efficiently;
thus the lungs have broader range of movement than when the shoulders
incline forward, and the body is stooping.

531. _Habit exercises an influence upon the range of the respiratory
movements._ A person who has been habituated to dress loosely, and
whose inspirations are full and free, suffers more from the tightness
of a vest or waistband, than one, the range of movements of whose
chest has long been subjected to tight lacing.

532. _The condition of the brain exercises a great influence upon
respiration._ If the brain is diseased, or the mind depressed by
grief, tormented by anxiety, or absorbed by abstract thought, the
contractile energy of the diaphragm and muscles that elevate the
ribs, is much diminished, and the lungs are not so fully inflated, as
when the mind is influenced by joy or other exhilarating emotions. The
depressing passions likewise lessen the frequency of respiration. By
the influence of these causes, the blood is but partially purified,
and the whole system becomes enfeebled. Here we may see the admirable
harmony between the different parts of the body, and the adaptation of
all the functions to each other.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

Give another test. How can the amount of pressure necessary to prevent
the enlargement of the chest be demonstrated? 530. Show the effect of
position on the movements of the ribs and diaphragm. 531. Show the
effect of habit on the respiratory movements. 532. State the influence
of the mind upon respiration.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

533. As the quantity of air inhaled at each unimpeded inspiration in
lungs of ample size, is about forty cubic inches, it follows, if the
movement of the ribs and diaphragm is restricted by an enfeebled
action of the respiratory muscles, or by any other means, the blood
will not be perfectly purified. In the experiment, (Sec. 522, 523,)
suppose forty cubic inches of air must pass over the membrane twenty
times every minute, and that this is the amount required to remove the
vapor which arises from the membrane; if only half of this amount of
air be supplied each minute, only one half as much water will be
removed from the alcohol through the membrane in twenty-four hours;
consequently, the alcohol would be impure from the water not being
entirely removed.

534. Restrain the elevation of the ribs and depression of the
diaphragm, so that the quantity of air conveyed into the lungs will be
reduced to twenty cubic inches, when forty are needed, and the results
will be as follows: Only one half of the carbonic acid will be
eliminated from the system, and the blood will receive but one half as
much oxygen as it requires. This fluid will then be imperfectly
oxydated, and partially freed of its impurities. The impure blood will
be returned to the left side of the heart, and the whole system will
suffer from an infringement of organic laws.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

533. Illustrate the effect upon the blood when the respiratory muscles
are enfeebled in their action. 534. Show how the blood is imperfectly
purified by restricting the movements of the ribs and diaphragm.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

535. _Scrofula, or consumption, frequently succeeds a depressed state
of the nervous system._ These diseases arise from the deposition of
tuberculous matter in different parts of the body. Those individuals
who have met with reverses of fortune, in which character and property
were lost, afford painful examples. Hundreds yearly die from the
effect of depressed spirits, caused by disappointed hopes, or
disappointed ambition.

_Illustration._ A striking instance of the effects of mental
depression is related by Laennec. In a female religious establishment
in France, great austerities were practised; the mind was absorbed in
contemplating the terrible truths of religion, and in mortifying the
flesh. The whole establishment, in the space of ten years, was
several times depopulated--with the exception of the persons
employed at the gate, in the kitchen, and garden--with that fatal
disease, consumption. This institution did not long continue, but
was suppressed by order of the French government.

536. _The purity of the blood is influenced by the condition of the
lungs._ When the bronchial tubes and air-cells have become partially
impervious to air, from pressure upon the lungs, from fluids in the
chest, from tumors, or from the consolidation of the cells and tubes
from disease,--as inflammation, or the deposition of yellow, cheesy
matter, called tubercles,--the blood will not be purified, even if the
air is pure, the lungs voluminous, and the respiratory movements
unrestricted, as the air cannot permeate the air-cells.

_Observations._ 1st. The twenty-three who escaped immediate death in
the Black Hole of Calcutta were soon attacked with inflammation of the
lungs, by which these organs were consolidated, and thus prevented
the permeation of air into their cells. This disease of the lungs was
caused by breathing vitiated air.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

535. Mention some of the effects of mental depression upon the body.
What is related by Laennec? 536. Does the condition of the lungs
influence the purity of the blood? Mention some of the conditions that
will impede the oxydation of blood in the lungs. What occurred to
those persons who escaped death in the Black Hole of Calcutta?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

2d. One of the precursory symptoms of consumption is the feeble murmur
of respiration in the upper part of the lungs. This condition of these
organs is produced by, or frequently follows, mental depression, the
breathing of impure air, the stooping position in standing or sitting,
and the restriction of the movements of the ribs and diaphragm.

3d. Persons asphyxiated by carbonic acid, water, strangling, or any
noxious air, after resuscitation, are usually affected with coughs and
other diseases of the lungs.

537. COLDS and COUGHS are generally induced by a chill, that produces
a contraction of the blood-vessels of the skin; and the waste
material, which should be carried from the body by the agency of the
vessels of this membrane, is retained in the system, and a great
portion of it is returned to the mucous membrane of the lungs. For
such is the harmony established by the Creator, that if the function
of any portion of the body is deranged, those organs whose offices are
similar take on an increased action.

538. The waste material, that should have passed through the many
outlets of the skin, creates an unusual fulness of the minute vessels
that nourish the mucous membrane of the bronchia; this induces an
irritation of these vessels, which increases the flow of blood to the
nutrient arteries of the lungs. There is, also, a thickening of the
lining membrane of the lungs, caused by the repletion of the bronchial
vessels of the mucous membrane; this impedes the passage of air
through the small bronchial tubes, and consequently the air-vesicles
cannot impart a sufficient quantity of oxygen to purify the blood, and
this fluid, imperfectly purified, does not pass with facility through
the lungs. An additional obstacle to the free passage of air into the
lungs, is the accumulation of blood in the pulmonary vessels.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

What is one of the precursory symptoms of consumption? How is this
condition frequently produced? What diseases usually follow asphyxia
by carbonic acid, water, strangling, &c.? 537. How are colds generally
induced? 538. What effect has a common cold upon the mucous membrane
of the lungs?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

539. As colds and coughs are very generally treated by the "matrons"
of the community, or by the patient, the following suggestions may aid
in directing a proper treatment: To effect a speedy cure, it is
necessary to diminish the amount of fluid in the vessels of the lungs.
This can be effected in two ways: 1st. By diminishing the quantity of
blood in the system; 2d. By diverting it from the lungs to the skin.
The first condition can be easily and safely affected, by abstaining
from food, and drinking no more than a gill of fluid in twenty-four
hours. As there is a continuous waste from the skin and other organs
of the system, the quantity of blood by this procedure will be
diminished, and the lungs relieved of the accumulated fluid.

540. The second condition can be accomplished by resorting to the warm
or vapor bath. These and the common sweats will invite the blood from
the lungs to the skin. By keeping up the action of the skin for a few
hours, the lungs will be relieved. In some instances, emetics and
cathartics are necessary; mucilages, as gum arabic or slippery-elm
bark, would be good. After the system is relieved, the skin is more
impressible to cold, and consequently requires careful protection by
clothing. In good constitutions, the first method is preferable, and
generally sufficient without any medicine or "sweating."

541. _The method of resuscitating persons apparently drowned._ In the
first instance, it is necessary to press the chest, suddenly and
forcibly, downward and backward, and instantly discontinue the
pressure. Repeat this without intermission, until a pair of bellows
can be procured. When the bellows are obtained, introduce the nozzle
well upon the base of the tongue, and surround the mouth and nose with
a towel or handkerchief, to close them. Let another person press upon
the projecting part of the neck, called "Adam's apple," while air is
introduced into the lungs through the bellows. Then press upon the
chest, to force the air from the lungs, to imitate natural breathing.
(Appendix M.)

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

539. Give the first method for the treatment of cold. 540. The second
method. 541, 542. How should persons apparently drowned be treated?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

542. Continue the use of the bellows, and forcing the air out of the
chest, for an hour at least, unless signs of natural breathing come
on. Wrap the body in warm, dry blankets, and place it near the fire,
to preserve the natural warmth, as well as to impart artificial heat.
Every thing, however, is secondary to filling the lungs with air.
Avoid all friction until breathing is restored. Send immediately for
medical aid.

543. _The means of resuscitating persons asphyxiated from electricity,
&c._ In apparent death from electricity, (lightning,) the person is
frequently asphyxiated from _pa-ral'y-sis_ (palsy) of the respiratory
muscles. To recover such persons, resort to artificial respiration. In
cases of apparent death from hanging or strangling, the knot should be
untied or cut immediately; then use artificial respiration, or
breathing, as directed in apparent death from drowning.

_Observation._ It is an impression, in many sections of the country,
that the law will not allow the removal of the cord from the neck of a
body found suspended, unless the coroner be present. It is therefore
proper to say, that no such delay is necessary, and that no time
should be lost in attempting to resuscitate the strangled person.

544. _The method of resuscitating persons apparently dead from
inhaling carbonic acid gas._ When life is apparently extinct from
breathing carbonic acid gas, the person should be carried into the
open air. The head and shoulders should be slightly elevated; the face
and chest should be sponged or sprinkled with cold water, or cold
vinegar and water, while the limbs are wrapped in dry, warm blankets.
In this, as in asphyxia from other causes, immediately resort to
artificial respiration.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

543. What treatment should be adopted in asphyxia from electricity?
From hanging? 544. What should be the treatment in asphyxia from
inhaling carbonic acid gas?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

_Observations._ 1st. Many persons have died from breathing carbonic
acid that was formed by burning charcoal in an open pan or portable
furnace, for the purpose of warming their, sleeping-rooms. This is not
only produced by burning charcoal, but is evolved from the live coals
of a wood fire; and being heavier than air, it settles on the floor of
the room; and, if there is no open door or chimney-draught, it will
accumulate, and, rising above the head of an individual, will cause
asphyxia or death.

2d. In resuscitating persons apparently dead from causes already
mentioned, if a pair of bellows cannot be procured immediately, let
their lungs be inflated by air expelled from the lungs of some person
present. To have the expired air as pure as possible, the person
should quickly inflate his lungs, and instantly expel the air into
those of the asphyxiated person. _Place the patient in pure air, admit
attendants only into the apartment, and send for a physician without
delay._

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

What sad results frequently follow the burning of charcoal in a closed
room? What suggestion in resuscitating asphyxiated persons?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=




CHAPTER XXVII.

ANIMAL HEAT.


545. The true sources of animal heat, or calorification, are still
imperfectly known. No hypothesis has, as yet, received the concurrent
assent of physiologists. We see certain phenomena, but the ultimate
causes are hidden from our view. Its regular production, to a certain
degree, is essential both to animal and vegetable life.

546. There is a tendency between bodies of different temperature to an
equilibrium of heat. Thus, if we touch or approach a hot body, the
heat, or caloric passes from that body to our organs of feeling, and
gives the sensation of heat. On the contrary, when we touch a cold
body, the heat passes from the hand to that body, and causes a
sensation of cold.

547. The greater number of animals appear cold when we touch them;
and, indeed, the temperature of their bodies is not much above that of
the atmosphere, and changes with it. In man, and other animals that
approach him in their organization, it is otherwise. They have the
faculty of producing a sufficient quantity of caloric to maintain
their temperatures nearly at the same degree, under all atmospheric
changes, and keep themselves warm.

548. Those animals whose proper heat is not very perceivable, are
called _cold_-blooded; as most species of fishes, toads, snakes,
turtles, and reptiles generally. Those animals which produce
sufficient heat independently of the atmosphere surrounding them, are
called _warm_-blooded; as man, birds, quadrupeds, &c.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

545-570. _What is said respecting animal heat?_ 545. Are the true
sources of animal heat known? What do we see? 546. What is the tendency
between bodies of different temperatures? Give an explanation. 547.
What is said of the temperature of animals? 548. What is meant by
cold-blooded animals? By warm-blooded animals?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

549. The temperature of man is about 98 deg., (Fahrenheit's thermometer,)
and that of some other animals is higher; the temperature of birds,
for example, is about 110 deg. It is obvious, that in most parts of the
globe, the heat of the atmosphere is, even in summer, less than that
of the human body. In our latitude, the mercury rarely attains 98 deg.,
and sometimes it descends to several degrees below zero.

550. Captain Parry, with his ship's company, in his voyage of
discovery to the arctic regions, wintered in a climate where the
mercury was at 40 deg., and sometimes at 55 deg. below zero. Captain Back
found it 70 deg. below zero. These were 72 deg. and 102 deg. below the
freezing point, or about 200 deg. below that of their own bodies, and
still they were able to resist this low temperature, and escape being
"frost-bitten."

551. Captain Lyon, who accompanied Captain Parry in his second voyage
to the northern regions, found the temperature of an arctic fox to be
106 deg., while that of the atmosphere was 32 deg. below zero; making a
difference between the temperature of the fox and that of the
atmosphere, of 138 deg. Captain Scoresby found the temperature of a
whale, in the Arctic Ocean, to be 104 deg., or nearly as high as that of
other animals of the same kind in the region of the equator, while the
temperature of the ice was as low as 32 deg., and the water was nearly as
cold. These facts show what a strong counteracting energy there is in
animals against the effects of cold.

552. On the other hand, it has been ascertained by numerous and
well-conducted experiments, that the human body can be exposed, even
for a length of time, to a very high temperature, without essentially
elevating that of the body. Chantrey, the sculptor, often entered the
furnace, heated for drying his moulds, when the temperature indicated
by the thermometer was 330 deg. Chaubert, the Fire-King, is said to have
entered ovens when heated to 600 deg. In 1774, Sir Charles Blagden
entered a room in which the mercury rose to 260 deg. He remained eight
minutes without suffering.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

549. What is the temperature of the human body? Of birds? How does the
heat of the atmosphere in summer, in our latitude, compare with that
of the human system? 550. What is related of Captain Parry? Of Captain
Back? 551. Of Captain Lyon? Of Captain Scoresby? What do these facts
show? 552. What has been ascertained on the other hand?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

553. In order to render it certain that there was no fallacy, says Sir
Charles Blagden, "in the degree of heat shown by the thermometer, but
that the air breathed was capable of producing all the well-known
effects of such a heat on inanimate matter, I put some eggs and
beefsteak upon a tin frame placed near the thermometer, and farther
distant from the cockle than from the wall of the room. In about
twenty minutes the eggs were taken out, roasted quite hard; and in
forty-seven minutes, the steak was not only dressed, but almost dry."

554. If a thermometer be placed under the tongue of a healthy person,
in all climates and seasons the temperature will be found nearly the
same. Sir Charles Blagden, "while in the heated room, breathed on a
thermometer, and the mercury sank several degrees; and when he expired
forcibly, the air felt cool as it passed through the nostrils, though
it was scorching hot when it entered them in inspiration."

_Observation._ Did not the human body possess within itself the power
of generating and removing heat, so as to maintain nearly an equality
of temperature, the most fatal consequences would ensue. In northern
latitudes, especially, in severe weather of winter, the blood would be
converted into a solid mass, and on the other hand, the fatty
secretion, when subjected to equatorial heat, would become fluid, and
life would be extinguished.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

What is related of Chantrey? Of Chaubert? Of Sir Charles Blagden? 553.
Give Sir Charles's own statement. 554. What is said of the temperature
of the human tongue? Mention the experiment by Sir Charles Blagden.
What would be the effect if the human system did not maintain an
equality of temperature?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

555. To enable man, and other warm-blooded animals, to maintain this
equilibrium of temperature under such extremes of heat and cold,
naturally suggests two inquiries: 1st. By what organs is animal heat
generated? 2d. By what means is its uniformity maintained?

556. The ancients had no well-arranged theory on the subject of animal
heat. They believed that the chief object of respiration was to cool
the blood, and that the heart was the great furnace where all the heat
was generated. At a later period, Mayow, from his discoveries
respecting respiration, asserted that the object of respiration was to
produce heat, and denied that the blood was cooled in the lungs.

557. When it was discovered that, both in combustion and respiration,
carbonic acid was produced and oxygen absorbed, it led Dr. Black to
conclude that breathing was a kind of combustion by which all the heat
of the body was produced. This theory was objected to, because, if all
the heat was generated in the lungs, like those parts of a stove in
contact with the fuel, they would be at a higher temperature than
those parts at a distance, which was known not to exist.

558. The next theory, and one which received the sanction of the
scientific men of Europe, was proposed by Dr. Crawford. He agreed with
Dr. Black that heat not only was generated in the lungs, but that the
arterial blood had a greater capacity for heat than the venous, and
that this increase of capacity takes place in the lungs. At the moment
heat is generated, a portion of it, under the name of latent heat, is
absorbed and conveyed to the different parts of the body Wherever
arterial blood is converted into venous, this latent heat is given
out. But, unfortunately for this theory, Dr. Davy proved the capacity
of both, for heat, to be nearly the same.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

555. What inquiries are naturally suggested? 556. What was the theory
of the ancients? What did Mayow assert at a later period? 557. What
was the theory of Dr. Black? The objection? 558. What was the theory
of Dr Crawford?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

559. No one can doubt that respiration and animal heat are closely
connected. Those animals whose respiratory apparatus is the most
extended, have the highest temperature. An example is seen in birds,
whose organs of respiration extend over a large part of the body, and
their temperature is 12 deg. above man; while the respiratory apparatus of
cold-blooded animals, as some kinds of fish, is imperfect, and only a
small quantity of blood is subjected, at any time, to the effects of
respiration.

560. To understand the process by which heat is generated in the human
system and in animals, it will be necessary to state: 1st. That the
apparent heat of a body, as perceived by the touch, or as indicated by
a thermometer, is not the measurement of heat contained in the body,
or its capacity for heat.

_Illustration._ If we mix one pound of water, at the temperature of
60 deg., with another pound at 91 deg., the resulting temperature will be
exactly the medium, or 75 1/2 deg. But, if we mix a pound of water at 60
deg. with a pound of quicksilver at 91 deg., the resulting temperature
will be only 61 deg., because the capacity of water for heat is so much
greater than that of quicksilver, that the heat which raised the
quicksilver 31 deg. will raise the water only 1 deg.

561. 2d. When the density and the arrangement of the atoms of a body
are changed, its capacity to hold heat in a latent state is altered.
If it will retain more, heat will be absorbed from contiguous and
surrounding substances; but, if its capacity for caloric is lessened,
heat will be set free and given out to surrounding bodies.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

The objection? 559. In what do all the physiologists of the present
day concur? How is it proved that respiration and animal heat are
closely connected? 560. What is said of the apparent heat of bodies?
How is this illustrated? 561. What is the effect when the density and
the arrangement of the atoms of a body are changed?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

_Illustrations._ 1st. Ice and salt, (Chl. of Sodium,) when mixed, are
converted into a fluid. In this state they will hold more heat than
when solid. The heat necessary to produce this change is drawn from
the surrounding medium, which is made proportionally colder by the
loss of caloric imparted to the ice and salt. It is by this chemical
process that "ice-cream" is made.

2d. On the other hand, mix water and sulphuric acid, (oil of vitriol,)
of the temperature of 60 deg., and the mixture will become quite warm,
and will freely impart its heat to surrounding and contiguous objects.

562. The same principle is exhibited, when oxygen unites with an
inflammable body, as in the burning of wood, coal, oil, &c. In
combustion, the oxygen of the atmosphere unites with carbon and
hydrogen, and carbonic acid and water are produced. This process,
according to all the known laws of caloric, is attended with heat. The
quantity of heat disengaged in combustion is always in proportion to
the amount of carbon and hydrogen consumed; thus a piece of wood
weighing one pound, in burning slowly, would give out the same
quantity of heat as a pound of shavings of the same wood, in burning
rapidly. Upon these principles, the production of animal heat may be
understood.

563. The food contains carbon and hydrogen. These exist in the chyle.
The old and waste atoms of the body likewise contain the same
elements. In the lungs the oxygen and nitrogen of the inspired air are
separated. It is now supposed that the oxygen enters the capillary
vessels of the lungs, and mingles with the blood, with which it is
carried to the heart and thence to the nutrient capillary vessels of
every part of the system.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

Give the 1st illustration. The 2d. 562. What changes take place when
oxygen unites with an inflammable body? To what is the quantity of
heat proportionate in combustion? Give an example. 563. How are carbon
and hydrogen supplied to the system? How the oxygen? Where does the
oxygen mingle with the blood?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

564. In the capillary vessels, the oxygen of the arterial blood unites
with the carbon and hydrogen which the refuse materials contain, and
carbonic acid and water are formed. The combustion of carbon and
hydrogen in the capillaries of every part of the system, (the lungs
not excepted,) is attended with a disengagement of heat, and the
