300 tons of copper in its exciting coils (Fig. 1). By May 1942 the
magnet was completed. During that summer it was used in a pilot plant to
separate the first significant amounts of U^{235} ever obtained. The
184-inch magnet remained in use in a research and development program at
Berkeley until the end of the war, supplying information to Oak Ridge,
Tennessee, where a large separation plant had been erected.

Construction on the rest of the cyclotron was resumed in 1945. By that
time a new principle had been discovered which made it possible to
obtain ion beams of much higher energy than originally hoped for. Yet a
considerably lower accelerating voltage could be used. This important
discovery was made independently by Dr. V. Veksler in Russia and by
Dr. Edwin M. McMillan, present Director of the Lawrence Radiation
Laboratory. Before attempting to discuss this principle, we should first
review the operation of a conventional cyclotron.




PRINCIPLE OF OPERATION OF A CONVENTIONAL CYCLOTRON


[Illustration: Fig. 2. Basic parts of a cyclotron.]

The main parts of a cyclotron are represented in Fig. 2. Charged
particles (ions) are accelerated inside an evacuated tank. This is to
prevent the beam from colliding with air molecules and being scattered.
The vacuum tank is placed between the poles of an electromagnet, whose
field bends the ion beam into a circular orbit.

The operation begins when the ions are introduced into the region
between two accelerating electrodes, or "dees."[2] Because the ions
carry a positive electric charge, they are attracted toward that dee
which is electrically negative at the moment. Were it not for the
magnetic field, the ions would be accelerated in a straight line;
instead they are deflected into a circular path back toward the dee gap.
By the time the ions again reach the dee gap, the sign of the electric
potential on the dees is reversed, so that now the ions are attracted
toward the opposite dee.

As this process of alternating the electric potential is repeated, the
ions gain speed and energy with each revolution. This causes them to
spiral outward. Finally they strike a target inserted into their path or
are extracted from the cyclotron for use as an external beam.

The time required for an ion to complete one loop remains constant as it
spirals outward. This is because its velocity increases sufficiently to
make up for the increased distance it travels during each turn. This
means that the electric potential applied to the dees must alternate at
a constant frequency, called the "resonant frequency."

The resonant frequency f is given by the relationship

            He
    f = --------- ,                                      (1)
         2[pi]mc

where H, e, [pi], c, and m are constants. H is the strength of the
magnetic field of the cyclotron, e is the electric charge carried by the
ion, [pi] equals 3.14, c is a conversion factor, and m is the mass of
the ion. For example, the resonant frequency for protons accelerated in
a 15,000-gauss magnetic field is 23.7 megacycles (Mc).[3] We call such a
rapidly alternating potential a "radiofrequency voltage" and the
electronic circuit for producing it a "radiofrequency oscillator."

The energy E of an ion emerging from the cyclotron is given by

        H^2 R^2   e^2
    E = -------  ---- ,                                  (2)
           2     mc^2

where H, e, and m are as defined above, and R is the radius at which the
beam is extracted. From this equation we see that for a given type of
ion (where e and m are constant), the energy depends on the diameter and
strength of the magnet, but not directly upon the voltage applied to the
dees.

The number of revolutions that an ion can make in a conventional
cyclotron is limited to about 70 to 100. This is due to a very curious
effect: as an ion is accelerated, its mass increases! [This phenomenon
is explained by Einstein's special theory of relativity (see Fig. 3).]
Referring back to Eq. (1), we see that if the ion mass (m) does not
remain constant, but rather increases, then the resonant frequency (f)
decreases. But since the dee potential continues alternating at a
constant frequency, an ion soon begins to arrive "late" at the dee gap.
By the time it has made about 70 to 100 turns an ion is so badly out of
phase that it is no longer accelerated.

Suppose now that we want to obtain an energy of 10 Mev. Because an ion
can make a maximum of about 100 turns, the accelerating potential would
have to be about 100,000 volts. However, Professor Lawrence hoped to
reach 100 Mev with the new 184-inch cyclotron. This meant that the
accelerating voltage would have to be about 1,000,000 volts. Preventing
such a high voltage from sparking promised to be one of many formidable
engineering problems.

[Illustration: Fig. 3. Graph showing how the mass of an object increases
as its velocity approaches that of light.]

FOOTNOTES:

[1] The grants were as follows: Rockefeller Foundation--$1,150,000; John
and Mary Markle Foundation--$25,000; The Research Corporation--$50,000.
The University of California added a guarantee of $175,000 to bring the
total building fund to $1,400,000.

[2] In the first cyclotrons the electrodes were shaped like the letter
"D."

[3] We have the values H = 15,000 gauss, e = 4.8 x 10^{-10}
electrostatic units, and m = 1.6 x 10^{-24} gram. To find f, we write

        15,000 (4.8) 10^{-10}
    f = ---------------------------------- ,
        2 (3.14)(1.6) 10^{-24} (3) 10^{10}

    f = 23.7 Mc.
