B. Craters are shallow, their diameters ranging from five times to more
than fifty times their depth. Archimedes, whose diameter we found to be
50 miles, has an average depth of about 4,000 feet below the crest of
its surrounding wall, and is relatively a shallow crater.

[Illustration: FIG. 63.--A typical lunar crater.--NASMYTH and
CARPENTER.]

C. Craters frequently have one or more hills rising within them which,
however, rarely, if ever, reach up to the level of the surrounding wall.

D. Whatever may have been the mode of their formation, the craters can
not have been produced by scooping out material from the center and
piling it up to make the wall, for in three cases out of four the volume
of the excavation is greater than the volume of material contained in
the wall.

106. MOON AND EARTH.--We have gone far enough now to appreciate both the
likeness and the unlikeness of the moon and earth. They may fairly
enough be likened to offspring of the same parent who have followed very
different careers, and in the fullness of time find themselves in very
different circumstances. The most serious point of difference in these
circumstances is the atmosphere, which gives to the earth a wealth of
phenomena altogether lacking in the moon. Clouds, wind, rain, snow,
dew, frost, and hail are all dependent upon the atmosphere and can not
be found where it is not. There can be nothing upon the moon at all like
that great group of changes which we call weather, and the unruffled
aspect of the moon's face contrasts sharply with the succession of cloud
and sunshine which the earth would present if seen from the moon.

The atmosphere is the chief agent in the propagation of sound, and
without it the moon must be wrapped in silence more absolute than can be
found upon the surface of the earth. So, too, the absence of an
atmosphere shows that there can be no water or other liquid upon the
moon, for if so it would immediately evaporate and produce a gaseous
envelope which we have seen does not exist. With air and water absent
there can be of course no vegetation or life of any kind upon the moon,
and we are compelled to regard it as an arid desert, utterly waste.

107. TEMPERATURE OF THE MOON.--A characteristic feature of terrestrial
deserts, which is possessed in exaggerated degree by the moon, is the
great extremes of temperature to which they and it are subject. Owing to
its slow rotation about its axis, a point on the moon receives the solar
radiation uninterruptedly for more than a fortnight, and that too
unmitigated by any cloud or vaporous covering. Then for a like period it
is turned away from the sun and allowed to cool off, radiating into
interplanetary space without hindrance its accumulated store of heat. It
is easy to see that the range of temperature between day and night must
be much greater under these circumstances than it is with us where
shorter days and clouded skies render day and night more nearly alike,
to say nothing of the ocean whose waters serve as a great balance wheel
for equalizing temperatures. Just how hot or how cold the moon becomes
is hard to determine, and very different estimates are to be found in
the books. Perhaps the most reliable of these are furnished by the
recent researches of Professor Very, whose experiments lead him to
conclude that "its rocky surface at midday, in latitudes where the sun
is high, is probably hotter than boiling water and only the most
terrible of earth's deserts, where the burning sands blister the skin,
and men, beasts, and birds drop dead, can approach a noontide on the
cloudless surface of our satellite. Only the extreme polar latitudes of
the moon can have an endurable temperature by day, to say nothing of the
night, when we should have to become troglodytes to preserve ourselves
from such intense cold."

While the night temperature of the moon, even very soon after sunset,
sinks to something like 200° below zero on the centigrade scale, or 320°
below zero on the Fahrenheit scale, the lowest known temperature upon
the earth, according to General Greely, is 90° Fahr. below zero,
recorded in Siberia in January, 1885.

Winter and summer are not markedly different upon the moon, since its
rotation axis is nearly perpendicular to the plane of the earth's orbit
about the sun, and the sun never goes far north or south of the moon's
equator. The month is the one cycle within which all seasonal changes in
its physical condition appear to run their complete course.

108. CHANGES IN THE MOON.--It is evidently idle to look for any such
changes in the condition of the moon's surface as with us mark the
progress of the seasons or the spread of civilization over the
wilderness. But minor changes there may be, and it would seem that the
violent oscillations of temperature from day to night ought to have some
effect in breaking down and crumbling the sharp peaks and crags which
are there so common and so pronounced. For a century past astronomers
have searched carefully for changes of this kind--the filling up of some
crater or the fall of a mountain peak; but while some things of this
kind have been reported from time to time, the evidence in their behalf
has not been altogether conclusive. At the present time it is an open
question whether changes of this sort large enough to be seen from the
earth are in progress. A crater much less than a mile wide can be seen
in the telescope, but it is not easy to tell whether so minute an object
has changed in size or shape during a year or a decade, and even if
changes are seen they may be apparent rather than real. Fig. 64 contains
two views of the crater Archimedes, taken under a morning and an
afternoon sun respectively, and shows a very pronounced difference
between the two which proceeds solely from a difference of illumination.
In the presence of such large fictitious changes astronomers are slow to
accept smaller ones as real.

[Illustration: FIG. 64.--Archimedes in the lunar morning and
afternoon.--WEINEK.]

It is this absence of change that is responsible for the rugged and
sharp-cut features of the moon which continue substantially as they were
made, while upon the earth rain and frost are continually wearing down
the mountains and spreading their substance upon the lowland in an
unending process of smoothing off the roughnesses of its surface. Upon
the moon this process is almost if not wholly wanting, and the moon
abides to-day much more like its primitive condition than is the earth.

109. THE MOON'S INFLUENCE UPON THE EARTH.--There is a widespread popular
belief that in many ways the moon exercises a considerable influence
upon terrestrial affairs: that it affects the weather for good or ill,
that crops must be planted and harvested, pigs must be killed, and
timber cut at the right time of the moon, etc. Our common word lunatic
means moonstruck--i. e., one upon whom the moon has shone while
sleeping. There is not the slightest scientific basis for any of these
beliefs, and astronomers everywhere class them with tales of witchcraft,
magic, and popular delusion. For the most part the moon's influence upon
the earth is limited to the light which it sends and the effect of its
gravitation, chiefly exhibited in the ocean tides. We receive from the
moon a very small amount of second-hand solar heat and there is also a
trifling magnetic influence, but neither of these last effects comes
within the range of ordinary observation, and we shall not go far wrong
in saying that, save the moonlight and the tides, every supposed lunar
influence upon the earth is either fictitious or too small to be readily
detected.




CHAPTER X

THE SUN


110. DEPENDENCE OF THE EARTH UPON THE SUN.--There is no better
introduction to the study of the sun than Byron's Ode to Darkness,
beginning with the lines--

    "I dreamed a dream
    That was not all a dream.
    The bright sun was extinguished,"

and proceeding to depict in vivid words the consequences of this
extinction. The most matter-of-fact language of science agrees with the
words of the poet in declaring the earth's dependence upon the sun for
all those varied forms of energy which make it a fit abode for living
beings. The winds blow and the rivers run; the crops grow, are gathered
and consumed, by virtue of the solar energy. Factory, locomotive, beast,
bird, and the human body furnish types of machines run by energy derived
from the sun; and the student will find it an instructive exercise to
search for kinds of terrestrial energy which are not derived either
directly or indirectly from the sun. There are a few such, but they are
neither numerous nor important.

111. THE SUN'S DISTANCE FROM THE EARTH.--To the astronomer the sun
presents problems of the highest consequence and apparently of very
diverse character, but all tending toward the same goal: the framing of
a mechanical explanation of the sun considered as a machine; what it is,
and how it does its work. In the forefront of these problems stand those
numerical determinations of distance, size, mass, density, etc., which
we have already encountered in connection with the moon, but which must
here be dealt with in a different manner, because the immensely greater
distance of the sun makes impossible the resort to any such simple
method as the triangle used for determining the moon's distance. It
would be like determining the distance of a steeple a mile away by
observing its direction first from one eye, then from the other; too
short a base for the triangle. In one respect, however, we stand upon a
better footing than in the case of the moon, for the mass of the earth
has already been found (Chapter IV) as a fractional part of the sun's
mass, and we have only to invert the fraction in order to find that the
sun's mass is 329,000 times that of the earth and moon combined, or
333,000 times that of the earth alone.

If we could rely implicitly upon this number we might make it determine
for us the distance of the sun through the law of gravitation as
follows: It was suggested in § 38 that Newton proved Kepler's three laws
to be imperfect corollaries from the law of gravitation, requiring a
little amendment to make them strictly correct, and below we give in the
form of an equation Kepler's statement of the Third Law together with
Newton's amendment of it. In these equations--

_T_ = Periodic time of any planet;

_a_ = One half the major axis of its orbit;

_m_ = Its mass;

_M_ = The mass of the sun;

_k_ = The gravitation constant corresponding to the particular set of
units in which _T_, _a_, _m_, and _M_ are expressed.

  (Kepler) a^{3}/T^{2} = h;
  (Newton) a^{3}/T^{2} = k (M + m).

Kepler's idea was: For every planet which moves around the sun, _a^{3}_
divided by _T^{2}_ always gives the same quotient, _h_; and he did not
concern himself with the significance of this quotient further than to
note that if the particular _a_ and _T_ which belong to any
planet--e. g., the earth--be taken as the units of length and time, then
the quotient will be 1. Newton, on the other hand, attached a meaning to
the quotient, and showed that it is equal to the product obtained by
multiplying the sum of the two masses, planet and sun, by a number which
is always the same when we are dealing with the action of gravitation,
whether it be between the sun and planet, or between moon and earth, or
between the earth and a roast of beef in the butcher's scales, provided
only that we use always the same units with which to measure times,
distances, and masses.

Numerically, Newton's correction to Kepler's Third Law does not amount
to much in the motion of the planets. Jupiter, which shows the greatest
effect, makes the circuit of his orbit in 4,333 days instead of 4,335,
which it would require if Kepler's law were strictly true. But in
another respect the change is of the utmost importance, since it enables
us to extend Kepler's law, which relates solely to the sun and its
planets, to other attracting bodies, such as the earth, moon, and stars.
Thus for the moon's motion around the earth we write--

    (240,000^{3})/(27.32^{2}) = k (1 + 1/81),

from which we may find that, with the units here employed, the earth's
mass as the unit of mass, the mean solar day as the unit of time, and
the mile as the unit of distance--

    k = 1830 × 10^{10}.

If we introduce this value of _k_ into the corresponding equation, which
represents the motion of the earth around the sun, we shall have--

    a^{3}/(365.25)^{2} = 1830 × 10^{10} (333,000 + 1),

where the large number in the parenthesis represents the number of times
the mass of the sun is greater than the mass of the earth. We shall find
by solving this equation that _a_, the mean distance of the sun from the
earth, is very approximately 93,000,000 miles.

113. ANOTHER METHOD OF DETERMINING THE SUN'S DISTANCE.--This will be
best appreciated by a reference to Fig. 17. It appears here that the
earth makes its nearest approach to the orbit of Mars in the month of
August, and if in any August Mars happens to be in opposition, its
distance from the earth will be very much less than the distance of the
sun from the earth, and may be measured by methods not unlike those
which served for the moon. If now the orbits of Mars and the earth were
circles having their centers at the sun this distance between them,
which we may represent by _D_, would be the difference of the radii of
these orbits--

    D = a´´ - a´,

where the accents ´´, ´ represent Mars and the earth respectively.
Kepler's Third Law furnishes the relation--

    (a´´)^{3}/(T´´)^{2} = (a´)^{3}/(T´)^{2};

and since the periodic times of the earth and Mars, _T´_, _T´´_, are
known to a high degree of accuracy, these two equations are sufficient
to determine the two unknown quantities, _a´_, _a´´_--i. e., the
distance of the sun from Mars as well as from the earth. The first of
these equations is, of course, not strictly true, on account of the
elliptical shape of the orbits, but this can be allowed for easily
enough.

In practice it is found better to apply this method of determining the
sun's distance through observations of an asteroid rather than
observations of Mars, and great interest has been aroused among
astronomers by the discovery, in 1898, of an asteroid, or planet, Eros,
which at times comes much closer to the earth than does Mars or any
other heavenly body except the moon, and which will at future
oppositions furnish a more accurate determination of the sun's distance
than any hitherto available. Observations for this purpose are being
made at the present time (October, 1900).

Many other methods of measuring the sun's distance have been devised by
astronomers, some of them extremely ingenious and interesting, but every
one of them has its weak point--e. g., the determination of the mass of
the earth in the first method given above and the measurement of _D_ in
the second method, so that even the best results at present are
uncertain to the extent of 200,000 miles or more, and astronomers,
instead of relying upon any one method, must use all of them, and take
an average of their results. According to Professor Harkness, this
average value is 92,796,950 miles, and it seems certain that a line of
this length drawn from the earth toward the sun would end somewhere
within the body of the sun, but whether on the nearer or the farther
side of the center, or exactly at it, no man knows.

114. PARALLAX AND DISTANCE.--It is quite customary among astronomers to
speak of the sun's parallax, instead of its distance from the earth,
meaning by parallax its difference of direction as seen from the center
and surface of the earth--i. e., the angle subtended at the sun by a
radius of the earth placed at right angles to the line of sight. The
greater the sun's distance the smaller will this angle be, and it
therefore makes a substitute for the distance which has the advantage of
being represented by a small number, 8".8, instead of a large one.

The books abound with illustrations intended to help the reader
comprehend how great is a distance of 93,000,000 miles, but a single one
of these must suffice here. To ride 100 miles a day 365 days in the year
would be counted a good bicycling record, but the rider who started at
the beginning of the Christian era and rode at that rate toward the sun
from the year 1 A. D. down to the present moment would not yet have
reached his destination, although his journey would be about three
quarters done. He would have crossed the orbit of Venus about the time
of Charlemagne, and that of Mercury soon after the discovery of America.

115. SIZE AND DENSITY OF THE SUN.--Knowing the distance of the sun, it
is easy to find from the angle subtended by its diameter (32 minutes of
arc) that the length of that diameter is 865,000 miles. We recall in
this connection that the diameter of the moon's _orbit_ is only 480,000
miles, but little more than half the diameter of the sun, thus affording
abundant room inside the sun, and to spare, for the moon to perform the
monthly revolution about its orbit, as shown in Fig. 65.

[Illustration: FIG. 65.--The sun's size.--YOUNG.]

In the same manner in which the density of the moon was found from its
mass and diameter, the student may find from the mass and diameter of
the sun given above that its mean density is 1.4 times that of water.
This is about the same as the density of gravel or soft coal, and is
just about one quarter of the average density of the earth.

We recall that the small density of the moon was accounted for by the
diminished weight of objects upon it, but this explanation can not hold
in the case of the sun, for not only is the density less but the force
of gravity (weight) is there 28 times as great as upon the earth. The
athlete who here weighs 175 pounds, if transported to the surface of the
sun would weigh more than an elephant does here, and would find his
bones break under his own weight if his muscles were strong enough to
hold him upright. The tremendous pressure exerted by gravity at the
surface of the sun must be surpassed below the surface, and as it does
not pack the material together and make it dense, we are driven to one
of two conclusions: Either the stuff of which the sun is made is
altogether unlike that of the earth, not so readily compressed by
pressure, or there is some opposing influence at work which more than
balances the effect of gravity and makes the solar stuff much lighter
than the terrestrial.

116. MATERIAL OF WHICH THE SUN IS MADE.--As to the first of these
alternatives, the spectroscope comes to our aid and shows in the sun's
spectrum (Fig. 50) the characteristic line marked _D_, which we know
always indicates the presence of sodium and identifies at least one
terrestrial substance as present in the sun in considerable quantity.
The lines marked _C_ and _F_ are produced by hydrogen, which is one of
the constituents of water, _E_ shows calcium to be present in the sun,
_b_ magnesium, etc. In this way it has been shown that about one half of
our terrestrial elements, mainly the metallic ones, are present as gases
on or near the sun's surface, but it must not be inferred that elements
not found in this way are absent from the sun. They may be there,
probably are there, but the spectroscopic proof of their presence is
more difficult to obtain. Professor Rowland, who has been prominent in
the study of the solar spectrum, says: "Were the whole earth heated to
the temperature of the sun, its spectrum would probably resemble that of
the sun very closely."

Some of the common terrestrial elements found in the sun are:

      Aluminium.
      Calcium.
      Carbon.
      Copper.
      Hydrogen.
      Iron.
      Lead.
      Nickel.
      Potassium.
      Silicon.
      Silver.
      Sodium.
      Tin.
      Zinc.
      Oxygen (?)

Whatever differences of chemical structure may exist between the sun and
the earth, it seems that we must regard these bodies as more like than
unlike to each other in substance, and we are brought back to the second
of our alternatives: there must be some influence opposing the force of
gravity and making the substance of the sun light instead of heavy, and
we need not seek far to find it in--

117. THE HEAT OF THE SUN.--That the sun is hot is too evident to require
proof, and it is a familiar fact that heat expands most substances and
makes them less dense. The sun's heat falling upon the earth expands it
and diminishes its density in some small degree, and we have only to
imagine this process of expansion continued until the earth's diameter
becomes 58 per cent larger than it now is, to find the earth's density
reduced to a level with that of the sun. Just how much the temperature
of the earth must be raised to produce this amount of expansion we do
not know, neither do we know accurately the temperature of the sun, but
there can be no doubt that heat is the cause of the sun's low density
and that the corresponding temperature is very high.

Before we inquire more closely into the sun's temperature, it will be
well to draw a sharp distinction between the two terms heat and
temperature, which are often used as if they meant the same thing. Heat
is a form of energy which may be found in varying degree in every
substance, whether warm or cold--a block of ice contains a considerable
amount of heat--while temperature corresponds to our sensations of warm
