
As they were going into camp that night in Kent, midway between London
and Rochester, word came to Norman of Torn that the Earl of Buckingham,
having sent his escort on to Dover, had stopped to visit the wife of a
royalist baron, whose husband was with Prince Edward's forces.

The fellow who gave this information was a servant in my lady's
household who held a grudge against his mistress for some wrong she had
done him. When, therefore, he found that these grim men were searching
for De Fulm, he saw a way to be revenged upon his mistress.

"How many swords be there at the castle?" asked Norman of Torn.

"Scarce a dozen, barring the Earl of Buckingham," replied the knave;
"and, furthermore, there be a way to enter, which I may show you, My
Lord, so that you may, unseen, reach the apartment where My Lady and the
Earl be supping."

"Bring ten men, beside yourself, Shandy," commanded Norman of Torn. "We
shall pay a little visit upon our amorous friend, My Lord, the Earl of
Buckingham."

Half an hour's ride brought them within sight of the castle.
Dismounting, and leaving their horses with one of the men, Norman of
Torn advanced on foot with Shandy and the eight others, close in the
wake of the traitorous servant.

The fellow led them to the rear of the castle, where, among the brush,
he had hidden a rude ladder, which, when tilted, spanned the moat and
rested its farther end upon a window ledge some ten feet above the
ground.

"Keep the fellow here till last, Shandy," said the outlaw, "till all
be in, an' if there be any signs of treachery, stick him through the
gizzard--death thus be slower and more painful."

So saying, Norman of Torn crept boldly across the improvised bridge, and
disappeared within the window beyond. One by one the band of cut-throats
passed through the little window, until all stood within the castle
beside their chief; Shandy coming last with the servant.

"Lead me quietly, knave, to the room where My Lord sups," said Norman
of Torn. "You, Shandy, place your men where they can prevent my being
interrupted."

Following a moment or two after Shandy came another figure stealthily
across the ladder and, as Norman of Torn and his followers left the
little room, this figure pushed quietly through the window and followed
the great outlaw down the unlighted corridor.

A moment later, My Lady of Leybourn looked up from her plate upon the
grim figure of an armored knight standing in the doorway of the great
dining hall.

"My Lord Earl!" she cried. "Look! Behind you."

And as the Earl of Buckingham glanced behind him, he overturned the
bench upon which he sat in his effort to gain his feet; for My Lord Earl
of Buckingham had a guilty conscience.

The grim figure raised a restraining hand, as the Earl drew his sword.

"A moment, My Lord," said a low voice in perfect French.

"Who are you?" cried the lady.

"I be an old friend of My Lord, here; but let me tell you a little
story.

"In a grim old castle in Essex, only last night, a great lord of England
held by force the beautiful daughter of a noble house and, when she
spurned his advances, he struck her with his clenched fist upon her fair
face, and with his brute hands choked her. And in that castle also was
a despised and hunted outlaw, with a price upon his head, for whose neck
the hempen noose has been yawning these many years. And it was this vile
person who came in time to save the young woman from the noble flower of
knighthood that would have ruined her young life.

"The outlaw wished to kill the knight, but many men-at-arms came to the
noble's rescue, and so the outlaw was forced to fly with the girl lest
he be overcome by numbers, and the girl thus fall again into the hands
of her tormentor.

"But this crude outlaw was not satisfied with merely rescuing the girl,
he must needs mete out justice to her noble abductor and collect in full
the toll of blood which alone can atone for the insult and violence done
her.

"My Lady, the young girl was Joan de Tany; the noble was My Lord the
Earl of Buckingham; and the outlaw stands before you to fulfill the duty
he has sworn to do. En garde, My Lord!"

The encounter was short, for Norman of Torn had come to kill, and he had
been looking through a haze of blood for hours--in fact every time he
had thought of those brutal fingers upon the fair throat of Joan de Tany
and of the cruel blow that had fallen upon her face.

He showed no mercy, but backed the Earl relentlessly into a corner
of the room, and when he had him there where he could escape in no
direction, he drove his blade so deep through his putrid heart that the
point buried itself an inch in the oak panel beyond.

Claudia Leybourn sat frozen with horror at the sight she was witnessing,
and, as Norman of Torn wrenched his blade from the dead body before him
and wiped it on the rushes of the floor, she gazed in awful fascination
while he drew his dagger and made a mark upon the forehead of the dead
nobleman.

"Outlaw or Devil," said a stern voice behind them, "Roger Leybourn owes
you his friendship for saving the honor of his home."

Both turned to discover a mail-clad figure standing in the doorway where
Norman of Torn had first appeared.

"Roger!" shrieked Claudia Leybourn, and swooned.

"Who be you?" continued the master of Leybourn addressing the outlaw.

For answer Norman of Torn pointed to the forehead of the dead Earl of
Buckingham, and there Roger Leybourn saw, in letters of blood, NT.

The Baron advanced with outstretched hand.

"I owe you much. You have saved my poor, silly wife from this beast,
and Joan de Tany is my cousin, so I am doubly beholden to you, Norman of
Torn."

The outlaw pretended that he did not see the hand.

"You owe me nothing, Sir Roger, that may not be paid by a good supper. I
have eaten but once in forty-eight hours."

The outlaw now called to Shandy and his men, telling them to remain on
watch, but to interfere with no one within the castle.

He then sat at the table with Roger Leybourn and his lady, who had
recovered from her swoon, and behind them on the rushes of the floor lay
the body of De Fulm in a little pool of blood.

Leybourn told them that he had heard that De Fulm was at his home, and
had hastened back; having been in hiding about the castle for half an
hour before the arrival of Norman of Torn, awaiting an opportunity to
enter unobserved by the servants. It was he who had followed across the
ladder after Shandy.

The outlaw spent the night at the castle of Roger Leybourn; for the
first time within his memory a welcomed guest under his true name at the
house of a gentleman.

The following morning, he bade his host goodbye, and returning to his
camp started on his homeward march toward Torn.

Near midday, as they were approaching the Thames near the environs of
London, they saw a great concourse of people hooting and jeering at a
small party of gentlemen and gentlewomen.

Some of the crowd were armed, and from very force of numbers were waxing
brave to lay violent hands upon the party. Mud and rocks and rotten
vegetables were being hurled at the little cavalcade, many of them
barely missing the women of the party.

Norman of Torn waited to ask no questions, but spurring into the thick
of it laid right and left of him with the flat of his sword, and his
men, catching the contagion of it, swarmed after him until the whole
pack of attacking ruffians were driven into the Thames.

And then, without a backward glance at the party he had rescued, he
continued on his march toward the north.

The little party sat upon their horses looking in wonder after the
retreating figures of their deliverers. Then one of the ladies turned
to a knight at her side with a word of command and an imperious gesture
toward the fast disappearing company. He, thus addressed, put spurs to
his horse, and rode at a rapid gallop after the outlaw's troop. In a few
moments he had overtaken them and reined up beside Norman of Torn.

"Hold, Sir Knight," cried the gentleman, "the Queen would thank you in
person for your brave defence of her."

Ever keen to see the humor of a situation, Norman of Torn wheeled his
horse and rode back with the Queen's messenger.

As he faced Her Majesty, the Outlaw of Torn bent low over his pommel.

"You be a strange knight that thinks so lightly on saving a queen's life
that you ride on without turning your head, as though you had but driven
a pack of curs from annoying a stray cat," said the Queen.

"I drew in the service of a woman, Your Majesty, not in the service of a
queen."

"What now! Wouldst even belittle the act which we all witnessed? The
King, my husband, shall reward thee, Sir Knight, if you but tell me your
name."

"If I told my name, methinks the King would be more apt to hang me,"
laughed the outlaw. "I be Norman of Torn."

The entire party looked with startled astonishment upon him, for none of
them had ever seen this bold raider whom all the nobility and gentry of
England feared and hated.

"For lesser acts than that which thou hast just performed, the King
has pardoned men before," replied Her Majesty. "But raise your visor,
I would look upon the face of so notorious a criminal who can yet be a
gentleman and a loyal protector of his queen."

"They who have looked upon my face, other than my friends," replied
Norman of Torn quietly, "have never lived to tell what they saw beneath
this visor, and as for you, Madame, I have learned within the year to
fear it might mean unhappiness to you to see the visor of the Devil of
Torn lifted from his face." Without another word he wheeled and galloped
back to his little army.

"The puppy, the insolent puppy," cried Eleanor of England, in a rage.

And so the Outlaw of Torn and his mother met and parted after a period
of twenty years.

Two days later, Norman of Torn directed Red Shandy to lead the forces of
Torn from their Essex camp back to Derby. The numerous raiding parties
which had been constantly upon the road during the days they had spent
in this rich district had loaded the extra sumpter beasts with rich
and valuable booty and the men, for the time satiated with fighting and
loot, turned their faces toward Torn with evident satisfaction.

The outlaw was speaking to his captains in council; at his side the old
man of Torn.

"Ride by easy stages, Shandy, and I will overtake you by tomorrow
morning. I but ride for a moment to the castle of De Tany on an errand,
and, as I shall stop there but a few moments, I shall surely join you
tomorrow."

"Do not forget, My Lord," said Edwild the Serf, a great yellow-haired
Saxon giant, "that there be a party of the King's troops camped close by
the road which branches to Tany."

"I shall give them plenty of room," replied Norman of Torn. "My neck
itcheth not to be stretched," and he laughed and mounted.

Five minutes after he had cantered down the road from camp, Spizo the
Spaniard, sneaking his horse unseen into the surrounding forest, mounted
and spurred rapidly after him. The camp, in the throes of packing
refractory, half broken sumpter animals, and saddling their own wild
mounts, did not notice his departure. Only the little grim, gray, old
man knew that he had gone, or why, or whither.

That afternoon, as Roger de Conde was admitted to the castle of Richard
de Tany and escorted to a little room where he awaited the coming of
the Lady Joan, a swarthy messenger handed a letter to the captain of the
King's soldiers camped a few miles south of Tany.

The officer tore open the seal as the messenger turned and spurred back
in the direction from which he had come.

And this was what he read:

Norman of Torn is now at the castle of Tany, without escort.

Instantly the call "to arms" and "mount" sounded through the camp and,
in five minutes, a hundred mercenaries galloped rapidly toward the
castle of Richard de Tany, in the visions of their captain a great
reward and honor and preferment for the capture of the mighty outlaw who
was now almost within his clutches.

Three roads meet at Tany; one from the south along which the King's
soldiers were now riding; one from the west which had guided Norman
of Torn from his camp to the castle; and a third which ran northwest
through Cambridge and Huntingdon toward Derby.

All unconscious of the rapidly approaching foes, Norman of Torn waited
composedly in the anteroom for Joan de Tany.

Presently she entered, clothed in the clinging house garment of the
period; a beautiful vision, made more beautiful by the suppressed
excitement which caused the blood to surge beneath the velvet of her
cheek, and her breasts to rise and fall above her fast beating heart.

She let him take her fingers in his and raise them to his lips, and then
they stood looking into each other's eyes in silence for a long moment.

"I do not know how to tell you what I have come to tell," he said sadly.
"I have not meant to deceive you to your harm, but the temptation to be
with you and those whom you typify must be my excuse. I--" He paused.
It was easy to tell her that he was the Outlaw of Torn, but if she loved
him, as he feared, how was he to tell her that he loved only Bertrade de
Montfort?

"You need tell me nothing," interrupted Joan de Tany. "I have guessed
what you would tell me, Norman of Torn. 'The spell of moonlight and
adventure is no longer upon us'--those are your own words, and still I
am glad to call you friend."

The little emphasis she put upon the last word bespoke the finality of
her decision that the Outlaw of Torn could be no more than friend to
her.

"It is best," he replied, relieved that, as he thought, she felt no
love for him now that she knew him for what he really was. "Nothing good
could come to such as you, Joan, if the Devil of Torn could claim more
of you than friendship; and so I think that for your peace of mind and
for my own, we will let it be as though you had never known me. I thank
you that you have not been angry with me. Remember me only to think that
in the hills of Derby, a sword is at your service, without reward and
without price. Should you ever need it, Joan, tell me that you will send
for me--wilt promise me that, Joan?"

"I promise, Norman of Torn."

"Farewell," he said, and as he again kissed her hand he bent his knee
to the ground in reverence. Then he rose to go, pressing a little packet
into her palm. Their eyes met, and the man saw, in that brief instant,
deep in the azure depths of the girl's that which tumbled the structure
of his new-found complacency about his ears.

As he rode out into the bright sunlight upon the road which led
northwest toward Derby, Norman of Torn bowed his head in sorrow, for he
realized two things. One was that the girl he had left still loved him,
and that some day, mayhap tomorrow, she would suffer because she had
sent him away; and the other was that he did not love her, that his
heart was locked in the fair breast of Bertrade de Montfort.

He felt himself a beast that he had allowed his loneliness and the
aching sorrow of his starved, empty heart to lead him into this girl's
life. That he had been new to women and newer still to love did not
permit him to excuse himself, and a hundred times he cursed his folly
and stupidity, and what he thought was fickleness.

But the unhappy affair had taught him one thing for certain: to know
without question what love was, and that the memory of Bertrade de
Montfort's lips would always be more to him than all the allurements
possessed by the balance of the women of the world, no matter how
charming, or how beautiful.

Another thing, a painful thing he had learned from it, too, that the
attitude of Joan de Tany, daughter of an old and noble house, was but
the attitude which the Outlaw of Torn must expect from any good woman
of her class; what he must expect from Bertrade de Montfort when she
learned that Roger de Conde was Norman of Torn.

The outlaw had scarce passed out of sight upon the road to Derby ere the
girl, who still stood in an embrasure of the south tower, gazing with
strangely drawn, sad face up the road which had swallowed him, saw a
body of soldiers galloping rapidly toward Tany from the south.

The King's banner waved above their heads, and intuitively, Joan de Tany
knew for whom they sought at her father's castle. Quickly she hastened
to the outer barbican that it might be she who answered their hail
rather than one of the men-at-arms on watch there.

She had scarcely reached the ramparts of the outer gate ere the King's
men drew rein before the castle.

In reply to their hail, Joan de Tany asked their mission.

"We seek the outlaw, Norman of Torn, who hides now within this castle,"
replied the officer.

"There be no outlaw here," replied the girl, "but, if you wish, you may
enter with half a dozen men and search the castle."

This the officer did and, when he had assured himself that Norman of
Torn was not within, an hour had passed, and Joan de Tany felt certain
that the Outlaw of Torn was too far ahead to be caught by the King's
men; so she said:

"There was one here just before you came who called himself though by
another name than Norman of Torn. Possibly it is he ye seek."

"Which way rode he?" cried the officer.

"Straight toward the west by the middle road," lied Joan de Tany. And,
as the officer hurried from the castle and, with his men at his back,
galloped furiously away toward the west, the girl sank down upon a
bench, pressing her little hands to her throbbing temples.

Then she opened the packet which Norman of Torn had handed her, and
within found two others. In one of these was a beautiful jeweled locket,
and on the outside were the initials JT, and on the inside the initials
NT; in the other was a golden hair ornament set with precious stones,
and about it was wound a strand of her own silken tresses.

She looked long at the little trinkets and then, pressing them against
her lips, she threw herself face down upon an oaken bench, her lithe
young form racked with sobs.

