It simply was, and knew that it was, and was satisfied.

Such a tiny organism can have only the most rudimentary of memories, but
it remembered. Once--Once long before, there had been ... more.

       *       *       *       *       *

Life had been the same, but somehow fuller. When it tried to recall
exactly in what this fullness lay, the memory just was not there; only a
vague recollection of comfort, motion, satiation.

When the men landed upon the moon in the twentieth century, they did not
find it at first. Locating it would have been comparable to stumbling
upon a solitary blade of grass, imbedded in ice at the South Pole. Men
came to the moon, though, and began to settle there. The first homes
they knew were mere metal shacks, filled with life-giving gases of their
planetary atmosphere, and devoid of all comforts save those necessary
for maintenance of life.

But men have a way of rising above the status quo, and so, within half a
pulsebeat of the plant, the surface of the moon became dotted with these
iglooic shacks, then pressurized tunnels radiated out in a unifying
network, and soon the Domes began to grow; immense translucent
light-weight structures of enormous strength bubbled up on the moon, and
soon cities were being built beneath them, strange towering fairyland
cities on this satellite where people and architecture alike boasted six
times the power possessed on Earth. The cities soared upward in
glinting, stalagmitic pinnacles whose tapering ends seemed to threaten
the fabric of the Domes themselves, but were in reality still far below
the blue-white curving surface.

Machines lay buried now in the grey pumice that was the surface of the
moon; machines that drained gases from the oxides and nitrates within
the planetoid and filled the Domes for the people with the life-giving
gases. And still the moon grew more Domes, and more.

And then, three motions of the tiny plant after the primal landing of
men on the moon, three half-cycles later, a pulse-and-a-half--It was
found.

The man who found it was an engineer, a man of high intelligence. For,
building on the moon was a perilous undertaking. A man had to know
stresses and strains, had to be able to read gauges that warned of
vacuum pockets beneath the crust of the moon that--if broken into--could
suck the life-giving gases from the metal caissons within which the men
laid the foundations of new Domes. Had it been on Earth, and the workman
unionized and possibly unlettered, it would have had the fate of a
dandelion that stands in the path of a growing subway tube.

Unfortunately, the man--as mentioned--had intelligence.

Carefully, the fossil--so he presumed--was cut away from the rock in
which it was rooted, and laid gently in a bed of soft cotton, and that
bed in a plastic casing, and the casing in a metal box. The box was
loaded aboard a spaceship and sent to a man back on Earth.

This man was an eminent botanist, and--eminent or not--he nearly jumped
with joy when he'd opened the box, unsealed the container, plucked away
the cotton, and saw the plant lying there. It was dead, insofar as he
knew, and apparently useless except perhaps as a club, but the botanist
was delighted to receive it. Through his head passed notions of cutting
it in two, then polishing the twin cut surfaces, and studying the cell
structure, so that he might compare its construction with similar--if
there were any--plants of Earth, and then write a learned thesis about
it which would be read only by other eminent botanists, who would all
then curse their luck for not having been friends with any engineers on
the moon. The whole procedure--taking the cosmic view--was almost
pointless, but it would make the botanist happy, at least.

       *       *       *       *       *

However, after setting up his instruments, and placing the plant in a
sort of padded vise to steady it against the invasion of its privacy, he
chanced to see a bit of root, broken off by sheer unaccustomed weight on
the planet, lying upon the lab table, and he placed that beneath the
glass lens of his microscope and studied it instead.

"I'll be damned!" he said. "The plasm is _liquid_!"
