folded his arms and said domineeringly: 'We found you lying on the
sands. Somebody had rapped you on the pate and taken your clothes.
Needing an extra man, we brought you aboard.'

'What ship is this?' Conan demanded.

'The _Venturer_, out of Messantia, with a cargo of mirrors, scarlet silk
cloaks, shields, gilded helmets and swords to trade to the Shemites for
copper and gold ore. I am Demetrio, captain of this vessel and your
master henceforward.'

'Then I'm headed in the direction I wanted to go, after all,' muttered
Conan, heedless of that last remark. They were racing southeastward,
following the long curve of the Argossean coast. These trading-ships
never ventured far from the shoreline. Somewhere ahead of him he knew
that low dark Stygian galley was speeding southward.

'Have you sighted a Stygian galley--' began Conan, but the beard of the
burly, brutal-faced captain bristled. He was not in the least interested
in any question his prisoner might wish to ask, and felt it high time he
reduced this independent wastrel to his proper place.

'Get for'ard!' he roared. 'I've wasted time enough with you! I've done
you the honor of having you brought to the poop to be revived, and
answered enough of your infernal questions. Get off this poop! You'll
work your way aboard this galley--'

'I'll buy your ship--' began Conan, before he remembered that he was a
penniless wanderer.

A roar of rough mirth greeted these words, and the captain turned
purple, thinking he sensed ridicule.

'You mutinous swine!' he bellowed, taking a threatening step forward,
while his hand closed on the knife at his belt. 'Get for'ard before I
have you flogged! You'll keep a civil tongue in your jaws, or by Mitra,
I'll have you chained among the blacks to tug an oar!'

Conan's volcanic temper, never long at best, burst into explosion. Not
in years, even before he was king, had a man spoken to him thus and
lived.

'Don't lift your voice to me, you tar-breeched dog!' he roared in a
voice as gusty as the sea-wind, while the sailors gaped dumfounded.
'Draw that toy and I'll feed you to the fishes!'

'Who do you think you are?' gasped the captain.

'I'll show you!' roared the maddened Cimmerian, and he wheeled and
bounded toward the rail, where weapons hung in their brackets.

The captain drew his knife and ran at him bellowing, but before he could
strike, Conan gripped his wrist with a wrench that tore the arm clean
out of the socket. The captain bellowed like an ox in agony, and then
rolled clear across the deck as he was hurled contemptuously from his
attacker. Conan ripped a heavy ax from the rail and wheeled cat-like to
meet the rush of the sailors. They ran in, giving tongue like hounds,
clumsy-footed and awkward in comparison to the pantherish Cimmerian.
Before they could reach him with their knives he sprang among them,
striking right and left too quickly for the eye to follow, and blood and
brains spattered as two corpses struck the deck.

Knives flailed the air wildly as Conan broke through the stumbling,
gasping mob and bounded to the narrow bridge that spanned the waist from
poop to forecastle, just out of reach of the slaves below. Behind him
the handful of sailors on the poop were floundering after him, daunted
by the destruction of their fellows, and the rest of the crew--some
thirty in all--came running across the bridge toward him, with weapons
in their hands.

Conan bounded out on the bridge and stood poised above the upturned
black faces, ax lifted, black mane blown in the wind.

'Who am I?' he yelled. 'Look, you dogs! Look, Ajonga, Yasunga, Laranga!
_Who am I?_'

And from the waist rose a shout that swelled to a mighty roar: 'Amra! It
is Amra! The Lion has returned!'

The sailors who caught and understood the burden of that awesome shout
paled and shrank back, staring in sudden fear at the wild figure on the
bridge. Was this in truth that blood-thirsty ogre of the southern seas
who had so mysteriously vanished years ago, but who still lived in gory
legends? The blacks were frothing crazy now, shaking and tearing at
their chains and shrieking the name of Amra like an invocation. Kushites
who had never seen Conan before took up the yell. The slaves in the pen
under the after-cabin began to batter at the walls, shrieking like the
damned.

Demetrio, hitching himself along the deck on one hand and his knees,
livid with the agony of his dislocated arm, screamed: 'In and kill him,
dogs, before the slaves break loose!'

Fired to desperation by that word, the most dread to all galleymen, the
sailors charged on to the bridge from both ends. But with a lion-like
bound Conan left the bridge and hit like a cat on his feet on the runway
between the benches.

'Death to the masters!' he thundered, and his ax rose and fell
crashingly full on a shackle-chain, severing it like matchwood. In an
instant a shrieking slave was free, splintering his oar for a bludgeon.
Men were racing frantically along the bridge above, and all hell and
bedlam broke loose on the _Venturer_. Conan's ax rose and fell without
pause, and with every stroke a frothing, screaming black giant broke
free, mad with hate and the fury of freedom and vengeance.

Sailors leaping down into the waist to grapple or smite at the naked
white giant hewing like one possessed at the shackles, found themselves
dragged down by the hands of slaves yet unfreed, while others, their
broken chains whipping and snapping about their limbs, came up out of
the waist like a blind, black torrent, screaming like fiends, smiting
with broken oars and pieces of iron, tearing and rending with talons and
teeth. In the midst of the melee the slaves in the pen broke down the
walls and came surging up on the decks, and with fifty blacks freed of
their benches Conan abandoned his iron-hewing and bounded up on the
bridge to add his notched ax to the bludgeons of his partisans.

Then it was massacre. The Argosseans were strong, sturdy, fearless like
all their race, trained in the brutal school of the sea. But they could
not stand against these maddened giants, led by the tigerish barbarian.
Blows and abuse and hellish suffering were avenged in one red gust of
fury that raged like a typhoon from one end of the ship to the other,
and when it had blown itself out, but one white man lived aboard the
_Venturer_, and that was the blood-stained giant about whom the chanting
blacks thronged to cast themselves prostrate on the bloody deck and beat
their heads against the boards in an ecstasy of hero-worship.

Conan, his mighty chest heaving and glistening with sweat, the red ax
gripped in his blood-smeared hand, glared about him as the first chief
of men might have glared in some primordial dawn, and shook back his
black mane. In that moment he was not king of Aquilonia; he was again
lord of the black corsairs, who had hacked his way to lordship through
flame and blood.

'Amra! Amra!' chanted the delirious blacks, those who were left to
chant. 'The Lion has returned! Now will the Stygians howl like dogs in
the night, and the black dogs of Kush will howl! Now will villages burst
in flames and ships founder! Aie, there will be wailing of women and the
thunder of the spears!'

'Cease this yammering, dogs!' Conan roared in a voice that drowned the
clap of the sail in the wind. 'Ten of you go below and free the oarsmen
who are yet chained. The rest of you man the sweeps and bend to oars and
halyards. Crom's devils, don't you see we've drifted inshore during the
fight? Do you want to run aground and be retaken by the Argosseans?
Throw these carcasses overboard. Jump to it, you rogues, or I'll notch
your hides for you!'

With shouts and laughter and wild singing they leaped to do his
commands. The corpses, white and black, were hurled overboard, where
triangular fins were already cutting the water.

Conan stood on the poop, frowning down at the black men who watched him
expectantly. His heavy brown arms were folded, his black hair, grown
long in his wanderings, blew in the wind. A wilder and more barbaric
figure never trod the bridge of a ship, and in this ferocious corsair
few of the courtiers of Aquilonia would have recognized their king.

'There's food in the hold!' he roared. 'Weapons in plenty for you, for
this ship carried blades and harness to the Shemites who dwell along the
coast. There are enough of us to work ship, aye, and to fight! You rowed
in chains for the Argossean dogs: will you row as free men for Amra?'

'_Aye!_' they roared. 'We are thy children! Lead us where you will!'

'Then fall to and clean out that waist,' he commanded. 'Free men don't
labor in such filth. Three of you come with me and break out food from
the after-cabin. By Crom, I'll pad out your ribs before this cruise is
done.'

Another yell of approbation answered him, as the half-starved blacks
scurried to do his bidding. The sail bellied as the wind swept over the
waves with renewed force, and the white crests danced along the sweep of
the wind. Conan planted his feet to the heave of the deck, breathed deep
and spread his mighty arms. King of Aquilonia he might no longer be;
king of the blue ocean he was still.




16

Black-Walled Khemi


The _Venturer_ swept southward like a living thing, her oars pulled now
by free and willing hands. She had been transformed from a peaceful
trader into a war-galley, insofar as the transformation was possible.
Men sat at the benches now with swords at their sides and gilded helmets
on their kinky heads. Shields were hung along the rails, and sheafs of
spears, bows and arrows adorned the mast. Even the elements seemed to
work for Conan now; the broad purple sail bellied to a stiff breeze that
held day by day, needing little aid from the oars.

But though Conan kept a man on the masthead day and night, they did not
sight a long, low, black galley fleeing southward ahead of them. Day by
day the blue waters rolled empty to their view, broken only by
fishing-craft which fled like frightened birds before them, at sight of
the shields hung along the rail. The season for trading was practically
over for the year, and they sighted no other ships.

When the lookout did sight a sail, it was to the north, not the south.
Far on the skyline behind them appeared a racing-galley, with full
spread of purple sail. The blacks urged Conan to turn and plunder it,
but he shook his head. Somewhere south of him a slim black galley was
racing toward the ports of Stygia. That night, before darkness shut
down, the lookout's last glimpse showed him the racing-galley on the
horizon, and at dawn it was still hanging on their tail, afar off, tiny
in the distance. Conan wondered if it was following him, though he could
think of no logical reason for such a supposition. But he paid little
heed.

Each day that carried him farther southward filled him with fiercer
impatience. Doubts never assailed him. As he believed in the rise and
set of the sun he believed that a priest of Set had stolen the Heart of
Ahriman. And where would a priest of Set carry it but to Stygia? The
blacks sensed his eagerness, and toiled as they had never toiled under
the lash, though ignorant of his goal. They anticipated a red career of
pillage and plunder and were content. The men of the southern isles knew
no other trade; and the Kushites of the crew joined whole-heartedly in
the prospect of looting their own people, with the callousness of their
race. Blood-ties meant little; a victorious chieftain and personal gain
everything.

Soon the character of the coastline changed. No longer they sailed past
steep cliffs with blue hills marching behind them. Now the shore was the
edge of broad meadowlands which barely rose above the water's edge and
swept away and away into the hazy distance. Here were few harbors and
fewer ports, but the green plain was dotted with the cities of the
Shemites; green sea, lapping the rim of the green plains, and the
ziggurats of the cities gleaming whitely in the sun, some small in the
distance.

Through the grazing-lands moved the herds of cattle, and squat, broad
riders with cylindrical helmets and curled blue-black beards, with bows
in their hands. This was the shore of the lands of Shem, where there was
no law save as each city-state could enforce its own. Far to the
eastward, Conan knew, the meadowlands gave way to desert, where there
were no cities and the nomadic tribes roamed unhindered.

Still as they plied southward, past the changeless panorama of
city-dotted meadowland, at last the scenery again began to alter. Clumps
of tamarind appeared, the palm groves grew denser. The shoreline became
more broken, a marching rampart of green fronds and trees, and behind
them rose bare, sandy hills. Streams poured into the sea, and along
their moist banks vegetation grew thick and of vast variety.

So at last they passed the mouth of a broad river that mingled its flow
with the ocean, and saw the great black walls and towers of Khemi rise
against the southern horizon.

The river was the Styx, the real border of Stygia. Khemi was Stygia's
greatest port, and at that time her most important city. The king dwelt
at more ancient Luxur, but in Khemi reigned the priestcraft; though men
said the center of their dark religion lay far inland, in a mysterious,
deserted city near the bank of the Styx. This river, springing from some
nameless source far in the unknown lands south of Stygia, ran northward
for a thousand miles before it turned and flowed westward for some
hundreds of miles, to empty at last into the ocean.

The _Venturer_, showing no lights, stole past the port in the night, and
before dawn discovered her, anchored in a small bay a few miles south of
the city. It was surrounded by marsh, a green tangle of mangroves, palms
and lianas, swarming with crocodiles and serpents. Discovery was
extremely unlikely. Conan knew the place of old; he had hidden there
before, in his corsair days.

As they slid silently past the city whose great black bastions rose on
the jutting prongs of land which locked the harbor, torches gleamed and
smoldered luridly, and to their ears came the low thunder of drums. The
port was not crowded with ships, as were the harbors of Argos. The
Stygians did not base their glory and power upon ships and fleets.
Trading-vessels and war-galleys, indeed, they had, but not in proportion
to their inland strength. Many of their craft plied up and down the
great river, rather than along the sea-coasts.

The Stygians were an ancient race, a dark, inscrutable people, powerful
and merciless. Long ago their rule had stretched far north of the Styx,
beyond the meadowlands of Shem, and into the fertile uplands now
inhabited by the peoples of Koth and Ophir and Argos. Their borders had
marched with those of ancient Acheron. But Acheron had fallen, and the
barbaric ancestors of the Hyborians had swept southward in wolfskins and
horned helmets, driving the ancient rulers of the land before them. The
Stygians had not forgotten.

       *       *       *       *       *

All day the _Venturer_ lay at anchor in the tiny bay, walled in with
green branches and tangled vines through which flitted gay-plumed,
harsh-voiced birds, and among which glided bright-scaled, silent
reptiles. Toward sundown a small boat crept out and down along the
shore, seeking and finding that which Conan desired--a Stygian fisherman
in his shallow, flat-prowed boat.

They brought him to the deck of the _Venturer_--a tall, dark, rangily
built man, ashy with fear of his captors, who were ogres of that coast.
He was naked except for his silken breeks, for, like the Hyrkanians,
even the commoners and slaves of Stygia wore silk; and in his boat was a
wide mantle such as these fishermen flung about their shoulders against
the chill of the night.

He fell to his knees before Conan, expecting torture and death.

'Stand on your legs, man, and quit trembling,' said the Cimmerian
impatiently, who found it difficult to understand abject terror. 'You
won't be harmed. Tell me but this: has a galley, a black racing-galley
returning from Argos, put into Khemi within the last few days?'

'Aye, my lord,' answered the fisherman. 'Only yesterday at dawn the
priest Thutothmes returned from a voyage far to the north. Men say he
has been to Messantia.'

'What did he bring from Messantia?'

'Alas, my lord, I know not.'

'Why did he go to Messantia?' demanded Conan.

'Nay, my lord, I am but a common man. Who am I to know the minds of the
priests of Set? I can only speak what I have seen and what I have heard
men whisper along the wharves. Men say that news of great import came
southward, though of what none knows; and it is well known that the lord
Thutothmes put off in his black galley in great haste. Now he is
returned, but what he did in Argos, or what cargo he brought back, none
knows, not even the seamen who manned his galley. Men say that he has
opposed Thoth-Amon, who is the master of all priests of Set, and dwells
in Luxur, and that Thutothmes seeks hidden power to overthrow the Great
One. But who am I to say? When priests war with one another a common man
can but lie on his belly and hope neither treads upon him.'

Conan snarled in nervous exasperation at this servile philosophy, and
turned to his men. 'I'm going alone into Khemi to find this thief
Thutothmes. Keep this man prisoner, but see that you do him no hurt.
Crom's devils, stop your yowling! Do you think we can sail into the
harbor and take the city by storm? I must go alone.'

Silencing the clamor of protests, he doffed his own garments and donned
the prisoner's silk breeches and sandals, and the band from the man's
hair, but scorned the short fisherman's knife. The common men of Stygia
were not allowed to wear swords, and the mantle was not voluminous
enough to hide the Cimmerian's long blade, but Conan buckled to his hip
a Ghanata knife, a weapon borne by the fierce desert men who dwelt to
the south of the Stygians, a broad, heavy, slightly curved blade of fine
steel, edged like a razor and long enough to dismember a man.

Then, leaving the Stygian guarded by the corsairs, Conan climbed into
the fisher's boat.

'Wait for me until dawn,' he said. 'If I haven't come then, I'll never
come, so hasten southward to your own homes.'

As he clambered over the rail, they set up a doleful wail at his going,
until he thrust his head back into sight to curse them into silence.
Then, dropping into the boat, he grasped the oars and sent the tiny
craft shooting over the waves more swiftly than its owner had ever
propelled it.




17

'He Has Slain the Sacred Son of Set!'


The harbor of Khemi lay between two great jutting points of land that
ran into the ocean. He rounded the southern point, where the great black
castles rose like a man-made hill, and entered the harbor just at dusk,
when there was still enough light for the watchers to recognize the
fisherman's boat and mantle, but not enough to permit recognition of
betraying details. Unchallenged he threaded his way among the great
black war galleys lying silent and unlighted at anchor, and drew up to a
flight of wide stone steps which mounted up from the water's edge. There
he made his boat fast to an iron ring set in the stone, as numerous
similar craft were tied. There was nothing strange in a fisherman
leaving his boat there. None but a fisherman could find a use for such a
craft, and they did not steal from one another.

No one cast him more than a casual glance as he mounted the long steps,
unobtrusively avoiding the torches that flared at intervals above the
lapping black water. He seemed but an ordinary, empty-handed fisherman,
returning after a fruitless day along the coast. If one had observed him
closely, it might have seemed that his step was somewhat too springy and
sure, his carriage somewhat too erect and confident for a lowly
fisherman. But he passed quickly, keeping in the shadows, and the
commoners of Stygia were no more given to analysis than were the
commoners of the less exotic races.

In build he was not unlike the warrior casts of the Stygians, who were a
tall, muscular race. Bronzed by the sun, he was nearly as dark as many
of them. His black hair, square-cut and confined by a copper band,
increased the resemblance. The characteristics which set him apart from
them were the subtle difference in his walk, and his alien features and
blue eyes.

But the mantle was a good disguise, and he kept as much in the shadows
as possible, turning away his head when a native passed him too closely.

But it was a desperate game, and he knew he could not long keep up the
deception. Khemi was not like the sea-ports of the Hyborians, where
types of every race swarmed. The only aliens here were negro and Shemite
slaves; and he resembled neither even as much as he resembled the
Stygians themselves. Strangers were not welcome in the cities of Stygia;
tolerated only when they came as ambassadors or licensed traders. But
even then the latter were not allowed ashore after dark. And now there
were no Hyborian ships in the harbor at all. A strange restlessness ran
through the city, a stirring of ancient ambitions, a whispering none
could define except those who whispered. This Conan felt rather than
knew, his whetted primitive instincts sensing unrest about him.

If he were discovered his fate would be ghastly. They would slay him
merely for being a stranger; if he were recognized as Amra, the corsair
chief who had swept their coasts with steel and flame--an involuntary
shudder twitched Conan's broad shoulders. Human foes he did not fear,
nor any death by steel or fire. But this was a black land of sorcery and
nameless horror. Set the Old Serpent, men said, banished long ago from
the Hyborian races, yet lurked in the shadows of the cryptic temples,
and awful and mysterious were the deeds done in the nighted shrines.

He had drawn away from the waterfront streets with their broad steps
leading down to the water, and was entering the long shadowy streets of
the main part of the city. There was no such scene as was offered by any
Hyborian city--no blaze of lamps and cressets, with gay-clad people
laughing and strolling along the pavements, and shops and stalls wide
open and displaying their wares.

Here the stalls were closed at dusk. The only lights along the streets
were torches, flaring smokily at wide intervals. People walking the
streets were comparatively few; they went hurriedly and unspeaking, and
their numbers decreased with the lateness of the hour. Conan found the
scene gloomy and unreal; the silence of the people, their furtive haste,
