stuffed the ball into Hugo's arms. "Go on," he shouted. The touchdown
was made in one play. Hugo saw a narrow hole and scooted into it. A man
met his outstretched arm on the other side. Another. Hugo dodged twice.
The crescendo roar of the Webster section came to him dimly. He avoided
the safety man and ran to the goal. In the pandemonium afterwards, Jerry
kicked the goal.

A new kick-off. Hugo felt a hand on his shoulder. "You've gotta break
this up." Hugo broke it up. He held Yale almost single-handed. They
kicked back. Hugo returned the kick to the middle of the field. He did
not dare to do more.

Then he stood in his leather helmet, bent, alert, waiting to run again.
They called the captain's signal. He made four yards. Then Lefty's. He
made a first down. Then Jerry's. Two yards. Six yards. Five yards.
Another first down. The stands were insane. Hugo was glad they were not
using him--glad until he saw Jerry Painter's face. It was pale with
rage. Blood trickled across it from a small cut. Three tries failed.
Hugo spoke to him. "I'll take it over, Jerry, if you say so."

Jerry doubled his fist and would have struck him if Hugo had not stepped
back. "God damn you, Danner, you come out here in the last few minutes
all fresh and make us look like a lot of fools. I tell you, my team and
I will take that ball across and not you with your bastard tricks."

"But, good God, man--"

"You heard me."

"This is your last down."

There was time for nothing more. Lefty called Jerry's signal, and Jerry
failed. The other team took the ball, rushed it twice, and kicked back
into the Webster territory. Again the tired, dogged players began a
march forward. The ball was not given to Hugo. He did his best, using
his body as a ram to open holes in the line, tripping tacklers with his
body, fighting within the limits of an appearance of human strength to
get his teammates through to victory. And Jerry, still pale and profane,
drove the men like slaves. It was useless. If Hugo had dared more, they
might have succeeded. But they lost the ball again. It was only in the
last few seconds that an exhausted and victorious team relinquished the
ball to Webster.

Jerry ordered his own number again. Hugo, cold and somewhat furious at
the vanity and injustice of the performance, gritted his teeth. "How
about letting me try, Jerry? I can make it. It's for Webster--not for
you."

"You go to hell."

Lefty said: "You're out of your head, Jerry."

"I said I'd take it."

For one instant Hugo looked into his eyes. And in that instant the
captain saw a dark and flickering fury that filled him with fear. The
whistle blew. And then Hugo, to his astonishment, heard his signal.
Lefty was disobeying the captain. He felt the ball in his arms. He ran
smoothly. Suddenly he saw a dark shadow in the air. The captain hit him
on the jaw with all his strength. After that, Hugo did not think
lucidly. He was momentarily berserk. He ran into the line raging and
upset it like a row of tenpins. He raced into the open. A single man,
thirty yards away, stood between him and the goal. The man drew near in
an instant. Hugo doubled his arm to slug him. He felt the arm
straighten, relented too late, and heard, above the chaos that was
loose, a sudden, dreadful snap. The man's head flew back and he
dropped. Hugo ran across the goal. The gun stopped the game. But, before
the avalanche fell upon him, Hugo saw his victim lying motionless on the
field. What followed was nightmare. The singing and the cheering. The
parade. The smashing of the goal posts. The gradual descent of silence.
A pause. A shudder. He realized that he had been let down from the
shoulders of the students. He saw Woodman, waving his hands, his face a
graven mask. The men met in the midst of that turbulence.

"You killed him, Hugo."

The earth spun and rocked slowly. He was paying his first price for
losing his temper. "Killed him?"

"His neck was broken-in three places."

Some of the others heard. They walked away. Presently Hugo was standing
alone on the cinders outside the stadium. Lefty came up. "I just heard
about it. Tough luck. But don't let it break you."

Hugo did not answer. He knew that he was guilty of a sort of murder. In
his own eyes it was murder. He had given away for one red moment to the
leaping, lusting urge to smash the world. And killed a man. They would
never accuse him. They would never talk about it. Only Woodman, perhaps,
would guess the thing behind the murder--the demon inside Hugo that was
tame, except then, when his captain in jealous and inferior rage had
struck him.

It was night. Out of deference to the body of the boy lying in the
Webster chapel there was no celebration. Every ounce of glory and joy
had been drained from the victory. The students left Hugo to a solitude
that was more awful than a thousand scornful tongues. They thought he
would feel as they would feel about such an accident. They gave him
respect when he needed counsel. As he sat by himself, he thought that he
should tell them the truth, all of them, confess a crime and accept the
punishment. Hours passed. At midnight Woodman called.

"There isn't much to say, Hugo. I'm sorry, you're sorry, we're all
sorry. But it occurred to me that you might do something foolish--tell
these people all about it, for example."

"I was going to."

"Don't. They'd never understand. You'd be involved in a legal war that
would undoubtedly end in your acquittal. But it would drag in all your
friends--and your mother and father--particularly him. The papers would
go wild. You might, on the other hand, be executed as a menace. You
can't tell."

"It might be a good thing," Hugo answered bitterly.

"Don't let me hear you say that, you fool! I tell you, Hugo, if you go
into that business, I'll get up on the stand and say I knew it all the
time and I let a man play on my team when I was pretty sure that sooner
or later he'd kill someone. Then I'll go to jail surely."

"You're a pretty fine man, Mr. Woodman."

"Hell!"

"What shall I do?" Hugo's voice trembled. He suffered as he had not
dreamed it was possible to suffer.

"That's up to you. I'd say, live it down."

"Live it down! Do you know what that means--in a college?"

"Yes, I think I do, Hugo."

"You can live down almost anything, except that one thing--murder. It's
too ugly, Woodie."

"Maybe. Maybe. You've got to decide, son. If you decide against
trying--and, mind you, you might be justified--I've got a brother-in-law
who has a ranch in Alberta. A couple of hundred miles from any place.
You'd be welcome there."

Hugo did not reply. He took the coach's hand and wrung it. Then for an
hour the two men sat side by side in the darkness. At last Woodman rose
and left. He said only: "Remember that offer. It's cold and bleak and
the work is hard. Good-night, Hugo."

"Good-night, Woodie. Thanks for coming up."

When the campus was still with the quiet of sleep, Hugo crossed it as
swiftly as a spectre. All night he strode remorselessly over country
roads. His face was set. His eyes burned. He ignored the trembling of
his joints. When the sky faded, he went back. He packed his clothes in
two suit-cases. With them swinging at his side, he stole out of the Psi
Delta house, crossed the campus, stopped. For a long instant he stared
at Webster Hall. The first light of morning was just touching it. The
debris collected for a fire that was never lighted was strewn around the
cannon. He saw the initials he had painted there a year and more ago
still faintly legible. A lump rose in his throat.

"Good-by, Webster," he said. He lifted the suitcase and vanished. In a
few minutes the campus was five miles behind him--six--ten--twenty. When
he saw the first early caravan of produce headed toward the market, he
slowed to a walk. The sun came over a hill and sparkled on a billion
drops of dew. A bird flew singing from his path. Hugo Danner had fled
beyond the gates of Webster.




X


A year passed. In the harbour of Cristobal, at the northern end of the
locks, waiting for the day to open the great steel jaws that dammed the
Pacific from the Atlantic, the _Katrina_ pulled at her anchor chain in
the gentle swell. A few stars, liquid bright, hung in the tropical sky.
A little puff of wind coming occasionally from the south carried the
smell of the jungle to the ship. The crew was awakening.

A man with a bucket on a rope went to the rail and hauled up a brimming
pail from the warm sea. He splashed his face and hands into it. Then he
poured it back and repeated the act of dipping up water.

"Hey!" he said.

Another man joined him. "Here. Swab off your sweat. Look yonder."

The dorsal fin of a shark rippled momentarily on the surface and dipped
beneath it. A third man appeared. He accepted the proffered water and
washed himself. His roving eye saw the shark as it rose for the second
time. He dried on a towel. The off-shore breeze stirred his dark hair.
There was a growth of equally dark beard on his tanned jaw and cheek.
Steely muscles bulged under his shirt. His forearm, when he picked up
the pail, was corded like cable. A smell of coffee issued from the
galley, and the smoke of the cook's fire was wafted on deck for a
pungent moment. Two bells sounded. The music went out over the water in
clear, humming waves.

The man who had come first from the forecastle leaned his buttocks
against the rail. One end of it had been unhooked to permit the
discharge of mail. The rail ran, the man fell back, clawing, and then,
thinking suddenly of the sharks, he screamed. The third man looked. He
saw his fellow-seaman go overboard. He jumped from where he stood,
clearing the scuppers and falling through the air before the victim of
the slack rail had landed in the water. The two splashes were almost
simultaneous. A boatswain, hearing the cry, hastened to the scene. He
saw one man lifted clear of the water by the other, who was treading
water furiously. He shouted for a rope. He saw the curve and dip of a
fin. The first man seized the rope and climbed and was pulled up. The
second, his rescuer, dived under water as if aware of something there
that required his attention. The men above him could not know that he
had felt the rake of teeth across his leg--powerful teeth, which
nevertheless did not penetrate his skin. As he dived into the green
depths, he saw a body lunge toward him, turn, yawn a white-fringed
mouth. He snatched the lower jaw in one hand, and the upper in the
other. He exerted his strength. The mouth gaped wider, a tail twelve
feet behind it lashed, the thing died with fingers like steel claws
tearing at its brain. It floated belly up. The man rose, took the rope,
climbed aboard. Other sharks assaulted the dead one.

The dripping sailor clasped his saviour's hand. "God Almighty, man, you
saved my life. Jesus!"

"That's four," Hugo Danner said abstractedly, and then he smiled. "It's
all right. Forget it. I've had a lot of experience with sharks." He had
never seen one before in his life. He walked aft, where the men grouped
around him.

"How'd you do it?"

"It's a trick I can't explain very well," Hugo said. "You use their rush
to break their jaws. It takes a good deal of muscle."

"Anyway--guy--thanks."

"Sure."

A whistle blew. The ships were lining up in the order of their arrival
for admission to the Panama Canal. Gatun loomed in the feeble sun of
dawn. The anchor chain rumbled. The _Katrina_ edged forward at half
speed.

The sea. Blue, green, restless, ghost-ridden, driven in empty quarters
by devils riding the wind, secretive, mysterious, making a last
gigantic, primeval stand against the conquest of man, hemming and
isolating the world, beautiful, horrible, dead god of ten thousand
voices, universal incubator, universal grave.

The _Katrina_ came to the islands in the South Pacific. Islands that
issued from the water like green wreaths and seemed to float on it. The
small boats were put out and sections of the cargo were sent to rickety
wharves where white men and brown islanders took charge of it and
carried it away into the fringe of the lush vegetation. Hugo, looking at
those islands, was moved to smile. The place where broken men hid from
civilization, where the derelicts of the world gathered to drown their
shame in a verdant paradise that had no particular position in the white
man's scheme of the earth.

At one of the smaller islands an accident to the engine forced the
_Katrina_ to linger for two weeks. It was during those two weeks, in a
rather extraordinary manner, that Hugo Danner laid the first foundation
of the fortune that he accumulated in his later life. One day, idling
away a leave on shore in the shade of a mighty tree, he saw the
outriggers of the natives file away for the oyster beds, and, out of
pure curiosity, he followed them. For a whole day he watched the men
plunge under the surface in search of pearls. The next day he came back
and dove with one of them.

On the bizarre floor of the ocean, among the colossal fronds of its
flora, the two men swam. They were invaders from the brilliance above
the surface, shooting like fish, horizontally, through the murk and
shadow, and the denizens of that world resented their coming. Great fish
shot past them with malevolent eyes, and the vises of giant clams shut
swiftly in attempts to trap their moving limbs. Hugo was entranced. He
watched the other man as he found the oyster bed and commenced to fill
his basket with frantic haste. When his lungs stung and he could bear
the agony no longer, he turned and forged toward the upper air. Then
they went down again.

Hugo's blood, designed to take more oxygen from the air, and his greater
density fitted him naturally for the work. The pressure did not make him
suffer and the few moments granted to the divers beneath the forbidding
element stretched to a longer time for him.

On the second day of diving he went alone. His amateur attempt had been
surprisingly fruitful. Standing erect in the immense solitude, he
searched the hills and valleys. At length, finding a promising cluster
of shellfish, he began to examine them one by one, pulling them loose,
feeling in their pulpy interior for the precious jewels. He occupied
himself determinedly while the _Katrina_ was waiting in Apia, and at the
end of the stay he had collected more than sixty pearls of great value
and two hundred of moderate worth.

It was, he thought, typical of himself. He had decided to make a fortune
of some sort after the first bitter rage over his debacle at Webster had
abated in his heart. He realized that without wealth his position in
the world would be more difficult and more futile than his fates had
decreed. Poverty, at least, he was not forced to bear. He could wrest
fortune from nature by his might. That he had begun that task by diving
for pearls fitted into his scheme. It was such a method as no other man
would have considered and its achievement robbed no one while it
enriched him.

When the _Katrina_ turned her prow westward again, Hugo worked with his
shipmates in a mood that had undergone considerable change. There was no
more despair in him, little of the taciturnity that had marked his
earliest days at sea, none of the hatred of mankind. He had buried that
slowly and carefully in a dull year of work ashore and a month of toil
on the heaving deck of the ship. For six months he had kept himself
alive in a manner that he could scarcely remember. Driving a truck.
Working on a farm. Digging in a road. His mind a bitter blank, his
valiant dreams all dead.

