And on the plain creosote bushes, purple sage, cactus ... coyotes and
rattlesnakes.

But ... no! This was an other-world desert, one spawned in the fires of
hell--a never-never land of scalding heat and unbelievable cold. He
thought it was like a painting by some mad artist. First he had sketched
in the plain with infinite care--a white-black, monotonous, unbroken
expanse. Afterward he had splashed in the rocks, painting with wild
abandon, heedless of design, form or structure, until the plain was a
hodgepodge of bizarre formations. They towered, squatted, pierced the
sky, crawled along the plain like giant serpents--an orgy in rock
without rhyme or reason. Somewhere in the lithic jungle his quarry
waited. He would flush him out.

He thought that the sniper must be getting low on oxygen. He couldn't
afford to waste time. He had to reach Red Dog soon--if he were to live.
Crag checked his oxygen meter and began moving forward, conscious that
the chase would be governed by his oxygen supply. He'd have to remember
that.

He reached a clearing on the slope just as the sniper disappeared into
the rock shadows on the opposite side. He hesitated. Would the pursued
man be waiting ... covering the trail behind him? He decided not to
chance crossing it and began skirting around its edge, fretting at the
minutes wasted. His earphones crackled and Prochaska's voice came, a
warning through the vacuum:

"Nagel says your oxygen must be low."

He glanced at the indicator on his cylinder. Still safe. He studied the
rocks ahead and told Prochaska:

"I've got to keep this baby from reaching Red Dog."

"Watch yourself. Don't go beyond the point of no return." Prochaska's
voice held concern.

"Stop worrying."

Crag pushed around the edge of the clearing with reckless haste. It was
hard going and he was panting heavily long before he reached the spot
where he had last seen the sniper. He paused to catch his breath. The
slope fell away beneath him, a miniature kingdom of jagged needle-sharp
rock. There was no sign of the fugitive. The plain, too, was devoid of
life. He descended to the edge of the clearing and picked his way
through the debris of some eon-old geologic catastrophe. Ahead and to
the left of the ridge, the plain was broken by shallow rills and weird
rock outcroppings. Farther out Backbone Ridge began as low mounds of
stone, becoming twisted black stalagmites hunched incongruously against
the floor of the crater, ending as jagged sharp needles of rock curving
over the plain in a huge arc.

A moment later he caught sight of his quarry. The invader had cut down
to the edge of the plain, abandoning the protection of the ridge, making
a beeline for the nearest rock extrusion on the floor of the crater. Too
far away for a shot. Crag cursed and made a quick judgment, deciding to
risk the open terrain in hopes of gaining shelter before the sniper was
aware of his strategy.

He abandoned the protection of the slope and struck out in a straight
line toward the distant mounds on the floor of the crater, keeping his
eyes on the fugitive. They raced across the clearing in parallel paths,
several hundred yards apart. The sniper had almost reached the first
rocks when he glanced back. He saw Crag and put on an extra burst of
speed, reaching the first rocks while Crag was still a hundred yards
from the nearest mound. Crag dropped to the ground, thankful that it was
slightly uneven. At best he'd make a poor target. He crawled, keeping
his body low, tossing his head in an effort to shake the perspiration
from his eyes.

"How you doing, skipper?" It was Prochaska. Lousy, Crag thought. He
briefed him without slowing his pace.

The ashy plain just in front of him spurted in little fountains of white
dust. He dropped flat on his belly with a gasp.

"You all right?"

"Okay," Crag gritted. "This boy's just using me for target practice."
Prochaska's voice became alarmed. He urged him to retreat.

"We can get them some other way," he said.

"Not if they once get that launcher in operation. I'm moving on." There
was a moment of silence.

"Okay, skipper, but watch yourself." His voice was reluctant. "And watch
your oxygen."

"Roger." He checked his gauge and hurriedly switched to the second
cylinder. Now he was on the last one. The trick would be to stretch his
oxygen out until the chase was ended--until the man ahead was a corpse.

He clung to the floor of the crater, searching for shelter. The ground
rose slightly to his right. He crawled toward the rise, noting that the
terrain crested high enough to cut his view of the base of the rocks.
Satisfied that he was no longer visible, he began inching his way toward
the nearest mounds.




CHAPTER 16


Crag studied the scene. He lay at one end of the great crescent of rock
forming Backbone Ridge, the other end of which ended about half a mile
from Red Dog. The floor of the crater between the rocket and the nearest
rock formations was fairly level and unbroken. The arced formation
itself was a veritable jungle of rocks of every type--gnarled, twisted
rock that hugged the ground, jutting black pinnacles piercing the sky,
bizarre bubble formations which appeared like weird ebony eskimo cities,
and great fantastic ledges which extruded from the earth at varying
angles, forming black caves against their bases.

Whole armies could hide there, he thought. Only the fugitive couldn't
hide. Oxygen was still the paramount issue. He'd have to thread his way
through the terrible rock jungle to the distant tip of the crescent,
then plunge across the open plain to the rocket if he hoped to survive.
The distance between the horns of the crescent appeared about three
miles. He pondered it thoughtfully, then got on the interphones and
outlined his plan to Prochaska.

"Okay, I know better than to argue," the Chief said dolefully when he
had finished. "But watch your oxygen." Damn the oxygen, Crag thought
irritably. He studied the labyrinth of rock into which his quarry had
vanished, then rose and started across the plain in a direct line for
the opposite tip of the crescent.

The first moments were the hardest. After that he knew he must be almost
out of range of the sniper's weapon. Perhaps, even, the other had not
seen his maneuver. He forced himself into a slow trot, his breath
whistling in his ears and his body sodden inside his suit. Perspiration
stung his eyes, his leg muscles ached almost intolerably, and every
movement seemed made on sheer will power. The whimsical thought crossed
his mind that Gotch had never painted this side of the picture. Nor was
it mentioned in the manual of space survival.

He was thankful that the plain between the two tips of the crescent was
fairly even. He moved quickly, but it was a long time before he reached
the further tip of the crescent. He wondered if he had been observed
from Red Dog. Well, no matter, he thought. He had cut the sniper's sole
avenue of escape. Victory over his quarry was just a matter of time, a
matter of waiting for him to appear. He picked a vantage point, a high
rocky ledge which commanded all approaches to his position. After
briefing Prochaska, he settled back to wait, thinking that the fugitive
must be extremely low on oxygen.

Long minutes passed. Once or twice he thought he saw movement among the
rocks and started to lift his rifle; but there was no movement.
Illusions, he told himself. His eyes were playing him tricks. The
bizarre sea of rocks confronting him was a study in black and white--the
intolerable light of sun-struck surfaces contrasting with the stygian
blackness of the shadows. His eyes began to ache and he shifted them
from time to time to shut out the glare. He was sweating again and there
was a dull ache at the back of his head. Precious time was fleeing. He'd
have to resolve the chase--soon.

All at once he saw movement that was not an illusion. He half rose,
raising his rifle when dust spurted from the ground a few feet to his
left. He cursed and threw himself to the ground, rolling until he was
well below the ridge. One thing was certain: the sniper had the ridge
well under control. The Red Dog watcher must have warned him, he
thought. He looked around. Off to one side a small rill cut through the
rocks running in the sniper's general direction. He looked back toward
the ridge, hesitated, then decided to gamble on the rill. He moved
crablike along the side of the slope until he reached its edge and
peered over. The bottom was a pool of darkness. He lowered himself over
the edge with some misgivings, searching for holds with his hands and
feet. His boot unexpectedly touched bottom.

Crag stood for a moment on the floor of the rill. His body was clothed
in black velvet shadows but it was shallow enough to leave his head in
the sunlight. He moved cautiously forward, half expecting the sniper to
appear in front of him. His nerves were taut, edgy.

_Relax, boy, you're strung like a violin_, he told himself. _Take it
easy._

A bend in the rill cut off the sun leaving him in a well of blackness.
He hadn't counted on that. Before he'd moved another dozen steps he
realized the rill wasn't the answer. He'd have to chance getting back
into the open. More time was lost. He felt the steep sides until he
located a series of breaks in the wall, then slung his rifle over his
shoulder and inched upward until his head cleared the edge. The sun's
sudden glare blinded him. Involuntarily he jerked his head sideways,
almost losing his hold in the process. He clung to the wall for a moment
before laboriously pulling his body over the edge.

He lay prone against the rocks, half-expecting to be greeted by a hail
of bullets. He waited quietly, without moving, then carefully raised his
head. Off to one side was a series of mounds. He crawled toward them
without moving his belly from the ground. When he reached the first one,
he half rose and scuttled forward until he found a view of the twisted
rocks where he had last seen the sniper.

The scene ahead was a still-life painting. It seemed incongruous that
somewhere among the quiet rocks death moved in the form of a man. He
decided against penetrating further into the tangle of rocks. He'd wait.
He settled back, conscious that time was fleeing.

"Skipper, are you checking your oxygen?" The Chief's voice rattled
against his eardrums. It was filled with alarm.

"Listen, I have no time--" Crag started to growl. His words were clipped
short as his eyes involuntarily took the reading of his oxygen gauge.
Low ... low. He calculated quickly. He was well past the point of no
return--too low to make the long trip back to Bandit. He was done, gone,
a plucked gosling. He had bought himself a coffin and he'd rest there
for all eternity--boxed in by the weird tombstones of Crater Arzachel.
Adam Crag--the Man in the Moon.

He grinned wryly. Well, at least his quarry was going with him. He
wouldn't greet his Maker empty handed. He tersely informed Prochaska of
his predicament, then recklessly moved to a high vantage point and
scanned the rocks beyond.

He had to make every second count. Light and shadow ... light and
shadow. Somewhere in the crisscross of light and shadow was a man-form,
a blob of protoplasm like himself, a living thing that had to be stamped
out before the last of his precious oxygen was gone. He was the
executioner. Somewhere ahead a doomed man waited in the docks ... waited
for him to come. They were two men from opposite sides of the world,
battling to death in Hell's own backyard. Only he'd win ... win before
he died.

He was scanning the rocky tableau when the sniper moved into his field
of vision, far to one side of Crag's position. He was running with short
choppy steps, threading between the rocks toward Red Dog. His haste and
apparent disregard of exposing himself puzzled Crag for a moment, then
he smiled grimly. Almost out of oxygen, he thought. Well, that makes two
of us. But he still had to make sure his quarry died. The thought
spurred him to action.

He turned and scrambled back toward the tip of Backbone Ridge to cut the
sniper's escape route. He reached the end rocks and waited. A few
moments later he sighted a figure scrambling toward him. He raised his
rifle thinking it was too far for a shot, then lowered it again. The
sniper began moving more slowly and cautiously, then became lost to
sight in a maze of rock outcroppings.

Crag waited impatiently, aware that precious moments were fleeing. He
was afraid to look at his gauge, plagued by the sense of vanishing
moments. Time was running out and eternity was drawing near--near to
Adam Crag as well as the sniper. The rocks extended before him, a
kaleidoscopic pattern of black and white. Somewhere in the tortuous
labyrinth was the man he had to kill before he himself died. He watched
nervously, trying to suppress the tension pulling at his muscles. A
nerve in his cheek twitched and he shook his head without removing his
eyes from the rocks ahead. Still there was no sign of the other.

Who was the stalker and who was the stalked? The question bothered him.
Perhaps even at that instant the sniper was drawing bead. Then he'd be
free to reach Red Dog--safety.

Crag decided he couldn't wait. He'd have to seek the other out, somehow
flush him from cover. He looked around. Off to one side a shelf of black
rock angled incongruously into the sky. Its sides were steep but its top
would command all approaches to the tip of the crescent. He made his way
to the base of the shelf and began scrambling up its steep sides,
finding it difficult to manage toe and hand holds. He slipped from time
to time, hanging desperately on to keep himself from rolling back to the
rocks below. Just below the top he rested, panting, fighting for breath,
conscious of his heart thudding in his ears. He had to hurry!

Slowly, laboriously he pulled himself up the last few feet and lay
panting atop the shelf, none too soon. The sniper scrambled out of the
rocks a scant hundred yards from Crag's position. He raised his rifle,
then hesitated. The Red Dog crewman had fallen to his hands and knees
and was fighting to rise. He pushed his hands against the plain in an
attempt to get his feet under him. Crag lowered his rifle and watched
curiously.

The sniper finally succeeded in getting to his feet. He stood for a
moment, weaving, before moving toward Crag's shelf with a faltering
zigzag gait. Crag raised the rifle and tried to line the sights. He had
difficulty holding the weapon steady. He started to pull the trigger
when the man fell again. Crag hesitated. The sniper floundered in the
ash, managed to pull himself half-erect. He weaved with a few faltering
steps and plunged forward on his face.

Crag watched for a moment. There was no movement. The black blob of the
suit lay with the stillness of the rocks in the brazen heat of the
crater. So that's the way a man dies when his oxygen runs out, he
thought. He just plops down, jerks a little and departs, with as little
ceremony as that. He grinned crookedly, thinking he had just watched a
rehearsal of his own demise. He watched for a moment longer before
turning his face back toward the plain.

Red Dog was a bare half-mile away--a clear level half-mile from the tip
of Backbone Ridge. That's how close the sniper had come to living. He
mulled the thought with a momentary surge of hope. Red Dog? Why not? If
he could shoot his way into the space cabin he'd live ... live. The
thought galvanized him to action.

He slung his rifle over his shoulder and scrambled down the slope
heedless of the danger of ripping his suit. He could make it. He had to
make it! He gained the bottom and paused to catch his breath before
starting toward the rocket. A glance at his oxygen meter told him that
the race was futile. Still, he forced his legs into a run, threading
through the rocks toward the floor of the crater. He reached the tip of
the crescent panting heavily and plunged across the level floor of the
plain. His legs were leaden, his lungs burned and sweat filled his eyes,
stinging and blurring his vision. Still he ran.

The rocket rose from the crater floor, growing larger, larger. He tried
to keep in a straight path, aware that he was moving in a crazy zigzag
course.

The rocket loomed bigger ... bigger. It appeared immense. Caution, he
told himself, there's an hombre up there with a rifle. He halted,
feeling his body weave, and tried to steady himself. High up in the nose
of Red Dog the hatch was a dancing black shadow--black with movement.
He pulled the rifle from his shoulder and moved the control to full
automatic, falling to his knees as he did so. Strange, the ashy floor of
the crater was erupting in small fountains just to his side. Danger, he
thought, take cover. The warning bells were still ringing in his brain
as he slid forward on his stomach and tried to steady his weapon. Dust
spurted across his face plate. The black rectangle of the hatch danced
crazily in his sights. He pulled back on the trigger, feeling the heavy
weapon buck against his shoulder, firing until the clip was empty. His
fingers hurriedly searched his belt for the spare clips. Gone. Somehow
he'd lost them. He'd have to rush the rocket.

He got to his feet, weaving dizzily, and forced his legs to move. Once
or twice he fell, regaining his feet with difficulty.

He heard a voice. It took him a minute to realize it was his own. He was
babbling to Prochaska, trying to tell him ...

The sky was black. No, it was white, dazzling white, white with heat,
red with flame. He saw Red Dog with difficulty. The rocket was a hotel,
complete with room clerk. He laughed inanely. A Single, please. No, I'll
only be staying for the night. He fell again. This time it took him
longer to regain his feet. He stumbled ... walked ... stumbled. His eyes
sought the rocket. It was weaving, swaying back and forth. Foolish, he
thought, there was no wind in Crater Arzachel. No air, no wind, no
nothing. Nothing but death. Wait, there was someone sitting on top of
the rocket--a giant of a man with a long white beard. He watched Crag
and smiled. He reached out a hand and beckoned. Crag ran. The sky
exploded within his brain, his legs buckled and he felt his face plate
smash against the ashy floor. For all eternity, he thought. The
blackness came.

       *       *       *       *       *

Adam Crag opened his eyes. He was lying on his back. Above him the dome
of the sky formed a great black canopy sprinkled with brilliant stars.
His thoughts, chaotic memories, gradually stabilized and he remembered
his mad flight toward Red Dog.

This couldn't be death, he thought. Spirits didn't wear space suits. He
sensed movement and twisted his head to one side. Gordon Nagel! The
oxygen man's face behind the heavy plate was thin, gaunt, but he was
smiling. Crag thought that he had never seen such a wonderful smile.
Nagel's lips crinkled into speech:

"I was beginning to wonder when you'd make it." Even his voice was
different, Crag thought. The nasal twang was gone. It was soft, mellow,
deep with concern. He thought it was the most wonderful sound he had
ever heard.

"Thanks, Gordon," he said simply. He spoke the words thinking it was the
first time he'd ever addressed the other by his first name.

"How'd you ever locate me?"

"Started early," Nagel said. "I was pretty sure you'd push yourself past
the point of no return. You seemed pretty set on getting that critter."

"It's a wonder you located me." He managed to push himself to a sitting
position.

"Prochaska didn't think I could. But I did. Matter of fact, I was pretty
close to you when you broke from the rocks heading for Red Dog." Red
Dog! Crag twisted his head and looked toward the rocket.

"He's lying at the base of the rocket," Nagel said, in answer to his
