and fades away, when the striving after naked truth alone
predominates, conditions which prevail only in nations while in
the prime of their development.--LAMPE, E.

                         _Die Entwickelung der Mathematik etc.
                         (Berlin, 1893), p. 4._


=1135.= Till the fifteenth century little progress appears to
have been made in the science or practice of music; but since
that era it has advanced with marvelous rapidity, its progress
being curiously parallel with that of mathematics, inasmuch as
great musical geniuses appeared suddenly among different nations,
equal in their possession of this special faculty to any that
have since arisen. As with the mathematical so with the musical
faculty--it is impossible to trace any connection between its
possession and survival in the struggle for existence.

                                                 --WALLACE, A. R.

                         _Darwinism, Chap. 15._


=1136.= In my opinion, there is absolutely no trustworthy proof
that talents have been improved by their exercise through the
course of a long series of generations. The Bach family shows
that musical talent, and the Bernoulli family that mathematical
power, can be transmitted from generation to generation, but this
teaches us nothing as to the origin of such talents. In both
families the high-watermark of talent lies, not at the end of the
series of generations, as it should do if the results of practice
are transmitted, but in the middle. Again, talents frequently
appear in some member of a family which has not been previously
distinguished.

Gauss was not the son of a mathematician; Handel's father was a
surgeon, of whose musical powers nothing is known; Titian was the
son and also the nephew of a lawyer, while he and his brother,
Francesco Vecellio, were the first painters in a family which
produced a succession of seven other artists with diminishing
talents. These facts do not, however, prove that the condition of
the nerve-tracts and centres of the brain, which determine the
specific talent, appeared for the first time in these men: the
appropriate condition surely existed previously in their parents,
although it did not achieve expression. They prove, as it seems
to me, that a high degree of endowment in a special direction,
which we call talent, cannot have arisen from the experience of
previous generations, that is, by the exercise of the brain in
the same specific direction.--WEISMANN, AUGUST.

                         _Essays upon Heredity [A. E. Shipley],
                         (Oxford, 1891), Vol. 1, p. 97._




  CHAPTER XII

  MATHEMATICS AS A LANGUAGE


=1201.= The new mathematics is a sort of supplement to language,
affording a means of thought about form and quantity and a means
of expression, more exact, compact, and ready than ordinary
language. The great body of physical science, a great deal of the
essential facts of financial science, and endless social and
political problems are only accessible and only thinkable to
those who have had a sound training in mathematical analysis, and
the time may not be very remote when it will be understood that
for complete initiation as an efficient citizen of one of the new
great complex world wide states that are now developing, it is as
necessary to be able to compute, to think in averages and maxima
and minima, as it is now to be able to read and to write.

                                                   --WELLS, H. G.

                         _Mankind in the Making (London, 1904),
                         pp. 191-192._


=1202.= Mathematical language is not only the simplest and most
easily understood of any, but the shortest also.--BROUGHAM, H. L.

                         _Works (Edinburgh, 1872), Vol. 7, p.
                         317._


=1203.= Mathematics is the science of definiteness, the necessary
vocabulary of those who know.--WHITE, W. F.

                         _A Scrap-book of Elementary Mathematics
                         (Chicago, 1908), p. 7._


=1204.= Mathematics, too, is a language, and as concerns its
structure and content it is the most perfect language which
exists, superior to any vernacular; indeed, since it is
understood by every people, mathematics may be called the
language of languages. Through it, as it were, nature herself
speaks; through it the Creator of the world has spoken, and
through it the Preserver of the world continues to speak.

                                                   --DILLMANN, C.

                         _Die Mathematik die Fackeltraegerin einer
                         neuen Zeit (Stuttgart, 1889), p. 5._


=1205.= Would it sound too presumptuous to speak of perception as
a quintessence of sensation, language (that is, communicable
thought) of perception, mathematics of language? We should then
have four terms differentiating from inorganic matter and from
each other the Vegetable, Animal, Rational, and Super-sensual
modes of existence.--SYLVESTER, J. J.

                         _Presidential Address, British
                         Association; Collected Mathematical
                         Papers, Vol. 2, p. 652._


=1206.= Little could Plato have imagined, when, indulging his
instinctive love of the true and beautiful for their own sakes,
he entered upon these refined speculations and revelled in a
world of his own creation, that he was writing the grammar of the
language in which it would be demonstrated in after ages that the
pages of the universe are written.--SYLVESTER, J. J.

                         _A Probationary Lecture on Geometry;
                         Collected Mathematical Papers, Vol. 2,
                         p. 7._


=1207.= It is the symbolic language of mathematics only which has
yet proved sufficiently accurate and comprehensive to demand
familiarity with this conception of an inverse process.

                                                    --VENN, JOHN.

                         _Symbolic Logic (London and New York,
                         1894), p. 74._


=1208.= Without this language [mathematics] most of the intimate
analogies of things would have remained forever unknown to us;
and we should forever have been ignorant of the internal harmony
of the world, which is the only true objective reality....

This harmony ... is the sole objective reality, the only truth we
can attain; and when I add that the universal harmony of the
world is the source of all beauty, it will be understood what
price we should attach to the slow and difficult progress which
little by little enables us to know it better.--POINCARE, H.

                         _The Value of Science [Halsted] Popular
                         Science Monthly, 1906, pp. 195-196._


=1209.= The most striking characteristic of the written language
of algebra and of the higher forms of the calculus is the
sharpness of definition, by which we are enabled to reason upon
the symbols by the mere laws of verbal logic, discharging our
minds entirely of the meaning of the symbols, until we have
reached a stage of the process where we desire to interpret our
results. The ability to attend to the symbols, and to perform the
verbal, visible changes in the position of them permitted by the
logical rules of the science, without allowing the mind to be
perplexed with the meaning of the symbols until the result is
reached which you wish to interpret, is a fundamental part of
what is called analytical power. Many students find themselves
perplexed by a perpetual attempt to interpret not only the
result, but each step of the process. They thus lose much of the
benefit of the labor-saving machinery of the calculus and are,
indeed, frequently incapacitated for using it.--HILL, THOMAS.

                         _Uses of Mathesis; Bibliotheca Sacra,
                         Vol. 32, p. 505._


=1210.= The prominent reason why a mathematician can be judged by
none but mathematicians, is that he uses a peculiar language. The
language of mathesis is special and untranslatable. In its
simplest forms it can be translated, as, for instance, we say a
right angle to mean a square corner. But you go a little higher
in the science of mathematics, and it is impossible to dispense
with a peculiar language. It would defy all the power of Mercury
himself to explain to a person ignorant of the science what is
meant by the single phrase "functional exponent." How much more
impossible, if we may say so, would it be to explain a whole
treatise like Hamilton's Quaternions, in such a wise as to make
it possible to judge of its value! But to one who has learned
this language, it is the most precise and clear of all modes of
expression. It discloses the thought exactly as conceived by the
writer, with more or less beauty of form, but never with
obscurity. It may be prolix, as it often is among French writers;
may delight in mere verbal metamorphoses, as in the Cambridge
University of England; or adopt the briefest and clearest forms,
as under the pens of the geometers of our Cambridge; but it
always reveals to us precisely the writer's thought.

                                                  --HILL, THOMAS.

                         _North American Review, Vol. 85, pp.
                         224-225._


=1211.= The domain, over which the language of analysis extends
its sway, is, indeed, relatively limited, but within this domain
it so infinitely excels ordinary language that its attempt to
follow the former must be given up after a few steps. The
mathematician, who knows how to think in this marvelously
condensed language, is as different from the mechanical computer
as heaven from earth.--PRINGSHEIM, A.

                         _Jahresberichte der Deutschen
                         Mathematiker Vereinigung, Bd. 13, p.
                         367._


=1212.= The results of systematic symbolical reasoning must
_always_ express general truths, by their nature; and do not, for
their justification, require each of the steps of the process to
represent some definite operation upon quantity. The _absolute
universality of the interpretation of symbols_ is the fundamental
principle of their use.--WHEWELL, WILLIAM.

                         _The Philosophy of the Inductive
                         Sciences, Part I, Bk. 2, chap. 12, sect.
                         2 (London, 1858)._


=1213.= Anyone who understands algebraic notation, reads at a
glance in an equation results reached arithmetically only with
great labour and pains.--COURNOT, A.

                         _Theory of Wealth [N. T. Bacon], (New
                         York, 1897), p. 4._


=1214.= As arithmetic and algebra are sciences of great
clearness, certainty, and extent, which are immediately
conversant about signs, upon the skilful use whereof they
entirely depend, so a little attention to them may possibly help
us to judge of the progress of the mind in other sciences, which,
though differing in nature, design, and object, may yet agree in
the general methods of proof and inquiry.--BERKELEY, GEORGE.

                         _Alciphron, or the Minute Philosopher,
                         Dialogue 7, sect. 12._


=1215.= In general the position as regards all such new calculi
is this--That one cannot accomplish by them anything that could
not be accomplished without them. However, the advantage is,
that, provided such a calculus corresponds to the inmost
nature of frequent needs, anyone who masters it thoroughly is
able--without the unconscious inspiration of genius which no one
can command--to solve the respective problems, yea, to solve them
mechanically in complicated cases in which, without such aid,
even genius becomes powerless. Such is the case with the
invention of general algebra, with the differential calculus, and
in a more limited region with Lagrange's calculus of variations,
with my calculus of congruences, and with Moebius's calculus. Such
conceptions unite, as it were, into an organic whole countless
problems which otherwise would remain isolated and require for
their separate solution more or less application of inventive
genius.--GAUSS, C. J.

                         _Werke, Bd. 8, p. 298._


=1216.= The invention of what we may call primary or fundamental
notation has been but little indebted to analogy, evidently owing
to the small extent of ideas in which comparison can be made
useful. But at the same time analogy should be attended to, even
if for no other reason than that, by making the invention of
notation an art, the exertion of individual caprice ceases to be
allowable. Nothing is more easy than the invention of notation,
and nothing of worse example and consequence than the confusion
of mathematical expressions by unknown symbols. If new notation
be advisable, permanently or temporarily, it should carry with it
some mark of distinction from that which is already in use,
unless it be a demonstrable extension of the latter.

                                                  --DE MORGAN, A.

                         _Calculus of Functions; Encyclopedia
                         Metropolitana, Addition to Article 26._


=1217.= Before the introduction of the Arabic notation,
multiplication was difficult, and the division even of integers
called into play the highest mathematical faculties. Probably
nothing in the modern world could have more astonished a Greek
mathematician than to learn that, under the influence of
compulsory education, the whole population of Western Europe,
from the highest to the lowest, could perform the operation of
division for the largest numbers. This fact would have seemed to
him a sheer impossibility.... Our modern power of easy reckoning
with decimal fractions is the most miraculous result of a perfect
notation.--WHITEHEAD, A. N.

                         _Introduction to Mathematics (New York,
                         1911), p. 59._


=1218.= Mathematics is often considered a difficult and
mysterious science, because of the numerous symbols which it
employs. Of course, nothing is more incomprehensible than a
symbolism which we do not understand. Also a symbolism, which we
only partially understand and are unaccustomed to use, is
difficult to follow. In exactly the same way the technical terms
of any profession or trade are incomprehensible to those who have
never been trained to use them. But this is not because they are
difficult in themselves. On the contrary they have invariably
been introduced to make things easy. So in mathematics, granted
that we are giving any serious attention to mathematical ideas,
the symbolism is invariably an immense simplification.

                                               --WHITEHEAD, A. N.

                         _Introduction to Mathematics (New York,
                         1911), pp. 59-60._


=1219.= Symbolism is useful because it makes things difficult.
Now in the beginning everything is self-evident, and it is hard
to see whether one self-evident proposition follows from another
or not. Obviousness is always the enemy to correctness. Hence we
must invent a new and difficult symbolism in which nothing is
obvious.... Thus the whole of Arithmetic and Algebra has
been shown to require three indefinable notions and five
indemonstrable propositions.--RUSSELL, BERTRAND.

                         _International Monthly, 1901, p. 85._


=1220.= The employment of mathematical symbols is perfectly
natural when the relations between magnitudes are under
discussion; and even if they are not rigorously necessary, it
would hardly be reasonable to reject them, because they are not
equally familiar to all readers and because they have sometimes
been wrongly used, if they are able to facilitate the exposition
of problems, to render it more concise, to open the way to more
extended developments, and to avoid the digressions of vague
argumentation.--COURNOT, A.

                         _Theory of Wealth [N. T. Bacon], (New
                         York, 1897), pp. 3-4._


=1221.= An all-inclusive geometrical symbolism, such as Hamilton
and Grassmann conceived of, is impossible.--BURKHARDT, H.

                         _Jahresbericht der Deutschen
                         Mathematiker Vereinigung, Bd. 5, p. 52._


=1222.= The language of analysis, most perfect of all, being in
itself a powerful instrument of discoveries, its notations,
especially when they are necessary and happily conceived, are so
many germs of new calculi.--LAPLACE.

                         _Oeuvres, t. 7 (Paris, 1896), p. xl._




  CHAPTER XIII

  MATHEMATICS AND LOGIC


=1301.= Mathematics belongs to every inquiry, moral as well as
physical. Even the rules of logic, by which it is rigidly bound,
could not be deduced without its aid. The laws of argument admit
of simple statement, but they must be curiously transposed before
they can be applied to the living speech and verified by
observation. In its pure and simple form the syllogism cannot be
directly compared with all experience, or it would not have
required an Aristotle to discover it. It must be transmuted into
all the possible shapes in which reasoning loves to clothe
itself. The transmutation is the mathematical process in the
establishment of the law.--PEIRCE, BENJAMIN.

                         _Linear Associative Algebra; American
                         Journal of Mathematics, Vol. 4 (1881),
                         p. 97._


=1302.= In mathematics we see the conscious logical activity of
our mind in its purest and most perfect form; here is made
manifest to us all the labor and the great care with which it
progresses, the precision which is necessary to determine exactly
the source of the established general theorems, and the
difficulty with which we form and comprehend abstract
conceptions; but we also learn here to have confidence in the
certainty, breadth, and fruitfulness of such intellectual labor.

                                                  --HELMHOLTZ, H.

                         _Vortraege und Reden, Bd. 1
                         (Braunschweig, 1896), p. 176._


=1303.= Mathematical demonstrations are a logic of as much or more
use, than that commonly learned at schools, serving to a just
formation of the mind, enlarging its capacity, and strengthening
it so as to render the same capable of exact reasoning, and
discerning truth from falsehood in all occurrences, even in
subjects not mathematical. For which reason it is said, the
Egyptians, Persians, and Lacedaemonians seldom elected any new
kings, but such as had some knowledge in the mathematics,
imagining those, who had not, men of imperfect judgments, and
unfit to rule and govern.--FRANKLIN, BENJAMIN.

                         _Usefulness of Mathematics; Works
                         (Boston, 1840), Vol. 2, p. 68._


=1304.= The mathematical conception is, from its very nature,
abstract; indeed its abstractness is usually of a higher order
than the abstractness of the logician.--CHRYSTAL, GEORGE.

                         _Encyclopedia Britannica (Ninth
                         Edition), Article "Mathematics."_


=1305.= Mathematics, that giant pincers of scientific logic....

                                                 --HALSTED, G. B.

                         _Science (1905), p. 161._


=1306.= Logic has borrowed the rules of geometry without
understanding its power.... I am far from placing logicians by
the side of geometers who teach the true way to guide the
reason.... The method of avoiding error is sought by every one.
The logicians profess to lead the way, the geometers alone reach
it, and aside from their science there is no true demonstration.

                                                        --PASCAL.

                         _Quoted by A. Rebiere: Mathematiques et
                         Mathematiciens (Paris, 1898), pp.
                         162-163._


=1307.= Mathematics, like dialectics, is an organ of the higher
sense, in its execution it is an art like eloquence. To both
nothing but the form is of value; neither cares anything for
content. Whether mathematics considers pennies or guineas,
whether rhetoric defends truth or error, is perfectly immaterial
to either.--GOETHE.

                         _Sprueche in Prosa, Natur IV, 946._


=1308.= Confined to its true domain, mathematical reasoning is
admirably adapted to perform the universal office of sound logic:
to induce in order to deduce, in order to construct.... It
contents itself to furnish, in the most favorable domain, a
model of clearness, of precision, and consistency, the close
contemplation of which is alone able to prepare the mind to
render other conceptions also as perfect as their nature permits.
Its general reaction, more negative than positive, must consist,
above all, in inspiring us everywhere with an invincible aversion
for vagueness, inconsistency, and obscurity, which may always be
really avoided in any reasoning whatsoever, if we make sufficient
effort.--COMTE, A.

                         _Subjective Synthesis._


=1309.= Formal thought, consciously recognized as such, is the
means of all exact knowledge; and a correct understanding of the
main formal sciences, Logic and Mathematics, is the proper and
only safe foundation for a scientific education.--LEFEVRE, ARTHUR.

                         _Number and its Algebra (Boston, Sect.
                         222.)_


=1310.= It has come to pass, I know not how, that Mathematics
and Logic, which ought to be but the handmaids of Physic,
nevertheless presume on the strength of the certainty which they
possess to exercise dominion over it.--BACON, FRANCIS.

                         _De Augmentis, Bk. 3._


=1311.= We may regard geometry as a practical logic, for the
truths which it considers, being the most simple and most
sensible of all, are, for this reason, the most susceptible to
easy and ready application of the rules of reasoning.--D'ALEMBERT.

                         _Quoted in A. Rebiere: Mathematiques et
                         Mathematiciens (Paris, 1898), pp.
                         151-152._


=1312.= There are notable examples enough of demonstration
outside of mathematics, and it may be said that Aristotle has
already given some in his "Prior Analytics." In fact logic is as
susceptible of demonstration as geometry, .... Archimedes is the
first, whose works we have, who has practised the art of
demonstration upon an occasion where he is treating of physics,
as he has done in his book on Equilibrium. Furthermore, jurists
may be said to have many good demonstrations; especially the
ancient Roman jurists, whose fragments have been preserved to us
in the Pandects.--LEIBNITZ, G. W.

                         _New Essay on Human Understanding
                         [Langley], Bk. 4, chap. 2, sect. 12._


=1313.= It is commonly considered that mathematics owes its
certainty to its reliance on the immutable principles of formal
logic. This ... is only half the truth imperfectly expressed. The
other half would be that the principles of formal logic owe such
a degree of permanence as they have largely to the fact that they
have been tempered by long and varied use by mathematicians. "A
vicious circle!" you will perhaps say. I should rather describe
it as an example of the process known by mathematicians as the
method of successive approximation.--BOCHER, MAXIME.

                         _Bulletin of the American Mathematical
                         Society, Vol. 11, p. 120._


=1314.= Whatever advantage can be attributed to logic in
directing and strengthening the action of the understanding is
found in a higher degree in mathematical study, with the
immense added advantage of a determinate subject, distinctly
circumscribed, admitting of the utmost precision, and free from
the danger which is inherent in all abstract logic,--of
leading to useless and puerile rules, or to vain ontological
speculations. The positive method, being everywhere identical, is
as much at home in the art of reasoning as anywhere else: and
this is why no science, whether biology or any other, can offer
any kind of reasoning, of which mathematics does not supply a
simpler and purer counterpart. Thus, we are enabled to eliminate
the only remaining portion of the old philosophy which could even
appear to offer any real utility; the logical part, the value of
which is irrevocably absorbed by mathematical science.--COMTE, A.

                         _Positive Philosophy [Martineau],
                         (London, 1875), Vol. 1, pp. 321-322._


=1315.= We know that mathematicians care no more for logic than
logicians for mathematics. The two eyes of exact science are
mathematics and logic: the mathematical sect puts out the logical
eye, the logical sect puts out the mathematical eye; each
believing that it can see better with one eye than with two.

                                                  --DE MORGAN, A.

                         _Quoted in F. Cajori: History of
                         Mathematics (New York, 1897), p. 316._


=1316.= The progress of the art of rational discovery depends in a
great part upon the art of characteristic (ars characteristica).
The reason why people usually seek demonstrations only in numbers
and lines and things represented by these is none other than that
there are not, outside of numbers, convenient characters
corresponding to the notions.--LEIBNITZ, G. W.

                         _Philosophische Schriften [Gerhardt] Bd.
                         8, p. 198._


=1317.= The influence of the mathematics of Leibnitz upon his
philosophy appears chiefly in connection with his law of
continuity and his prolonged efforts to establish a Logical
Calculus.... To find a Logical Calculus (implying a universal
philosophical language or system of signs) is an attempt to apply
in theological and philosophical investigations an analytic
method analogous to that which had proved so successful in
Geometry and Physics. It seemed to Leibnitz that if all the
complex and apparently disconnected ideas which make up our
knowledge could be analysed into their simple elements, and if
these elements could each be represented by a definite sign, we
should have a kind of "alphabet of human thoughts." By the
combination of these signs (letters of the alphabet of thought) a
system of true knowledge would be built up, in which reality
would be more and more adequately represented or symbolized....
In many cases the analysis may result in an infinite series of
elements; but the principles of the Infinitesimal Calculus in
mathematics have shown that this does not necessarily render
calculation impossible or inaccurate. Thus it seemed to Leibnitz
that a synthetic calculus, based upon a thorough analysis, would
be the most effective instrument of knowledge that could be
devised. "I feel," he says, "that controversies can never be
finished, nor silence imposed upon the Sects, unless we give up
complicated reasonings in favor of simple _calculations_, words
of vague and uncertain meaning in favor of fixed symbols." Thus
it will appear that "every paralogism is nothing but _an error of
calculation_." "When controversies arise, there will be no more
necessity of disputation between two philosophers than between
two accountants. Nothing will be needed but that they should take
pen in hand, sit down with their counting-tables, and (having
summoned a friend, if they like) say to one another: _Let us
calculate_."--LATTA, ROBERT.

                         _Leibnitz, The Monadology, etc. (Oxford,
                         1898), p. 85._


=1318.= Pure mathematics was discovered by Boole in a work which
he called "The Laws of Thought".... His work was concerned with
formal logic, and this is the same thing as mathematics.

                                             --RUSSELL, BERTRAND.

                         _International Monthly, 1901, p. 83._


=1319.= Mathematics is but the higher development of Symbolic
Logic.--WHETHAM, W. C. D.

                         _Recent Development of Physical Science
                         (Philadelphia, 1904), p. 34._


=1320.= Symbolic Logic has been disowned by many logicians
on the plea that its interest is mathematical, and by many
mathematicians on the plea that its interest is logical.

                                               --WHITEHEAD, A. N.

                         _Universal Algebra (Cambridge, 1898),
                         Preface, p. 6._


=1321.= ... the two great components of the critical movement,
though distinct in origin and following separate paths, are found
to converge at last in the thesis: Symbolic Logic is Mathematics,
Mathematics is Symbolic Logic, the twain are one.--KEYSER, C. J.

                         _Lectures on Science, Philosophy and Art
                         (New York, 1908), p. 19._


=1322.= The emancipation of logic from the yoke of Aristotle very
much resembles the emancipation of geometry from the bondage of
Euclid; and, by its subsequent growth and diversification, logic,
less abundantly perhaps but not less certainly than geometry, has
illustrated the blessings of freedom.--KEYSER, C. J.

                         _Science, Vol. 35 (1912), p. 108._


=1323.= I would express it as my personal view, which is probably
not yet shared generally, that pure mathematics seems to me
merely a _branch of general logic_; that branch which is based on
the concept of _numbers_, to whose economic advantages is to be
attributed the tremendous development which this particular
branch has undergone as compared with the remaining branches of
logic, which until the most recent times have remained almost
stationary.--SCHROeDER, E.

                         _Ueber Pasigraphie etc.; Verhandlungen
                         des 1. Internationalen
                         Mathematiker-Kongresses (Leipzig, 1898),
                         p. 149._


=1324.= If logical training is to consist, not in repeating
barbarous scholastic formulas or mechanically tacking together
empty majors and minors, but in acquiring dexterity in the use of
trustworthy methods of advancing from the known to the unknown,
then mathematical investigation must ever remain one of its most
indispensable instruments. Once inured to the habit of accurately
imagining abstract relations, recognizing the true value of
symbolic conceptions, and familiarized with a fixed standard of
proof, the mind is equipped for the consideration of quite other
objects than lines and angles. The twin treatises of Adam Smith
on social science, wherein, by deducing all human phenomena first
from the unchecked action of selfishness and then from the
unchecked action of sympathy, he arrives at mutually-limiting
conclusions of transcendent practical importance, furnish for all
time a brilliant illustration of the value of mathematical
methods and mathematical discipline.--FISKE, JOHN.

                         _Darwinism and other Essays (Boston,
                         1893), pp. 297-298._


=1325.= No irrational exaggeration of the claims of Mathematics
can ever deprive that part of philosophy of the property of being
the natural basis of all logical education, through its
simplicity, abstractness, generality, and freedom from
disturbance by human passion. There, and there alone, we find in
full development the art of reasoning, all the resources of
which, from the most spontaneous to the most sublime, are
continually applied with far more variety and fruitfulness than
elsewhere;.... The more abstract portion of mathematics may in
fact be regarded as an immense repository of logical resources,
ready for use in scientific deduction and co-ordination.

                                                      --COMTE, A.

                         _Positive Philosophy [Martineau],
                         (London, 1875), Vol. 2, p. 439._


=1326.= Logic it is called [referring to Whitehead and Russell's
Principia Mathematica] and logic it is, the logic of propositions
and functions and classes and relations, by far the greatest (not
merely the biggest) logic that our planet has produced, so much
that is new in matter and in manner; but it is also mathematics,
a prolegomenon to the science, yet itself mathematics in its most
genuine sense, differing from other parts of the science only in
the respects that it surpasses these in fundamentality,
