about a quarter of a million miles. What is the base line in this case?

4. THE HORIZON--ALTITUDES.--In their observations astronomers and
sailors make much use of the _plane of the horizon_, and practically any
flat and level surface, such as that of a smooth pond, may be regarded
as a part of this plane and used as such. A very common observation
relating to the plane of the horizon is called "taking the sun's
altitude," and consists in measuring the angle between the sun's rays
and the plane of the horizon upon which they fall. This angle between a
line and a plane appears slightly different from the angle between two
lines, but is really the same thing, since it means the angle between
the sun's rays and a line drawn in the plane of the horizon toward the
point directly under the sun. Compare this with the definition given in
the geographies, "The latitude of a point on the earth's surface is its
angular distance north or south of the equator," and note that the
latitude is the angle between the plane of the equator and a line drawn
from the earth's center to the given point on its surface.

A convenient method of obtaining a part of the plane of the horizon for
use in observation is as follows: Place a slate or a pane of glass upon
a table in the sunshine. Slightly moisten its whole surface and then
pour a little more water upon it near the center. If the water runs
toward one side, thrust the edge of a thin wooden wedge under this side
and block it up until the water shows no tendency to run one way rather
than another; it is then level and a part of the plane of the horizon.
Get several wedges ready before commencing the experiment. After they
have been properly placed, drive a pin or tack behind each one so that
it may not slip.

5. TAKING THE SUN'S ALTITUDE. EXERCISE 4.--Prepare a piece of board 20
centimeters, or more, square, planed smooth on one face and one edge.
Drive a pin perpendicularly into the face of the board, near the middle
of the planed edge. Set the board on edge on the horizon plane and turn
it edgewise toward the sun so that a shadow of the pin is cast on the
plane. Stick another pin into the board, near its upper edge, so that
its shadow shall fall exactly upon the shadow of the first pin, and with
a watch or clock observe the time at which the two shadows coincide.
Without lifting the board from the plane, turn it around so that the
opposite edge is directed toward the sun and set a third pin just as the
second one was placed, and again take the time. Remove the pins and draw
fine pencil lines, connecting the holes, as shown in Fig. 4, and with
the protractor measure the angle thus marked. The student who has
studied elementary geometry should be able to demonstrate that at the
mean of the two recorded times the sun's altitude was equal to one half
of the angle measured in the figure.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.--Taking the sun's altitude.]

When the board is turned edgewise toward the sun so that its shadow is
as thin as possible, rule a pencil line alongside it on the horizon
plane. The angle which this line makes with a line pointing due south is
called the sun's _azimuth_. When the sun is south, its azimuth is zero;
when west, it is 90°; when east, 270°, etc.

EXERCISE 5.--Let a number of different students take the sun's altitude
during both the morning and afternoon session and note the time of each
observation, to the nearest minute. Verify the setting of the plane of
the horizon from time to time, to make sure that no change has occurred
in it.

6. GRAPHICAL REPRESENTATIONS.--Make a graph (drawing) of all the
observations, similar to Fig. 5, and find by bisecting a set of chords
_g_ to _g_, _e_ to _e_, _d_ to _d_, drawn parallel to _B B_, the time at
which the sun's altitude was greatest. In Fig. 5 we see from the
intersection of _M M_ with _B B_ that this time was 11h. 50m.

The method of graphs which is here introduced is of great importance in
physical science, and the student should carefully observe in Fig. 5
that the line _B B_ is a scale of times, which may be made long or
short, provided only the intervals between consecutive hours 9 to 10, 10
to 11, 11 to 12, etc., are equal. The distance of each little circle
from _B B_ is taken proportional to the sun's altitude, and may be upon
any desired scale--e. g., a millimeter to a degree--provided the same
scale is used for all observations. Each circle is placed accurately
over that part of the base line which corresponds to the time at which
the altitude was taken. Square ruled paper is very convenient, although
not necessary, for such diagrams. It is especially to be noted that from
the few observations which are represented in the figure a smooth curve
has been drawn through the circles which represent the sun's altitude,
and this curve shows the altitude of the sun at every moment between 9
A. M. and 3 P. M. In Fig. 5 the sun's altitude at noon was 57°. What was
it at half past two?

[Illustration: FIG. 5.--A graph of the sun's altitude.]

7. DIAMETER OF A DISTANT OBJECT.--By sighting over a protractor, measure
the angle between imaginary lines drawn from it to the opposite sides of
a window. Carry the protractor farther away from the window and repeat
the experiment, to see how much the angle changes. The angle thus
measured is called "the angle subtended" by the window at the place
where the measurement was made. If this place was squarely in front of
the window we may draw upon paper an angle equal to the measured one and
lay off from the vertex along its sides a distance proportional to the
distance of the window--e. g., a millimeter for each centimeter of real
distance. If a cross line be now drawn connecting the points thus found,
its length will be proportional to the width of the window, and the
width may be read off to scale, a centimeter for every millimeter in the
length of the cross line.

The astronomer who measures with an appropriate instrument the angle
subtended by the moon may in an entirely similar manner find the moon's
diameter and has, in fact, found it to be 2,163 miles. Can the same
method be used to find the diameter of the sun? A planet? The earth?




CHAPTER II

THE STARS AND THEIR DIURNAL MOTION


8. THE STARS.--From the very beginning of his study in astronomy, and as
frequently as possible, the student should practice watching the stars
by night, to become acquainted with the constellations and their
movements. As an introduction to this study he may face toward the
north, and compare the stars which he sees in that part of the sky with
the map of the northern heavens, given on Plate I, opposite page 124.
Turn the map around, upside down if necessary, until the stars upon it
match the brighter ones in the sky. Note how the stars are grouped in
such conspicuous constellations as the Big Dipper (Ursa Major), the
Little Dipper (Ursa Minor), and Cassiopeia. These three constellations
should be learned so that they can be recognized at any time.

_The names of the stars._--Facing the star map is a key which contains
the names of the more important constellations and the names of the
brighter stars in their constellations. These names are for the most
part a Greek letter prefixed to the genitive case of the Latin name of
the constellation. (See the Greek alphabet printed at the end of the
book.)

9. MAGNITUDES OF THE STARS.--Nearly nineteen centuries ago St. Paul
noted that "one star differeth from another star in glory," and no more
apt words can be found to mark the difference of brightness which the
stars present. Even prior to St. Paul's day the ancient Greek
astronomers had divided the stars in respect of brightness into six
groups, which the modern astronomers still use, calling each group a
_magnitude_. Thus a few of the brightest stars are said to be of the
first magnitude, the great mass of faint ones which are just visible to
the unaided eye are said to be of the sixth magnitude, and intermediate
degrees of brilliancy are represented by the intermediate magnitudes,
second, third, fourth, and fifth. The student must not be misled by the
word magnitude. It has no reference to the size of the stars, but only
to their brightness, and on the star maps of this book the larger and
smaller circles by which the stars are represented indicate only the
brightness of the stars according to the system of magnitudes. Following
the indications of these maps, the student should, in learning the
principal stars and constellations, learn also to recognize how bright
is a star of the second, fourth, or other magnitude.

10. OBSERVING THE STARS.--Find on the map and in the sky the stars
[a] Ursæ Minoris, [a] Ursæ Majoris, [b] Ursæ Majoris. What geometrical
figure will fit on to these stars? In addition to its regular name,
[a] Ursæ Minoris is frequently called by the special name Polaris, or
the pole star. Why are the other two stars called "the Pointers"? What
letter of the alphabet do the five bright stars in Cassiopeia suggest?

EXERCISE 6.--Stand in such a position that Polaris is just hidden behind
the corner of a building or some other vertical line, and mark upon the
key map as accurately as possible the position of this line with respect
to the other stars, showing which stars are to the right and which are
to the left of it. Record the time (date, hour, and minute) at which
this observation was made. An hour or two later repeat the observation
at the same place, draw the line and note the time, and you will find
that the line last drawn upon the map does not agree with the first one.
The stars have changed their positions, and with respect to the vertical
line the Pointers are now in a different direction from Polaris.
Measure with a protractor the angle between the two lines drawn in the
map, and use this angle and the recorded times of the observation to
find how many degrees per hour this direction is changing. It should be
about 15° per hour. If the observation were repeated 12 hours after the
first recorded time, what would be the position of the vertical line
among the stars? What would it be 24 hours later? A week later? Repeat
the observation on the next clear night, and allowing for the number of
whole revolutions made by the stars between the two dates, again
determine from the time interval a more accurate value of the rate at
which the stars move.

The motion of the stars which the student has here detected is called
their "diurnal" motion. What is the significance of the word diurnal?

In the preceding paragraph there is introduced a method of great
importance in astronomical practice--i. e., determining something--in
this case the rate per hour, from observations separated by a long
interval of time, in order to get a more accurate value than could be
found from a short interval. Why is it more accurate? To determine the
rate at which the planet Mars rotates about its axis, astronomers use
observations separated by an interval of more than 200 years, during
which the planet made more than 75,000 revolutions upon its axis. If we
were to write out in algebraic form an equation for determining the
length of one revolution of Mars about its axis, the large number,
75,000, would appear in the equation as a divisor, and in the final
result would greatly reduce whatever errors existed in the observations
employed.

Repeat Exercise 6 night after night, and note whether the stars come
back to the same position at the same hour and minute every night.

[Illustration: FIG. 6. The plumb-line apparatus.]

[Illustration: FIG. 7. The plumb-line apparatus.]

11. THE PLUMB-LINE APPARATUS.--This experiment, and many others, may be
conveniently and accurately made with no other apparatus than a plumb
line, and a device for sighting past it. In Figs. 6 and 7 there is
shown a simple form of such apparatus, consisting essentially of a board
which rests in a horizontal position upon the points of three screws
that pass through it. This board carries a small box, to one side of
which is nailed in vertical position another board 5 or 6 feet long to
carry the plumb line. This consists of a wire or fish line with any
heavy weight--e. g., a brick or flatiron--tied to its lower end and
immersed in a vessel of water placed inside the box, so as to check any
swinging motion of the weight. In the cover of the box is a small hole
through which the wire passes, and by turning the screws in the
baseboard the apparatus may be readily leveled, so that the wire shall
swing freely in the center of the hole without touching the cover of the
box. Guy wires, shown in the figure, are applied so as to stiffen the
whole apparatus. A board with a screw eye at each end may be pivoted to
the upright, as in Fig. 6, for measuring altitudes; or to the box, as in
Fig. 7, for observing the time at which a star in its diurnal motion
passes through the plane determined by the plumb line and the center of
the screw eye through which the observer looks.

The whole apparatus may be constructed by any person of ordinary
mechanical skill at a very small cost, and it or something equivalent
should be provided for every class beginning observational astronomy. To
use the apparatus for the experiment of § 10, it should be leveled, and
the board with the screw eyes, attached as in Fig. 7, should be turned
until the observer, looking through the screw eye, sees Polaris exactly
behind the wire. Use a bicycle lamp to illumine the wire by night. The
apparatus is now adjusted, and the observer has only to wait for the
stars which he desires to observe, and to note by his watch the time at
which they pass behind the wire. It will be seen that the wire takes the
place of the vertical edge of the building, and that the board with the
screw eyes is introduced solely to keep the observer in the right place
relative to the wire.

12. A SIDEREAL CLOCK.--Clocks are sometimes so made and regulated that
they show always the same hour and minute when the stars come back to
the same place, and such a timepiece is called a sidereal clock--i. e.,
a star-time clock. Would such a clock gain or lose in comparison with an
ordinary watch? Could an ordinary watch be turned into a sidereal watch
by moving the regulator?

[Illustration: FIG. 8.--Photographing the circumpolar stars.--BARNARD.]

13. PHOTOGRAPHING THE STARS.--EXERCISE 7.--For any student who uses a
camera. Upon some clear and moonless night point the camera, properly
focused, at Polaris, and expose a plate for three or four hours. Upon
developing the plate you should find a series of circular trails such as
are shown in Fig. 8, only longer. Each one of these is produced by a
star moving slowly over the plate, in consequence of its changing
position in the sky. The center indicated by these curved trails is
called the pole of the heavens. It is that part of the sky toward which
is pointed the axis about which the earth rotates, and the motion of the
stars around the center is only an apparent motion due to the rotation
of the earth which daily carries the observer and his camera around this
axis while the stars stand still, just as trees and fences and telegraph
poles stand still, although to the passenger upon a railway train they
appear to be in rapid motion. So far as simple observations are
concerned, there is no method by which the pupil can tell for himself
that the motion of the stars is an apparent rather than a real one, and,
following the custom of astronomers, we shall habitually speak as if it
were a real movement of the stars. How long was the plate exposed in
photographing Fig. 8?

14. FINDING THE STARS.--On Plate I, opposite page 124, the pole of the
heavens is at the center of the map, near Polaris, and the heavy trail
near the center of Fig. 8 is made by Polaris. See if you can identify
from the map any of the stars whose trails show in the photograph. The
brighter the star the bolder and heavier its trail.

Find from the map and locate in the sky the two bright stars Capella and
Vega, which are on opposite sides of Polaris and nearly equidistant from
it. Do these stars share in the motion around the pole? Are they visible
on every clear night, and all night?

Observe other bright stars farther from Polaris than are Vega and
Capella and note their movement. Do they move like the sun and moon? Do
they rise and set?

In what part of the sky do the stars move most rapidly, near the pole or
far from it?

How long does it take the fastest moving stars to make the circuit of
the sky and come back to the same place? How long does it take the slow
stars?

15. RISING AND SETTING OF THE STARS.--A study of the sky along the lines
indicated in these questions will show that there is a considerable part
of it surrounding the pole whose stars are visible on every clear night.
The same star is sometimes high in the sky, sometimes low, sometimes to
the east of the pole and at other times west of it, but is always above
the horizon. Such stars are said to be circumpolar. A little farther
from the pole each star, when at the lowest point of its circular path,
dips for a time below the horizon and is lost to view, and the farther
it is away from the pole the longer does it remain invisible, until, in
the case of stars 90° away from the pole, we find them hidden below the
horizon for twelve hours out of every twenty-four (see Fig. 9). The sun
is such a star, and in its rising and setting acts precisely as does
every other star at a similar distance from the pole--only, as we shall
find later, each star keeps always at (nearly) the same distance from
the pole, while the sun in the course of a year changes its distance
from the pole very greatly, and thus changes the amount of time it
spends above and below the horizon, producing in this way the long days
of summer and the short ones of winter.

[Illustration: FIG. 9.--Diurnal motion of the northern constellations.]

How much time do stars which are more than 90° from the pole spend above
the horizon?

We say in common speech that the sun rises in the east, but this is
strictly true only at the time when it is 90° distant from the
pole--i. e., in March and September. At other seasons it rises north or
south of east according as its distance from the pole is less or greater
than 90°, and the same is true for the stars.

16. THE GEOGRAPHY OF THE SKY.--Find from a map the latitude and
longitude of your schoolhouse. Find on the map the place whose latitude
is 39° and longitude 77° west of the meridian of Greenwich. Is there any
other place in the world which has the same latitude and longitude as
your schoolhouse?

The places of the stars in the sky are located in exactly the manner
which is illustrated by these geographical questions, only different
names are used. Instead of latitude the astronomer says _declination_,
in place of longitude he says _right ascension_, in place of meridian he
says _hour circle_, but he means by these new names the same ideas that
the geographer expresses by the old ones.

Imagine the earth swollen up until it fills the whole sky; the earth's
equator would meet the sky along a line (a great circle) everywhere 90°
distant from the pole, and this line is called the _celestial equator_.
Trace its position along the middle of the map opposite page 190 and
notice near what stars it runs. Every meridian of the swollen earth
would touch the sky along an hour circle--i. e., a great circle passing
through the pole and therefore perpendicular to the equator. Note that
in the map one of these hour circles is marked 0. It plays the same part
in measuring right ascensions as does the meridian of Greenwich in
measuring longitudes; it is the beginning, from which they are reckoned.
Note also, at the extreme left end of the map, the four bright stars in
the form of a square, one side of which is parallel and close to the
hour circle, which is marked 0. This is familiarly called the Great
Square in Pegasus, and may be found high up in the southern sky whenever
the Big Dipper lies below the pole. Why can it not be seen when Ursa
Major is above the pole?

Astronomers use the right ascensions of the stars not only to tell in
what part of the sky the star is placed, but also in time reckonings, to
regulate their sidereal clocks, and with regard to this use they find
it convenient to express right ascension not in degrees but in hours,
24 of which fill up the circuit of the sky and each of which is equal
to 15° of arc, 24 × 15 = 360. The right ascension of Capella is
5h. 9m. = 77.2°, but the student should accustom himself to using it
in hours and minutes as given and not to change it into degrees. He
should also note that some stars lie on the side of the celestial
equator toward Polaris, and others are on the opposite side, so that the
astronomer has to distinguish between north declinations and south
declinations, just as the geographer distinguishes between north
latitudes and south latitudes. This is done by the use of the + and -
signs, a + denoting that the star lies north of the celestial equator,
i. e., toward Polaris.

[Illustration: FIG. 10.--From a photograph of the Pleiades.]

Find on Plate II, opposite page 190, the Pleiades (Pl[=e]ad[=e]s),
R. A. = 3h. 42m., Dec. = +23.8°. Why do they not show on Plate I,
opposite page 124? In what direction are they from Polaris? This is one
of the finest star clusters in the sky, but it needs a telescope to
bring out its richness. See how many stars you can count in it with the
naked eye, and afterward examine it with an opera glass. Compare what
you see with Fig. 10. Find Antares, R. A. = 16h. 23m. Dec. = -26.2°. How
far is it, in degrees, from the pole? Is it visible in your sky? If so,
what is its color?

Find the R. A. and Dec. of [a] Ursæ Majoris; of [b] Ursæ Majoris; of
Polaris. Find the Northern Crown, _Corona Borealis_, R. A. = 15h. 30m.,
Dec. = +27.0°; the Beehive, _Præsepe_, R. A. = 8h. 33m., Dec. = +20.4°.

These should be looked up, not only on the map, but also in the sky.

17. REFERENCE LINES AND CIRCLES.--As the stars move across the sky in
their diurnal motion, they carry the framework of hour circles and
equator with them, so that the right ascension and declination of each
star remain unchanged by this motion, just as longitudes and latitudes
remain unchanged by the earth's rotation. They are the same when a star
is rising and when it is setting; when it is above the pole and when it
is below it. During each day the hour circle of every star in the
heavens passes overhead, and at the moment when any particular hour
circle is exactly overhead all the stars which lie upon it are said to
be "on the meridian"--i. e., at that particular moment they stand
directly over the observer's geographical meridian and upon the
corresponding celestial meridian.

An eye placed at the center of the earth and capable of looking through
its solid substance would see your geographical meridian against the
