The fellow had dived that incredible distance and come up unharmed!

I called to him to await us below, assuring him that he need have no
fear of my weapon, since it would harm only my enemies.  He shook his
head and mut-tered something which I could not hear at so great a
distance; but when I pushed him he promised to wait for us.  At the
same instant Dian caught my arm and pointed toward the village.  My
shot had brought a crowd of natives on the run toward us.

The fellow whom I had stunned with my javelin had regained
consciousness and scrambled to his feet.  He was now racing as fast as
he could go back toward his people.  It looked mighty dark for Dian and
me with that ghastly descent between us and even the beginnings of
liberty, and a horde of savage enemies advancing at a rapid run.

There was but one hope.  That was to get Dian started for the bottom
without delay.  I took her in my arms just for an instant--I felt,
somehow, that it might be for the last time.  For the life of me I
couldn't see how both of us could escape.

I asked her if she could make the descent alone--if she were not
afraid.  She smiled up at me bravely and shrugged her shoulders.  She
afraid! So beautiful is she that I am always having difficulty in
remembering that she is a primitive, half-savage cave girl of the stone
age, and often find myself mentally limiting her capacities to those of
the effete and overcivilized beauties of the outer crust.

"And you?" she asked as she swung over the edge of the cliff.

"I shall follow you after I take a shot or two at our friends," I
replied.  "I just want to give them a taste of this new medicine which
is going to cure Pellucidar of all its ills.  That will stop them long
enough for me to join you.  Now hurry, and tell Juag to be ready to
shove off the moment I reach the boat, or the instant that it becomes
apparent that I cannot reach it.

"You, Dian, must return to Sari if anything happens to me, that you may
devote your life to carrying out with Perry the hopes and plans for
Pellucidar that are so dear to my heart.  Promise me, dear."

She hated to promise to desert me, nor would she; only shaking her head
and making no move to descend.  The tribesmen were nearing us.  Juag
was shouting up to us from below.  It was evident that he realized from
my actions that I was attempting to persuade Dian to descend, and that
grave danger threatened us from above.

"Dive!" he cried.  "Dive!"

I looked at Dian and then down at the abyss below us. The cove appeared
no larger than a saucer.  How Juag ever had hit it I could not guess.

"Dive!" cried Juag.  "It is the only way--there is no time to climb
down."



CHAPTER XI

ESCAPE

Dian glanced downward and shuddered.  Her tribe were hill people--they
were not accustomed to swimming other than in quiet rivers and placid
lakelets.  It was not the steep that appalled her.  It was the
ocean--vast, mysterious, terrible.

To dive into it from this great height was beyond her.  I couldn't
wonder, either.  To have attempted it myself seemed too preposterous
even for thought.  Only one consideration could have prompted me to
leap headforemost from that giddy height--suicide; or at least so I
thought at the moment.

"Quick!" I urged Dian.  "You cannot dive; but I can hold them until you
reach safety."

"And you?" she asked once more.  "Can you dive when they come too
close? Otherwise you could not escape if you waited here until I
reached the bottom."

I saw that she would not leave me unless she thought that I could make
that frightful dive as we had seen Juag make it.  I glanced once
downward; then with a mental shrug I assured her that I would dive the
moment that she reached the boat.  Satisfied, she began the descent
carefully, yet swiftly.  I watched her for a moment, my heart in my
mouth lest some slight mis-step or the slipping of a finger-hold should
pitch her to a frightful death upon the rocks below.

Then I turned toward the advancing Hoojans--"Hoosiers," Perry dubbed
them--even going so far as to christen this island where Hooja held
sway Indiana; it is so marked now upon our maps.  They were coming on
at a great rate.  I raised my revolver, took deliberate aim at the
foremost warrior, and pulled the trigger.  With the bark of the gun the
fellow lunged forward.  His head doubled beneath him.  He rolled over
and over two or three times before he came to a stop, to lie very
quietly in the thick grass among the brilliant wild flowers.

Those behind him halted.  One of them hurled a javelin toward me, but
it fell short--they were just beyond javelin-range.  There were two
armed with bows and arrows; these I kept my eyes on.  All of them
appeared awe-struck and frightened by the sound and effect of the
firearm.  They kept looking from the corpse to me and jabbering among
themselves.

I took advantage of the lull in hostilities to throw a quick glance
over the edge toward Dian.  She was half-way down the cliff and
progressing finely.  Then I turned back toward the enemy.  One of the
bowmen was fitting an arrow to his bow.  I raised my hand.

"Stop!" I cried.  "Whoever shoots at me or advances toward me I shall
kill as I killed him!"

I pointed at the dead man.  The fellow lowered his bow.  Again there
was animated discussion.  I could see that those who were not armed
with bows were urging something upon the two who were.

At last the majority appeared to prevail, for simu-taneously the two
archers raised their weapons.  At the same instant I fired at one of
them, dropping him in his tracks.  The other, however, launched his
missile, but the report of my gun had given him such a start that the
arrow flew wild above my head.  A second after and he, too, was
sprawled upon the sward with a round hole between his eyes.  It had
been a rather good shot.

I glanced over the edge again.  Dian was almost at the bottom.  I could
see Juag standing just beneath her with his hands upstretched to assist
her.

A sullen roar from the warriors recalled my attention toward them.
They stood shaking their fists at me and yelling insults.  From the
direction of the village I saw a single warrior coming to join them.
He was a huge fellow, and when he strode among them I could tell by his
bearing and their deference toward him that he was a chieftain.  He
listened to all they had to tell of the happenings of the last few
minutes; then with a command and a roar he started for me with the
whole pack at his heels.  All they had needed had arrived--namely, a
brave leader.

I had two unfired cartridges in the chambers of my gun.  I let the big
warrior have one of them, thinking that his death would stop them all.
But I guess they were worked up to such a frenzy of rage by this time
that nothing would have stopped them.  At any rate, they only yelled
the louder as he fell and increased their speed toward me.  I dropped
another with my remaining cartridge.

Then they were upon me--or almost.  I thought of my promise to
Dian--the awful abyss was behind me--a big devil with a huge bludgeon
in front of me.  I grasped my six-shooter by the barrel and hurled it
squarely in his face with all my strength.

Then, without waiting to learn the effect of my throw, I wheeled, ran
the few steps to the edge, and leaped as far out over that frightful
chasm as I could.  I know something of diving, and all that I know I
put into that dive, which I was positive would be my last.

For a couple of hundred feet I fell in horizontal position. The
momentum I gained was terrific.  I could feel the air almost as a solid
body, so swiftly I hurtled through it.  Then my position gradually
changed to the vertical, and with hands outstretched I slipped through
the air, cleaving it like a flying arrow.  Just before I struck the
water a perfect shower of javelins fell all about.  My enemies had
rushed to the brink and hurled their weapons after me.  By a miracle I
was untouched.

In the final instant I saw that I had cleared the rocks and was going
to strike the water fairly.  Then I was in and plumbing the depths.  I
suppose I didn't really go very far down, but it seemed to me that I
should never stop.  When at last I dared curve my hands upward and
divert my progress toward the surface, I thought that I should explode
for air before I ever saw the sun again except through a swirl of
water.  But at last my head popped above the waves, and I filled my
lungs with air.

Before me was the boat, from which Juag and Dian were clambering.  I
couldn't understand why they were deserting it now, when we were about
to set out for the mainland in it; but when I reached its side I
understood.  Two heavy javelins, missing Dian and Juag by but a hair's
breadth, had sunk deep into the bottom of the dugout in a straight line
with the grain of the wood, and split her almost in two from stem to
stern.  She was useless.

Juag was leaning over a near-by rock, his hand out-stretched to aid me
in clambering to his side; nor did I lose any time in availing myself
of his proffered assistance.  An occasional javelin was still dropping
perilously close to us, so we hastened to draw as close as possible to
the cliffside, where we were comparatively safe from the missiles.

Here we held a brief conference, in which it was decided that our only
hope now lay in making for the opposite end of the island as quickly as
we could, and utilizing the boat that I had hidden there, to continue
our journey to the mainland.

Gathering up three of the least damaged javelins that had fallen about
us, we set out upon our journey, keeping well toward the south side of
the island, which Juag said was less frequented by the Hoojans than the
central portion where the river ran.  I think that this ruse must have
thrown our pursuers off our track, since we saw nothing of them nor
heard any sound of pursuit during the greater portion of our march the
length of the island.

But the way Juag had chosen was rough and round-about, so that we
consumed one or two more marches in covering the distance than if we
had followed the river.  This it was which proved our undoing.

Those who sought us must have sent a party up the river immediately
after we escaped; for when we came at last onto the river-trail not far
from our destination, there can be no doubt but that we were seen by
Hoojans who were just ahead of us on the stream.  The result was that
as we were passing through a clump of bush a score of warriors leaped
out upon us, and before we could scarce strike a blow in defense, had
disarmed and bound us.

For a time thereafter I seemed to be entirely bereft of hope.  I could
see no ray of promise in the future--only immediate death for Juag and
me, which didn't concern me much in the face of what lay in store for
Dian.

Poor child! What an awful life she had led! From the moment that I had
first seen her chained in the slave caravan of the Mahars until now, a
prisoner of a no less cruel creature, I could recall but a few brief
intervals of peace and quiet in her tempestuous existence.  Before I
had known her, Jubal the Ugly One had pursued her across a savage world
to make her his mate.  She had eluded him, and finally I had slain him;
but terror and privations, and exposure to fierce beasts had haunted
her footsteps during all her lonely flight from him.  And when I had
returned to the outer world the old trials had recommenced with Hooja
in Jubal's role.  I could almost have wished for death to vouchsafe her
that peace which fate seemed to deny her in this life.

I spoke to her on the subject, suggesting that we expire together.

"Do not fear, David," she replied.  "I shall end my life before ever
Hooja can harm me; but first I shall see that Hooja dies."

She drew from her breast a little leathern thong, to the end of which
was fastened a tiny pouch.

"What have you there?" I asked.

"Do you recall that time you stepped upon the thing you call viper in
your world?" she asked.

I nodded.

"The accident gave you the idea for the poisoned arrows with which we
fitted the warriors of the empire," she continued.  "And, too, it gave
me an idea.  For a long time I have carried a viper's fang in my bosom.
It has given me strength to endure many dangers, for it has always
assured me immunity from the ultimate insult.  I am not ready to die
yet.  First let Hooja embrace the viper's fang."

So we did not die together, and I am glad now that we did not.  It is
always a foolish thing to contemplate suicide; for no matter how dark
the future may appear today, tomorrow may hold for us that which will
alter our whole life in an instant, revealing to us nothing but
sunshine and happiness.  So, for my part, I shall always wait for
tomorrow.

In Pellucidar, where it is always today, the wait may not be so long,
and so it proved for us.  As we were passing a lofty, flat-topped hill
through a park-like wood a perfect network of fiber ropes fell suddenly
about our guard, enmeshing them.  A moment later a horde of our
friends, the hairy gorilla-men, with the mild eyes and long faces of
sheep leaped among them.

It was a very interesting fight.  I was sorry that my bonds prevented
me from taking part in it, but I urged on the brutemen with my voice,
and cheered old Gr-gr-gr, their chief, each time that his mighty jaws
crunched out the life of a Hoojan.  When the battle was over we found
that a few of our captors had escaped, but the majority of them lay
dead about us.  The gorilla-men paid no further attention to them.
Gr-gr-gr turned to me.

"Gr-gr-gr and all his people are your friends," he said.  "One saw the
warriors of the Sly One and followed them.  He saw them capture you,
and then he flew to the village as fast as he could go and told me all
that he had seen.  The rest you know.  You did much for Gr-gr-gr and
Gr-gr-gr's people.  We shall always do much for you."

I thanked him; and when I had told him of our escape and our
destination, he insisted on accompanying us to the sea with a great
number of his fierce males.  Nor were we at all loath to accept his
escort.  We found the canoe where I had hidden it, and bidding Gr-gr-gr
and his warriors farewell, the three of us embarked for the mainland.

I questioned Juag upon the feasibility of attempting to cross to the
mouth of the great river of which he had told me, and up which he said
we might paddle almost to Sari; but he urged me not to attempt it,
since we had but a single paddle and no water or food.  I had to admit
the wisdom of his advice, but the desire to explore this great waterway
was strong upon me, arousing in me at last a determination to make the
attempt after first gaining the mainland and rectifying our
deficiencies.

We landed several miles north of Thuria in a little cove that seemed to
offer protection from the heavier seas which sometimes run, even upon
these usually pacific oceans of Pellucidar.  Here I outlined to Dian
and Juag the plans I had in mind.  They were to fit the canoe with a
small sail, the purposes of which I had to explain to them both--since
neither had ever seen or heard of such a contrivance before.  Then they
were to hunt for food which we could transport with us, and prepare a
receptacle for water.

These two latter items were more in Juag's line, but he kept muttering
about the sail and the wind for a long time.  I could see that he was
not even half convinced that any such ridiculous contraption could make
a canoe move through the water.

We hunted near the coast for a while, but were not rewarded with any
particular luck.  Finally we decided to hide the canoe and strike
inland in search of game.  At Juag's suggestion we dug a hole in the
sand at the upper edge of the beach and buried the craft, smoothing the
surface over nicely and throwing aside the excess material we had
excavated.  Then we set out away from the sea.  Traveling in Thuria is
less arduous than under the midday sun which perpetually glares down on
the rest of Pellucidar's surface; but it has its draw-backs, one of
which is the depressing influence exerted by the everlasting shade of
the Land of Awful Shadow.

The farther inland we went the darker it became, until we were moving
at last through an endless twilight.  The vegetation here was sparse
and of a weird, colorless nature, though what did grow was wondrous in
shape and form.  Often we saw huge lidi, or beasts of burden, striding
across the dim landscape, browsing upon the grotesque vegetation or
drinking from the slow and sullen rivers that run down from the Lidi
Plains to empty into the sea in Thuria.

What we sought was either a thag--a sort of gigantic elk--or one of the
larger species of antelope, the flesh of either of which dries nicely
in the sun.  The bladder of the thag would make a fine water-bottle,
and its skin, I figured, would be a good sail.  We traveled a
considerable distance inland, entirely crossing the Land of Awful
Shadow and emerging at last upon that portion of the Lidi Plains which
lies in the pleasant sunlight.  Above us the pendent world revolved
upon its axis, filling me especially--and Dian to an almost equal
state--with wonder and insatiable curiosity as to what strange forms of
life existed among the hills and valleys and along the seas and rivers,
which we could plainly see.

