turned due north.

"Why, hello!" exclaimed his companion, "we're over water!"

"Yes," replied Dave, "it's the lake."

"Lake Superior!  Dave, are we going to cross it?"

"A good many times in the future probably, but not tonight.  I am
looking for a revolving light west of the city, right along the
coast."

"I'll keep a lookout, too."

The lake was here and there dotted with the signal lights of
steamers.  Along the shore, which Dave skirted closely, various
lights their met view.  Both boys strained their gaze.  Finally
Hiram called out sharply: "I see it, Dave."

"See what?"

"A revolving light."

"Where?"

"See, just beyond that little cluster of town lights--quite high
up."

"Yes," answered Dave in a tone of satisfaction.  "That is Rocky
Point lighthouse.  I know my bearings, now."

"Are you going to land, Dave?"

"Presently."

"But you're driving out further over the lake."

"Just for a short distance, Hiram," advised Dave.  "There's an
island down shore where they run a smelter--ah, I think I locate
it."

Dave was not mistaken.  He came within range of some tall, stacks
sending out sparks and flames.  Now he changed his course.  He kept
his glance fixed below him and to the right as steadily as his
duties at the lever would permit.

The Monarch II passed over two small islands.  Half a mile beyond
them arose a third larger one.  It was quite prominent, for the
reason, that it presented a range of great cliffs.  Dave navigated
the air in narrowing circles.  Then, timing and calculating a
volplane glide, he let the machine down easily to the ground.

"Well!" ejaculated Hiram, "you've hit on a pretty dark spot for a
camp, Dave."

"And a safe one," replied the young aviator.  "Mr. Alden described
this place to me.  It is called Desert Island, and has no
inhabitants on it.  It seems dark because we are so shut in, but
your eyes will soon become used to that."

It was a singular place into which the Monarch II had descended.
High declivitous, masses of rock formed a sort of immense cairn.
They seemed shut in on every side, fully one hundred feet below the
level of the cliffs.

The farther north they had run the cooler air currents had become.
Both boys felt somewhat chilly.

"See here," spoke Hiram, after they had seen that the machine was
all right and a rubber sheet thrown over the machinery to protect it
from the heavy night dews, "a warm cup coffee wouldn't hurt us."

"That's right, Hiram," agreed Dave.  "We are all shut in here, and
even a big fire wouldn't show from the land or the deck of a
passenger steamer.  You can try your hand at coffee making, if you
like."

"The coffee is all made, but cold, in these bottles," explained
Hiram, fishing out two from the accommodation basket.

There were both trees and bushes near by.  Hiram gathered some dry
branches and  roots and soon had a comfortable little campfire
going.  He poured out the coffee from the bottles into a tin water
pail, and soon had it steaming hot.  Sandwiches and some bakery
stuff Dave had bought at Ironton made a very satisfactory meal.
Then they spread some wraps over a heap of dried grass, which they
gathered up without much trouble.  They rested in luxurious ease,
watching the bright, snapping fire glow and feeling its genial
warmth.

"Well, this is just like Robinson Crusoe, isn't it, Dave?" asked
Hiram, with an air of great comfort.

"If you are a man Friday, then," rejoined the young aviator with a
smile, "you scout around in the morning and see if there are any
breaks in these great walls of rock shutting us in."

"Oh, then you're not counting an leaving here again by the air
route?" inquired Hiram in some surprise.

"Not in daylight.  I want to find some other way out for that.  You
see," explained Dave, "this is just an ideal spot as a rendezvous.
I want to get over to the city tomorrow, though, to attend to some
important business."

"How are you going to get there?"

"Why, I'll have to trust to my swimming skill, I guess," replied
Dave.

"Um-m," observed Hiram thoughtfully, and, if the young aviator had
been more watchful, he would have noticed that for the rest of the
evening his willing assistant seemed to have something on his mind.





CHAPTER XIX

THE SEARCHLIGHT


"Hallo!  Hallo!"

Dave made the echoes ring with the loud call as he moved up and down
and across the queer basin, or cairn, where they had landed in the
Monarch II the night previous.

He had awakened just at daylight to find Hiram Dobbs mysteriously
missing.  Dave was not worried at the first, but as he looked around
and then explored the immediate neighborhood, he began to get
mystified, if not alarmed.

Neither did his vigorous shouting bring any response.  Dave came
back to the camp spot to make a new discovery that puzzled him.  On
the ground near where they had slept were Hiram's coat, vest, shoes
and cap.

"Why, I can't understand this at all," mused the young aviator.
"Hiram couldn't have done much in the way of climbing up, he appears
to be nowhere within hail, and he is not given to play tricks."

Dave did not wait to eat anything.  He was really concerned about
his comrade.  He got a long tree branch, stripped it, and went along
the side of the cairn, poking in and out among the dense dumps of
shrubbery.

"Hello," he exclaimed suddenly, as disturbing some vines he saw an
opening, and not twenty feet away a natural rocky tunnel, "daylight,
and the waves of the lake.  I think I understand now."

Dave penetrated the passage.  As he came out at the other end, he
found he faced a rock-strewn stretch of sand.  The waves of the lake
lapped this.  In the distance he could make out Anseton, and nearer
still, about a mile distant, the main shore.

The shore he was on terminated in a ridge of rocks that ran far out
into the water.  Dave wondered if the exploring spirit had moved
Hiram to attempt an entire circle about the island.

"He went away in swimming trim," thought Dave, "so that may be so.
I'll go out on that ledge of rocks and explore a little myself."

"Hello, Dave Dashaway!" sang out an exultant voice, just as Dave was
about to remove his shoes.

Around the ledge of rock came a light skiff.  The oarsman was Dave's
missing comrade.  He drove the boat upon the sandy beach and leaped
out with a gay laugh.

"Why, Hiram," exclaimed the young aviator in marked surprise.

"It's me," chuckled Hiram.  "Stole a march on you.  Nearly dry," he
added, shaking his clinging garments.  "And oh! what a swim."

"You have been to the mainland?" questioned Dave.

"Where else?  When you said 'swim' last night, it gave me an idea.
I'm some swimmer, Dave Dashaway.  Always was.  Took the prize in a
contest in Plum Creek back at home one Fourth of July.  I found a
way out of that shut in place and made a jolly dive for shore."

"But the skiff?"

"You'll need one, won't you?" challenged Hiram.

"Why, yes.  I intended hiring one when I got across from the
island."

"So you said, and I acted.  I did better than hiring a boat, Dave."

"How is that?"

"Bought one outright.  I took my money with me.  Found an old fellow
who lets out a lot of boats for fishing, and made a bargain.  The
skiff isn't the staunchest craft on the lake.  Leaks a little, and
one oar has been split and mended, but it's all right for our little
use.  Four dollars and a half--and we can sell it for something when
we get through using it."

"You're a great fellow, Hiram, I must confess," said Dave
admiringly.

"I'd like to do something to help on this trip of ours, you know."

"You've done a good deal this time, I can tell you that," declared
Dave.  "I can manage all my plans finely, now."

They pulled the boat into the shelter of some rocks.  Then they
returned to the rocky hollow.  A good breakfast was in order.  Dave
announced the importance of his getting to Anseton at once.

An hour later the little skiff was launched once more.  Dave rowed
over to the mainland and lined the shore till well into city waters.
He secured the skiff near a public pier, and started on foot for his
destination.

Left to himself on the island, Hiram proceeded to dry his clothing.
Then he puttered about the machine.  He read for an hour or two in a
book on aeronautics he found in the basket, well on towards the
afternoon.

Hiram got tired of waiting for Dave.  He went through the tunnel
finally and roamed about on the rocky shore.  There was more of
scenery and variety here.  The youth watched the boats in the
distance.  Then he made out the little skiff he had bought that
morning making its way in and out among other craft between the
island, and the mainland.

"What's the news, Dave?" inquired Hiram, as they gained the camp
after securing the skiff where it could not be easily seen or found.

"The best ever," reported Dave cheerily.

"Tell me about it, won't you?"

"Well, I saw Mr. Price."

"Is he here at Anseton?"

"Yes, with his men.  I had a long talk with him.  He feels pretty
good to know that we got here safely with the Monarch II.  I told
him all about the place where the moving picture man saw Jerry
Dawson and the Chinaman.  He thinks that is an excellent clew."

"I should think it was," said Hiram.

"He wants us to try and discover the Drifter.  He says it's only a
question of time, he and his men running down the smugglers.  You
see, Hiram, we are interested mainly in finding the aero-hydroplane,
and getting it back to the Interstate people."

"That's so."

"And we must think of that first."

"I understand."

"We will make a long trip tonight--clear across the lake."

"Suppose you get a sight of the Drifter?"

"Then we'll know that it is really here, won't we?"

"Yes, but are you going to jog right into them and capture them?"

"Hardly," laughed Dave.  "I hope if we do come across the Drifter,
that we can follow it or keep it company, or find out where it is
hidden away in the daytime.  We will have to run across it before we
can decide what circumstances will lead us to do."

"They're an ugly crowd--the Dawsons, and probably the fellows with
them, too."

"I realize that.  Mr. Price insisted on my taking these," and Dave
began opening a boxlike package he had brought with him in the
skiff.

"Hello," cried Hiram, as two good sized weapons and some boxes of
cartridges were disclosed.  "Do we have to use them?"

"I hope not," replied Dave, "but Mr. Price said we might come to a
pinch where we could use them to show we were not unprotected, and
to scare any crowd that tried to interfere with us."

"Well, it begins to look like real business," commented Hiram.

"That's what we're here for."

"Yes, indeed."

They had no difficulty in getting the Monarch II aloft, the hollow
extending for several hundred feet.  The night was ideal for a
secret sky voyage.  A slight mist hung over the ground, but at a
height of five hundred feet the air was perfectly clear.  There was
bright starlight, and against the radiance they could make out
flying birds quite a distance away.

Dave took a route across the lake diagonally from Anseton.  They
skirted the other shore for about ten miles.  Then they recrossed
the lake.  The machine made a sweep along the coast line.

"Well, Dave," remarked his trusty assistant, "we've run across no
air bird so far."

"I didn't expect to, all at once," was Dave's reply.  "We can only
keep at it."

"And trust to luck--I say!"

Hiram interrupted himself with a shout.  Just beneath them an
excursion steamer was ploughing its way through the waves, bound
citywards on its return trip.  They could hear the music of the band
aboard, until now drowned out by hoarse blare of the fog whistle.

At the same moment a broad vivid flare of electric radiance shot
across the sky from the deck of the steamer.  It waved horizontally
in some signal to the landing dock two miles further away.  Then the
operator of this glowing searchlight sent its gleams upwards in a
slow way, as if for scenic effect for the passengers on board.

"The mischief!" exclaimed Dave bending to levers and starting the
Monarch II forward at best speed.

Hiram sat staring.  He blinked, half-blinded.  The machine was
irradiated in clear, sharp outlines as the great searchlight glare
