"Hast thou the clothes ready bundled and the key, also, to this gate
to perdition? And the room: didst set to rights the furnishings I had
delivered here, and sweep the century-old accumulation of filth and
cobwebs from the floor and rafters? Why, the very air reeked of the dead
Romans who builded London twelve hundred years ago. Methinks, too, from
the stink, they must have been Roman swineherd who habited this sty with
their herds, an' I venture that thou, old sow, hast never touched broom
to the place for fear of disturbing the ancient relics of thy kin."

"Cease thy babbling, Lord Satan," cried the woman. "I would rather hear
thy money talk than thou, for though it come accursed and tainted from
thy rogue hand, yet it speaks with the same sweet and commanding voice
as it were fresh from the coffers of the holy church.

"The bundle is ready," she continued, closing the door after De Vac, who
had now entered, "and here be the key; but first let us have a payment.
I know not what thy foul work may be, but foul it is I know from the
secrecy which you have demanded, an' I dare say there will be some who
would pay well to learn the whereabouts of the old woman and the child,
thy sister and her son you tell me they be, who you are so anxious to
hide away in old Til's garret. So it be well for you, my Lord, to pay
old Til well and add a few guilders for the peace of her tongue if you
would that your prisoner find peace in old Til's house."

"Fetch me the bundle, hag," replied De Vac, "and you shall have gold
against a final settlement; more even than we bargained for if all goes
well and thou holdest thy vile tongue."

But the old woman's threats had already caused De Vac a feeling of
uneasiness, which would have been reflected to an exaggerated degree in
the old woman had she known the determination her words had caused in
the mind of the old master of fence.

His venture was far too serious, and the results of exposure too
fraught with danger, to permit of his taking any chances with a disloyal
fellow-conspirator. True, he had not even hinted at the enormity of the
plot in which he was involving the old woman, but, as she had said, his
stern commands for secrecy had told enough to arouse her suspicions, and
with them her curiosity and cupidity. So it was that old Til might well
have quailed in her tattered sandals had she but even vaguely guessed
the thoughts which passed in De Vac's mind; but the extra gold pieces
he dropped into her withered palm as she delivered the bundle to him,
together with the promise of more, quite effectually won her loyalty and
her silence for the time being.

Slipping the key into the pocket of his tunic and covering the bundle
with his long surcoat, De Vac stepped out into the darkness of the alley
and hastened toward the dock.

Beneath the planks he found a skiff which he had moored there earlier
in the evening, and underneath one of the thwarts he hid the bundle.
Then, casting off, he rowed slowly up the Thames until, below the palace
walls, he moored near to the little postern gate which let into the
lower end of the garden.

Hiding the skiff as best he could in some tangled bushes which grew to
the water's edge, set there by order of the King to add to the beauty of
the aspect from the river side, De Vac crept warily to the postern and,
unchallenged, entered and sought his apartments in the palace.

The next day, he returned the original key to Brus, telling the old man
that he had not used it after all, since mature reflection had convinced
him of the folly of his contemplated adventure, especially in one whose
youth was past, and in whose joints the night damp of the Thames might
find lodgement for rheumatism.

"Ha, Sir Jules," laughed the old gardener, "Virtue and Vice be twin
sisters who come running to do the bidding of the same father, Desire.
Were there no desire there would be no virtue, and because one man
desires what another does not, who shall say whether the child of his
desire be vice or virtue? Or on the other hand if my friend desires his
own wife and if that be virtue, then if I also desire his wife, is not
that likewise virtue, since we desire the same thing? But if to obtain
our desire it be necessary to expose our joints to the Thames' fog, then
it were virtue to remain at home."

"Right you sound, old mole," said De Vac, smiling, "would that I might
learn to reason by your wondrous logic; methinks it might stand me in
good stead before I be much older."

"The best sword arm in all Christendom needs no other logic than the
sword, I should think," said Brus, returning to his work.

That afternoon, De Vac stood in a window of the armory looking out
upon the beautiful garden which spread before him to the river wall two
hundred yards away. In the foreground were box-bordered walks, smooth,
sleek lawns, and formal beds of gorgeous flowering plants, while here
and there marble statues of wood nymph and satyr gleamed, sparkling in
the brilliant sunlight, or, half shaded by an overhanging bush, took
on a semblance of life from the riotous play of light and shadow as the
leaves above them moved to and fro in the faint breeze. Farther in the
distance, the river wall was hidden by more closely massed bushes, and
the formal, geometric precision of the nearer view was relieved by a
background of vine-colored bowers, and a profusion of small trees and
flowering shrubs arranged in studied disorder.

Through this seeming jungle ran tortuous paths, and the carved stone
benches of the open garden gave place to rustic seats, and swings
suspended from the branches of fruit trees.

Toward this enchanting spot slowly were walking the Lady Maud and her
little charge, Prince Richard; all ignorant of the malicious watcher in
the window behind them.

A great peacock strutted proudly across the walk before them, and, as
Richard ran, childlike, after it, Lady Maud hastened on to the little
postern gate which she quickly unlocked, admitting her lover, who had
been waiting without. Relocking the gate the two strolled arm in arm to
the little bower which was their trysting place.

As the lovers talked, all self-engrossed, the little Prince played
happily about among the trees and flowers, and none saw the stern,
determined face which peered through the foliage at a little distance
from the playing boy.

Richard was devoting his royal energies to chasing an elusive butterfly
which fate led nearer and nearer to the cold, hard watcher in the
bushes. Closer and closer came the little Prince, and in another
moment, he had burst through the flowering shrubs, and stood facing the
implacable master of fence.

"Your Highness," said De Vac, bowing to the little fellow, "let old
DeVac help you catch the pretty insect."

Richard, having often seen De Vac, did not fear him, and so together
they started in pursuit of the butterfly which by now had passed out
of sight. De Vac turned their steps toward the little postern gate,
but when he would have passed through with the tiny Prince, the latter
rebelled.

"Come, My Lord Prince," urged De Vac, "methinks the butterfly did but
alight without the wall, we can have it and return within the garden in
an instant."

"Go thyself and fetch it," replied the Prince; "the King, my father, has
forbid me stepping without the palace grounds."

"Come," commanded De Vac, more sternly, "no harm can come to you."

But the child hung back and would not go with him so that De Vac was
forced to grasp him roughly by the arm. There was a cry of rage and
alarm from the royal child.

"Unhand me, sirrah," screamed the boy. "How dare you lay hands on a
prince of England?"

De Vac clapped his hand over the child's mouth to still his cries,
but it was too late. The Lady Maud and her lover had heard and, in an
instant, they were rushing toward the postern gate, the officer drawing
his sword as he ran.

When they reached the wall, De Vac and the Prince were upon the outside,
and the Frenchman had closed and was endeavoring to lock the gate.
But, handicapped by the struggling boy, he had not time to turn the key
before the officer threw himself against the panels and burst out before
the master of fence, closely followed by the Lady Maud.

De Vac dropped the key and, still grasping the now thoroughly
affrightened Prince with his left hand, drew his sword and confronted
the officer.

There were no words, there was no need of words; De Vac's intentions
were too plain to necessitate any parley, so the two fell upon each
other with grim fury; the brave officer facing the best swordsman that
France had ever produced in a futile attempt to rescue his young prince.

In a moment, De Vac had disarmed him, but, contrary to the laws of
chivalry, he did not lower his point until it had first plunged through
the heart of his brave antagonist. Then, with a bound, he leaped between
Lady Maud and the gate, so that she could not retreat into the garden
and give the alarm.

Still grasping the trembling child in his iron grip, he stood facing the
lady in waiting, his back against the door.

"Mon Dieu, Sir Jules," she cried, "hast thou gone mad?"

"No, My Lady," he answered, "but I had not thought to do the work which
now lies before me. Why didst thou not keep a still tongue in thy head
and let his patron saint look after the welfare of this princeling? Your
rashness has brought you to a pretty pass, for it must be either you or
I, My Lady, and it cannot be I. Say thy prayers and compose thyself for
death."

Henry III, King of England, sat in his council chamber surrounded by
the great lords and nobles who composed his suit. He awaited Simon de
Montfort, Earl of Leicester, whom he had summoned that he might heap
still further indignities upon him with the intention of degrading and
humiliating him that he might leave England forever. The King feared
this mighty kinsman who so boldly advised him against the weak follies
which were bringing his kingdom to a condition of revolution.

What the outcome of this audience would have been none may say, for
Leicester had but just entered and saluted his sovereign when there came
an interruption which drowned the petty wrangles of king and courtier in
a common affliction that touched the hearts of all.

There was a commotion at one side of the room, the arras parted, and
Eleanor, Queen of England, staggered toward the throne, tears streaming
down her pale cheeks.

"Oh, My Lord! My Lord!" she cried, "Richard, our son, has been
assassinated and thrown into the Thames."

In an instant, all was confusion and turmoil, and it was with the
greatest difficulty that the King finally obtained a coherent statement
from his queen.

It seemed that when the Lady Maud had not returned to the palace with
Prince Richard at the proper time, the Queen had been notified and an
immediate search had been instituted--a search which did not end for
over twenty years; but the first fruits of it turned the hearts of the
court to stone, for there beside the open postern gate lay the dead
bodies of Lady Maud and a certain officer of the Guards, but nowhere
was there a sign or trace of Prince Richard, second son of Henry III of
England, and at that time the youngest prince of the realm.

It was two days before the absence of De Vac was noted, and then it was
that one of the lords in waiting to the King reminded his majesty of
the episode of the fencing bout, and a motive for the abduction of the
King's little son became apparent.

An edict was issued requiring the examination of every child in England,
for on the left breast of the little Prince was a birthmark which
closely resembled a lily and, when after a year no child was found
bearing such a mark and no trace of De Vac uncovered, the search was
carried into France, nor was it ever wholly relinquished at any time for
more than twenty years.

The first theory, of assassination, was quickly abandoned when it was
subjected to the light of reason, for it was evident that an assassin
could have dispatched the little Prince at the same time that he killed
the Lady Maud and her lover, had such been his desire.

The most eager factor in the search for Prince Richard was Simon de
Montfort, Earl of Leicester, whose affection for his royal nephew had
always been so marked as to have been commented upon by the members of
the King's household.

Thus for a time the rupture between De Montfort and his king was
healed, and although the great nobleman was divested of his authority in
Gascony, he suffered little further oppression at the hands of his royal
master.




CHAPTER IV

As De Vac drew his sword from the heart of the Lady Maud, he winced,
for, merciless though he was, he had shrunk from this cruel task. Too
far he had gone, however, to back down now, and, had he left the Lady
Maud alive, the whole of the palace guard and all the city of London
would have been on his heels in ten minutes; there would have been no
escape.

The little Prince was now so terrified that he could but tremble and
whimper in his fright. So fearful was he of the terrible De Vac that a
threat of death easily stilled his tongue, and so the grim, old man led
him to the boat hidden deep in the dense bushes.

De Vac did not dare remain in this retreat until dark, as he had first
intended. Instead, he drew a dingy, ragged dress from the bundle beneath
the thwart and in this disguised himself as an old woman, drawing a
cotton wimple low over his head and forehead to hide his short hair.
Concealing the child beneath the other articles of clothing, he pushed
off from the bank, and, rowing close to the shore, hastened down the
Thames toward the old dock where, the previous night, he had concealed
his skiff. He reached his destination unnoticed, and, running in beneath
the dock, worked the boat far into the dark recess of the cave-like
retreat.

Here he determined to hide until darkness had fallen, for he knew that
the search would be on for the little lost Prince at any moment, and
that none might traverse the streets of London without being subject to
the closest scrutiny.

Taking advantage of the forced wait, De Vac undressed the Prince and
clothed him in other garments, which had been wrapped in the bundle
hidden beneath the thwart; a little red cotton tunic with hose to match,
a black doublet and a tiny leather jerkin and leather cap.

The discarded clothing of the Prince he wrapped about a huge stone torn
from the disintegrating masonry of the river wall, and consigned the
bundle to the voiceless river.

The Prince had by now regained some of his former assurance and,
finding that De Vac seemed not to intend harming him, the little fellow
commenced questioning his grim companion, his childish wonder at this
strange adventure getting the better of his former apprehension.

"What do we here, Sir Jules?" he asked. "Take me back to the King's, my
father's palace. I like not this dark hole nor the strange garments you
have placed upon me."

"Silence, boy!" commanded the old man. "Sir Jules be dead, nor are you
a king's son. Remember these two things well, nor ever again let me hear
you speak the name Sir Jules, or call yourself a prince."

The boy went silent, again cowed by the fierce tone of his captor.
Presently he began to whimper, for he was tired and hungry and
frightened--just a poor little baby, helpless and hopeless in the hands
of this cruel enemy--all his royalty as nothing, all gone with the
silken finery which lay in the thick mud at the bottom of the Thames,
and presently he dropped into a fitful sleep in the bottom of the skiff.

When darkness had settled, De Vac pushed the skiff outward to the
side of the dock and, gathering the sleeping child in his arms, stood
listening, preparatory to mounting to the alley which led to old Til's
place.

As he stood thus, a faint sound of clanking armor came to his attentive
ears; louder and louder it grew until there could be no doubt but that a
number of men were approaching.

De Vac resumed his place in the skiff, and again drew it far beneath
the dock. Scarcely had he done so ere a party of armored knights and
men-at-arms clanked out upon the planks above him from the mouth of the
dark alley. Here they stopped as though for consultation and plainly
could the listener below hear every word of their conversation.

"De Montfort," said one, "what thinkest thou of it? Can it be that the
Queen is right and that Richard lies dead beneath these black waters?"

"No, De Clare," replied a deep voice, which De Vac recognized as that of
the Earl of Leicester. "The hand that could steal the Prince from out of
the very gardens of his sire without the knowledge of Lady Maud or her
companion, which must evidently have been the case, could more easily
and safely have dispatched him within the gardens had that been the
object of this strange attack. I think, My Lord, that presently we shall
hear from some bold adventurer who holds the little Prince for
ransom. God give that such may be the case, for of all the winsome and
affectionate little fellows I have ever seen, not even excepting mine
own dear son, the little Richard was the most to be beloved. Would that
I might get my hands upon the foul devil who has done this horrid deed."

Beneath the planks, not four feet from where Leicester stood, lay the
object of his search. The clanking armor, the heavy spurred feet, and
the voices above him had awakened the little Prince and, with a startled
cry, he sat upright in the bottom of the skiff. Instantly De Vac's iron
band clapped over the tiny mouth, but not before a single faint wail had
reached the ears of the men above.

"Hark! What was that, My Lord?" cried one of the men-at-arms.

In tense silence they listened for a repetition of the sound and then De
Montfort cried out:

"What ho, below there! Who is it beneath the dock? Answer, in the name
of the King!"

Richard, recognizing the voice of his favorite uncle, struggled to free
himself, but De Vac's ruthless hand crushed out the weak efforts of the
babe, and all was quiet as the tomb, while those above stood listening
for a repetition of the sound.

"Dock rats," said De Clare, and then as though the devil guided them to
protect his own, two huge rats scurried upward from between the loose
boards, and ran squealing up the dark alley.

"Right you are," said De Montfort, "but I could have sworn 'twas a
child's feeble wail had I not seen the two filthy rodents with mine own
eyes. Come, let us to the next vile alley. We have met with no success
here, though that old hag who called herself Til seemed overanxious to
bargain for the future information she seemed hopeful of being able to
give us."

As they moved off, their voices grew fainter in the ears of the
listeners beneath the dock and soon were lost in the distance.

"A close shave," thought De Vac, as he again took up the child and
prepared to gain the dock. No further noises occurring to frighten him,
he soon reached the door to Til's house and, inserting the key, crept
noiselessly to the garret room which he had rented from his ill-favored
hostess.

There were no stairs from the upper floor to the garret above, this
ascent being made by means of a wooden ladder which De Vac pulled up
after him, closing and securing the aperture, through which he climbed
with his burden, by means of a heavy trapdoor equipped with thick bars.

The apartment which they now entered extended across the entire east end
of the building, and had windows upon three sides. These were heavily
curtained. The apartment was lighted by a small cresset hanging from a
rafter near the center of the room.

The walls were unplastered and the rafters unceiled; the whole bearing a
