Station, said: "Young man, I _love_ Jess Brinker. But keep away from
him, or you'll wind up in the prison pits, or worse."

And Copeland heard about Tom Brinker, Jess' dad--the kind of swindler
always found in rough new territory, anywhere. He had promoted the idea
of a real city on Lunar. Yeah--one with trees and flowers. What
sentimental bait that was for home-starved, desolation-sick wanderers!
No wonder somebody had murdered him recently.

By common opinion, twenty-odd years was the only difference between Jess
and his father. "Stay clear," was the warning; the name of Brinker was
mud and poison.

Arne Copeland was a cagey youngster; nobody influenced him when he made
up his mind. He was no cow-eyed hero-worshipper; yet, on his own, he
kind of liked the large, battered, egotist. Copeland knew that he
was an egotist himself. He also knew that merely to be on the
sketchily-explored Moon was to take chances.

So he said "Okay," to Brinker, and got some metal boot-soles made, with
his name etched into them in reverse, as in a rubber stamp.

       *       *       *       *       *

Under packs that no coolie could ever have lifted against Earth gravity,
they left Tycho Station and moved toward the fringe of that lunar
hemisphere which is never seen from Terra--though it is no different
from the visible half in general character.

Wherever their feet found a medium that would take an impression, they
left their trademark behind them. Copeland could brush a name out with a
glove; otherwise those names were about as permanent as if carved from
granite, for there was no wind to blow the dust, and no rain to wash it
away. Passing tractor-caravans would never blot out all of the
footprints. Not in ages of time.

"At least we got us a monument, Jess," Copeland said once, feeling
somewhat thrilled. "That's what guys out exploring and prospecting need.
A legend. A reputation."

Jess Brinker's eyes narrowed, making him look sinister. "Yeah, Cope," he
drawled. "But in my case it's a _counter_-reputation, with a little of
Robin Hood thrown in, to help blow the stink of my Old Man off me. I
want some friends and backing, so I can do what Dad really wanted to
do--though he was as much of a rogue as a saint. You listening, Cope?"

Copeland kept his face stony. "Tell me what you want to, and then stop,"
he said softly.

"Thanks," Brinker answered. "It doesn't matter too much that I can guess
who killed Pop, and would like to square things. Yeah, a hatchet-faced
ex-partner who turned pious and legal on the outside, after he got the
breaks. How old is that story, I wonder?... It doesn't even rile me
terribly, knowing that Dad wasn't all crook, knowing he _believed_ his
idea was good for everybody, and was trying to get funds to put it
across."

Brinker sighed and went on: "The idea is the _important_ thing, Cope. A
place with trees and flowers, a city, maybe--an antidote for the Moon's
desolation. Anyone here feels the need in his bones and nerves. But it
would take more air and water than could ever be imported, or drawn from
the lunar crust. You wouldn't know it on the dead surface, but two
hundred miles deep in the Moon there's still molten lava, plentiful
water in the form of steam, volcanic carbon-dioxide gas--the makings of
oxygen. There's nitrogen, too.

"How to reach that stuff is the question. Drills break under the
pressure of depth at a tenth of the distance. Pop's idea involved
Brulow's Comet, which will be coming back sunward from far space in
three years. Imagine--a comet! It could be dangerous, too; nobody could
ever get permission for an attempt."

Brinker paused again. Copeland and he were plodding through a jagged
valley. The stars were merciless pinpoints, the silence brittle and
grating.

"But there must be a way of blasting down to those life-giving
raw-materials, Cope," Brinker continued. "Maybe with atomic explosive.
Experiments call for funds and backing. So I save my money, and wish I
had a head for making it faster. And I look for weak spots in the lunar
crust with radar. And I try to get people to know I'm around, and to
like me...."

Copeland realized that what he had just heard could be a line of malarky
meant to kid a yokel, or a bid to get him involved in something. But he
found himself kind of falling for the yarn. More than ever he suspected
that folks were wrong about Jess Brinker; his warning instincts were
being lulled to sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

Month-long lunar days passed, while the two men ranged over a segment of
the hidden hemisphere. They trod plains and crater-walls unsullied by
human feet before; they took photographs to be sold to the Lunar
Topographical Commission; they located deposits of radioactive metals,
which could be registered for investigation by an assaying party, and
for possible royalties. Periodically they visited scattered supply
stations, and then set out once more.

Such a life had its poisons even for Brinker and Copeland, who were
braced for meeting the unknown and the strange.

Living in space suits for weeks at a time; smelling their own unwashed
bodies; slipping an arm out of a heavy sleeve to draw food through a
little airlock in their armor's chestplate; knowing, in spite of
effective insulation, that the heat of day exceeded the boiling point of
water, and that the cold of the protracted night, when usually they
continued their explorations with the aid of ato-lamps, hovered at the
brink of absolute zero--all those things had a harsh effect on
nervous-systems.

They found two human corpses. One had been crushed in a long fall, his
spacesuit ripped open; he was a blackened mummy. The other was a
freckled youth, coffined in his armor. Failure of its air-rejuvenator
unit had caused asphyxia. What you did for guys like this was collect
their credentials for shipment home.

Copeland also found a Martian--inside its transparent version of a
spacesuit, for the ancient Moon had been much the same as now. The being
was dead, of course. Its brain-case had been a sac; its tentacles were
like a snarl of age-hardened leather thongs.

Lying near it was an even greater rarity--the remains of a different
sort of monster from the planet that had been literally exploded
in a war with Mars, to form the countless fragments that were the
