large, and red. For miles, across the surface of the sand, the shadows
of the dunes were stretching out.... And out of the sunset a tiny speck
of black appeared.

Where he lay the man heard the sound of it--a steady drone, or buzz. At
first it did not catch his attention, its inception was so gradual; but
soon it became a roar, and he opened his eyes with a start. He had heard
no sound since the departure of the space ship--had expected none. An
uneasy excitement gripped him. He strained his eyes upward....

Suddenly, over the dune against which he lay, there shot a something,
roaring thunderously. He cowered down, stunned by the terrific sound of
it; but he watched it with wide eyes, as it moved across the sky.

It was T-shaped; with the cross-piece going before. Beneath it hung two
wheels. It gleamed metallically.

Without attempting to rise, he howled shrilly, time after time, catching
his breath in gasps--while the thing moved steadily away.

Following an undeviating line, it left him far behind, diminished to a
speck, and disappeared. The sound of it lingered when he could see it no
longer.

His breath came quickly, spasmodically, through parted lips; his throat
was tight, and his heart pounded. The staggering surprise of what he had
seen and heard left him incapable of thought. His mind was a racing
turmoil of questions. His contentment, his resignation were
gone--destroyed in a moment; and in their place rose a great uneasiness.

The return of Hope, to a man who has definitely put it away from him, is
a joy closely akin to pain in its intensity. His whole body shook as he
struggled with the sand, attempting to rise.

He had seen a machine, he knew. It could not have been an animal. It was
not alive, and it was made of metal.... A machine meant reasoning
beings. There must be reasoning beings on Toon--where Loten's scientists
had argued that they could not be! And machines that travelled through
space! Perhaps....

As the new possibilities of his situation burst upon him, his
homesickness returned a thousandfold; and he knew that he could rest no
longer--could not wait in the sand for death. He must struggle--he must
strive, until the end came--because there was a chance!

Immediately, his mind became purposeful, and he took stock of his
position. He knew that the whole of Toon was not like this great stretch
of sand. Thousands of years of observation of the bright planet had
convinced the scientists of the Loten that it bore vegetation--and
probably animal life of some sort....

But rational beings! His astonishment re-asserted itself. Five thousand
years of systematic signalling had brought no response, and the project
had lately been abandoned. Yet....

He shook his head, and returned to his problem. He must not waste time
now.

He had food enough in his stomach to last three days at least, and he
would not need water for even longer. He suddenly realized, with
enormous satisfaction, that the pain in his head was considerably less
than at first. Perhaps his system would be able to adjust itself to the
atmospheric pressure....

The great question was where--and how--to go. He must go somewhere. Only
motion would satisfy his craving for accomplishment of some sort. He
would get no help on this great, sterile plain. He had no guarantee that
another of the flying machines would come near him, and even if it did
there was not much hope of attracting its attention. No, he must
move....

He decided to follow in the direction the machine had taken. Its
destination might be near-by--or it might be thousands of miles away.
The probability seemed to be in favor of the former hypothesis, because
the machine had been moving so very slowly.... Anyway, it was a chance!

Pulling his legs up under him, he made another determined attempt to
rise; and finally succeeded in standing erect. But it made his legs ache
terribly; and when he tried a step he slipped, falling back with a
jarring thud.

He would have to crawl.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ridding himself of the parachute, and with no further hesitation, he set
out, crawling slowly and laboriously, keeping the sun at his back.

The heat was less oppressive now. The sun had sunk to a point where its
rays were no hotter than at midday on his Loten; and he marvelled at the
similarity of the two climates. He had seen none of the water vapors
that astronomers described as almost constantly enveloping Toon.
Toon--what he had seen of it--seemed to be as dry as the Loten, if not
more so.

He climbed the long, gradual slope of a dune; and, after surveying the
endless stretch of sand which met his view at the top, slid down the
steep side, and crawled doggedly on.

Night was falling. The blue dome above him steadily darkened until it
began to take on the appearance of his own native sky.

He was dead tired within an hour. He lay still for a time, breathing
deeply--marshalling his strength. He was in excellent physical
condition, but here his body was so heavy that the slightest motion was
a strain. Soon, however, his eager spirit drove him onward.

At the end of another hour, happening to raise his head, he uttered an
involuntary cry. Points of light glimmered in the sky.... So he was to
see the stars after all!--though only at night, it seemed. He was
relieved. In the back of his mind had been the ever-growing certainty
that he would not be able to keep a direct course. He rested again, and
picked out certain designs that would be helpful as guides.

He wondered if one of them were Loten. They were very dim and they
blinked strangely; and their arrangement was meaningless to him. He
fixed upon one of them--the brightest--and imagined that it might be
_his_ world--where his friends were, and his enemies; where his wives
grieved for him perhaps; where his children laughed and played; where he
might one day return....

He crawled along through the sand.

It was not really dark--only twilight. He wondered if this were night on
Toon. It must be. Almost directly ahead of him--just a little to the
right--was a radiance close to the horizon. It puzzled him. Soon it was
spreading over the sky--a pale, ghostly light. Then a bright point
appeared--a line; it grew. He stared in abject wonder while a great,
white disk mounted into the sky, illuminating the scene around.

He rested a while, and watched it. It was Toon's satellite. It could be
nothing else. But beside it the two luminaries of his own world were as
pygmies. He was still watching it, fascinated, when he resumed his
journey.




CHAPTER II.

Signs of Life


All through the night he travelled; and into the rising sun. The noonday
heat forced him to take a prolonged rest, but he fought on as soon as
possible; and sunset found him crawling weakly onward. The cool of night
revived him somewhat. He knew that the strain under which he labored
would hasten his time of sleep, and that worried him. Even now, he was
often in a semi-conscious state. Still, he could not stop.

When the sun rose again, it shone through trees; and far across the
yellow sand his tired eyes saw green hills. The sight invigorated
him--spurred him on to stronger efforts. Soon after midday he lay
panting in the shade of trees.

The trees astonished him. They towered above him, fully five times as
high as any he had ever seen. Their stems were of enormous girth--rough
and hard to the touch. There seemed to be something moving in their
heavy foliage, far above him, and he heard faint, sharp whistling
sounds. He looked around uneasily.

The size of the trees worried him. If there were animal life, it might
be proportionately large. He shuddered. The desert, although
uncomfortable, had had one advantage: he had been alone there.

Still, it was not loneliness that he was seeking, he thought grimly.
Obviously, he....

He stiffened. He had been staring abstractedly at the coarse grass which
grew thickly around him. Now his eyes became focussed upon a movement
there--not three feet away. The grass was waving strangely, in a
peculiar, uneven line; and he caught sight of something slim and green,
that was not the grass. His throat contracted painfully. The thing did
not seem to move, yet it was coming nearer. Whenever he caught sight of
a part of its body, it appeared stationary; yet the waving of the grass
was closer, and ever closer. It was very close now....

