bright new flier had been delivered and housed here, awaiting his
arrival.

The official closed a switch on the wall of the building, and the hangar
door rolled open. While the two Earthians were entering the craft the
attendants quickly placed the luggage into the load compartment.

Shelby fumbled with the destination mechanism and pressed the starting
lever. The propellers, whirled at high speed by the soundless atomic
motor, thrummed softly. In a moment, the plane, unguided by human hands,
hoisted itself almost vertically into the night and was off. Unerringly
it would carry its occupants to their destination.




CHAPTER II

A Strange Story


Shelby looked down at his companion. For a time she had been strangely
quiet. Could it be that there was just a hint of a troubled look on her
beautiful face? The young engineer felt himself drawn to her more than
ever. He wanted to know more about his new Martian acquaintance, but he
disliked to ask a direct question concerning him, for he feared vaguely
that it might give her offense.

"Jan," he said, "you look worried. Is anything wrong?"

She shook her head, slowly, absently, without looking at him. "No, I was
just thinking." She paused, and then in the same absent manner she
continued: "Only Hekalu Selba is back, and I thought I was rid of him."

Reassured somewhat by her words, but still taking care to conceal any
hint of the menace he had sensed about the Martian, Shelby asked: "What
possible difference can his presence in Chicago mean to you? He seemed
to me to be a very ordinary Martian nobleman--evidently supplied with
plenty of money, and having no other motive in life than to enjoy
himself, and perhaps to help others enjoy themselves. A perfectly
harmless individual."

Janice's face grew serious. "You say those things because you do not
know Hekki," she said. "Shall I tell you about him? It would relieve me
to share my knowledge with someone."

The young man nodded but made no comment.

"Two years ago," she began, "I went to Taboor on Mars to study
sculpture. Not long after my arrival at school, in the company of a
number of other art students, I attended a ball given at a glorious old
palace in the heart of the ancient Martian quarter. Our gracious host
was Hekalu Selba himself. I met him, danced with him, and talked with
him. From the first he was attracted to me and I to him, and so we were
often together.

"Though some of his peculiar affectations were obnoxious to me, I
thought that his good qualities far overbalanced his failings. He seemed
always kind and considerate in his dealings with all about him; he was
well informed on almost every possible subject; he painted pictures and
played various musical instruments with a skill that was little short of
genius, and his tales of his travels and adventures in the little-known
region beyond the orbits of the minor planets could not fail to delight
any listeners. Dreamer and brilliant artist--that was Hekki as I saw him
then. Effeminate--yes, but brave and resourceful too.

"Our intimacy grew. He made frequent proposals of marriage to me, but I
put him off, saying that I was not sure I loved him. I informed Father
back here in Chicago of our friendship. His next letter showed plainly
his enthusiasm over the idea of the possible marriage of his daughter
with this young noble of the ancient Martian house of Selba. 'Get him,
Jan,' he wrote. 'He'd be the catch of a lifetime. Why, his total assets
would make the treasure of Croesus look like a little piece of twisted
copper wire.' Poor practical old Dad! For once his business judgment was
in the wrong. It was well that I did not follow his advice."

At this point Jan's story was interrupted by the sudden dropping of the
plane. They had reached their destination. The craft descended
vertically and landed with a light impact in the center of a small
private roof garden at the summit of a great apartment building.

"Dad won't be home now," said Jan. "He was delayed in New York, and will
not appear until tomorrow. There isn't anyone else around here except
old Rufus, so we needn't go down stairs. Let's sit over there instead."
She pointed toward a quaintly wrought bench beside a splashing fountain.
The moon was shining, and the solitary cypress tree cast a spear-like
shadow over the pool. There was a faint fragrance of flowers in the
night.

Janice and Shelby seated themselves and the girl continued:

"Shortly after my meeting with Hekalu Selba rumors began to come to me.
Men died mysteriously, and there were people who made vague hints that
my noble friend was responsible. An uncle of Hekki's had made him the
principal heir to his fortune--shortly afterward the uncle contracted a
virulent disease and passed away. On both planets men that were
obnoxious to Hekki were murdered--capable business rivals and people who
perhaps 'knew too much.' Always the circumstances of their deaths were
peculiar. Frequently they were found in locked rooms to which an
assassin could scarcely have gained entrance without breaking his way.
But such violent methods had not been used. Never was there a shred of
evidence to implicate the noble.

       *       *       *       *       *

"But I was beginning to see Hekalu's true color. The lavish display of
his wealth--his estates and his art treasures, and the endless round of
good times he sought to provide, were merely an attempt to cover up his
wickedness. One afternoon that I was with him, he was under the
influence of the Elar drug. His face was red and his eyes gleamed with a
wicked light. He proposed to me again, and when I made an angry refusal
he threatened me--said that if there was another whom I loved he would
destroy him and me too.

"That, I assured myself, was the end. Hekki tried to make up, but when
he found that I would have nothing to do with him he vanished. I think
he went off into the outer regions of the solar system again. He was
gone for a long time, and I devoted myself entirely to my studies.

"Then suddenly, out of the blue, I received a letter from Hekki. It came
from a small village far to the west of Taboor. A gift accompanied it.
Hekki informed me that in a valley far out in the unexplored Taraal
desert he had run across a ruined city built by the Melbar kings some
seventy-five thousand years ago. He hoped to make an enormous fortune
from the art treasures he had found there.

"The gift and the small photograph he sent me, I shall show you at the
first opportunity. They are packed away now. The former is a dagger with
a flexible blade of a shiny black substance unknown to me. It does not
seem to be metal. The hilt is a lump of platinum. It is carved to
represent some strange animal with scores of coiling tentacles. Hekki
says that the object is one of his treasures, found on the site of the
ancient city. But I have doubted this. I know something of the art of
the Melbar kings, and certainly the dagger does not resemble the
products of their craftsmen. The same is true of those wares of Hekki's
which my friends have bought. They are strange--belonging neither to
Earth nor Mars.

"The picture too is equally puzzling. It depicts a night scene in a
desert valley. Jagged hills in the distance and the nearer moon of Mars
in the sky. The floor of the valley is in shadow and things there are
indistinct. There are shapes there--vast shapes, odd and grotesque. And
there is something in the foreground which might be almost human!

"In his letter Hekki asked if he might see me again, and I immediately
wrote and told him that I would. To you, Austin, this probably seems a
crazy thing to do, but like most everyone who is young, I had a genuine
love for intrigue and mystery, even though they might be dangerous
things to meddle with.

"Hekalu came to Taboor, but I saw comparatively little of him. He seemed
always to be tremendously busy. Sometimes he would be extravagantly
jubilant, as though he had met with some tremendous success, or again he
would apparently be worried almost to the point of madness. What these
emotional changes meant, he would never tell me.

"Several times old Alka, his favorite slave, spoke to me. 'The Master is
not as he used to be, Miss Darell,' he would say. 'He works feverishly
with odd mechanisms, and every night when he is at home he stares out
into space toward the farther planets with his new super-telescope.
Always, what he sees makes his face turn white and hard; sometimes, he
smiles and sometimes his features look like a devil's mask.'

"And still Hekki's weird treasures continued, and still continue to come
from the Taraal.

"A group of men was sent by the heads of the Place of Knowledge out into
the desert to investigate. They disappeared. The officials of the
Planetary Patrol made only a hasty and unsuccessful investigation.

"On the day of my departure from Mars, after having finished my course,
I saw Hekki, believing that it was for the last time. He said he was
going back into the Taraal. And then he popped up on the liner. And
that, Austin, is all I know about Hekalu Selba. What do you make of it?
What is he trying to do out there in the desert?" She placed her hand
lightly on Shelby's arm and looked up appealingly into his face. "Can't
you offer some suggestions, Austin? You know that when suspicious events
are troubling you, a plausible explanation eases your mind even though
you cannot know the truth. And I am afraid, afraid that he is
deliberately following me to Earth!"

While Jan had been telling of her acquaintance with the Martian, Austin
had been staring at a very large Sadu moth which hovered, and leisurely
moved about on thrumming gorgeous wings, which spanned fully eighteen
inches. It moved from blossom to blossom in a nearby flower bed,
delicately sipping nectar. Always its great luminous eyes, which glowed
like coals of gleaming fire, were turned toward the pair. Shelby had
scarcely noticed it, for he was absorbed with the girl's account; but
now, when it edged closer towards them, and then made a sudden
mischievous swoop not six inches above their heads, its presence could
no longer be ignored. The girl gave an exclamation of revulsion and
shrank involuntarily toward her companion. He leaped to his feet, and
picking up a pebble from beside the fountain, hurled it at the night
prowler.

"You dirty eavesdropper!" he shouted angrily. "The man who brought your
kind from Mars for ornamental purposes must have been crazy!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The moth buzzed up into the cypress tree and squatted there, silently,
apparently resting. Only its eyes continued to glare fixedly, almost
malignantly at the occupants of the garden. But they quickly forgot
about its presence.

"I don't know whether I can offer a sensible explanation for Hekalu's
actions or not, Jan," Shelby said. "However, as far as his activities in
the Taraal are concerned, it seems quite possible that he did discover
ruins there, and is trying to keep other fortune seekers away. The ruins
may of course not really belong to the Melbar dynasty. They might have
been built by some contemporary race. Just what he is doing among the
minor planets, we can't any more than guess at. Probably he's just
adventuring like a few other people. And as for his following you to
Earth--well, I admit that you _do_ seem to be popular!"

"You're making it sound awfully simple, Austin," said Jan. She paused
and thought for a moment, and then, with seeming irrelevance she
continued: "Haven't you heard of queer clusters of luminous specks
recently seen by astronomers not far beyond Mars? They called them
meteor clusters, but they drifted about here and there, not following
definite paths as meteors should do."

"You're trying to suggest that they are space ships, aren't you, Jan?"

She nodded.

"But they aren't," Shelby assured her. "They don't polarize the
reflected light of the sun as space ships do. Besides, where could they
have been built? Certainly not among the planetoids. And any place on
the planets, the Taraal desert for instance, would be an almost equally
impossible site for their construction.

"Think of the enormous crews of men and the vast supplies of food and
water and materials that would have to be taken out there into the
wilderness. Undoubtedly Hekalu could back such a project financially,
but he would be discovered before he had made a fair start, and the
Martian Planet Patrol would wipe him out of existence. Still, though I
don't think that the luminous specks are man-built vessels, I am equally
certain that they aren't meteors either."

"Then what are they?"

The young man smiled and shrugged. "I don't know," he said. The
intuitive feeling that unknown, and not too beneficient forces were at
work in the ether about, was troubling him again, making his scalp
muscles tingle.

For a moment Shelby stared at the ground. "Jan," he said, "I didn't tell
you what I saw on the liner. I didn't tell anyone because I don't want
to be called a lunatic. But I guess it's all right to let you in on this
now. Briefly, during the sleep period, I came upon Hekalu Selba prowling
in a passageway aboard the _Ekova_, in the company of a vague thing that
may have been similar to that shape in the photograph--long arms, big
head, squat and muscular. If we knew what that thing was, and where it
came from, the snarl might be half untangled."

Janice Darell's face took on a sudden surprised look. "You actually saw
what you say you saw?" she cried. When her companion nodded, she
continued excitedly with wide-open eyes. "I still believe that Hekalu
knows something about the meteor cluster. And the beast figures in
somewhere too. Austin," she cried, "what if Hekki is trying something
really great? I know you don't take stock in any such idea, but just
supposing he is--what if--"

"Let him try!" the young man cut in. "I almost wish he would! I'm afraid
he would get the surprise of his life." He was staring straight at the
unwinking, malignant eyes of the Sadu moth.

"What do you mean?"

Shelby drew a small black case from his sleeve pocket and opened it. He
took from it a device which looked like a tiny pistol. There were
several other odds and ends of mechanisms in the case. "For a year I
have been working on a new weapon," he said. "All the parts are
completed, and tonight I shall finish assembling them. This little gun
is the projector for a new ray which I have discovered--an etheric
vibration of extremely short wavelength. A portion of the atomic energy
in any solid or liquid substance the ray touches is instantly released.

"You doubt whether it is effective? Well, I can't give you any proof
now; I can only say that when I was back on Mars, fooling with my first
cumbersome projector, which produced only the weakest of vibrations, I
blasted a big hole in the wall of my apartment, and nearly killed the
Martian physician who lived in the rooms next to mine. I had a devil of
a time explaining the explosion, and narrowly missed getting myself into
serious trouble. In a few days I shall try to sell the weapon to the
Earth Government. If they are convinced of its value, and I don't see
how they can help but be convinced, our friend from the Red Planet will
have to be very careful if he tries anything."

Shelby glanced at his wrist watch. "Eleven thirty--my bed time," he said
with mock seriousness. "But Jan, there's one favor I want to ask you
before I go. Try not to see anymore of Hekalu Selba, Akar."

Janice Darell made a valiant attempt to act the part of one whose pride
and sense of freedom had been deeply outraged. "Mr. Shelby," she said,
"what right have you to tell me what I shall or shall not do?" But a
light laugh broke from her lips and spoiled her bluff.

"There are two reasons," replied her companion seriously. "First,
because we both believe that Hekalu Selba is dangerous; second--because
I love you." He leaned closer toward her with the light of eagerness in
his eyes. "Oh, I know I'm crude, Jan," he said passionately. "I'm just a
clumsy engineer, not a poet or ladies' man. What I'm trying to say to
you must seem awfully trite, but anyway, I want you with me always."

"You mean--?"

He nodded.

"All right, Austin," she said quietly, looking straight into his eyes.

His arms crept around her, and now he drew her gently to him.

Some moments later, in the nearby pergola, the door which led to the
rooms below opened, and an ancient negro clad in gaudy pajamas and
bathrobe peered out into the garden. He saw the pair and recognized the
girl. A happy grin came over his wrinkled black face. "Well, if dat
ain't a mos' pretty sight to look at," he muttered. "My baby done come
back at las', and dat sho' am a han'some boy she got dar!" He turned,
and leaving the door open and the light burning on the stair, descended.
Very softly and wistfully he was crooning an old darky love song.

It was an hour later before Shelby's craft whirred up into the
moon-bathed night over the winking lights of the city. And at the same
time the big-eyed Sadu moth which had been crouching in the cypress
tree, rose on its velvety wings and sped away, as though some urgent
mission had suddenly claimed its attention.




CHAPTER III

Hekki's Proposal


When Shelby reached his apartment, he immediately donned his laboratory
smock and set to work. But he had scarcely finished mounting a tiny coil
of wire within the hand-grip of his weapon, when the view-phone bell
rang insistently.

The inventor pulled off his smock and threw it over the materials on his
work bench, so that the person at the other end of the view-phone
connection, whoever it was, would not be able to see them. Then he
snapped the television and audio switches. The mists in the view-plate
cleared, and there before him, as real as though he were actually in the
room, sat Hekalu Selba. The Martian's eyes gleamed with suppressed
excitement.

"Mr. Shelby," he was saying, "it may seem strange that I should be
calling you so soon, but I have something simply colossal to talk over
