toward it on momentum alone!"

Lents' brown eyes twinkled with perplexity in their pits of fat.

"The force, whatever it is, doesn't seem like anything in nature. But if
we're traveling on momentum alone we can pull away with our emergency
rockets--though I hate to waste the fuel."

Sine leaped to the rocket controls. "Grab handholds!" he snapped over
his shoulder. The men rolled into the padded niches provided for that
purpose. Sine's niche was so placed that it would not be necessary to
lift a hand against the tremendous pressure of rocket acceleration. A
lateral swing of the lever along its quadrant operated the rockets.

"Oof!" came a smothered exclamation from Lents as the ship seemed to
pause, to leap forward in space again. The star-studded heavens as seen
through the ports were hidden by a curtain of flame, electric blue and
as stiff seeming as a steel bar--the trail of the forward rockets.

For some minutes there was no sound save the subdued thunder of the hull
as it trembled under the tug of the rockets. Then a light flashed redly
and a gong sounded. The signal that meant, "fuel half gone." Sine shut
off the power, crawled out stiffly. His first glance out of a port
showed that they were still falling toward the mysterious cylindrical
space wanderer.

Kass wiped the sweat from his bald head.

"No use wasting any more effort," he said hoarsely. "That thing is a
space ship, and there are men in it. The force they have been using on
us is some kind of gravity beam--probably it's also their means of space
propulsion. They mean to capture us, no doubt----"

"And they've reversed the beam!" Lents puffed as he turned away from the
ampliscope, pulling his sweat-soaked toga away from his fat body with
thumb and forefinger. "We're decelerating fast, but we can't feel it
because the force acts on every particle of our bodies exactly the same
as on the ship----"

"Proving," added Sine, looking out of the port curiously, "that it's a
true gravity beam!"

The utter stillness of their ship gave the illusion that she was
motionless, and that the sinister stranger was drifting toward them.

"It _is_ a ship!" Lents rumbled. "Look at her ports. But they're
shuttered."

"Not a bad idea," Sine agreed. "Protection against pin-point meteorites,
anyway." They saw now that the cylinder was slightly rounded at each
end, and the end presented to them had at its nose a circular
projection, not unlike a very large button, that glowed with a lavender
light, which they guessed to be the source of the gravity beam.

They were torn between the excitement of discovery and a very natural
apprehension. In the dim past, more than 200,000 years ago, there had
been a regular commerce between Earth and the Jovian colonies. But the
comet swarm, coming out of the mysterious depths of space, had released
to the solar system such swarms of meteorites as to make interplanetary
travel in the spatial belt between Mars and Jupiter utterly suicidal. It
required the passing of two thousand centuries to thin them out
sufficiently to permit the voyage of exploration in which these three
men were engaged.

What would these children of Earth look like after 200,000 years of
Jovian evolution? Would they be friendly?

They must, at any rate, be curious people. The great cylinder was
passing over them, and they had a better conception of its size. It was
at least twice as big as the 200-foot diameter Kass had estimated, and
fully 1500 feet long. A section of its hull slid open, and the
scientists felt the tug of mysterious forces on their own little vessel.
They drifted up into the opening, knew that the hatch had closed by the
shutting out of the solar glare. But there was no lack of light. They
could see the welded plates of the hull by an intense saffron light that
came from oval plates set in the wall. More of the gravity buttons were
ranged around the room. It appeared that they were regularly used in
handling freight. Now, as the little captive ship was tugged here and
there, the prisoners could see flashes of that penetrating lavender
light that seemed somehow solid.

"Get ready, men!" Sine said, breaking off his absorbed contemplation of
their surroundings. "Strap on your belts, and be sure your disintegrator
tubes are in their clips."

Lents was already lifting his toga and snapping his weapon belt around
his ample waist. A mere strip of flexible metal with pockets for the
atobombs and a clip for the delicate little tube--it might easily be
taken for a mere ornamental article of apparel.

"Hope they're friendly," Kass remarked, patting the buckle shut over his
flat diaphragm, "but if they aren't we can give 'em a thing or two to
think about."

The quartz ports, kept free from frost on the inside by a curtain of hot
dry air blown over them through a slit, suddenly misted over on the
outside, became opaque with a milky glaze of frost. This told the
prisoners that their captors were "bleeding" air into the hold, which
did double duty as an airlock. They heard vague clanging of metal on
metal, transmitted to them through the hull of their ship. Then a sharp
blade scraped away the ice from one of the ports, and a face peered in.

They looked at one another for a few moments, these cousins of the human
race, separated by 200,000 years of time and impassable meteor-strewn
wastes of space. The man at the port turned and beckoned to others, who
also surveyed the prisoners.

Then the first one, evidently the chief of this massive space vessel,
motioned to the prisoners, to open their manports.

"Keep together now!" Sine admonished his companions. "If they act
unfriendly we'll let them have the ray. Then you two slip back into your
own ship while I grab this vacuum suit out of the lock. With that on I
can carve a way out, and disable them, too."

"It would be a shame!" Kass said as he whirled the handwheel of the
inner manport, "but----"

The valve opened, and a few minutes later the three Earthmen stepped out
to confront the Jovians.

There were half a dozen of them, standing firmly, by virtue of the
artificial gravity, somehow produced. They were not far different from
Earthmen, except that they were shorter, being barely five feet tall.
Their tremendous muscles told of the race's adaptation to the superior
gravity of Jupiter. Their feet, encased in slippers of some burnished
material, were unusually large.

They were dressed in an armor of overlapping scales that covered every
part of their bodies, even their fingers. But their heads, instead of
being armored, were protected by a thin, transparent membrane that
followed the shape of their features closely. The Earthmen recognized
the protective covering used before the comet swarm as a defense against
the then used heat ray. So the Jovians had developed no new weapon! Sine
thought comfortably of his little disintegrator tube. He could make
those armored men vanish like puffs of smoke.

But they made no hostile move, and Sine had leisure to notice their
faces. If their bodies were too heavily muscled for grace, their heads
atoned for that defect. These were truly Jovian, god-like, combining
intense virility, dominance, courage. But there was also about them an
expression of intolerance, of ruthlessness, of selfishness. Here were
men, it could be seen, who would not be too scrupulous in attaining
their ends. But men, too, who could be charming companions.

Their leader, the man who had first looked into the port, now detached
himself from the group and came forward, his hand outstretched in the
old Earth gesture of friendliness. His appearance had all the
characteristics of his companions, but in a more striking degree. He was
taller than they, more than five feet, and his broad shoulders had the
confident bearing of accustomed command. He spoke, in a pleasant,
vibrant baritone:

"Welcome, men of Earth. Sorry for our little misunderstanding."

Sine gripped his hand, returned the muscular grip.

"It took us a little while to know what you were. And I may add that I'm
pleasantly surprised that we can still understand each other."

The Jovian shrugged his shoulder:

"Canned speech. No chance for a language to evolve when it's
mechanically recorded. But come up to my cabin. It's chilly here, and
your manner of dress----"

"_That_ has changed!" Sine smiled. "Lents and Kass, will you go ahead?"




CHAPTER II

The Pleasure Bubble


After the first suspicions had worn off, the Earthmen felt that they had
been singularly fortunate. To be captured by these intelligent beings
had been about the most convenient thing that could happen to them. They
might have found the human race entirely wiped out on the gloomy planet.
Or they might have been struck by one of the still inconveniently
numerous meteorites which would mean, at the very least, being marooned.
Had they possessed the ability to look into the future they would not
have rested quite so complacently in the hammocks assigned to them in
the great patrol ship.

The big Jovian, they learned, was chief of the ship. He told them his
name was Musters, and introduced his officers. They were an intelligent,
efficient lot. From them the Earthmen learned something of the social
organization of the human race as it survived on Jupiter.

"The race followed its natural evolution," intelligent and handsome
young Lieutenant Reko explained to Sine as they leaned against a railing
and gazed out of an unshuttered port at the somber splendors of Jupiter
as it gradually swelled and covered the firmament.

"Like mated to like, and so the superior individuals became more
superior, and the inferior ones more inferior. This resulted eventually
in two races. Naturally we took steps to properly segregate the inferior
race. Our efficiency experts have found ways to put them to work--to
make them quite useful in fact. Of course we could not trust them with
our weapons, our ships, our really important central power plants----"

What were these inferior--these so-called _Mugs_--what were they like?
Reko arched aristocratic eyebrows. Why, they were often quite human in
their appearance--though occupational diseases, and so forth----. Sine
gained the impression that they were kept out of the way in order not to
disturb the esthetic comfort of the superior race.

"There was a time when we had trouble with them," Lieutenant Reko said.
"There were trouble makers among them. They attacked the homes of the
First race, seized power control stations. Not fifty years ago there was
an insurrection. But the Mugs lost. Thousands upon thousands of them
were driven into the swamps and caves on the edge of the Tenebrian Sea.
