Kormt looked at the declining sun. "I must go now," he said. "There are
the evening chores to do. I will be in town tonight if you should wish
to see me."

"I probably will," said Jorun. "There's a lot to do, readying the
evacuation, and you're a big help."

       *       *       *       *       *

The old man bowed with grave courtesy, turned, and walked off down the
road. He wore the common costume of Terran men, as archaic in style as
in its woven-fabric material: hat, jacket, loose trousers, a long staff
in his hand. Contrasting the drab blue of Kormt's dress, Jorun's vivid
tunic of shifting rainbow hues was like a flame.

The psychotechnician sighed again, watching him go. He liked the old
fellow. It would be criminal to leave him here alone, but the law
forbade force--physical or mental--and the Integrator on Corazuno wasn't
going to care whether or not one aged man stayed behind. The job was to
get the _race_ off Terra.

_A lovely world._ Jorun's thin mobile features, pale-skinned and
large-eyed, turned around the horizon. _A fair world we came from._

There were more beautiful planets in the Galaxy's swarming myriads--the
indigo world-ocean of Loa, jeweled with islands; the heaven-defying
mountains of Sharang; the sky of Jareb, that seemed to drip light--oh,
many and many, but there was only one Earth.

Jorun remembered his first sight of this world, hanging free in space to
watch it after the gruelling ten-day run, thirty thousand light-years,
from Corazuno. It was blue as it turned before his eyes, a burnished
turquoise shield blazoned with the living green and brown of its lands,
and the poles were crowned with a flimmering haze of aurora. The belts
that streaked its face and blurred the continents were cloud, wind and
water and the gray rush of rain, like a benediction from heaven. Beyond
the planet hung its moon, a scarred golden crescent, and he had wondered
how many generations of men had looked up to it, or watched its light
like a broken bridge across moving waters. Against the enormous cold of
the sky--utter black out to the distant coils of the nebulae, thronging
with a million frosty points of diamond-hard blaze that were the
stars--Earth had stood as a sign of haven. To Jorun, who came from
Galactic center and its uncountable hosts of suns, heaven was bare, this
was the outer fringe where the stars thinned away toward hideous
immensity. He had shivered a little, drawn the envelope of air and
warmth closer about him, with a convulsive movement. The silence drummed
in his head. Then he streaked for the north-pole rendezvous of his
group.

_Well_, he thought now, _we have a pretty routine job. The first
expedition here, five years ago, prepared the natives for the fact
they'd have to go. Our party simply has to organize these docile
peasants in time for the ships._ But it had meant a lot of hard work,
and he was tired. It would be good to finish the job and get back home.

Or would it?

He thought of flying with Zarek, his team-mate, from the rendezvous to
this area assigned as theirs. Plains like oceans of grass, wind-rippled,
darkened with the herds of wild cattle whose hoofbeats were a thunder in
the earth; forests, hundreds of kilometers of old and mighty trees,
rivers piercing them in a long steel gleam; lakes where fish leaped;
spilling sunshine like warm rain, radiance so bright it hurt his eyes,
cloud-shadows swift across the land. It had all been empty of man, but
still there was a vitality here which was almost frightening to Jorun.
His own grim world of moors and crags and spin-drift seas was a niggard
beside this; here life covered the earth, filled the oceans, and made
the heavens clangerous around him. He wondered if the driving energy
within man, the force which had raised him to the stars, made him
half-god and half-demon, if that was a legacy of Terra.

Well--man had changed; over the thousands of years, natural and
controlled adaptation had fitted him to the worlds he had colonized, and
most of his many races could not now feel at home here. Jorun thought of
his own party: round, amber-skinned Chuli from a tropic world,
complaining bitterly about the cold and dryness; gay young Cluthe,
gangling and bulge-chested; sophisticated Taliuvenna of the flowing dark
hair and the lustrous eyes--no, to them Earth was only one more planet,
out of thousands they had seen in their long lives.

_And I'm a sentimental fool._


2

He could have willed the vague regret out of his trained nervous system,
but he didn't want to. This was the last time human eyes would ever look
on Earth, and somehow Jorun felt that it should be more to him than just
another psychotechnic job.

"Hello, good sir."

He turned at the voice and forced his tired lips into a friendly smile.
"Hello, Julith," he said. It was a wise policy to learn the names of the
townspeople, at least, and she was a great-great-granddaughter of the
Speaker.

She was some thirteen or fourteen years old, a freckle-faced child with
a shy smile, and steady green eyes. There was a certain awkward grace
about her, and she seemed more imaginative than most of her stolid race.
She curtsied quaintly for him, her bare foot reaching out under the long
smock which was daily female dress here.

"Are you busy, good sir?" she asked.

"Well, not too much," said Jorun. He was glad of a chance to talk; it
silenced his thoughts. "What can I do for you?"

"I wondered--" She hesitated, then, breathlessly: "I wonder if you could
give me a lift down to the beach? Only for an hour or two. It's too far
to walk there before I have to be home, and I can't borrow a car, or
even a horse. If it won't be any trouble, sir."

"Mmmm--shouldn't you be at home now? Isn't there milking and so on to
do?"

"Oh, I don't live on a farm, good sir. My father is a baker."

"Yes, yes, so he is. I should have remembered." Jorun considered for an
instant. There was enough to do in town, and it wasn't fair for him to
play hooky while Zarek worked alone. "Why do you want to go to the
beach, Julith?"

"We'll be busy packing up," she said. "Starting tomorrow, I guess. This
is my last chance to see it."

Jorun's mouth twisted a little. "All right," he said; "I'll take you."

"You are very kind, good sir," she said gravely.

He didn't reply, but held out his arm, and she clasped it with one hand
while her other arm gripped his waist. The generator inside his skull
responded to his will, reaching out and clawing itself to the fabric of
forces and energies which was physical space. They rose quietly, and
went so slowly seaward that he didn't have to raise a wind-screen.

"Will we be able to fly like this when we get to the stars?" she asked.

"I'm afraid not, Julith," he said. "You see, the people of my
civilization are born this way. Thousands of years ago, men learned how
to control the great basic forces of the cosmos with only a small bit of
energy. Finally they used artificial mutation--that is, they changed
themselves, slowly, over many generations, until their brains grew a new
