acid the silicic acid is at first held in solution to a large extent.
Immediate treatment of the fused mass with strong acid is likely
to cause a semi-gelatinous silicic acid to separate at once and to
inclose alkali salts or alumina.

A flocculent residue will often remain after the decomposition of the
fused mass is effected. This is usually partially dehydrated silicic
acid and does not require further treatment at this point. The
progress of the dehydration is indicated by the behavior of the
solution, which as evaporation proceeds usually gelatinizes. On this
account it is necessary to allow the solution to evaporate on a steam
bath, or to stir it vigorously, to avoid loss by spattering.]

[Note 2: To obtain an approximately pure silica, the residue after
evaporation must be thoroughly extracted by warming with hydrochloric
acid, and the solution freely diluted to prevent, as far as possible,
the inclosure of the residual salts in the particles of silica. The
filtration should take place without delay, as the dehydrated silica
slowly dissolves in hydrochloric acid on standing.]

[Note 3: It has been shown by Hillebrand that silicic acid cannot be
completely dehydrated by a single evaporation and heating, nor by
several such treatments, unless an intermediate filtration of the
silica occurs. If, however, the silica is removed and the filtrates
are again evaporated and the residue heated, the amount of silica
remaining in solution is usually negligible, although several
evaporations and filtrations are required with some silicates to
insure absolute accuracy.

It is probable that temperatures above 100 deg.C. are not absolutely
necessary to dehydrate the silica; but it is recommended, as tending
to leave the silica in a better condition for filtration than when
the lower temperature of the water bath is used. This, and many other
points in the analysis of silicates, are fully discussed by Dr.
Hillebrand in the admirable monograph on "The Analysis of Silicate and
Carbonate Rocks," Bulletin No. 700 of the United States Geological
Survey.

The double evaporation and filtration spoken of above are essential
because of the relatively large amount of alkali salts (sodium
chloride) present after evaporation. For the highest accuracy in the
determination of silica, or of iron and alumina, it is also necessary
to examine for silica the precipitate produced in the filtrate by
ammonium hydroxide by fusing it with acid potassium sulphate and
solution of the fused mass in water. The insoluble silica is filtered,
washed, and weighed, and the weight added to the weight of silica
previously obtained.]

[Note 4: Aluminium and iron are likely to be thrown down as basic
salts from hot, very dilute solutions of their chlorides, as a result
of hydrolysis. If the silica were washed only with hot water, the
solution of these chlorides remaining in the filter after the passage
of the original filtrate would gradually become so dilute as to throw
down basic salts within the pores of the filter, which would remain
with the silica. To avoid this, an acid wash-water is used until the
aluminium and iron are practically removed. The acid is then removed
by water.]


IGNITION AND TESTING OF SILICA

PROCEDURE.--Transfer the two washed filters belonging to each
determination to a platinum crucible, which need not be previously
weighed, and burn off the filter (Note 1). Ignite for thirty minutes
over the blast lamp with the cover on the crucible, and then for
periods of ten minutes, until the weight is constant.

When a constant weight has been obtained, pour into the crucible about
3 cc. of water, and then 3 cc. of hydrofluoric acid. !This must be
done in a hood with a good draft and great care must be taken not to
come into contact with the acid or to inhale its fumes (Note 2!).

If the precipitate has dissolved in this quantity of acid, add two
drops of concentrated sulphuric acid, and heat very slowly (always
under the hood) until all the liquid has evaporated, finally igniting
to redness. Cool in a desiccator, and weigh the crucible and residue.
Deduct this weight from the previous weight of crucible and impure
silica, and from the difference calculate the percentage of silica in
the sample (Note 3).

[Note 1: The silica undergoes no change during the ignition beyond the
removal of all traces of water; but Hillebrand (!loc. cit.!) has shown
that the silica holds moisture so tenaciously that prolonged ignition
over the blast lamp is necessary to remove it entirely. This finely
divided, ignited silica tends to absorb moisture, and should be
weighed quickly.]

[Note 2: Notwithstanding all precautions, the ignited precipitate of
silica is rarely wholly pure. It is tested by volatilisation of the
silica as silicon fluoride after solution in hydrofluoric acid, and,
if the analysis has been properly conducted, the residue, after
treatment with the acids and ignition, should not exceed 1 mg.

The acid produces ulceration if brought into contact with the skin,
and its fumes are excessively harmful if inhaled.]

[Note 3: The impurities are probably weighed with the original
precipitate in the form of oxides. The addition of the sulphuric
acid displaces the hydrofluoric acid, and it may be assumed that the
resulting sulphates (usually of iron or aluminium) are converted to
oxides by the final ignition.

It is obvious that unless the sulphuric and hydrofluoric acids used
are known to leave no residue on evaporation, a quantity equal to that
employed in the analysis must be evaporated and a correction applied
for any residue found.]

[Note 4: If the silicate to be analyzed is shown by a previous
qualitative examination to be completely decomposable, it may be
directly treated with hydrochloric acid, the solution evaporated to
dryness, and the silica dehydrated and further treated as described in
the case of the feldspar after fusion.

A silicate which gelatinizes on treatment with acids should be mixed
first with a little water, and the strong acid added in small portions
with stirring, otherwise the gelatinous silicic acid incloses
particles of the original silicate and prevents decomposition. The
water, by separating the particles and slightly lessening the rapidity
of action, prevents this difficulty. This procedure is one which
applies in general to the solution of fine mineral powders in acids.

If a small residue remains undecomposed by the treatment of the
silicate with acid, this may be filtered, washed, ignited and fused
with sodium carbonate and a solution of the fused mass added to the
original acid solution. This double procedure has an advantage, in
that it avoids adding so large a quantity of sodium salts as is
required for disintegration of the whole of the silicate by the fusion
method.]




PART IV

STOICHIOMETRY


The problems with which the analytical chemist has to deal are not, as
a matter of actual fact, difficult either to solve or to understand.
That they appear difficult to many students is due to the fact that,
instead of understanding the principles which underlie each of the
small number of types into which these problems may be grouped, each
problem is approached as an individual puzzle, unrelated to others
already solved or explained. This attitude of mind should be carefully
avoided.

It is obvious that ability to make the calculations necessary for
the interpretation of analytical data is no less important than the
manipulative skill required to obtain them, and that a moderate time
spent in the careful study of the solutions of the typical problems
which follow may save much later embarrassment.

1. It is often necessary to calculate what is known as a "chemical
factor," or its equivalent logarithmic value called a "log factor,"
for the conversion of the weight of a given chemical substance into an
equivalent weight of another substance. This is, in reality, a very
simple problem in proportion, making use of the atomic or molecular
weights of the substances in question which are chemically equivalent
to each other. One of the simplest cases of this sort is the
following: What is the factor for the conversion of a given weight of
barium sulphate (BaSO_{4}) into an equivalent weight of sulphur (S)?
The molecular weight of BaSO_{4} is 233.5. There is one atom of S in
the molecule and the atomic weight of S is 32.1. The chemical factor
is, therefore, 32.1/233.5, or 0.1375 and the weight of S corresponding
to a given weight of BaSO_{4} is found by multiplying the weight of
BaSO_{4} by this factor. If the problem takes the form, "What is
the factor for the conversion of a given weight of ferric oxide
(Fe_{2}O_{3}) into ferrous oxide (FeO), or of a given weight of
mangano-manganic oxide (Mn_{3}O_{4}) into manganese (Mn)?" the
principle involved is the same, but it must then be noted that, in the
first instance, each molecule of Fe_{2}O_{3} will be equivalent to two
molecules of FeO, and in the second instance that each molecule of
Mn_{3}O_{4} is equivalent to three atoms of Mn. The respective factors
then become

(2FeO/Fe_{2}O_{3}) or (143.6/159.6) and (3Mn/Mn_{3}O_{4}) or
(164.7/228.7).

It is obvious that the arithmetical processes involved in this type
of problem are extremely simple. It is only necessary to observe
carefully the chemical equivalents. It is plainly incorrect to express
the ratio of ferrous to ferric oxide as (FeO/Fe_{2}O_{3}), since each
molecule of the ferric oxide will yield two molecules of the ferrous
oxide. Mistakes of this sort are easily made and constitute one of the
most frequent sources of error.

2. A type of problem which is slightly more complicated in appearance,
but exactly comparable in principle, is the following: "What is the
factor for the conversion of a given weight of ferrous sulphate
(FeSO_{4}), used as a reducing agent against potassium permanganate,
into the equivalent weight of sodium oxalate (Na_{2}C_{2}O_{4})?" To
determine the chemical equivalents in such an instance it is necessary
to inspect the chemical reactions involved. These are:

10FeSO_{4} + 2KMnO_{4} + 8H_{2}SO_{4} --> 5Fe_{2}(SO_{4})_{3} +
K_{2}SO_{4} + 2MnSO_{4} + 8H_{2}O,

5Na_{2}C_{2}O_{4} + 2KMnO_{4} + 8H_{2}SO_{4} --> 5Na_{2}SO_{4} +
10CO_{2} + K_{2}SO_{4} + 2MnSO_{4} + 8H_{2}O.

It is evident that 10FeSO_{4} in the one case, and 5Na_{2}C_{2}O_{4}
in the other, each react with 2KMnO_{4}. These molecular
quantities are therefore equivalent, and the factor becomes
(10FeSO_{4}/5Na_{2}C_{2}O_{4}) or (2FeSO_{4}/Na_{2}C_{2}O_{4}) or
(303.8/134).

Again, let it be assumed that it is desired to determine the
factor required for the conversion of a given weight of potassium
permanganate (KMnO_{4}) into an equivalent weight of potassium
bichromate (K_{2}Cr_{2}O_{7}), each acting as an oxidizing agent
against ferrous sulphate. The reactions involved are:

10FeSO_{4} + 2KMnO_{4} + 8H_{2}SO_{4} --> 5Fe_{2}(SO_{4})_{3} +
K_{2}SO_{4} + 2MnSO_{4} + 8H_{2}O,

6FeSO_{4} + K_{2}Cr_{2}O_{7} + 7H_{2}SO_{4} --> 3Fe_{2}(SO_{3})_{3} +
K_{2}SO_{4} + Cr_{2}(SO_{4})_{3} + 7H_{2}O.

An inspection of these equations shows that 2KMO_{4} react with
10FeSO_{4}, while K_{2}Cr_{2}O_{7} reacts with 6FeSO_{4}. These are
not equivalent, but if the first equation is multiplied by 3 and the
second by 5 the number of molecules of FeSO_{4} is then the same in
both, and the number of molecules of KMnO_{4} and K_{2}Cr_{2}O_{7}
reacting with these 30 molecules become 6 and 5 respectively. These
are obviously chemically equivalent and the desired factor is
expressed by the fraction (6KMnO_{4}/5K_{2}Cr_{2}O_{7}) or
(948.0/1471.0).

3. It is sometimes necessary to calculate the value of solutions
according to the principles just explained, when several successive
reactions are involved. Such problems may be solved by a series of
proportions, but it is usually possible to eliminate the common
factors and solve but a single one. For example, the amount of MnO_{2}
in a sample of the mineral pyrolusite may be determined by dissolving
the mineral in hydrochloric acid, absorbing the evolved chlorine in a
solution of potassium iodide, and measuring the liberated iodine
by titration with a standard solution of sodium thiosulphate. The
reactions involved are:

MnO_{2} + 4HCl --> MnCl_{2} + 2H_{2}O + Cl_{2}
Cl_{2} + 2KI --> I_{2} + 2KCl
I_{2} + 2Na_{2}S_{2}O_{3} --> 2NaI + Na_{2}S_{4}O_{6}

Assuming that the weight of thiosulphate corresponding to the
volume of sodium thiosulphate solution used is known, what is the
corresponding weight of manganese dioxide? From the reactions given
above, the following proportions may be stated:

2Na_{2}S_{2}O_{3}:I_{2} = 316.4:253.9,

I_{2}:Cl_{2} = 253.9:71,

Cl_{2}:MnO_{2} = 71:86.9.

After canceling the common factors, there remains
2Na_{2}S_{2}O_{3}:MnO_{2} = 316.4:86.9, and the factor for the
conversion of thiosulphate into an equivalent of manganese dioxide is
86.9/316.4.

4. To calculate the volume of a reagent required for a specific
operation, it is necessary to know the exact reaction which is to be
brought about, and, as with the calculation of factors, to keep in
mind the molecular relations between the reagent and the substance
reacted upon. For example, to estimate the weight of barium chloride
necessary to precipitate the sulphur from 0.1 gram of pure pyrite
(FeS_{2}), the proportion should read

       488.           120.0
  2(BaCl_{2}.2H_{2}O):FeS_{2} = x:0.1,

where !x! represents the weight of the chloride required. Each of the
two atoms of sulphur will form upon oxidation a molecule of sulphuric
acid or a sulphate, which, in turn, will require a molecule of the
barium chloride for precipitation. To determine the quantity of the
barium chloride required, it is necessary to include in its molecular
weight the water of crystallization, since this is inseparable from
the chloride when it is weighed. This applies equally to other similar
instances.

If the strength of an acid is expressed in percentage by weight, due
regard must be paid to its specific gravity. For example, hydrochloric
acid (sp. gr. 1.12) contains 23.8 per cent HCl !by weight!; that is,
0.2666 gram HCl in each cubic centimeter.

5. It is sometimes desirable to avoid the manipulation required for
the separation of the constituents of a mixture of substances by
making what is called an "indirect analysis." For example, in the
analysis of silicate rocks, the sodium and potassium present may be
obtained in the form of their chlorides and weighed together. If the
weight of such a mixture is known, and also the percentage of chlorine
present, it is possible to calculate the amount of each chloride in
the mixture. Let it be assumed that the weight of the mixed chlorides
is 0.15 gram, and that it contains 53 per cent of chlorine.

The simplest solution of such a problem is reached through algebraic
methods. The weight of chlorine is evidently 0.15 x 0.53, or 0.0795
gram. Let x represent the weight of sodium chloride present and y
that of potassium chloride. The molecular weight of NaCl is 58.5 and
that of KCl is 74.6. The atomic weight of chlorine is 35.5. Then

x + y = 0.15
(35.5/58.5)x + (35.5/74.6)y = 0.00795

Solving these equations for x shows the weight of NaCl to be 0.0625
gram. The weight of KCl is found by subtracting this from 0.15.

The above is one of the most common types of indirect analyses. Others
are more complex but they can be reduced to algebraic expressions and
solved by their aid. It should, however, be noted that the results
obtained by these indirect methods cannot be depended upon for high
accuracy, since slight errors in the determination of the common
constituent, as chlorine in the above mixture, will cause considerable
variations in the values found for the components. They should not be
employed when direct methods are applicable, if accuracy is essential.




PROBLEMS


(The reactions necessary for the solution of these problems are either
stated with the problem or may be found in the earlier text. In the
calculations from which the answers are derived, the atomic weights
given on page 195 have been employed, using, however, only the first
decimal but increasing this by 1 when the second decimal is 5 or
above. Thus, 39.1 has been taken as the atomic weight of potassium,
32.1 for sulphur, etc. This has been done merely to secure uniformity
of treatment, and the student should remember that it is always well
to take into account the degree of accuracy desired in a particular
instance in determining the number of decimal places to retain.
Four-place logarithms were employed in the calculations. Where four
figures are given in the answer, the last figure may vary by one or
(rarely) by two units, according to the method by which the problem is
solved.)


VOLUMETRIC ANALYSIS

1. How many grams of pure potassium hydroxide are required for exactly
1 liter of normal alkali solution?

!Answer!: 56.1 grams.

2. Calculate the equivalent in grams (a) of sulphuric acid as an acid;
(b) of hydrochloric acid as an acid; (c) of oxalic acid as an acid;
(d) of nitric acid as an acid.

!Answers!: (a) 49.05; (b) 36.5; (c) 63; (d) 63.

3. Calculate the equivalent in grams of (a) potassium hydroxide;
(b) of sodium carbonate; (c) of barium hydroxide; (d) of sodium
bicarbonate when titrated with an acid.

!Answers!: (a) 56.1; (b) 53.8; (c) 85.7; (d) 84.

4. What is the equivalent in grams of Na_{2}HPO_{4} (a) as a
phosphate; (b) as a sodium salt?

!Answers!: (a) 47.33; (b) 71.0.

5. A sample of aqueous hydrochloric acid has a specific gravity
of 1.12 and contains 23.81 per cent hydrochloric acid by weight.
Calculate the grams and the milliequivalents of hydrochloric acid
(HCl) in each cubic centimeter of the aqueous acid.

!Answers!: 0.2667 gram; 7.307 milliequivalents.

6. How many cubic centimeters of hydrochloric acid (sp. gr. 1.20
containing 39.80 per cent HCl by weight) are required to furnish 36.45
grams of the gaseous compound?

!Answer!: 76.33 cc.

7. A given solution contains 0.1063 equivalents of hydrochloric acid
in 976 cc. What is its normal value?

!Answer!: 0.1089 N.

8. In standardizing a hydrochloric acid solution it is found that
47.26 cc. of hydrochloric acid are exactly equivalent to 1.216 grams
of pure sodium carbonate, using methyl orange as an indicator. What is
the normal value of the hydrochloric acid?

!Answer!: 0.4855 N.

9. Convert 42.75 cc. of 0.5162 normal hydrochloric acid to the
equivalent volume of normal hydrochloric acid.

!Answer!: 22.07 cc.

10. A solution containing 25.27 cc. of 0.1065 normal hydrochloric acid
is added to one containing 92.21 cc. of 0.5431 normal sulphuric acid
and 50 cc. of exactly normal potassium hydroxide added from a pipette.
Is the solution acid or alkaline? How many cubic centimeters of
0.1 normal acid or alkali must be added to exactly neutralize the
solution?

!Answer!: 27.6 cc. alkali (solution is acid).

11. By experiment the normal value of a sulphuric acid solution is
found to be 0.5172. Of this acid 39.65 cc. are exactly equivalent to
21.74 cc. of a standard alkali solution. What is the normal value of
the alkali?

!Answer!: 0.9432 N.

12. A solution of sulphuric acid is standardized against a sample of
calcium carbonate which has been previously accurately analyzed and
found to contain 92.44% CaCO_{3} and no other basic material. The
sample weighing 0.7423 gram was titrated by adding an excess of acid
(42.42 cc.) and titrating the excess with sodium hydroxide solution
(11.22 cc.). 1 cc. of acid is equivalent to 0.9976 cc. of sodium
hydroxide. Calculate the normal value of each.

!Answers!: Acid 0.4398 N; alkali 0.4409 N.

13. Given five 10 cc. portions of 0.1 normal hydrochloric acid, (a)
how many grams of silver chloride will be precipitated by a portion
when an excess of silver nitrate is added? (b) how many grams of pure
anhydrous sodium carbonate (Na_{2}CO_{3}) will be neutralized by a
portion of it? (c) how many grams of silver will there be in the
silver chloride formed when an excess of silver nitrate is added to a
portion? (d) how many grams of iron will be dissolved to FeCl_{2} by a
portion of it? (e) how many grams of magnesium chloride will be formed
and how many grams of carbon dioxide liberated when an excess of
magnesium carbonate is treated with a portion of the acid?
