This is the first volume of a treatise on the xxxix. Articles, and
contains the Introduction and Articles i.-xviii.


R.L. OTTLEY

THE DOCTRINE OF THE INCARNATION. By R.L. OTTLEY, M.A., late fellow of
Magdalen College, Oxon. Principal of Pusey House. _In two volumes.
Demy 8vo._

This is the first volume of a book intended to be an aid in the study
of the doctrine of the Incarnation. It deals with the leading points
in the history of the doctrine, its content, and its relation to other
truths of Christian faith.


F.S. GRANGER

THE WORSHIP OF THE ROMANS. By F.S. GRANGER, M.A., Litt.D., Professor
of Philosophy at University College, Nottingham. _Crown 8vo. 6s._

The author has attempted to delineate that group of beliefs which
stood in close connection with the Roman religion, and among the
subjects treated are Dreams, Nature Worship, Roman Magic, Divination,
Holy Places, Victims, etc. Thus the book is, apart from its immediate
subject, a contribution to folk-lore and comparative psychology.


L.T. HOBHOUSE

THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE. By L.T. HOBHOUSE, Fellow and Tutor of Corpus
College, Oxford. _Demy 8vo. 21s._

'The Theory of Knowledge' deals with some of the fundamental problems
of Metaphysics and Logic, by treating them in connection with one
another. PART I. begins with the elementary conditions of knowledge
such as Sensation and Memory, and passes on to Judgment. PART II.
deals with Inference in general, and Induction in particular. PART
III. deals with the structural conceptions of Knowledge, such as
Matter, Substance, and Personality. The main purpose of the book is
constructive, but it is also critical, and various objections are
considered and met.


W.H. FAIRBROTHER

THE PHILOSOPHY OF T.H. GREEN. By W.H. FAIRBROTHER, M.A., Lecturer at
Lincoln College, Oxford. _Crown 8vo. 5s._

This volume is expository, not critical, and is intended for senior
students at the Universities, and others, as a statement of Green's
teaching and an introduction to the study of Idealist Philosophy.


F.W. BUSSELL

THE SCHOOL OF PLATO: its Origin and Revival under the Roman Empire. By
F.W. BUSSELL, M.A., Fellow and Tutor of Brasenose College, Oxford. _In
two volumes. Demy 8vo. Vol. I._

In these volumes the author has attempted to reach the central
doctrines of Ancient Philosophy, or the place of man in created
things, and his relation to the outer world of Nature or Society, and
to the Divine Being. The first volume comprises a survey of the entire
period of a thousand years, and examines the cardinal notions of the
Hellenic, Hellenistic, and Roman ages from this particular point of
view.

In succeeding divisions the works of Latin and Greek writers under the
Empire will be more closely studied, and detailed essays will discuss
their various systems, e.g. Cicero, Manilius, Lucretius, Seneca,
Aristides, Appuleius, and the New Platonists of Alexandria and Athens.


C.J. SHEBBEARE

THE GREEK THEORY OF THE STATE AND THE NONCONFORMIST CONSCIENCE: a
Socialistic Defence of some Ancient Institutions. By CHARLES JOHN
SHEBBEARE, B.A., Christ Church, Oxford. _Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d._



HISTORY AND BIOGRAPHY


EDWARD GIBBON

THE DECLINE AND FALL OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. By EDWARD GIBBON. A New
Edition, edited with Notes, Appendices, and Maps by J.B. BURY, M.A.,
Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin. _In Seven Volumes. Crown 8vo. 6s.
each. Vol I._

The time seems to have arrived for a new edition of Gibbon's great
work--furnished with such notes and appendices as may bring it up to
the standard of recent historical research. Edited by a scholar who
has made this period his special study, and issued in a convenient
form and at a moderate price, this edition should fill an obvious
void. The volumes will be issued at intervals of a few months.


E.L.S. HORSBURGH

THE CAMPAIGN OF WATERLOO. By E.L.S. HORSBURGH, B.A. _With Plans. Crown
8vo. 5s._

This is a full account of the final struggle of Napoleon, and contains
a careful study from a strategical point of view of the movements of
the French and allied armies.


FLINDERS PETRIE

EGYPTIAN DECORATIVE ART. By W.M. FLINDERS PETRIE, D.C.L. _With 120
Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d._

A book which deals with a subject which has never yet been seriously
treated.


EGYPTIAN TALES. Translated from the Papyri, and edited with notes by
W.M. FLINDERS PETRIE, LL.D., D.C.L. Illustrated by TRISTRAM ELLIS.
_Part II. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d_.


W.H. HUTTON

THE LIFE OF SIR THOMAS MORE. By W.H. HUTTON, M.A., Author of 'William
Laud.' _With Portraits. Crown 8vo. 5s._

This book contains the result of some research and a considerable
amount of information not contained in other Lives. It also contains
six Portraits after Holbein of More and his relations.


R.F. HORTON

JOHN HOWE. By R.F. HORTON, D.D., Author of 'The Bible and
Inspiration,' etc. _With a Portrait. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d. [Leaders of
Religion_.


F. M'CUNN

THE LIFE OF JOHN KNOX. By F. M'CUNN. With a Portrait. _Crown 8vo. 3s.
6d. [Leaders of Religion_.



GENERAL LITERATURE


W.B. WORSFOLD

SOUTH AFRICA: Its History and its Future. By W. BASIL WORSFOLD, M.A.
_With a Map. Crown 8vo. 6s_.

This volume contains a short history of South Africa, and a full
account of its present position; and of its extraordinary capacities.


J.S. SHEDLOCK

THE PIANOFORTE SONATA: Its Origin and Development. By J.S. SHEDLOCK.
_Crown 8vo. 5s._

This is a practical and not unduly technical account of the Sonata
treated historically. It contains several novel features, and an
account of various works little known to the English public.


F.W. THEOBALD

INSECT LIFE. By F.W. THEOBALD, M.A. _Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d.
[Univ. Extension Series_.


R.F. BOWMAKER

THE HOUSING OF THE WORKING CLASSES. By F. BOWMAKER. _Crown 8vo. 2s.6d.
[Social Questions Series_.


W. CUNNINGHAM

MODERN CIVILISATION IN SOME OF ITS ECONOMIC ASPECTS. By W. CUNNINGHAM,
LL.D., Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge. _Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d.
[Social Questions Series_.


M. KAUFMANN.

SOCIALISM AND MODERN THOUGHT. By M. KAUFMANN, _Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d.
[Social Questions Series_.



CLASSICAL TRANSLATIONS


_NEW VOLUMES_

_Crown 8vo. Finely printed and bound in blue buckram._


SOPHOCLES--Electra and Ajax. Translated by E.D.A. MORSHEAD, M.A., late
Scholar of New College, Oxford; Assistant Master at Winchester. _2s.
6d_.

CICERO--De Natura Deorum. Translated by F. BROOKS, M.A. _3s. 6d_.



EDUCATIONAL


A.M.M. STEDMAN

STEPS TO GREEK. By A.M.M. STEDMAN, M.A. _18mo. 1s. 6d_.

A very easy introduction to Greek, with Greek-English and
English-Greek Exercises.


F.D. SWIFT

DEMOSTHENES AGAINST CONON AND CALLICLES. Edited, with Notes,
Appendices, and Vocabulary, by F. DARWIN SWIFT, M.A., formerly Scholar
of Queen's College, Oxford; Assistant Master at Denstone College.
_Fcap, 8vo. 2s._



A LIST OF

MESSRS. METHUEN'S

PUBLICATIONS

POETRY

RUDYARD KIPLING. BARRACK-ROOM BALLADS; And Other Verses. By RUDYARD
KIPLING. _Eighth Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s_.

A Special Presentation Edition, bound in white buckram, with extra
gilt ornament. _7s. 6d_.

'Mr. Kipling's verse is strong, vivid, full of character ...
Unmistakable genius rings in every line.'--_Times_.

'The disreputable lingo of Cockayne is henceforth justified before the
world; for a man of genius has taken it in hand, and has shown, beyond
all cavilling, that in its way it also is a medium for literature.
You are grateful, and you say to yourself, half in envy and half in
admiration: "Here is a _book_; here, or one is a Dutchman, is one of
the books of the year." '_--National Observer_.

'"Barrack-Room Ballads" contains some of the best work that Mr.
Kipling has ever done, which is saying a good deal. "Fuzzy-Wuzzy,"
"Gunga Din," and "Tommy," are, in our opinion, altogether superior
to anything of the kind that English literature has hitherto
produced.'--_Athenaeum_.

'The ballads teem with imagination, they palpitate with emotion. We
read them with laughter and tears; the metres throb in our pulses, the
cunningly ordered words tingle with life; and if this be not poetry,
what is?'--_Pall Mall Gazette_.

HENLEY. LYRA HEROIC A: An Anthology selected from the best English
Verse of the 16th, 17th, 18th, and 19th Centuries. By WILLIAM ERNEST
HENLEY. _Crown 8vo. Buckram, gilt top. 6s_.

Mr. Henley has brought to the task of selection an instinct alike for
poetry and for chivalry which seems to us quite wonderfully, and even
unerringly, right.'--_Guardian_.


"Q" THE GOLDEN POMP: A Procession of English Lyrics from Surrey to
Shirley, arranged by A.T. QUILLER COUCH. _Crown 8vo. Buckram. 6s_.

Also 40 copies on hand-made paper. _Demy 8vo. L1, 1s_. net.

Also 15 copies on Japanese paper. _Demy 8vo. L2, 2s_. net

'A delightful volume: a really golden "Pomp."'--SPECTATOR.

'Of the many anthologies of 'old rhyme' recently made, Mr. Couch's
seems the richest in its materials, and the most artistic in its
arrangement. Mr. Couch's notes are admirable; and Messrs. Methuen are
to be congratulated on the format of the sumptuous volume.'--_Realm_.


"Q." GREEN BAYS: Verses and Parodies. By "Q.," Author of 'Dead Man's
Rock,' etc. _Second Edition. Fcap. 8vo. 3s. 6d._

'The verses display a rare and versatile gift of parody, great command
of metre, and a very pretty turn of humour.'--_Times_.


H.O. BEECHING. LYRA SACRA: An Anthology of Sacred Verse. Edited by
H.C. BEECHING, M.A. _Crown 8vo. Buckram, gilt-top. 6s._

'An anthology of high excellence.'--_Athenaeum_.

'A charming selection, which maintains a lofty standard of
excellence.'--_Times_.


YEATS. AN ANTHOLOGY OF IRISH VERSE. Edited by W.B. YEATS. _Crown 8vo.
3s. 6d_.

'An attractive and catholic selection.'--_Times_.

'It is edited by the most original and most accomplished of modern
Irish poets, and against his editing but a single objection can be
brought, namely, that it excludes from the collection his own delicate
lyrics.'--_Saturday Review_.


MACKAY. A SONG OF THE SEA: MY LADY OF DREAMS, AND OTHER POEMS. By ERIC
MACKAY, Author of 'The Love Letters of a Violinist.' _Second Edition.
Fcap. 8vo, gilt top, 5s._

'Everywhere Mr. Mackay displays himself the master of a style marked
by all the characteristics of the best rhetoric. He has a keen sense
of rhythm and of general balance; his verse is excellently sonorous,
and would lend itself admirably to elocutionary art.... Its main merit
is its "long resounding march and energy divine." Mr. Mackay is full
of enthusiasm, and for the right things. His new book is as healthful
as it is eloquent.'--_Globe_.

'Throughout the book the poetic workmanship is fine.'--_Scotsman_.


JANE BARLOW. THE BATTLE OF THE FROGS AND MICE, translated by JANE
BARLOW, Author of 'Irish Idylls,' and pictured by F.D. BEDFORD. _Small
4to. 6s. net_.


IBSEN. BRAND. A Drama by HENRIK IBSEN. Translated by WILLIAM WILSON.
_Crown 8vo. Second Edition. 3s. 6d._

'The greatest world-poem of the nineteenth century next to "Faust."
"Brand" will have an astonishing interest for Englishmen. It is in the
same set with "Agamemnon," with "Lear," with the literature that we
now instinctively regard as high and holy.'--_Daily Chronicle_.


"A.G." VERSES TO ORDER. By "A.G." _Cr. 8vo. 2s. 6d net_.

A small volume of verse by a writer whose initials are well known to
Oxford men.

'A capital specimen of light academic poetry. These verses are very
bright and engaging, easy and sufficiently witty.--_St. James's
Gazette_.


Hosken. VERSES BY THE WAY. By J.D. HOSKEN. _Crown 8vo. 5s._


Gale. CRICKET SONGS. By NORMAN GALE. _Crown 8vo. Linen. 2s. 6d_.

Also a limited edition on hand-made paper. _Demy 8vo. 10s. 6d. net._

'As healthy as they are spirited, and ought to have a great
success.'--_Times._
