darkness. He faintly heard what sounded like the distant sighing of
innumerable treetops.

In the rapidly darkening twilight, they came abruptly on a man. He was
standing in a pool, on one leg. A pile of boulders had hidden him from
their view. The water came as far up as his calf. A trifork, similar to
the one Maskull had seen on Disscourn, but smaller, had been stuck in
the mud close by his hand.

They stopped by the side of the pond, and waited. Immediately he became
aware of their presence, the man set down his other leg, and waded out
of the water toward them, picking up his trifork in doing so.

"This is not Maulger, but Catice," said Spadevil.

"Maulger is dead," said Catice, speaking the same tongue as Spadevil,
but with an even harsher accent, so that the tympanum of Maskull's ear
was affected painfully.

The latter saw before him a bowed, powerful individual, advanced in
years. He wore nothing but a scanty loincloth. His trunk was long
and heavy, but his legs were rather short. His face was beardless,
lemon-coloured, and anxious-looking. It was disfigured by a number of
longitudinal ruts, a quarter of an inch deep, the cavities of which
seemed clogged with ancient dirt. The hair of his head was black and
sparse. Instead of the twin membranous organs of Spadevil, he possessed
but one; and this was in the centre of his brow.

Spadevil's dark, solid person stood out from the rest like a reality
among dreams.

"Has the trifork passed to you?" he demanded.

"Yes. Why have you brought this woman to Sant?"

"I have brought another thing to Sant. I have brought the new faith."

Catice stood motionless, and looked troubled. "State it."

"Shall I speak with many words, or few words?"

"If you wish to say what is not, many words will not suffice. If you
wish to say what is, a few words will be enough."

Spadevil frowned.

"To hate pleasure brings pride with it. Pride is a pleasure. To kill
pleasure, we must attach ourselves to duty. While the mind is planning
right action, it has no time to think of pleasure."

"Is that the whole?" asked Catice.

"The truth is simple, even for the simplest man."

"Do you destroy Hator, and all his generations, with a single word?"

"I destroy nature, and set up law."

A long silence followed.

"My probe is double," said Spadevil. "Suffer me to double yours, and you
will see as I see."

"Come you here, you big man!" said Catice to Maskull. Maskull advanced a
step closer.

"Do you follow Spadevil in his new faith?"

"As far as death," exclaimed Maskull.

Catice picked up a flint. "With this stone I strike out one of your
two probes. When you have but one, you will see with me, and you will
recollect with Spadevil. Choose you then the superior faith, and I shall
obey your choice."

"Endure this little pain, Maskull, for the sake of future men," said
Spadevil.

"The pain is nothing," replied Maskull, "but I fear the result."

"Permit me, although I am only a woman, to take his place, Catice," said
Tydomin, stretching out her hand.

He struck at it violently with the flint, and gashed it from wrist to
thumb; the pale carmine blood spouted up. "What brings this kiss-lover
to Sant?" he said. "How does she presume to make the rules of life for
the sons of Hator?"

She bit her lip, and stepped back. "Well then, Maskull, accept! I
certainly should not have played false to Spadevil; but you hardly can."

"If he bids me, I must do it," said Maskull. "But who knows what will
come of it?"

Spadevil spoke. "Of all the descendants of Hator, Catice is the most
wholehearted and sincere. He will trample my truth underfoot, thinking
me a demon sent by Shaping, to destroy the work of this land. But a seed
will escape, and my blood and yours, Tydomin, will wash it. Then men
will know that my destroying evil is their greatest good. But none here
will live to see that."

Maskull now went quite close to Catice, and offered his head. Catice
raised his hand, and after holding the flint poised for a moment,
brought it down with adroitness and force upon the left-hand probe.
Maskull cried out with the pain. The blood streamed down, and the
function of the organ was destroyed.

There was a pause, while he walked to and fro, trying to staunch the
blood.

"What now do you feel, Maskull? What do you see?" inquired Tydomin
anxiously.

He stopped, and stared hard at her. "I now see straight," he said
slowly.

"What does that mean?"

He continued to wipe the blood from his forehead. He looked troubled.
"Henceforward, as long as I live, I shall fight with my nature, and
refuse to feel pleasure. And I advise you to do the same."

Spadevil gazed at him sternly. "Do you renounce my teaching?"

Maskull, however, returned the gaze without dismay. Spadevil's
image-like clearness of form had departed for him; his frowning face he
knew to be the deceptive portico of a weak and confused intellect.

"It is false."

"Is it false to sacrifice oneself for another?" demanded Tydomin.

"I can't argue as yet," said Maskull. "At this moment the world with
its sweetness seems to me a sort of charnel house. I feel a loathing for
everything in it, including myself. I know no more."

"Is there no duty?" asked Spadevil, in a harsh tone.

"It appears to me but a cloak under which we share the pleasure of other
people."

Tydomin pulled at Spadevil's arm. "Maskull has betrayed you, as he has
so many others. Let us go."

He stood fast. "You have changed quickly, Maskull."

Maskull, without answering him, turned to Catice. "Why do men go on
living in this soft, shameful world, when they can kill themselves?"

"Pain is the native air of Surtur's children. To what other air do you
wish to escape?"

"Surtur's children? Is not Surtur Shaping?"

"It is the greatest of lies. It is Shaping's masterpiece."

"Answer, Maskull!" said Spadevil. "Do you repudiate right action?"

"Leave me alone. Go back! I am not thinking of you, and your ideas. I
wish you no harm."

The darkness came on fast. There was another prolonged silence.

Catice threw away the flint, and picked up his staff. "The woman must
return home," he said.

"She was persuaded here, and did not come freely. You, Spadevil, must
die--backslider as you are!"

Tydomin said quietly, "He has no power to enforce this. Are you going to
allow the truth to fall to the ground, Spadevil?"

"It will not perish by my death, but by my efforts to escape from death.
Catice, I accept your judgment."

Tydomin smiled. "For my part, I am too tired to walk farther today, so I
shall die with him."

Catice said to Maskull, "Prove your sincerity. Kill this man and his
mistress, according to the laws of Hator."

"I can't do that. I have travelled in friendship with them."

"You denied duty; and now you must do your duty," said Spadevil, calmly
stroking his beard. "Whatever law you accept, You must obey, without
turning to right or left. Your law commands that we must be stoned; and
it will soon be dark."

"Have you not even this amount of manhood?" exclaimed Tydomin.

Maskull moved heavily. "Be my witness, Catice, that the thing was forced
on me."

"Hator is looking on, and approving," replied Catice.

Maskull then went apart to the pile of boulders scattered by the side
of the pool. He glanced about him, and selected two large fragments of
rock, the heaviest that he thought he could carry. With these in his
arms, he staggered back.

He dropped them on the ground, and stood, recovering his breath. When
he could speak again, he said, "I have a bad heart for the business. Is
there no alternative? Sleep here tonight, Spadevil, and in the morning
go back to where you have come from. No one shall harm you."

Spadevil's ironic smile was lost in the gloom.

"Shall I brood again, Maskull, for still another year, and after that
come back to Sant with other truths? Come, waste no time, but choose the
heavier stone for me, for I am stronger than Tydomin."

Maskull lifted one of the rocks, and stepped out four full paces.
Spadevil confronted him, erect, and waited tranquilly.

The huge stone hurtled through the air. Its flight looked like a dark
shadow. It struck Spadevil full in the face, crushing his features, and
breaking his neck. He died instantaneously.

Tydomin looked away from the fallen man.

"Be very quick, Maskull, and don't let me keep him waiting."

He panted, and raised the second stone. She placed herself in front of
Spadevil's body, and stood there, unsmiling and cold.

The blow caught her between breast and chin, and she fell. Maskull went
to her, and, kneeling on the ground, half-raised her in his arms. There
she breathed out her last sighs.

After that, he laid her down again, and rested heavily on his hands,
while he peered into the dead face. The transition from its heroic,
spiritual expression to the vulgar and grinning mask of Crystalman came
like a flash; but he saw it.

He stood up in the darkness, and pulled Catice toward him.

"Is that the true likeness of Shaping?"

"It is Shaping stripped of illusion."

"How comes this horrible world to exist?"

Catice did not answer.

"Who is Surtur?"

"You will get nearer to him tomorrow; but not here."

"I am wading through too much blood," said Maskull. "Nothing good can
come of it."

"Do not fear change and destruction; but laughter and joy."

Maskull meditated.

"Tell me, Catice. If I had elected to follow Spadevil, would you really
have accepted his faith?"

"He was a great-souled man," replied Catice. "I see that the pride of
our men is only another sprouting-out of pleasure. Tomorrow I too shall
leave Sant, to reflect on all this."

Maskull shuddered. "Then these two deaths were not a necessity, but a
crime!"

"His part was played and henceforward the woman would have dragged down
his ideas, with her soft love and loyalty. Regret nothing, stranger, but
go away at once out of the land."

"Tonight? Where shall I go?"

"To Wombflash, where you will meet the deepest minds. I will put you on
the way."

He linked his arm in Maskull's, and they walked away into the night.
For a mile or more they skirted the edge of the precipice. The wind was
searching, and drove grit into their faces. Through the rifts of the
clouds, stars, faint and brilliant, appeared. Maskull saw no familiar
constellations. He wondered if the sun of earth was visible, and if so
which one it was.

They came to the head of a rough staircase, leading down the cliffside.
It resembled the one by which he had come up; but this descended to the
Wombflash Forest.

"That is your path," said Catice, "and I shall not come any farther."

Maskull detained him. "Say just this, before we part company--why does
pleasure appear so shameful to us?"

"Because in feeling pleasure, we forget our home."

"And that is--"

"Muspel," answered Catice.

Having made this reply, he disengaged himself, and, turning his back,
disappeared into the darkness.

Maskull stumbled down the staircase as best he could. He was tired,
but contemptuous of his pains. His uninjured probe began to discharge
matter. He lowered himself from step to step during what seemed an
interminable time. The rustling and sighing of the trees grew louder as
he approached the bottom; the air became still and warm.

He at last reached level ground. Still attempting to proceed, he began
to trip over roots, and to collide with tree trunks. After this had
happened a few times, he determined to go no farther that night. He
heaped together some dry leaves for a pillow, and immediately flung
himself down to sleep. Deep and heavy unconsciousness seized him almost
instantly.



Chapter 13. THE WOMBFLASH FOREST

He awoke to his third day on Tormance. His limbs ached. He lay on his
side, looking stupidly at his surroundings. The forest was like night,
but that period of the night when the grey dawn is about to break and
objects begin to be guessed at, rather than seen. Two or three amazing
shadowy shapes, as broad as houses, loomed up out of the twilight. He
did not realise that they were trees, until he turned over on his back
and followed their course upward. Far overhead, so high up that he dared
not calculate the height, he saw their tops glittering in the sunlight,
against a tiny patch of blue sky.

Clouds of mist, rolling over the floor of the forest, kept interrupting
his view. In their silent passage they were like phantoms flitting among
the trees. The leaves underneath him were sodden, and heavy drops of
moisture splashed onto his head from time to time.

He continued lying there, trying to reconstruct the events of the
preceding day. His brain was lethargic and confused. Something terrible
had happened, but what it was he could not for a long time recollect.
Then suddenly there came before his eyes that ghastly closing scene at
dusk on the Sant plateau--Spadevil's crushed and bloody features and
Tydomin's dying sighs.... He shuddered convulsively, and felt sick.

The peculiar moral outlook that had dictated these brutal murders had
departed from him during the night, and now he recognised what he
had done! During the whole of the previous day he seemed to have
been labouring under a series of heavy enchantments. First Oceaxe had
enslaved him, then Tydomin, then Spadevil, and lastly Catice. They
had forced him to murder and violate; he had guessed nothing, but had
imagined that he was travelling as a free and enlightened stranger.
What was this nightmare journey for--and would it continue, in the same
way?...

The silence of the forest was so intense that he heard no sound except
the pumping of blood through his arteries.

Putting his hand to his face, he found that his remaining probe had
disappeared and that he was in possession of three eyes. The third eye
was on his forehead, where the old sorb had been. He could not guess its
use. He still had his third arm, but it was nerveless.

Now he puzzled his head for a long time, trying unsuccessfully to recall
that name which had been the last word spoken by Catice.

He got up, with the intention of resuming his journey. He had no toilet
to make, and no meal to prepare. The forest was tremendous. The nearest
tree appeared to him to have a circumference of at least a hundred feet.
Other dim boles looked equally large. But what gave the scene its aspect
of immensity was the vast spaces separating tree from tree. It was
like some gigantic, supernatural hall in a life after death. The
lowest branches were fifty yards or more from the ground. There was
no underbrush; the soil was carpeted only by the dead, wet leaves. He
looked all around him, to find his direction, but the cliffs of Sant,
which he had descended, were invisible--every way was like every other
way, he had no idea which quarter to attack. He grew frightened, and
muttered to himself. Craning his neck back, he stared upward and
tried to discover the points of the compass from the direction of the
sunlight, but it was impossible.

While he was standing there, anxious and hesitating, he heard the drum
taps. The rhythmical beats proceeded from some distance off. The unseen
drummer seemed to be marching through the forest, away from him.

"Surtur!" he said, under his breath. The next moment he marvelled at
himself for uttering the name. That mysterious being had not been in his
thoughts, nor was there any ostensible connection between him and the
drumming.

He began to reflect--but in the meantime the sounds were travelling
away. Automatically he started walking in the same direction. The drum
beats had this peculiarity--though odd and mystical, there was nothing
awe-inspiring in them, but on the contrary they reminded him of some
place and some life with which he was perfectly familiar. Once again
they caused all his other sense impressions to appear false.

The sounds were intermittent. They would go on for a minute, or for
five minutes, and then cease for perhaps a quarter of an hour. Maskull
followed them as well as he could. He walked hard among the huge,
indistinct trees, in the attempt to come up with the origin of the
noise, but the same distance always seemed to separate them. The forest
from now onward descended. The gradient was mostly gentle--about one
foot in ten--but in some places it was much steeper, and in other parts
again it was practically level ground for quite long stretches. There
were great swampy marshes, through which Maskull was obliged to splash.
It was a matter of indifference to him how wet he became--if only he
could catch sight of that individual with the drum. Mile after mile was
covered, and still he was no nearer to doing so.

The gloom of the forest settled down upon his spirits. He felt
despondent, tired, and savage. He had not heard the drum beats for some
while, and was half inclined to discontinue the pursuit.

Passing around a great, columnar tree trunk, he almost stumbled against
a man who was standing on the farther side. He was leaning against
the trunk with one hand, in an attitude of repose. His other hand was
resting on a staff. Maskull stopped short and started at him.

He was nearly naked, and of gigantic build. He over-topped Maskull by a
head. His face and body were faintly phosphorescent. His eyes--three in
number--were pale green and luminous, shining like lamps. His skin was
hairless, but the hair of his head was piled up in thick, black coils,
and fastened like a woman's. His features were absolutely tranquil, but
a terrible, quiet energy seemed to lie just underneath the surface.

