
"Perhaps you are mistaken there," said Gazen, assuming a more serious
air. "In any case I for one shall miss you. In fact, to speak plainly, I
shall feel aggrieved--hurt. You and I are old friends, and when you
asked me to join you in this expedition I was moved by friendship as
well as interest. Certainly, I never dreamed that you would desert the
ship. I thought it was understood that we should sink or swim together.
If you leave us I shan't answer for the consequences. I appreciate the
dilemma in which you are placed, but surely friendship has a prior if a
weaker claim than love-passion. Surely you owe some allegiance to
Carmichael and myself."

"What would you have me do?"

"Only to carry out the original plan of the voyage. Promise me that you
will stick to the ship. Afterwards you can return to Venus and do as you
please. Stanley, you know, made his greatest journey into Africa between
his engagement and his marriage."

"Very well, I promise."

With an agitated mind I repaired to the tryst next evening and waited
for Alumion. How should I break the news to her, and how would she
receive it?

The cool airs of the water, and the glorious pageant of the sunset
calmed my troubled spirit. All day the serene and beamy azure of the
heavens had been plumed with snowy cloudlets of graceful and capricious
form, which, as the sun sank to the horizon, were tinged with fleeting
glows resembling the iris of a dove's neck, or the hues of a dying
dolphin. The great luminary himself was lost in a golden glamour, and a
single bright star shone palely through a rosy mist, which covered all
the southern sky, like a diamond seen through a bridal veil of gauze.

That lone star was the earth.

Strange to say, I felt a kind of yearning towards it, a yearning as of
home-sickness, and it seemed to reproach me for having thought of
forsaking it. I wondered what my friends were doing now within that
blaze; perhaps they were looking at Venus and speculating on what I was
about. How delighted I should be to see them again, and show them my
incomparable wife--but could I ever take her there?

Whilst I was musing, the low sweet voice of Alumion thrilled me to the
marrow. I turned and saw her. She was dressed to-night in a filmy
vesture of opalescent or pearly white, partly diaphanous, and having a
deep fringe of gold. There was a pink blush on her cheek and a sparkle
of girlish love in her celestial eyes. Never had she seemed more
ravishingly beautiful.

    "Beauty too rare for use, for earth too dear."

"You were gazing on the star. You did not hear my coming," she said with
a little feminine pout.

"I was thinking of you, darling."

She smiled again.

"Is it not a lovely star?" she said. "We call it the star of Love--the
star of the Blest."

"It is my home."

"Your home!" she exclaimed with a look of surprise and wonderment.

"You have heard that I come from another world."

"Yes, but I did not know it was a star. And is that beautiful star your
home?"

"Yes, beloved; and I am sorry to say I must return there soon again."

"And I will go! You will take me with you to that fair world!"

I thought of all the crime and folly, the deceit, violence, and
wretchedness lurking behind that pure and peaceful ray. Alas! how could
I tell her the truth and destroy her illusions. She was innocent as a
child, and an instinct warned me to keep the knowledge of evil from her,
while a contrary spirit urged me to speak.

"You might not find it so fair as it looks from here."

"I am sure it cannot be an evil world since you come from it. To us it
is a sacred star."

"If the inhabitants could see it as I do now, perhaps the sight would
make them lead better lives--would shame them into being worthier of
their dwelling-place."

"Are they not good?" she asked with a look of wonder and sorrowful
compassion. "Then how unhappy they must be."

"Some are good and some are bad. Everything is mixed in our world--the
strong and the weak--the rich and the poor--the happy and the
miserable."

"But do the good not help the bad?"

"Yes, to a certain extent; but life is a struggle there; every man for
himself; and the good very often find it hard to secure a little
happiness for themselves."

"How can they be happy when they know that others are suffering and in
want, that others are bad? I long to go and help them."

"Darling, you are an angel, and I adore you; but, believe me, you alone
could do very little. One has already come and taught us how to love and
cherish each other, that the strong should help the weak, the rich give
to the poor, and the happy comfort the wretched. His followers believe
that He came from Heaven, and yet after nineteen hundred years I am
afraid that some of them do not fully understand the plain meaning of
His words, or else find it convenient to ignore them."

"But many of us will go there. We will bring the sinful and the
suffering over here to Womla and make them happy."

"I am touched by your simple faith in us, dearest It does you honour,
but I fear it is mistaken. What would you say if the very people you had
saved and befriended were to turn round and take your country from you,
perhaps even destroy you? Such ingratitude is not unknown in our
world."

"If they are so wicked they have the more need of help."

"In any case, darling, I cannot take you with me, for the vessel we came
in is too small; but I will come back as soon as possible and stay with
you in Womla. How happy we shall be!"

"In Womla--no. We should not be quite at rest."

"Then we shall seek out some desert star where we can live only for each
other."

"You do not understand me. Neither in Womla nor in a desert star could
we be happy in a selfish love, knowing that others were in pain."

"Better I had not spoken of my world at all."

"No, a thousand times no!" cried Alumion with fervour. "For you have
opened up to me a new source of happiness--of blessedness which I have
never known before. Only let us go together to your world and minister
to the unfortunate."

"Well, darling, we will think of it; but see! the sun has set and you
are free again. I came to marry you, but since I must return so soon to
my own world, perhaps it would be well to postpone the ceremony until I
come back here."

"Why should we do that?"

Evidently she had no idea of the dangers of the journey, or how long it
would take.

"If anything should happen to me. If I should die and never return."

"Ah! do not speak of that. The Giver will preserve you."

"But life is uncertain."

"Beloved, I shall never love another but you; therefore, let us unite
ourselves, as we are already united in heart and soul, henceforth and
forever. Come!"

With these words she turned and glided towards the sacred grotto. I held
aside the flowering creeper which hung over the entrance like a curtain,
and followed her within. To my great surprise the interior was neither
dark nor dusky, but filled with a soft and luscious light from myriads
of glow-worms and fire-flies of various colours, which glimmered on the
walls like tiny electric lamps, or sparkled in the facets of the gems
and spars depending from the roof. Judging by their shape and tint I
imagine that some of these incrustations are native crystals of the
diamond and ruby, the sapphire, topaz, and emerald. In a deep recess or
alcove on one side a spring of clear water gushed from the rock into a
natural basin of sinter, enamelled inside and out with the precious
opal. Owing perhaps to the minerals through which it had passed the
liquid shed a delicious perfume in the air, and made a bath fit for the
goddess of beauty.

I had scarcely time to look about me when a strange and wonderful melody
of most entrancing sweetness echoed through the cavern.

"Siloo, Siloo!" cried Alumion softly, and the music, which I cannot
compare to any earthly strain, ceased in a moment. Presently I was more
than startled to see in the gloomier background of the cavern a great
white serpent glide like a ghost along the floor and come straight
towards us. His milk-white body was speckled all over with jewelled
scales, and shone with a pale blue phosphorescence; his eyes blazed in
his head like twin carbuncles, and in spite of my instinctive dread of
snakes, I could not help admiring his repulsive beauty. Presently he
reared his long neck, and faced us with his forked tongue playing out
and in. I shrank back, for I thought he was about to spring upon me; but
Alumion, laughing gaily at my fears, stepped quickly up to him, and
stroked him with her hand. The serpent laid his head caressingly upon
her shoulder and emitted a low faint note of pleasure.

Alumion then took a shallow dish or patera, and, filling it from a vase
which she carried with her set it upon the floor for the snake to feed.

"You don't seem to be afraid of that gruesome reptile," said I
pleasantly.

"Oh, no," she replied smiling. "Siloo knows me very well."

"Tell me, was it he who made the music a little while ago?"

"Yes, and also the noise which alarmed you the first night you wandered
here. The music comes from his head, and the noise is from his tail.
That is why we call him Siloo."

The word, as nearly as I can translate it, means harmony, order,
measure, proportion, in the Womla tongue.

"Does he always live in this cave?"

"Yes, he is a sacred animal with us, and long ago was worshipped and
consulted by our forefathers, and those who preceded them in the
island."

"Is he very old?"

"None can tell how old. Some say he is immortal. Others think he is only
the offspring of the snake worshipped by our forefathers. He is guardian
of the sacred fountain whose waters we are about to drink."

When she had spoken, Alumion tripped to the flowing spring, and, taking
a cup which was standing on the edge of the basin, filled it from the
pellucid stream.

"Give me your hand," she murmured, holding out her own, and lifting her
celestial eyes, so full of love and tenderness, to mine. It was a dainty
hand, plump, lilywhite, and dimpled, with tapering fingers; and as I
felt her warm and silk-soft touch for the first time, my soul melted
within me, and my whole being thrilled with delight. Her rosy lips
parted with pleasure, and a delicate blush mantled her blooming cheeks
and full white throat.

I gazed in rapture on her divine countenance, so like a speaking flower,
the image of a beautiful soul on which neither sorrow, care, nor passion
had ever left a trace.

She raised the cup, and having sipped of the water, handed it to me in
silence. I sought the place where her lips had touched the brim and
drank. Now whether it was phantasy or some foreign ingredient I cannot
tell, but the water seemed to taste like nectar, and to run through all
my veins like wine.

The glamour of the lights and the perfume of the waters wrought upon my
senses, and, yielding to the intoxication of my love, I caught Alumion
to my arms.

Suddenly the most appalling noise rent the air, and caused me to spring
back from my bride in terror. It came from the rattlesnake. His grisly
body swayed to and fro, his gaping mouth displayed all its horrid fangs,
and his large eyes burned like two red-hot coals.

"Siloo, Siloo!" cried Alumion hastily in a tone of command. "Down,
Siloo!"

The serpent at once obeyed her voice and retired again to his dish.

"He thought I was going to harm you," I exclaimed, not without a sense
of relief. "Or perhaps he was jealous of me."

"Remember this is holy ground," responded Alumion.

"Forgive me," I said, feeling her reproof. "My love--your beauty--must
be my excuse."

"We must part now," she continued, with a blinding glance and a
ravishing smile. "I have some last offices to perform here. We shall
meet to-morrow at my father's house."

On my way home the blood coursed through my veins like an immortal ichor
of the gods, full of sweet and inextinguishable fire. Inebriated with
the cup of bliss which I had only tasted, I began to repent me of my
promise to leave Womla.

"To-morrow Alumion will be mine," I reflected, "but for how long? A few
days at the most. It is too bad!"

An idea struck me.

"Gazen," said I that night as soon as I had a convenient opportunity to
speak with him, "I have married Alumion."

"Married her!" he exclaimed, completely taken aback.

"Yes, that is to say, I have gone through the formal ceremony of
marriage. I have drunk of the cup."

"But you promised me you would do nothing of the kind."

"I said I would go back to the earth with you, and I will keep my word.
But I must say that since I agreed to your wishes in the matter, I think
you owe me some concession, and I want you to leave me in Womla while
you go on to Mercury, and then come back here to pick me up. That will
give me a longer honeymoon."

"Impossible, my dear fellow--quite impossible," replied the professor.
"Venus will be too far out of our way home. We have no oxygen to waste,
and can't go hunting you in your love affairs all round the solar
system."

"Very well, then, I shall stay behind."

