past, you have committed treason.

Damn it, Charles!  The military forces of this nation are not your
private army.  Maybe you don't like the way I was elected; maybe you
think your ends justify the means.  Maybe you hate my guts.  None of
this is important now.  What is important is the political survival of
the United Commonwealth, and the sparing of further bloodshed.

Please, I'm asking you, DON'T DO ANYTHING RASH.  Think the matter
through.  You have made veiled threats to me, which if realized, could
result in civil war, or worse.  Do you really want to stage this coup?
Do you really want to denounce me, your President, and see how much of
government and the military will stand behind you?  It goes against all
the principles of democracy that you profess so loudly.

I am neither historian nor moralist, as you well know, and I am trying
not to lose my temper.  But it seems to me that our forefathers, as you
call them, set up their system of checks and balances specifically to
prevent this kind of showdown, and personal grab for power.  And they
must have done something right, because our government has lasted,
intact, for over four hundred years.  Will you tear all that down
because of your obsession with communism?  Even your beloved George
Washington turned down the chance to be a monarch, saying it was
contrary to all that he had fought for.

There is nothing more I can say but to fully clarify my position, so
that there will be no chance of further misunderstanding.

A)  I will not ask Congress for a Declaration of War.  I will say only
that your attack on the colonies was the result of miscommunication
between us, and then attempt to make reparation to the provinces of
Democratic Germany and Greater Czechoslovakia.  I am prepared to take
full responsibility for this 'misunderstanding' myself, so long as your
exploits stop now.

B)  I will not disown you, as you suggest, nor call your bluff in
public.  I am not looking for a fight, nor will I back down from one.
You will remain my Secretary of State, but immediately relinquish all
military title and authority.  I'll not have a maverick heading the
armed forces of this nation.

C)  My orders to you now, as your Commander-in-Chief, are to break off
from any plans of further adventurism, and return with the Third Fleet
to Commonwealth space at once.

THROUGH HIS RAGE, THE SECRETARY HAD SENSE ENOUGH TO REALIZE THAT THIS
LIST OF DEMANDS COULD NOT HAVE BEEN PUT FORWARD BY STONE.  FOR ONE
THING, THE WORDING WAS MUCH TOO COGENT.  AND IN FACT, IT WAS THE ONE
PART OF THE LETTER NOT LARGELY INTACT FROM THE PRESIDENT'S ORIGINAL
DICTATION.  DESPAIRING AT HIS OWN IGNORANCE, AND NOT KNOWING WHOM TO
TRUST, STONE HAD TURNED TO HIS VICE PRESIDENT, A CAPABLE MAN, WHO AFTER
LONG AND SECRET CONSULTATION WITH SAM BACON, WHITE HOUSE
CHIEF-OF-STAFF, HAD WRITTEN THE PARAGRAPH FOR HIM.

You may consider me a small and weak man.  But I have the power of the
Constitution behind me.  And we will also see, should you choose to
defy me, how the American people, including the military, will react
when they find out they've been lied to, and committed murder on your
behalf.

I ask you once again, to be reasonable.

Sincerely,

Edgar James Stone
President of the United Commonwealth.



General Hayes stood perfectly still for perhaps two minutes, holding
the piece of paper in his tightly clench hands, looking at the blank
portion at the top of it with unfocused eyes.  The two lesser generals,
knowing better, did not interrupt his mediations, but remained silently
by the door.  Calder knew his master well enough to read the signs of
rejection, and still greater determination, on his face.  Frank could
only stare at the man he both admired and feared, wondering.

At length the Secretary stirred.

"Your incinerator, Michael."  Calder handed him the tiny device, and
Hayes vaporized the President's message.  He rose.

"General Frank.  Schedule a meeting of the Staff in ConRoom 16 for 2200
hours.  I'll address all subcommanders by visual at 0600 tomorrow.
Request your communications officer to remain in his quarters until I
send for him.  The attack will go on as scheduled."

Hayes, his thought rebuked, was now going on instinct.  And his
instincts always told him to attack.  The three dispersed, and the
First Communications crew, with the exception of Janson, returned to
their posts.





There are perhaps three basic ways that the human mind reacts when its
perception of reality, colored by hopes and dreams, is suddenly,
forcibly confronted.  The first is the way adopted by those who
acknowledge their own humanity.  This is to take a step back, question
perspective, yield to some more profound influence, or simply admit
that there may be some aspect of the situation not immediately
understood.  In short, it is the realization that life, for good or
ill, is not going to change for them, and that their dreams and
ambitions must be based on reality, or they simply cannot last.

The second reaction, just as common, may be viewed as the first step
toward irrational thinking.  Those who fall into this category, rather
than relinquishing the illusion in question, cling the more fiercely to
it, stubbornly blocking out all contradictory input, and, if necessary,
delving into a world of pure fantasy.

The third reaction, by far the most dangerous, is centered around a
belief that the more one's goals and ambitions are resisted, the truer
and more indisputable the path taken, since clearly they are being
resisted by evil.  The Devil, and those who serve him, are to blame.
Therefore the harder the subsequent struggle, the more righteous the
cause.  Such is the road taken by the political or religious fanatic.

Hayes, in his more rational moods, fell into the second category.  When
directly challenged, as he was now, he fell into the third.

The man remained seated in his quarters, brooding.  All his thought had
been bent so strongly, all his efforts geared so unshakably toward the
realization of a single goal---riding the tide of patriotic fervor,
with the whole of the Commonwealth behind him, into a grand and
decisive campaign against galactic communism---that Stone's rejection
had hit him like a physical blow.  Why had his destiny been denied him?
 OR WAS IT A TRIAL OF FAITH?

And one more thing troubled him.  He was still sane and noble enough
(after a fashion) to see that it would indeed be wrong to usurp the
duly-elected President, fool that he was, and try to seize power by a
military coup.  This, however, did not keep him from disregarding his
current orders, which were clearly and dangerously wrong.  Having been
stripped of its pet fantasy, his mind now seized upon another.

HE WOULD DO IT ALL HIMSELF.  With only the resources and undying
loyalty of the Third Fleet, he would defeat Soviet Space alone, against
orders---the greatest military feat of all time.  Each disposition
would have to be perfect, each soldier's skill and determination honed
to a cutting edge of steel.  AGAINST ALL ODDS!  Or, at the very least,
he would draw the Soviets into a full-scale war. . .and give his
reluctant president no choice.....  He got up and began to pace
eagerly, shaking off age and fatigue.

YES, THAT'S IT.  OF COURSE!  HE THINKS HE'S MADE A CLEVER MOVE, CHEATED
ME.  WE'LL SEE HOW LONG THE SOVIETS REMAIN NEUTRAL WHEN I DEVASTATE THE
COALITION FORCES, AND KNOCK OUT THE EAST GERMAN HOME PLANET.  "MORE
DEPENDS ON IT THAN YOUR EGO OR MINE," HE SAID TO ME.  "TO VIEW THE
MATTER HARSHLY. . .TREASON!"  HE'LL 'CALL MY BLUFF', WILL HE?  MY
'OBSESSION' WITH COMMUNISM.  Hayes smashed a fist into his open hand.
"RELINQUISH ALL MILITARY TITLES."  "MAVERICK!."  SO HELP ME GOD; IF
THIS ACTION ISN'T ENOUGH TO CHANGE HIS MIND, I'LL DO IT.  I'LL COME
AFTER HIM!  FOOL.  BLIND FOOL.

At length he ceased his pacing and grew calmer.  The meeting with
General Staff was approaching, and he must decide what course to take
with them:

The meeting would be held.  He would address the sub-commanders as
scheduled, as the mighty ship headed out toward the entrance of the
star gate.  Nothing had changed.  Stone's actions had been a small
annoyance, nothing more.  He switched on the dictation machine, and
began speaking rapidly and decisively.



*                        *                        *


Lt. Eric Muller had been in e-light warp for almost fifteen hours,
barely outraced by the laser sounding-beam sent out ahead of him days
before.

So far he had been lucky---he had not had to deviate course.  He knew
that once he did, leaving the path of the beam, he would have no
warning at all before smashing into an unrecorded meteor, or bit of
space debris.  To come out of light-speed and fly by sight and
instruments meant to expose himself to tracking, almost certain death
while approaching enemy-controlled positions.

The small, blistering ship in which he flew had been designed with but
a single purpose:  to outrace tracking, come out of warp just long
enough to aim the projectile, then split in two, the adjoining missile
(hopefully) striking its target before the enemy could react, while the
escape-ship ran for cover.

It was a desperate scheme, this squadron of forty missile-ships; but it
remained theoretically possible, and therefore must be tried.  The
Coalition powers had not been idle since the attack on Athena, and the
high command of the Provinces of Democratic (East) Germany, suspecting
their inner planets to be a likely next target, were determined to show
Hayes what they were made of---that it would be no easy fight---and
that the Dreadnought was not impregnable.

Constant tension and near maniacal alertness had begun to take its toll
on the young pilot, chosen, along with the others, because of his
lightning reflexes and exceptional endurance.  Two seconds of neglect
were all that was needed to end his life.  If for that brief period he
did not watch the signal monitor and react instantaneously to its
warning---the possible complexities of which were too vast even for an
unassisted computer to judge---all was lost.  He could not know it,
since the speed at which he traveled made communication impossible, but
eight of his comrades had already been killed, or forced to break off
because of mechanical failure.

He reached back to massage his aching neck.  Scarcely a moment had
passed before he heard the warning tone---meteor particles directly
ahead.  With the thought control computer he veered left and down, then
back again to the right.  His reactions had been swift and correct, and
he was able to readjust quickly and continue on toward the target.

But the beam was lost, so that now he flew blind.  And after a time the
real fear began to set in.  Roughly two hours later his craft spun out
of control and exploded, after striking a meteor-pellet six inches
long.  SubCaptain Schmidt was lost a few minutes after that, when he
outraced his beam and tried to decelerate too quickly.

Twenty-four hours into the mission, only seven of the original forty
remained, still at least eight hours away from their estimated time of
intercept.





 IV


Hayes was wakened at 0400.  He felt upon first consciousness, as he
often did after a short sleep, a vague and powerful sense of
uneasiness, like a man walking steeply uphill, with death drawing
nearer behind him.  He sat bolt upright, his jaw set and eyes squinting
fire, and slowly the feeling passed.  He got out of bed, told the
yeoman to send Calder to him at 0420, and stalked into the bathroom.
Finishing his toilet he reentered the bedroom and immediately began his
morning isometrics, running through his mind as he did so the business
of the day, and recalling with disciplined satisfaction his performance
of the night before.  His words to the meeting of Staff:

"My fellow officers of the intrepid Third Fleet, your
Commander-in-Chief asks much of you.  As President, he understands as I
do the urgent necessity of our great endeavor, and along with the
Senate, stands squarely behind us.  But his political enemies, the
weak-hearted opposition who hold the majority in Congress, needing to
make themselves feel important, have delayed a vote on the formal
Declaration of War.  They have attempted to sabotage the mechanisms of
just vigilance and freedom.  They SAY they need more proof."  As he
said this, and various officers scowled, he had looked over at Frank
and nodded gravely, as if this was what had upset him in the
President's reply.

"Fortunately, Edgar Stone is not the kind of man to let ignorance and
cowardice stand in his way.  They have said they need more proof, of
the ruthless barbarity of the Coalition leaders against their own
people, as well as the armed strength of our great nation---and he has
assigned US to give it to them."  Expressions of satisfaction and
approval.  "To us then falls the task of demonstrating the absolute
superiority of the United Commonwealth of America, and the prowess of
its men at arms.  He knows that in this, we shall not fail him."

As he recalled this speech Hayes felt only one regret.  In referring to
Stone's (supposed) vote of confidence in the Third Fleet, and
simultaneously expressing his own desires and expectations of it, he
had unwittingly imparted into their image of the President a courage
and forthrightness he did not possess, and which might later have to be
altered, should matters force a showdown and the need arise to
challenge his authority.

But this could not be helped, and already he felt his subconscious
beginning to turn the necessary phrases of shock and disbelief at
Stone's treachery and sudden reversal.  He dressed briskly, and had
only just begun to pace when Calder appeared at the portal.  He turned
to him at once.

"Have communications officer Janson report to me in SubCon 20 in half
an hour, then tell the yeoman to have my breakfast sent there."  His
expression changed slightly as he looked into the unquestioning face of
his loyal subaltern.  "...  Do you want to know what he really said?"

Calder stepped beyond the portal and turned the small handle that
security-sealed the room, showing by this mute gesture that it did not
matter to him, he would serve his General as he had always done, but
that if Hayes wished to tell him he would be honored to listen.  He was
the one man who could have a softening effect on his master, though he
would have been shocked to learn it.  Hayes turned to face the wall.

"He tried to cut me off, Michael."  He glanced over at him briefly, the
smallest touch of melancholy, then back to the wall.  "He said that my
'obsession' with the communist threat was based on pure fabrication,
the result of an unbalance mind."  For as he spoke, he truly believed
that this was what Stone had done.  "He said that to view the matter
harshly, I had committed treason.....  He ordered me to return home
with my tail between my legs and maybe, MAYBE he  would forgive me."
Without turning he knew that Calder's face had assumed its
characteristic frown of fierce devotion, the one that acknowledged
tough measures were at hand, not wanted, but forced upon them by those
enemies, unfathomable in their ignorance and baseness, who challenged
and sought to sabotage his master's clear vision and irreproachable
aims.

"He can't do that, sir."  Hayes turned, rekindled, as always, by this
soldier's undying spirit.

"No, he can't.  Though it does my heart good to hear it."  Their eyes
met.  "But you needed to know that things could get a little rough.
The President of the United Commonwealth himself is no longer above
suspicion."

"You know that I would do anything," stammered Calder.  "Follow you
anywhere."

"Yes, yes!  That's the spirit we need to impart!  It's entirely on our
shoulders now.  The Third Fleet must take up the sword alone."  His
temper had been quite restored.  "But."  He raised a stern finger.
"One thing at a time, and not missing a single detail.  That's how
we've got to do it."

"The business of the day, sir?"

"Yes, we'll discuss it over breakfast."  A rare honor.  "Have you eaten
yet today?"  And Calder went off to do his master's bidding.

Leif Janson, meanwhile, dressed himself in a state of anxiety such as
he had seldom experienced.  He had no grounds for this feeling; he had
been summoned at odd hours by high personages before.  But remembering
his blunder the day before, so innocent, and yet looked upon with such
gravity, he felt in his gut that a dark cloud hung over him, and
wondered only at the severity of the coming storm.

He had never liked Hayes, liked him still less for their meeting; but
this could not alter the fact, much as it galled him, that he was
terrified of the man.  STUPID, he admonished himself.  THIS ISN'T NAZI
GERMANY.  He tried to shave, cut himself, realized that this would look
bad, placed a skin pad over the area, forgetting to wipe away the blood
first, ripped it off, toweled his face and did it again.  By now his
agitation was so acute that he began to get angry.  But his experience
in government service told him that if he gave in to his instincts
(fought back), not only would things not get better, they could get
considerably worse.

And so, passing through the corridor and up through an elevator tube,
he entered after two lefts and a right, the hallway that led to SubCon
20.  He checked his watch.  Two minutes early.  He stopped, knowing by
reputation Hayes' fanaticism concerning time.  Needing something to
occupy his mind, he mused for perhaps the thousandth time that
everything in the military was capital letters and even numbers:  black
and white.  He paced a little, and looking up, saw to his dismay that
the hall camera followed his every movement.  He checked his watch.
Thirty seconds to go.  TO HELL WITH THIS, he thought.  He entered the
chamber.

Hayes looked up from the table as he saluted, nodded placidly, and
finished his breakfast without haste.  Calder, standing against the
adjacent wall, gazed at him with the blank, somewhat hostile expression
of an off-duty drill sergeant.  Hayes placed the tray in the wall-slot,
brushed stray crumbs from the table with his uniform sleeve, and
without rising, addressed him.

"Major Leif Janson, I believe.  Well, Major.  Since yesterday I've
checked your record, and I believe you can be trusted."

"Thank you, sir."  He wondered why this vote of confidence did not
comfort him.  "I'm sorry for my blunder, sir.  It was inexcusable."

Hayes' words belied his expression.  "A momentary lapse, nothing more."
 He placed a strange emphasis on 'lapse.'  "You've been trained for
high-speed craft, is that correct?"

"Yes, sir," Janson said stiffly, maintaining with difficulty his rigid
posture and straight-ahead gaze.  It had been twelve years, but this
was hardly the time.....

"I want you to run a very special errand for me, Major.  I want you to
take some particularly sensitive data back to President Stone, and
deliver it to him personally.  I'm having a Clipper specially prepared.
 She'll fly mainly on auto-pilot, with extra speed built in.  I need
this material in the President's hands by July 16---he'll know you're
coming.  Do you think you can do it?"

"Yes, sir.  Of course, sir."  But this was absurd.  Bullet-pouches were
three times faster, and with self-destruct, an infinitely better
security risk.

"Good, Major.  That's what I wanted to hear.  Report to Shuttle Dock 36
at 1400 sharp.  You're to remain in your quarters till then, and speak
of this to no one.  I'll have the flight-suit brought to you there.
The materials will be turned over to you by special courier aboard
ships.  Any questions?"

Janson glanced at him quickly.  There were no questions.

"That will be all then, Major.  Dismissed."  Janson saluted and showed
himself the door.  As his footsteps receded down the hallway, Hayes
turned to Calder.

"You know what to do?"  His second nodded sternly and went out.
