_orichalch_."

Bending again, I satisfied myself that this metal was the same as that
with which the walls of the library were overcast.

"It is orichalch," continued M. Le Mesge. "You look as if you had no
idea how a human body can look like a statue of orichalch. Come,
Captain Morhange, you whom I gave credit for a certain amount of
knowledge, have you never heard of the method of Dr. Variot, by which
a human body can be preserved without embalming? Have you never read
the book of that practitioner?[11] He explains a method called
electro-plating. The skin is coated with a very thin layer of silver
salts, to make it a conductor. The body then is placed in a solution,
of copper sulphate, and the polar currents do their work. The body of
this estimable English major has been metalized in the same manner,
except that a solution of orichalch sulphate, a very rare substance,
has been substituted for that of copper sulphate. Thus, instead of the
statue of a poor slave, a copper statue, you have before you a statue
of metal more precious than silver or gold, in a word, a statue worthy
of the granddaughter of Neptune."

[Footnote 11: Variot: _L'anthropologie galvanique_. Paris, 1890. (Note
by M. Leroux.)]

M. Le Mesge waved his arm. The black slaves seized the body. In a few
seconds, they slid the orichalch ghost into its painted wooden sheath.
That was set on end and slid into its niche, beside the niche where an
exactly similar sheath was labelled "Number 52."

Upon finishing their task, they retired without a word. A draught of
cold air from the door again made the flames of the copper torches
flicker and threw great shadows about us.

Morhange and I remained as motionless as the pale metal specters which
surrounded us. Suddenly I pulled myself together and staggered forward
to the niche beside that in which they just had laid the remains of
the English major. I looked for the label.

Supporting myself against the red marble wall, I read:

"Number 52. Captain Laurent Deligne. Born at Paris, July 22, 1861.
Died at Ahaggar, October 30, 1896."

"Captain Deligne!" murmured Morhange. "He left Colomb-Bechar in 1895
for Timmimoun and no more has been heard of him since then."

"Exactly," said M. Le Mesge, with a little nod of approval.

"Number 51," read Morhange with chattering teeth. "Colonel von
Wittman, born at Jena in 1855. Died at Ahaggar, May 1, 1896....
Colonel Wittman, the explorer of Kanem, who disappeared off Agades."

"Exactly," said M. Le Mesge again.

"Number 50," I read in my turn, steadying myself against the wall, so
as not to fall. "Marquis Alonzo d'Oliveira, born at Cadiz, February
21, 1868. Died at Ahaggar, February 1, 1896. Oliveira, who was going
to Araouan."

"Exactly," said M. Le Mesge again. "That Spaniard was one of the best
educated. I used to have interesting discussions with him on the exact
geographical position of the kingdom of Antee."

"Number 49," said Morhange in a tone scarcely more than a whisper.
"Lieutenant Woodhouse, born at Liverpool, September 16, 1870. Died at
Ahaggar, October 4, 1895."

"Hardly more than a child," said M. Le Mesge.

"Number 48," I said. "Lieutenant Louis de Maillefeu, born at Provins,
the...."

I did not finish. My voice choked.

Louis de Maillefeu, my best friend, the friend of my childhood and of
Saint-Cyr.... I looked at him and recognized him under the metallic
coating. Louis de Maillefeu!

I laid my forehead against the cold wall and, with shaking shoulders,
began to sob.

I heard the muffled voice of Morhange speaking to the Professor:

"Sir, this has lasted long enough. Let us make an end of it."

"He wanted to know," said M. Le Mesge. "What am I to do?"

I went up to him and seized his shoulders.

"What happened to him? What did he die of?"

"Just like the others," the Professor replied, "just like Lieutenant
Woodhouse, like Captain Deligne, like Major Russell, like Colonel von
Wittman, like the forty-seven of yesterday and all those of
to-morrow."

"Of what did they die?" Morhange demanded imperatively in his turn.

The Professor looked at Morhange. I saw my comrade grow pale.

"Of what did they die, sir? _They died of love_."

And he added in a very low, very grave voice:

"Now you know."

Gently and with a tact which we should hardly have suspected in him,
M. Le Mesge drew us away from the statues. A moment later, Morhange
and I found ourselves again seated, or rather sunk among the cushions
in the center of the room. The invisible fountain murmured its plaint
at our feet.

Le Mesge sat between us.

"Now you know," he repeated. "You know, but you do not yet
understand."

Then, very slowly, he said:

"You are, as they have been, the prisoners of Antinea. And vengeance
is due Antinea."

"Vengeance?" said Morhange, who had regained his self-possession. "For
what, I beg to ask? What have the lieutenant and I done to Atlantis?
How have we incurred her hatred?"

"It is an old quarrel, a very old quarrel," the Professor replied
gravely. "A quarrel which long antedates you, M. Morhange."

"Explain yourself, I beg of you, Professor."

"You are Man. She is a Woman," said the dreamy voice of M. Le Mesge.
"The whole matter lies there."

"Really, sir, I do not see ... we do not see."

"You are going to understand. Have you really forgotten to what an
extent the beautiful queens of antiquity had just cause to complain of
the strangers whom fortune brought to their borders? The poet, Victor
Hugo, pictured their detestable acts well enough in his colonial poem
called _la Fille d'O-Taiti_. Wherever we look, we see similar examples
of fraud and ingratitude. These gentlemen made free use of the beauty
and the riches of the lady. Then, one fine morning, they disappeared.
She was indeed lucky if her lover, having observed the position
carefully, did not return with ships and troops of occupation."

"Your learning charms me," said Morhange. "Continue."

"Do you need examples? Alas! they abound. Think of the cavalier
fashion in which Ulysses treated Calypso, Diomedes Callirhoe. What
should I say of Theseus and Ariadne? Jason treated Medea with
inconceivable lightness. The Romans continued the tradition with still
greater brutality. Aenaeus, who has many characteristics in common
with the Reverend Spardek, treated Dido in a most undeserved fashion.
Caesar was a laurel-crowned blackguard in his relations with the
divine Cleopatra. Titus, that hypocrite Titus, after having lived a
whole year in Idummea at the expense of the plaintive Berenice, took
her back to Rome only to make game of her. It is time that the sons of
Japhet paid this formidable reckoning of injuries to the daughters of
Shem.

"A woman has taken it upon herself to re-establish the great Hegelian
law of equilibrium for the benefit of her sex. Separated from the
Aryan world by the formidable precautions of Neptune, she draws the
youngest and bravest to her. Her body is condescending, while her
spirit is inexorable. She takes what these bold young men can give
her. She lends them her body, while her soul dominates them. She is
the first sovereign who has never been made the slave of passion, even
for a moment. She has never been obliged to regain her self-mastery,
for she never has lost it. She is the only woman who has been able to
disassociate those two inextricable things, love and voluptuousness."

M. Le Mesge paused a moment and then went on.

"Once every day, she comes to this vault. She stops before the niches;
she meditates before the rigid statues; she touches the cold bosoms,
so burning when she knew them. Then, after dreaming before the empty
niche where the next victim soon will sleep his eternal sleep in a
cold case of orichalch, she returns nonchalantly where he is waiting
for her."

The Professor stopped speaking. The fountain again made itself heard
in the midst of the shadow. My pulses beat, my head seemed on fire. A
fever was consuming me.

"And all of them," I cried, regardless of the place, "all of them
complied! They submitted! Well, she has only to come and she will see
what will happen."

Morhange was silent.

"My dear sir," said M. Le Mesge in a very gentle voice, "you are
speaking like a child. You do not know. You have not seen Antinea. Let
me tell you one thing: that among those"--and with a sweeping gesture
he indicated the silent circle of statues--"there were men as
courageous as you and perhaps less excitable. I remember one of them
especially well, a phlegmatic Englishman who now is resting under
Number 32. When he first appeared before Antinea, he was smoking a
cigar. And, like all the rest, he bent before the gaze of his
sovereign.

"Do not speak until you have seen her. A university training hardly
fits one to discourse upon matters of passion, and I feel scarcely
qualified, myself, to tell you what Antinea is. I only affirm this,
that when you have seen her, you will remember nothing else. Family,
country, honor, you will renounce everything for her."

"Everything?" asked Morhange in a calm voice.

"Everything," Le Mesge insisted emphatically. "You will forget all,
you will renounce all."

From outside, a faint sound came to us.

Le Mesge consulted his watch.

"In any case, you will see."

The door opened. A tall white Targa, the tallest we had yet seen in
this remarkable abode, entered and came toward us.

He bowed and touched me lightly on the shoulder.

"Follow him," said M. Le Mesge.

Without a word, I obeyed.




XI

ANTINEA


My guide and I passed along another long corridor. My excitement
increased. I was impatient for one thing only, to come face to face
with that woman, to tell her.... So far as anything else was
concerned, I already was done for.

I was mistaken in hoping that the adventure would take an heroic turn
at once. In real life, these contrasts never are definitely marked
out. I should have remembered from many past incidents that the
burlesque was regularly mixed with the tragic in my life.

We reached a little transparent door. My guide stood aside to let me
pass.

I found myself in the most luxurious of dressing-rooms. A ground glass
ceiling diffused a gay rosy light over the marble floor. The first
thing I noticed was a clock, fastened to the wall. In place of the
figures for the hours, were the signs of the Zodiac. The small hand
had not yet reached the sign of Capricorn.

Only three o'clock!

The day seemed to have lasted a century already.... And only a little
more than half of it was gone.

Another idea came to me, and a convulsive laugh bent me double.

"Antinea wants me to be at my best when I meet her."

A mirror of orichalch formed one whole side of the room. Glancing into
it, I realized that in all decency there was nothing exaggerated in
the demand.

My untrimmed beard, the frightful layer of dirt which lay about my
eyes and furrowed my cheeks, my clothing, spotted by all the clay of
the Sahara and torn by all the thorns of Ahaggar--all this made me
appear a pitiable enough suitor.

I lost no time in undressing and plunging into the porphry bath in the
center of the room. A delicious drowsiness came over me in that
perfumed water. A thousand little jars, spread on a costly carved wood
dressing-table, danced before my eyes. They were of all sizes and
colors, carved in a very transparent kind of jade. The warm humidity
of the atmosphere hastened my relaxation.

I still had strength to think, "The devil take Atlantis and the vault
and Le Mesge."

Then I fell asleep in the bath.

When I opened my eyes again, the little hand of the clock had almost
reached the sign of Taurus. Before me, his black hands braced on the
edge of the bath, stood a huge Negro, bare-faced and bare-armed, his
forehead bound with an immense orange turban.

He looked at me and showed his white teeth in a silent laugh.

"Who is this fellow?"

The Negro laughed harder. Without saying a word, he lifted me like a
feather out of the perfumed water, now of a color on which I shall not
dwell.

In no time at all, I was stretched out on an inclined marble table.

The Negro began to massage me vigorously.

"More gently there, fellow!"

My masseur did not reply, but laughed and rubbed still harder.

