had caught a leaping tarantula upon the point of his spear, and had
escaped from the web of a banded web-spider by oiling his body so that
the sticky threads of the snare refused to hold him fast. He had
attacked and killed a great gray labyrinth spider.

But most potent of all, he had returned and had been welcomed by
Saya--Saya of the swift feet and slender limbs, whose smile roused
strange emotions in Burl's breast.

It was the adoring gaze of Saya that had roused Burl to this last pitch
of rashness. Months before the clotho spider in the hemispherical silk
castle of the gruesome decorations had killed and eaten one of the men
of the tribe. Burl and the spider's victim had been together when the
spider appeared, and the first faint gray light of morning barely
silhouetted the shaggy, horrible creature as it leaped from ambush
behind a toadstool toward the fear-stricken pair.

Its attenuated legs were outstretched, its mandibles gaped wide, and its
jaws clashed horribly as it formed a black blotch in mid air against the
lightening sky.

Burl had fled, screaming, when the other man was seized. Now, however,
he was leading half a dozen trembling men toward the inverted dome in
which the spider dozed. Two or three of them bore spears like Burl
himself, but they bore them awkwardly and timorously. Burl himself was
possessed by a strange, fictitious courage. It was the utter
recklessness of youth, coupled with the eternal masculine desire to
display prowess before a desired female.

The wavering advance came to a halt. Most of the naked men stopped from
fear, but Burl stopped to invoke his newly discovered inner self, that
had furnished him with such marvelous plans. Quite accidentally he had
found that if he persistently asked himself a question, some sort of
answer came from within.

Now he gazed up from a safe distance and asked himself how he and the
others were to slay the clotho spider. The nest was some forty feet from
the ground, on the undersurface of a shelf of rock. There was sheer open
space beneath it, but it was firmly held to its support by long, silken
cables that curled to the upper side of the rock-shelf, clinging to the
stone.

Burl gazed, and presently an idea came to him. He beckoned to the others
to follow him, and they did so, their knees knocking together from their
fright. At the slightest alarm they would flee, screaming in fear, but
Burl did not plan that there should be any alarm.

He led them to the rear of the singular rock formation, up the gently
sloping side, and toward the precipitous edge. He drew near the point
where the rock fell away. A long, tentacle-like silk cable curled up
over the edge of a little promontory of stone that jutted out into
nothingness.

Burl began to feel oddly cold, and something of the panic of the other
men communicated itself to him. This was one of the anchoring cables
that held the spider's castle secure. He looked and found others, six or
seven in all, which performed the task of keeping the shaggy, horrid
ogre's home from falling to the ground below.

His idea did not desert him, however, and he drew back, to whisper
orders to his followers. They obeyed him solely because they were
afraid, and he spoke in an authoritative tone, but they did obey, and
brought a dozen heavy boulders of perhaps forty pounds weight each.

Burl grasped one of the silken cables at its end and tore it loose from
the rock for a space of perhaps two yards. His flesh crawled as he did
so, but something within him drove him on. Then, while beads of
perspiration stood out on his forehead--induced by nothing less than
cold, physical fear--he tied the boulder to the cable. The first one
done, he felt emboldened, and made a second fast, and a third.

One of his men stood near the edge of the rock, listening in agonized
apprehension. Burl had soon tied a heavy stone to each of the cables he
saw, and as a matter of fact, there was but one of them he failed to
notice. That one had been covered by the flaking mold that took the
place of grass upon the rocky eminence.

There were left upon the promontory, several of the boulders for which
there was no use, but Burl did not attempt to double the weights on the
cables. He took his followers aside and explained his plan in whispers.
Quaking, they agreed, and, trembling, they prepared to carry it out.

One of them stationed himself beside each of the boulders, Burl at the
largest. He gave a signal, and half a dozen ripping, tearing sounds
broke the sullen silence of the day. The boulders clashed and clattered
down the rocky side of the precipice, tearing--perhaps "peeling"--the
cables from their adhesion to the stone. They shot into open space and
jerked violently at the half-globular nest, which was wrenched from its
place by the combined impetus of the six heavy weights.

Burl had flung himself upon his face to watch what he was sure would be
the death of the spider as it fell forty feet and more, imprisoned in
its heavily weighted home. His eyes sparkled with triumph as he saw the
ghastly, trophy-laden house swing out from the cliff. Then he gasped in
terror.

One of the cables had not been discovered. That single cable held the
spider's castle from a fall, though the nest had been torn from its
anchorage, and now dangled heavily on its side in mid air. A convulsive
struggle seemed to be going on within.

Then one of the archlike doors opened, and the spider emerged, evidently
in terror, and confused by the light of day, but still venomous and
still deadly. It found but a single of its anchoring cables intact, that
leading to the cliff top hard by Burl's head.

The spider sprang for this single cable, and its legs grasped the
slender thread eagerly while it began to climb rapidly up toward the
cliff top.

As with all the creatures of Burl's time, its first thought was of
battle, not flight, and it came up the thin cord with its poison fangs
unsheathed and its mandibles clashing in rage. The shaggy hair upon its
body seemed to bristle with insane ferocity, and the horrible, thin legs
moved with desperate haste as it hastened to meet and wreak vengeance
upon the cause of its sudden alarm.

Burl's followers fled, uttering shrieks of fear, and Burl started to his
feet, in the grip of a terrible panic. Then his hand struck one of the
heavy boulders. Exerting every ounce of his strength, he pushed it over
the cliff just where the cable appeared above the edge. For the fraction
of a second there was silence, and then the indescribable sound of an
impact against a soft body.

There was a gasping cry, and a moment later the curiously muffled
clatter of the boulder striking the earth below. Somehow, the sound
suggested that the boulder had struck first upon some soft object.

A faint cry came from the bottom of the hill. The last of Burl's men was
leaping to a hiding-place among the mushrooms of the forest, and had
seen the sheen of shining armor just before him. He cried out and waited
for death, but only a delicately formed wasp rose heavily into the air,
bearing beneath it the more and more feebly struggling body of a giant
cricket.

Burl had stood paralyzed, deprived of the power of movement, after
casting the boulder over the cliff. That one action had taken the last
ounce of his initiative, and if the spider had hauled itself over the
rocky edge and darted toward him, slavering its thick spittle and
uttering sounds of mad fury, Burl would not even have screamed as it
seized him. He was like a dead thing. But the oddly muffled sound of the
boulder striking the ground below brought back hope of life and power of
movement.

He peered over the cliff. The nest still dangled at the end of the
single cable, still freighted with its gruesome trophies, but on the
ground below a crushed and horribly writhing form was moving in
convulsions of rage and agony.

Long, hairy legs worked desperately from a body that was no more than a
mass of pulped flesh. A ferocious jaw tried to clamp upon something--and
there was no other jaw to meet it. An evil-smelling, sticky liquid
exuded from the mangled writhing, thing upon the earth, moving in
terrible contortions of torment.

Presently an ant drew near and extended inquisitive antennae at the
helpless monster wounded to death. A shrill stridulation sounded out,
and three or four other foot-long ants hastened up to wait patiently
just outside the spider's reach until its struggles should have lessened
enough to make possible the salvage of flesh from the perhaps
still-living creature for the ant city a mile away.

And Burl, up on the cliff-top, danced and gesticulated in triumph. He
had killed the clotho spider, which had slain one of the tribesmen four
months before. Glory was his. All the tribesmen had seen the spider
living. Now he would show them the spider dead. He stopped his dance of
triumph and walked down the hill in haughty grandeur. He would reproach
his timid followers for fleeing from the spider, leaving him to kill it
alone.

Quite naively Burl assumed that it was his place to give orders and that
of the others to obey. True, no one had attempted to give orders before,
or to enforce their execution, but Burl had reached the eminently
wholesome conclusion that he was a wonderful person whose wishes should
be respected.

Burl, filled with fresh notions of his own importance, strutted on
toward the hiding-place of the tribe, growing more and more angry with
the other men for having deserted him. He would reproach them, would
probably beat them. They would be afraid to protest, and in the future
would undoubtedly be afraid to run away.

Burl was quite convinced that running away was something he could not
tolerate in his followers. Obscurely--and conveniently in the extreme
back of his mind--he reasoned that not only did a larger number of men
present at a scene of peril increase the chances of coping with the
danger, but they also increased the chances that the victim selected by
the dangerous creature would be another than himself.

Burl's reasoning was unsophisticated, but sound; perhaps unconscious,
but none the less effective. He grew quite furious with the deserters.
They had run away! They had fled from a mere spider.

A shrill whine filled the air, and a ten-inch ant dashed at Burl with
its mandibles extended threateningly. Burl's path had promised to
interrupt the salvaging work of the insect, engaged in scraping shreds
of flesh from the corselet of one of the smaller beetles slain the
previous night. The ant dashed at Burl like an infuriated fox-terrier,
and Burl scurried away in undignified retreat. The ant might not be
dangerous, but bites from its formic acid-poisoned mandibles were no
trifles.

Burl came to the tangled thicket of mushrooms in which his tribefolk
hid. The entrance was tortuous and difficult to penetrate, and could be
blocked on occasion with stones and toadstool pulp. Burl made his way
toward the central clearing, and heard as he went the sound of weeping,
and the excited chatter of the tribes people.

Those who had fled from the rocky cliff had returned with the news that
Burl was dead, and Saya lay weeping beneath an over-shadowing toadstool.
She was not yet the mate of Burl, but the time would come when all the
tribe would recognize a status dimly different from the usual tribal
relationship.

Burl stepped into the clearing, and straightway cuffed the first man he
came upon, then the next and the next. There was a cry of astonishment,
and the next second instinctive, fearful glances at that entrance to the
hiding-place.

Had Burl fled from the spider, and was it following? Burl spoke loftily,
saying that the spider was dead, that its legs, each one the length of a
man, were still, and its fierce jaws and deadly poison-fangs harmless
forevermore.

Ten minutes later he was leading an incredulous, awed little group of
pink-skinned people to the spot below the cliff where the spider
actually lay dead, with the ants busily at work upon its remains.

And when he went back to the hiding-place he donned again his great
cloak that was made from the wing of a magnificent moth, slain by the
flames of the purple hills, and sat down in splendor upon a crumbling
toadstool, to feast upon the glances of admiration and awe that were
sent toward him. Only Saya held back shyly, until he motioned for her to
draw near, when she seated herself at his feet and gazed up at him with
unutterable adoration in her eyes.

But while Burl basked in the radiance of his tribe's admiration, danger
was drawing near them all. For many months there had been strange red
mushrooms growing slowly here and there all over the earth, they knew.
The tribefolk had speculated about them, but forebore tasting them
because they were strange, and strange things were usually dangerous and
often fatal.

Now those red growths had ripened and grown ready to emit their spores.
Their rounded tops had grown fat, and the tough skin grew taut as if a
strange pressure were being applied from within. And to-day, while Burl
luxuriated in his position of feared and admired great man of his tribe,
at a spot a long distance away, upon a hill-top, one of the red
mushrooms burst. The spores inside the taut, tough skin shot all about
as if scattered by an explosion, and made a little cloud of reddish,
impalpable dust, which hung in the air and moved slowly with the
sluggish breeze.

A bee droned into the thin red cloud of dust, lazily and heavily flying
back toward the hive. But barely had she entered the tinted atmosphere
when her movements became awkward and convulsive, effortful and excited.
She trembled and twisted in mid air in a peculiar fashion, then dropped
to the earth, while her abdomen moved violently.

Bees, like almost all insects, breathe through spiracles on the
undersurfaces of their abdomens. This bee had breathed in some of the
red mushroom's spores. She thrashed about desperately upon the
toadstools on which she had fallen, struggling for breath, for life.

After a long time she was still. The cloud of red mushroom spores had
strangled or poisoned her. And everywhere the red fringe grew, such
explosions were taking place, one by one, and wherever the red clouds
hung in the air creatures were breathing them in and dying in
convulsions of strangulation.




CHAPTER II

The Journey


Darkness. The soft, blanketing night of the age of fungoids had fallen
over all the earth, and there was blackness everywhere that was not good
to have. Here and there, however, dim, bluish lights glowed near the
ground. There an intermittent glow showed that a firefly had wandered
far from the rivers and swamps above which most of his kind now
congregated. Now a faintly luminous ball of fire drifted above the
steaming, moisture-sodden earth. It was a will-o'-the-wisp, grown to a
yard in diameter.

From the low-hanging banks of clouds that hung perpetually overhead,
large, warm raindrops fell ceaselessly. A drop, a pause, and then
another drop, added to the already dank moisture of the ground below.

