lowlands, deep under the cloud-bank, amid surroundings which were
riotous, swarming, frenzied horror. They had become savages.

They were less than savages, because they had forgotten their destiny as
men.




_1. MAD PLANET_


In all his lifetime of perhaps twenty years, it had never occurred to
Burl to wonder what his grandfather had thought about his surroundings.
The grandfather had come to an untimely end in a fashion which Burl
remembered as a succession of screams coming more and more faintly to
his ears, while he was being carried away at the topmost speed of which
his mother was capable.

Burl had rarely or never thought of his grandfather since. Surely he had
never wondered what his great-grandfather had thought, and most surely
of all he never speculated upon what his many-times-removed
great-grandfather had thought when his lifeboat landed from the
_Icarus_. Burl had never heard of the _Icarus_. He had done very little
thinking of any sort. When he did think, it was mostly agonized effort
to contrive a way to escape some immediate and paralyzing danger. When
horror did not press upon him, it was better not to think, because there
wasn't much but horror to think about.

At the moment, he was treading cautiously over a brownish carpet of
fungus, creeping furtively toward the stream which he knew only by the
generic name of "water." It was the only water he knew. Towering far
above his head, three man-heights high, great toadstools hid the gray
sky from his sight. Clinging to the yard-thick stalks of the toadstools
were still other fungi, parasites upon the growths that once had been
parasites themselves.

Burl appeared a fairly representative specimen of the descendants of the
long-forgotten _Icarus_ crew. He wore a single garment twisted about his
middle, made from the wing-fabric of a great moth which the members of
his tribe had slain as it emerged from its cocoon. His skin was fair
without a trace of sunburn. In all his lifetime he had never seen the
sun, though he surely had seen the sky often enough. It was rarely
hidden from him save by giant fungi, like those about him now, and
sometimes by the gigantic cabbages which were nearly the only green
growths he knew. To him normal landscape contained only fantastic pallid
mosses, and misshapen fungus growths, and colossal moulds and yeasts.

He moved onward. Despite his caution, his shoulder once touched a
cream-colored toadstool stalk, giving the whole fungus a tiny shock.
Instantly a fine and impalpable powder fell upon him from the umbrella
like top above. It was the season when the toadstools sent out their
spores. He paused to brush them from his head and shoulders. They were,
of course, deadly poison.

Burl knew such matters with an immediate and specific and detailed
certainty. He knew practically nothing else. He was ignorant of the use
of fire, of metals, and even of the uses of stone and wood. His language
was a scanty group of a few hundred labial sounds, conveying no
abstractions and few concrete ideas. He knew nothing of wood, because
there was no wood in the territory furtively inhabited by his tribe.
This was the lowlands. Trees did not thrive here. Not even grasses and
tree-ferns could compete with mushrooms and toadstools and their kin.
Here was a soil of rusts and yeasts. Here were toadstool forests and
fungus jungles. They grew with feverish intensity beneath a cloud-hidden
sky, while above them fluttered butterflies no less enlarged than they,
moths as much magnified, and other creatures which could thrive on their
corruption.

The only creatures on the planet which crawled or ran or flew--save only
Burl's fugitive kind--were insects. They had been here before men came,
and they had adapted to the planet's extraordinary ways. With a world
made ready before their first progenitors arrived, insects had thriven
incredibly. With unlimited food-supplies, they had grown large. With
increased size had come increased opportunity for survival, and
enlargement became hereditary. Other than fungoid growths, the solitary
vegetables were the sports of unstable varieties of the plants left
behind by the _Ludred_. There were enormous cabbages, with leaves the
size of ship-sails, on which stolid grubs and caterpillars ate
themselves to maturity, and then swung below in strong cocoons to sleep
the sleep of metamorphosis. The tiniest butterflies of Earth had
increased their size here until their wings spread feet across, and
some--like the emperor moths--stretched out purple wings which were
yards in span. Burl himself would have been dwarfed beneath a great
moth's wing.

But he wore a gaudy fabric made of one. The moths and giant butterflies
were harmless to men. Burl's fellow tribesmen sometimes came upon a
cocoon when it was just about to open, and if they dared they waited
timorously beside it until the creature inside broke through its
sleeping-shell and came out into the light.

Then, before it gathered energy from the air and before its wings
swelled to strength and firmness, the tribesmen fell upon it. They tore
the delicate wings from its body and the still-flaccid limbs from their
places. And when it lay helpless before them they fled away to feast on
its juicy meat-filled limbs.

They dared not linger, of course. They left their prey helpless--staring
strangely at the world about it through its many-faceted eyes--before
the scavengers came to contest its ownership. If nothing more deadly
appeared, surely the ants would come. Some of them were only inches
long, but others were the size of fox-terriers. All of them had to be
avoided by men. They would carry the moth-carcass away to their
underground cities, triumphantly, in shreds and morsels.

But most of the insect world was neither so helpless nor so
unthreatening. Burl knew of wasps almost the length of his own body,
with stings that were instantly fatal. To every species of wasp,
however, some other insect is predestined prey. Wasps need not be
dreaded too much. And bees were similarly aloof. They were hard put to
it for existence, those bees. Since few flowers bloomed, they were
reduced to expedients that once were considered signs of degeneracy in
their race: bubbling yeasts and fouler things, or occasionally the
nectarless blooms of the rank giant cabbages. Burl knew the bees. They
droned overhead, nearly as large as he was, their bulging eyes gazing at
him and everything else in abstracted preoccupation.

There were crickets, and beetles, and spiders.... Burl knew spiders! His
grandfather had been the prey of a hunting tarantula which had leaped
with incredible ferocity from its tunnel in the ground. A vertical pit,
a yard in diameter, went down for twenty feet. At the bottom of the lair
the monster waited for the tiny sounds that would warn him of prey
approaching his hiding-place.

Burl's grandfather had been careless. The terrible shrieks he uttered as
he was seized still lingered vaguely in Burl's mind. And he had seen,
too, the webs of another species of spider--inch-thick cables of dirty
silk--and watched from a safe distance as the misshapen monster sucked
the juices from a three-foot cricket its trap had caught. He remembered
the stripes of yellow and black and silver that crossed upon its
abdomen. He had been fascinated and horrified by the blind struggling of
the cricket, tangled in hopeless coils of gummy cord, before the spider
began its feast.

Burl knew these dangers. They were part of his life. It was this
knowledge that made life possible. He knew the ways to evade these
dangers. But if he yielded to carelessness for one moment, or if he
relaxed his caution for one instant, he would be one with his ancestors.
They were the long-forgotten meals of inhuman monsters.

Now, to be sure, Burl moved upon an errand that probably no other of his
tribe would have imagined. The day before, he had crouched behind a
shapeless mound of inter-tangled growths and watched a duel between two
huge horned beetles. Their bodies were feet long. Their carapaces were
waist-high to Burl when they crawled. Their mandibles, gaping laterally,
clicked and clashed upon each other's impenetrable armor. Their legs
crashed like so many cymbals as they struck against each other. They
fought over some particularly attractive bit of carrion.

Burl had watched with wide eyes until a gaping hole appeared in the
armor of the smaller one. It uttered a grating outcry--or seemed to. The
noise was actually the tearing of its shell between the mandibles of the
victor.

The wounded creature struggled more and more feebly. When it ceased to
offer battle, the conqueror placidly began to dine before its prey had
ceased to live. But this was the custom of creatures on this planet.

Burl watched, timorous but hopeful. When the meal was finished, he
darted in quickly as the diner lumbered away. He was almost too late,
even then. An ant--the forerunner of many--already inspected the
fragments with excitedly vibrating antennae.

Burl needed to move quickly and he did. Ants were stupid and
short-sighted insects; few of them were hunters. Save when offered
battle, most of them were scavengers only. They hunted the scenes of
nightmare for the dead and dying only, but fought viciously if their
prey were questioned. And always there were others on the way.

Some were arriving now. Hearing the tiny clickings of their approach,
Burl was hasty. Over-hasty. He seized a loosened fragment and fled. It
was merely the horn, the snout of the dead and eaten creature. But it
was loose and easily carried. He ran.

Later he inspected his find with disappointment. There was little meat
clinging to it. It was merely the horn of a Minotaur beetle, shaped like
the horn of a rhinoceros. Plucking out the shreds left by its murderer,
he pricked his hand. Pettishly, he flung it aside. The time of darkness
was near, so he crept to the hiding place of his tribe to huddle with
them until light came again.

There were only twenty of them; four or five men and six or seven women.
The rest were girls or children. Burl had been wondering at the strange
feelings that came over him when he looked at one of the girls. She was
younger than Burl--perhaps eighteen--and fleeter of foot. They talked
together sometimes and, once or twice, Burl shared an especially
succulent find of foodstuffs with her.

He could share nothing with her now. She stared at him in the deepening
night when he crept to the labyrinthine hiding place the tribe now used
in a mushroom forest. He considered that she looked hungry and hoped
that he would have food to share. And he was bitterly ashamed that he
could offer nothing. He held himself a little apart from the rest,
because of his shame. Since he too was hungry, it was some time before
he slept. Then he dreamed.

Next morning he found the horn where he had thrown it disgustedly the
day before. It was sticking in the flabby trunk of a toadstool. He
pulled it out. In his dream he had used it....

Presently he tried to use it. Sometimes--not often--the men of the tribe
used the saw-toothed edge of a cricket-leg, or the leg of a
grasshopper, to sever tough portions of an edible mushroom. The horn had
no cutting edge, but Burl had used it in his dream. He was not quite
capable of distinguishing clearly between reality and dreams; so he
tried to duplicate what happened in the dream. Remembering that it had
stuck into the mushroom-stalk, he thrust it. It stabbed. He remembered
distinctly how the larger beetle had used its horn as a weapon. It had
stabbed, too.

He considered absorbedly. He could not imagine himself fighting one of
the dangerous insects, of course. Men did not fight, on the forgotten
planet. They ran away. They hid. But somehow Burl formed a fantastic
picture of himself stabbing food with this horn, as he had stabbed a
mushroom. It was longer than his arm and though naturally clumsy in his
hand, it would have been a deadly weapon in the grip of a man prepared
to do battle.

Battle did not occur to Burl. But the idea of stabbing food with it was
clear. There could be food that would not fight back. Presently he had
an inspiration. His face brightened. He began to make his way toward the
tiny river that ran across the plain in which the tribe of humans lived
by foraging in competition with the ants. Yellow-bellied newts--big
enough to be lusted for--swam in its waters. The swimming larvae of a
thousand kinds of creatures floated on the sluggish surface or crawled
over the bottom.

There were deadly things there, too. Giant crayfish snapped their claws
at the unwary. One of them could sever Burl's arm with ease. Mosquitoes
sometimes hummed high above the river. Mosquitoes had a four-inch
wing-spread, now, though they were dying out for lack of plant-juices on
which the males of their species fed. But they were formidable. Burl had
learned to crush them between fragments of fungus.

He crept slowly through the forest of toadstools. What should have been
grass underfoot was brownish rust. Orange and red and purple moulds
clustered about the bases of the creamy mushroom-trunks. Once, Burl
paused to run his weapon through a fleshy column and reassure himself
that what he planned was possible.

He made his way furtively through the bulbous growths. Once he heard
clickings and froze to stillness. Four or five ants, minims only eight
inches long, were returning by an habitual pathway to their city. They
moved sturdily along, heavily laden, over the route marked by the scent
of formic acid left by their fellow-townsmen. Burl waited until they had
passed, then went on.

He came to the bank of the river. It flowed slowly, green scum covering
a great deal of its surface in the backwaters, occasionally broken by a
slowly enlarging bubble released from decomposing matter on the bottom.
In the center of the stream the current ran a little more swiftly and
the water itself seemed clear. Over it ran many water-spiders. They had
not shared in the general increase of size in the insect world.
Depending as they did on the surface tension of the water for support,
to have grown larger and heavier would have destroyed them.

Burl surveyed the scene. His search was four parts for danger and only
one part for a way to test his brilliant notion, but that was natural.
Where he stood, the green scum covered the stream for many yards.
Down-river a little, though, the current came closer to the bank. Here
he could not see whatever swam or crawled or wriggled underwater; there
he might.

There was an outcropping rock forming a support for crawling stuff,
which in turn supported shelf-fungi making wide steps almost down to the
water's edge. Burl was making his way cautiously toward them when he saw
one of the edible mushrooms which formed so large a part of his diet. He
paused to break off a flabby white piece large enough to feed him for
many days. It was the custom of his people, when they found a store of
food, to hide with it and not venture out again to danger until it was
all eaten. Burl was tempted to do just that with his booty. He could
give Saya of this food and they would eat together. They might hide
together until it was all consumed.

But there was a swirling in the water under the descending platforms of
shelf-fungi. A very remarkable sensation came to Burl. He may have been
the only man in many generations to be aware of the high ambition to
stab something to eat. He may have been a throw-back to ancestors who
had known bravery, which had no survival-value here. But Burl had
imagined carrying Saya food which he had stabbed with the spear of a
Minotaur beetle. It was an extraordinary idea.

It was new, too. Not too long ago, when he was younger, Burl would have
thought of the tribe instead. He'd have thought of old Jon, bald-headed
and wheezing and timorous, and how that patriarch would pat his arm
exuberantly when handed food; or old Tama, wrinkled and querulous, whose
look of settled dissatisfaction would vanish at sight of a tidbit; of
Dik and Tet, the tribe-members next younger, who would squabble
zestfully over the fragments allotted them.

But now he imagined Saya looking astonished and glad when he grandly
handed her more food than she could possibly eat. She would admire him
enormously!

Of course he did not imagine himself fighting to get food for Saya. He
meant only to stab something edible in the water. Things in the water
did not fight things on land. Since he would not be in the water, he
would not be in a fight. It was a completely delectable idea, which no
man within memory had ever entertained before. If Burl accomplished it,
his tribe would admire him. Saya would admire him. Everybody, observing
that he had found a new source of food, would even envy him until he
showed them how to do it too. Burl's fellow-humans were preoccupied with
the filling of their stomachs. The preservation of their lives came
second. The perpetuation of the race came a bad third in their
consideration. They were herded together in a leaderless group, coming
to the same hiding-place nightly only that they might share the finds of
the lucky and gather comfort from their numbers. They had no weapons.
Even Burl did not consider his spear a weapon. It was a tool for
stabbing something to eat only. Yet he did not think of it in that way
exactly. His tribe did not even consciously use tools. Sometimes they
used stones to crack open the limbs of great insects they found
incompletely devoured. They did not even carry rocks about with them for
that purpose. Only Burl had a vague idea of taking something to some
place to do something with it. It was unprecedented. Burl was at least
an atavar. He may have been a genius.

But he was not a high-grade genius. Certainly not yet.

He reached a spot from which he could look down into the water. He
looked behind and all about, listening, then lay down to stare into the
shallow depths. Once, a huge crayfish, a good eight feet long, moved
leisurely across his vision. Small fishes and even huge newts fled
before it.
