editor




THE REVOLT OF THE SCIENTISTS

By Technocrat Bruce Yerke


The editor of this magazine has asked me to prepare an article about a
certain subject that has hitherto been totally lacking from the pages of
all the scientifictional magazines, and which, with an article in a
special LASFL publication, burst a bombshell on the science-fictional
field, and at the same moment punched an irreparable hole in the
Wollheim-Michel gas bag. Being recognized as the _science-fiction
Technocrat_, I was asked to do this by Mr. Bradbury, who is himself a
new recruit to OUR ranks. Since many of the readers of this magazine
have all read the article in the first _MIKROS_, I feel that I can take
a few liberties to go ahead.

When you write an introductory article to a generally new audience on
Technocracy, you have to start from the ground up. You cannot assume
that the readers know a whit about it. This, eventually, becomes boring
to the _teacher_, for he is so exuberant and anxious to take up other
phases of the subject that he soon gets tired of merely telling of the
first stepping stone in a vast subject.

This article will cause much interrogation. It would be impossible for
me, in this limited space, to give you all of the facts I wish to, but I
do suggest that everyone who is interested should go to the nearest
TECHNOCRACY INC. section (and there are many in every large city) and
receive some of their literature, or write to CONTINENTAL HEADQUARTERS
if you live at some flag stop, and get their pamphlets.

If you have ever heard of Technocracy, it was probably through some
garbled news item, and thus you, like I myself, no doubt have or had a
very wrong opinion of this organization. It is perfectly legal in all
respects, being incorporated under the laws of New York State. It is
technically an educational organization, and many authorities have to
admit that Tech's twenty week study course is the equivalent of a 4 year
college experience. The fact that its speakers are allowed to talk in
public high schools, and hold meetings in the same place, shows that
even the carefully censured school board is, at least, not opposing it.

Technocracy is not an organization that wants to overthrow the American
government, but only an org. that will step in when the present Price
System collapses. (At this point it MUST be taken note of that PRICE
SYSTEM is not a different word for the Marxian definition of CAPITALISM.
_Price SYSTEM_ is merely a term designating _any system using a_
circulating medium of exchange for the distribution of goods and
services.)

If you go to a Technocracy section, they will show you a chart that will
convince you that this _system_ will collapse before 1945, probably
1942. This chart shows the economic trends of this nation from its birth
to 1939, and also the amount of extraneous energy and human toil
required to produce and maintain this economy. When you leave, you'll be
convinced, don't worry. I have not the time nor space to do that here.
The end of the Price System is inevitable, and when it comes you are not
faced with the choice of taking Technocracy or Socialism, Communism or
any other 'ism'. You are faced with a choice of Tech. or _chaos_, out of
which the majority of us will not emerge--alive.

This nation is so highly inter-dependant, that the failure of one phase
of its industrial sequence would mean the ultimate collapse of the whole
country. If the electric power of New York was shut off, the city would
burn down in approximately SIX HOURS! This, because of the rate fires
break out. If the transportation system were shut off, all of the food
in the city would be gone in six days, water would be so polluted that
disease 10,000 times worse than the Black Plague would break out.

I shall not spend time telling you why we are faced with economic
disaster, for thousands of examples can be had at a Technocracy section.
We shall, for the purposes of this article simply assume that the
collapse is near, within a matter of days.

All of the large business institutes, and Technocracy as well, will know
within 100 days of the time of the ultimate end, when all stocks and
bonds depreciate to zero and the financial structure of this country is
due to fall.

At this time Technocracy will do, what is termed in colloquial American
slang--"TURN ON THE HEAT!" At the present time Technocracy is not
interested in forming a large organization, formed of emotional
butterflys. It is constructing a functional group; a nucleus of people
who know the subject to a T, and who will be prepared to act in the
forming of a skeleton control until things are reorganized. In the last
five years Technocracy has not used one bit of emotional fly paper, but
has presented its whole plan in plain facts, and in as hard-boiled and
unentertaining a manner as could be done without insulting the
listeners. Nevertheless Tech. is the fastest growing organization in the
nation. (except the relief organization)

Under Technocracy people will be classified in a set of probably 100
industrial sequences, according to their work. Each of these is known as
a FUNCTIONAL SEQUENCE. Let us trace the work of one sequence from the
bottom to the top.

The nation will be divided into regional divisions, determined by
latitude and longitude. In each division there will be the various
offices of whatever sequences are operating in that division. (each
sequence of the 100 different ones will not necessarily appear in every
division, though) Some will only have three or four or even as high as
fifty. In this division we will find, say, a factory, for the production
of steel, and thus there will be a steel sequence in this division.
(This is how it will work in all sequences, essentially.)

The lowest classification will be the man doing the simplest job. We'll
use as our example one who works a welding torch. All the welding torch
