should be avoided. In sleeping the pillow should be of the right thickness
to support the head on a level with the spinal column and should not be
too soft. If one sleeps on his back, no pillow is required. It is best not
to acquire the habit of sleeping always on the same side.

Where one is compelled by his work to assume harmful positions, these
should be corrected by proper exercises, and by cultivating opposing
positions during the leisure hours. Much is to be accomplished through
those forms of physical exercise which develop the muscles whose work it
is to keep the body in an upright position.

*School Furniture.*--It has long been observed that school children are
more subject to curvature of the spine and other deformities of the
skeleton than the children who do not attend school. While this is due
largely to faulty positions assumed by the pupils at their work, it has
been suggested that the school furniture may be in part to blame for these
positions. Investigations of this problem have shown that most of the
school desks and seats in use in our public schools are unhygienically
constructed, in that they _force_ pupils into unnatural positions. School
seats should support the pupil in a natural position, both in the use of
his books and in writing, and there are many arguments in favor of the
so-called "adjustable" school furniture. Fig. 106 shows the seat and desk
designed by the Boston, Mass., Schoolhouse Commission after much study and
experimenting and used in the Boston schools. This furniture, which
provides a seat adjustable for height, having a back rest also adjustable
for height, and a desk which is likewise provided with a vertical
adjustment, supplies all essential hygienic requirements. It is to be
hoped that school furniture of this character may in the near future come
into general use.

                                [Fig. 106]


    Fig. 106--Adjustable seat and desk used in schools of Boston, Mass.


*Correction of Skeletal Deformities.*--It is, of course, easier to prevent
deformities of the skeleton by giving attention to proper positions, than
to correct them after they have occurred. It should also be noted that
severe deformities cannot be corrected by the individual for himself, but
these must come under the treatment of specialists in this line of medical
work. In mild cases of spinal curvature, drooping of the head, and round
shoulders, the individual _can_ benefit his condition. By working to
"substitute a correct attitude for the faulty one,"(81) he can by
persistence bring about marked improvements. It is better, however, to
have the advice and aid of a physical director, where this is possible. It
should also be borne in mind that the correction of skeletal deformities
requires effort through a long period of time, especially where the
deformities are pronounced; and one lacking the will power to persist will
not secure all the results which he seeks.

*"Setting Up" Exercises.*--The splendid carriage of students from military
schools shows what may be accomplished in securing erectness of form where
proper attention is given to this matter. The military student gets his
fine form partly through his exercises in handling arms, but mainly
through his so-called "setting up" drill. As a suggestion to one desiring
to improve the form of his body, a modification of the usual "setting up"
drill is here given:

1. Standing erect, with the heels together, the feet at an angle of 45 deg.,
and hands at the sides, bring the arms to a horizontal position in front,
little fingers touching and nails down. From this position raise the hands
straight over the head, bringing the palms gradually together. Then with a
backward sweeping movement, return the hands again to the sides. Repeat
several times.

2. With the feet as in the above exercise, bring the hands and the arms to
a level with the shoulders, palms down, elbows bent, middle fingers of the
two hands touching, and the extended thumbs touching the chest. Keeping
the palms down and the arms on a level with the shoulders, extend the
hands as far sideward and backward as possible, returning each time to the
first position. As the hands move out, inhale deeply (through the nose),
and as they are brought back, exhale quickly (through the mouth). Repeat
several times.

3. With the arms at the sides and the feet side by side and touching,
bring the hands in a circular movement to a vertical position over the
head, and lock the thumbs. Keeping the knees straight and the thumbs
locked, bend forward, letting the hands touch the ground if possible, and
then bring the body and hands again to the vertical position. Then by a
backward sweeping movement, return the hands again to the sides. Repeat.

While these exercises may be practiced whenever convenient, it is best to
set apart some special time each day for them, as on retiring at night or
on rising in the morning.

*Hygienic Footwear.*--A necessary aid to erectness of position in standing
and walking is a properly fitting shoe. Heels that are too high tilt the
body unnaturally forward, and shoes that cause any kind of discomfort in
walking lead to unnatural positions in order to protect the feet. Shoes
should fit snugly, being neither too large nor too small. Many shoes,
however, are unhygienically constructed, and no attempt should be made to
wear them. Certainly is this true of styles that approach the "French
heel" or the "toothpick toe" (Fig. 107). However, many styles of shoes are
manufactured that are both hygienic and neat fitting. Rubber heels, on
account of their elasticity, are to be preferred to those made of leather.

                                [Fig. 107]


     Fig. 107--Heels and toes of unhygienic and of hygienic footwear.


*The Skeleton in Childhood and Old Age.*--Certain peculiarities are found
to exist in the bones of children and of old people which call for special
care of the skeleton during the first and last periods of life. The bones
of children are soft, lacking mineral matter, and are liable to become
bent For this reason, children who are encouraged to walk at too early an
age may bend the thigh bones, causing the too familiar "bow-legs." These
bones may also be bent by having children sit on benches and chairs which
are too high for the feet to reach the floor, and which do not provide
supports for the feet. Wholesome food, fresh air, sunlight, and exercise
are also necessary to the proper development of the bones of children.
Where these natural conditions are lacking, as in the crowded districts of
cities, children often suffer from a disease known as "rickets," on
account of which their bones are unnaturally soft and easily bent.

On account of the accumulation of mineral matter, the bones of elderly
people become brittle and are easily broken, and from lack of vigor of the
bone cells they heal slowly after such injuries occur. This makes the
breaking of a bone by an aged person a serious matter. Old people should,
as far as possible, avoid liabilities to falls, such as going rapidly up
and down stairs, or walking on icy sidewalks, and should use the utmost
care in getting about. In old people also the cartilage between the bones
softens, increasing the liability of getting misshaped. Special attention,
therefore, should be given to erectness of form, and to such exercises as
tend to preserve the natural shape of the body.

*Treatment of Fractures.*--A fractured bone always requires the aid of a
surgeon, and no time should be lost in securing his services. In the
meantime the patient should be put in a comfortable position, and the
broken limb supported above the rest of the body. Though the breaking of a
bone is not, as a rule, a serious mishap, it is necessary that the very
best skill be employed in setting it. Any failure to bring the ends of the
broken bone into their normal relations permanently deforms the limb and
interferes with its use.

*Dislocations and Sprains.*--Dislocations, if they be of the larger joints,
also require the aid of the surgeon in their reduction and sometimes in
their subsequent treatment. Simple dislocations of the finger joints,
however, may be reduced by pulling the parts until the bones can be
slipped into position.

_A sprain_, which is an overstrained condition of the ligaments
surrounding a joint, frequently requires very careful treatment. When the
sprain is at all serious, a physician should be called. Because of the
limited supply of blood to the ligaments, they are slow to heal, and the
temptation to use the joint before it is fully recovered is always great.
Massage(82) judiciously applied to a sprained joint, by bringing about a
more rapid change in the blood and the lymph, is beneficial both in
relieving the pain, and in hastening recovery.

*Summary.*--The skeleton, or framework of the body, is a structure which is
movable as a whole and in most of its parts. It preserves the form of the
body, protects important organs, and supplies the mechanical devices, or
machines, upon which the muscles act in the production of motion. The
skeleton is adapted to its purposes through the number and properties of
the bones, and through the cartilage and connective tissue associated with
the bones. The places where the different bones connect one with another
are known as joints, and most of these admit of motion. The preservation
of the natural form of the skeleton is necessary, both for its proper
action and for the health of the body.

*Exercises.*--1. State the main purpose of the skeleton. What is the
necessity for so many bones in its construction?

2. How may the per cent of animal and of mineral matter in a bone be
determined?

3. What properties are given the bones by the animal matter? What by the
mineral matter?

4. Locate the bone cells. What is their special function?

5. State the plan by which nourishment is supplied to the bone cells in
different parts of the bone.

6. Give the uses of the periosteum.

7. State the purpose of the Haversian canals. Of the canaliculi.

8. Give functions of the spinal column.

9. Name the different materials used in the construction of a joint and
the purpose served by each.

10. Name four mechanical devices, or machines, found in the skeleton and
state the purpose served by each.

11. Name one or more of the body machines not located in the skeleton.

12. Of what advantage is the peculiar shape of the lower jaw? Of the ribs?
Of the bones of the pelvic girdle?

13. State the importance of preserving the natural form of the skeleton.
How are unnatural curves produced in the spinal column?

14. How may slight deformities of the skeleton be corrected?

15. What different systems are employed in the body in the production of
motion? What is the special function of each?



PRACTICAL WORK


To obtain clear ideas of the form and functions of the bones, a careful
examination of a prepared and mounted skeleton is necessary. Many of the
bones, however, may be located and their general form made out from the
living body. Bones of the lower animals may also be studied to advantage.

*Experiments to show the Composition of Bone.*--1. Examine a slender bone,
like that in a chicken's leg. Note that it resists bending and is
difficult to break. Note also that it is elastic--that, when slightly bent,
it will spring back.

2. Soak such a bone over night in a mixture of one part hydrochloric acid
and four parts water. Then ascertain by bending, stretching, and twisting
what properties the bone has lost. The acid has dissolved out the mineral
matter.

3. Burn a small piece of bone in a clear gas flame, or on a bed of coals,
until it ceases to blaze and turns a white color. Can the bone now be bent
or twisted? What properties has it lost and what retained? What substance
has been removed from the bone by burning?

*Observation on the Gross Structure of Bone.*--1. Procure a long, dry bone.
(One that has lain out in the field until it has bleached will answer the
purpose excellently.) Test its hardness, strength, and stiffness. Saw it
in two a third of the distance from one end, and saw the shorter piece in
two lengthwise. Compare the structure at different places. Find rough
elevations on the outside for the attachment of muscles, and small
openings into the bone for the entrance of blood vessels and nerves. Make
drawings to represent the sections.

2. Procure a fresh bone from the butcher shop. Note the difference between
it and the dry bone. Examine the materials surrounding the sides and
covering the ends of the bone. Saw through the enlarged portion at the end
and examine the red marrow. Saw through the middle of the bone and observe
the yellow marrow.

*To show the Minute Structure of the Bone.*--Prepare a section of bone for
microscopic study as follows: With a jeweler's saw cut as thin a slice as
possible. Place this upon a good-sized whetstone, not having too much
grit, and keeping it wet rub it under the finger, or a piece of leather,
until it is thin enough to let the light shine through. The section may
then be washed and examined with the microscope. If the specimen is to be
preserved for future study, it may be mounted in the usual way, but with
_hard_ balsam. Prepare and study both transverse and longitudinal
sections, making drawings. The sections should be prepared from bones that
are thoroughly dry but which have not begun to decay.

*To show the Structure of a Joint.*--Procure from a butcher the joint of
some small animal (hog or sheep). Cut it open and locate the cartilage,
synovial membrane, and ligaments. Observe the shape and surface of the
rubbing parts and the strength of the ligaments.




CHAPTER XV - THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM


As already stated, the skeleton, the nervous system, and the muscular
system are concerned in the production of motion. The skeleton and the
nervous system, however, serve other purposes in the body, while the
muscular system is devoted exclusively to the production of motion. For
this reason it is looked upon as the special _motor_ system. The muscular
tissue is the most abundant of all the tissues, forming about 41 per cent
of the weight of the body.

*Properties of Muscles.*--The ability of muscular tissue to produce motion
depends primarily upon two properties--the property of irritability and the
property of contractility. _Irritability_ is that property of a substance
which enables it to respond to a stimulus, or to act when acted upon.
_Contractility_ is the property which enables the muscle when stimulated
to draw up, thereby becoming shorter and thicker (a condition called
contraction), and when the stimulation ceases, to return to its former
condition (of relaxation). The property of contractility enables the
muscles to produce motion. Irritability is a condition necessary to their
control in the body.

*Kinds of Muscular Tissue.*--Three kinds of muscular tissue are found in
the body. These are known as the _striated_, or striped, muscular tissue;
the _non-striated_, or plain, muscular tissue; and the _muscular tissue of
the heart_. These are made up of different kinds of muscle cells and act
in different ways to cause motion. The striated muscular tissue far
exceeds the others in amount and forms all those muscles that can be felt
from the surface of the body. The non-striated muscle is found in the
walls of the food canal, blood vessels, air passages, and other tubes of
the body; while the muscular tissue of the heart is confined entirely to
that organ.

*Striated Muscle Cells.*--The cells of the striated muscles are slender,
thread-like structures, having an average length of 1-1/2 inches (35
millimeters) and a diameter of about 1/400 of an inch (60 {~GREEK SMALL LETTER MU~}). Because of
their great length they are called fibers, or fiber cells. They are marked
by a number of dark, transverse bands, or stripes, called striations,(83)
which seem to divide them into a number of sections, or disks (Fig. 108).
A thin sac-like covering, called the _sarcolemma_, surrounds the entire
cell and just beneath this are a number of nuclei.(84)

                                [Fig. 108]


Fig. 108--*A striated muscle cell* highly magnified, showing striations and
    nuclei. Attached to the cell is the termination of a nerve fiber.


Within the sarcolemma are minute fibrils and a semiliquid substance,
called the _sarcoplasm_. At each end the cell tapers to a point from which
the sarcolemma appears to continue as a fine thread, and this, by
attaching itself to the inclosing sheath, holds the cell in place. Most of
the muscle cells receive, at some portion of their length, the termination
of a nerve fiber. This penetrates the sarcolemma and spreads out upon a
kind of disk, having several nuclei, known as the _end plate_.

*The "Muscle-organ."*--We must distinguish between the term "muscle" as
applied to the muscular tissue and the term as applied to a working group
of muscular tissue, which is an organ. In the muscle, or muscle-organ, is
found a definite grouping of muscle fibers such as will enable a large
number of them to act together in the production of the same movement. An
examination of one of the striated muscles shows the individual fibers to
lie parallel in small bundles, each bundle being surrounded by a thin
layer of connective tissue. (See Practical Work.) These small bundles are
bound into larger ones by thicker sheaths and these in turn may be bound
into bundles of still larger size (Fig. 109). The sheaths surrounding the
fiber bundles are connected with one another and also with the outer
covering of the muscle, known as

                                [Fig. 109]


 Fig. 109--*Diagram* of a section of a muscle, showing the perimysium and
                       the bundles of fiber cells.


                                [Fig. 110]


Fig. 110--*A muscle-organ in position.* The tendons connect at one end with
 the bones and at the other end with the fiber cells and perimysium. (See
                                  text.)


*The Perimysium.*--The plan of the muscle-organ is revealed through a study
of the perimysium. This is not limited to the surface of the muscle, as
the name suggests, but properly includes the sheaths that surround the
bundles of fibers. Furthermore, the surface perimysium and that within the
muscle are both continuous with the strong, white cords, called _tendons_,
that connect the muscles with the bones. By uniting with the bone at one
end and blending with the perimysium and fiber bundles at the other, the
tendon forms a very secure attachment for the muscle. The perimysium and
the tendon are thus the means through which the fiber cells in any
muscle-organ are made to _pull together_ upon the same part of the body
(Fig. 110).

*Purpose of Striated Muscles.*--The striated muscles, by their attachments
to the bones, supply motion to all the mechanical devices, or machines,
located in the skeleton. Through them the body is moved from place to
place and all the external organs are supplied with such motion as they
require. Because of the attachment of the striated muscles to the
skeleton, and their action upon it, they are called _skeletal_ muscles. As
most of them are under the control of the will, they are also called
_voluntary_ muscles. They are of special value in adapting the body to its
surroundings.

*Structure of the Non-striated Muscles.*--The cells of the non-striated
muscles differ from those of the striated muscles in being decidedly
spindle-shaped and in having but a single well-defined nucleus (Fig. 111).
Furthermore, they have no striations, and their connection with the nerve
fibers is less marked. They are also much smaller than the striated cells,
being less than one one-hundredth of an inch in length and one
three-thousandth of an inch in diameter.

In the formation of the non-striated muscles, the cells are attached to
one another by a kind of muscle cement to form thin sheets or slender
bundles. These differ from the striated muscles in several particulars.
They are of a pale, whitish color, and they have no tendons. Instead of
being attached to the bones, they usually form a distinct layer in the
walls of small cavities or of tubes (Fig. 111). Since they are controlled
by the part of the nervous system which acts independently of the will,
they are said to be _involuntary_. They contract and relax slowly.

                                [Fig. 111]


 Fig. 111--*Non-striated muscle cells.* _A._ Cross section of small artery
    magnified, showing (1) the layer of non-striated cells. _B._ Three
                   non-striated cells highly magnified.


*Work of the Non-striated Muscles.*--The work of the non-striated muscles,
both in purpose and in method, is radically different from that of the
striated. They do not change the _position_ of parts of the body, as do
the striated muscles, but they alter the _size_ and _shape_ of the parts
which they surround. Their purpose, as a rule, is to move, or control the
movement of, materials within cavities and tubes, and they do this by
means of the _pressure_ which they exert. Examples of their action have
already been studied in the propulsion of the food through the alimentary
canal and in the regulation of the flow of blood through the arteries
(pages 159 and 49). While they do not contract so quickly, nor with such
great force as the striated muscles, their work is more closely related to
the vital processes.

*Structure of the Heart Muscle.*--The cells of the heart combine the
structure and properties of the striated and the non-striated muscle
cells, and form an intermediate type between the two. They are
cross-striped like the striated cells, and are nearly as wide, but are
rather short (Fig. 112). Each cell has a well-defined nucleus, but the
sarcolemma is absent. They are placed end to end to form fibers, and many
of the cells have branches by which they are united to the cells in
neighboring fibers. In this way they interlace more or less with each
other, but are also cemented together. They contract quickly and with
great force, but are not under control of the will. Muscular tissue of
this variety seems excellently adapted to the work of the heart.

                                [Fig. 112]


Fig. 112--*Muscle cells from the heart*, highly magnified (after Schaefer).


*The Muscular Stimulus.*--The inactive, or resting, condition of a muscle
is that of relaxation. It does work through contracting. It becomes
active, or contracts, only when it is being acted upon by some force
outside of itself, and it relaxes again when this force is withdrawn. Any
kind of force which, by acting on muscles, causes them to contract, is
called a _muscular stimulus_. Electricity, chemicals of different kinds,
and mechanical force may be so applied to the muscles as to cause them to
contract. These are _artificial_ stimuli. So far as known, muscles are
stimulated _naturally_ in but one way. This is through the nervous system.
The nervous system supplies a stimulus called the _nervous impulse_, which
reaches the muscles by the nerves, causing them to contract. By means of
nervous impulses, all of the muscles (both voluntary and involuntary) are
made to contract as the needs of the body for motion require.

*Energy Transformation in the Muscle.*--The muscle serves as a kind of
engine, doing work by the transformation of potential into kinetic energy.
Evidences of this are found in the changes that accompany contraction.
Careful study shows that during any period of contraction oxygen and food
materials are consumed, waste products, such as carbon dioxide, are
produced, and heat is liberated. Furthermore, the _blood supply to the
muscle_ is such that the materials for providing energy may be carried
rapidly to it and the products of oxidation as rapidly removed. Blood
vessels penetrate the muscles in all directions and the capillaries lie
very near the individual cells (Fig. 113). Provision is made also, through
the nervous system, for _increasing_ the blood supply when the muscle is
at work. From these facts, as well as from the great force with which the
muscle contracts, one must conclude that the muscle is a _transformer of
energy_--that within its protoplasm, chemical changes take place whereby
the potential energy of oxygen and food is converted into the kinetic
energy of motion.

                                [Fig. 113]


                    Fig. 113--*Capillaries* of muscles.


*Plan of Using Muscular Force.*--Two difficulties have to be overcome in
the using of muscular force in the body. The first of these is due to the
fact that the muscles exert their force _only when they contract_. They
can pull but not push. Hence, in order to bring about the opposing
movements(85) of the body, each muscle must work against some force that
produces a result directly opposite to that which the muscle produces.
Some of the muscles (those of breathing) work against the elasticity of
certain parts of the body; others (those that hold the body in an upright
position), to some extent against gravity; and others (the non-striated
muscle in arteries), against pressure. But in most cases, _muscles work
against muscles_.

                                [Fig. 114]


 Fig. 114--*The muscle pair* that operates the forearm. For names of these
                          muscles, see Fig. 119.


The striated, or skeletal, muscles are nearly all arranged after the
last-named plan. As a rule a pair of muscles is so placed, with reference
to a joint, that one moves the part in one direction, and the other moves
it in the opposite direction. From the kinds of motion which the various
muscle pairs produce, they are classified as follows:

1. _Flexors and Extensors._--The flexor muscles bend and the extensors
straighten joints (Fig. 114).

2. _Adductors and Abductors._--The adductors draw the limbs into positions
parallel with the axis of the body and the abductors draw them away.

3. _Rotators_ (two kinds).--The rotators are attached about pivot joints
and bring about twisting movements.

4. _Radiating and Sphincter Muscles. _--The radiating muscles open and the
sphincter muscles close the natural openings of the body, such as the
mouth.

The pupil should locate examples of the different kinds of muscle pairs in
his own body.

*Exchange of Muscular Force for Motion.*--The second difficulty to be
overcome in the use of muscular force in the body is due to the fact that
the muscles contract through _short_ distances, while it is necessary for
most of them to move portions of the body through _long_ distances. It may
be easily shown that the longest muscles of the body do not shorten more
than three or four inches during contraction. To bring about the required
movements of the body, which in some instances amount to four or five
feet, requires that a large proportion of the muscular force be exchanged
for motion. The machines of the skeleton, while providing for motion in
definite directions, also provide the means whereby _strong forces_,
acting through _short distances_, are made to produce movements of _less
force_, through _long distances_. The mechanical device employed for this
purpose is known as

*The Lever.*--The lever may be described as a stiff bar which turns about a
fixed point of support, called the _fulcrum_. The force applied to the bar
to make it turn is called the _power_, and that which is lifted or moved
is termed the _weight_. The weight, the power, and the fulcrum may occupy
different positions along the bar and this gives rise to the three kinds
of levers, known as levers of the first class, the second class, and the
third class (Fig. 115). In levers of the _first class_ the fulcrum
occupies a position somewhere between the power and the weight. In the
_second class_ the weight is between the fulcrum and the power. In the
_third class_ the power is between the fulcrum and the weight.

                                [Fig. 115]


    Fig. 115--*Classes of levers. I.* Two levers of first class showing
fulcrums in different positions. II. Lever of second class. III. Lever of
 third class. _F._ Fulcrum. _P._ Power. _W._ Weight. _a._ Power-arm. _b._
                               Weight-arm.


*Application to the Body.*--In the body the bones serve as levers; the
turning points, or fulcrums, are found at the joints; the muscles supply
the power; and parts of the body, or things to be lifted, serve as
weights. For these levers to _increase_ the motion of the muscles, it is
necessary that the muscles be attached to the bones _near the joints_, and
that the parts to be moved be located at some distance from the joints. In
other words the (muscle) power-arm must be _shorter_ than the (body)
