the strain."

"No, I mean it," Dal said earnestly. "I think that is exactly what's
been happening."

Tiger looked at him with concern. "Dal, this is no time for double talk
and nonsense."

"It's not nonsense," Dal said. "It's the answer, if you'll only stop and
think."

"An intelligent _virus_?" Jack said. "Who ever heard of such a thing?
There's never been a life-form like that reported since the beginning of
the galactic exploration."

"But that doesn't mean there couldn't be one," Dal said. "And how would
an exploratory crew ever identify it, if it existed? How would they ever
even suspect it? They'd miss it completely--unless it happened to get
into trouble itself and try to call for help!" Dal jumped up in
excitement.

"Look, I've seen a dozen articles showing how such a thing was
theoretically possible ... a virus life-form with billions of
submicroscopic parts acting together to form an intelligent colony. The
only thing a virus-creature would need that other intelligent creatures
don't need would be some kind of a host, some sort of animal body to
live in so that it could use its intelligence."

"It's impossible," Jack said scornfully. "Why don't you give it up and
get some rest? Here we sit with our feet in the fire, and all you can do
is dream up foolishness like this."

"I'm not so sure it's foolishness," Tiger Martin said slowly. "Jack,
maybe he's got something. A couple of things would fit that don't make
sense at all."

"All sorts of things would fit," Dal said. "The viruses we know have to
have a host--some other life-form to live in. Usually they are
parasites, damaging or destroying their hosts and giving nothing in
return, but some set up real partnership housekeeping with their hosts
so that both are better off."

"You mean a symbiotic relationship," Jack said.

"Of course," Dal said. "Now suppose these virus-creatures were
intelligent, and came from some other place looking for a new host they
could live with. They wouldn't look for an intelligent creature, they
would look for some _unintelligent_ creature with a good strong body
that would be capable of doing all sorts of things if it only had an
intelligence to guide it. Suppose these virus-creatures found a
simple-minded, unintelligent race on this planet and tried to set up a
symbiotic relationship with it. The virus-creatures would need a host to
provide a home and a food supply. Maybe they in turn could supply the
intelligence to raise the host to a civilized level of life and
performance. Wouldn't that be a fair basis for a sound partnership?"

Jack scratched his head doubtfully. "And you're saying that these
virus-creatures came here after the exploratory ship had come and gone?"

"They must have! Maybe they only came a few years ago, maybe only months
ago. But when they tried to invade the unintelligent creatures the
exploratory ship found here, they discovered that the new host's body
couldn't tolerate them. His body reacted as if they were parasitic
invaders, and built up antibodies against them. And those body defenses
were more than the virus could cope with."

Dal pointed to the piles of notes on the desk. "Don't you see how it
adds up? Right from the beginning we've been assuming that these
monkey-like creatures here on this planet were the dominant, intelligent
life-forms. Anatomically they were ordinary cellular creatures like you
and me, and when we examined them we expected to find the same sort of
biochemical reactions we'd find with any such creatures. And all our
results came out wrong, because we were dealing with a combination of
two creatures--the host and a virus. Maybe the creatures on 31 Brucker
VII were naturally blank-faced idiots before the virus came, or maybe
the virus was forced to damage some vital part just in order to fight
back--but it was the _virus_ that was being killed by its own host, not
the other way around."

Jack studied the idea, no longer scornful. "So you think the
virus-creatures called for help, hoping we could find some way to free
them from the hosts that were killing them. And when Fuzzy developed a
powerful antibody against them, and we started using the stuff--" Jack
broke off, shaking his head in horror. "Dal, if you're right, we were
literally _slaughtering our own patients_ when we gave those injections
down there!"

"Exactly," Dal said. "Is it any wonder they're so scared of us now? It
must have looked like a deliberate attempt to wipe them out, and now
they're afraid that we'll go get help and _really_ move in against
them."

Tiger nodded. "Which was precisely what we were planning, if you stop to
think about it. Maybe that was why they were so reluctant to tell us
anything about themselves. Maybe they've already been mistaken for
parasitic invaders before, wherever in the universe they came from."

"But if this is true, then we're really in a jam," Jack said. "What can
we possibly do for them? We can't even repair the damage that we've
already done. What sort of treatment can we use?"

Dal shook his head. "I don't know the answer to that one, but I do know
we've got to find out if we're right. An intelligent virus-creature has
as much right to life as any other intelligent life-form. If we've
guessed right, then there's a lot that our intelligent friends down
there haven't told us. Maybe there'll be some clue there. We've just got
to face them with it, and see what they say."

Jack looked at the viewscreen, at the angry mob milling around on the
ground, held back from the ship by the energy screen. "You mean just go
out there and say, 'Look fellows, it was all a mistake, we didn't really
mean to do it?'" He shook his head. "Maybe you want to tell them. Not
me!"

"Dal's right, though," Tiger said. "We've got to contact them somehow.
They aren't even responding to radio communication, and they've
scrambled our outside radio and fouled our drive mechanism somehow.
We've got to settle this while we still have an energy screen."

There was a long silence as the three doctors looked at each other. Then
Dal stood up and walked over to the swinging platform. He lifted Fuzzy
down onto his shoulder. "It'll be all right," he said to Jack and
Tiger. "I'll go out."

"They'll tear you to ribbons!" Tiger protested.

Dal shook his head. "I don't think so," he said quietly. "I don't think
they'll touch me. They'll greet me with open arms when I go down there,
and they'll be eager to talk to me."

"Are you crazy?" Jack cried, leaping to his feet. "We can't let you go
out there."

"Don't worry," Dal said. "I know exactly what I'm doing. I'll be able to
handle the situation, believe me."

He hesitated a moment, and gave Fuzzy a last nervous pat, settling him
more firmly on his shoulder. Then he started down the corridor for the
entrance lock.

       *       *       *       *       *

He had promised himself long before ... many years before ... that he
would never do what he planned to do now, but now he knew that there was
no alternative. The only other choice was to wait helplessly until the
power failed and the protective screen vanished and the creatures on the
ground outside tore the ship to pieces.

As he stood in the airlock waiting for the pressure to shift to outside
normal, he lifted Fuzzy down into the crook of his arm and rubbed the
little creature between the shoe-button eyes. "You've got to back me up
now," he whispered softly. "It's been a long time, I know that, but I
need help now. It's going to be up to you."

Dal knew the subtle strength of his people's peculiar talent. From the
moment he had stepped down to the ground the second time with Tiger and
Jack, even with Fuzzy waiting back on the ship, he had felt the powerful
wave of horror and fear and anger rising up from the Bruckians, and he
had glimpsed the awful idiot vacancy of the minds of the creatures in
the enclosure, in whom the intelligent virus was already dead. This had
required no effort; it just came naturally into his mind, and he had
known instantly that something terrible had gone wrong.

In the years on Hospital Earth, he had carefully forced himself never to
think in terms of his special talent. He had diligently screened off the
impressions and emotions that struck at him constantly from his
classmates and from others that he came in contact with. Above all, he
had fought down the temptation to turn his power the other way, to use
it to his own advantage.

But now, as the lock opened and he started down the ladder, he closed
his mind to everything else. Hugging Fuzzy close to his side, he turned
his mind into a single tight channel. He drove the thought out at the
Bruckians with all the power he could muster: _I come in peace. I mean
you no harm. I have good news, joyful news. You must be happy to see me,
eager to welcome me...._

He could feel the wave of anger and fear strike him like a physical blow
as soon as he appeared in the entrance lock. The cries rose up in a
wave, and the crowd surged in toward the ship. With the energy field
released, there was nothing to stop them; they were tripping over each
other to reach the bottom of the ladder first, shouting threats and
waving angry fists, reaching up to grab at Dal's ankles as he came
down....

And then as if by magic the cries died in the throats of the ones
closest to the ladder. The angry fists unclenched, and extended into
outstretched hands to help him down to the ground. As though an
ever-widening wave was spreading out around him, the aura of peace and
good will struck the people in the crowd. And as it spread, the anger
faded from the faces; the hard lines gave way to puzzled frowns, then to
smiles. Dal channeled his thoughts more rigidly, and watched the effect
spread out from him like ripples in a pond, as anger and suspicion and
fear melted away to be replaced by confidence and trust.

Dal had seen it occur a thousand times before. He could remember his
trips on Garvian trading ships with his father, when the traders with
their fuzzy pink friends on their shoulders faced cold, hostile,
suspicious buyers. It had seemed almost miraculous the way the
suspicions melted away and the hostile faces became friendly as the
buyers' minds became receptive to bargaining and trading. He had even
seen it happen on the _Teegar_ with Tiger and Jack, and it was no
coincidence that throughout the galaxy the Garvians--always accompanied
by their fuzzy friends--had assumed the position of power and wealth and
leadership that they had.

And now once again the pattern was being repeated. The Bruckians who
surrounded Dal were smiling and talking eagerly; they made no move to
touch him or harm him.

The spokesman they had talked to before was there at his elbow, and Dal
heard himself saying, "We have found the answer to your problem. We know
now the true nature of your race, and the nature of your intelligence.
You were afraid that we would find out, but your fears were groundless.
We will not turn our knowledge against you. We only want to help you."

An expression almost like despair had crossed the spokesman's face as
Dal spoke. Now he said, "It would be good--if we could believe you. But
how can we? We have been driven for so long and come so far, and now you
would seek to wipe us out as parasites and disease-carriers."

Dal saw the Bruckian creature's eyes upon him, saw the frail body
tremble and the lips move, but he knew now that the intelligence that
formed the words and the thoughts behind them, the intelligence that
made the lips speak the words, was the intelligence of a creature far
different from the one he was looking at--a creature formed of billions
of submicroscopic units, imbedded in every one of the Bruckian's body
cells, trapped there now and helpless against the antibody reaction that
sought to destroy them. This was the intelligence that had called for
help in its desperate plight, but had not quite dared to trust its
rescuers with the whole truth.

But was this strange virus-creature good or evil, hostile or friendly?
Dal's hand lay on Fuzzy's tiny body, but he felt no quiver, no vibration
of fear. He looked across the face of the crowd, trying with all his
strength to open his mind to the feelings and emotions of these people.
Often enough, with Fuzzy nearby, he had felt the harsh impact of
hostile, cruel, brutal minds, even when the owners of those minds had
tried to conceal their feelings behind smiles and pleasant words. But
here there was no sign of the sickening feeling that kind of mind
produced, no hint of hostility or evil.

He shook his head. "Why should we want to destroy you?" he said. "You
are good, and peaceful. We know that; why should we harm you? All you
want is a place to live, and a host to join with you in a mutually
valuable partnership. But you did not tell us everything you could about
yourselves, and as a result we have destroyed some of you in our clumsy
attempts to learn your true nature."

They talked then, and bit by bit the story came out. The life-form was
indeed a virus, unimaginably ancient, and intelligent throughout
millions of years of its history. Driven by over-population, a pure
culture of the virus-creatures had long ago departed from their original
native hosts, and traveled like encapsulated spores across space from a
distant galaxy. The trip had been long and exhausting; the
virus-creatures had retained only the minimum strength necessary to
establish themselves in a new host, some unintelligent creature living
on an uninhabited planet, a creature that could benefit by the great
intelligence of the virus-creatures, and provide food and shelter for
both. Finally, after thousands of years of searching, they had found
this planet with its dull-minded, fruit-gathering inhabitants. These
creatures had seemed perfect as hosts, and the virus-creatures had
thought their long search for a perfect partner was finally at an end.

It was not until they had expended the last dregs of their energy in
anchoring themselves into the cells and tissues of their new hosts that
they discovered to their horror that the host-creatures could not
tolerate them. Unlike their original hosts, the bodies of these
creatures began developing deadly antibodies that attacked the virus
invaders. In their desperate attempts to hold on and fight back, the
virus-creatures had destroyed vital centers in the new hosts, and one by
one they had begun to die. There was not enough energy left for the
virus-creatures to detach themselves and move on; without some way to
stem the onslaught of the antibodies, they were doomed to total
destruction.

"We were afraid to tell you doctors the truth," the spokesman said. "As
we wandered and searched we discovered that creatures like ourselves
were extreme rarities in the universe, that most creatures similar to us
were mindless, unintelligent parasites that struck down their hosts and
destroyed them. Wherever we went, life-forms of your kind regarded us as
disease-bearers, and their doctors taught them ways to destroy us. We
had hoped that from you we might find a way to save ourselves--then you
unleashed on us the one weapon we could not fight."

"But not maliciously," Dal said. "Only because we did not understand.
And now that we do, there may be a way to help. A difficult way, but at
least a way. The antibodies themselves can be neutralized, but it may
take our biochemists and virologists and all their equipment months or
even years to develop and synthesize the proper antidote."

The spokesman looked at Dal, and turned away with a hopeless gesture.
"Then it is too late, after all," he said. "We are dying too fast. Even
those of us who have not been affected so far are beginning to feel the
early symptoms of the antibody attack." He smiled sadly and reached out
to stroke the small pink creature on Dal's arm. "Your people too have a
partner, I see. We envy you."

Dal felt a movement on his arm and looked down at Fuzzy. He had always
taken his little friend for granted, but now he thought of the feeling
of emptiness and loss that had come across him when Fuzzy had been
almost killed. He had often wondered just what Fuzzy might be like if
his almost-fluid, infinitely adaptable physical body had only been
endowed with intelligence. He had wondered what kind of a creature Fuzzy
might be if he were able to use his remarkable structure with the
guidance of an intelligent mind behind it....

He felt another movement on his arm, and his eyes widened as he stared
down at his little friend.

A moment before, there had been a single three-inch pink creature on his
elbow. But now there were two, each just one-half the size of the
original. As Dal watched, one of the two drew away from the other,
