partly circled the Moon so as now to approach it from the Earthward
side.

Miko for a time had been at my side in the turret. I had not seen
Coniston or Hahn of recent hours. I had slept, awakened refreshed, and
had a meal. Coniston and Hahn remained below, one or other of them
always with the crew to execute my sirened orders. Then Coniston came
to take my place in the turret, and I went with Miko to the radio
room.

"You are skillful, Haljan." A measure of grim approval was in his
voice. "You evidently have no wish to try and fool me in this
navigation."

I had not, indeed. It is delicate work at best, coping with the
intricacies of celestial mechanics upon a semicircular trajectory with
retarding velocity, and with a makeshift crew we could easily have
come upon real difficulty.

We hung at last, hull down, facing the Earthward hemisphere of the
Lunar disc. The giant ball of the Earth lay behind and above us--the
Sun over our stern quarter. With forward velocity almost checked, we
poised, and Snap began his signals to the unsuspecting Grantline.

My work momentarily was over. I sat watching the radio room. Moa was
here, close beside me. I felt always her watchful gaze, so that even
the play of my emotions needed reining.

Miko worked with Snap. Anita too was here. To Miko and Moa it was the
somber, taciturn George Prince, shrouded always in his black mourning
cloak, disinclined to talk; sitting alone, brooding and sullen. This
is how they thought of Anita.

Miko repeated: "By the infernal, if you try to fool me, Snap Dean!"

The small metal room, with its grid floor and low arched ceiling,
glared with moonlight through its window. The moving figures of Snap
and Miko were aped by the grotesque, misshapen shadows of them on the
walls. Miko gigantic--a great menacing ogre. Snap small and alert--a
trim, pale figure in his tight-fitting white trousers, broad-flowing
belt, and white shirt open at the throat. His face was pale and drawn
from lack of sleep and the torture to which Miko had subjected him
earlier on the voyage. But he grinned at the brigand's words, and
pushed his straggling hair closer under the red eyeshade.

The room over long periods was deadly silent, with Miko and Snap
bending watchfully at the crowded banks of instruments. A silence in
which my own pounding heart seemed to echo. I did not dare look at
Anita, nor she at me. Snap was trying to signal Earth, not the Moon!
His main grids were set in the reverse. The infra-red waves, flung
from the bow window, were of a frequency which Snap and I believed
that Grantline could not pick up. And over against the wall, close
beside me and seemingly ignored by Snap, there was a tiny ultra-violet
sender. Its faint hum and the quivering of its mirrors had so far
passed unnoticed.

Would some Earth station pick it up? I prayed so. There was a
thumbnail mirror here which would bring an answer.

Would some Earth telescope be able to see us? I doubted it. The
pinpoint of the _Planetara's_ infinitesimal bulk would be beyond
vision.

Long silences, broken only by the faint hiss and murmur of Snap's
instruments.

"Shall I try the graphs, Miko?"

"Yes."

I helped him with the spectro. At every level the plates showed us
nothing save the scarred and pitted Moon surface. We worked for an
hour. There was nothing. Bleak cold night on the Moon here beneath us.
A touch of fading sunlight upon the Apennines. Up near the South Pole,
Tycho with its radiating open rills stood like a grim dark maw.

Miko bent over a plate. "Something here? Is there?"

An abnormality upon the frowning ragged cliffs of Tycho? We thought
so. But then it seemed not.

Another hour. No signal came from Earth. If Snap's calls were getting
through we had no evidence of it. Abruptly Miko strode at me from
across the room. I went cold and tense; Moa shifted, alert to my every
movement. But Miko was not interested in me. A sweep of his clenched
fist knocked the ultra-violet sender and its coils and mirrors in a
tinkling crash to the grid at my feet.

"We don't need that, whatever it is!" He rubbed his knuckles where the
violet waves had tinged them, and turned grimly back to Snap.

"Where are your ray mirrors? If the treasure lies exposed--"

This Martian's knowledge was far greater than we believed. He grinned
sardonically at Anita. "If our treasure is here on this hemisphere,
Prince, we should pick up its rays. Don't you think so? Or is
Grantline too cautious to leave it exposed?"

Anita spoke in a careful, throaty drawl. "The rays came through enough
when we passed here on the way out."

"You should know," grinned Miko. "An expert eavesdropper, Prince, I
will say that for you.... Come, Dean, try something else. By God, if
Grantline does not signal us, I will be likely to blame you--my
patience is shortening. Shall we go closer, Haljan?"

"I don't think it would help," I said.

He nodded. "Perhaps not. Are we checked?"

"Yes." We were poised very nearly motionless. "If you wish an advance,
I can ring it. But we need a surface destination now."

"True, Haljan." He stood thinking. "Would a zed-ray penetrate those
crater cliffs? Tycho, for instance, at this angle?"

"It might," Snap agreed. "You think he may be on the northern inner
Tycho?"

"He may be anywhere," said Miko shortly.

"If you think that," Snap persisted, "suppose we swing the _Planetara_
over the South Pole. Tycho, viewed from there--"

"And take another quarter day of time?" Miko sneered. "Flash on your
zed-ray; help him hook it up, Haljan."

I moved to the lens box of the spectroheliograph. It seemed that Snap
was very strangely reluctant. Was it because he knew that the
Grantline camp lay concealed on the north inner wall of Tycho's giant
ring? I thought so. But Snap flashed a queer look at Anita. She did
not see it, but I did. And I could not understand it.

My accursed, witless incapacity! If only I had taken warning!

"Here," commanded Miko. "A score of 'graphs with the zed-ray. I tell
you I will comb this surface if we have to stay here until our ship
comes from Ferrok-Shahn to join us!"

The Martian brigands were coming. Miko's signals had been answered. In
ten days the other brigand ship, adequately manned and armed, would be
here.

Snap helped me connect the zed-ray. He did not dare even to whisper to
me, with Moa hovering always so close. And for all Miko's sardonic
smiling, we knew that he would tolerate nothing from us now. He was
fully armed and so was Moa.

I recall that several times Snap endeavored to touch me significantly.
Oh, if only I had taken warning!

We finished our connecting. The dull gray point of zed-ray gleamed
through the prisms to mingle with the moonlight entering the main
lens. I stood with the shutter trip.

"The same interval, Snap?"

"Yes."

Beside me, I was aware of a faint reflection of the zed-ray--a gray
cathedral shaft crossing the room and falling upon the opposite wall.
An unreality there, as the zed-ray faintly strove to penetrate the
metal room side.

I said, "Shall I make the exposure?"

Snap nodded. But that 'graph was never made. An exclamation from Moa
made us all turn. The gamma mirrors were quivering! Grantline had
picked our signals! With what was undoubtedly an intensified receiving
equipment which Snap had not thought Grantline able to use, he had
caught our faint zed-rays, which Snap was sending only to deceive
Miko. And Grantline had recognized the _Planetara_, and had released
his occulting screens surrounding the ore.

And upon their heels came Grantline's message. Not in the secret
system he had arranged with Snap, but unsuspectingly in open code. I
could read the swinging mirror, and so could Miko.

And Miko decoded it triumphantly aloud:

"Surprised but pleased your return. Approach Mid-Northern Hemisphere
region of Archimedes, forty thousand off nearest Apennine range."

The message broke off. But even its importance was overshadowed. Miko
stood in the center of the radio room, triumphantly reading the little
indicator. Its beam swung on the scale, which chanced to be almost
directly over Anita's head. I saw Miko's expression change.... A look
of surprise, amazement, came over him.

"Why--"

He gasped. He stood staring. Almost stupidly staring, for an instant.
And as I regarded him with fascinated horror, there came upon his
heavy gray face a look of dawning comprehension. And I heard Snap's
startled intake of breath. He moved to the spectro, where the zed-ray
connections were still humming.

But, with a leap, Miko flung him away. "Off with you! Moa, watch him!
Haljan, don't move!"

Again Miko stood staring. I saw now that he was staring at Anita!

"Why, George Prince! How strange you look!"

Anita did not move. She was stricken with horror; she shrank back
against the wall, huddled in her cloak. Miko's sardonic voice came
again:

"How strange you look, Prince!" He took a step forward. He was grim
and calm. Horribly calm. Deliberate. Gloating like a great gray
monster in human form toying with a fascinated, imprisoned bird.

"Move just a little, Prince. Let the zed-ray light fall more fully."

Anita's head was bare. That pale, Hamlet-like face. Dear God, the
zed-ray light lay gray and penetrating upon it!

Miko took another step. Peering. Grinning. "How amazing, George
Prince! Why, I can hardly believe it!"

Moa was armed with an electronic cylinder now. For all her
amazement--what turgid emotions sweeping her I can only guess--she
never took her eyes from Snap and me.

"Back! Don't move either of you!" she hissed at us.

Then Miko leaped at Anita like a giant gray leopard pouncing.

"Away with that cloak, Prince!"

I stood cold and numbed. And realization came at last. The faint
zed-light had fallen by chance upon Anita's face. Penetrating the
flesh; exposed, faintly glowing, the bone line of her jaw. Unmasked
the art of Glutz.

Miko seized her wrists, drew her forward, beyond the shaft of
zed-light, into the brilliant light of the Moon. And ripped her cloak
from her. The gentle curves of her woman's figure were so
unmistakable!

And as Miko gazed at them, all his calm triumph swept away.

"Why, Anita!"

I heard Moa mutter, "So that is it?" A venomous flashing look--a shaft
from me to Anita and back again. "So that is it?"

"Why, Anita!"

Miko's great arms gathered her up as though she were a child. "So I
have you back! From the dead, delivered back to me!"

"Gregg!" Snap's warning, and his grip on my shoulders brought me a
measure of sanity. I had tensed to spring. I stood quivering, and Moa
thrust her weapon against my face. The grids were swaying again with a
message from Grantline. But it was ignored.

In the glare of moonlight by the forward window, Miko held Anita, his
great hands pawing her with triumphant possessive caresses.

"So, little Anita, you are given back to me!"




XX


Moonlight upon Earth so gently shines to make romantic a lover's
smile! But the reality of the Lunar night is cold beyond human belief.
Cold and darkly silent. Grim desolation. Awesome. Majestic. A frowning
majesty that even to the most intrepid human beholder is inconceivably
forbidding.

And there were humans here now. On this tumbled plain, between
Archimedes and the mountains, one small crater amid the million of its
fellows was distinguished this night by the presence of humans. The
Grantline camp! It huddled in the deepest purple shadows on the side
of a bowl-like pit, a crudely circular orifice with a scant two miles
across its rippling rim. There was faint light here to mark the
presence of the living intruders. The blue glow radiance of Morrell
tube lights under a spread of glassite.

The Grantline camp stood midway up one of the inner cliff walls of the
little crater. The broken, rock-strewn floor, two miles wide, lay five
hundred feet below the camp. Behind it, the jagged, precipitous cliff
rose another five hundred to the heights of the upper rim. A broad
level shelf hung midway up the cliff, and upon it Grantline had built
his little group of glassite dome shelters. Viewed from above there
was the darkly purple crater floor, the upflung circular rim where the
Earthlight tinged the spires and crags with yellow sheen; and on the
shelf, like a huddled group of birds' nests, Grantline's domes hung
and gazed down upon the inner valley.

The air here on the Moon surface was negligible--a scant one
five-thousandth of the atmospheric pressure at the sea level on Earth.
But within the glassite shelter, a normal Earth pressure must be
maintained. Rigidly braced double walls to withstand the explosive
tendency, with no external pressure to counteract it. A tremendous
necessity for mechanical equipment had burdened Grantline's small ship
to capacity. The chemistry of manufactured air, the pressure
equalizers, renewers, respirators, the lighting and temperature
maintenance of a space-flyer was here.

There was this main Grantline building, stretched low and rectangular
along the front edge of the ledge. Within it were living rooms, mess
hall and kitchen. Fifty feet behind it, connected by a narrow passage
of glassite, was a similar though smaller structure. The mechanical
control rooms, with their humming, vibrating mechanisms were here. And
an instrument room with signaling apparatus, senders, receivers,
mirror-grids and audiphones of several varieties. And an
electro-telescope, small but modern, with dome overhead like a little
Earth observatory.

From this instrument building, beside the connecting pedestrian
passage, wire cables for light, and air tubes and strings and bundles
of instrument wires ran to the main structure--gray snakes upon the
porous, gray Lunar rock.

The third building seemed a lean-to banked against the cliff wall, a
slanting shed-wall of glassite fifty feet high and two hundred in
length. Under it, for months Grantline's bores had dug into the cliff.
Braced tunnels were here, penetrating back and downward into the vein
of rock.

The work was over. The borers had been dismantled and packed away. At
one end of the cliff the mining equipment lay piled in a litter. There
was a heap of discarded ore where Grantline had carted and dumped it
after his first crude refining process had yielded it as waste. The
ore slag lay like gray powder flakes strewn down the cliff. Trucks and
ore carts along the ledge stood discarded, mute evidence of the weeks
and months of work these helmeted miners had undergone, struggling
upon this airless, frowning world.

But now all that was finished. The catalytic ore was sufficiently
concentrated. It lay--this treasure--in a seventy foot pile behind
the glassite lean-to, with a cage of wires over it and an insulation
barrage hiding its presence.

The ore shelter was dark; the other two buildings were lighted. And
