
"Now," said Dark, "you tell me that you love me. You must admit that
the question raised by this is rather serious. Does this declaration of
love--which, I assure you, is reciprocated completely--imply a radical
change in your past course of action? Or, since you're still a
terrestrial agent, can I expect to be arrested again as a preliminary to
your joining Mr. Eli in the holy state of matrimony?"

Maya looked up into his face, and burst out laughing.

"I may have put it jokingly," protested Dark, a little taken aback, "but
I'm serious, Maya."

"I know you are!" she giggled. "That's what makes it so funny. Answering
you in the same vein, Mr. Kensington, I don't intend to put you in
double jeopardy!"

Dark raised his eyebrows quizzically.

"I arrested you and you were killed resisting arrest," she explained
mischievously. "I've discharged that duty as a terrestrial agent, so I
don't think I'm either required or entitled to arrest you again. And as
for the other, well, I am a little sorry for Nuwell, but I do love you,
and I won't marry Nuwell, since you're alive. But I can't marry you,
Dark."

Dark was stunned at this.

"Why not, Maya? You mean, because you're a terrestrial agent?"

"No, it isn't that. I'm planning to resign as an agent, as soon as I get
back to Mars City, and that wouldn't stop me, anyway. The reason I can't
marry you is simply that you haven't asked me."

Dark laughed, a rollicking, relieved laugh, and swept her into his arms.

"Maya, darling, I ask you now!" he exclaimed. "Will you marry me?"

"Yes, Dark," she answered demurely.

She leaned back in the circle of his arms and looked up into his face,
seriously.

"Whither thou goest, I will go," she said, very quietly. "If you're a
rebel, Dark, I'll be a rebel, too. I want to be with you, and help you
in whatever you do."




14


Dark and Maya sat with their backs against the wall of Ultra Vires, and
Qril squatted before them, towering huge above them. A little distance
away the other three Martians were grouped, playing some sort of game,
doing some sort of work or participating in some sort of joint
demonstration. Dark could not be sure which.

Qril boomed out a long, rolling sentence and Maya broke into laughter.
She turned to Dark and translated:

"He said he didn't understand why I'm wearing a helmet, when you aren't.
I explained that I have to wear a helmet to breathe, and he said that,
since you and I are alike, it appears that we'd dress alike. So you see,
darling, even the Martians recognize that we're made for each other."

Dark shook his head in wonderment.

"No human has ever been able to figure out Martian thinking processes,
and I doubt that one ever will," he remarked. "This is the Martian who
explained to you the physiological structure that permits me to live
without oxygen, and yet he asks a question like that!"

"There's one thing that puzzles me," said Maya curiously. "Without a
helmet, you can't use your marsuit heater, and you said you walked here
naked. But the temperature out here right now is well below freezing.
Aren't you cold?"

"No," answered Dark. "I get cold in temperatures that are uncomfortable
to anyone else when I'm in a dome or a building and breathing. But out
here, when I'm not breathing, I'm aware of temperature changes but they
don't cause me any discomfort. It must be that switching to direct
utilization of solar power alters my reactions to temperature."

"Well," said Maya, "I can understand that utilization of solar power
when you're in the sunshine. But how can you keep operating when you're
in shadow, or at night, and not breathing?"

"I don't know. Maybe Qril does."

Maya asked the Martian, and relayed his answer to Dark:

"Qril says that you store excess energy in the tissues, very much as the
Martians store oxygen. In a sense, direct sunlight's your generator, and
it charges your batteries for power when it isn't operating. Now, Dark,
why don't you ask him anything you want to know about your origin, and
I'll act as translator."

"All right," agreed Dark. "But first, it was among Martians that I awoke
when I returned to life the first time in the Icaria Desert. That's
pretty far away, but I understand Martians have a weird sort of
sympathetic communication among themselves. Does he know anything about
how I got there?"

Maya talked with Qril and translated:

"Qril is one of the Martians I saw come by here and pick up your body
the morning after Goat killed you and threw your body out in the desert.
Qril says they recognized you from your genetic pattern--and don't ask
me how they did this!--as being the one they had completed embryonic
alteration on years before, so they picked you up and took you with them
to give you a chance to regenerate and revive."

"But how and why did I turn up after my revival with Dark Kensington's
memories?"

"He says they gave you a memory pattern by a deep telepathic process,"
answered Maya after talking with Qril, "because your memory pattern as
Brute was of no value to you in meeting a new environment. It seems that
there was some blockage in the operation of your brain as Brute, because
of a slight fault in the embryonic alteration, and they corrected that
before you revived."

"But why Dark Kensington's memory pattern?" asked Dark. "It turned out
to be a valuable one for me, but I've met the real Dark Kensington since
then, and he's a much older man. Why did they choose his memory
pattern?"

Maya talked with Qril.

"He says names mean very little to them," she said then. "That's
something I learned as a child: that Martians often interchange their
names, and the names evidently refer to a state of experience and being
rather than to a specific individual. But he says that the memory
pattern they chose to give you was that of your father!"

Dark stared at her, stunned.

"Then," he said slowly, "Old Beard is my father. I should have known! I
think I felt it."

"I'm not surprised if you did," said Maya. "From what Qril tells me,
Dark, this prenatal alteration they performed on you gave you even more
extensive powers than we realized. He says that you have extraordinary
extrasensory ability, if you would only make an effort to use it."

"Oh, I do, do I?" murmured Dark thoughtfully.

He looked over at the other Martians, seated in a circle in the morning
sunshine. They were taking turns tossing some small polygons, and
evidently the objective of whatever they were doing lay in the way the
polygons fell.

Dark felt a sudden surge of power in his brain. He concentrated it, he
focused it, and one of the polygons rose slowly from the ground and
drifted into the air above the Martians' heads.

Dark could feel the strength that went out and raised the polygon, like
an invisible extension of himself. Then he felt another force seize the
polygon, and it was drawn back firmly and without hesitation to its
former place.

Dark turned his head back to look into Qril's huge eyes, and at once he
was in mental contact with the Martian.

Qril was laughing at him. There was no change of expression on Qril's
face, but in his mind was the atmosphere of high humor. Qril's thoughts
came to him without words, in no language, silently but clearly:

_You have not practised your power. Experience will be necessary before
you can compete with the simplest effort of one of our race._

Dark turned to Maya.

"He's right," said Dark. "I do have extrasensory powers, but they'll
need some development."

"I know," said Maya. "The telepathic voltage in the atmosphere must be
very high right now, because even I sensed your effort in lifting that
object, and I understood Qril's communication to you."

Maya and Dark took their leave of Qril, and went back into Ultra Vires.
As they did so, Qril and the other Martians arose and began to drift
away into the desert, as though they had had a mission in staying here,
which was now accomplished.

"I hope you know something about mechanics," said Maya as they walked
down the corridor together. "Because if you don't, it looks like we're
stuck here for a while. At least I am, unless you can run one of these
groundcars with psychokinetic power."

"No, apparently I'm not that good at it yet," said Dark. "Maybe I could
teleport in any parts you need. No wait! I just remembered something!
Come with me."

They turned off into a side corridor, found stairs and climbed to the
top floor of the building. There they followed another corridor until
Dark stopped and opened a door.

It was the door to a small airlock. Dark led Maya through it into a huge
room.

A helicopter stood in its center.

"Goat _did_ leave it here!" exclaimed Dark joyfully. "I'd forgotten that
he had this. He must have just packed the most necessary things when he
left the place, planning to send trucks and a crew back and clean it out
later at his leisure. Now, if this copter's only in good flying shape,
we're set."

He checked the machine over. Everything was in order.

"How do we get it out of here?" asked Maya curiously, looking around the
room. "That little airlock's too small for a copter to go through it."

"The roof rolls back," said Dark. "Put on your helmet, and I'll show
you."

Maya donned her marshelmet. Dark went to the wall and pulled a switch.
Nothing happened.

"I forgot," he said. "The electricity's off. Well, let's try something."

Dark concentrated his mind intensely on the movable ceiling. For a
moment, there was resistance, then, very slowly, it began to open. A
crack appeared in its center, and the air of the room hissed out with
the swish of a minor tempest. After that, it was easier. The crack
widened swiftly, and the roof rolled back to the walls, leaving the room
open to the heavens.

"All we have to do now is to climb into it and go," said Dark with
satisfaction. "You fill the fuel tanks, and I'll run down to the motor
pool and pick up those other two marsuits. One of them is for my friend
Happy, who is very fat, and he couldn't wear either of the emergency
suits in the copter."

Maya uncoiled the hose from one of the fuel drums in the room and poked
it into the copter's tank. Dark left the room, walked down the corridor
and descended the stairs.

He made his way to the motor pool. Maya was wearing one of the three
marsuits he had brought down, but the other two were still lying on the
floor. He picked them up and started back.

He was walking down the first floor corridor, carrying the marsuits,
when there crashed in on his mind a terrifying, silent scream:

_Help!_

Dark stopped, appalled. It took him a moment to realize that he was
still standing in the corridor. It took him a moment to realize that he
actually had heard nothing.

The corridor stretched away ahead of him, dim and dusty. There was no
movement in it, no sound. It was utterly silent. He stood there, in a
dim, dusty corridor, in waiting silence, holding two marsuits under his
arms.

_Help!_

It was a cry that shrieked in his mind, reverberated in his mind,
touching nothing around him, touching not the silent corridor.

_Maya!_

Dark's mind went out to her, rode up on swift wings to the room above
where she had waited for his return.

He was there, in that room, and there was the helicopter. There was no
Maya there.

But there were figures in the copter, moving.

He was in the copter, and there was Maya, struggling and writhing, as
Nuwell Eli, in a furious concentration of savage energy, bound her into
one of its seats with a length of rope.

Dark touched her mind, and her mind grasped his, desperately.

_Dark, he followed us up here, and hid until you left. He crept up
behind me and seized me. Hurry, Dark, he's taking me away!_

Hurry? Down those corridors, up those steps, when Nuwell already was
sliding into the pilot's seat of the copter?

Frantically, Dark grasped at his only chance of reaching her in time.
Teleportation.

He clamped down with his mind on himself. With a frenzied burst of
strength, he sought to lift himself bodily, to be there in the copter
with them. He put every ounce of energy he possessed into the effort.

And he failed.

He was standing in the dim, dusty corridor, two marsuits under his arm,
straining futilely toward a place he could not reach. And now he
actually heard, with his ears, the muted vibration above him as the
copter's engines roared to life.

Dark started running.

He dropped the marsuits, and ran down the corridor. He leaped up the
stairs, two and three at a time. Breathless, his heart pounding, he
staggered down the upper corridor and impatiently went through the
seemingly interminable process of negotiating the airlock.

He emerged into the big room.

It was empty.

The ceiling was open to the Martian sky. The sunlight poured into the
roofless room.

In the sky, a small, teetering object rose and moved away from Ultra
Vires, its blades whirring a sparkling circle in the thin air.

Dark reached out to it with his mind, and again he was in the copter.
Nuwell sat tensely at the controls, guiding it. Maya was in the other
seat, her arms bound down by her sides, her expression agonized.

Nuwell was unaware of Dark's mental presence. Maya sensed it and her
mind turned toward him.

_Dark, Dark, what can we do? I should have been watching for him. I
