
CHAPTER XI

  Roger Carries On


For gray Roger had not perished in the floods of Nevian energy which had
destroyed his planetoid. While those terrific streamers of force
emanating from the crimson obscurity surrounding the amphibians'
space-ship were driving into his defensive screens, Roger sat impassive
and immobile at his desk. His hard gray eyes moved methodically over his
instruments and recorders; and after a few minutes he smiled coldly,
while an expression of relief struggled fleetingly to move his
expressionless face. Even though his screens were better than anyone had
supposed, why admit it?

"Baxter, Hartkopf, Chatelier, Anandrusung, Penrose, Nishimura,
Mirsky...." He called off a list of names. "Report to me here at once!"

"The planetoid is lost," he informed his select group of scientists when
they had assembled, "and we must abandon it in exactly fifteen minutes,
which will be the time required for the robots to fill this first
section with our most necessary machinery and instruments. Pack each of
you one box of the things he most wishes to take with him, and report
back here in not more than thirteen minutes. Say nothing to anyone
else."

They filed out calmly, and as they passed out into the hall Baxter,
perhaps a trifle less case-hardened than his fellows, at least voiced a
thought for those they were so brutally deserting.

"I say, it seems a bit thick to dash off this way and leave the rest of
them; but still, I suppose...."

"You suppose correctly." Bland and heartless Nishimura filled in the
pause. "A small part of the planetoid may be able to escape; which, to
me at least, is pleasantly surprising news. It cannot carry all of our
men and mechanisms, therefore only the most important of both are saved.
What would you? For the rest it is simply what you call 'the fortune of
war,' no?"

"But the beautiful...." began the amorous Chatelier.

"Hush, fool!" snorted Hartkopf. "One word of that to the ear of Roger
and you too are left behind. Of such non-essentials the Universe is
full, to be collected in times of ease, but in times hard to be
disregarded. Und this is a time of schrecklichkeit indeed!"

  [Illustration:

    And through that terrific conduit came speeding package
    after package of destruction.]

The group broke up, each man going to his own quarters; to meet again in
the First Section a few minutes before the zero time. Roger's "office"
was now packed so tightly with machinery and supplies that but little
room was left for the scientists. The gray monstrosity still sat unmoved
behind his dials.

"But of what use is it, Roger?" the Russian physicist demanded. "Those
waves are of some ultra-band, of a frequency immensely higher than
anything heretofore known. Our screens should not have stopped them for
an instant. It is a mystery that they have held so long, and certainly
this single section will not be permitted to leave the planetoid without
being destroyed."

"There are many things you do not know, Mirsky," came the cold and level
answer. "Our screens, which you think are of your own devising, have
several improvements of my own in the formulae, and would hold forever
had I the power to drive them. The screens of this section, being
smaller, can be held as long as will be found necessary."

"Power!" the dumfounded Russian exclaimed. "Why, we have almost infinite
power--unlimited--sufficient for a lifetime of high expenditure!"

But Roger made no reply, for the time of departure was at hand. He
pressed down a tiny lever, and a robot in the power room threw in the
gigantic plunger switches which launched against the Nevians the
stupendous beam which so upset the complacence of Nerado the
amphibian--the beam into which was poured recklessly every resource of
power afforded by the planetoid, careless alike of burn-out and of
exhaustion. Then, all the attention of the Nevians and the greater part
of their power output devoted to the neutralization of that last
desperate thrust, the metal wall of the planetoid opened and the First
Section shot out into space. Full-driven as they were, Roger's screens
flared white as he drove through the temporarily lessened attack of the
Nevians; but in their preoccupation the amphibians did not notice the
additional disturbance and the section tore on, unobserved and
undetected. Far out in space, Roger raised his eyes from the instrument
panel and continued the conversation as though it had not been
interrupted.

"Everything is relative, Mirsky, and you have misused gravely the term
'unlimited.' Our power was, and is, very definitely limited. True, it
then seemed ample for our needs, and is far superior to that possessed
by the inhabitants of any solar system with which I am familiar; but the
beings behind that red screen, whoever they are, have sources of power
as far above ours as ours are above those of the Solarians."

"How do you know?"

"That power, what is it?" "We have, then, the analyses of those fields
recorded!" Came simultaneous questions and explanations.

"Their power-source is very probably the intra-atomic energy of iron;
and if so, much remains to be done before I can proceed with my plan. I
must have the most powerful structure in the known Universe before I can
act. In the light of what I have just learned, the loss of the planetoid
is but a trifle." Roger, as unmoved as one of his own automatons, was
coldly analyzing the situation, thinking the thing through to its
logical conclusion, paying no attention whatever to the losses of life,
time and treasure now behind him.

"But what can you do about it?" growled the Russian.

"Many things. From the charts of the recorders we can compute their
fields of force, and from that point it is only a step to their method
of liberating the energy. We shall build robots. They shall build other
robots, who shall in turn construct another planetoid; one this time
that, wielding the theoretical maximum of power, will be suited to my
needs."

"And where will you build it? We are marked. Invisibility now is
useless. Triplanetary will find us, even if we take up an orbit beyond
that of Pluto!"

"We have already left your Solarian system far behind. We are going to
another system; one far enough removed so that the spy-rays of
Triplanetary will never find us, and yet one that we can reach in a
reasonable length of time with the energies at our command. Some fifteen
days will be required for the journey, however, and our quarters are
cramped. Therefore make places for yourselves wherever you can, and
lessen the tedium of those fifteen days by working upon whatever
problems are most pressing in your respective researches."

The gray monster fell silent, immersed in what thoughts no one knew, and
the scientists set out to obey his orders. Baxter, the British chemist,
followed Penrose, the lantern-jawed, saturnine American engineer and
inventor, as he made his way to the furthermost cubicle of the section.

"I say, Penrose, I'd like to ask you a couple of questions, if you don't
mind?"

"Go ahead. Ordinarily it's dangerous to be a cackling hen anywhere
around _him_, but he can't hear anything here now. His system is pretty
well shot to pieces. You want to know all I know about Roger?"

"Exactly so. You have been with him so much longer than I have, you
know. In some ways he impresses one as being scarcely human, if you know
what I mean. Ridiculous, of course, but of late I have been wondering
whether he really _is_ human. He knows too much, about too many things.
He seems to be acquainted with many solar systems, to visit which would
require life-times. Then, too, he has dropped remarks which would imply
that he actually saw things that happened long before any living man
could possibly have been born. Finally, he looks--well, peculiar--and
certainly does not act human. I have been wondering, and have been able
to learn nothing about him; as you have said, such talk as this aboard
the planetoid was impossible."

"You needn't worry about being paid your price; that's one thing. If we
live--and that was part of the agreement, you know--we will all get what
we sold out for. You will become a belted earl. I have already made
millions, and shall make many more. Similarly, Chatelier has had and
will have his women, Anandrusung and Nishimura their cherished revenges.
Hartkopf his power, and so on." He eyed the other speculatively, then
went on:

"I might as well spill it all, since I'll never have a better chance and
since you should know what the rest of us do. You're in the same boat
with us and tarred with the same brush. There's a lot of gossip, that
may or may not be true, but I know one very startling fact. Here it is.
My great-great-grandfather left some notes which, taken in connection
with certain things I myself saw on the planetoid, prove beyond question
that our Roger went to Harvard University at the same time he did. Roger
was a grown man then, and the elder Penrose noted that he was marked,
like this," and the American sketched a cabalistic design.

"What!" Baxter exclaimed. "An adept of North Polar Jupiter--_them?_"

"Yes. That was before the First Jovian War, you know, and it was those
medicine-men--really high-caliber scientists--that prolonged that war
so...."

"But I say, Penrose, that's really a bit thick. When they were wiped out
it was proved a lot of hocus-pocus...."

"Some of it was, but most of it wasn't," Penrose interrupted in turn.
"I'm not asking you to believe anything except that one fact; I'm just
telling you the rest of it. But it is also a fact that those adepts knew
things and did things that take a lot of explaining. Now for the gossip,
none of which is guaranteed. Roger is undoubtedly of Tellurian
parentage, and the story is that his father was a moon-pirate, his
mother a Greek adventuress. When the pirates were chased off the moon
they went to Ganymede, you know, and some of them were captured by the
Jovians. It seems that Roger was born at an instant of time sacred to
the adepts, so they took him on. He worked his way up through the
Forbidden Society as all adepts did, by various kinds of murder and job
lots of assorted deviltries, until he got clear to the top--the
seventy-seventh mystery...."

"The secret of eternal youth!" gasped Baxter, awed in spite of himself.

"Right, and he stayed Chief Devil, in spite of all the efforts of all
his ambitious sub-devils to kill him, until the turning-point of the
First Jovian War. He cut away then in a space-ship, and ever since then
he has been working--and working hard--on some stupendous plan of his
own that nobody else has ever got even an inkling of. That's the story.
True or not, it explains a lot of things that no other theory can touch.
And now I think you'd better shuffle along; enough of this is a great
plenty!"

Baxter went to his own cubby, and each man of the adept's cold-blooded
crew methodically took up his task. True to prediction, in fifteen days
a planet loomed beneath them and their vessel settled through a reeking
atmosphere toward a rocky and forbidding plain. Then for another day
they plunged along, a few thousand feet above the surface of that
strange world, while Roger with his analytical detectors sought the most
favorable location from which to wrest the materials necessary for his
program of construction.

It was a world of cold; its sun was distant, pale, and wan. It had
monstrous forms of vegetation, of which each branch and member writhed
and fought with a grotesque and horrible individual activity. Ever and
anon a struggling part broke from its parent plant and darted away in
independent existence; leaping upon and consuming or being consumed by a
fellow creature equally monstrous. This flora was of a uniform color--a
lurid, sickly yellow. In form some of it was fern-like, some
cactus-like, some vaguely tree-like; but it was all outrageous,
inherently repulsive to all Solarian senses. And no less hideous were
the animal-like forms of life, which slithered and slunk rapaciously
through that fantastic pseudo-vegetation. Snake-like, reptile-like,
bat-like, the creatures squirmed, crawled, and flew; each covered with a
dankly oozing yellow hide and each motivated by twin common impulses--to
kill and insatiably and indiscriminately to devour. Over this reeking
wilderness Roger drove his vessel, untouched by its disgusting, its
appalling ferocity and horror.

"There should be intelligence, of a kind," he mused, and swept the
surface of the planet with an exploring beam. "Ah, yes, there is a city,
of sorts," and in a few minutes the outlaws were looking down upon a
metal-walled city of roundly conical buildings.

Inside these structures and between and around them there scuttled
formless blobs of matter, one of which Roger brought up into his vessel
by means of a tractor ray. Held immovable by the beam it lay upon the
floor, a strangely extensile, amoeba-like metal-studded mass of leathery
substance. Of eyes, ears, limbs, or organs it apparently had none, yet
it radiated an intensely hostile aura; a mental effluvium concentrated
of rage and of hatred.

"Apparently the ruling intelligence of the planet," Roger commented.
"Such creatures are useless to us; we can build robots in half the time
required for their subjugation and training. Still, it should not be
permitted to carry back what it may have learned of us." As he spoke the
adept threw the peculiar being out into the air and dispassionately
rayed it out of existence.

"That thing reminds me of a man I used to know, back in Penobscot."
Penrose was as coldly callous as his unfeeling master. "The
evenest-tempered man in town--mad all the time!"

Eventually Roger found a location which satisfied his requirements of
raw materials, and made a landing upon that unfriendly soil. Sweeping
beams denuded a great circle of life, and into that circle leaped
robots. Robots requiring neither rest nor food, but only lubricants and
power; robots insensible alike to that bitter cold and to that noxious
atmosphere.

But the outlaws were not to win a foothold upon that inimical planet
easily, nor were they to hold it without effort. Through the weird
vegetation of the circle's bare edge there scuttled and poured along a
horde of the metal-studded men--if "men" they might be called--who,
ferocity incarnate, rushed the robot line. Mowed down by hundreds, still
they came on; willing, it seemed to expend any number of lives in order
that one living creature might once touch a robot with one out-thrust
metallic stud. Whenever that happened there was a flash as of lightning,
the heavy smoke of burning insulation, grease and metal, and the robot
went down out of control. Recalling his remaining automatons, Roger sent
out a shielding screen, against which the defenders of their planet
raged in impotent fury. For days they hurled themselves and their every
force against that impenetrable barrier, then withdrew: temporarily
stopped, but by no means acknowledging defeat.

Then, while Roger and his cohorts directed affairs from within their
comfortable and now sufficiently roomy vessel, there came into being
around it an industrial city of metal, peopled by metallic and insensate
mechanisms. Mines were sunk, furnaces were blown in, smelters belched
forth into the already unbearable air their sulphurous fumes, rolling
mills and machine shops were built and equipped: and as fast as new
enterprises were completed additional robots were ready to man them. In
record time the heavy work of girders, members, and plates was well
under way; and shortly thereafter light, deft, and multi-fingered
mechanical men began the interminable task of building and installing
the prodigious amount of precise machinery required for the vast
structure. Roger was well content: but one day he was rudely awakened
from his dream of complete isolation.

Even though he had no reason to believe that there was anything
dangerous within hundreds of millions of miles, it was Roger's cautious
custom to release the screens from time to time, in order to allow his
detectors to range out. This day, as he sent out his beams, his hard
gray eyes grew even harder.

"Mirsky! Nishimura! Come here!" he snapped, and showed them upon his
plate an enormous sphere of steel, its rays flaming viciously. "Is there
any doubt whatever in your minds as to the System to which that ship
belongs?"

"None at all--Triplanetarian," replied the Russian. "While larger than
any I have seen before, its construction is unmistakable. They managed
to trace us, and are testing out their weapons before attacking. Do we
attack or do we run away?"

"If Triplanetarian, and it surely is, we attack," coldly. "This one
section is armed and powered to defeat Triplanetary's entire navy. We
shall take that ship, and shall add its slight resources to our own. And
it may even be that they have picked up the three who escaped me.... I
have never yet been balked for long. Yes, we shall take that vessel. And
those three sooner or later. Bradley I care nothing about ... but
Costigan handled me ... and the woman...." Diamond-hard eyes glared
balefully at the urge of thoughts to a clean and normal mind
unthinkable.

"To your posts," he ordered. "The robots will continue to function under
their automatic controls during the short time it will require to abate
this nuisance."

"_One moment!_" A strange voice roared from the speakers. "Consider
yourselves under arrest, by order of the Triplanetary Council! Surrender
and you shall receive impartial hearing; fight us and you shall never
come to trial. From what we have learned of Roger, we do not expect him
to surrender, but if any of you other men wish to avoid immediate death,
