wildly. "We cannot get sick now. We cannot die--we are immortal. Come,
Master--let us make you so!"

Tarrano whispered: "You see, Lady Elza? The orange spots! These men of
medicine here have used the Brende secret to its full. Immune from
disease!"

"Let us treat _you_, Master. This immortality----"

On Cretar's face was a triumphant smile, but in his eyes lay a terror.
The man who had not been treated stood against the wall watching with
interest and curiosity. But the others! They crouched; wary; alert eyes
like animals at bay.

Tarrano laughed. "Treat me! Cretar, you know not with what you have been
trifling. Immortal? You are indeed. Disease cannot touch you! You cannot
die--save by violence!"

He swung to Elza. "These men, Lady Elza--they are strong-muscled. In
health now more perfect than any other humans. _You_ are frail--a frail
little woman. And unarmed. I bid you--strike one of them!"

She stared; but as she suddenly faced about, she caught in part his
meaning. Before her Cretar shrank back, his face gone white, his teeth
chattering.

"What's that behind you?" Tarrano's voice simulated sudden alarm; he
scuffled his feet on the floor. The men jumped with fright; nerves
unstrung, they cowered.

"What manner of men!" Tarrano's laugh was contemptuous. "Oh, Lady Elza,
let this be a lesson to all of us! To cure disease is well. To prevent
it--that too is good. But immortality--Dr. Brende never intended it,
_you_ know he did not, Lady Elza--the belief that we have everlasting
life here on this plane--the Creator never intended that. With all
danger of death gone--save violence--these immortals here fear violence
so greatly that they are men no longer!

"Immortal terror! God forbid _I_ should ever feel it! Or you, Lady Elza.
A lesson for us all, who would be so un-Godly as to seek and think we
have found what only the Creator Himself can bestow!"




CHAPTER XXVI

_Black Cloud of Death_


I must revert now to that time in the gardens of Maida's palace at the
Great City when we stood upon its roof-top, threatened below by that mob
of _slaans_. Georg stood with the cylinder in his hand, waving it. The
palm foliage was freezing. Down through the swirling snow fell the
frozen bodies of the _slaans_ who had climbed into the gigantic palm
fronds. The thuds as the bodies struck the ground sounded horribly plain
in the stillness. Georg was still waving his cylinder. Snow and ice were
gathering everywhere. Incautiously he lowered the weapon; a brief,
momentary chill--the congealing breath of the Arctic in this warm
palm-laden garden--swept the horror-stricken crowd.

"Georg, have mercy!"

Maida's frightened, pleading words brought Georg to his senses. He
snapped off the cylinder and dropped it behind him to the palace
roof-top. He was trembling and white as he stood with his arm around
Maida. Weapons so drastic as this one were seldom used. Indeed, it was
law throughout both Venus and the Earth that no civilian should possess
them. The power for wholesale death in his hand, and which without
wholly meaning to, he had so nearly used to its full effect, had
unnerved him.

Without the ray, the wind soon died. The warmer air mounting, melted the
ice; the snow ceased falling. But the swath of shriveled foliage
remained--a hideous scar cut into the luxuriant tropical growth.

The mob had forgotten its threats, its evil intent. Silent for a moment,
it now burst into outcries. Motionless: then milling about, struggling
aimlessly with itself--struggling to retreat. A panic of terror. The
boats in the lagoon were retreating. The _slaans_ along the fringe of
shore began hurriedly to embark. The groups huddled at the palace steps
were trying to shove the others back. In a rout they tumbled into their
boats and scurried away. Maida's voice, striving to reassure them, was
unheard.

And presently the scarred, trampled garden was empty and silent.

The rebellion, checked thus at its start, was quelled. Throughout the
city that night--for the _slaans_ to hear whether they would or no--the
broadcast stations flung their stentorian tones to the people; a speech
by Maida; her promise of better things to come for the _slaans_; the end
of Tarrano's brief rule; a reorganization of past conditions. Maida
herself had never been in control in the Central State. The luxury--the
license-of the ruling class had been no fault of hers. She promised fair
treatment now to the _slaans_. She was to marry Georg Brende, the Earth
man.

Maida did marry Georg. With the many stirring events--a time when
disaster and death threatened us all--so soon to follow, I shall not
pause to describe the wedding. A quaint, yet magnificent spectacle.
Maida in her regal robe; Georg looking every inch a ruler. Their barge
of white leading the procession--a barge of white flowers, its sides
lined with maidens to fend off the deluge of blossoms with which the
onlookers assailed the bridal couple. The arrival at the marriage
island, where on an altar the quaintly garbed holy man immersed them;
and the solemn men of law united them as one.

It was a night of rejoicing throughout the Great City; and on every
mirror in the Empire it was pictured for those who could not be present.

A time of rejoicing. Yet then--as always those days--my heart was heavy.
Elza was held by Tarrano. We knew he had taken her to the City of Ice.
There was of course, no radio communication with the Cold Country. We
had tried eavesdropping upon it, but to no avail. Tarrano's close-flung
barrage checked every wave we could send against it.

Time passed--a month or more. We were worried over Elza naturally. Yet
the saving grace was that we knew Tarrano would treat her kindly; that
for the present at least, she was in no danger.

Georg and Maida took possession of the Central State. Their rule started
auspiciously, for by a series of speeches--a reorganization of money
payments--the _slaans_ seemed well satisfied. Loyal, and with a growing
patriotism, an eagerness to help in the coming war with Tarrano.
Georg--without actually saying so--made them believe that the only hope
of everlasting life was the recovery from Tarrano of the Brende model.
The model was in the City of Ice; it must be captured.

As a matter of fact, to us of the government, the Brende model was not
indispensable. The greatest factor was that the threat of Tarrano's
universal conquest must be forever removed. Like a rocket-bomb, this man
of genius had risen from obscurity--had all but conquered the three
greatest worlds of the universe.

I think that the height of Tarrano's power was reached that day on the
eve of the Water Festival when he made his triumphant entry into the
Great City. Venus was his at that moment; all of Venus. Mars was his;
the Hairless Men--savages who had fallen readily to his wiles, had
conquered the civilized, ruling Little People. And the Earth, over-run
by his spies, deluged by his propaganda which, insidiously as rust will
eat away a metal, was eating into the loyalty of our Earth-public--our
own great Earth was in a dangerous position. The Earth Council realized
it. The Almighty only could know how many of our officials, our men in
trusted positions, were at heart loyal to Tarrano!

The thing was obvious. The assassination of our three rulers--leaders of
the white, yellow and black races--with which Tarrano's campaign in the
open had begun--those assassinations could never have taken place had
not our military organization been diseased.

Facts like these were constantly coming to us now, here in the Great
City. A brief time of physical inactivity. Yet underneath the calm, we
realized there was a struggle going on everywhere; a struggle of
sentiment, of propaganda, of public opinion.

Warfare, with modern weapons by which a man single-handed might destroy
a city--is no longer a matter of men. The citizen--unarmed--united in
sentiment and desire with a million of his kind--becomes the real ruler.
You cannot--because you have a weapon--destroy a million of your
brothers.

We realized this. And in the ultimate decision--the popular fancy
almost--of our publics--lay our real success or downfall.

Tarrano in the popular mind had a tremendous hold. Dispatches from Earth
made it plain that upon every street level the people were discussing
him. From the Great City daily we sent bulletins of our progress toward
checking--destroying--the menace of him. But bulletins also were
emanating from the City of Ice. We could not stop them. Cut off at every
official Earth station--and with all unofficial stations unable to
receive them--nevertheless at some secret station which could not be
found, they were received. And from there, circulated throughout the
Earth. The air was full of them. Mysteriously, scenes showing the great
Tarrano appeared upon the official news-mirrors; a speech of Tarrano's
was once officially broadcasted before its source could be located and
stopped.

Like a smothered fire smouldering, lacking only a breath of vital gas to
explode it into flame, the sentiment for Tarrano spread about the Earth.

Public opinion is fickle. It sways instinctively--not always, but
often--to the winning side. Here in Venus we knew we must defeat
Tarrano. Destroy him personally and thus put an end to it all forever,
since his dominion hung wholly upon the genius of his own personality.

Our spies, some of them, got to the City of Ice, and back. A few flying
men were able to hover about the city, and with instruments peer down
into it. We knew that Tarrano was mobilizing for a move upon the Earth,
where with a war-like demonstration he hoped to be accepted, yielded to,
without a severe struggle. But, within a month now, we learned he had
abandoned that idea. He knew, of course, our own preparations to attack
him; and he began concentrating everything upon his own defense in the
City of Ice.

His last stand. We officials knew it. And we knew he felt it also. And
though on Earth our public felt differently, the Little People
recognized it. A stirring, wonderful time--that day when on our mirrors
was pictured the revolt of the Little People against the Tarrano rule of
the Hairless Men. Grim scenes of tragedy; and over the carnage, the
Little People triumphed. Tarrano's rule--with all the excesses of the
Hairless Men who proved themselves mere rapacious plunderers in the name
of warfare--was at an end on Mars.

The effect on Earth of this Martian reversal was beneficial to us. A
good omen. We on Venus, redoubled our efforts to attack successfully the
City of Ice.

Mars could send us no aid, though now in full sympathy with us. The
planet was daily at a greater distance from us; and the Little People,
not recovered from the effects of their own bloody strife, were in no
position to help us.

Nor did the Earth Council deem it wise to send men additional to those
few we already had. The Earth was rapidly being left behind by the
swifter flight of Venus through her orbit. The official season for the
mail-flyers was closed. The opposition of the two planets was long since
passed; millions of additional miles were adding to the space separating
them.

And the Earth Council was not sure of its men! Any one of them might
secretly be in Tarrano's service--and do us infinitely more harm if
brought to Venus, than if left at home.

We seemed of solid strength in the Central State. For the first time in
generations the _Rhaals_--the men of science from whom all the progress
of civilization on Venus came--departed from their attitude of
aloofness. Their work--always before industrial--now turned to the
sterner demands of war.

The Rhaal City[22] lay a brief flight from us. A grave sort of
people, these _Rhaals_. Men of square-cut, sober-colored garments; women
of sober grey flowing robes--white hair coiled upon their heads.
Intelligent women, dignified of demeanor; many of them learned as were
the men.

[Footnote 22: An awkward, unpronounceable word which for the purposes of
this narrative may be termed Industriana.]

Their city, teeming now with the preparations for war, was intensely
interesting to me. We spent most of our days in it, flying back at
nightfall to Maida's palace. Yet I shall not describe it, nor our
preparations, our days of activity--but hasten on to the first of the
extraordinary incidents impending.

It came--this first incident--through my thoughts of Elza. I was
worried--more than worried, sometimes almost terrified about her. My
instinct would have been to take a handful of men and dash to her
rescue--which of course would have been absurd. I tried to reassure
myself. Tarrano would treat her kindly. Soon, in full force, our army
would descend upon the City of Ice, capture it, destroy Tarrano--rescue
Elza.

Rescue Elza! Ah, there lay the difficulty which I never dared
contemplate in detail. How would we rescue her? Tarrano would treat her
kindly, now during his own security. But if, at the last, he saw his own
defeat, his death perhaps impending--would he treat her kindly then?

I loved Elza very deeply. A new torture came from it now. Did she love
me--or Tarrano? I remembered the gentleness of the man with her. His
dignity, his power--his undoubted genius. And who, what was I? A mere
news-gatherer. A man of no force, and little personality. A nonentity.
Sometimes as in my jealousy I contemplated Elza with Tarrano now, I felt
that he was everything a young girl would fancy. How could she help
loving him?

At night, when sleep would not come to me, I would lie tossing, thinking
of it. Did Elza love me--or Tarrano? Once I had thought she loved me.
But she had never said so.

It was out of this constant thinking of Elza that the first of the
incidents I have mentioned, arose. There came to me one night the
feeling that Elza was near me. I awoke from half sleep to full
wakefulness. In my bedroom, upon the low couch on which I lay, the aural
lights of Venus spread their vivid tints. The palace was silent; I sat
up, pressing my palms to my throbbing temples.

_Elza was coming nearer to me!_

I knew it. Not by any of my bodily senses. A knowledge, which suddenly I
realized that I had. A moment, and then I was conscious of her voice! No
sound; my ears heard nothing. Yet my brain was aware of familiar tones.
I recognized them, as one can remember how a loved voice sounded when
last it was heard.

But this was no memory. A present actuality; it rang soundless in my
brain. Elza's voice. Anxious! Frightened!

At first only the confused _tone_ of it. Then the consciousness of
words. Two reiterated words:

_"Danger! Jac! Danger! Jac!"_

I waited no longer, but rushed to Georg and Maida--beautiful Maida in
her robe of sleep with her white hair tumbling about her. Georg half
awake--yet almost at once he could understand me, and explain.

Natural, instinctive telepathy! It had not occurred to me. I had never
bothered to develop telepathy; and indeed with any degree of fluency--or
even of surety of reception--the phenomenon is difficult to perfect.
Yet, as I knew, with a loved one absent upon whom one's thoughts dwell
constantly--in time of stress telepathy is occasionally automatically
established.

It was so in Georg and Maida's case, back there in the Mountain Station
on Earth. Telepathy was the explanation of Georg's mysterious actions as
he stood there before the sending mirrors, crossed the room in
confusion, and like one in a dream leaped from the window to be seized
by Tarrano's spies. Maida had been abducted a moment before. Georg's
brain became aware of it. Her danger, the appeal she sent to him.

So it now seemed to be from Elza to me. Georg, out of bed now beside me,
urged me to greater efforts of concentration, that I might understand
what message Elza was sending.

_"Elza! Elza dear! Where are you? What is it?"_

I murmured the words to myself as with all my power, I thought them over
and over, flinging out the thoughts like radio waves into the night.
Mysterious vibrations! In an instant, from here--everywhere in the
universe. Who knows their character? Their speed? The speed of light a
laggard perhaps beside the flash of a thought! Waves of my thoughts,
speeding through the night, with only one receiving station in all the
universe! Would Elza's brain capture them?

_"Elza dear! Where are you? What is it?"_

_"Jac! Danger! Jac! Danger!"_

It was very clear. The words rang in my head. But always only those two.
And then at last--it may have been an hour later--other words:

_"Death! The black cloud of death! You can see it coming! See it coming!
Death! To you Jac! To all of you in the city!"_

We rushed to the casement. The broad lagoon before the palace lay like a
mirror tinted red and purple. Beyond it, palms and the outlines of
houses lay dark against the star-strewn sky.

But out there, over the city, in the distance a dark patch obscured the
stars. We watched it breathless. A dark patch which soon took shape. A
cloud! A black cloud--unnatural of aspect somehow--a rolling, low-lying
black cloud. Growing larger; spreading out side-wise; sweeping toward
the city on a wind which had not reached us.

_"Jac! Jac dear! Danger! Death to all the city!"_

Elza's words were still beating in my brain. Soundless words of terror
and warning!

_"Death, Jac! Death to all the city! The black cloud of death!"_




CHAPTER XXVII

_Tarrano the Man_


"Wake up, Lady Elza."

A silence. His hand touched her white shoulder. "Wake up, Lady Elza. It
is I--Tarrano."

Elza opened her eyes, struggling to confused wakefulness. The white
walls of her sleeping room in Tarrano's palace of the City of Ice were
stained with the dim red radiance of her night light. She opened her
eyes to meet Tarrano's inscrutable face as he bent over her couch;
became conscious of his low, insistent, "Wake up, Lady Elza;" and his
fingers half caressing the filmy scarf that covered her shoulders.

Terror flooded Elza; that time she had always feared, had come. Yet she
had the presence of mind to smile, drawing away from him and sitting up,
with the fur bed-covering pulled to her chin.

"Tarrano? Why--"

He straightened, and into his expression came apology.

"I frightened you, Lady Elza? I'm sorry. I would not do that for all the
worlds."

Her terror receded. The old Tarrano over whom she still held sway. She
summoned a look of haughty questioning.

"You are bold, Tarrano--"

His gesture was deprecating; he seated himself on the edge of her couch.
She saw now that he was fully dressed and armed with a belt of many
instruments.

At this time Elza had been in the City of Ice for a considerable period.
Irksome, worried days of semi-imprisonment; and through them, Tarrano's
attitude toward her was unchanged. She saw little of him; he seemed very
busy, though to what end, and what his activities, she could not learn.

Within the palace, half as guard, half as maid-servant, Tara was
generally Elza's only companion. And then, one evening when Tara's
smouldering jealousy broke forth in Tarrano's presence and Elza uttered
an involuntary cry of fear, Tara was summarily removed.

Elza was left practically alone; until at length came this night when
invading the privacy of her sleeping room, Tarrano awakened her. He sat
now upon the edge of her couch.

"I have a confession to make to you, Lady Elza." He smiled slightly. "As
you know, there is no one else in our habitable universe to whom I would
speak thus frankly."

"I am honored, Tarrano. But here, at this hour of sleep--"

He waved away the words. "I have asked your pardon for that. My
confession--as once before, Lady Elza, I come to you most humbly,
confessing that my affairs are not going as I would like. You do not
know, of course, that Mars--"

"I know nothing," she interrupted. "You have kept me from the
news-mirrors, if indeed there are any here--"

"Mars revolted against me," he went on imperturbably. "The Little People
are again in control. Fools! They do not realize, those governors of
Mars, that their public ultimately will demand this _Everlasting Life_
