(_Algebra der Griechen_, 1842, p. 138), that Ptolemy merely used [Greek: o]
for [Greek: ouden], with no notion of zero. See also G. Fazzari, "Dell'
origine delle parole zero e cifra," _Ateneo_, Anno I, No. 11, reprinted at
Naples in 1903, where the use of the point and the small cross for zero is
also mentioned. Th. H. Martin, _Les signes numeraux_ etc., reprint p. 30,
and J. Brandis, _Das Muenz-, Mass- und Gewichtswesen in Vorderasien bis auf
Alexander den Grossen_, Berlin, 1866, p. 10, also discuss this usage of
[Greek: o], without the notion of place value, by the Greeks.

[201] _Al-Batt[=a]n[=i] sive Albatenii opus astronomicum_. Ad fidem codicis
escurialensis arabice editum, latine versum, adnotationibus instructum a
Carolo Alphonso Nallino, 1899-1907. Publicazioni del R. Osservatorio di
Brera in Milano, No. XL.

[202] Loc. cit., Vol. II, p. 271.

[203] C. Henry, "Prologus N. Ocreati in Helceph ad Adelardum Batensem
magistrum suum," _Abhandlungen zur Geschichte der Mathematik_, Vol. III,
1880.

[204] Max. Curtze, "Ueber eine Algorismus-Schrift des XII. Jahrhunderts,"
_Abhandlungen zur Geschichte der Mathematik_, Vol. VIII, 1898, pp. 1-27;
Alfred Nagl, "Ueber eine Algorismus-Schrift des XII. Jahrhunderts und ueber
die Verbreitung der indisch-arabischen Rechenkunst und Zahlzeichen im
christl. Abendlande," _Zeitschrift fuer Mathematik und Physik, Hist.-lit.
Abth._, Vol. XXXIV, pp. 129-146 and 161-170, with one plate.

[205] "Byzantinische Analekten," _Abhandlungen zur Geschichte der
Mathematik_, Vol. IX, pp. 161-189.

[206] [symbol] or [symbol] for 0. [symbol] also used for 5. [symbols] for
13. [Heiberg, loc. cit.]

[207] Gerhardt, _Etudes historiques sur l'arithmetique de position_,
Berlin, 1856, p. 12; J. Bowring, _The Decimal System in Numbers, Coins, &
Accounts_, London, 1854, p. 33.

[208] Karabacek, _Wiener Zeitschrift fuer die Kunde des Morgenlandes_, Vol.
XI, p. 13; _Fuehrer durch die Papyrus-Ausstellung Erzherzog Rainer_, Vienna,
1894, p. 216.

[209] In the library of G. A. Plimpton, Esq.

[210] Cantor, _Geschichte_, Vol. I (3), p. 674; Y. Mikami, "A Remark on the
Chinese Mathematics in Cantor's Geschichte der Mathematik," _Archiv der
Mathematik und Physik_, Vol. XV (3), pp. 68-70.

[211] Of course the earlier historians made innumerable guesses as to the
origin of the word _cipher_. E.g. Matthew Hostus, _De numeratione
emendata_, Antwerp, 1582, p. 10, says: "Siphra vox Hebraeam originem sapit
refertque: & ut docti arbitrantur, a verbo saphar, quod Ordine numerauit
significat. Unde Sephar numerus est: hinc Siphra (vulgo corruptius). Etsi
vero gens Iudaica his notis, quae hodie Siphrae vocantur, usa non fuit:
mansit tamen rei appellatio apud multas gentes." Dasypodius, _Institutiones
mathematicae_, Vol. I, 1593, gives a large part of this quotation word for
word, without any mention of the source. Hermannus Hugo, _De prima
scribendi origine_, Trajecti ad Rhenum, 1738, pp. 304-305, and note, p.
305; Karl Krumbacher, "Woher stammt das Wort Ziffer (Chiffre)?", _Etudes de
philologie neo-grecque_, Paris, 1892.

[212] Buehler, loc. cit., p. 78 and p. 86.

[213] Fazzari, loc. cit., p. 4. So Elia Misrachi (1455-1526) in his
posthumous _Book of Number_, Constantinople, 1534, explains _sifra_ as
being Arabic. See also Steinschneider, _Bibliotheca Mathematica_, 1893, p.
69, and G. Wertheim, _Die Arithmetik des Elia Misrachi_, Programm,
Frankfurt, 1893.

[214] "Cum his novem figuris, et cum hoc signo 0, quod arabice zephirum
appellatur, scribitur quilibet numerus."

[215] [Greek: tziphra], a form also used by Neophytos (date unknown,
probably c. 1330). It is curious that Finaeus (1555 ed., f. 2) used the
form _tziphra_ throughout. A. J. H. Vincent ["Sur l'origine de nos
chiffres," _Notices et Extraits des MSS._, Paris, 1847, pp. 143-150] says:
"Ce cercle fut nomme par les uns, _sipos, rota, galgal_ ...; par les autres
_tsiphra_ (de [Hebrew: TSPR], _couronne_ ou _diademe_) ou _ciphra_ (de
[Hebrew: SPR], _numeration_)." Ch. de Paravey, _Essai sur l'origine unique
et hieroglyphique des chiffres et des lettres de tous les peuples_, Paris,
1826, p. 165, a rather fanciful work, gives "vase, vase arrondi et ferme
par un couvercle, qui est le symbole de la 10^e Heure, [symbol]," among the
Chinese; also "Tsiphron Zeron, ou tout a fait vide en arabe, [Greek:
tziphra] en grec ... d'ou chiffre (qui derive plutot, suivant nous, de
l'Hebreu _Sepher_, compter.")

[216] "Compilatus a Magistro Jacobo de Florentia apud montem pesalanum,"
and described by G. Lami in his _Catalogus codicum manuscriptorum qui in
bibliotheca Riccardiana Florentiae adservantur_. See Fazzari, loc. cit., p.
5.

[217] "Et doveto sapere chel zeuero per se solo non significa nulla ma e
potentia di fare significare, ... Et decina o centinaia o migliaia non si
puote scrivere senza questo segno 0. la quale si chiama zeuero." [Fazzari,
loc. cit., p. 5.]

[218] Ibid., p. 6.

[219] Avicenna (980-1036), translation by Gasbarri et Francois, "piu il
punto (gli Arabi adoperavano il punto in vece dello zero il cui segno 0 in
arabo si chiama _zepiro_ donde il vocabolo zero), che per se stesso non
esprime nessun numero." This quotation is taken from D. C. Martines,
_Origine e progressi dell' aritmetica_, Messina, 1865.

[220] Leo Jordan, "Materialien zur Geschichte der arabischen Zahlzeichen in
Frankreich," _Archiv fuer Kulturgeschichte_, Berlin, 1905, pp. 155-195,
gives the following two schemes of derivation, (1) "zefiro, zeviro, zeiro,
zero," (2) "zefiro, zefro, zevro, zero."

[221] Koebel (1518 ed., f. A_4) speaks of the numerals in general as "die
der gemain man Zyfer nendt." Recorde (_Grounde of Artes_, 1558 ed., f. B_6)
says that the zero is "called priuatly a Cyphar, though all the other
sometimes be likewise named."

[222] "Decimo X 0 theca, circul[us] cifra sive figura nihili appelat'."
[_Enchiridion Algorismi_, Cologne, 1501.] Later, "quoniam de integris tam
in cifris quam in proiectilibus,"--the word _proiectilibus_ referring to
markers "thrown" and used on an abacus, whence the French _jetons_ and the
English expression "to _cast_ an account."

[223] "Decima vero o dicitur teca, circulus, vel cyfra vel figura nichili."
[Maximilian Curtze, _Petri Philomeni de Dacia in Algorismum Vulgarem
Johannis de Sacrobosco commentarius, una cum Algorismo ipso_, Copenhagen,
1897, p. 2.] Curtze cites five manuscripts (fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries) of Dacia's commentary in the libraries at Erfurt, Leipzig, and
Salzburg, in addition to those given by Enestroem, _Oefversigt af Kongl.
Vetenskaps-Akademiens Foerhandlingar_, 1885, pp. 15-27, 65-70; 1886, pp.
57-60.

[224] Curtze, loc. cit., p. VI.

[225] _Rara Mathematica_, London, 1841, chap, i, "Joannis de Sacro-Bosco
Tractatus de Arte Numerandi."

[226] Smith, _Rara Arithmetica_, Boston, 1909.

[227] In the 1484 edition, Borghi uses the form "cefiro: ouero nulla:"
while in the 1488 edition he uses "zefiro: ouero nulla," and in the 1540
edition, f. 3, appears "Chiamata zero, ouero nulla." Woepcke asserted that
it first appeared in Calandri (1491) in this sentence: "Sono dieci le
figure con le quali ciascuno numero si puo significare: delle quali n'e una
che si chiama zero: et per se sola nulla significa." (f. 4). [See
_Propagation_, p. 522.]

[228] Boncompagni _Bulletino_, Vol. XVI, pp. 673-685.

[229] Leo Jordan, loc. cit. In the _Catalogue of MSS., Bibl. de l'Arsenal_,
Vol. III, pp. 154-156, this work is No. 2904 (184 S.A.F.), Bibl. Nat., and
is also called _Petit traicte de algorisme_.

[230] Texada (1546) says that there are "nueue letros yvn zero o cifra" (f.
3).

[231] Savonne (1563, 1751 ed., f. 1): "Vne ansi formee (o) qui s'appelle
nulle, & entre marchans zero," showing the influence of Italian names on
French mercantile customs. Trenchant (Lyons, 1566, 1578 ed., p. 12) also
says: "La derniere qui s'apele nulle, ou zero;" but Champenois, his
contemporary, writing in Paris in 1577 (although the work was not published
until 1578), uses "cipher," the Italian influence showing itself less in
this center of university culture than in the commercial atmosphere of
Lyons.

[232] Thus Radulph of Laon (c. 1100): "Inscribitur in ultimo ordine et
figura [symbol] sipos nomine, quae, licet numerum nullum signitet, tantum
ad alia quaedam utilis, ut insequentibus declarabitur." ["Der Arithmetische
Tractat des Radulph von Laon," _Abhandlungen zur Geschichte der
Mathematik_, Vol. V, p. 97, from a manuscript of the thirteenth century.]
Chasles (_Comptes rendus_, t. 16, 1843, pp. 1393, 1408) calls attention to
the fact that Radulph did not know how to use the zero, and he doubts if
the sipos was really identical with it. Radulph says: "... figuram, cui
sipos nomen est [symbol] in motum rotulae formatam nullius numeri
significatione inscribi solere praediximus," and thereafter uses _rotula_.
He uses the sipos simply as a kind of marker on the abacus.

[233] Rabbi ben Ezra (1092-1168) used both [Hebrew: GLGL], _galgal_ (the
Hebrew for _wheel_), and [Hebrew: SPR'], _sifra_. See M. Steinschneider,
"Die Mathematik bei den Juden," in _Bibliotheca Mathematica_, 1893, p. 69,
and Silberberg, _Das Buch der Zahl des R. Abraham ibn Esra_, Frankfurt a.
M., 1895, p. 96, note 23; in this work the Hebrew letters are used for
numerals with place value, having the zero.

[234] E.g., in the twelfth-century _Liber aligorismi_ (see Boncompagni's
_Trattati_, II, p. 28). So Ramus (_Libri II_, 1569 ed., p. 1) says:
"Circulus quae nota est ultima: nil per se significat." (See also the
Schonerus ed. of Ramus, 1586, p. 1.)

[235] "Und wirt das ringlein o. die Ziffer genant die nichts bedeut."
[Koebel's _Rechenbuch_, 1549 ed., f. 10, and other editions.]

[236] I.e. "circular figure," our word _notation_ having come from the
medieval _nota_. Thus Tzwivel (1507, f. 2) says: "Nota autem circularis .o.
per se sumpta nihil vsus habet. alijs tamen adiuncta earum significantiam
et auget et ordinem permutat quantum quo ponit ordinem. vt adiuncta note
binarij hoc modo 20 facit eam significare bis decem etc." Also (ibid., f.
4), "figura circularis," "circularis nota." Clichtoveus (1503 ed., f.
XXXVII) calls it "nota aut circularis o," "circularis nota," and "figura
circularis." Tonstall (1522, f. B_3) says of it: "Decimo uero nota ad
formam [symbol] litterae circulari figura est: quam alij circulum, uulgus
cyphram uocat," and later (f. C_4) speaks of the "circulos." Grammateus, in
his _Algorismus de integris_ (Erfurt, 1523, f. A_2), speaking of the nine
significant figures, remarks: "His autem superadditur decima figura
circularis ut 0 existens que ratione sua nihil significat." Noviomagus (_De
Numeris libri II_, Paris, 1539, chap. xvi, "De notis numerorum, quas
zyphras vocant") calls it "circularis nota, quam ex his solam, alij
sipheram, Georgius Valla zyphram."

[237] Huswirt, as above. Ramus (_Scholae mathematicae_, 1569 ed., p. 112)
discusses the name interestingly, saying: "Circulum appellamus cum multis,
quam alii thecam, alii figuram nihili, alii figuram privationis, seu
figuram nullam vocant, alii ciphram, cum tamen hodie omnes hae notae vulgo
ciphrae nominentur, & his notis numerare idem sit quod ciphrare." Tartaglia
(1592 ed., f. 9) says: "si chiama da alcuni tecca, da alcuni circolo, da
altri cifra, da altri zero, & da alcuni altri nulla."

[238] "Quare autem aliis nominibus vocetur, non dicit auctor, quia omnia
alia nomina habent rationem suae lineationis sive figurationis. Quia
rotunda est, dicitur haec figura teca ad similitudinem tecae. Teca enim est
ferrum figurae rotundae, quod ignitum solet in quibusdam regionibus imprimi
fronti vel maxillae furis seu latronum." [Loc. cit., p. 26.] But in Greek
_theca_ ([THEKE], [Greek: theke]) is a place to put something, a
receptacle. If a vacant column, e.g. in the abacus, was so called, the
initial might have given the early forms [symbol] and [symbol] for the
zero.

[239] Buteo, _Logistica_, Lyons, 1559. See also Wertheim in the
_Bibliotheca Mathematica_, 1901, p. 214.

[240] "0 est appellee chiffre ou nulle ou figure de nulle valeur." [La
Roche, _L'arithmetique_, Lyons, 1520.]

[241] "Decima autem figura nihil uocata," "figura nihili (quam etiam cifram
uocant)." [Stifel, _Arithmetica integra_, 1544, f. 1.]

[242] "Zifra, & Nulla uel figura Nihili." [Scheubel, 1545, p. 1 of ch. 1.]
_Nulla_ is also used by Italian writers. Thus Sfortunati (1545 ed., f. 4)
says: "et la decima nulla & e chiamata questa decima zero;" Cataldi (1602,
p. 1): "La prima, che e o, si chiama nulla, ouero zero, ouero niente." It
also found its way into the Dutch arithmetics, e.g. Raets (1576, 1580 ed.,
f. A_3): "Nullo dat ist niet;" Van der Schuere (1600, 1624 ed., f. 7);
Wilkens (1669 ed., p. 1). In Germany Johann Albert (Wittenberg, 1534) and
Rudolff (1526) both adopted the Italian _nulla_ and popularized it. (See
also Kuckuck, _Die Rechenkunst im sechzehnten Jahrhundert_, Berlin, 1874,
p. 7; Guenther, _Geschichte_, p. 316.)

[243] "La dixieme s'appelle chifre vulgairement: les vns l'appellant zero:
nous la pourrons appeller vn Rien." [Peletier, 1607 ed., p. 14.]

[244] It appears in the Polish arithmetic of K[=l]os (1538) as _cyfra_.
"The Ciphra 0 augmenteth places, but of himselfe signifieth not," Digges,
1579, p. 1. Hodder (10th ed., 1672, p. 2) uses only this word (cypher or
cipher), and the same is true of the first native American arithmetic,
written by Isaac Greenwood (1729, p. 1). Petrus de Dacia derives _cyfra_
from circumference. "Vocatur etiam cyfra, quasi circumfacta vel
circumferenda, quod idem est, quod circulus non habito respectu ad
centrum." [Loc. cit., p. 26.]

[245] _Opera mathematica_, 1695, Oxford, Vol. I, chap. ix, _Mathesis
universalis_, "De figuris numeralibus," pp. 46-49; Vol. II, _Algebra_, p.
10.

[246] Martin, _Origine de notre systeme de numeration ecrite_, note 149, p.
36 of reprint, spells [Greek: tsiphra] from Maximus Planudes, citing Wallis
as an authority. This is an error, for Wallis gives the correct form as
above.

Alexander von Humboldt, "Ueber die bei verschiedenen Voelkern ueblichen
Systeme von Zahlzeichen und ueber den Ursprung des Stellenwerthes in den
indischen Zahlen," Crelle's _Journal fuer reine und angewandte Mathematik_,
Vol. IV, 1829, called attention to the work [Greek: arithmoi Indikoi] of
the monk Neophytos, supposed to be of the fourteenth century. In this work
the forms [Greek: tzuphra] and [Greek: tzumphra] appear. See also Boeckh,
_De abaco Graecorum_, Berlin, 1841, and Tannery, "Le Scholie du moine
Neophytos," _Revue Archeologique_, 1885, pp. 99-102. Jordan, loc. cit.,
gives from twelfth and thirteenth century manuscripts the forms _cifra_,
_ciffre_, _chifras_, and _cifrus_. Du Cange, _Glossarium mediae et infimae
Latinitatis_, Paris, 1842, gives also _chilerae_. Dasypodius,
_Institutiones Mathematicae_, Strassburg, 1593-1596, adds the forms
_zyphra_ and _syphra_. Boissiere, _L'art d'arythmetique contenant toute
dimention, tres-singulier et commode, tant pour l'art militaire que autres
calculations_, Paris, 1554: "Puis y en a vn autre dict zero lequel ne
designe nulle quantite par soy, ains seulement les loges vuides."

[247] _Propagation_, pp. 27, 234, 442. Treutlein, "Das Rechnen im 16.
Jahrhundert," _Abhandlungen zur Geschichte der Mathematik_, Vol. I, p. 5,
favors the same view. It is combated by many writers, e.g. A. C. Burnell,
loc. cit., p. 59. Long before Woepcke, I. F. and G. I. Weidler, _De
characteribus numerorum vulgaribus et eorum aetatibus_, Wittenberg, 1727,
asserted the possibility of their introduction into Greece by Pythagoras or
one of his followers: "Potuerunt autem ex oriente, uel ex phoenicia, ad
graecos traduci, uel Pythagorae, uel eius discipulorum auxilio, cum aliquis
eo, proficiendi in literis causa, iter faceret, et hoc quoque inuentum
addisceret."

[248] E.g., they adopted the Greek numerals in use in Damascus and Syria,
and the Coptic in Egypt. Theophanes (758-818 A.D.), _Chronographia_,
Scriptores Historiae Byzantinae, Vol. XXXIX, Bonnae, 1839, p. 575, relates
that in 699 A.D. the caliph Wal[=i]d forbade the use of the Greek language
in the bookkeeping of the treasury of the caliphate, but permitted the use
of the Greek alphabetic numerals, since the Arabs had no convenient number
notation: [Greek: kai ekoluse graphesthai Hellenisti tous demosious ton
logothesion kodikas, all' Arabiois auta parasemainesthai, choris ton
psephon, epeide adunaton tei ekeinon glossei monada e duada e triada e okto
hemisu e tria graphesthai; dio kai heos semeron eisin sun autois notarioi
Christianoi.] The importance of this contemporaneous document was pointed
out by Martin, loc. cit. Karabacek, "Die Involutio im arabischen
Schriftwesen," Vol. CXXXV of _Sitzungsberichte d. phil.-hist. Classe d. k.
Akad. d. Wiss._, Vienna, 1896, p. 25, gives an Arabic date of 868 A.D. in
Greek letters.

[249] _The Origin and History of Our Numerals_ (in Russian), Kiev, 1908;
_The Independence of European Arithmetic_ (in Russian), Kiev.

[250] Woepcke, loc. cit., pp. 462, 262.

[251] Woepcke, loc. cit., p. 240. _[H.]is[=a]b-al-[.G]ob[=a]r_, by an
anonymous author, probably Ab[=u] Sahl Dunash ibn Tamim, is given by
Steinschneider, "Die Mathematik bei den Juden," _Bibliotheca Mathematica_,
1896, p. 26.

[252] Steinschneider in the _Abhandlungen_, Vol. III, p. 110.

[253] See his _Grammaire arabe_, Vol. I, Paris, 1810, plate VIII; Gerhardt,
_Etudes_, pp. 9-11, and _Entstehung_ etc., p. 8; I. F. Weidler,
_Spicilegium observationum ad historiam notarum numeralium pertinentium_,
Wittenberg, 1755, speaks of the "figura cifrarum Saracenicarum" as being
different from that of the "characterum Boethianorum," which are similar to
the "vulgar" or common numerals; see also Humboldt, loc. cit.

[254] Gerhardt mentions it in his _Entstehung_ etc., p. 8; Woepcke,
_Propagation_, states that these numerals were used not for calculation,
but very much as we use Roman numerals. These superposed dots are found
with both forms of numerals (_Propagation_, pp. 244-246).

[255] Gerhardt (_Etudes_, p. 9) from a manuscript in the Bibliotheque
Nationale. The numeral forms are [symbols], 20 being indicated by [symbol
with dot] and 200 by [symbol with 2 dots]. This scheme of zero dots was
also adopted by the Byzantine Greeks, for a manuscript of Planudes in the
Bibliotheque Nationale has numbers like [pi alpha with 4 dots] for
8,100,000,000. See Gerhardt, _Etudes_, p. 19. Pihan, _Expose_ etc., p. 208,
gives two forms, Asiatic and Maghrebian, of "Ghob[=a]r" numerals.

[256] See Chap. IV.

[257] Possibly as early as the third century A.D., but probably of the
eighth or ninth. See Cantor, I (3), p. 598.

[258] Ascribed by the Arabic writer to India.

[259] See Woepcke's description of a manuscript in the Chasles library,
"Recherches sur l'histoire des sciences mathematiques chez les orientaux,"
_Journal Asiatique_, IV (5), 1859, p. 358, note.

