fleets of purple-sailed war galleys had made Vilayet an Hyrkanian lake.
The dark-skinned people of Zamora paid him tribute, as did the eastern
provinces of Koth. The Shemites bowed to his rule as far west as
Shushan. His armies ravaged the borders of Stygia in the south and the
snowy lands of the Hyperboreans in the north. His riders bore torch and
sword westward into Brythunia and Ophir and Corinthia, even to the
borders of Nemedia. His gilt-helmeted swordsmen had trampled hosts under
their horses' hoofs, and walled cities went up in flames at his
command. In the glutted slave markets of Aghrapur, Sultanapur,
Khawarizm, Shahpur and Khorusun, women were sold for three small silver
coins--blond Brythunians, tawny Stygians, dark-haired Zamorians, ebon
Kushites, olive-skinned Shemites.

Yet, while his swift horsemen overthrew armies far from his frontiers,
at his very borders an audacious foe plucked his beard with a
red-dripping and smoke-stained hand.

On the broad steppes between the Sea of Vilayet and the borders of the
easternmost Hyborian kingdoms, a new race had sprung up in the past
half-century, formed originally of fleeing criminals, broken men,
escaped slaves, and deserting soldiers. They were men of many crimes and
countries, some born on the steppes, some fleeing from the kingdoms in
the west. They were called _kozak_, which means wastrel.

Dwelling on the wild, open steppes, owning no law but their own peculiar
code, they had become a people capable of defying the Grand Monarch.
Ceaselessly they raided the Turanian frontier, retiring in the steppes
when defeated; with the pirates of Vilayet, men of much the same breed,
they harried the coast, preying off the merchant ships which plied
between the Hyrkanian ports.

'How am I to crush these wolves?' demanded Jehungir. 'If I follow them
into the steppes, I run the risk either of being cut off and destroyed,
or having them elude me entirely and burn the city in my absence. Of
late they have been more daring than ever.'

'That is because of the new chief who has risen among them,' answered
Ghaznavi. 'You know whom I mean.'

'Aye!' replied Jehungir feelingly. 'It is that devil Conan; he is even
wilder than the _kozaks_, yet he is crafty as a mountain lion.'

'It is more through wild animal instinct than through intelligence,'
answered Ghaznavi. 'The other _kozaks_ are at least descendants of
civilized men. He is a barbarian. But to dispose of him would be to deal
them a crippling blow.'

'But how?' demanded Jehungir. 'He has repeatedly cut his way out of
spots that seemed certain death for him. And, by instinct or cunning, he
has avoided or escaped every trap set for him.'

'For every beast and for every man there is a trap he will not escape,'
quoth Ghaznavi. 'When we have parleyed with the _kozaks_ for the ransom
of captives, I have observed this man Conan. He has a keen relish for
women and strong drink. Have your captive Octavia fetched here.'

Jehungir clapped his hands, and an impassive Kushite eunuch, an image of
shining ebony in silken pantaloons, bowed before him and went to do his
bidding. Presently he returned, leading by the wrist a tall handsome
girl, whose yellow hair, clear eyes and fair skin identified her as a
pure-blooded member of her race. Her scanty silk tunic, girded at the
waist, displayed the marvelous contours of her magnificent figure. Her
fine eyes flashed with resentment and her red lips were sulky, but
submission had been taught her during her captivity. She stood with
hanging head before her master until he motioned her to a seat on the
divan beside him. Then he looked inquiringly at Ghaznavi.

'We must lure Conan away from the _kozaks_,' said the counsellor
abruptly. 'Their war camp is at present pitched somewhere on the lower
reaches of the Zaporoska River--which, as you well know, is a wilderness
of reeds, a swampy jungle in which our last expedition was cut to pieces
by those masterless devils.'

'I am not likely to forget that,' said Jehungir wryly.

'There is an uninhabited island near the mainland,' said Ghaznavi,
'known as Xapur, the Fortified, because of some ancient ruins upon it.
There is a peculiarity about it which makes it perfect for our purpose.
It has no shore-line, but rises sheer out of the sea in cliffs a hundred
and fifty feet tall. Not even an ape could negotiate them. The only
place where a man can go up or down is a narrow path on the western side
that has the appearance of a worn stair, carved into the solid rock of
the cliffs.

'If we could trap Conan on that island, alone, we could hunt him down at
our leisure, with bows, as men hunt a lion.'

'As well wish for the moon,' said Jehungir impatiently. 'Shall we send
him a messenger, bidding him climb the cliffs and await our coming?'

'In effect, yes!' Seeing Jehungir's look of amazement, Ghaznavi
continued: 'We will ask for a parley with the _kozaks_ in regard to
prisoners, at the edge of the steppes by Fort Ghori. As usual, we will
go with a force and encamp outside the castle. They will come, with an
equal force, and the parley will go forward with the usual distrust and
suspicion. But this time we will take with us, as if by casual chance,
your beautiful captive.' Octavia changed color and listened with
intensified interest as the counsellor nodded toward her. 'She will use
all her wiles to attract Conan's attention. That should not be
difficult. To that wild reaver she should appear a dazzling vision of
loveliness. Her vitality and substantial figure should appeal to him
more vividly than would one of the doll-like beauties of your seraglio.'

Octavia sprang up, her white fists clenched, her eyes blazing and her
figure quivering with outraged anger.

'You would force me to play the trollop with this barbarian?' she
exclaimed. 'I will not! I am no market-block slut to smirk and ogle at a
steppes-robber. I am the daughter of a Nemedian lord--'

'You were of the Nemedian nobility before my riders carried you off,'
returned Jehungir cynically. 'Now you are merely a slave who will do as
she is bid.'

'I will not!' she raged.

'On the contrary,' rejoined Jehungir with studied cruelty, 'you will. I
like Ghaznavi's plan. Continue, prince among counsellors.'

'Conan will probably wish to buy her. You will refuse to sell her, of
course, or to exchange her for Hyrkanian prisoners. He may then try to
steal her, or take her by force--though I do not think even he would
break the parley-truce. Anyway, we must be prepared for whatever he
might attempt.

'Then, shortly after the parley, before he has time to forget all about
her, we will send a messenger to him, under a flag of truce, accusing
him of stealing the girl, and demanding her return. He may kill the
messenger, but at least he will think that she has escaped.

'Then we will send a spy--a Yuetshi fisherman will do--to the _kozak_
camp, who will tell Conan that Octavia is hiding on Xapur. If I know my
man, he will go straight to that place.'

'But we do not know that he will go alone,' Jehungir argued.

'Does a man take a band of warriors with him, when going to a rendezvous
with a woman he desires?' retorted Ghaznavi. 'The chances are all that
he _will_ go alone. But we will take care of the other alternative. We
will not await him on the island, where we might be trapped ourselves,
but among the reeds of a marshy point which juts out to within a
thousand yards of Xapur. If he brings a large force, we'll beat a
retreat and think up another plot. If he comes alone or with a small
party, we will have him. Depend upon it, he will come, remembering your
charming slave's smiles and meaning glances.'

'I will never descend to such shame!' Octavia was wild with fury and
humiliation. 'I will die first!'

'You will not die, my rebellious beauty,' said Jehungir, 'but you will
be subjected to a very painful and humiliating experience.'

He clapped his hands, and Octavia paled. This time it was not the
Kushite who entered, but a Shemite, a heavily muscled man of medium
height with a short, curled, blue-black beard.

'Here is work for you, Gilzan,' said Jehungir. 'Take this fool, and play
with her awhile. Yet be careful not to spoil her beauty.'

With an inarticulate grunt the Shemite seized Octavia's wrist, and at
the grasp of his iron fingers, all the defiance went out of her. With a
piteous cry she tore away and threw herself on her knees before her
implacable master, sobbing incoherently for mercy.

Jehungir dismissed the disappointed torturer with a gesture, and said to
Ghaznavi: 'If your plan succeeds, I will fill your lap with gold.'




