
"That's right," Fernack said. "Good old Burris of the FBI. And he told
me this was a National Security case. National Security. It's your baby,
Malone, because Burris wants it that way." He snorted. "So don't worry
about me," he said. "I'm just here to co-operate. The patriotic, loyal,
dumb slave of a grateful government."

Malone blew out a plume of smoke. "You know, John Henry," he said, "you
might have made a good FBI man yourself. You've got the right attitude."

"Never mind the jokes," Fernack said bitterly.

"O.K.," Malone said. "But tell me: Did you actually make arrangements
for me to get into that warehouse? I suppose you know that's what I
want."

"I guessed that much," Fernack said. "I haven't made any arrangements at
all yet, but I will. I'll have Safe and Loft get the keys, and a full
set of floor plans to the place while they're at it. Will that do, Your
Majesty?"

Malone choked on his smoke and shot a quick look over his shoulder.
There was nothing there but the wall of the booth. Queen Elizabeth I was
nowhere in evidence. Then he realized that Fernack had been talking to
him.

"Don't do that," he said.

"What?" Fernack said.

Malone realized in one awful second how strange the explanation was
going to sound. Could he say that he thought he'd been mistaken for an
old friend of his, Elizabeth Tudor? Could he say that he'd just had a
call from her?

In the end he merely said: "Nothing," and let it go at that.

"Well, anyhow," Fernack said, "do you want anything else?"

"Not right now," Malone said. "I'll let you know, though. And--thanks,
John Henry. No matter why you're doing this, thanks."

"I don't deserve 'em." Fernack muttered. "And I hope you get caught in
some kind of deadfall and have to come screaming to the cops."

That, Malone reflected, was the second time a cop had suggested his
yelling if he got into trouble.

Hadn't the police force ever heard of telephones?

He said good-by and flipped off.

Then he stared at the screen for a little while, as his cigarette burned
down between his fingers. At last he put the cigarette out and went
downstairs again to the bar.

If he had to do some heavy thinking, he told himself, there was
absolutely no reason why he couldn't enjoy himself a little while doing
it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The evening rush had begun, and Malone found himself a stool by the
simple expedient of slipping into one while a drinker's back was turned.
Once ensconced, he huddled himself up like an old drunk, thus
effectively cutting himself off from interruptions, and lit another
cigarette. Ray was down at the other end of the bar, chatting with a
red-headed woman and her pale, bald escort. Malone sighed and set
himself to the job of serious, constructive thinking.

How, he asked himself, do you go about catching a person who can vanish
away like so much smoke?

Well, Malone could think of one solution, but it was pretty bloody.
Nailing the kids to a wall would probably work, but he couldn't say much
else for it. There had to be another way out. For some reason Malone
just couldn't see himself with a mouthful of nails, a hammer and a
teen-ager.

It sounded just a little too messy.

Then, of course, there were handcuffs.

That sounded a little better. The trouble was that Malone simply didn't
have enough information, and knew it. Obviously, the kids could carry
stuff with them when they teleported; the stuff they stole proved that.
And their clothes, Malone added. Apparently the kids didn't arrive at
wherever they went stark staring naked.

But how close to a teleport did the things he carried have to be?

In other words. Malone thought, if you put handcuffs on a teleport,
would the handcuffs vanish when the teleport did? And did that include
the part of the cuff you were holding?

What happened if you snapped half the cuff around your own wrist first?
Did you go along with the teleport? Or did your wrist go, while you
stayed behind and wondered how long it would take to bleed to death?

Or what?

All the questions were intriguing ones. Malone sighed, wishing he knew
the answer to even one of them.

It was somewhat comforting to think that he'd managed to progress a
little, anyway. The kids hadn't meant anybody to find out about
them--but Malone had found out about them, and alerted all the cops in
town, as well as the rest of the FBI. He knew just who they were, and
where they lived, and how they performed the "miracles" they performed.

Anyhow, he knew something about that last item.

He even knew who had his notebook.

He tabled that thought, and went back to feeling victorious. Within a
few seconds, the sense of achievement was gone, and futility had come in
its place. After all, he still didn't know how to catch the kids, did
he?

No.

He thought about handcuffs some more and then gave up. He'd just have to
try it and see how it worked. And if the teleports took his wrist away
he'd ... he'd ... he'd go after them and make them give it back.

Sure he would.

That reminded him of the notebook again, and, since the thing was being
so persistent, he decided he might as well pay some attention to it.

Dorothea had the notebook. Malone tried to see himself barging in on her
and asking for it, and he didn't care for the picture at all--no matter
how Good Queen Bess felt about it.

After all, she thought Mike Fueyo was basically a nice kid.

So what did she know?

He closed his eyes. There he was, in the Fueyo apartment, talking to
Dorothea.

"Dorothea," he muttered. "You filched my notebook."

That didn't sound very effective. And besides, it wasn't really his
notebook. He tried again.

"Dorothea, you pinched your brother's notebook."

Now, for some reason, it sounded like something covered by the Vice
Squad. It sounded terrible. But there were other ways of saying the same
thing.

"Dorothea," he muttered, "you borrowed your brother's notebook."

That was too patronizing. Malone told himself that he sounded like a
character straight out of the 3-D screens, and settled himself gamely
for another try.

"Dorothea, you _have_ your brother's notebook."

To which the obvious answer was: "Yes, I do, and so what?"

Or, possibly: "How do you know?"

And Malone thought about answering that one. "Queen Elizabeth told me,"
was the literal truth, but somehow it didn't sound like it. And he
couldn't find another answer to give the girl.

"Dorothea," he said, and a voice from nowhere added:

"Will you have another drink?"

Malone exploded, "That's not the question. Drinks have nothing to do
with notebooks. I'm after notebooks. Can't you understand--" Belatedly,
he looked up.

There was Ray, the barman.

"Oh," he said.

"I just came over," Ray said. "And I figured if you couldn't find your
notebook, maybe you'd like a drink. So long as you're here."

"Ray," Malone said with feeling, "you are an eminently reasonable
fellow. I accept your solution. Nay, more. I endorse your solution.
Wholeheartedly."

Ray went off to mix, and Malone stared after him happily. This was
really a nice place, he reflected--almost as nice as the City Hall Bar
in Chicago where he'd gone long ago with his father.

But he tore his mind away from the happy past and concentrated, instead,
on the miserable present. He decided for the last time that he was not
going to ask Dorothea for the book--not just yet, anyhow. After all, it
wasn't as if he needed the book; he knew his own name, and he knew
Lynch's name, and he knew the names on the second page. And he didn't
see any particular need for a picture of a red Cadillac, no matter how
nicely colored it was.

So, he asked himself, why embarrass everybody by trying to get it back?

Of course, it _was_ technically a crime to pick pockets, and that went
double or triple for the pockets of FBI agents. But Malone told himself
that he didn't feel like pressing charges, anyhow. And Dorothy probably
didn't make a habit of pocket-picking.

He sighed and glanced at his watch. It was fifteen minutes of six.

Now, he knew what his next move was going to be.

He was going to go back to his hotel and change his clothes.

That is, he amended, as soon as he finished the drink that Ray was
setting up in front of him.




XIII.


By the time Malone reached the Statler Hilton Hotel it was six-twenty.
Malone hadn't reckoned with New York's rush-hour traffic, and, after
seeing it, he still didn't believe it. Finding a cab had been
impossible, and he had started for the subway, hoping that he wouldn't
get lost and end up somewhere in Brooklyn.

But one look at the shrieking mob trying to sardine itself into the
Seventh Avenue subway entrance had convinced him it was better to walk.
Bucking the street crowds was bad enough. Bucking the subway crowds was
something Malone didn't even want to think about.

He let himself into his room, and was taking off his shoes with a
grateful sigh when there was a rap on the door of the bathroom that
connected his room with Boyd's. Malone padded over to the door, his
shoes in one hand. "Tom?" he said.

[Illustration]

"You were expecting maybe Titus Moody?" Boyd called.

"O.K.," Malone said. "Come on in."

Boyd pushed open the door. He was stripped to the waist, a state of
dress which showed the largest expanse of chest Malone had ever seen,
and he was carrying the small scissors which he used to trim his Henry
VIII beard. He stabbed the scissors toward Malone, who shuffled back
hurriedly.

"Listen," Boyd said, "did you call the office after you left this
afternoon?"

"No," Malone admitted. "Why? What happened?"

"There was a call for you," Boyd said. "Long Distance, just before I
left at five. I came on back to the hotel and waited until I heard you
come in. Thought you might want to know about it."

"I do, I guess," Malone said. "Who from?" Looking at Boyd, a modern-day
Henry VIII, the association was too obvious to be missed. Malone thought
of Good Queen Bess, and wondered why she was calling him again.

And--more surprising--why she'd called him at FBI headquarters, when she
must have known that he wasn't there.

"Dr. O'Connor," Boyd said.

"Oh," Malone said, somewhat relieved. "At Yucca Flats."

Boyd nodded. "Right," he said. "You're to call Operator Nine."

"Thanks." Malone went over to the phone, remembered his shoes and put
them down carefully on the floor. "Anything else of importance?" he
asked.

"On the Cadillacs," Boyd said. "We've got a final report now. Leibowitz
and Hardin finally finished checking the last of them--there weren't
quite as many as we were afraid there were going to be. Red isn't a very
popular color around here."

"Good," Malone said.

"And there isn't a doggone thing on any of 'em," Boyd said. "Oh, we
cleared up a lot of small-time crime, one thing and another, but that's
about all. No such thing as an electro-psionic brain to be found
anywhere in the lot. Leibowitz says he's willing to swear to it."

Malone sighed. "I didn't think he'd find one," he said.

"You didn't?"

"No," Malone said.

Boyd stabbed at him with the scissors again. "Then why did you cause all
that trouble?" he said.

"Because I thought we might find electro-psionic brains," Malone said
wearily. "Or one, anyhow."

"But you just said--"

Malone picked up the phone, got Long Distance and motioned Boyd to
silence in one sweeping series of moves. The Long Distance Operator
said: "Yes, sir? May we help you?"

"Give me Operator Nine," Malone said.

There was a buzz, a click and a new voice which said: "Operator Ni-yun.
May we help you?"

"All nine of you?" Malone muttered. "Never mind. This is Kenneth Malone.
I've got a call from Dr. Thomas O'Connor at Yucca Flats. Please connect
me."

There was another buzz, a click and an ungodly howl which was followed
by the voice of Operator Ni-yun saying: "We are connecting you. There
will be a slight delay. We are sor-ree."

Malone waited. At last there was another small howl, and the screen lit
up. Dr. O'Connor's face, as stern and ascetic as ever, stared through at
Malone.

"I understand you called me," Malone said.

"Ah, yes," Dr. O'Connor said. "It's very good to see you again, Mr.
Malone." He gave Malone a smile good for exchange at your corner
grocery: worth, one icicle.

"It's good to see you, too," Malone lied.

"Mr. Burris explained to me what it was that you wanted to talk to me
about," O'Connor said. "Am I to understand that you have actually found
a teleport?"

"Unless my theories are away off," Malone said, "I've done a lot better
than that. I've found eight of them."

"Eight!" Dr. O'Connor's smile grew perceptibly warmed. It now stood at
about thirty-four degrees Fahrenheit. "That is really excellent, Mr.
Malone. You have done a fine job."

"Thanks," Malone muttered. He wished that O'Connor didn't make him feel
quite so much like a first-year law student talking to an egomaniacal
professor.

"When can you deliver them?" O'Connor said.

"Well," Malone said carefully, "that depends." O'Connor seemed to view
the teleports as pieces of equipment, he thought. "I can't deliver them
until I catch them," he said. "And that's why I wanted to talk to you."

"Some slight delay," Dr. O'Connor said, "will be quite understandable."
His face left no doubt that he didn't like the necessity of
understanding anything that was going to keep him and the eight
teleports apart for even thirty seconds longer, now that he knew about
them.

"You see," Malone said, "they're kids. Juvenile delinquents, or
something like that. But they are teleports, that's for sure."

"I see," Dr. O'Connor said.

"So we've got to nab them," Malone said. "And for that I need all the
information I can get."

Dr. O'Connor nodded slowly. "I'll be happy," he said, "to give you any
information I can provide."

       *       *       *       *       *

Malone took a deep breath, and plunged. "How does this teleportation bit
work, anyhow?" he said.

"You've asked a very delicate question," Dr. O'Connor said. "Actually,
we can't be quite positive." His expression showed just how little he
wanted to make this admission. "However," he went on, brightening,
"there is some evidence which seems to show that it is basically the
same process as psychokinesis. And we do have quite a bit of empirical
data on psychokinesis." He scribbled something on a sheet of paper and
said: "For instance, there's this." He held the paper up to the screen
so that Malone could read it.

It said:

  md
  ----- = K
  ft2

Malone looked at it for some seconds. At last he said: "It's very
pretty. What is it?"

"This," Dr. O'Connor said, in the tone of voice that meant You Should
Have Known All Along, But You're Just Hopeless, "is the basic formula
for the phenomenon, where _m_ is the mass in grams, _d_ is the distance
in centimeters, _f_ is the force in dynes and _t_ is the time in
seconds. _K_ is a constant whose value is not yet known."

Malone said: "Hm-m-m," and stared at the equation again. Somehow, the
explanation was not very helpful. The value of _K_ was unknown. He
understood that much, all right but it didn't seem to do him any good.

"As you can see," Dr. O'Connor went on, "the greater the force, and the
longer time it is applied, the greater distance any mass can be moved.
Or, contrariwise, the more mass, the greater mass, that is, the easier
it is to move it any given distance. This is, as you undoubtedly
understand, not at all in contradistinction to physical phenomena."

