"When thou knowest his wondrous wisdom touching many things, O Pharaoh,
thou mayest think fit to give him a place among thy wise men, where they
may learn from him and he from them. Will it please thee to send a
slave for the Larger Eye and have it placed by yonder window, and he
will presently show unto thee many of the wonders of the starry heavens
that are hidden beyond the reach of man's unaided vision."

While two slaves were despatched in charge of a soldier to bring the
telescope, we were served with a highly-sparkling, gas-charged wine,
which further whetted my appetite. Then came another maiden with a small
roast bird, neatly and delicately carved, and each tempting piece was
laid upon a small lozenge of bread. I never ate anything with more
relish.

There was an excited buzz among the women, and the Pharaoh himself was
visibly affected at the sight of the telescope, whose burnished brass
was evidently mistaken for gold. The doctor mounted it upon the backs of
slaves near a high window, whence there was a good view of the heavens,
and signalled to me to explain its use.

"O Zaphnath, wilt thou make known unto the Pharaoh, and these, his
guests, that the wondrous value of this instrument lieth not in its
bright and glistening appearance, but in the farther reach and truer
vision of the heavenly bodies which it affordeth us. With this we
ascertain all and far more than yon monstrous Gnomons tell thee; we
learn the periods of the day, the seasons of the year, and vastly more
than our common tongue hath words to tell thee of. Tell me, what
callest thou yon risen orb, which hasteneth a rapid backward journey
through the heavens?" I asked, indicating the full disc of Phobos.

"That is the Perverse Daughter, sole disobedient Child of Night, whose
stubborn, contrary ways are justly punished by her mother. For she must
draw a veil across her brilliant face for a brief period during every
hasty trip she makes."

"Behold her, then, just entering upon her punishment!" I exclaimed, for
the regular eclipse was just beginning. "Look! and tell us all thou
seest."

"I see a glorious orb, far larger than the Day-Giver and very near to
Ptah! But it is the Perverse Daughter, grown larger and come nearer, for
she alone knoweth how to draw the veil of night across her face like
that. Now she hath fully hidden! It is most wonderful, O Pharaoh!"

"Be not deceived by mere appearance, O Zaphnath," replied the Pharaoh.
"All that thou seest may be contained within the thing thou gazest into.
'Tis true, the Perverse Daughter hath drawn her veil, but be thou sure
thou seest what is beyond and not merely what is within."

As soon as this was translated to us, the doctor focussed the telescope
upon the Gnomons, which were just visible over the edge of the plateau,
and I said,--

"Look now again, and behold all the familiar features of the landscape,
the plateau yonder and the ponderous Gnomons, which could never be
contained within this little enclosure."

"'Tis all most true, O Pharaoh, and with this little instrument thy
reign may be more glorious, and come to greater wisdom, than any of that
long line of Pharaohs, whose toiling slaves have built the towering
Gnomons. Let this grey-beard be made chief of all thy wise men; let the
others teach him our language and make him acquainted with all our
monuments and records; also command them to record most faithfully all
the wonders which he is able to reveal. Mayhap he may be able to write
thy name among the stars of night, to shine for ever, instead of upon
the crumbling stone which telleth of thy ancestors!"

"O men of Kem," replied the Pharaoh, addressing the other guests, "hear
ye the wisdom of Zaphnath, which cometh with the swift wings of birds,
while thy halting counsel stumbleth slowly upon the lazy legs of asses!
What Zaphnath asketh hath already been decreed touching these two men
from the Blue Star, provided only that they live peaceably among us
obedient to our laws."

We assured him of our obedience and our best efforts to discharge our
new duties, whereupon the feast continued. Courses of small birds' eggs
and of fruits and confections were each served by a separate group of
maidens. When the feast was finally completed, I turned to Zaphnath with
my cigars and said,--

"In our travelling house I brought with me many such things as these and
others of a smaller, milder form, which might delight the women; but now
that the house is gone, I have but three, one of which wilt thou send to
the Pharaoh, one keep for thyself, and the other I will smoke to show
you the manner of it. There is naught to fear about them; your taste for
heavy vapours will have prepared you to enjoy the warmth and fragrance
of this peculiar weed."

A servant came to carry the one to the Pharaoh, and I struck a match
upon the stone floor and held the cigar designed for Zaphnath in the
flame. Then I touched the flame to my own, and puffing gently, I asked
Zaphnath to do the same. When I saw that his custom of inhaling gases
led him to breathe in the smoke, I puffed very slowly and gently, until
he should become accustomed to it. When Pharaoh saw that it did no harm
to Zaphnath, he lighted his own and inhaled the smoke in long draughts
with evident gusto.

"How sayest thou, O Zaphnath," he said at last. "Is not this warm vapour
most stimulating? It is a treat worth all the rest of the banquet.
Continual feasting hath made the luxuries of Kem to pall upon me, but
this hath novelty and comfort in it. If, indeed, there were many of
these in thy travelling house, my slaves shall search all the width and
breadth of Ptah, until it be found."

The music now burst forth again in new volume, and the singing girls
went through a new evolution, which broke up their groups and formed
twelve new ones, containing one girl from each of the previous sets.
Then the entire number began ascending the steps together, and I noted
that those approaching me were the twelve maidens who had served me
during the banquet. They came and circled around me, and presently
stopped with their hands upon their cheeks in salute. The other groups
did the same to the guests they had served, and each guest selected a
maiden by saluting her upon the cheek, whereupon she left her circle and
took her position upon the cushion opposite him. Zaphnath, seeing that
we did not understand this ceremony, explained it to me.

"It is an ancient custom with the Pharaoh to present each of his guests
with a living reminder of the occasion and his hospitality. Wherefore he
desireth thee to choose which of the twelve serving maidens hath pleased
thee best, and he will give her to thee, to be always thy maidservant."

I translated this to the doctor, and watched him curiously, with an
inquiring twinkle in my eye.

"Let us accept them, and bestow their liberty upon them," he said.

I immediately chose the third maiden, who had pressed her pink cheeks to
my lips, and when she came to sit opposite to me upon the cushion, I
spoke to her through Zaphnath,--

"Thy ways have pleased me, but upon my star we do not think it proper
to own any slaves. When we know well-favoured and graceful women, such
as thou art, we prefer to be their slaves, rather than they ours. If I
could take thee with me to the Earth, the laws there would set thee free
to do whatever pleased thee best. Wishest thou that I make thee free
here?"

She was evidently surprised when Zaphnath put this question to her. She
replied in a sincere and pleading tone, but her words astonished me,--

"Whatever the dark Man of Ice wisheth, I will do. I know not why he hath
asked what I desire. He speaketh of freedom, but I beseech him not to
send me back to that! I was born an unhappy and masterless maiden, and
many years I struggled and laboured for a miserable existence. I drove
asses, gleaned in the fields, and did the menial work of men. But I felt
I was fit for better, nobler things. At last, I heard that the armies of
the Pharaoh were coming to my land, and I took heed of my appearance,
put on my neatest feather clothing, and went to throw myself before the
soldiers. They were pleased with me, and brought me to this city, where
fortune favoured me, and Pharaoh, looking over all the women whom the
soldiers brought from the wars, chose me, with many others, to join his
household. And here in the Palace for a few years I have been happy and
well cared for. I pray thee do not turn me out again; do not degrade me
to the labour and misery of freedom. Even the beasts have masters! They
are housed, and fed, and cared for; why should I then be cast out and
left to drudge or beg?"

"Doth she mean this?" I exclaimed. "What then is the chief aim of women
in Kem? What is the highest state to which they may aspire?"

"'Tis a strange, simple question!" he answered. "There is no greater
blessing for a woman than to belong to the household of the Pharaoh.
Here they are delighted with constant music and dancing; their beauty is
cultivated and heightened by rich and tasteful clothing; and their
charms and graces may win for them a selection as one of the
one-and-twenty favourites of the Pharaoh. What they fear most is being
chosen and carried away by guests whose palaces and ways of life are
less luxurious than the Pharaoh's."

"Why then, as we have no palaces and wish no slaves, it were best to
return these maidens to the Pharaoh if they will be happier and better
cared for here than anywhere else in all the land of Kem," I said to
Zaphnath.

"This age is not ripe for the grand idea of freedom which dominates our
own," remarked the doctor, as we returned the grateful maidens to the
constant delights of an ornate and sensuous slavery.




CHAPTER VII

Parallel Planetary Life


I was sleeping soundly on my deliciously soft heap of downy pillows,
when in the early morning I was awakened by a pounding on the door of
the ante-chamber. As one always wakens from a sound sleep with his most
familiar language upon his tongue, I cried out in English, "Who's
there?" The doctor answered, wishing to be let in. I fumbled about in
the darkness sleepily, and opened the door, and he lighted two of my
gas-lamps with the one he carried. He looked rather tired and worn.

"I am possessed by a tyrant idea, which will not let me sleep," he said.
"I must get rid of it before morning. Come, get your senses about you,
and listen to me," he commanded, as I yawned and rubbed my fists into my
eyes, blinded by the sudden strong light.

"If you think I can sleep with it any better than you can, out with it,"
I answered.

"How does it happen that a young Hebrew is ruler over all these people?"
he demanded.

"Do you lie awake thinking up conundrums?" I ejaculated.

"On Earth, what notable Jews have been rulers over a great people not of
their own race?" he continued.

"Disraeli in England, Joseph in Egypt, and--well, that is all I can
think of just now."

"Perhaps that is enough. Egypt was the greatest grain-raising country in
Joseph's time, wasn't it?"

"Yes, of course," I answered. "And Joseph's rule began with seven years
of most wonderful crops."

"Zaphnath told us this morning that the seventh great crop, and the most
plenteous of all, is now growing," he interrupted.

"What has that to do with Joseph? We are not on Earth, but on Mars. Have
you been dreaming? Zaphnath is---- But, by the way, Joseph's Egyptian
name was Zaphnath-paaneah, meaning a revealer of secrets! When I heard
that name this morning, I thought it was strangely familiar. Pharaoh
called him that when he appointed him ruler, because he had interpreted
his dream," I said, just realizing the very peculiar coincidence.

"You are as good as a Bible!" cried the doctor. "Perhaps you can also
remember by which of Jacob's wives Joseph was born?"

"Of course I can. He was the first son of Rachel, the wife whom Jacob
really loved, and worked fourteen years to secure."

"But how could he have ten older brothers, if he was Rachel's first
son?" he demanded, a little perplexed.

"They were all the sons of her sister Leah and her handmaidens. Rachel
was barren all her life until Joseph was born," I explained.

"And Zaphnath said this morning that his mother was barren all the years
of her life that the Blue Star wandered. He also called himself revealer
of God's hidden things."

"Yes; and it struck me as peculiar at the time that he said of '_God's_'
not of '_the gods'_,'" I reflected. "Evidently he thinks there is but
one God. The whole matter is altogether peculiar."

"Here are the facts," replied the doctor. "Listen to them attentively.
We have dropped down into a civilization here upon Mars which coincides
in every important particular with that of the Ancient Egyptians on
Earth. They are great builders, erecters of monuments, raisers of grain,
polygamists, and they now have a young Hebrew ruler, corresponding in
every important respect with Joseph. We chance to have arrived during
the seventh year of plenty of Joseph's rule. Grain abounds; the soil
brings it forth 'by handfuls.' It is, 'as the sand of the sea, very
much,' and the Pharaoh, probably at the suggestion of his young ruler,
is storing it up----"

"By all the Patriarchs!" I interrupted. "They are running a wheat
corner, and I didn't know it! Go on, go on!"

"These are all very singular coincidences with a history which was
enacted many thousands of years ago on Earth. Now, how can you explain
their strange recurrence here?" he queried.

"How should I know? I haven't been lying awake! How do you explain
them?" I asked, full of interest.

"I have tossed on my pillows in there for three hours evolving a theory
for it. If it is correct, our opportunities here in Kem are simply
enormous. Now listen, and don't interrupt me. The Creator has given all
the habitable planets the same great problem of life to work out. Every
one of His worlds in its time passes through the same general history.
This runs parallel on all of them, but at a different speed on each. The
swift ones, nearest to the sun, have hurried through it, and may be
close upon the end. But this is a slow planet, whose year is almost
twice as long as the Earth's, and more than three times that of Venus.
The seasons pass sluggishly here, and history ripens slowly. This world
has only reached that early chapter in the story equivalent to Ancient
Egypt on Earth. We have forged far ahead of that, and on Venus they have
worked out far more of the story than we know anything about. If Mercury
is habitable yet, his people may have reached almost the end, but it is
most probable that life has not started there; when it does begin, it
will be worked out four times as rapidly as it has on Earth."

"Then a seven years' famine will begin here next year, and I am in
charge of the world's entire wheat supply!" I gasped, almost overwhelmed
by the speculative possibilities which this unfolded.

"It is not likely that there will be more than a general similarity of
the history. But Zaphnath has told us that this is the seventh year of
plenty. If the famine begins soon, it will be fair to suppose it will
for about seven crops. In its later developments the entire history may
change when the crucial period comes, and have a very different outcome.
But we are now almost at the beginnings of civilized history. Joseph,
the first Jew in Egypt, is a ruler here, and your entire race must
follow him hither, and pass through a miserable captivity. Even if you
remained here all your life, you would not last that long; but upon the
later doings of your people and their treatment of the Martian Messiah,
when He comes, depend the future conditions of this planet. Will it be
different then from the Earthly story? It is an extremely interesting
theory to follow to the end, but that would take thousands of years, and
we are concerned with the present."

"Doctor, if this theory be true, then we are nothing short of prophets
here!" I exclaimed, still struggling with the wonderful bearings of the
idea on our personal welfare.

"In a general way we are prophets, but Zaphnath has forestalled us on
immediate matters. Let us keep our own counsel as to any foreknowledge.
If we disclose it, we may suddenly lose our opportunities, and, besides,
we shall be powerless to change history here in any important respect."

"I might prevent Zaphnath from bringing all Israel down into Egypt, and
thus save them from that captivity," I exclaimed.

"Then you would forestall a Moses, and prevent the miraculous
deliverance of your people, and all the paternal care which God bestowed
upon them during that time. You will never be able to do this. Zaphnath
is in the way. He is headstrong and wilful. He is an active thinker and
a hard worker among a race of idlers, who live only to enjoy the fulness
of a rich land. He knows the greater activity and industry of his own
people, and he will wish to make them masters of this goodly land. I
will warrant that his head is full of plans at this very moment for
bringing his old father and all his race down here to give them
important places. See how readily he gave the keystone of the whole
situation to you. It will pay you better to keep on good terms with him.
Instead of trying to change the situation, let us make the best of it as
we find it."

"Well, I must say the present situation is attractive enough to me," I
said, and then inquired, "How many gold coins have you, Doctor?"

"I have only a hundred half eagles and a little silver coin," he
replied; "and I wish to be very sure of the correctness of my theory
before I undertake any speculations with that."

"Nonsense! What is money for, but to double, and then to double the
result again!" I exclaimed. "You work out this great theory, and then
fail to grasp its commercial importance to us. You and I will embark in
the grain business, with our entire stock of gold, the first thing in
the morning. We have iron enough to live on."

"I didn't come here to go into business," he answered. "I have a grand
scientific career to pursue, and last night's appointment puts me in
just the position to carry it out."

"Go ahead with it then, but invest your gold coins in my enterprise. I
will manage it all," I said, reaching for my belt under my pillow. "I
have here three hundred eagles and one hundred double eagles,--five
thousand dollars in all. I scarcely need your five hundred dollars, but
I don't wish to see you left out, and buying bread of me at a dollar a
loaf in a short time. Gold must have an enormous value here, considering
the small amount of it used as ornaments in the Pharaoh's household, and
the general currency of iron money. Three of these double eagles would
make a pair of ear pendants equal to his. I wonder how he would like to
have pure gold bracelets on all his women instead of those rough iron
things? And wheat must be cheaper than dirt after seven enormous crops.
I will buy all the grain he has to sell before to-morrow night! Even if
your theory is all wrong, we can't lose much."

"That is all very well, but we may as well be sure," he replied
cautiously. "You can find out much by a few discreet questions to
Zaphnath in the morning."

"The trouble about the whole matter is, that I will be obliged to do
business through him altogether until we learn this language. Come, you
must contribute your share. I have furnished the Hebrew, you must learn
the Kemish at once through those wise men. But I can't wait for that. I
will make Zaphnath teach me the necessary shop words and stock phrases
for carrying on the grain business to-morrow. I can't perform my new
duties unless he does that."

However, the doctor did not respond wholly to my new enthusiasm. He was
sleepy, and retired yawning to his own room to get the rest which had
evaded him. But I lay and tossed on the pillows, revolving a hundred
plans, and feeling anything but sleepy. Presently I thought of a scheme,
which would demonstrate whether there was anything in the doctor's
theory. I knew it would just suit him, and I sprang up and knocked
gently on his door, saying,--

"I have it, Doctor. Here is the very idea!" There was no answer, so I
knocked louder and listened. I heard him breathing heavily in deep
slumber. After all, the morrow would do for ideas; just then he needed
sleep.
