to a tryst through the shambles of a world.

Their shields were gone, their corselets dinted. Blood smeared their
mail; their swords were red. Their horned helmets showed the marks of
fierce strokes.

One spoke, he whose locks and beard were red as the blood on the sunlit
snow.

"Man of the raven locks," said he, "tell me your name, so that my
brothers in Vanaheim may know who was the last of Wulfhere's band to
fall before the sword of Heimdul."

"This is my answer," replied the black-haired warrior: "Not in Vanaheim,
but in Valhalla will you tell your brothers the name of Amra of
Akbitana."

Heimdul roared and sprang, and his sword swung in a mighty arc. Amra
staggered and his vision was filled with red sparks as the blade
shivered into bits of blue fire on his helmet. But as he reeled he
thrust with all the power of his great shoulders. The sharp point drove
through brass scales and bones and heart, and the red-haired warrior
died at Amra's feet.

Amra stood swaying, trailing his sword, a sudden sick weariness
assailing him. The glare of the sun on the snow cut his eyes like a
knife and the sky seemed shrunken and strangely far. He turned away from
the trampled expanse where yellow-bearded warriors lay locked with
red-haired slayers in the embrace of death. A few steps he took, and the
glare of the snow fields was suddenly dimmed. A rushing wave of
blindness engulfed him, and he sank down into the snow, supporting
himself on one mailed arm, seeking to shake the blindness out of his
eyes as a lion might shake his mane.

A silvery laugh cut through his dizziness, and his sight cleared slowly.
There was a strangeness about all the landscape that he could not place
or define--an unfamiliar tinge to earth and sky. But he did not think
long of this. Before him, swaying like a sapling in the wind, stood a
woman. Her body was like ivory, and save for a veil of gossamer, she was
naked as the day. Her slender bare feet were whiter than the snow they
spurned. She laughed, and her laughter was sweeter than the rippling of
silvery fountains, and poisonous with cruel mockery.

"Who are you?" demanded the warrior.

"What matter?" Her voice was more musical than a silver-stringed harp,
but it was edged with cruelty.

"Call up your men," he growled, grasping his sword. "Though my strength
fail me, yet they shall not take me alive. I see that you are of the
Vanir."

"Have I said so?"

He looked again at her unruly locks, which he had thought to be red. Now
he saw that they were neither red nor yellow, but a glorious compound
of both colors. He gazed spell-bound. Her hair was like elfin-gold,
striking which, the sun dazzled him. Her eyes were neither wholly blue
nor wholly grey, but of shifting colors and dancing lights and clouds of
colors he could not recognize. Her full red lips smiled, and from her
slim feet to the blinding crown of her billowy hair, her ivory body was
as perfect as the dream of a god. Amra's pulse hammered in his temples.

"I can not tell," said he, "whether you are of Vanaheim and mine enemy,
or of Asgard and my friend. Far have I wandered, from Zingara to the Sea
of Vilayet, in Stygia and Kush, and the country of the Hyrkanians; but a
woman like you I have never seen. Your locks blind me with their
brightness. Not even among the fairest daughters of the Aesir have I
seen such hair, by Ymir!"

"Who are you to swear by Ymir?" she mocked. "What know you of the gods
of ice and snow, you who have come up from the south to adventure among
strangers?"

"By the dark gods of my own race!" he cried in anger. "Have I been
backward in the sword-play, stranger or no? This day I have seen four
