
At the home of Gor he found Loah, slim and beautiful as always. She
had just come from the bath. The creamy texture of her skin had
flushed to rosiness in the cold fountain. Her jeweled breast-plates
sparkled. A cloth that shone like silk enwrapped her hips in soft
folds of pale rose and hung in an absurd little skirt. She might have
been the spirit of youth itself, a vision of loveliness; yet Rawson
felt an almost uncontrollable desire to take her in his two hands and
shake her when she bowed humbly and treated his request as if it were
a royal command.

"To walk with Dean-Rah-Sun! But certainly, if that is his wish!"

In silence they left the village and walked toward the island's end
where Rawson had emerged from the under-world.

The island was not large. On either side were low hills, mere knolls,
of white crystal, where, in every hollow, men and women were
harvesting strange grain. Between the two ranges of hills were flat
fields of green, reaching out toward the point some three miles
distant.

Rawson made no attempt to talk as he led Loah along the roadway that
cleft the green expanse in half. Other workers were there, and Dean
acknowledged their smiling, worshipful salutations. He did not want to
talk now; he wanted to find some place where he and Loah could be by
themselves. There was so much he must tell her. He must try to make
her understand. And after that, perhaps, with her help, he could find
some way to be of aid to his own beleaguered people--something he
could do even single-handed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Where the fields ended, and from there on toward the point, had been
an expanse of glistening white. Rawson remembered it plainly. So now,
when he found it a place of flaming crimson, he stared in amazement.
Across the full width of the valley a brilliant carpet had spread
itself, a covering of flowers. A blossoming vine had sprung up in the
few days since his arrival and had woven a thick mat of vegetation.

He wanted to go on out to the extreme end of the point. There they
would be alone. But Loah objected when he started to enter the red
expanse.

"No!" she said in quick alarm. "We must not cross. It is the Place of
Death. We will go around it, following the hills."

"We crossed it the other day when it was a plain of white salt,"
argued Rawson.

"But now the flowers have come. Even now it might be safe--but when
they die then nothing can cross here and live."

Loah could not give the reason. Dean gathered from what she could tell
that a gas of some sort was formed, perhaps by the decomposing
vegetation. Perhaps it combined with the sparkling white shale. But
all this was of no consequence compared with his own problems. He did
not argue the matter but followed where Loah led.

"Where is the shell?" he asked, when they stood at last near the open
mouth of the great shaft into which the air was rushing. "Where is the
machine that we came here in? I wanted to see it--thought perhaps I
could use it later on.

"The jana--the shell, as you call it--is safely locked in a great room
of Gor's house. Not all understand its use; it must be kept away from
careless hands."

       *       *       *       *       *

Then Rawson put that thought aside. He took Loah's hand and led her
some distance away toward the shore. Beyond a rocky, crystalline mass,
where fragments had been heaped, the sound of the rushing air was
lost; only the flashing emerald waves whispered softly on the shore
beyond. And there in that quiet place, under the brilliance of the
central sun, Rawson told her of himself and of the great outer world.
He told her of his work, of everything that had happened, of how he
was only one of many millions of men and women like, and yet unlike,
the People of the Light. And at last he knew that she understood.

He had spoken softly, though he knew there were no other listening
ears. Loah had been seated before him on one of the white blocks. She
rose to her feet. Her eyes were troubled. Vaguely he sensed behind
them a conflict of emotions.

"I must think," she said. "I will walk by myself for a time; then I
will return."

Rawson reached for her hand. "You're a good sport," he said huskily.
Then he felt the trembling of that hand in his; and, as if it had been
an electric current, his own body responded.

Shaken in every nerve, his poise deserted him. He could not think
clearly. He knew only that that horrible loneliness was somehow gone.
By force of will alone he kept his arms from reaching out toward that
radiant figure. Instead, he raised her hand toward his lips.

She withdrew it sharply. "No," she said, "our Wise Ones were mistaken.
For years they have listened to the mountain; they have written down
its words. Slowly they have learned their meaning. A kiss, they said,
was a symbol of love in your world. They were mistaken--as was I. Now
I will walk alone for a time."

       *       *       *       *       *

Rawson let her go. She seemed hardly looking where she went; her eyes
were downcast. She moved slowly around the sheltering rock and on
toward the level ground and the rushing winds of the shaft.

His own thoughts were in a whirl, too confused with emotion for clear
thinking. "A symbol of love!" And back there in that cave world she
had pressed her lips to his hand. Then they had come here, and he had
been transformed to a god, a being who could never have more than an
impersonal affection for one as humble as she.

The rising flood of happiness within him was abruptly frozen, changed
to something which filled his veins with ice. For, from beyond the
crystal barrier that hid Loah from his view, her voice had come in one
single cry of terror. Then, "Dean!" she called. "Dean San!" But by
then, Rawson was throwing himself madly around the barricade of rocks.

Like a sensitized plate when the camera's shutter is opened a merest
fraction of a second, Rawson's brain took the imprint of every detail
that was there. The black mouth of the shaft, and, on the rock beside
it, something metallic, brilliantly gleaming--a flame-thrower! Beyond
the pit was Loah, half crouching, her slim body tense as if checked in
mid-flight. She had been running toward him, coming to warn him. And
between her and the shaft, his back turned squarely toward Rawson, was
the hideous figure of a mole-man, one of the Reds! His grotesque,
pointed head was bent forward toward the girl; his arms were reaching,
the long fingers like talons.

       *       *       *       *       *

Rawson did not know when he called the girl's name. But he knew the
instant that he had done it and he knew it was a mistake. He should
have crept quietly, seized the weapon--and now his feet tore madly on
the white rock floor as he raced toward the shining implement of
death. From beyond, the red figure, whirling at his call, leaped
wildly for the same prize.

The taloned hands were on the flame-thrower first. Rawson saw the red
body straighten, saw the weapon swing, glistening in air, swinging
over and down. From its tip green fire made a straight line of light.

He leaped in under the descending flame, felt the nozzle of the
projector as it crashed upon his right shoulder and the green fire
spat harmlessly beyond his back. That last spring had thrown him
bodily against the red monster. They were both knocked off balance for
a moment, then Rawson caught himself and swung with his left. He set
himself in that fraction of a second, felt the first movement of that
shining, crook-necked tube that meant the green flame was being drawn
back where it could reach him; then his fist crashed into a yielding
jaw.

Not five feet from the brink of that nearly bottomless shaft he stood
wavering in the rush of air. He knew that the ugly red figure had
toppled sideways, that the weapon had fallen with him, the blast
swinging upward in a vertical, hissing arc--then man and weapon had
dropped silently into the pit.

He was alone, save for the girl, who, her eyes wide with horror, threw
herself upon him and clung trembling, while she murmured
incomprehensible endearments in her own tongue wherein his own name
was mingled: "Dean, dear! My own Dean-San!"

But the mole-men! Dean Rawson's mind was aghast with the horror of it:
the mole-men had now found the way.




CHAPTER XXI

_Suicide?_


Gordon Smith, sometimes known as Smithy, was to remember little of the
happenings that followed the crash of the big Army dreadnought. It was
Colonel Culver who dragged him from the pilot-room wreckage, Colonel
Culver and one of the pilots whom he had restored to consciousness.
They lowered Smithy carefully to the ground, then explored the rest of
the ship.

Their hands were red when they returned--and empty. Captain Farrell
and the rest of the crew had ceased to be units of the United States
Army Air Force; henceforth they would be only names on a casualty list
grown ominously long.

"Stood plumb on her tail," said the pilot, staring at the wreck. "They
hit us just once, and the left wing crumpled like cardboard. Last I
remember was pulling her up off the trees." He stared at the mass of
twisted metal and the center section where the wing had torn loose; it
stood upright, almost vertical, resting on the crushed tail.

"Funny," said the pilot in the same flat, level tone that seemed the
only voice he had since that last pull on a whipping wheel. "Damn
funny--mostly we get it first up there."

"Come here!" snapped Colonel Culver. "Lend a hand here with Smith;
we've got to carry him. And don't talk so loud--those red devils will
be out here any minute."

       *       *       *       *       *

Smithy was taking a more active interest in his surroundings when he
sat a week later in the Governor's office.

"There's a detachment moving in there from the south," said the
Governor. "We're going to follow your advice, to some extent at least.
We're sending troops to Tonah Basin. If the top of that dead crater is
closed they will blast it open; then a scouting party's going down.
Call it a reconnaissance, call it suicide--one name's just as good as
the other. Colonel Culver, here, is going. But you know the lay of the
land there; you could be of great help. How about it?"

"Are you asking me?" Smithy inquired.

He stood up, flexed his arms, while he grinned at Colonel Culver.
"Hinges all greased and working! As a flier, Colonel, you're a darn
good first-aid man. I'll say that! When do we start?"

Which explains why Smithy, some time later, hidden under the grotesque
disguise of a gas mask, was one of fifty, similarly attired, who stood
waiting about the black open maw in the great cinder-floored crater of
one of the peaks that surrounded Tonah Basin.

Night. And the big stars that hang so low in the black desert sky
should have been brilliant. They were lost now in the white glare that
streamed upward. The crater was a fortress. Around the circle of the
entire rim, on the inner side of the rough crags, men of the 49th
Field Artillery stood by their guns. Lookouts trailed their telephone
wire to the higher peaks, where they perched as shapeless as huddled
owls; and, like owls, their eyes swept the mountain's slopes and the
desert at its base, where the searchlight crews played long fingers of
light incessantly--and where nothing moved.

But the empty silence of the desert was misleading, as the men in the
crater knew.

       *       *       *       *       *

They had begun arriving with the earliest light of morning. Smithy had
come in with the first lot. And when the first big auto-gyro transport
had settled and risen again from the crater, another had taken its
place, and another and many others after that.

That first crew had been a machine-gun battalion, and Smithy had
smiled with grim satisfaction at the unhurried way in which their
young captain had snapped them into position without the loss of a
second. And their guns, Smithy noticed, were trained inward upon the
crater itself.

Inside that protecting circle the other transports landed one by one:
men, mobile artillery, ammunition cases, big searchlights, and a
dozen engine-generator outfits. The last transports brought in strange
cargo--short sections of aluminum struts with bolts and splice plates
to join them together: blocks, and tackle and sheaves; then spools of
steel alloy cable at least ten miles in length.

From the last ship they took a hoisting engine and an assortment of
aluminum plates and bars which were bolted together by waiting
mechanics, and which grew magically to a crude but exceedingly
substantial elevator, on which fifty men, by considerable crowding,
could stand.

Only a floor of bolted plates, with corner posts and diagonal bracing
and a single guard rail running around the four sides--but for the
first time Smithy began to feel that he was actually going down; that
this was not all make-believe, or a futile gesture. He would stand on
that platform; he would go down where Dean had gone. And then.... But
what would come after he knew he could never imagine.

       *       *       *       *       *

A little crane swung the first metal work into position above the
shaft. One end of the assembled framework of aluminum alloy dragged
loosely on the ground; the other end swung out and projected above the
shaft, swayed for an instant--and then came the first direct knowledge
of the enemy's presence. The end of a metal strut, though nothing
visible was touching it, grew suddenly white hot, sagged, then broke
into a shower of molten, dazzling drops that rained down into the pit.

"Good," said Colonel Culver, who was standing beside Smithy. "Now we
know they are there--but it means we will have to go down there with
our gas masks on."

To Smithy it was not immediately apparent how gas masks were to
protect them from the deadly invisible ray. He got the connection of
thoughts when a bomb was slid over the edge. The dull thud of the
explosion quickly came back to them.

"They popped that one off in the air--hit it with their heat ray,"
said a cheerful voice beside them. "But the phosgene will keep on
going down. Give them another!"

The interval this time was longer. "Now for a dirty crack," said the
cheerful voice. "Time this one."

       *       *       *       *       *

A youngster nearby snapped a stop-watch as the bomb was released. He
held some printed tables in his hands. Odd receivers from which no
wire led were clamped over his ears. This time the dull thud was long
in coming. It was hardly perceptible when the young man with the stop
watch announced: "Fifty thousand feet, sir."

"Give 'em another. Time it again." A second high explosive bomb was
released.

"Fifty thousand feet, sir."

"Good. That measures it. And those last bombs have knocked the devil
out of whatever machinery they've got down there. Now we'll give them
a real taste of gas. Two of the green ones there, men. Put ten miles
of cable on the drums. Get that hoisting frame into place."

But night had come, though searchlights outside the crater and
floodlights within had robbed the night of its terror, when Smithy,
with Culver beside him, climbed over the guard rail of the lift that
hung waiting just over the pit.

A gas mask covered his entire face. Through its round eye plates he
looked at the others who crowded about him. Grotesque, almost
ludicrous--twenty men, armed with clumsy sub-machine guns; the others
would follow later. A searchlight was on a tripod at the center, and a
spool of electric cable.

The light sizzled into life and swung slowly about. Then the platform
jarred, and the spool of cable began slowly to unwind. Beside him
Colonel Culver was returning the salute of an officer outside on the
ashy ground. Smithy raised his hand, but the brink of that pit had
moved swiftly up--there was nothing before him but a glassy wall.

Reconnaissance? Suicide? One word was as good as another. But he was
going down--down where Dean Rawson had gone--down where there was a
debt to be paid.




CHAPTER XXII

_The Red-Flowering Vine_


"Rotan," said Gor slowly, sadly, "was wrong. His vision was not the
truth. The Red Ones have come. And now--we die."

"Without a fight?" Rawson demanded incredulously.

"We are not a fighting people. We have no weapons. We can only die."

Rawson turned to Loah. They were inside the mountain, and the servants
of the mountain, with terror and dismay written plainly on their
faces, were gathered about. "At the Lake of Fire," said Rawson, "when
you saved me, there was an explosion and clouds of white fumes. What
was it?"

"It was like water," Loah said. "We found it deep inside the earth in
a place where it is very cold. When warmed it turns to white clouds.
We threw a flask of it on the hot rocks, hoping to reach you while
they could not see."--she paused and shook her head slowly--"but we
can get no more. The Pathway of Light is closed to us, now that the
