
A few clods of earth cascaded after them as the monster above dug its
great splay feet into the ground and checked its rush in time to keep
from falling after them. Then the top of the pit slowly darkened as a
covering of some sort slid across it. They were in a prison as
profoundly quiet and utterly black as a tomb.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Dorn," shouted Joyce. "Are you all right?"

"Yes," came a voice in the near darkness. "And you?"

"I'm still in one piece as far as I can feel." There was a splashing
noise. He waded toward it and in a moment his outstretched hand
touched the professor's shoulder.

"This is a fine mess," he observed shakily. "We got away from those
tooth-lined jaws, all right, but I'm wondering if we're much better
off than we would have been if we hadn't escaped."

"I'm wondering the same thing." Wichter's voice was strained. "Did you
see the way the top of the pit closed above us? That means we're in a
trap. And a most ingenious trap it is, too! The roof of it is
camouflaged until it looks exactly like the rest of the trail floor.
The water in here is just shallow enough to let large animals break
their necks when they fall in and just deep enough to preserve small
animals--like ourselves--alive. We're in the hands of some sort of
reasoning, intelligent beings, Joyce!"

"In that case," said Joyce with a shudder, "we'd better do our best to
get out of here!"

But this was found to be impossible. They couldn't climb up out of the
pit, and nowhere could they feel any openings in the walls. Only
smooth, impenetrable stone met their questing fingers.

"It looks as though we're in to stay," said Joyce finally. "At least
until our Zeudian hosts, whatever kind of creatures they may be, come
and take us out. What'll we do then? Sail in and die fighting? Or go
peaceably along with them--assuming we aren't killed at once--on the
chance that we can make a break later?"

"I'd advise the latter," answered Wichter. "There is a small animal on
our own planet whose example might be a good one for us to follow.
That's the 'possum." He stopped abruptly, and gripped Joyce's arm.

From the opposite side of the pit came a grating sound. A crack of
greenish light appeared, low down near the water. This widened jerkily
as though a door were being hoisted by some sort of pulley
arrangement. The walls of the pit began to glow faintly with
reflected light.

"Down," breathed Wichter.

       *       *       *       *       *

Noiselessly they let themselves sink into the water until they were
floating, eyes closed and motionless, on the surface. Playing dead to
the best of their ability, they waited for what might happen next.

They heard a splashing near the open rock door. The splashing neared them,
and high-pitched hissing syllables came to their ears--variegated sounds
that resembled excited conversation in some unknown language.

Joyce felt himself touched by something, and it was all he could do to
keep from shouting aloud and springing to his feet at the contact.

He'd had no idea, of course, what might be the nature of their
captors, but he had imagined them as man-like, to some extent at
least. And the touch of his hand, or flipper, or whatever it was,
indicated that they were not!

They were cold-blooded, reptilian things, for the flesh that had
touched him was cold; as clammy and repulsive as the belly of a dead
fish. So repulsive was that flesh that, when he presently felt himself
lifted high up and roughly carried, he shuddered in spite of himself
at the contact.

Instantly the thing that bore him stopped. Joyce held his breath. He
felt an excruciating, stabbing pain in his arm, after which the
journey through the water was resumed. Stubbornly he kept up his
pretence of lifelessness.

The splashing ceased, and he heard flat wet feet slapping along on dry
rock, indicating that they had emerged from the pit. Then he sank into
real unconsciousness.

The next thing he knew was that he was lying on smooth, bare rock in a
perfect bedlam of noises. Howls and grunts, snuffling coughs and
snarls beat at his ear-drums. It was as though he had fallen into a
vast cage in which were hundreds of savage, excited animals--animals,
however, that in spite of their excitement and ferocity were
surprisingly motionless, for he heard no scraping of claws, or padding
of feet.

Cautiously he opened his eyes....

       *       *       *       *       *

He was in a large cave, the walls of which were glowing with greenish,
phosphorescent light. Strewn about the floor were seemingly dead
carcasses of animals. And what carcasses there were! Blubber-coated
things that looked like giant tadpoles, gazelle-like creatures with a
single, long slim horn growing from delicate small skulls, four-legged
beasts and six-legged ones, animals with furry hides and crawlers with
scaled coverings--several hundred assorted specimens of the smaller
life of Zeud lay stretched out in seeming lifelessness.

But they were not dead, these bizarre beasts of another world. They
lived, and were animated with the frenzied fear of trapped things.
Joyce could see the tortured heaving of their furred and scaled sides
as they panted with terror. And from their throats issued the
outlandish noises he had heard. They were alive enough--only they
seemed unable to move!

There was nothing in his range of vision that might conceivably be the
beings that had captured them, so Joyce started to lift his head and
look around at the rest of the cavern. He found that he could not
move. He tried again, and his body was as unresponsive as a log. In
fact, he couldn't feel his body at all! In growing terror, he
concentrated all his will on moving his arm. It was as limp as a rag.

He relaxed, momentarily in the grip of stark, blind panic. He was as
helpless as the howling things around him! He was numbed, completely
paralyzed into immobility!

The professor's voice--a weak, uncertain voice--sounded from behind
him. "Joyce! Joyce!"

He found that he could talk, that the paralysis that gripped the rest
of his muscles had not extended to the vocal cords. "Dorn! Thank God
you're alive! I couldn't see you, and I thought--"

"I'm alive, but that's about all," said Wichter. "I--I can't move."

"Neither can I. We've been drugged in some manner--just as all the
other animals in here have been drugged. I must have got my dose in
the pit. I was cut, or stabbed, in the arm."

       *       *       *       *       *

Joyce stopped talking as he suddenly heard steps, like human footsteps
yet weirdly different--flap-flapping sounds as though awkward flippers
were slapping along the rock floor toward them. The steps stopped
within a few feet of them; then, after what seemed hours, they sounded
again, this time in front of him.

He opened his eyes, cautiously, barely moving his eyelids, and saw at
last, in every hideous detail, one of the super-beasts that had
captured Wichter and himself.

It was a horrible cartoon of a man, the thing that stood there in the
greenish glow of the cave. Nine or ten feet high, it loomed; hairless,
with a faintly iridescent, purplish hide. A thick, cylindrical trunk
sloped into a neck only a little smaller than the body itself. Set on
this was a bony, ugly head that was split clear across by lipless
jaws. There was no nose, only slanted holes like the nostrils of an
animal; and over these were set pale, expressionless, pupil-less eyes.
The arms were short and thick and ended in bifurcated lumps of flesh
like swollen hands encased in old-fashioned mittens. The legs were
also grotesquely short, and the feet mere shapeless flaps.

It was standing near one of the smaller animals, apparently regarding
it closely. Observing it himself, Joyce saw that it was moving a
little. As though coming out of a coma, it was raising its bizarre
head and trying to get on its feet.

Leisurely the two-legged monster bent over it. Two long fangs gleamed
in the lipless mouth. These were buried in the neck of the reviving
beast--and instantly it sank back into immobility.

Having reduced it to helplessness--the monster ate it! The lipless
jaws gaped widely. The shapeless hands forced in the head of the
animal. The throat muscles expanded hugely: and in less than a minute
it had swallowed its living prey as a boa-constrictor swallows a
monkey.

       *       *       *       *       *

Joyce closed his eyes, feeling weak and nauseated. He didn't open them
again till long after he had heard the last of the awkward, flapping
footsteps.

"Could you see it?" asked Wichter, who was lying so closely behind him
that he couldn't observe the monstrous Zeudian. "What did it do? What
was it like?"

Joyce told him of the way the creature had fed. "We are evidently in
their provision room," he concluded. "They keep some of their food
alive, it seems.... Well, it's a quick death."

"Tell me more about the way the other animal moved, just before it was
eaten."

"There isn't much to tell," said Joyce wearily. "It didn't move long
after those fangs were sunk into it."

"But don't you see!" There was sudden hope in Wichter's voice. "That
means that the effect of the poison, which is apparently injected by
those fangs, wears off after a time. And in that case--"

"In that case," Joyce interjected, "we'd have only an unknown army of
ten-foot Zeudians, the problem of finding a way to the surface of the
ground again, and the lack of any kind of weapons, to keep us from
escaping!"

"We're not quite weaponless, though," the professor whispered back.
"Over in a corner there's a pile of the long, slender horns that
sprout from the heads of some of these creatures. Evidently the
Zeudians cut them out, or break them off before eating that
particular type of animal. They'd be as good as lances, if we could
get hold of them."

       *       *       *       *       *

Joyce said nothing, but hope began to beat in his own breast. He had
noticed a significant happening during the age-long hours in the
commissary cave. Most of the Zeudians had entered from the direction
of the pit. But one had come in through an opening in the opposite
side. And this one had blinked pale eyes as though dazzled from bright
sunlight--and was bearing some large, woody looking tubers that seemed
to have been freshly uprooted! There was a good chance, thought Joyce,
that that opening led to a tunnel up to the world above!

He drew a deep breath--and felt a dim pain in his back, caused by the
cramping position in which he had lain for so long.

He could have shouted aloud with the thrill of that discovery. This
was the first time he had felt his body at all! Did it mean that the
effect of the poison was wearing off--that it wasn't as lastingly
paralyzing to his earthly nerve centers as to those of Zeudian
creatures around them? He flexed the muscles of his leg. The leg moved
a fraction of an inch.

"Dorn!" he called softly, "I can move a little! Can you?"

"Yes," Wichter answered, "I've been able to wriggle my fingers for
several minutes. I think I could walk in an hour or two."

"Then pray for that hour or two. It might mean our escape!" Joyce told
him of the seldom used entrance that he thought led to the open air.
"I'm sure it goes to the surface, Dorn. Those woody looking tubers had
been freshly picked."

       *       *       *       *       *

Three of the two-legged monsters came in just then. They relapsed into
lifeless silence. There was a horrible moment as the three paused over
them longer than any of the others had. Was it obvious that the
effects of the numbing poison was wearing off? Would they be bitten
again--or eaten?

The Zeudians finally moved on, hissing and clicking to each other.
Eventually the cold-blooded things fed, and dragged lethargically out
of the cave in the direction of the pit.

With every passing minute Joyce could feel life pouring back into his
numbed body. His cramped muscles were in agony now--a pain that gave
him fierce pleasure. At last, risking observation, he lifted his head
and then struggled to a sitting position and looked around.

No Zeudian was in sight. Evidently they were too sure of their poison
glands to post a guard over them. He listened intently, and could hear
no dragging footsteps. He turned to Wichter, who had followed his
example and was sitting up, feebly rubbing his body to restore
circulation.

"Now's our chance," he whispered. "Stand up and walk a little to
steady your legs, while I go over and get us a couple of those sharp
horns. Then we'll see where that entrance of mine goes!"

He walked to the pile of bones and horns in the corner and selected
two of the longest and slimmest of the ivory-like things. Just as he
had rejoined Wichter he heard the sound with which he was now so
grimly familiar--flapping, awkward footsteps. Wildly he signaled the
professor. They dropped in their tracks, just as the approaching
monster stumped into the cave.

       *       *       *       *       *

For an instant he dared hope that their movement had gone unobserved,
but his hope was rudely shattered. He heard a sharp hiss: heard the
Zeudian flap toward them at double-quick time. Abandoning all
pretense, he sprang to his feet just as the thing reached him, its
fangs gleaming wickedly in the greenish light.

He leaped to the side, going twenty feet or more with the press of his
Earth muscles against the reduced gravity. The creature rushed on
toward the professor. That game little man crouched and awaited its
onslaught. But Joyce had sprung back again before the two could clash.

He raised the long horn and plunged it into the smooth, purplish back.
Again and again he drove it home, as the monster writhed under him. It
had enormous vitality. Gashed and dripping, it yet struggled on,
attempting to encircle Joyce with its stubby arms. Once it succeeded,
and he felt his ribs crack as it contracted its powerful body. But a
final stroke finished the savage fight. He got up and, with an
incoherent cry to Wichter, raced toward the opening on which they
pinned their hopes of reaching the upper air.

Hissing cries and the thudding of many feet came to them just as they
reached the arched mouth of the passage. But the cries, and the
constant pandemonium of the paralysed animals died behind them as they
bounded along the tunnel.

       *       *       *       *       *

They emerged at last into the sunlight they had never expected to see
again, beside one of the great lavender trees. They paused an instant
to try to get their bearings.

"This way," panted Joyce as he saw, on a hard-packed path ahead of
them, one of the trail-marks he had blazed.

Down the trail they raced, toward their space shell. Fortunately they
met none of the tremendous animals that infested the jungles; and
their journey to the clearing in which the shell was lying was
accomplished without accident.

"We're safe now," gasped Wichter, as they came in sight of the bare
lava patch. "We can outrun them five feet to their one!"

They burst into the clearing--and halted abruptly. Surrounding the
shell, stumping curiously about it and touching it with their
shapeless hands, were dozens of the Zeudians.

"My God!" groaned Joyce. "There must be at least a hundred of them!
We're lost for certain now!"

They stared with hopeless longing at the vehicle that, if only they
could reach it, could carry them back to Earth. Then they turned to
each other and clasped hands, without a word. The same thought was in
the mind of each--to rush at the swarming monsters and fight till they
were killed. There was absolutely no chance of winning through to the
shell, but it was infinitely better to die fighting than be swallowed
alive.

       *       *       *       *       *

So engrossed were the Zeudians by the strange thing that had fallen
into their province, that Joyce and Wichter got within a hundred feet
of them before they turned their pale eyes in their direction. Then,
baring their fangs, they streamed toward the Earth men, just as the
pursuing Zeudians entered the clearing from the jungle trail.

The two prepared to die as effectively as possible. Each grasped his
lace-like horn tightly. The professor mechanically adjusted his
glasses more firmly on his nose....

With his move, the narrowing circle of Zeudians halted. A violent
clamor broke out among them. They glared at the two, but made no
further step toward them.

"What in the world--" began Wichter bewilderedly.

"Your glasses!" Joyce shouted, gripping his shoulder. "When you moved
them, they all stopped! They must be afraid of them, somehow. Take
them clear off and see what happens."

Wichter removed his spectacles, and swung them in his hand, peering
