Schools could take care of that better than people could.

She snuggled against him.

"What say, Man?" she said: "What's eatin yuh?"

He did not know how to answer. He tried to talk, tried to break through,
to clarify.

"What's it, huh?" he nearly pleaded. "All this, I mean. Like what's it
for?"

She stretched out on the grass and looked at him a moment.

"Search me," she ventured. "I guess maybe what you need's a Bed."

He guessed she was right.

       *       *       *       *       *

They went back to the mansion through the twilight, and established
themselves in one of the rooms. The soft curtains were drawn, the Bed
was large, the sheets were silky and creamy. She reclined on her back,
and the mattress moulded itself perfectly to her form.

He lay down beside her, and caressed her. She clasped him tight to
her breast. And he was clasped also by an invisible but very palpable
field of energy, that directed his movements and charged him with an
inexhaustible and ceaseless power. He held her tight, and the force
entwined them. They were one throbbing ecstasy, and only at the very
last endurable moment were they given release.

Then the Bed slowly soothed them, massaged them, and invigorated them
once again. Throughout the night it continued, activity and repose,
until toward the dawn he fell into a dead sleep, which lasted until the
following morning.

He did not know that he dreamed. He did not consciously remember any
of it. He only knew, as he ate his ample breakfast, that he was not so
thoroughly at peace as he should have been. And he knew that it was
useless to ask the Woman, or one of the Girls.

But the Woman's androids did well by her, it seemed. Maybe he had better
go home to Meg.

"What the square, anyhow?" he said to himself. A little more rest in his
familiar surroundings, and he would be all right. A Bed always took a
lot out of a man. He arose to go.

"Goodbye, dear," the Woman said, as he came to the head of the main
path. She was serene and smiling.

He adjusted his tunic, and smiled in reply. Yes sir, the old world was
in good shape, just like always. He signaled for a Car. The bright ocean
again passed by him, and the broad sands, and he dozed.

       *       *       *       *       *

The dreams were more importunate, this time. When he awoke, with a blank
start, the Car was cruising aimlessly. He looked around, and broke into
a sweat. There was a button he had to push, somewhere, there was a
handle he had to take hold of. He stammered out "Stop--now!" and stepped
onto the curb. The car sped away, to another summons. He was before an
Emporium, but he did not enter. Instead, he did an unprecedented thing:
he went for a walk, through the streets of the City. This was not done,
and none of the occupants of the passing cars observed him.

He was really wondering, now. Could something be wrong? This
possibility, with all its full horror, had never entered his mind
before; indeed, he did not even have the conceptions of rightness
and wrongness, and yet there was the inescapable word, "wrong". His
agitation increased. He found himself with the hardly formulated idea
that a school was a place where one learned something, and he did not
know what this could mean.

He thought of the School that he had attended. All the young people of
the District of Fransco attended it: they had been told that there were
other Schools, in other districts, and that they were all the same.
He had believed it, and forgotten about it. What did it matter? One
district was as good as another. He had never travelled. He knew a Man
who had gone to the District of Shasta, but he had not been interested
in hearing about it. He remembered that the Man had said it was all the
same thing, not worth the bother. One had everything he needed, in his
own place. But now it seemed that he needed something more, something
nobody had ever heard of. He walked on, thinking about the School.

Everybody was born in a House, and kept there till he was weaned, and
could walk. Then he was taken to the School. There he grew up in an
atmosphere of Group Living, and was gradually showed everything that he
needed--everything that there was. The hes and shes played together;
they were instructed in the Ways of Life.

As they grew older, they were taken around the City. They were showed
the places that the Cars could take them; they were showed how to push
the buttons. Of course the robots did a perfect job of instruction.
There were Kitchens, in which one could eat. There were parks and
gardens, in which one could stroll and lounge. There were Emporiums, in
which one could get clothes and things. It was all--as it was.

When one reached puberty, he was taken from the School, and given a
Pad. There he lived, listening to the soft music that came from the
walls, eating and sleeping. And doing. He selected his android from an
Emporium, and did her as he pleased. She was his company, the Warmth of
his Pad. She shopped in the Emporium for him, she fixed him cozy little
meals, and brought him his pipe or his cigar. She spread the depilatory
cream upon his face in the morning, and wiped, with so soft a touch, his
beard away; and she bathed him, in the scented waters.

       *       *       *       *       *

He remembered that after a year or two, he had felt almost restless.
From his touch, Meg had understood. She had whispered "House" to him,
and he had gone out and instructed a Car. That had been his first
experience of a Girl. He supposed that it had been the same with the
others. He had never inquired. In the garden bower the idea of children
had come to him, and his mind had been at rest. He had not tried a Bed
until the fifth or sixth time. He had, he supposed, taken for granted
that the Girls lived in the same way that he did. They had their own
androids, their own Pads. They never associated with the Men, except in
a House. Men got together sometimes, and ate and drank, and had android
orgies; no doubt the Girls did likewise.

With a great effort, aided by hints from what he could remember of Life,
he pieced an idea together, not knowing what he had done. Of course
human copulation was too dangerous: it might make one unhappy. He had
learned, in the bowers, that Man and Girl were not of the same temper,
and that their union was not always perfect. Somehow it was better, even
so, but it was too difficult. It tended to be--painful.

He did not know the word. He did not know any of the words for these
strange thoughts of his, but they were now very palpable to him, and
very urgent. His android was his, and was never dissatisfied; and so,
neither was he. It was a perfect and complete system. And what was
happening to him? The word "happiness" came upon him, and he shuddered,
almost in terror. What did it mean? Too many things were happening, all
at once.

       *       *       *       *       *

He turned into a street, and stopped. He had never seen it before.
But why should this disturb him? The District was a big place. But he
thought he had better get out of this street. Maybe pick up another
