when some presence of mind returned to Clee.

"Run, Jim!" he yelled, moving away. "It's coming straight down!"

Wilson came out of his daze and the two sprinted wildly for the path
that led down the spur on which their camp was located. They had not
made more than fifty yards when they heard a dull thud, and, turning,
saw the great sphere resting on the ground with a slight rocking
motion that quickly ceased.

A gully cut into the trail ahead, and when they reached it Clee
grabbed his partner's arm and pulled him off to one side, where,
panting with their sudden exertion, they wormed up to the brow and
peeped over at their strange visitor.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sphere stood in the starlight on the very spot they had been
occupying when they first saw it. Right in their campfire it lay--a
great, dark-red crystal shape perhaps fifty feet in diameter, whose
surface sparkled with innumerable facets. It rested quietly on the
ground, as if oblivious of the two routed men breathlessly watching it
from a short distance. No ports or variations of any kind were visible
to mar its star-reflecting sides.

"It must be some new kind of dirigible!" murmured Jim; "but why did it
go and pick on us for its midnight call!"

"It's a space ship from Mars," answered Clee with a serious face.
"They heard you, and're coming to take you for your ride. See?" he
added quickly, pointing.

A large door was opening in the side of the sphere, and the
illumination within threw a bright beam of amber-colored light in
their direction. A metallic ramp slid out and angled down to the
ground.

Breathlessly the two men waited to see who would emerge, but a long
time went by without their catching the slightest sign of life within.
The face of Clee's wrist watch was fluorescing brilliantly now, and
moment by moment the weird glow was increasing. Jim stirred nervously.

"I don't mind telling you, I'm scared," he said.

"Aw, they won't make you walk back," consoled Clee; but he was scared
himself. Why didn't something happen? Why didn't someone come out of
the ship?

Jim thought he heard a noise, and touched Clee on the shoulder,
pointing to a place on the trail down which they had come a few
minutes before. Clee looked, and as he did so the hair on the back of
his neck stood up. For the bushes along the side of the path were
moving as if they were being brushed aside by someone in
passing--someone making a straight line to the spot where they lay
concealed. And no one was there!

"Can they be invisible?" breathed Jim, every pore in his body
prickling.

       *       *       *       *       *

For a moment the two men could hardly breathe, so great was their
unnamed fear. During that time no other movements could be noted. Then
Clee suddenly pointed to a bush only five yards away. Half a dozen
leaf-tipped branches were bending slowly in their direction--and then
a sharp crack, as of a broken twig, came to them from the same spot.

Panic, blind and unreasoning, swept them. "Run!" gasped Jim; and
together, instinctively, they turned and scrambled down the side of
the ridge to get away, anywhere, far from the approaching menace of
they knew not what. Reckless of possible injury, they slid and
stumbled down the brush-covered slope--and right behind them came
sudden crashing sounds of pursuit.

New fears lent wings to their flight, but the sounds behind continued
inexorably at their heels no matter how fast they ran or how lucky
they were in making past obstacles. Their pursuer was as fast as they.
They had no idea who--or what--it might be, for in the brief glances
they snatched over their shoulders they could not see anything at all!

The going was bad, and the two campers had not gone more than a
quarter-mile when they were breathing hard, and felt that they could
not make one more step without collapsing on the ground to give their
laboring lungs a chance to catch up. Panting like dogs they dragged
themselves along through pine and birch trees, around large rocks and
over briar-covered hills, only a few steps ahead of their pursuer.

Then Partridge, a little in the lead as they made their way up a steep
slope, heard Jim suddenly go sprawling; heard him gasp:

"It's got me!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Turning, he saw his partner rolling and threshing violently on the
ground, and now and then lashing out at the empty air with his fists.
Without a moment's hesitation he jumped from his position
above--jumped square and hard into the space which Jim's invisible
assailant should be occupying. With a great thud he crashed into some
unseen body in the air, and went down, the breath knocked out of him.
As he got to his knees an odor like that of cloves came to his
nostrils, and something caught him around the neck and began
constricting. Frantically he tried to tear himself loose, but the
harder he struggled the more strangling became the grip on his neck;
and at last, faint from the growing odor and the lack of air, his
efforts dwindled into a spasmodic tightening and relaxing of the
muscles.

Then, for a moment, the hold on his neck must have loosened, for he
found himself able to breathe a little. Turning, he saw Jim at his
side, apparently similarly held.

"If I could only--see it!" Clee managed to get out. Jim's spasmodic,
bitter answer came a moment later.

"Being invisible--tremendous advantage!" he gasped.

In desperation the two men again began to fight against the clutches
that were holding them, and this time the grip about their necks
unexpectedly loosened--to bring to their noses the odor of cloves
overpowering in strength. And that was all they knew before they
lapsed into a black and bottomless void....

       *       *       *       *       *

Through the lifting haze of returning consciousness Clee felt a
command to get up. As he automatically complied he saw that Jim was
doing likewise. Once on his feet he felt another impulse to go to the
cherry-crystal sphere, visible in the distance; but his legs were
weak, and neither he nor Jim could walk very well until out of the
nothingness around them came something of invisible bulk to lend them
support.

Slowly, carefully, straight for the waiting globe the two men were
conducted; and in his state of half-consciousness Clee wondered at the
impotence of his will to make his body offer resistance. They passed
right by their tent and up the ramp to the inside of the strange
sphere.

Clee's impressions were blurred and dull, but he noticed that they
were in a small room brilliant with amber light, on one wall of which
there was a circular area which contained a dozen or more instruments
and levers and wheels. As his eyes rested on them, one of the levers
moved, seemingly of itself, and the ramp came sliding into the ship
and the thick door slowly swung closed. Then they were conducted along
a short, narrow passageway into which opened, on the right, a small
dim room; and there the grip about their bodies loosened and they
slumped to the floor. The door whereby they had entered, closed.

A faint vibration became noticeable; they suddenly felt very heavy;
and to the accompaniment of a low but rising hum they saw one wall of
their room begin to glow with a beautiful cherry color. Although they
had been too stupefied to try to speak, this spurred their tired
bodies, and they dragged themselves over to it. They found the wall to
be of some kind of hard crystal; it was the outer shell of the sphere;
and it now gleamed redly transparent.

       *       *       *       *       *

Far out and down the men saw a great convex surface on which lay
narrow ribbons of silver, winding veinlike through dark areas that
were in some places lit by little clusters of twinkling lights. As
they watched, the distances on the surface shrank in on themselves;
they could see the outline of a great circle. The sight stimulated the
exhausted men. In a hushed and awestruck voice, Jim Wilson broke the
silence.

"We've been kidnaped," he said. "Being taken God knows where, out
among the stars...."

He was getting the sky-ride he had asked for.

Clee smiled faintly, and was going to remind him of this; but he was
too tired to make the effort. He only looked at the tremendous scene
below: at the Earth they knew so well, with its familiar streets,
comfortable fireplaces, the faces of those they loved and those others
who were their friends....

The Earth soon became a ball--a globe such as he had used at school,
showing clearly the outline of the continents and oceans. And little
by little it dwindled, until it was only a ghostly shape far out in
nothingness....

A little later, had the two Earthlings not been deep in sleep, they
might have seen enter a strange-looking man clad in odd garments--a
man whose great, bulging head was quite bald, and whose wrinkled,
leprous-white face wore an expression of unutterable wisdom and
majesty. In his hands he carried a strange piece of apparatus which he
held to Jim's wrist while it emitted a coarse vibratory hum that
whined slowly up in pitch until it passed the range of hearing. He did
the same thing to Clee, and then he quietly left.

But the two Earthlings knew nothing of this. Limp on the floor,
oblivious to everything, they slept....

       *       *       *       *       *

Some hours later found the kidnapped men well recovered and sitting on
the floor of their cell talking over their situation. As usual, Wilson
was thinking out loud.

"What can they be?--or who?" he asked, frowning with his thought.
"They can't be from Earth, for no one there could invent such a ship
as this and keep it a secret; and even if someone had, he could never
have done the equally astounding thing of inventing a way to render
living bodies invisible. I doubt if the thing that caught us was
human, by what I was able to feel in my short struggle with it. There
was something that might have been a hand; but the strength and the
weight of its body was enormous!"

"Well, we'll probably soon see," commented Clee with philosophic
resignation and pulling out of a hip pocket a package of tobacco and
his corn-cob pipe. "Or, rather, we may soon know. Our captors may keep
themselves invisible; and of course it's barely possible that it's
their natural state to be invisible, so that we may never hope to see
them. What I'm chiefly afraid of, is that they are from some other
planet, and that that's where we are being taken--though heaven knows
what any creatures so infinitely far ahead of us Earthlings
scientifically could want with a pair of young Earth lawyers!"

He offered the package to Jim. "Here, have a smoke; you'll feel
better," he said. "While there's tobacco there's hope."

"At least they don't seem disposed to kill us right off," returned
Jim, handing back the tobacco after lighting his own pipe. "Later--if
there's to _be_ any 'later' for us--we may be able to find a way to
get out of this room; though how we'd run the ship, to get back home,
is another hard brick wall.... Maybe the controls are invisible, too!"
he suggested with a wry grin. "Ever take any pre-law courses on how
to work the invisible controls of a space ship?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Clee's reply was spoken low, and was entirely irrelevant.

"That's funny," he said.

He was looking at the face of the watch on his left wrist. For the
first time since they had been abducted, its abnormal brightness had
left it.

As Jim watched, inquiringly, Clee moved his right hand a little, and
once more the dial leaped out through the dimness with unnatural
brilliance. Jim saw that his friend was holding in this hand the
package of tobacco. Clee repeated the demonstration.

"The dial glows with unusual brightness always--except when I hold the
package of tobacco in front of it at this spot," he said wonderingly,
half to himself. "If I remember my science right, ultra-violet light
would make the radium on the dial glow; and the lead in the tin-foil
of the tobacco wrapping would screen it off. Let's see--"

He crossed to the other side of the room and held his watch and the
package of tobacco in various positions until he again found one line
along which the watch-dial gave off only its customary light.

"Yes," he said, "--exactly in the extended line made by my watch and
this package of tobacco is the source of the ray which makes the
watch-dial glow. It's probably the control room of this ship."

"An extraordinary deduction, my dear Sherlock," commented Wilson
drily; "and valuable. I wish you'd now take a moment and deduce the
reason for the mysterious appearance of the lumps on the back of our
necks. I know I didn't have mine before I was taken for this
sky-ride."

       *       *       *       *       *

As he spoke, his hand sought the back of his neck where there was a
fat lump about the size of a quarter--a lump not painful, for all its
newness and size. Hard pushing with probing fingers had revealed
something that seemed to be hard and flat, buried within; but close
examinations failed to show any wound or scar, and the men had no
notion what the lumps might be. Clee's was just like Jim's.

But Clee did not respond to his friend's invitation. A heavy mood had
come over him; he was standing by the outer wall, looking out. Jim
went and stood beside him, his hand on his shoulder, and together they
gazed through the cherry-crystal wall of their prison ship out on the
loneliness of the immeasurable miles outside. For them, space was red,
instead of the deep black they knew they would see through colorless
glass. Brilliant pinpoints of light, millions of them, in all sizes,
made up the infinite space that was the background of their adventure.

To which one--near which one were they going? Would they ever return
to their Earth again? Would their friends ever know of the incredible
adventure that had overtaken them?--or would they, after the few weeks
of searching and inquiry that must follow their disappearance, at last
conclude that some nameless mountain disaster had made them victims,
and give them up for dead? No doubt. And month after succeeding month
their memory would fade from the minds of those who had loved them,
while they would be--where?...

       *       *       *       *       *

A peculiar, dynamic thought came simultaneously into the minds of the
two men. It was not a word: it seemed more like a feeling; but its
unquestionable import was "Come." Together they rose, and looked at
each other wonderingly. Again came the feeling. They started for the
door.

"But that's foolish!" Jim said aloud, as if objecting to his own
thought. "The door's locked! We tried it!" He looked at Partridge, who
returned his gaze blankly--and then, in spite of what he had said, he
reached out and turned the latch.

The door swung open!

Expressions of surprise died on the men's lips as again came the
compelling urge to go to some unknown destination.

"Suggestion!" said Clee, as he passed through the doorway. "Someone's
suggesting--telepathically willing--that we come to him! And I--God
help me--I can't resist!"

His neck corded with veins and muscles with his effort to restrain his
body from obeying the mysterious command that was drawing it onward.
Wilson, one arm outstretched in a repelling gesture, his legs stiff
and tight, was also trying to resist. But the will that had sounded
within them was stronger than theirs, and slowly, inevitably, they
were drawn down the passage.

Their carpeted way took them back to the entrance chamber and then up
a steeply sloping corridor that led upward to the left. As they passed
along they saw that the hand of a master had made on the walls, in
panel effect, marvelously complicated decorations in many-colored
mosaic. No man of Earth could ever have done such work, the two men
realized--and this thought did not cheer them any.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the top of their curving passage a doorway led them into a spacious
room hung with soft, finely woven tapestries with a metallic lustre
and furnished with deep-napped rugs and luxurious chairs and divans.
Through this room the intangible threads of the alien will directed
them--on into a wide-vaulted alcove about one-third its size. There,
the strange clutch on them relaxed, and they looked about, at first
apprehensively, then with growing boldness and curiosity.

"This is the control room!" exclaimed Clee suddenly; and after a
moment Jim agreed with him. It was the simplicity of the controls
which had prevented them from recognizing it at first. Against the
left wall was a great table with a tilted top, bearing, in its center,
a raised and hooded eyepiece giving a view into a large, enclosed
black box. On each side were several rows of small, shiny, metallic
levers and what they took to be instrument dials--round, cup-shaped
depressions with pointers free to move across dials lined with
disorderly and meaningless convolutions. For the full length of the
middle wall, straight ahead, was a broad table of some jet-black
polished material, and on it was a large array of instruments and
