He said grimly: "We could have gone straight to the wharf without that
little layover to pick you up. Take the wheel."

"Charles, I--"

He snarled at her.

"_Take the wheel._"

She did, and he went aft to stare through the darkness. The harbor
lights were twinkling pin-points; then his eyes misted so he could not
see them at all. He didn't give a damn if a dozen corvettes were already
slicing the bay in pursuit. He had failed.




XVI


It was a dank fog-shrouded morning. Sometime during the night the quill
of the dead reckoner had traced its fine red line over the 30th
meridian. Roughly half-way, Charles Orsino thought, rubbing the sleep
from his eyes. But the line was straight as a string for the last four
hours of their run. The damn girl must have fallen asleep on watch. He
glared at her in the bow and broke open a ration. Blandly oblivious to
the glare, she said: "Good morning."

Charles swallowed a mouthful of chocolate, half-chewed, and choked on
it. He reached hastily for water and found the tall plastic column of
the ion-exchange apparatus empty. "Damn it," he snarled, "why didn't you
refill this thing when you emptied it? And why didn't you zig-zag
overnight? You're utterly irresponsible." He hurled the bucket overside,
hauled it up and slopped seawater into the apparatus. Now there'd be a
good twenty minutes before a man-sized drink accumulated.

"Just a minute," she told him steadily. "Let's straighten this out. I
haven't had any water on the night watch so I didn't have any occasion
to refill the tube. You must have taken the last of the water with your
dinner. And as for the zig-zag, you said we should run a straightaway
now and then to mix it up. I decided that last night was as good a time
as any."

He took a minute drink from the reservoir, stalling. There was
something--yes; he had _meant_ to refill the apparatus after his dinner
ration. And he _had_ told her to give it a few hours of straightaway
some night....

He said formally: "You're quite right on both counts. I apologize." He
bit into a ration.

"That's not good enough," she said. "I'm not going to have you tell me
you're sorry and then go scowling and sulking about the boat. In fact I
don't like your behavior at all."

He said, enormously angry: "_Oh, you don't do you?_" and hated her, the
world and himself for the stupid inadequacy of the comeback.

"No. I don't. I'm seriously worried. I'm afraid the conditioning you got
didn't fall away completely when they swore you in. You've been acting
irrationally and inconsistently."

"What about you?" he snapped. "You got conditioned too."

"That's right," she said. "That's another reason why you're worrying me.
I find impulses in myself that have no business there. I simply seem to
do a better job of controlling them than you're doing. For instance:
we've been quarreling and at cross-purposes ever since you and Martha
picked me up. That couldn't be unless I were contributing to the
friction."

The wheel was fixed; she took a step or two aft and said professorially:
"I've never had trouble getting along with people. I've had differences,
of course, and at times I've allowed myself displays of temper when it
was necessary to assert myself. But I find that you upset me; that for
some reason or other your opinion on a matter is important to me, that
if it differs with mine there should be a reconciliation."

He put down the ration and said wonderingly: "Do you know, that's the
way I feel about you? And you think it's the conditioning or--or
something?" He took a couple of steps forward, hesitantly.

"Yes," she said in a rather tremulous voice. "The conditioning or
something. For instance, you're inhibited. You haven't made an indecent
proposition to me, not even as a matter of courtesy. Not that I care, of
course, but--" In stepping aft, she tripped over the water bucket and
went down to the deck with a faint scream.

He said: "Here, let me help you." He picked her up and didn't let go.

"Thanks," she said faintly. "The conditioning technique can't be called
faulty, but it has inherent limitations...." She trailed off and he
kissed her. She kissed back and said more faintly still: "Or it might be
the drugs we used.... Oh, Charles, what _took_ you so long?"

He said, brooding: "You're way out of my class, you know. I'm just a
bagman for the New York police. I wouldn't even be that if it weren't
for Uncle Frank, and you're a Falcaro. It's just barely thinkable that I
could make a pass at you. I guess that held me off and I didn't want to
admit it so I got mad at you instead. Hell, I could have swum back to
the base and made a damned fool of myself trying to find Grinnel, but
down inside I knew better. The kid's _gone_."

"We'll make a psychologist of you yet," she said.

"Psychologist? Why? You're joking."

"No. It's not a joke. You'll _like_ psychology, darling. You can't go on
playing polo forever, you know."

Darling! What was he getting into? Old man Gilby was four-goal at sixty,
wasn't he? Good God, was he hooked into marriage at twenty-three? Was
she married already? Did she know or care whether he was? Had she been
promiscuous? Would she continue to be? He'd never know; that was the one
thing you never asked; your only comfort, if you needed comfort, was
that she could never dream of asking you. What went on here? Let me out!

It went through his mind in a single panicky flash and then he said:
"The hell with it," and kissed her again.

She wanted to know: "The hell with what, darling?"

"Everything. Tell me about psychology. I can't go on playing polo
forever."

It was an hour before she got around to telling him about psychology:
"The neglect has been criminal--and inexplicable. For about a century
it's been _assumed_ that psychology is a dead fallacy. Why?"

"All right," he said amiably, playing with a lock of her hair. "Why?"

"Lieberman," she said. "Lieberman of Johns-Hopkins. He was one of the
old-line topological psychology men--don't let the lingo throw you,
Charles; it's just the name of a system. He wrote an attack on
the _mengenlehre_ psychology school--point-sets of emotions,
class-inclusions of reactions and so on. He blasted them to bits by
proving that their constructs didn't correspond to the emotions and
reactions of random-sampled populations. And then came the pay-off: he
tried the same acid test on his _own_ school's constructs and found out
that they didn't correspond either. It didn't frighten him; he was a
scientist. He published, and then the jig was up. Everybody, from full
professors to undergraduate students went down the roster of the schools
of psychology and wrecked them so comprehensively that the field was as
dead as palmistry in twenty years. The miracle is that it hadn't
happened before. The flaws were so glaring! Textbooks of the older kind
solemnly described syndromes, psychoses, neuroses that simply couldn't
be found in the real world! And that's the way it was all the way down
the line."

"So where does that leave us?" Charles demanded. "Is it or isn't it a
science?"

"It is," she said simply. "Lieberman and his followers went too far. It
became a kind of hysteria. The experimenters must have been too eager.
They misread results, they misinterpreted statistics, they misunderstood
the claims of a school and knocked down not its true claims but
straw-man claims they had set up themselves."

"But--_psychology_!" Charles protested, obscurely embarrassed at the
thought that man's mind was subject to scientific study--not because he
knew the first thing about it, but because _everybody_ knew psychology
was phony.

She shrugged. "I can't help it. We were doing physiology of the sensory
organs, trying to settle the oldie about focusing the eye, and I got to
grubbing around the pre-Lieberman texts looking for light in the
darkness. Some of it sounded so--not sensible, but _positive_ that I ran
off one of Lieberman's population checks. And the old boy had been dead
wrong. _Mengenlehre_ constructs correspond quite nicely to the actual
way people's minds work. I kept checking and the schools that were
destroyed as hopelessly fallacious a century ago checked out, some
closely and some not so closely, as good descriptions of the way the
mind works. Some have predictive value. I used _mengenlehre_ psychology
algorithms to compute the conditioning on you and me, including the
trigger release. It worked. You see, Charles? We're on the rim of
something tremendous!"

"When did this Lieberman flourish?"

"I don't have the exact dates in my head. The breakup of the schools
corresponded roughly with the lifetime of John G. Falcaro."

That pin-pointed it rather well. John G. succeeded Rafael, who succeeded
Amadeo Falcaro, first leader of the Syndic in revolt. Under John G., the
hard-won freedom was enjoyed, the bulging store-houses were joyously
emptied, craft union rules went joyously out the window and builders
_worked_, the dollar went to an all-time high and there was an all-time
number of dollars in circulation. It had been an exhuberant time still
fondly remembered; just the time for over-enthusiastic rebels against a
fusty scholasticism to joyously smash old ways of thought without too
much exercise of the conscience. It all checked out.

She started and he got to his feet. A hardly-noticed discomfort was
becoming acute; the speedboat was pitching and rolling quite seriously,
for the first time since their escape. "Dirty weather coming up," he
said. "We've been too damned lucky so far." He thought, but didn't
remark, that there was much to worry about in the fact that there seemed
to have been no pursuit. The meager resources of the North American Navy
wouldn't be spent on chasing a single minor craft--not if the weather
could be counted on to finish her off.

"I thought we were unsinkable?"

"In a way. Seal the boat and she's unsinkable the way a corked bottle
is. But the boat's made up of a lot of bits and pieces that go together
just so. Pound her for a few hours with waves and the bits and pieces
give way. She doesn't sink, but she doesn't steam or steer either. I
wish the Syndic had a fleet on the Atlantic."

"Sorry," she said. "The nearest fleet I know of is Mob ore boats on the
great lakes and they aren't likely to pick us up."

The sea-search radar pinged and they flew to the screen. "_Something_ at
273 degrees, about eight miles," he said. "It can't be pursuit. They
couldn't have any reason at all to circle around us and come at us from
ahead." He strained his eyes into the west and thought he could see a
black speck on the gray.

Lee Falcaro tried a pair of binoculars and complained: "These things
won't work."

"Not on a rolling, pitching platform they won't--not with an optical
lever eight miles long. I don't suppose this boat would have a
gyro-stabilized signal glass." He spun the wheel to 180; they staggered
and clung as the bow whipped about, searched and steadied on the new
course. The mounting waves slammed them broadside-to and the rolling
increased. They hardly noticed; their eyes were on the radarscope.
Fogged as it was with sea return, they nevertheless could be sure after
several minutes that the object had changed course to 135. Charles made
a flying guess at her speed, read their own speed off and scribbled for
a moment.

He said nothing, but spun the wheel to 225 and went back to the
radarscope. The object changed course to 145. Charles scribbled again
and said at last, flatly: "They're running collision courses on us.
Automatically computed, I suppose, from a radar. We're through."

He spun the wheel to 180 again, and studied the crawling green spark on
the radarscope. "This way we give 'em the longest run for their money
and can pray for a miracle. The only way we can use our speed to outrun
them is to turn around and head back into Government Territory--which
isn't what we want. Relax, Lee. Maybe if the weather thickens they'll
lose us--no; not with radar."

They sat together on a bunk, wordlessly, for hours while the spray
dashed higher and the boat shivered to hammering waves. Briefly they saw
the pursuer, three miles off, low, black and ugly, before fog closed in
again.

At nightfall there was the close, triumphant roar of a big reaction
turbine and a light stabbed through the fog, flooding the boat with
blue-white radiance. A cliff-like black hull loomed alongside as a
bull-horn roared at them: "Cut your engines and come about into the
wind."

Lee Falcaro read white-painted letters on the black hull: "_Hon. James
J. Regan, Chicago_." She turned to Charles and said wonderingly: "It's
an ore boat. From the Mob great lakes fleet."




XVII


"Here?" Charles demanded. "_Here?_"

"No possible mistake," she said, stunned. "When you're a Falcaro you
travel. I've seen 'em in Duluth, I've seen 'em in Quebec, I've seen 'em
in Buffalo."

The bull-horn voice roared again, dead in the shroud of fog; "Come into
the wind and cut your engines or we'll put a shell into you."

Charles turned the wheel and wound in the moderator rod; the boat
pitched like a splinter on the waves. There was a muffled double
explosion and two grapnels crunched into the plastic hull, bow and
stern. As the boat steadied, sharing the inertia of the ore ship, a dark
figure leaped from the blue-white eye of the searchlight to their deck.
And another. And another.

"Hello, Jim," Lee Falcaro said almost inaudibly. "Haven't met since Las
Vegas, have we?"

The first boarder studied her cooly. He was built for football or any
other form of mayhem. He ignored Charles completely. "Lee Falcaro as
advised. Do you still think twenty reds means a black is bound to come
up? You always were a fool, Lee. And now you're in real trouble."

"What's going on, mister?" Charles snapped. "We're Syndics and I presume
you're Mobsters. Don't you recognize the treaty?"

The boarder turned to Charles inquiringly. "Some confusion," he said.
"Max Wyman? Charles Orsino? Or just some wild man from outback?"

"Orsino," Charles said formally. "Second cousin of Edward Falcaro, under
the guardianship of Francis W. Taylor."

The boarder bowed slightly. "James Regan IV," he said. "No need to list
my connections. It would take too long and I feel no need to justify
myself to a small-time dago chisler. Watch him gentlemen!"

Charles found his arms pinned by Regan's two companions. There was a gun
muzzle in his ribs.

Regan shouted to the ship and a ladder was let down. Lee Falcaro and
Charles climbed it with guns at their backs. He said to her: "Who is
that lunatic?" It did not even occur to him that the young man was who
he claimed to be--the son of the Mob Territory opposite number of Edward
Falcaro.

"He's Regan," she said. "And I don't know who's the lunatic, him or me.
Charles, I'm sorry, terribly sorry, I got you into this."

He managed to smile. "I volunteered," he said.

"Enough talk," Regan said, following them onto the deck. Dull-eyed
sailors watched them incuriously, and there were a couple of anvil-jawed
men with a stance and swagger Charles had come to know. Guardsmen--he
would have staked his life on it. Guardsmen of the North American
Government Navy--aboard a Mob Territory ship and acting as if they were
passengers or high-rated crewmen.

Regan smirked: "I'm on the horns of a dilemma. There are no
accomodations that are quite right for you. There are storage
compartments which are worse than you deserve and there are passenger
quarters which are too good for you. I'm afraid it will have to be one
of the compartments. Your consolation will be that it's only a short run
