be even more deadly and appalling than the red dust had been for his
kind. It was a female black hunting-spider, the so-called American
tarantula. When he glimpsed the thing the blood drained from Burl's
face.

As the monster moved out of sight Burl, abandoning any other project he
might have intended, headed for the place his tribe had more or less
settled in. He had news which offered the satisfaction of making him
much-needed again, but he would have traded that pleasure ten hundred
times over for the simple absence of that one creature from this valley.
That female tarantula meant simply and specifically that the tribe must
flee or die. This place was not paradise!

The entry of the spider into the region had preceded the arrival of the
people. A giant, even of its kind, it had come across some pass among
the mountains for reasons only it could know. But it was deadliness
beyond compare. Its legs spanned yards. The fangs were needle-sharp and
feet in length--and poisoned. Its eyes glittered with insatiable, insane
blood-lust. Its coming was ten times more deadly to the humans--as to
the other living creatures of the valley--than a Bengal tiger loosed in
a human city would have been. It was bad enough in itself, but it
brought more deadly disaster still behind it.

Bumping and bouncing behind its abdomen as it moved, fastened to its
body by dirtied silken ropes, this creature dragged a burden which was
its own ferocity many times multiplied. It was dragging an egg-bag
larger than its body--which was feet in diameter. The female spider
would carry this ghastly burden--cherishing it--until the eggs hatched.
And then there would be four to five hundred small devils loose in the
valley. From the instant of their hatching they would be as deadly as
their parent. Though the offspring would be small--with legs spanning no
more than a foot--their bodies would be the size of a man's fist and
able to leap two yards. Their tiny fangs would be no less envenomed than
their mother's. In stark, maniacal hatred of all other life they would
at least equal the huge gray horror which had begot them.

Burl told his tribesmen. They listened, eyes large with fright but not
quite afraid. The thing had not yet happened. When Burl insistently
commanded that they follow him on a new journey, they nodded uneasily
but slipped away. He could not gather the tribe together. Always there
were members who hid from him--and when he went in search of them, the
ones he had gathered vanished before he could return.

There were days of bright light and murder, and nights of slow rain and
death in the valley. The great creatures under the cloud-bank committed
atrocities upon each other and blandly dined upon their victims.
Unthinkingly solicitous parents paralyzed creatures to be left living
and helpless for their young to feed on. There were enormities of
cruelty done in the matter-of-fact fashion of the insect world. To these
things the humans were indifferent. They were uneasy, but like other
humans everywhere they would not believe the worst until the worst
arrived.

Two weeks after their coming to the valley, the worst was there. When
that day came the first gray light of dawn found the humans in a
shivering, terrified group in a completely suicidal position. They were
out in the open--not hidden but in plain view. They dared not hide any
more. The furry gray monster's brood had hatched. The valley seemed to
swarm with small gray demons which killed and killed, even when they
could not devour. When they encountered each other they fought in
slavering fury and the victors in such duels dined upon their brethren.
But always they hunted for more things to kill. They were literally
maniacs--and they were too small and too quick to fight with spears or
clubs.

So now, at daybreak, the humans looked about despairingly for death to
come to them. They had spent the night in the open lest they be trapped
in the very thickets that had formerly been their protection. They were
in clear sight of the large gray murderer, if it should pass that way.
And they did not dare hide because of that ogreish creature's brood.

The monster appeared. A young girl saw it and cried out chokingly. It
had not seen them. They watched it leap upon and murder a
vividly-colored caterpillar near the limit of vision in the
morning-mist. It was in the tribe's part of the valley. Its young
swarmed everywhere. The valley could have been a paradise, but it was
doomed to become a charnel-house.

And then Burl shook himself. He had been angry when he left his tribe.
He had been more angry when he returned and they would not obey him. He
had remained with them, petulantly silent, displaying the offended
dignity he felt and elaborately refusing to acknowledge any overtures,
even from Saya. Burl had acted rather childishly. But his tribesmen were
like children. It was the best way for him to act.

They shivered, too hopeless even to run away while the shaggy monster
feasted a half-mile away. There were six men and seven women besides
himself, and the rest were children, from gangling adolescents to one
babe in arms. They whimpered a little. Then Saya looked imploringly at
Burl--coquetry forgotten now. The other whimpered more loudly. They had
reached that stage of despair, now, when they could draw the monster to
them by blubbering in terror.

This was the psychological moment. Burl said dourly:

"Come!"

He took Saya's hand and started away. There was but one direction in
which any human being could think to move in this valley, at this
moment. It was the direction away from the grisly mother of horrors. It
happened to be the way up the valley wall. Burl started up that slope.
Saya went with him.

Before they had gone ten yards Dor spoke to his wife. They followed
Burl, with their three children. Five yards more, and Jak agitatedly
began to bustle his family into movement. Old Jon, wheezing, frantically
scuttled after Burl, and Cori competently set out with the youngest of
her children in her arms and the others marching before her. Within
seconds more, all the tribe was in motion.

Burl moved on, aware of his following, but ignoring it. The procession
continued in his wake simply because it had begun to do so. Dik, his
adolescent brashness beaten down by terror, nevertheless regarded Burl's
stained weapon with the inevitable envy of the half-grown for
achievement. He saw something half-buried in the soil and--after a
fearful glance behind--he moved aside to tug at it. It was part of the
armor of a former rhinoceros beetle. Tet joined him. They made an act of
great daring of lingering to find themselves weapons as near as possible
to Burl's.

A quarter-mile on, the fugitives passed a struggling milkweed plant, no
more than twenty feet high and already scabrous with scale and rusts
upon its lower parts. Ants marched up and down its stalk in a steady
single file, placing aphids from their nearby ant-city on suitable spots
to feed,--and to multiply as only parthenogenic aphids can do. But
already, on the far side of the milkweed, an ant-lion climbed up to do
murder among them. The ant-lion, of course, was the larval form of a
lace-wing fly. The aphids were its predestined prey.

Burl continued to march, holding Saya's hand. The reek of formic acid
came to his nostrils. He ignored it. Ants were as much prey to his
tribesmen, now, as crabs and crayfish to other, shore-dwelling tribesmen
on long-forgotten Earth. But Burl was not concerned with food, now. He
stalked on toward the mountain-slopes.

Dik and Tet brandished their new weapons. They looked fearfully behind
them. The monster from whom they fled was lost in its gruesome
feasting,--and they were a long way from it, now. There was a steady,
single-file procession of ants, with occasional gaps in the line. The
procession passed the line through one of those gaps.

Beyond it, Tet and Dik conferred. They dared each other. They went
scrambling back to the line of ants. Their weapons smote. The
slaughtered ants died instantly and were quickly dragged from the
formic-acid-scented path. The remaining ants went placidly on their way.
The weapons struck again.

The two adolescents had to outdo each other. But they had as much food
as they could carry. Gloating--each claiming to have been most daring
and to have the largest bag of game--they ran panting after the tribe.
They grandly distributed their take of game. It was a form of boasting.
But the tribesfolk accepted the gifts automatically. It was, after all,
food.

The two gangling boys, jabbering at each other, raced back once more.
Again they returned with dangling masses of foodstuff,--half-scores of
foot-long creatures whose limbs, at least, contained firm meat.

Behind, the ant-lion made his onslaught into the stupidly feasting
aphids, and warrior-ants took alarm and thrust forward to offer battle.
Tumult arose upon the milkweed.

But Burl led his followers toward the mountainside. He reached a minor
eminence and looked about him. Caution was the price of existence on
this world.

Two hundred feet away, a small scurrying horror raged and searched among
the rough-edged layers of what on other worlds was called paper-mould or
rock-tripe. Here it was thick as quilting, and infinitesimal creatures
denned under it. The sixteen-inch spider devoured them, making
gluttonous sounds. But it was busy, and all spiders are relatively
short-sighted.

Burl turned to Saya, and realized that all his tribe had followed him
fearfully even to this small height he'd climbed only to look around
from. Dor had taken advantage of Burl's pause. There was an empty
cricket-shell partly overwhelmed by the fungoid soil. He tore free a
now-hollow, sickle-shaped jaw. It was curved and sharp and deadly if
properly wielded. Dor had seen Burl kill things. He had even helped.
Now, very grimly, he tried to imagine killing something all alone. Jak
saw him working on the sickle-shaped weapon. He tugged at the cricket's
ransacked carcass for another weapon. Dik and Tet vaingloriously
pretended to fight between themselves with their recently acquired
instruments for killing. Jon wheezed and panted. Old Tama complained to
herself in whispers, not daring to make sounds in the daylight. The rest
waited until Burl should lead them further.

When Burl turned angry eyes upon them--he was beginning to do such
things deliberately, now--they all regarded him humbly. Now they
remembered that they had been hungry and he had gotten food for them,
and they had been paralyzed by terror, and he dared to move. They
definitely had a feeling of dependence upon him, for the present moment
only. Later, their feeling of humbleness would diminish. In proportion
as he met their needs for leadership, they would tend to try to become
independent of him. His leadership would be successful in proportion as
he taught them to lead themselves. But Burl perceived this only dimly.
At the moment it was pleasing to have all his tribe regard him so
worshipfully, even if not in quite the same fashion as Saya. He was
suddenly aware that now--at any rate while they were so frightened--they
would obey him. So he invented an order for them to obey.

"I carry sharp things," he said sternly. "Some of you have gotten sharp
things. Now everybody must carry sharp things, to fight with."

Humbly, they scattered to obey. Saya would have gone with them, but Burl
held her back. He did not quite know why. It could have been that the
absolute equality of the sexes in cravenness was due to end, and for his
own vanity Burl would undertake the defense of Saya. He did not analyze
so far. He did not want her to leave him, so he prevented it.

The tribesfolk scattered. Dor went with his wife, to help her arm
herself. Jak uneasily followed his. Jon went timorously where the
picked-over remnant of the cricket's carcass might still yield an
instrument of defense. Cori laid her youngest child at Burl's feet while
she went fearfully to find some toothed instrument meeting Burl's
specification of sharpness.

There was a stifled scream. A ten-year-old boy--he was Dik's younger
brother--stood paralyzed. He stared in an agony of horror at something
that had stepped from behind a misshapen fungoid object fifty yards from
Burl, but less than ten yards from him.

It was a pallidly greenish creature with a small head and enormous eyes.
It stood upright, like a man,--and it was a few inches taller than a
man. Its abdomen swelled gracefully into a leaflike form. The boy faced
it, paralyzed by horror, and it stood stock-still. Its great, hideously
spined arms were spread out in a pose of hypocritical benediction.

It was a partly-grown praying mantis, not too long hatched. It stood
rigid, waiting benignly for the boy to come closer or try to flee. If
he had fled, it would fling itself after him with a ferocity beside
which the fury of a tiger would be kittenish. If he approached, its
fanged arms would flash down, pierce his body, and hold him terribly
fast by the needle-sharp hooks that were so much worse than trap-claws.
And of course it would not wait for him to die before it began its meal.

All the small party of humans stood frozen. It may be questioned whether
they were filled with horror for the boy, or cast into a deeper abyss of
despair by the sight of a half-grown mantis. Only Burl, so far, had any
notion of actually leaving the valley. To the rest, the discovery of one
partly mature praying mantis meant that there would be hundreds of
others. It would be impossible to evade the tiny, slavering demons which
were the brood of the great spider. It would be impossibility multiplied
to live where a horde of small--yet vastly larger--fiends lived, raising
their arms in a semblance of blessing before they did murder.

Only Burl was capable of thought, and this was because vanity filled
him. He had commanded and had been obeyed. Now obedience was forgotten
because there was this young mantis. If the men had dreamed of fighting
it, it could have destroyed any number of them by sheer ferocity and its
arsenal of knives and daggers. But Burl was at once furious and
experienced. He had encountered such a middle-sized monster, when alone,
and deliberately had experimented with it. In consequence he could dare
to rage. He ran toward the mantis. He swung the small corpse of an
ant--killed by Tet only minutes since--and hurled it past the
terror-fascinated boy. He had hurled it at the mantis.

It struck. And insects simply do not think. Something hurtled at the
ghastly young creature. Its arms struck ferociously to defend itself.
The ant was heavy. Poised upright in its spectral attitude, the mantis
was literally flung backward. But it rolled over, fighting the dead ant
with that frenzy which is not so much ferocity as mania.

The small boy fled, hysterically, once the insect's attention was
diverted.

The human tribe gathered around Burl many hundreds of yards away,--again
uphill. He was their rendezvous because of the example set by Cori. She
had left her baby with Burl. When Burl dashed from the spot, Saya had
quite automatically followed the instinct of any female for the young of
its kind. She'd snatched up the baby before she fled. And--of
course--she'd joined Burl when the immediate danger was over.

The floor of the valley seemed a trifle indistinct, from here. The mist
that hung always in the air partly veiled the details of its horrors. It
was less actual, not quite as deadly as it once had seemed.

Burl said fiercely to his followers:

"Where are the sharp things?"

The tribesfolk looked at one another, numbly. Then Jon muttered
rebelliously, and old Tama raised her voice in shrill complaint. Burl
had led them to this! There had been only the red dust in the place from
which they had come, but here was a hunting-spider and its young and
also a new hatching of mantises! They could dodge the red dust, but how
could they escape the deaths that waited them here? Ai! Ai! Burl had
persuaded them to leave their home and brought them here to die....

Burl glared about him. It was neither courage nor resolution, but he had
come to realize that to be admired by one's fellows was a splendid
sensation. The more one was admired, the better. He was enraged that
anyone dared to despair instead of thinking admiringly about his
remarkableness.

"I," said Burl haughtily, "am not going to stay here. I go to a place
where there are neither spiders nor mantises. Come!"

He held out his hand to Saya. She gave the child to Cori and confidently
moved to follow him. Burl stalked grandly away and she went with him. He
went uphill. Naturally! There were spiders and mantises in the
valley,--so many that to stay there meant death. So he moved to go
somewhere else.

And this was the climactic event that changed the whole history of
humanity upon the forgotten planet. Up to this point, there may have
been other individuals who had accomplished somewhat of Burl's kind of
leadership. A few may have learned courage. It is possible that some
even led their tribesfolk upon migrations in search of safer lands to
live in. But until Burl led his people out of a valley filled with food,
up a mountainside toward the unknown, it was simply impossible for
humans to rise permanently above the status of hunted vermin; at the
mercy of monstrous mindless creatures; whose forbears had most
ironically been brought to this planet to prepare it for humans to live
on.

Burl was the first man to lead his fellows toward the heights.




_9. THERE IS SUCH A THING AS SUNSHINE_


