and sank, to rise no more.

       *       *       *       *       *

After that there had been losses, of course. The Lassan shells
occasionally burst in the back areas and claimed a toll. But the advance
had gone on steadily for a whole day, unchecked; the Lassans were driven
back.

And then, as suddenly as they had come, they disappeared. South African
aerial scouts, far ahead of the army, reported there was no sign of the
enemy in the whole of New Jersey. The dodos vanished from the skies, the
fighting machines from the earth. The Lassans seemed to have abandoned
the struggle and retired to their underground city to wait for the end.

"Frankly," said Sherman, "I don't like it. Those johnnies are too smart
to give up like that. I'll bet you a thousand dollars against a lead
bullet that they've gone back there to figure out some surprise for us,
and when it comes it's going to be a beaner. Those babies may be
elephants to the eye, but there's nothing slow about their brains."

"General Grierson doesn't think so," said Ben Ruby. "He's all ready to
hang out the flags and call it a day. He sent home two more divisions of
infantry yesterday."

"General Grierson hasn't got the finest girl in the world locked up in
that hole under the Catskills, burning her fingers off," said Sherman
with a set face. "Say, those babies aren't licked by a million miles.
Their guns are just as good as ours and that light stuff they put in
them is worse than powder when it goes off. They just didn't have as
many guns. I'm taking even money that when they come out again, they'll
have something that will make our artillery look sick."

They stood on a street-corner in Philadelphia, the new headquarters of
the army of the federated governments.

"Yes, but what are we going to do about it?" asked Ben.

"A lot. For one thing we might go up there and try to bust in, but I
don't think that would be very hot. They'll be expecting it. What we can
do though, is get General Grierson to give us one of the laboratories
here in town and some men to help us, and dope out a few little presents
on our side of the fence. I learned plenty through those thought helmets
of theirs while I was in that place, though I didn't realize I was
getting a lot of it at the time. Those helmets work both ways, you know,
and they couldn't keep me from picking up some of their stuff,
especially as they were so anxious to find out what I knew they didn't
watch themselves."

"Nice idea," said Ben. "I know a little about chemistry and between us
we might put over something good. Let's Go."

An hour later, they were installed in their own experimental laboratory,
just off Market Street, with enough assistants to help them with routine
work and Gloria Rutherford and Murray Lee to keep them amused.

"All right, chief," said Ben, when they were installed. "What do we do
first?"

"Figure out some kind of armor that will stand off whatever kind of ray
they pop up with, I guess," offered Sherman.

"May I stick my two cents in?" said Murray Lee. "I don't think that any
kind of armor is going to do a lot of good. For one thing, you don't
know what the Lassans are going to produce. Those tanks we had were
armored against the best kind of shells, and the Lassans turned up with
the light-ray that made them look like Swiss cheese. It's your show, but
if I were fishing for something, it would be a way to sock those guys.
In this kind of war, the man that gets in the first punch is going to
beat."

"That light-ray of theirs is pretty good," said Ben. "From what you know
about it already, you ought to be able to dope out a pretty good heat
ray."

"No soap," said Sherman. "Too slow. They'll be all set for that, anyway.
It's right along the line they think. No, what we've got to have is
something along a new line, and I'm thinking it can't be anything like a
gun, either. They're onto that now." He closed the door to the inner
office with a bang.

"By the way," asked Gloria, "why don't the Australians send some
airplanes up there to the Catskills and shoot up the Lassan
headquarters?"

"Didn't you know?" asked Ben. "They tried it. They dumped about a
hundred tons of explosives all over the joint, and it might have been so
much mud for all the good it did. Then they ran a railroad gun up there
and tried to shell the door, but that wasn't any good, either. They've
got a signal station up there watching, waiting for them to come out,
and we'll just have to wait for that. Sherman"--he indicated the door
behind which the aviator had retired--"is nearly bughouse. They've got
his girl a prisoner in there."

"Tough break," commented Gloria. "Wish I could do something for the
lady."

They talked about minor matters for a time, Ben speaking absently and
cudgeling his brains for a line on which to work toward the new weapon.
It is not easy to sit down and plan out a new invention without anything
to start on beyond the desire to have it.

Suddenly, the inner door was flung open. In the aperture they saw
Sherman, his face grinning, a small piece of metal in his hand.

"I've got it, folks!" he cried. "A gravity beam!"




CHAPTER XIX

The Gravity Beam


"A gravity beam!" they ejaculated together in tones varying from
incredulity to simple puzzlement. "What's that?"

"Well, it'll take quite a bit of explaining, but I'll drop out the
technical part of it.... You see, it's like this--You remember old man
Einstein, the frizzy-hair Frisian, demonstrated that magnetism and
gravity are the same thing down underneath? And that some of the
astronomers and physicists have said that both magnetism and light are
the same thing? That is, forms of vibration. Well, one of the things I
picked up from the lads in this Lassan city was that light, matter,
electricity, gravitation, magnetism and the whole works, are the same
thing in different forms.

"They've just jumped one step beyond Einstein. Now, they've got a way of
producing, or mining, pure light, that is, pure matter in its simplest
form. When it's released from pressure it becomes material and raises
hell all over the shop. How they get the squeeze on it, I can't say.
Anyway, it isn't important."

"Very interesting lecture--very," commented Gloria, gravely.

"You pipe down and listen to your betters till they get through,"
Sherman went on. "Children should be seen, not heard. But what I've got
here is a piece of permalloy. Under certain magnetic conditions it
defies gravity. Now if we can screen gravity that way, why can't we
concentrate it, too?"

"Why not? Except that nobody ever did it and nobody knows how," said Ben
Ruby.

"Well, here's the catch. We can do anything we want to with gravity if
we go about it right. What is it in chemical atoms that has weight? It's
the positive charge, isn't it? The nucleus. And it's balanced by the
negative charges, the electrons, that revolve around it. Now if we can
find a way to pull some of these negative charges loose from a certain
number of atoms of a substance, there are going to be a whole lot of
positive charges floating around without anything to bite on. And if we
can shoot them at something, it's going to have more positive charges
than it can stand. And when that happens, the something is going to get
awful heavy, and there are going to be exchanges of negative charges
among all the positive charges, and things are going to pop."

"Yes, yes," said Ben. "But what good does all this do? Give us the real
dope on how you're going to do it."

"Well, with what I picked up from the Lassans, I think I know. They
know all about light and mechanics, but they're rotten chemists, and
don't realize how good a thing they've got in lots of ways. Now look--if
you throw a beam of radiations from a cathode tube into finely divided
material you break up some of the atoms. Well, all we have to do is get
an extra-powerful cathode tube, break up a lot of atoms, and then
deliver the positive charges from them onto whatever we're going for.
That would be your gravity beam."

"How are you going to get radiation powerful enough to split up enough
atoms to do you any good?" inquired Ben.

"Easy. Use a radium cathode. The Lassans have the stuff, but never think
of using it seriously. They think it's an amusing by-product in their
pure light mines, and just play round with it. Nobody ever used it
before on earth, because it was too expensive for such foolishness, but
with so many less people around, we can get some without too much
trouble, I guess."

"Mmm. Sounds possible," said Ben. "That is, in theory. I'd like to see
it work in practice. How are you going to throw this beam?"

"Cinch. Down a beam of light. Light will conduct sound or radio waves
even through a vacuum and this stuff I'm sending isn't so very
different. Whatever we hit will act as an amplifier and spread the
effect through the whole body."

"Boy, you want to be careful you don't blow up the earth," said Murray
Lee. "Well, Gloria, I guess we're indicated to go out and dig up some
radium. Let's fool them by going before they ask us. There ought to be a
supply in some of the hospitals."

They rose and the other two plunged into an excited and highly technical
discussion. When they returned, the workmen had already constructed a
black box, not unlike an enormous camera in shape, in the center of the
floor. At its back and attached to it, stood a stand fitted with a
series of enormous clamps. Ben and Sherman were at a bench, working
blowpipes, and shaping the delicate, iridescent glass of a long tube
with a bulge at its center.

"Here you are," said Murray Lee. "I had to row with the Surgeon-General
of the Dutch Colonial contingent to get this. He wanted to use it on
some tuberculosis experiment. But I convinced him that he wouldn't be
worrying about 't. b.' if the Lassans came out of their hole and stood
the army on its head. How goes the job?"

"Swell," said Sherman. "Now you children run along and play. We're busy.
We won't be finished with this thing before tomorrow afternoon, if
then."

As a matter of fact it was the next evening before Murray and Gloria
were summoned back to the laboratory. The device they had seen was now
mounted on a stand of its own, with long ropes of electrical connections
running back from it, and had been pushed back to the end of the room.
Opposite it was another stand with a two-foot square piece of sheet iron
resting on a chair in its center. The lens of the big camera was pointed
in that direction.

"Now," said Sherman, "watch your uncle and see what happens."

       *       *       *       *       *

He turned a switch; the tube at the back of the apparatus lit up with a
vivid violet glow and a low humming sound filled the room.

"I decided to use powdered lead in the box," he explained. "It is the
heaviest metal there is available, and gives us the largest number of
nuclei to project."

A second switch was thrown in and a beam of light leaped from the camera
and struck in the center of the iron sheet, producing merely a mild
white illumination.

"Poof!" said Gloria. "That isn't such a much. I could do that with a
flashlight."

"Right you are. I haven't let her go yet. Hold your breath now."

He bent over, drove a plunger home. For just a second the only visible
effect was a slight intensification of the beam of light. Then there was
a report like a thunder-clap; a dazzling ball of fire appeared on the
stand; a cloud of smoke, and Murray and Gloria found themselves sitting
on the floor. The iron plate had completely vanished; so had the chair,
all but two of its legs, which, lying in the center of the stand, were
burning brightly. The acrid odor of nitrogen dioxide filled the room.

"Golly," said Ben Ruby, seizing a fire extinguisher from the wall and
turning it on the blaze. "That's even more than we expected. Look, it
made a hole right through the wall! We'll have to keep that thing tied
up."

"I'll say you will," said Murray, helping Gloria up. "It's as bad for
the guy that's using it as the one at the other end. But seriously,
you've got something good there. What happened to the iron plate?"

"Disintegrated. Let's see, where does iron come in the periodic table,
Ben? Twenty-six? Then you'll probably find small quantities of all the
chemical elements from twenty-five down in that heap of ashes. Phooey,
what a rotten smell! That must be the action of the beam on the nitrogen
in the air."

"There's a lot to be worked out in this thing, yet, though," declared
Ben, "and if you're right about the Lassans making a comeback, precious
little time in which to work it out. For one thing, we've got to get a
searchlight that will throw a narrow pencil of light for a long
distance. I don't think those elephant-men are going to let us poke this
thing under their noses. And for another we've got to dope out something
to keep it in and some way to furnish current for it...."

"Can't you work it from a tank?" asked Murray, "and rig up a friction
accumulator to work from the tracks?"

"I can, but I don't like the idea," Sherman replied. "From the way those
Lassans took to our airplanes, I could make a guess that when they come,
they're going to come in some kind of flying machine. The dodos are no
good in modern war. We'd never catch any kind of an airplane with a
tank."

"How about an airplane for yourselves?"

"Too unsteady and too frail. I want something that will take a few pokes
and not fold up."

"Say, you guys have less ingenuity for a couple of inventors than anyone
I ever heard of," Gloria put in. "Why don't you get one of these
Australian rocket-planes and fix it up. It's big enough to hold all your
foolishness, and if this thing is half as powerful as it looks, you
ought to be able to harness it some way for a power-plant. Then you can
plaster your rocket all over with armor. I think--"

Sherman interrupted her by bringing his fist down on the table with a
bang that made the glasses rattle.

"You've got it! By the nine gods of Clusium! With the punch this thing
gives us used as a rocket, we'd have power enough to fly to the moon if
we wanted to. Why a rocket airplane at all? Why not a pure rocket? Let's
go."

It was another week before workmen, even toiling with all the
machine-shop facilities of Philadelphia at their disposal, and working
day and night, could turn out the machine to Sherman's design, and it
was two more before the apparatus was installed. The trial trip was set
for the early morning when there would be least chance of atmospheric
disturbance.

The _Monitor_ (she had been named for the famous fighting craft with
which the American navy ushered in a new age in the history of war) now
stood near the center of the flying field at the Philadelphia airport--a
long, projectile-like vessel with gleaming metal sides, set with heavy
windows, ten feet in diameter and nearly twice as long. At her stern a
funnel-like opening led to the interior. This was the exhaust for the
power-plant. At her bow the sharp nose was blunted off and its tip was
occupied by the lens of a high-powered parabolic searchlight, slightly
recessed, and with the discharge tubes for the atomic nuclei arranged
around its edge so they would be thrown directly into the light-beam as
soon as generated.

As the four approached her she had been placed on the ramp from which
she was to start, slanting slightly upward, with a buffer of timber and
earth behind it, to take up the enormous recoil her power plant was
expected to develop.

"How do you get in?" asked Gloria, walking around the _Monitor_ and
discovering no sign of a door.

"Oh, that's a trick I borrowed from our friends the Lassans," explained
Sherman. "Look here." He led her to a place half way along one side,
where two almost imperceptible holes marred the shining brightness of
the new vessel's sides. "Stick your fingers in."

       *       *       *       *       *

She did as directed, pressed, and a wide door in the side of the
projectile swung open. "Bright thought. No handles to break off."

They stepped in, bending their heads to avoid the low ceiling.

"She isn't as roomy or comfortable or as heavily armored as the one I
mean to build later," explained Sherman, "but this is only an
experimental craft, built in a hurry, so I had to take what I could
get.... Now here, Murray you sit here. Your job is going to be to mind
the gravity beam that furnishes us our power. Every time you get the
signal from me, you throw this power switch. That will turn on all three
switches at the stern, and shoot the gravity beam out for the
exhaust.... You see, we can't expect to keep up a steady stream of
explosions with this kind of a machine. We wouldn't be able to control
it. We'll travel in a series of short hops through the air, soaring
between hops, like a glider."

"How are you going to do any soaring without wings?" asked Murray.

"We have wings. They fold into the body at the back. I've made them
automatic. When the power switch is thrown the wings fold in; after the
explosion they come out automatically unless we disconnect them. If we
want to really go fast, we'll disconnect them and go through the air
like a projectile."

"Oh, I see. Will the windows stand the gaff?"

"I hope to tell you they will. I had them made of fused quartz, with an
outer plating of leaded glass, just in case the Lassans try to get fresh
with that light-ray of theirs.

"Now, Gloria, you sit here. You're the best shot in the crowd, and it's
going to be your job to run that searchlight in the prow. As soon as you
pick up anything with it, Ben will throw his switch, and whatever is at
the end of it will get a dose of pure protons. We'll have to do a good
deal of our aiming by turning the ship itself. I made the searchlight as
flexible as I could, but I couldn't get a great deal of turn to it on
account of the necessity of getting the nuclei into the light beam."

"By the way," asked Murray. "Won't this pure light armor of the Lassans
knock your beam for a row of ashcans?"

"I should say not! If they use it, we've got 'em. That stuff has weight
and the minute this beam of ours hits it, it will intensify the effect,
and no matter how much pressure they have on it, it will blow up all
over the place.... All set? Let's go. Throw in your switch, Murray."

Murray did as directed. There was a humming sound and the tiny beam of
light leaped across the rear end of the ship and out the exhaust. Across
it fell a thin powder of iron filings--the material that was to be
decomposed to furnish the power.

Bang! With a roar, the _Monitor_ leaped forward, throwing all of them
back into their heavily padded seats, then dipped and soared as the
wings came into play. The passengers glanced through the windows.
Beneath them the outskirts of Philadelphia were already speeding by.

"Say," said Ben, "this is some bus. We must be making five hundred miles
an hour."

"Sure," said Sherman. "We could do over seven hundred as a pure
projectile, but we can't use that much speed and keep our maneuvering
power."




CHAPTER XX

The Coming of the Green Globes


"Where to, folks?" asked Sherman, during one of their periods of
soaring, as they floated high above the hilly country to the west of the
Delaware River.

