the great black stone walls that rose on each side of the streets. There
was a grim massiveness about Stygian architecture that was overpowering
and oppressive.

Few lights showed anywhere except in the upper parts of the buildings.
Conan knew that most of the people lay on the flat roofs, among the
palms of artificial gardens under the stars. There was a murmur of weird
music from somewhere. Occasionally a bronze chariot rumbled along the
flags, and there was a brief glimpse of a tall, hawk-faced noble, with a
silk cloak wrapped about him, and a gold band with a rearing
serpent-head emblem confining his black mane; of the ebon, naked
charioteer bracing his knotty legs against the straining of the fierce
Stygian horses.

But the people who yet traversed the streets on foot were commoners,
slaves, tradesmen, harlots, toilers, and they became fewer as he
progressed. He was making toward the temple of Set, where he knew he
would be likely to find the priest he sought. He believed he would know
Thutothmes if he saw him, though his one glance had been in the
semi-darkness of the Messantian alley. That the man he had seen there
had been the priest he was certain. Only occultists high in the mazes of
the hideous Black Ring possessed the power of the black hand that dealt
death by its touch; and only such a man would dare defy Thoth-Amon, whom
the western world knew only as a figure of terror and myth.

The street broadened, and Conan was aware that he was getting into the
part of the city dedicated to the temples. The great structures reared
their black bulks against the dim stars, grim, indescribably menacing in
the flare of the few torches. And suddenly he heard a low scream from a
woman on the other side of the street and somewhat ahead of him--a naked
courtesan wearing the tall plumed head-dress of her class. She was
shrinking back against the wall, staring across at something he could
not yet see. At her cry the few people on the street halted suddenly as
if frozen. At the same instant Conan was aware of a sinister slithering
ahead of him. Then about the dark corner of the building he was
approaching poked a hideous, wedge-shaped head, and after it flowed coil
after coil of rippling, darkly glistening trunk.

The Cimmerian recoiled, remembering tales he had heard--serpents were
sacred to Set, god of Stygia, who men said was himself a serpent.
Monsters such as this were kept in the temples of Set, and when they
hungered, were allowed to crawl forth into the streets to take what prey
they wished. Their ghastly feasts were considered a sacrifice to the
scaly god.

The Stygians within Conan's sight fell to their knees, men and women,
and passively awaited their fate. One the great serpent would select,
would lap in scaly coils, crush to a red pulp and swallow as a rat-snake
swallows a mouse. The others would live. That was the will of the gods.

But it was not Conan's will. The python glided toward him, its attention
probably attracted by the fact that he was the only human in sight still
standing erect. Gripping his great knife under his mantle, Conan hoped
the slimy brute would pass him by. But it halted before him and reared
up horrifically in the flickering torchlight, its forked tongue
flickering in and out, its cold eyes glittering with the ancient cruelty
of the serpent-folk. Its neck arched, but before it could dart, Conan
whipped his knife from under his mantle and struck like a flicker of
lightning. The broad blade split that wedge-shaped head and sheared deep
into the thick neck.

Conan wrenched his knife free and sprang clear as the great body knotted
and looped and whipped terrifically in its death throes. In the moment
that he stood staring in morbid fascination, the only sound was the thud
and swish of the snake's tail against the stones.

Then from the shocked votaries burst a terrible cry: 'Blasphemer! He has
slain the sacred son of Set! Slay him! Slay! Slay!'

Stones whizzed about him and the crazed Stygians rushed at him,
shrieking hysterically, while from all sides others emerged from their
houses and took up the cry. With a curse Conan wheeled and darted into
the black mouth of an alley. He heard the patter of bare feet on the
flags behind him as he ran more by feel than by sight, and the walls
resounded to the vengeful yells of the pursuers. Then his left hand
found a break in the wall, and he turned sharply into another, narrower
alley. On both sides rose sheer black stone walls. High above him he
could see a thin line of stars. These giant walls, he knew, were the
walls of temples. He heard, behind him, the pack sweep past the dark
mouth in full cry. Their shouts grew distant, faded away. They had
missed the smaller alley and run straight on in the blackness. He too
kept straight ahead, though the thought of encountering another of Set's
'sons' in the darkness brought a shudder from him.

Then somewhere ahead of him he caught a moving glow, like that of a
crawling glow-worm. He halted, flattened himself against the wall and
gripped his knife. He knew what it was: a man approaching with a torch.
Now it was so close he could make out the dark hand that gripped it, and
the dim oval of a dark face. A few more steps and the man would
certainly see him. He sank into a tigerish crouch--the torch halted. A
door was briefly etched in the glow, while the torch-bearer fumbled with
it. Then it opened, the tall figure vanished through it, and darkness
closed again on the alley. There was a sinister suggestion of
furtiveness about that slinking figure, entering the alley-door in
darkness; a priest, perhaps, returning from some dark errand.

But Conan groped toward the door. If one man came up that alley with a
torch, others might come at any time. To retreat the way he had come
might mean to run full into the mob from which he was fleeing. At any
moment they might return, find the narrower alley and come howling down
it. He felt hemmed in by those sheer, unscalable walls, desirous of
escape, even if escape meant invading some unknown building.

The heavy bronze door was not locked. It opened under his fingers and he
peered through the crack. He was looking into a great square chamber of
massive black stone. A torch smoldered in a niche in the wall. The
chamber was empty. He glided through the lacquered door and closed it
behind him.

His sandaled feet made no sound as he crossed the black marble floor. A
teak door stood partly open, and gliding through this, knife in hand, he
came out into a great, dim, shadowy place whose lofty ceiling was only a
hint of darkness high above him, toward which the black walls swept
upward. On all sides black-arched doorways opened into the great still
hall. It was lit by curious bronze lamps that gave a dim weird light. On
the other side of the great hall a broad black marble stairway, without
a railing, marched upward to lose itself in gloom, and above him on all
sides dim galleries hung like black stone ledges.

Conan shivered; he was in a temple of some Stygian god, if not Set
himself, then someone barely less grim. And the shrine did not lack an
occupant. In the midst of the great hall stood a black stone altar,
massive, somber, without carvings or ornament, and upon it coiled one of
the great sacred serpents, its iridescent scales shimmering in the
lamplight. It did not move, and Conan remembered stories that the
priests kept these creatures drugged part of the time. The Cimmerian
took an uncertain step out from the door, then shrank back suddenly,
not into the room he had just quitted, but into a velvet-curtained
recess. He had heard a soft step somewhere near by.

From one of the black arches emerged a tall, powerful figure in sandals
and silken loin-cloth, with a wide mantle trailing from his shoulders.
But face and head were hidden by a monstrous mask, a half-bestial,
half-human countenance, from the crest of which floated a mass of
ostrich plumes.

In certain ceremonies the Stygian priests went masked. Conan hoped the
man would not discover him, but some instinct warned the Stygian. He
turned abruptly from his destination, which apparently was the stair,
and stepped straight to the recess. As he jerked aside the velvet
hanging, a hand darted from the shadows, crushed the cry in his throat
and jerked him headlong into the alcove, and the knife impaled him.

Conan's next move was the obvious one suggested by logic. He lifted off
the grinning mask and drew it over his own head. The fisherman's mantle
he flung over the body of the priest, which he concealed behind the
hangings, and drew the priestly mantle about his own brawny shoulders.
Fate had given him a disguise. All Khemi might well be searching now for
the blasphemer who dared defend himself against a sacred snake; but who
would dream of looking for him under the mask of a priest?

He strode boldly from the alcove and headed for one of the arched
doorways at random; but he had not taken a dozen strides when he wheeled
again, all his senses edged for peril.

A band of masked figures filed down the stair, appareled exactly as he
was. He hesitated, caught in the open, and stood still, trusting to his
disguise, though cold sweat gathered on his forehead and the backs of
his hands. No word was spoken. Like phantoms they descended into the
great hall and moved past him toward a black arch. The leader carried an
ebon staff which supported a grinning white skull, and Conan knew it was
one of the ritualistic processions so inexplicable to a foreigner, but
which played a strong--and often sinister--part in the Stygian religion.
The last figure turned his head slightly toward the motionless
Cimmerian, as if expecting him to follow. Not to do what was obviously
expected of him would rouse instant suspicion. Conan fell in behind the
last man and suited his gait to their measured pace.

They traversed a long, dark, vaulted corridor in which, Conan noticed
uneasily, the skull on the staff glowed phosphorescently. He felt a
surge of unreasoning, wild animal panic that urged him to rip out his
knife and slash right and left at these uncanny figures, to flee madly
from the grim, dark temple. But he held himself in check, fighting down
the dim monstrous intuitions that rose in the back of his mind and
peopled the gloom with shadowy shapes of horror; and presently he barely
stifled a sigh of relief as they filed through a great double-valved
door which was three times higher than a man, and emerged into the
starlight.

Conan wondered if he dared fade into some dark alley; but hesitated,
uncertain, and down the long dark street they padded silently, while
such folk as they met turned their heads away and fled from them. The
procession kept far out from the walls; to turn and bolt into any of the
alleys they passed would be too conspicuous. While he mentally fumed and
cursed, they came to a low-arched gateway in the southern wall, and
through this they filed. Ahead of them and about them lay clusters of
low, flat-topped mud houses, and palm-groves, shadowy in the starlight.
Now if ever, thought Conan, was his time to escape his silent
companions.

But the moment the gate was left behind them those companions were no
longer silent. They began to mutter excitedly among themselves. The
measured, ritualistic gait was abandoned, the staff with its skull was
tucked unceremoniously under the leader's arm, and the whole group broke
ranks and hurried onward. And Conan hurried with them. For in the low
murmur of speech he had caught a word that galvanized him. The word was:
"_Thutothmes!_"




18

'I Am the Woman Who Never Died'


Conan stared with burning interest at his masked companions. One of them
was Thutothmes, or else the destination of the band was a rendezvous
with the man he sought. And he knew what that destination was, when
beyond the palms he glimpsed a black triangular bulk looming against the
shadowy sky.

They passed through the belt of huts and groves, and if any man saw them
he was careful not to show himself. The huts were dark. Behind them the
black towers of Khemi rose gloomily against the stars that were mirrored
in the waters of the harbor; ahead of them the desert stretched away in
dim darkness; somewhere a jackal yapped. The quick-passing sandals of
the silent neophytes made no noise in the sand. They might have been
ghosts, moving toward that colossal pyramid that rose out of the murk of
the desert. There was no sound over all the sleeping land.

Conan's heart beat quicker as he gazed at the grim black wedge that
stood etched against the stars, and his impatience to close with
Thutothmes in whatever conflict the meeting might mean was not unmixed
with a fear of the unknown. No man could approach one of those somber
piles of black stone without apprehension. The very name was a symbol of
repellent horror among the northern nations, and legends hinted that the
Stygians did not build them; that they were in the land at whatever
immeasurably ancient date the dark-skinned people came into the land of
the great river.

As they approached the pyramid he glimpsed a dim glow near the base
which presently resolved itself into a doorway, on either side of which
brooded stone lions with the heads of women, cryptic, inscrutable,
nightmares crystalized in stone. The leader of the band made straight
for the doorway, in the deep well of which Conan saw a shadowy figure.

The leader paused an instant beside this dim figure, and then vanished
into the dark interior, and one by one the others followed. As each
masked priest passed through the gloomy portal he was halted briefly by
the mysterious guardian and something passed between them, some word or
gesture Conan could not make out. Seeing this, the Cimmerian purposely
lagged behind, and stooping, pretended to be fumbling with the fastening
of his sandal. Not until the last of the masked figures had disappeared
did he straighten and approach the portal.

He was uneasily wondering if the guardian of the temple were human,
remembering some tales he had heard. But his doubts were set at rest. A
dim bronze cresset glowing just within the door lighted a long narrow
corridor that ran away into blackness, and a man standing silent in the
mouth of it, wrapped in a wide black cloak. No one else was in sight.
Obviously the masked priests had disappeared down the corridor.

Over the cloak that was drawn about his lower features, the Stygian's
piercing eyes regarded Conan sharply. With his left hand he made a
curious gesture. On a venture Conan imitated it. But evidently another
gesture was expected; the Stygian's right hand came from under his cloak
with a gleam of steel and his murderous stab would have pierced the
heart of an ordinary man.

But he was dealing with one whose thews were nerved to the quickness of
a jungle cat. Even as the dagger flashed in the dim light, Conan caught
the dusky wrist and smashed his clenched right fist against the
Stygian's jaw. The man's head went back against the stone wall with a
dull crunch that told of a fractured skull.

Standing for an instant above him, Conan listened intently. The cresset
burned low, casting vague shadows about the door. Nothing stirred in the
blackness beyond, though far away and below him, as it seemed, he caught
the faint, muffled note of a gong.

He stooped and dragged the body behind the great bronze door which stood
wide, opened inward, and then the Cimmerian went warily but swiftly down
the corridor, toward what doom he did not even try to guess.

He had not gone far when he halted, baffled. The corridor split in two
branches, and he had no way of knowing which the masked priests had
taken. At a venture he chose the left. The floor slanted slightly
downward and was worn smooth as by many feet. Here and there a dim
cresset cast a faint nightmarish twilight. Conan wondered uneasily for
what purpose these colossal piles had been reared, in what forgotten
age. This was an ancient, ancient land. No man knew how many ages the
black temples of Stygia had looked against the stars.

Narrow black arches opened occasionally to right and left, but he kept
to the main corridor, although a conviction that he had taken the wrong
branch was growing in him. Even with their start on him, he should have
overtaken the priests by this time. He was growing nervous. The silence
was like a tangible thing, and yet he had a feeling that he was not
alone. More than once, passing a nighted arch he seemed to feel the
glare of unseen eyes fixed upon him. He paused, half minded to turn back
to where the corridor had first branched. He wheeled abruptly, knife
lifted, every nerve tingling.

A girl stood at the mouth of a smaller tunnel, staring fixedly at him.
Her ivory skin showed her to be Stygian of some ancient noble family,
and like all such women she was tall, lithe, voluptuously figured, her
hair a great pile of black foam, among which gleamed a sparkling ruby.
But for her velvet sandals and broad jewel-crusted girdle about her
supple waist she was quite nude.

'What do you here?' she demanded.

To answer would betray his alien origin. He remained motionless, a grim,
somber figure in the hideous mask with the plumes floating over him. His
alert gaze sought the shadows behind her and found them empty. But there
might be hordes of fighting-men within her call.

She advanced toward him, apparently without apprehension though with
suspicion.

'You are not a priest,' she said. 'You are a fighting-man. Even with
that mask that is plain. There is as much difference between you and a
priest as there is between a man and a woman. By Set!' she exclaimed,
halting suddenly, her eyes flaring wide. 'I do not believe you are even
a Stygian!'

With a movement too quick for the eye to follow, his hand closed about
her round throat, lightly as a caress.

'Not a sound out of you!' he muttered.

Her smooth ivory flesh was cold as marble, yet there was no fear in the
wide, dark, marvelous eyes which regarded him.

'Do not fear,' she answered calmly. 'I will not betray you. But are you
mad to come, a stranger and a foreigner, to the forbidden temple of
Set?'

'I'm looking for the priest Thutothmes,' he answered. 'Is he in this
temple?'

'Why do you seek him?' she parried.

'He has something of mine which was stolen.'

'I will lead you to him,' she volunteered so promptly that his
suspicions were instantly roused.

'Don't play with me, girl,' he growled.

'I do not play with you. I have no love for Thutothmes.'

He hesitated, then made up his mind; after all, he was as much in her
power as she was in his.

'Walk beside me,' he commanded, shifting his grasp from her throat to
her wrist. 'But walk with care. If you make a suspicious move--'

She led him down the slanting corridor, down and down, until there were
no more cressets, and he groped his way in darkness, aware less by sight
than by feel and sense of the woman at his side. Once when he spoke to
her, she turned her head toward him and he was startled to see her eyes
glowing like golden fire in the dark. Dim doubts and vague monstrous
suspicions haunted his mind, but he followed her, through a labyrinthine
maze of black corridors that confused even his primitive sense of
direction. He mentally cursed himself for a fool, allowing himself to be
led into that black abode of mystery; but it was too late to turn back
now. Again he felt life and movement in the darkness about him, sensed
peril and hunger burning impatiently in the blackness. Unless his ears
deceived him he caught a faint sliding noise that ceased and receded at
a muttered command from the girl.

She led him at last into a chamber lighted by a curious seven-branched
candelabrum in which black candles burned weirdly. He knew they were far
below the earth. The chamber was square, with walls and ceiling of
polished black marble and furnished after the manner of the ancient
Stygians; there was a couch of ebony, covered with black velvet, and on
a black stone dais lay a carven mummy-case.

Conan stood waiting expectantly, staring at the various black arches
which opened into the chamber. But the girl made no move to go farther.
Stretching herself on the couch with feline suppleness, she intertwined
her fingers behind her sleek head and regarded him from under long
drooping lashes.

'Well?' he demanded impatiently. 'What are you doing? Where's
Thutothmes?'

'There is no haste,' she answered lazily. 'What is an hour--or a day, or
a year, or a century, for that matter? Take off your mask. Let me see
your features.'

With a grunt of annoyance Conan dragged off the bulky headpiece, and the
girl nodded as if in approval as she scanned his dark scarred face and
blazing eyes.

'There is strength in you--great strength; you could strangle a
bullock.'

He moved restlessly, his suspicion growing. With his hand on his hilt he
peered into the gloomy arches.

'If you've brought me into a trap,' he said, 'you won't live to enjoy
your handiwork. Are you going to get off that couch and do as you
promised, or do I have to--'

His voice trailed away. He was staring at the mummy-case, on which the
countenance of the occupant was carved in ivory with the startling
vividness of a forgotten art. There was a disquieting familiarity about
that carven mask, and with something of a shock he realized what it was;
there was a startling resemblance between it and the face of the girl
lolling on the ebon couch. She might have been the model from which it
was carved, but he knew the portrait was at least centuries old. Archaic
hieroglyphics were scrawled across the lacquered lid, and, seeking back
into his mind for tag-ends of learning, picked up here and there as
incidentals of an adventurous life, he spelled them out, and said aloud:
'Akivasha!'

'You have heard of Princess Akivasha?' inquired the girl on the couch.

'Who hasn't?' he grunted. The name of that ancient, evil, beautiful
princess still lived the world over in song and legend, though ten
thousand years had rolled their cycles since the daughter of Tuthamon
had reveled in purple feasts amid the black halls of ancient Luxur.

'Her only sin was that she loved life and all the meanings of life,'
said the Stygian girl. 'To win life she courted death. She could not
bear to think of growing old and shriveled and worn, and dying at last
as hags die. She wooed Darkness like a lover and his gift was life--life
that, not being life as mortals know it, can never grow old and fade.
She went into the shadows to cheat age and death--'

Conan glared at her with eyes that were suddenly burning slits. And he
wheeled and tore the lid from the sarcophagus. It was empty. Behind him
the girl was laughing and the sound froze the blood in his veins. He
whirled back to her, the short hairs on his neck bristling.

'You are Akivasha!' he grated.

She laughed and shook back her burnished locks, spread her arms
