created by Clark Ashton Smith. The latter's tale, at best, was an
inferior Smith writing, and truly, not one of his best. One must be
logical and open-minded, you know. R. H. Barlow is deserving of praise
for his 'Annals.' The gentlemen with the musical pen-name of Hoy Ping
Pong produced an enjoyable article on 'How to Write a STF Story:' very
amusing satire."--Robert Nelson

"I surely am delighted with the second issue of TFF--a big step
forward from the first edition! By all means keep up the good work
that you have started. This is just the thing we non-scientifictionists
need. Lovecraft, Smith, Wandrei, Howard, and Quinn, I hope, will be
your main contributors as they just about hold up the weird and
fantastic candle. I look for big things from you! 'The Kingdom of the
Worm' was quite light and weak and far below the Smith standard--he is
my favorite author and I know what he can do as I have nearly all of
his stories and poems. The idea of portrayal was novel but many more
pages could have been written. It seemed to me that the climax came
too quickly, and with a less startling denouement than is customary
with Mr. Smith's work. However, I was gladly surprised to see the
story in this new magazine's pages. 'Supernatural Horror in
Literature' by H. P. Lovecraft is intensely interesting."--F. Lee
Baldwin

One has his full right to like or dislike a story, and while you and
the previous writer believed Smith's tale to be below his standard,
many have written in acclaiming it one of his best. If the tale had
appeared in _Weird Tales_, you might have thought so also, but
seeing that TFF is only a struggling little publication, you might
have "hypnotised" yourself into believing that it was not up to his
average. And then again, you must be in the mood when you read weird
stories. Reading them under unfavorable conditions may force a
derogatory opinion of the tale upon you.

"The second TFF was good! Hope you will get more staff writers who are
familiar with fantastic fiction as you go along. Glad to see
Lovecraft's article. C. A. Smith's tale was fine. Keep up their
publication in spite of the opposition which will be forthcoming of
'pure' stf addicts."--Lester Anderson

"The second issue was read with much interest and enjoyment. It showed
considerable improvement over the first issue. The high spots were
Clark Ashton Smith's story 'The Kingdom of the Worm' and the beginning
of H. P. Lovecraft's article on 'Supernatural Horror in Literature.'
Smith's story was splendid and I hope to see much more of his work in
TFF. Lovecraft's article began very promisingly, my only criticism
being that the instalment was much too short."--H. Koenig.

"I am glad to learn that TFF will be devoted henceforth to the weird
in fiction, for I feel that truly fantastic literature, as
distinguished from the merely pseudo-scientific, is entitled to the
fullest support; a support hitherto given to the stf type. I feel
certain that a large and appreciative following may be built up among
the disciples of this branch of literature. My best wishes to the
success of TFF."--Richard F. Searight

Following are two letters in direct contrast.

"I have read the October issue of TFF from cover to cover and enjoyed
it thoroughly. I have one objection, though. Since TFF is a magazine
devoted to the discussion of weird fiction, you should cut down on the
stf stuff. You'll find plenty of readers who will enjoy it without
having to add so much science fiction talk."--Emil Petaja

"Please keep on using the same kind of paper and add more pages. Was
sorry to hear that TFF is leaning toward weird fiction. Why do you
encourage superstition with all the pronouncements of science against
it? I like the magazine fine, all except the weird part. I never have
read a good weird tale. Why do they print the science fiction and
interplanetary stories of Kline, Hamilton, and Williamson in _Weird
Tales_, for weird tales, interplanetary stories are not weird."--Lloyd
Fowler.

Now, considering the two above letters, what is the poor editor to do?
For the present, we will continue to use both stf and weird material,
leaning toward the weird and printing only weird stories--except, of
course, in the January issue, which will be chiefly weird. By the way,
we believe that the January number will have quite opposite effects
upon Messrs. Petaja and Fowler. We are sorry to hear that Mr. Fowler
has never read a good weird story. We must pity him. Has he ever tried
a magazine known as _Weird Tales_ by any chance? But all kidding aside,
we will take his suggestions into consideration.

For some reason known only to themselves, _Weird Tales_ has refused to
accept the TFF ad for their January, 1934 issue. Perhaps they think
they have competition! We had intended to make our January number
entirely weird with 24 pages, but now find it inadvisable, because of
the rejection of our ad. We find that it would be best to conserve the
Fantasy Fan Fund for future issues, rather than put everything into
one issue.




MY SCIENCE FICTION COLLECTION

by Forrest J. Ackerman

Part Four


In my collection are the manuscripts of such stories as "West of the
Earth" (renamed "In Martian Depths") by Juve, Miss Long's "The Last
Man" ("Omega"), "The Egg from the Lost Planet" ("Girl from Mars," by
Breuer-Williamson), Skidmore's "Romance of Posi and Nega," "Lancer in
the Crystal" ... "The Cities of Ardathia" ... "In the Land of the
Bipos" ... "The Machine Man of Ardathia"... "By the Hands of the Dead"
.... "Seed of the Toc-Toc Birds" .... "The Head of Apex," and others
all by Francis Flagg ... "The Golden Bough," by Dr. Keller, Ed Earl
Repp's "Metal World", Bob Olsen's "My Martian Sweetheart", pages from
different Edmond Hamilton stories, and others, plus the entire serial
by C. Willard Diffin, "Two Thousand Miles Below." I have, in addition,
a translation into French of David H. Keller's "Stenographer's Hands,"
which originally appeared in _Amazing Stories Quarterly_. The French
version is known as "Les mains et la machine."

Also, there are four letter files and a large cabinet--all chock full
of correspondence from authors and fans.

There is one portion of my collection yet to be described: the
scientifilms. In a large box are advertisements, press-sheets,
reviews, write-ups, publicity copy, photos, "cuts," and all similar
material from dozens of movie magazines, newspapers, other
periodicals, film companies and all parts of the world on the
scientific from long years ago up to even those to be produced in the
future. The amount of material covered in this file is impossible to
describe.

(In the installments Mr. Ackerman tells about his scientifilm
"stills".)




Birkett's Twelfth Corpse

by August W. Derleth


The wall of hate that stood between the two old rivermen, Fred Birkett
and Hank Blum, had grown from a strange and gruesome rivalry--the
finding of dead bodies of persons drowned in the Wisconsin River at
Sac Prairie. At the time of the tragic drowning of Bud Enders, the
rivermen were tied--each had found eleven bodies in the past forty
years. It was said by each of them, and repeated in Sac Prairie, that
Bud Enders' body would decide the contest.

The sympathy of Sac Prairie was with Birkett, a kindly old man in
