course--and do away with Skandos Three. There might have to be another
interference, too, to get Tedric started along the right time-track. He
could tell better after seeing what Time-Track Three looked like. If
so, it would necessitate the displacement of Skandos Four._

_So what? He had never had any qualms; and, now that he had done it
once, he had no doubt whatever as to his ability to do it twice more._

       *       *       *       *       *

Of the three standing beside Sarpedion's grisly altar, King Phagon was
the first to become conscious of the fact that something should be done
about his daughter's nudity.

"Flasnir, your cloak!" he ordered sharply; and the Lady Rhoann,
unclamping her arms from around Tedric's armored neck and disengaging
his steel-clad arm from around her waist, covered herself with the
proffered garment. Partially covered, that is; for, since the cloak
had come only to mid-thigh on the courtier and since she was a good
seven inches taller than he, the coverage might have seemed, to a
prudish eye, something less than adequate.

"Chamberlain Schillan--Captain Sciro," the king went on briskly. "Haul
me this carrion to the river and dump it in--put men to cleaning this
place--'tis not seemly so."

The designated officers began to bawl orders, and Tedric turned to the
girl, who was still just about as close to him as she could get; awe,
wonder, and relieved shock still plain on her expressive face.

"One thing, Lady Rhoann, I understand not. You seem to know me; act
as though I were an old, tried friend. 'Tis vast honor, but how? You of
course I know; have known and honored since you were a child; but me, a
commoner, you know not. Nor, if you did, couldst know who it was neath
all this iron?"

"Art wrong, Lord Tedric--nay, not 'Lord' Tedric; henceforth you and I
are Tedric and Rhoann merely--I have known you long and well; would
recognize you anywhere. The few of the old, true blood stand out head
and shoulders above the throng, and you stand out, even among them. Who
else could it have been? Who else hath the strength of arm and soul,
the inner and the outer courage? No coward I, Tedric, nor ever called
so, but on that altar my very bones turned jelly. I could not have
swung weapon against Sarpedion. I tremble yet at the bare thought of
what you did; I know not how you could have done it."

"You feared the god, Lady Rhoann, as do so many. I hated him."

"'Tis not enough of explanation. And 'Rhoann' merely, Tedric, remember?"

"Rhoann ... Thanks, my lady. 'Tis an honor more real than your
father's patent of nobility ... but 'tis not fitting. I feel as much a
commoner...."

"Commoner? Bah! I ignored that word once, Tedric, but not twice. You
are, and deservedly, the Highest of the High. My father the king has
known for long what you are; he should have ennobled you long since.
Thank Sarp ... thank all the gods he had the wit to put it off no
longer! 'Tis blood that tells, not empty titles. The Throne can make
and unmake nobility at will, but no power whatever can make true-bloods
out of mongrels, nor create real _manhood_ where none exists!"

Tedric did not know what to say in answer to that passionate outburst,
so he changed the subject; effectively, if not deftly. "In speaking of
the Marches to your father the king, you mentioned the Sages. What said
they?"

"At another time, perhaps." Lady Rhoann was fast recovering her wonted
cool poise. "'Tis far too long to go into while I stand here half
naked, filthy, and stinking. Let us on with the business in hand;
which, for me, is a hot bath and clean clothing."

Rhoann strolled away as unconcernedly as though she were wearing full
court regalia, and Tedric turned to the king.

"Thinkst the Lady Trycie is nearby, sire?"

"If I know the jade at all, she is," Phagon snorted. "And not only
near. She's seen everything and heard everything; knows more about
everything than either of us, or both of us together. Why? Thinkst
she'd make a good priestess?"

"The best. Much more so, methinks, than the Lady Rhoann. Younger.
More ... umm ... more priestess-like, say?"

"Perhaps." Phagon was very evidently skeptical, but looked around the
temple, anyway. "Trycie!" he yelled.

"Yes, father?" a soft voice answered--right behind them!

The king's second daughter was very like his first in size and shape,
but her eyes were a cerulean blue and her hair, as long and as thick as
Rhoann's own, had the color of ripe wheat.

"Aye, daughter. Wouldst like to be Priestess of Llosir?"

"Oh, yes!" she squealed; but sobered quickly. "On second thought ...
perhaps not ... no. If sobeit sacrifice is done I intend to marry, some
day, and have six or eight children. But ... perhaps ... could I take
it now, and resign later, think you?"

"'Twould not be necessary, sire and Lady Trycie," Tedric put in, while
Phagon was still thinking the matter over. "Llosir is not at all like
Sarpedion. Llosir wants abundance and fertility and happiness, not
poverty and sterility and misery. Llosir's priestess marries as she
pleases and has as many children as she wants."

"Your priestess I, then, sirs! I go to have cloth-of-gold robes made at
once!" The last words came floating back over her shoulder as Trycie
raced away.

"Lord Tedric, sir." Unobserved, Sciro had been waiting for a chance to
speak to his superior officer.

"Yes, captain?"

"'Tis the men ... the cleaning ... They ... We, I mean ..." Sciro of
Old Lomarr would not pass the buck. "The bodies--the priests, you know,
and so on--were easy enough; and we did manage to handle most of the
pieces of the god. But the ... the heart, and so on, you know ... we
know not where you want them taken ... and besides, we fear ... wilt
stand by and ward, Lord Tedric, while I pick them up?"

"'Tis my business, Captain Sciro; mine alone. I crave pardon for not
attending to it sooner. Hast a bag?"

"Yea." The highly relieved officer held out a duffle-bag of fine, soft
leather.

Tedric took it, strode across to the place where Sarpedion's image had
stood, and--not without a few qualms of his own, now that the frenzy of
battle had evaporated--picked up Sarpedion's heart, liver, and brain
and deposited them, neither too carefully nor too carelessly, in the
sack. Then, swinging the burden up over his shoulder--

"I go to fetch the others," he explained to his king. "Then we hold
sacrifice to end all human sacrifice."

"Hold, Tedric!" Phagon ordered. "One thing--or two or three, methinks.
'Tis not seemly to conduct a thing so; lacking order and organization
and plan. Where dost propose to hold such an affair? Not in your
ironworks, surely?"

"Certainly not, sire." Tedric halted, almost in midstride. He hadn't
got around yet to thinking about the operation as a whole, but he
began to do so then. "And certainly not on this temple or Sarpedion's
own. Lord Llosir is clean: all our temples are foul in every stone
and timber...." He paused. Then, suddenly: "I have it, sire--the
amphitheater!"

"The amphitheater? 'Tis well. 'Tis of little enough use, and a shrine
will not interfere with what little use it has."

"Wilt give orders to build...?"

"The Lord of the Marches issues his own orders. Hola, Schillan, to me!"
the monarch shouted, and the Chamberlain of the Realm came on the run.
"Lord Tedric speaks with my voice."

"I hear, sire. Lord Tedric, I listen."

"Have built, at speed, midway along the front of the amphitheater, on
the very edge of the cliff, a table of clean, new-quarried stone; ten
feet square and three feet high. On it mount Lord Llosir so firmly that
he will stand upright forever against whatever may come of wind or
storm."

The chamberlain hurried away. So did Tedric, with his bag of
spoils. First to his shop, where his armor was removed and where
he scratched himself vigorously and delightfully as it came off.
