                                CANTO I.


Rosicrucian machinery.    73

All bodies are immersed in the matter of heat. Particles of bodies do
not touch each other.    97

Gradual progress of the formation of the earth, and of plants and
animals. Monstrous births    101

Fixed stars approach towards each other, they were projected from chaos
by explosion, and the planets projected from them    105

An atmosphere of inflammable air above the common atmosphere principally
about the poles    123

Twilight fifty miles high. Wants further observations    126

Immediate cause of volcanos from steam and other vapours. They prevent
greater earthquakes    152

Conductors of heat. Cold on the tops of mountains    176

Phosphorescent light in the evening from all bodies    177

Phosphoric light from calcined shells. Bolognian stone. Experiments of
Beccari and Wilson    182

Ignis fatuus doubtful    189

Electric Eel. Its electric organs. Compared to the electric Leyden phial
202

Discovery of fire. Tools of steel. Forests subdued. Quantity of food
increased by cookery    212

Medusa originally an hieroglyphic of divine wisdom    218

Cause of explosions from combined heat. Heat given out from air in
respiration. Oxygene looses less heat when converted into nitrous acid
than in any other of its combinations    226

Sparks from the collision of flints are electric. From the collision of
flint and steel are from the combustion of the steel    229

Gunpowder described by Bacon. Its power. Should be lighted in the
centre. A new kind of it. Levels the weak and strong    242

Steam-engine invented by Savery. Improved by Newcomen. Perfected by Watt
and Boulton    254

Divine benevolence. The parts of nature not of equal excellence    278

Mr. Boulton's steam-engine for the purpose of coining would save many
lives from the executioner    281

Labours of Hercules of great antiquity. Pillars of Hercules. Surface of
the Mediteranean lower than the Atlantic. Abyla and Calpe. Flood of
Deucalion    297

Accumulation of electricity not from friction    335

Mr. Bennet's sensible electrometer    345

Halo of saints is pictorial language    358

We have a sense adapted to perceive heat but not electricity    365

Paralytic limbs move by electric influence    367

Death of Professor Richman by electricity    373

Lightning drawn from the clouds. How to be safe in thunder storms    383

Animal heat from air in respiration. Perpetual necessity of respiration.
Spirit of animation perpetually renewed    401

Cupid rises from the egg of night. Mrs. Cosway's painting of this
subject    413

Western-winds. Their origin. Warmer than south-winds. Produce a thaw
430

Water expands in freezing. Destroys succulent plants, not resinous ones.
Trees in valleys more liable to injury. Fig-trees bent to the ground in
winter    439

Buds and bulbs are the winter cradle of the plant. Defended from frost
and from insects. Tulip produces one flower-bulb and several leaf-bulbs,
and perishes.    460

Matter of heat is different from light. Vegetables blanched by exclusion
of light. Turn the upper surface of their leaves to the light. Water
decomposed as it escapes from their pores. Hence vegetables purify air
in the day time only.    462

Electricity forwards the growth of plants. Silk-worms electrised spin
sooner. Water decomposed in vegetables, and by electricity    463

Sympathetic inks which appear by heat, and disappear in the cold. Made
from cobalt    487

Star in Cassiope's chair    515

Ice-islands 100 fathoms deep.  Sea-ice more difficult of solution. Ice
evaporates producing great cold. Ice-islands increase. Should be
navigated into southern climates. Some ice-islands have floated
southwards 60 miles long. Steam attending them in warm climates    529

Monsoon cools the sands of Abyssinia    547

Ascending vapours are electrised plus, as appears from an experiment of
Mr. Bennet. Electricity supports vapour in clouds. Thunder showers from
combination of inflammable and vital airs    553




                               CANTO II.


Solar volcanos analogous to terrestrial and lunar ones. Spots of the sun
are excavations    14

Spherical form of the earth. Ocean from condensed vapour. Character of
Mr. Whitehurst    17

Granite the oldest part of the earth. Then limestone. And lastly, clay,
iron, coal, sandstone. Three great concentric divisions of the globe
35

Formation of primeval islands before the production of the moon.
Paradise. The Golden Age. Rain-bow. Water of the sea originally fresh
36

Venus rising from the sea an hieroglyphic emblem of the production of
the earth beneath the ocean     47

First great volcanos in the central parts of the earth. From steam,
inflammable gas, and vital air. Present volcanos like mole-hills    68

Moon has little or no atmosphere. Its ocean is frozen. Is not yet
inhabited, but may be in time    82

Earth's axis changed by the ascent of the moon. Its diurnal motion
retarded. One great tide    84

Limestone produced from shells. Spars with double refractions. Marble.
Chalk    93

Antient statues of Hercules. Antinous. Apollo. Venus. Designs of
Roubiliac. Monument of General Wade. Statues of Mrs. Damer    101

Morasses rest on limestone. Of immense extent    116

Salts from animal and vegetable bodies decompose each other, except
marine salt. Salt mines in Poland. Timber does not decay in them. Rock-
salt produced by evaporation from sea-water. Fossil shells in salt
mines. Salt in hollow pyramids. In cubes. Sea-water contains about one-
thirtieth of salt    119

Nitre, native in Bengal and Italy. Nitrous gas combined with vital air
produces red clouds, and the two airs occupy less space than one of them
before, and give out heat. Oxygene and azote produce nitrous acid    143

Iron from decomposed vegetables. Chalybeat springs. Fern-leaves in
nodules of iron. Concentric spheres of iron nodules owing to polarity,
like iron-filings arranged by a magnet. Great strata of the earth owing
to their polarity    183

Hardness of steel for tools. Gave superiority to the European nations.
Welding of steel. Its magnetism. Uses of gold    192

Artificial magnets improved by Savery and Dr. Knight, perfected by Mr.
Michel. How produced. Polarity owing to the earth's rotatory motion. The
electric fluid, and the matter of heat, and magnetism gravitate on each
other. Magnetism being the lightest is found nearest the axis of the
motion. Electricity produces northern lights by its centrifugal motion
193

Acids from vegetable recrements. Flint has its acid from the new world.
Its base in part from the old world, and in part from the new. Precious
stones    215

Diamond. Its great refraction of light. Its volatibility by heat. If an
inflammable body.    228

Fires of the new world from fermentation. Whence sulphur and bitumen by
sublimation, the clay, coal, and flint remaining    275

Colours not distinguishable in the enamel-kiln, till a bit of dry wood
is introduced    283

Etrurian pottery prior to the foundations of Rome. Excelled in fine
forms, and in a non-vitreous encaustic painting, which was lost till
restored by Mr. Wedgwood. Still influences the taste of the inhabitants
291

Mr. Wedgwood's cameo of a slave in chains, and of Hope    315

Basso-relievos of two or more colours not made by the antients. Invented
by Mr. Wedgwood    342

Petroleum and naptha have been sublimed. Whence jet and amber. They
absorb air. Attract straws when rubbed. Electricity from electron the
greek name for amber    353

Clefts in granite rocks in which metals are found. Iron and manganese
found in all vegetables. Manganese in limestone. Warm springs from steam
rising up the clefts of granite and limestone. Ponderous earth in
limestone clefts and in granite. Copper, lead, iron, from descending
materials. High mountains of granite contain no ores near their summits.
Transmutation of metals. Of lead into calamy. Into silver    398

Armies of Cambytes destroyed by famine, and by sand-storms     435

Whirling turrets of sand described and explained    478

Granite shews iron as it decomposes. Marble decomposes. Immense quantity
of charcoal exists in limestone. Volcanic slags decompose, and become
clay     523

Millstones raised by wooden pegs    524

Hannibal made a passage by fire over the Alps   534

Passed tense of many words twofold, as driven or drove, spoken or spoke.
A poetic licence    609




                               CANTO III.


Clouds consist of aqueous spheres, which do not easily unite, like
globules of quicksilver, as may be seen in riding through water. Owing
to electricity. Snow. Hailstones rounded by attrition and dissolution of
their angles. Not from frozen drops of water    15

Dew on points and edges of grass, or hangs over cabbage-leaves, needle
floats on water    18

Mists over rivers and on mountains. Halo round the moon. Shadow of a
church-steeple upon a mist. Dry mist, or want of transparency of the
air, a sign of fair-weather    20

Tides on both sides of the earth. Moon's tides should be much greater
than the earth's tides. The ocean of the moon is frozen      61

Spiral form of shells saves calcareous matter. Serves them as an organ
of hearing. Calcareous matter produced from inflamed membranes. Colours
of shells, labradore-stone from mother-pearl. Fossil shells not now
found recent    66

Sea-insects like flowers. Actinia     82

Production of pearls, not a disease of the fish. Crab's eyes. Reservoirs
of pearly matter    84

Rocks of coral in the south-sea. Coralloid limestone at Linsel, and
Coalbrook Dale     90

Rocks thrown from mountains, ice from glaciers, and portions of earth,
or morasses, removed by columns of water. Earth-motion in Shropshire.
Water of wells rising above the level of the ground. St. Alkmond's well
near Derby might be raised many yards, so as to serve the town. Well at
Sheerness, and at Hartford in Connecticut     116

Moonsoons attended with rain Overflowing of the Nile. Vortex of
ascending air. Rising of the Dogstar announces the floods of the Nile.
Anubis hung out upon their temples     129

Situations exempt from rain. At the Line in Lower Egypt. On the coast of
Peru    138

Giesar, a boiling fountain in Iceland. Water with great degrees of heat
dissolves siliceous matter. Earthquake from steam    150

Warm springs not from decomposed pyrites. From steam rising up fissures
from great depths    166

Buxton bath possesses 82 degrees of heat. Is improperly called a warm
bath. A chill at immersion, and then a sensation of warmth, like the eye
in an obscure room owing to increased sensibility of the skin    184

Water compounded of pure air and inflammable air with as much matter of
heat as preserves it fluid. Perpetually decomposed by vegetables in the
sun's light, and recomposed in the atmosphere    204

Mythological interpretation of Jupiter and Juno designed as an emblem of
the composition of water from two airs    260

Death of Mrs. French    308

Tomb of Mr. Brindley    341

Invention of the pump. The piston lifts the atmosphere above it. The
surrounding atmosphere presses up the water into the vacuum. Manner in
which a child sucks     366

Air-cell in engines for extinguishing fire. Water dispersed by the
explosion of Gunpowder. Houses preserved from fire by earth on the
floors, by a second ceiling of iron-plates or coarse mortar. Wood
impregnated with alabaster or flint     406

Muscular actions and sensations of plants    460

River Achelous. Horn of Plenty    495

Flooding lands defends them from vernal frosts. Some springs deposit
calcareous earth. Some contain azotic gas, which contributes to produce
nitre. Snow water less serviceable    540




                               CANTO IV.


Cacalia produces much honey, that a part may be taken by insects without
injury    2

Analysis of common air. Source of azote. Of Oxygene. Water decomposed by
vegetable pores and the sun's light. Blood gives out phlogiston and
receives vital air. Acquires heat and the vivifying principle    34

Cupid and Psyche    48

Simoom, a pestilential wind. Described. Owing to volcanic electricity.
Not a whirlwind    65

Contagion either animal or vegetable    82

Thyrsis escapes the Plague    91

Barometer and air-pump, Dew on exhausting the receiver though the
hygrometer points to dryness. Rare air will dissolve or acquire more
heat, and more moisture, and more electricity    128

Sound propagated best by dense bodies, as wood, and water, and earth.
Fish in spiral shells all ear    164

Discoveries of Dr. Priestley. Green vegetable matter. Pure air contained
in the calces of metals, as minium, manganese, calamy, ochre    166

Fable of Proserpine an antient chemical emblem    178

Diving balloons supplied with pure air from minium. Account of one by
Mr. Boyle    195

Mr. Day. Mr. Spalding    217

Captain Pierce and his daughters    219

Pestilential winds of volcanic origin. Jordan flows through a country of
volcanos    294

Change of wind owing to small causes. If the wind could be governed, the
products of the earth would be doubled, and its number of inhabitants
increased    308

Mr. Kirwan's treatise on temperature of climates    342

Seeds of plants. Spawn of fish. Nutriment lodged in seeds. Their
preservation in their seed-vessels    355

Fixed stars approach each other    369

Fable of the Phoenix    377

Plants visible within bulbs, and buds, and seeds    383

Great Egg of Night    406

Seeds shoot into the ground. Pith. Seed-lobes. Starch converted into
sugar. Like animal chyle    411

Light occasions the actions of vegetable muscles. Keeps them awake
422

Vegetable love in Parnassia, Nigella. Vegetable adultery in Collinsonia
456

Strong vegetable shoots and roots bound with wire, in part debarked,
whence leaf-buds converted into flower-buds. Theory of this curious fact
463

Branches bent to the horizon bear more fruit    466

Engrafting of a spotted passion-flower produced spots upon the stock.
Apple soft on one side and hard on the other    483

Cyprepedium assumes the form of a large spider to affright the humming-
bird. Fly-ophris. Willow-wren sucks the honey of the crown-imperial
505

Diseases of plants four kinds. Honey-dew    511

Ergot a disease of rye    513

Glass unannealed. Its cracks owing to elasticity. One kind of lead-ore
cracks into pieces. Prince Rupert's drops. Elastic balls    519

Sleep of plants. Their irritability, sensibility, and voluntary motions
538




                           ADDITIONAL NOTES.


                           NOTE I.--METEORS.


     _Etherial Forms! you chase the shooting stars,
     Or yoke the vollied lightnings to your cars._

                                            CANTO I. l. 115.


There seem to be three concentric strata of our incumbent atmosphere; in
which, or between them, are produced four kinds of meteors; lightning,
shooting stars, fire-balls, and northern lights. First, the lower region
of air, or that which is dense enough to resist by the adhesion of its
particles the descent of condensed vapour, or clouds, which may extend
from one to three or four miles high. In this region the common
lightning is produced from the accumulation or defect of electric matter
in those floating fields of vapour either in respect to each other, or
in respect to the earth beneath them, or the dissolved vapour above
them, which is constantly varying both with the change of the form of
the clouds, which thus evolve a greater or less surface; and also with
their ever-changing degree of condensation. As the lightning is thus
produced in dense air, it proceeds but a short course on account of the
greater resistance which it encounters, is attended with a loud
explosion, and appears with a red light.

2. The second region of the atmosphere I suppose to be that which has
too little tenacity to support condensed vapour or clouds; but which yet
contains invisible vapour, or water in aerial solution. This aerial
solution of water differs from that dissolved in the matter of heat, as
it is supported by its adhesion to the particles of air, and is not
precipitated by cold. In this stratum it seems probable that the meteors
called shooting stars are produced; and that they consist of electric
sparks, or lightning, passing from one region to another of these
invisible fields of aero-aqueous solution. The height of these shooting
stars has not yet been ascertained by sufficient observation; Dr.
Blagden thinks their situation is lower down in the atmosphere than that
of fireballs, which he conjectures from their swift apparent motion, and
ascribes their smallness to the more minute division of the electric
matter of which they are supposed to consist, owing to the greater
resistance of the denser medium through which they pass, than that in
