
Ludwig received him with little ceremony. "Sit down, Herbert. It was
good of you to come. Miss Dodson," he called through the intercom,
"this is strictly off the air. Nothing is to be recorded. Is that
clear?"

"Well, John," said Carre. "You're looking harassed, if I may say
so. Are they working you too hard? Or are you just faced with the
unpleasant job of firing an old friend? I realize, of course, that AFE
aren't using much of my stuff just now."

Ludwig smiled unhappily and shook his head. "I'm not planning to fire
you, Herbert. But you know, of course, that you're in the same boat
with the other Writers, and that boat is in choppy waters. Frankly,
I'm not very happy about the situation. The five-year experimental
period is coming to an end. This Bureau has the job of providing
entertainment, and that includes, among many other categories,
literature. Books, articles, and stories. And I'm faced with a
difficult decision: shall we employ Writers, or use Script-Lab? You are
only one of the many people we support, of course, and both you and
Script-Lab furnish material to Adult Fiction, Earth, who distribute it
as they see fit."

Herbert Carre nibbled at his graying moustache. "I know. And for the
last year, for some reason, AFE has not seen fit to use much of my
stuff. And yet it's no different. I write just the same sort of thing I
always did."

"Tastes change, Herbert. Script-Lab reports that the public seem to
prefer the machine-made stories. I have a week to make a definite
decision, and I'm particularly anxious to finish the job because I've
been asked to transfer, at the earliest possible moment, to the Bureau
of Public Safety. The Committee are inclined, on the whole, to favor
the enlarging of Script-Lab, and transferring all the Writers to some
other department."

"Great Gamma! You mean _all_ literature will be machine-made from now
on?"

"Don't get excited, Herb! That's what I've got to decide. But if they
can really write it just as well, why not? You remember Hartridge,
don't you? Class behind me at college, majored in electronics? He's in
charge of the machine experiment and he's about convinced us that his
machines can turn out manuscripts at lower cost, more rapidly and of
better quality than you Writers can. And he says the public like his
product better. Have you seen any of it?"

"No," said Carre, "I don't know that I have. You know I never read
anything but the classics, for pleasure; nothing later than Thackeray,
or, at the latest, James Joyce. What principle do they work on?"

"I'm not an electronics man. Hartridge tells me they are specially
sensitive blocks of tubes, and that memory, including all the basic
plots of fiction, and all the basic varieties of dialog have been built
into them."

Carre shuddered. "I will never believe, in the face of any evidence,
that machines can take the place of human writers. What machine could
have written 'Alice'?"

"Calm down, Herbert. I want your help. I haven't followed developments
since the days of the early electronic computers, and I haven't time
for studying them now. And, unfortunately, I never read modern fiction
any more--no time for anything but official reports. Now I've always
respected your judgment. I want your opinion of the adequacy of the
material put out by Script-Lab."

"Have you forgotten," said Carre, "that I am a Writer? Aren't you
afraid of a biased report?"

"Not from you. I need a competent judge. And if you are forced to bring
in a favorable report, you know I'd find you a place in some other
field. I might even get you a pension."

"I hope not. Not yet."

"Go over and see Hartridge, look over his machines, and bring me a
critical estimate of the quality of their work--not just literary
quality, of course; we're interested also in entertainment value. Don't
be prejudiced. I imagine you'd be the last to deny that writing can be
damned hard work."

"You're right," said Carre. "I would be the last person to deny it.
Somehow, I've always liked the work, but if the machines can really
take our place, I will try to bow out gracefully."

       *       *       *       *       *

Once again Carre took the escalator to the Airway and moved across the
city. He tried to think of fiction plots, but he could not control his
mind. He was worried. The people standing near him were quarreling,
their shrill voices hurt his ears, and the crowd was so dense that he
could not move away.

Age, he feared, was making him irritable. As he approached his station,
he pushed towards the escalator. He brushed against a woman who was
reading a plastibacked book. She looked up, frowned, and then stamped
viciously on his extended foot. Half-stunned with pain and amazement,
Herbert managed to get to the escalator, went down, and limped slowly
through the doorway of Computer House. What had possessed the woman? he
