"But, my dear fellow--"

"Say no more about it. I have made up my mind."




CHAPTER XI.

THE FLYING APE.


It was broad day when I awoke, and oppressively warm in the little
cabin. My first thoughts were of Alumion, the consecration of our loves,
and my resolution to abide in Venus. In getting up I felt so light and
buoyant that for a moment I fancied I must be giddy, but on reflection I
ascribed the sensation to the intoxication of passion, and the
exhilarating atmosphere of the planet. I looked out of a window towards
the blessed island of my dreams, and to my blank amazement found that
_it was gone!_ I could neither see anything of the lake, the square, nor
the town, but only a bare and rugged platform of weathered rocks, and
the cloudy sky above it.

What was the matter? Had Gazen and Carmichael taken it into their heads
to make an excursion, such as we had often planned, in order to observe
something more of the country? Yes, that was it, no doubt.

Under the circumstances I was far from pleased with them for having
carried me off without asking my leave, knowing as they should have
done, that I would be eager to rejoin Alumion; but experience of travel
had taught me that a man must not expect to have it all his own way, and
should know when to let his companions have theirs, and above all things
to keep his temper. I, therefore, decided to take their behaviour in
good part, more especially as we could always return to the capital as
quickly as we had come from it.

Apparently there was nobody in the car but myself. Wondering, and
perhaps a trifle uneasy at the dead stillness, I dressed rapidly and
went outside.

The welkin was wholly overcast with dense, murky vapours, which totally
hid the sun, and the air was excessively hot, moist, and sultry as
before a thunderstorm--an unusual phenomenon in Womla. Black boulders
and crags, speckled with lichens, and carpeted with coarse herbage, shut
out the prospect on every side but one, where the edge of the platform
on which the car was resting ran along the sky. I saw it all now. Gazen
and Carmichael had made a journey to the extreme verge of the country;
to the very summit of the precipice which surrounded the Crater Land.

Picking my steps over the rough rocks like one who treads on air, I
hastened to the brink of the platform. If the car were on the further
side of the summit I should be able to see the wide ocean, but if, as I
fondly hoped, it were on the hither side, I should enjoy a far-off
glimpse of the city and its holy island, which had become a heaven to
me. How different was the scene which met my view!

I was looking away over a vast plain towards a distant range of volcanic
mountains. A broad river wound through the midst between isolated
volcanoes, curling with smoke, and thick forests of a sable hue, or
expanded into marshy lakes half lost in brakes of grisly reeds, on the
margin of which living monsters were plashing in the mud, or soaring
into the air on dusky pinions.

My first shock of surprise passed into a fearful admiration for the
savage and gloomy grandeur of the primeval landscape; but as that
feeling wore away the old irritation against my fellow-travellers came
back. From all I had heard or seen there was no such place as this in
Womla, and as it dawned upon me that they had migrated to some other
island, or perhaps continent in Venus, I forgot my good resolution, and
shouted indignantly,

"Gazen, Gazen! Hallo there! Hallo!"

There was no response, and the dead silence that swallowed up my voice
was awful. Had anything happened to my companions, and was I left alone
in this appalling solitude? Was I in my right senses, or was I not? I
shouted again at the very pitch of my voice, and this time an answering
cry came to my relief. On turning in the direction from which it
proceeded, I observed Professor Gazen coming slowly towards me, round a
mass of turretted rocks.

"What is the meaning of all this?" I demanded petulantly, as he came
near, gingerly stepping from stone to stone.

He made no reply, but seemed to be meditating what he would say.

"A nice trick you've played me! Wherever have we got to?"

"Mercury," replied Gazen coolly.

"_Mercury!_" I exclaimed, fairly astounded. "Impossible!"

"Not at all."

"Oh, come!" said I sarcastically, "that won't do. A joke is a joke; but
I'm not in a merry mood this morning."

"So I see. A laugh would do you good."

"Well, where are we?"

"In Mercury."

"What nonsense!" I ejaculated. "Last night I went to bed in Venus, and
you want me to believe that I've woke up on Mercury. Tell that to the
marines."

"Last night you say; but do you know how long you have slept? And have
you forgotten that we are now so near the sun--that the attraction of
the sun on the car has assisted the machines to propel us through the
intermediate space?"

I had not thought of that.

"Then it is true."

"Of course."

"And why have you come here--what authority--what right--had you to
carry me off in this manner without my consent?" I burst out angrily.
"You knew I had made up my mind to stay in Venus. I took you into my
confidence and told you about my love affair. Why have you betrayed that
confidence, and kidnapped me like a slave or a lunatic?"

"Hear me, old friend," said Gazen softly. "We have all noticed a decided
change in you of late--ever since the day of the ceremony on the island.
You have been like a different person--absent in your mind--incoherent
in your speech--abrupt in your manner. You have forsaken your old
friends completely, and apparently lost all interest in their doings,
all desire for their company. In short, you have behaved like a man
beside himself, distraught. We could not make it out, and we had many
anxious consultations about the matter. I wondered whether you had had a
sunstroke. Carmichael suggested that the stimulating air of Venus had
affected your brain. Miss Carmichael alone suspected that you were in
love; but I would not believe her. I had been so much in your society
without having seen anything to justify her suspicion, and you yourself
had never breathed a word to lend it colour. Carmichael and I sought to
question you about your health, and the influence of the sun and air
upon you, while Miss Carmichael tried to draw you on the subject of the
ladies. All in vain. We could not solve the mystery, and as your
condition was evidently growing worse and worse, we resolved to leave
the planet. Although it was not in the original programme, we had
sometimes talked of extending our journey to Mercury, so as to visit all
the inferior planets, and give me an opportunity of getting as near the
sun as possible for my observations, and this project was made the
pretext for hastening our departure.

"We submitted the plan to you, and you know the rest. After you had
given us your word of honour that you would break with the lady and
return home with us for the sake of your friends, after we had made all
our preparations to start, you came back at the eleventh hour, and
declared that you had made up your mind to stay behind. If anything had
been wanted to prove to us that you were hopelessly
infatuated--hypnotised--mad--it would have been that; and as we were
morally bound to fetch you back with us, we took the bull by the horns,
and carried you off in spite of yourself."

"You had no business to do anything of the kind," I replied hotly. "I am
chiefly responsible for this expedition."

"True; but you forget that Carmichael is the nominal leader, by your own
agreement, and we are all to some extent under his orders. I, too, was
bound in honour to bring you safe home if I could."

"Bound in honour to take care of _me_! You treat me like a baby."

"People don't come away on such an adventure as ours without a tacit if
not a formal understanding to protect each other to the best of their
ability, and besides, I had given my word to your friends that I would
do my best to help you through. When you come to your senses you will
acknowledge that we did right."

Despite my excusable anger and vexation, the calm and friendly
explanation of the professor was not without its effect on me. It was
true that I had broken my promise to my fellow-travellers; true that
Carmichael was commander of the expedition. I was myself at fault. And
yet what a disappointment! What would Alumion think of me! After all my
vows of eternal fidelity, uttered as they had been in that sacred spot,
I had sneaked away like a thief in the night.

"I shall go back to Venus," said I, in a determined manner.

"Tut, tut," said Gazen, with a good-natured smile; "you had better give
up that idea. You are clearly the victim of hypnotic influence--of
suggestion. By-and-by it will lose its hold on you, and you will regain
your freedom of action."

"Never!" I exclaimed, with all the energy of my soul. "My dear Gazen,
you are quite mistaken in supposing anything of the kind. I was never
saner in my life. Nay, it is only now that I know what it is to be sane;
what life was meant to be. Hypnotic suggestion! Pshaw! I know what I am
doing as well as you do. I am not a fool. I am only seeking my own
happiness--and hers--I tell you that a single moment in her society is
worth a whole lifetime on the earth. What do I say? A lifetime? An
eternity. Heaven itself were nothing to me without her. I would not take
it as a gift. I shall go back. I must go back. I cannot live without
her."

"Take time to consider at all events," said Gazen, somewhat impressed by
my vehemence. "In the meantime let us join Miss Carmichael. She is
beyond the rocks there sketching the valley."

We walked in that direction.

"You may return to the earth," said I; "but on the way you must drop me
at Venus."

Gazen had no opportunity of answering, for just at that moment we were
startled by a piercing shriek from behind the crags, and rushing, or
rather bounding forward, saw a sight that made our very blood run cold.

A flying monster, with enormous bat-like wings and hanging legs, was
evidently swooping down on Miss Carmichael, as she stood beside her
easel on the brow of the cliff.

"Run for your life!" roared Gazen, dashing towards her with frantic
speed.

Alas! she did not hear him, or else she was fascinated by the
approaching horror, and rooted to the spot. He was still several hundred
yards from her, but owing to the feebleness of gravity on the planet he
was so preternaturally light and nimble that he might have covered the
distance in a minute or so, had he been more accustomed to control his
limbs, and the ground been smoother. As it was he leaped high into the
air, and rebounded from the stones like an india-rubber ball, at the
risk of spraining his ankles or breaking his neck, while brandishing his
arms, and firing his pistol, and hooting with all his force of lung to
frighten away the monster.

Too late. The huge leathery wings of the dragon overshadowed the
shrinking form of the girl, and the talons of its drooping feet caught
in her dress. She made one desperate, but futile effort to free herself
from its terrible clutch, and, screaming loudly for help, was borne away
over the abyss of the valley as easily as a lamb is carried by an eagle.

"Oh, Heaven!" cried Gazen, stopping with a gesture of despair.

He was deeply moved, and pale as death; but he did not altogether lose
his head.

What was to be done?

"The car--the car!" he exclaimed. "We must follow her in the car. Keep
your eye on the beast while I go for it."

Carmichael was fast asleep in his cabin, after his long weary vigil
during the passage from Venus, but the car was quickly put in motion,
and I jumped on board just as it cleared the brink of the precipice.

The dragon, which had the start of us by a mile or more, was apparently
steering for the mountains on the other side of the valley.
Notwithstanding its enormous bulk, and the dead weight hanging from its
claws, it flew with surprising speed, owing to the weakness of gravity
and the vast spread of its wings.

I shall never forget that singular chase, which is probably unparalleled
in the history of the universe. A prey to anxiety and the most
distressing emotions, we did not properly observe the marvellous, the
Titanic, I had almost said the diabolical aspect of the country beneath
us, and still we could not altogether blind ourselves to it. Colossal
jungles, resembling brakes of moss and canes five hundred or a thousand
feet in height--creeks as black as porter, gliding under their dank and
rotting aisles--mountainous quadrupeds or lizards crashing and tearing
through their branches--one of them at least six hundred feet in length,
with a ridgy back and long spiky tail, dragging on the ground, a baleful
green eye, and a crooked mouth full of horrid fangs, which made it look
the very incarnation of cruelty and brute strength--black lakes and
grisly reeds as high as bamboo--prodigious black serpents troubling the
water, and rearing their long spiry necks above the surface--gigantic
alligators and crocodiles resting motionless in the shallows, with their
snouts high in the air--hideous toads or such-like forbidding reptiles,
many with tusks like the walrus, and some with glorious eyes, crouching
on the banks or waddling in the reeds, and so enormous as to give
variety to the landscape--volcanic craters, with red-hot lava simmering
in their depths, and emitting fumes of sulphur, which might have choked
us had we not closed the scuttles--while over all great dragons and
other bat-like animals were flitting through the dusky atmosphere like
demons in a nightmare.

Little by little we gained upon our quarry, but being afraid to run him
too close for fear that he might drop his victim, we kept at a safe
distance behind him, yet within rifle range, and near enough to make a
prompt attack when he should settle on the ground.

At length we reached the other side of the valley, and found to our
intense satisfaction that the monster was making for a rocky ledge on
the shoulder of an extinct volcano, where we could see the yawning mouth
of what appeared an immense cavern.

"That is probably his den," said Gazen, who was now as collected as I
have ever seen him. Nevertheless all his faculties were on the stretch.
His keen grey eye was everywhere, and his active mind was calculating
every chance. I felt then as I had often felt before that in action as
well as in thought the professor was a man of no common mark.

The event showed that his surmise was correct, for soon after he had
spoken the dragon uttered a startling cry--a kind of squawk like that of
a drake, but much louder, hoarser, shriller--and alighted on the ground.

"There is not a moment to lose," said Gazen. "We must attack him before
he enters the cave."

Certainly the darkness inside the cavern would give the beast a great
advantage, and although we might succeed in killing him, we could
scarcely hope to find Miss Carmichael alive. Was she alive now? I had my
doubts, but I kept them to myself. Since she had been carried away she
