that the ions which were in the midst of material molecules produce,
as the result of collisions, new divisions in these last. Other ions
are thus born, and this production is in part compensated for by
recombinations between ions of opposite signs. The impacts will be
more active in the event of the gas being placed in a field of force
and of the pressure being slight, the speed attained being then
greater and allowing the active force to reach a high value. The
energy necessary for the production of an ion is, in fact, according
to Professor Rutherford and Professor Stark, something considerable,
and it much exceeds the analogous force in electrolytic decomposition.

It is therefore in tubes of rarefied gas that this ionisation by
impact will be particularly felt. This gives us the reason for the
aspect presented by Geissler tubes. Generally, in the case of
discharges, new ions produced by the molecules struck come to add
themselves to the electrons produced, as will be seen, by the cathode.
A full discussion has led to the interpretation of all the known
facts, and to our understanding, for instance, why there exist bright
or dark spaces in certain regions of the tube. M. Pellat, in
particular, has given some very fine examples of this concordance
between the theory and the facts he has skilfully observed.

In all the circumstances, then, in which ions appear, their formation
has doubtless been provoked by a mechanism analogous to that of the
shock. The X rays, if they are attributable to sudden variations in
the ether--that is to say, a variation of the two vectors of Hertz--
themselves produce within the atom a kind of electric impulse which
breaks it into two electrified fragments; _i.e._ the positive centre,
the size of the molecule itself, and the negative centre, constituted
by an electron a thousand times smaller. Round these two centres, at
the ordinary temperature, are agglomerated by attraction other
molecules, and in this manner the ions whose properties have just been
studied are formed.


Sec. 4. ELECTRONS IN METALS

The success of the ionic hypothesis as an interpretation of the
conductivity of electrolytes and gases has suggested the desire to try
if a similar hypothesis can represent the ordinary conductivity of
metals. We are thus led to conceptions which at first sight seem
audacious because they are contrary to our habits of mind. They must
not, however, be rejected on that account. Electrolytic dissociation
at first certainly appeared at least as strange; yet it has ended by
forcing itself upon us, and we could, at the present day, hardly
dispense with the image it presents to us.

The idea that the conductivity of metals is not essentially different
from that of electrolytic liquids or gases, in the sense that the
passage of the current is connected with the transport of small
electrified particles, is already of old date. It was enunciated by W.
Weber, and afterwards developed by Giese, but has only obtained its
true scope through the effect of recent discoveries. It was the
researches of Riecke, later, of Drude, and, above all, those of J.J.
Thomson, which have allowed it to assume an acceptable form. All these
attempts are connected however with the general theory of Lorentz,
which we will examine later.

It will be admitted that metallic atoms can, like the saline molecule
in a solution, partially dissociate themselves. Electrons, very much
smaller than atoms, can move through the structure, considerable to
them, which is constituted by the atom from which they have just been
detached. They may be compared to the molecules of a gas which is
enclosed in a porous body. In ordinary conditions, notwithstanding the
great speed with which they are animated, they are unable to travel
long distances, because they quickly find their road barred by a
material atom. They have to undergo innumerable impacts, which throw
them first in one direction and then in another. The passage of a
current is a sort of flow of these electrons in a determined
direction. This electric flow brings, however, no modification to the
material medium traversed, since every electron which disappears at
any point is replaced by another which appears at once, and in all
metals the electrons are identical.

This hypothesis leads us to anticipate certain facts which experience
confirms. Thus J.J. Thomson shows that if, in certain conditions, a
conductor is placed in a magnetic field, the ions have to describe an
epicycloid, and their journey is thus lengthened, while the electric
resistance must increase. If the field is in the direction of the
displacement, they describe helices round the lines of force and the
resistance is again augmented, but in different proportions. Various
experimenters have noted phenomena of this kind in different
substances.

For a long time it has been noticed that a relation exists between the
calorific and the electric conductivity; the relation of these two
conductivities is sensibly the same for all metals. The modern theory
tends to show simply that it must indeed be so. Calorific conductivity
is due, in fact, to an exchange of electrons between the hot and the
cold regions, the heated electrons having the greater velocity, and
consequently the more considerable energy. The calorific exchanges
then obey laws similar to those which govern electric exchanges; and
calculation even leads to the exact values which the measurements have
given.[31]

[Footnote 31: The whole of this argument is brilliantly set forth by
Professor Lorentz in a lecture delivered to the Electrotechnikerverein
at Berlin in December 1904, and reprinted, with additions, in the
_Archives Neerlandaises_ of 1906.--ED.]

In the same way Professor Hesehus has explained how contact
electrification is produced, by the tendency of bodies to equalise
their superficial properties by means of a transport of electrons, and
Mr Jeans has shown that we should discover the existence of the
well-known laws of distribution over conducting bodies in electrostatic
equilibrium. A metal can, in fact, be electrified, that is to say, may
possess an excess of positive or negative electrons which cannot
easily leave it in ordinary conditions. To cause them to do so would
need an appreciable amount of work, on account of the enormous
difference of the specific inductive capacities of the metal and of
the insulating medium in which it is plunged.

Electrons, however, which, on arriving at the surface of the metal,
possessed a kinetic energy superior to this work, might be shot forth
and would be disengaged as a vapour escapes from a liquid. Now, the
number of these rapid electrons, at first very slight, increases,
according to the kinetic theory, when the temperature rises, and
therefore we must reckon that a wire, on being heated, gives out
electrons, that is to say, loses negative electricity and sends into
the surrounding media electrified centres capable of producing the
phenomena of ionisation. Edison, in 1884, showed that from the
filament of an incandescent lamp there escaped negative electric
charges. Since then, Richardson and J.J. Thomson have examined
analogous phenomena. This emission is a very general phenomenon which,
no doubt, plays a considerable part in cosmic physics. Professor
Arrhenius explains, for instance, the polar auroras by the action of
similar corpuscules emitted by the sun.

In other phenomena we seem indeed to be confronted by an emission, not
of negative electrons, but of positive ions. Thus, when a wire is
heated, not _in vacuo_, but in a gas, this wire begins to electrify
neighbouring bodies positively. J.J. Thomson has measured the mass of
these positive ions and finds it considerable, i.e. about 150 times
that of an atom of hydrogen. Some are even larger, and constitute
almost a real grain of dust. We here doubtless meet with the phenomena
of disaggregation undergone by metals at a red heat.




CHAPTER IX

CATHODE RAYS AND RADIOACTIVE BODIES


Sec. 1. THE CATHODE RAYS

A wire traversed by an electric current is, as has just been
explained, the seat of a movement of electrons. If we cut this wire, a
flood of electrons, like a current of water which, at the point where
a pipe bursts, flows out in abundance, will appear to spring out
between the two ends of the break.

If the energy of the electrons is sufficient, these electrons will in
fact rush forth and be propagated in the air or in the insulating
medium interposed; but the phenomena of the discharge will in general
be very complex. We shall here only examine a particularly simple
case, viz., that of the cathode rays; and without entering into
details, we shall only note the results relating to these rays which
furnish valuable arguments in favour of the electronic hypothesis and
supply solid materials for the construction of new theories of
electricity and matter.

For a long time it was noticed that the phenomena in a Geissler tube
changed their aspect considerably, when the gas pressure became very
weak, without, however, a complete vacuum being formed. From the
cathode there is shot forth normally and in a straight line a flood
within the tube, dark but capable of impressing a photographic plate,
of developing the fluorescence of various substances (particularly the
glass walls of the tube), and of producing calorific and mechanical
effects. These are the cathode rays, so named in 1883 by E. Wiedemann,
and their name, which was unknown to a great number of physicists till
barely twelve years ago, has become popular at the present day.

About 1869, Hittorf made an already very complete study of them and
put in evidence their principal properties; but it was the researches
of Sir W. Crookes in especial which drew attention to them. The
celebrated physicist foresaw that the phenomena which were thus
produced in rarefied gases were, in spite of their very great
complication, more simple than those presented by matter under the
conditions in which it is generally met with.

He devised a celebrated theory no longer admissible in its entirety,
because it is not in complete accord with the facts, which was,
however, very interesting, and contained, in germ, certain of our
present ideas. In the opinion of Crookes, in a tube in which the gas
has been rarefied we are in presence of a special state of matter. The
number of the gas molecules has become small enough for their
independence to be almost absolute, and they are able in this
so-called radiant state to traverse long spaces without departing
from a straight line. The cathode rays are due to a kind of molecular
bombardment of the walls of the tubes, and of the screens which can be
introduced into them; and it is the molecules, electrified by their
contact with the cathode and then forcibly repelled by electrostatic
action, which produce, by their movement and their _vis viva_, all the
phenomena observed. Moreover, these electrified molecules animated
with extremely rapid velocities correspond, according to the theory
verified in the celebrated experiment of Rowland on convection
currents, to a true electric current, and can be deviated by a magnet.

Notwithstanding the success of Crookes' experiments, many physicists--
the Germans especially--did not abandon an hypothesis entirely
different from that of radiant matter. They continued to regard the
cathode radiation as due to particular radiations of a nature still
little known but produced in the luminous ether. This interpretation
seemed, indeed, in 1894, destined to triumph definitely through the
remarkable discovery of Lenard, a discovery which, in its turn, was to
provoke so many others and to bring about consequences of which the
importance seems every day more considerable.

Professor Lenard's fundamental idea was to study the cathode rays
under conditions different from those in which they are produced.
These rays are born in a very rarefied space, under conditions
perfectly determined by Sir W. Crookes; but it was a question whether,
when once produced, they would be capable of propagating themselves in
other media, such as a gas at ordinary pressure, or even in an
absolute vacuum. Experiment alone could answer this question, but
there were difficulties in the way of this which seemed almost
insurmountable. The rays are stopped by glass even of slight
thickness, and how then could the almost vacuous space in which they
have to come into existence be separated from the space, absolutely
vacuous or filled with gas, into which it was desired to bring them?

The artifice used was suggested to Professor Lenard by an experiment
of Hertz. The great physicist had, in fact, shortly before his
premature death, taken up this important question of the cathode rays,
and his genius left there, as elsewhere, its powerful impress. He had
shown that metallic plates of very slight thickness were transparent
to the cathode rays; and Professor Lenard succeeded in obtaining
plates impermeable to air, but which yet allowed the pencil of cathode
rays to pass through them.

Now if we take a Crookes tube with the extremity hermetically closed
by a metallic plate with a slit across the diameter of 1 mm. in width,
and stop this slit with a sheet of very thin aluminium, it will be
immediately noticed that the rays pass through the aluminium and pass
outside the tube. They are propagated in air at atmospheric pressure,
and they can also penetrate into an absolute vacuum. They therefore
can no longer be attributed to radiant matter, and we are led to think
that the energy brought into play in this phenomenon must have its
seat in the light-bearing ether itself.

But it is a very strange light which is thus subject to magnetic
action, which does not obey the principle of equal angles, and for
which the most various gases are already disturbed media. According to
Crookes it possesses also the singular property of carrying with it
electric charges.

This convection of negative electricity by the cathode rays seems
quite inexplicable on the hypothesis that the rays are ethereal
radiations. Nothing then remained in order to maintain this
hypothesis, except to deny the convection, which, besides, was only
established by indirect experiments. That the reality of this
transport has been placed beyond dispute by means of an extremely
elegant experiment which is all the more convincing that it is so very
simple, is due to M. Perrin. In the interior of a Crookes tube he
collected a pencil of cathode rays in a metal cylinder. According to
the elementary principles of electricity the cylinder must become
charged with the whole charge, if there be one, brought to it by the
rays, and naturally various precautions had to be taken. But the
result was very precise, and doubt could no longer exist--the rays
were electrified.

It might have been, and indeed was, maintained, some time after this
experiment was published, that while the phenomena were complex inside
the tube, outside, things might perhaps occur differently. Lenard
himself, however, with that absence of even involuntary prejudice
common to all great minds, undertook to demonstrate that the opinion
he at first held could no longer be accepted, and succeeded in
repeating the experiment of M. Perrin on cathode rays in the air and
even _in vacuo_.

On the wrecks of the two contradictory hypotheses thus destroyed, and
out of the materials from which they had been built, a theory has been
constructed which co-ordinates all the known facts. This theory is
furthermore closely allied to the theory of ionisation, and, like this
latter, is based on the concept of the electron. Cathode rays are
electrons in rapid motion.

The phenomena produced both inside and outside a Crookes tube are,
however, generally complex. In Lenard's first experiments, and in many
others effected later when this region of physics was still very
little known, a few confusions may be noticed even at the present day.

At the spot where the cathode rays strike the walls of the tube the
essentially different X rays appear. These differ from the cathode
radiations by being neither electrified nor deviated by a magnet. In
their turn these X rays may give birth to the secondary rays of M.
Sagnac; and often we find ourselves in presence of effects from these
last-named radiations and not from the true cathode rays.

The electrons, when they are propagated in a gas, can ionise the
molecules of this gas and unite with the neutral atoms to form
negative ions, while positive ions also appear. There are likewise
produced, at the expense of the gas still subsisting after
rarefication within the tube, positive ions which, attracted by the
cathode and reaching it, are not all neutralised by the negative
electrons, and can, if the cathode be perforated, pass through it, and
if not, pass round it. We have then what are called the canal rays of
Goldstein, which are deviated by an electric or magnetic field in a
contrary direction to the cathode rays; but, being larger, give weak
deviations or may even remain undeviated through losing their charge
when passing through the cathode.

It may also be the parts of the walls at a distance from the cathode
which send a positive rush to the latter, by a similar mechanism. It
may be, again, that in certain regions of the tube cathode rays are
met with diffused by some solid object, without having thereby changed
their nature. All these complexities have been cleared up by M.
Villard, who has published, on these questions, some remarkably
ingenious and particularly careful experiments.

M. Villard has also studied the phenomena of the coiling of the rays
in a field, as already pointed out by Hittorf and Pluecker. When a
magnetic field acts on the cathode particle, the latter follows a
trajectory, generally helicoidal, which is anticipated by the theory.
We here have to do with a question of ballistics, and experiments duly
confirm the anticipations of the calculation. Nevertheless, rather
singular phenomena appear in the case of certain values of the field,
and these phenomena, dimly seen by Pluecker and Birkeland, have been
the object of experiments by M. Villard. The two faces of the cathode
seem to emit rays which are deviated in a direction perpendicular to
the lines of force by an electric field, and do not seem to be
electrified. M. Villard calls them magneto-cathode rays, and according
to M. Fortin these rays may be ordinary cathode rays, but of very
slight velocity.

In certain cases the cathode itself may be superficially
disaggregated, and extremely tenuous particles detach themselves,
which, being carried off at right angles to its surface, may deposit
themselves like a very thin film on objects placed in their path.
Various physicists, among them M. Houllevigue, have studied this
phenomenon, and in the case of pressures between 1/20 and 1/100 of a
millimetre, the last-named scholar has obtained mirrors of most
metals, a phenomenon he designates by the name of ionoplasty.

But in spite of all these accessory phenomena, which even sometimes
conceal those first observed, the existence of the electron in the
cathodic flux remains the essential characteristic.

The electron can be apprehended in the cathodic ray by the study of
its essential properties; and J.J. Thomson gave great value to the
hypothesis by his measurements. At first he meant to determine the
speed of the cathode rays by direct experiment, and by observing, in a
revolving mirror, the relative displacement of two bands due to the
excitement of two fluorescent screens placed at different distances
from the cathode. But he soon perceived that the effect of the
fluorescence was not instantaneous, and that the lapse of time might
form a great source of error, and he then had recourse to indirect
methods. It is possible, by a simple calculation, to estimate the
deviations produced on the rays by a magnetic and an electric field
respectively as a function of the speed of propagation and of the
relation of the charge to the material mass of the electron. The
measurement of these deviations will then permit this speed and this
relation to be ascertained.

Other processes may be used which all give the same two quantities by
two suitably chosen measurements. Such are the radius of the curve
taken by the trajectory of the pencil in a perpendicular magnetic
field and the measure of the fall of potential under which the
discharge takes place, or the measure of the total quantity
of electricity carried in one second and the measure of the
calorific energy which may be given, during the same period, to a
thermo-electric junction. The results agree as well as can be expected,
having regard to the difficulty of the experiments; the values of the
speed agree also with those which Professor Wiechert has obtained by
direct measurement.

The speed never depends on the nature of the gas contained in the
Crookes tube, but varies with the value of the fall of potential at
the cathode. It is of the order of one tenth of the speed of light,
and it may rise as high as one third. The cathode particle therefore
goes about three thousand times faster than the earth in its orbit.
The relation is also invariable, even when the substance of which the
cathode is formed is changed or one gas is substituted for another. It
is, on the average, a thousand times greater than the corresponding
relation in electrolysis. As experiment has shown, in all the
circumstances where it has been possible to effect measurements, the
equality of the charges carried by all corpuscules, ions, atoms, etc.,
we ought to consider that the charge of the electron is here, again,
that of a univalent ion in electrolysis, and therefore that its mass
is only a small fraction of that of the atom of hydrogen, viz., of the
order of about a thousandth part. This is the same result as that to
which we were led by the study of flames.

The thorough examination of the cathode radiation, then, confirms us
in the idea that every material atom can be dissociated and will yield
an electron much smaller than itself--and always identical whatever
the matter whence it comes,--the rest of the atom remaining charged
with a positive quantity equal and contrary to that borne by the
electron. In the present case these positive ions are no doubt those
that we again meet with in the canal rays. Professor Wien has shown
that their mass is really, in fact, of the order of the mass of atoms.
Although they are all formed of identical electrons, there may be
various cathode rays, because the velocity is not exactly the same for
all electrons. Thus is explained the fact that we can separate them
and that we can produce a sort of spectrum by the action of the
magnet, or, again, as M. Deslandres has shown in a very interesting
experiment, by that of an electrostatic field. This also probably
explains the phenomena studied by M. Villard, and previously pointed
out.


Sec. 2. RADIOACTIVE SUBSTANCES

Even in ordinary conditions, certain substances called radioactive
emit, quite outside any particular reaction, radiations complex
indeed, but which pass through fairly thin layers of minerals, impress
photographic plates, excite fluorescence, and ionize gases. In these
radiations we again find electrons which thus escape spontaneously
from radioactive bodies.

It is not necessary to give here a history of the discovery of radium,
for every one knows the admirable researches of M. and Madame Curie.
But subsequent to these first studies, a great number of facts have
accumulated for the last six years, among which some people find
themselves a little lost. It may, perhaps, not be useless to indicate
the essential results actually obtained.

The researches on radioactive substances have their starting-point in
the discovery of the rays of uranium made by M. Becquerel in 1896. As
early as 1867 Niepce de St Victor proved that salts of uranium
impressed photographic plates in the dark; but at that time the
phenomenon could only pass for a singularity attributable to
phosphorescence, and the valuable remarks of Niepce fell into
oblivion. M. Becquerel established, after some hesitations natural in
the face of phenomena which seemed so contrary to accepted ideas, that
the radiating property was absolutely independent of phosphorescence,
that all the salts of uranium, even the uranous salts which are not
phosphorescent, give similar radiant effects, and that these phenomena
correspond to a continuous emission of energy, but do not seem to be
the result of a storage of energy under the influence of some external
radiation. Spontaneous and constant, the radiation is insensible to
variations of temperature and light.

The nature of these radiations was not immediately understood,[32] and
their properties seemed contradictory. This was because we were not
dealing with a single category of rays. But amongst all the effects
there is one which constitutes for the radiations taken as a whole, a
veritable process for the measurement of radioactivity. This is their
ionizing action on gases. A very complete study of the conductivity of
