    rancid. Smooth surface of sound wood looks and feels greasy or waxy.
    Moderate contrast between early and late wood. Color varies from
    straw color to dark brown, often with reddish and greenish tinge.
    Heartwood more deeply colored than the sapwood but without distinct
    boundary line.

    Wood used in general construction, especially in places where
    durability is required; also for shingles, cooperage, posts, and
    poles.

4. Red Cedar. Has a distinct aromatic odor. Wood uniform-textured; late
    wood usually very thin, inconspicuous. Color deep reddish brown or
    purple, becoming dull upon exposure; numerous minute red dots often
    visible under lens. Sapwood white. Red cedar can be distinguished
    from all the other conifers mentioned by the deep color of the wood
    and the very distinct aromatic odor.

    Wood largely used for pencils; also for chests and cabinets, posts,
    and poles. It is very durable in contact with the ground.

    _Western red cedar_ is lighter, softer, less deeply colored and less
    fragrant than the common Eastern cedar. It grows along the Pacific
    Coast and is extensively used for shingles throughout the country.

5. Redwood. Wood odorless and tasteless, uniform-textured, light and
    weak, rather coarse and harsh. Color light cherry. Close inspection
    under lens of a small split surface will reveal many little resin
    masses that appear as rows of black or amber beads which are
    characteristic of this wood.

    Redwood is confined to portions of the Pacific Coast. It is used for
    house construction, interior finish, tanks and flumes, shingles,
    posts, and boxes. It is very durable.



II. WOODS WITH PORES--BROADLEAF, OR SO-CALLED "HARDWOODS"


A. Ring-porous.


1. Woods with a portion of the rays very large and conspicuous.

Oak. The wood of all of the oaks is heavy, hard, and strong. They may be
    separated into two groups. The white oaks and the red or black oaks.

  (a) White oaks. Pores in early wood plugged with tyloses, collected in
    a few rows. Fig. 146. The transition from the large pores to the
    small ones in the late wood is abrupt. The latter are very small,
    numerous, and appear as irregular grayish bands widening toward the
    outer edge of the annual ring. Impossible usually to see into the
    small pores with magnifier.

  (b) Red or black oaks. Pores are usually open though tyloses may
    occur, Fig. 147; the early wood pores are in several rows and the
    transition to the small ones in late wood is gradual. The latter are
    fewer, larger and more distinct than in white oak and it is
    possible to see into them with a hand lens.

    The wood of the oaks is used for all kinds of furniture, interior
    finish, cooperage, vehicles, cross-ties, posts, fuel, and
    construction timber.

2. Woods with none of the rays large and conspicuous.

(a) Pores in late wood small and in radial lines, wood parenchyma in
inconspicuous tangential lines.

Chestnut. Pores in early wood in a broad band, oval in shape, mostly
    free from tyloses. Pores in late wood in flame-like radial white
    patches that are plainly visible without lens. Color medium brown.
    Nearly odorless and tasteless. Chestnut is readily separated from
    oak by its weight and absence of large rays; from black ash by the
    arrangement of the pores in the late wood; from sassafras by the
    arrangement of the pores in the late wood, the less conspicuous
    rays, and the lack of distinct color.

    The wood is used for cross-ties, telegraph and telephone poles,
    posts, furniture, cooperage, and tannin extract. Durable in contact
    with the ground.

(b) Pores in late wood small, not radially arranged, being distributed
singly or in groups. Wood parenchyma around pores or extending wing-like
from pores in late wood, often forming irregular tangential lines.

1. Ash. Pores in early wood in a rather broad band (occasionally
    narrow), oval in shape, see Fig. 148, tyloses present. Color brown
    to white, sometimes with reddish tinge to late wood. Odorless and
    tasteless. There are several species of ash that are classed as
    white ash and one that is called black or brown ash.

  (a) White ash. Wood heavy, hard, strong, mostly light colored except
    in old heartwood, which is reddish. Pores in late wood, especially
    in the outer part of the annual ring, are joined by lines of wood
    parenchyma.

  (b) Black ash. Wood more porous, lighter, softer, weaker, and darker
    colored than white ash. Pores in late wood fewer and larger and
    rarely joined by tangential lines of wood parenchyma.

    The wood of the ashes is used for wagon and carriage stock,
    agricultural implements, oars, furniture, interior finish, and
    cooperage. It is the best wood for bent work.

[Illustration: FIG. 149.--Hickory Wood. (Magnified 45 times.)]

2. Locust. Pores in early wood in a rather narrow band, round, variable
    in size, densely filled with tyloses. Color varying from golden
    yellow to brown, often with greenish hue. Very thin sapwood, white.
    Odorless and almost tasteless. Wood extremely heavy and hard,
    cutting like horn. Locust bears little resemblance to ash, being
    harder, heavier, of a different color, with more distinct rays, and
    with the pores in late wood in larger groups.

    The wood is used for posts, cross-ties, wagon hubs, and insulator
    pins. It is very durable in contact with the ground.

(c) Pores in late wood comparatively large, not in groups or lines.
Wood parenchyma in numerous fine but distinct tangential lines.

[Illustration: FIG. 150.--Elm. (Magnified 25 times.)]

Hickory, Fig. 149. Pores in early wood moderately large, not abundant,
    nearly round, filled with tyloses. Color brown to reddish brown;
    thick sapwood, white. Odorless and tasteless. Wood very heavy, hard,
    and strong. Hickory is readily separated from ash by the fine
    tangential lines of wood parenchyma and from oak by the absence of
    large rays.

    The wood is largely used for vehicles, tool handles, agricultural
    implements, athletic goods, and fuel.

(d) Pores in late wood small and in conspicuous wavy tangential bands.
Wood parenchyma not in tangential lines.

Elm. Pores in early wood not large and mostly in a single row, Fig. 150
    (several rows in slippery elm), round, tyloses present. Color brown,
    often with reddish tinge. Odorless and tasteless. Wood rather heavy
    and hard, tough, often difficult to split. The peculiar arrangement
    of the pores in the late wood readily distinguishes elm from all
    other woods except _hackberry_, from which it may be told by the
    fact that in elm the medullary rays are indistinct, while they are
    quite distinct in hackberry; moreover, the color of hackberry is
    yellow or grayish yellow instead of brown or reddish brown as in
    elm.

    The wood is used principally for slack cooperage; also for hubs,
    baskets, agricultural implements, and fuel.

[Illustration: FIG. 151.--(Magnified about 8 times.)]


B. Diffuse-porous.

1. Pores varying in size from rather large to minute, the largest being
in the early wood. Intermediate between ring-porous and diffuse-porous.

Black Walnut. Color rich dark or chocolate brown. Odor mild but
    characteristic. Tasteless or nearly so. Wood parenchyma in numerous,
    fine tangential lines. Wood heavy and hard, moderately stiff and
    strong. The wood is used principally for furniture, cabinets,
    interior finish, moulding, and gun stocks.

2. Pores all minute or indistinct, evenly distributed throughout annual
ring.

(a) With conspicuously broad rays.

1. Sycamore. Fig. 151. Rays practically all broad. Color light brown,
    often with dark stripes or "feather grain." Wood of medium weight
    and strength, usually cross-grained, difficult to split.

    The wood is used for general construction, woodenware, novelties,
    interior finish, and boxes.

2. Beech. With only a part of the rays broad, the others very fine, Fig.
    151. Color pale reddish brown to white; uniform. Wood heavy, hard,
    strong, usually straight-grained.

    The wood is used for cheap furniture, turnery, cooperage,
    woodenware, novelties, cross-ties, and fuel. Much of it is
    distilled.

(b) Without conspicuously broad rays.

1. Cherry. Rays rather fine but very distinct. Color of wood reddish
    brown. Wood rather heavy, hard, and strong.

    The wood is used for furniture, cabinet work, moulding, interior
    finish, and miscellaneous articles.

2. Maple, Fig. 152. With part of the rays rather broad and conspicuous,
    the others very fine. Color light brown tinged with red. The wood of
    the hard maple is very heavy, hard and strong; that of the soft
    maples is rather light, fairly strong. Maple most closely resembles
    birch, but can be distinguished from it through the fact that in
    maple the rays are considerably more conspicuous than in birch.

    The wood is used for slack cooperage, flooring, interior finish,
    furniture, musical instruments, handles, and destructive
    distillation.

3. Tulip-tree, yellow poplar or whitewood. Rays all fine but distinct.
    Color yellow or brownish yellow; sapwood white. Wood light and soft,
    straight-grained, easy to work.

    The wood is used for boxes, woodenware, tops and bodies of vehicles,
    interior finish, furniture, and pulp.

4. Red or sweet gum. Rays all fine but somewhat less distinct than in
    tulip tree. Color reddish brown, often with irregular dark streaks
    producing a "watered" effect on smooth boards; thick sapwood,
    grayish white. Wood rather heavy, moderately hard, cross-grained,
    difficult to work.

    The best grades of figured red gum resemble Circassian walnut, but
    the latter has much larger pores unevenly distributed and is less
    cross-grained than red gum.

    The wood is used for finishing, flooring, furniture, veneers, slack
    cooperage, boxes, and gun stocks.

[Illustration: FIG. 152.--Maple. (Magnified 25 times.)]

5. Black or sweet birch, Fig. 151. Rays variable in size but all rather
    indistinct. Color brown, tinged with red, often deep and handsome.
    Wood heavy, hard, and strong, straight-grained, readily worked. Is
    darker in color and has less prominent rays than maple.

    The wood is used for furniture, cabinet work, finishing, and
    distillation.

6. Cottonwood. Rays extremely fine and scarcely visible even under lens.
    Color pale dull brown or grayish brown. Wood light, soft, not
    strong, straight-grained, fairly easy to work. Cottonwood can be
    separated from other light and soft woods by the fineness of its
    rays, which is equaled only by willow, which it rather closely
    resembles. The wood is largely used for boxes, general construction,
    lumber, and pulp.



How to judge the quality of wood: To know the name of a piece of wood
    means, in a general way, to know certain qualities that are common
    to all other pieces of wood of that species, but it does not explain
    the special peculiarities of the piece in question or why that
    particular piece is more suitable or unsuitable for a particular
    purpose than another piece of the same species. The mere
    identification of the wood does not explain why a particular piece
    is tougher, stronger or of darker color than another piece of the
    same species or even of the same tree. The reason for these special
    differences lies in the fact that wood is not a homogeneous material
    like metal. Within the same tree different parts vary in quality.
    The heartwood is generally heavier and of deeper color than the
    sapwood. The butt is superior to the top wood, and the manner in
    which the wood was sawed and dried will affect its quality. Knots,
    splits, checks, and discoloration due to incipient decay are defects
    worth considering. Wood that looks lusterless is usually defective,
    because the lack of luster is generally due to disease. Woods that
    are hard wear best. Hardness can be determined readily by striking
    the wood with a hammer and noting the sound produced. A clear,
    ringing sound is a sign of hardness. The strength of a piece of wood
    can be judged by its weight after it is well dried. Heavy woods are
    usually strong. A large amount of late wood is an indication of
    strength and the production of a clear sound when struck with a
    hammer is also an evidence of strength.




CHAPTER IX

AN OUTDOOR LESSON ON TREES


The importance of nature study in the training of the child is now well
recognized. The influences of such study from the hygienic, moral and
aesthetic point of view are far reaching and cannot be expressed in
dollars and cents. In his association with nature, the child is led to
observe more closely and to know and to be fond of what is truly
beautiful in life--beautiful surroundings, beautiful thoughts and
beautiful deeds. He is inspired with reverence for law, order and truth
because he sees it constantly reflected in all works of nature. The
social instinct is highly developed and even the parents are often
bettered through the agency of their children.

The only way, however, to study nature--especially plants--is to study
it out of doors. Our present tendency to gather in cities demands the
upbuilding influences of trips into the open in order to equip the child
mentally and physically to face the world and its work with the strength
and tenacity characteristic of the country-bred. Moreover, the study of
objects rather than books is an axiom in modern education and here, too,
we can readily see that the best way to study trees is to take the pupil
to the trees. Such studies are more lasting than book study because they
emphasize the spirit and the goal rather than the petty facts.

Educators and parents are now recognizing the value of outdoor trips
for their children and are beginning to indulge in them quite
frequently. In many instances teachers about to take out their children
for a day have inquired of the writer how to go about giving a general
field lesson when they reached the park or woodland. The purpose of this
chapter is to answer such a question and yet it is evident that it
cannot be answered completely. What to observe out doors and how to
present one's impressions is a broad question and varies with the
knowledge and ability of the teacher as well as with the age and
experience of the children. The how and the what in nature study is of
greater import than the hard, dry facts and that must be left entirely
to the teacher. A few suggestions, however, may not be amiss:

1. General observations with a view to character building: First of all
    it is important to remember that the great value of all tree and
    nature study is the inculcation in the minds of the children of an
    appreciation and love for the beautiful. Inspiring them to _love_
    trees generally means more than teaching them to _know_ trees. Mere
    facts about trees taught in an academic way are often no more
    lasting than the formulae in trigonometry which most of us have long
    ago forgotten. The important thing is that permanent results be left
    and nothing else will produce such lasting impressions as the study
    of trees out of doors.

[Illustration: FIG. 153.--Trees Have Individuality.]

