creeping in to snuggle closer to Dal's side, and a pair of shoe-button
eyes appeared and blinked up at him trustingly. But the other creature
was moving down his arm, straining out toward the Bruckian spokesman....

Dal realized instantly what was happening. He started to draw back, but
something stopped him. Deep in his mind he could sense a gentle voice
reassuring him, saying, _It's all right, there is nothing to fear, no
harm will come to me. These creatures need help, and this is the way to
help them._

He saw the Bruckian reach out a trembling hand. The tiny pink creature
that had separated from Fuzzy seemed almost to leap across to the
outstretched hand. And then the spokesman held him close, and the new
Fuzzy shivered happily.

The virus-creatures had found a host. Here was the ideal kind of body
for their intelligence to work with and mold, a host where
antibody-formation could be perfectly controlled. Dal knew now that the
problem had almost been solved once before, when the virus-creature had
reached Fuzzy on the ship; if they had only waited a little longer they
would have seen Fuzzy recover from his illness a different creature
entirely than before.

Already the new creature was dividing again, with half going on to the
next of the Bruckians. To a submicroscopic virus, the body of the host
would not have to be large; soon there would be a sufficient number of
hosts to serve the virus-creatures' needs forever. As he started back up
the ladder to the ship, Dal knew that the problem on 31 Brucker VII had
found a happy and permanent solution.

       *       *       *       *       *

Back in the control room Dal related what had happened from beginning to
end. There was only one detail that he concealed. He could not bring
himself to tell Tiger and Jack of the true nature of his relationship
with Fuzzy, of the odd power over the emotions of others that Fuzzy's
presence gave him. He could tell by their faces that they realized that
he was leaving something out; they had watched him go down to face a
blood-thirsty mob, and had seen that mob become docile as lambs as
though by magic. Clearly they could not understand what had happened,
yet they did not ask him.

"So it was Fuzzy's idea to volunteer as a new host for the creatures,"
Jack said.

Dal nodded. "I knew that he could reproduce, of course," he said. "Every
Garvian has a Fuzzy, and whenever a new Garvian is born, the father's
Fuzzy always splits so that half can join the new-born child. It's like
the division of a cell; within hours the Fuzzy that stayed down there
will have divided to provide enough protoplasm for every one of the
surviving intelligent Bruckians."

"And your diagnosis was the right one," Jack said.

"We'll see," Dal said. "Tomorrow we'll know better."

But clearly the problem had been solved. The next day there was an
excited conference between the spokesman and the doctors on the
_Lancet_. The Bruckians had elected to maintain the same host body as
before. They had gotten used to it; with the small pink creatures
serving as a shelter to protect them against the deadly antibodies, they
could live in peace and security. But they were eager, before the
_Lancet_ disembarked, to sign a full medical service contract with the
doctors from Hospital Earth. A contract was signed, subject only to
final acceptance and ratification by the Hospital Earth officials.

Now that their radio was free again, the three doctors jubilantly
prepared a full account of the problem of 31 Brucker and its solution,
and dispatched the news of the new contract to the first relay station
on its way back to Hospital Earth. Then, weary to the point of collapse,
they retired for the first good sleep in days, eagerly awaiting an
official response from Hospital Earth on the completed case and the
contract.

"It ought to wipe out any black mark Dr. Tanner has against any of us,"
Jack said happily. "And especially in Dal's case." He grinned at the Red
Doctor. "This one has been yours, all the way. You pulled it out of the
fire after I flubbed it completely, and you're going to get the credit,
if I have anything to say about it."

"We should all get credit," Dal said. "A new contract isn't signed every
day of the year. But the way we all fumbled our way into it, Hospital
Earth shouldn't pay much attention to it anyway."

But Dal knew that he was only throwing up his habitual shield to guard
against disappointment. Traditionally, a new contract meant a Star
rating for each of the crew that brought it in. All through medical
school Dal had read the reports of other patrol ships that had secured
new contracts with uncontacted planets, and he had seen the fanfare and
honor that were heaped on the doctors from those ships. And for the
first time since he had entered medical school years before, Dal now
allowed himself to hope that his goal was in sight.

He wanted to be a Star Surgeon more than anything else. It was the one
thing that he had wanted and worked for since the cruel days when the
plague had swept his homeland, destroying his mother and leaving his
father an ailing cripple. And since his assignment aboard the _Lancet_,
one thought had filled his mind: to turn in the scarlet collar and cuff
in return for the cape and silver star of the full-fledged physician in
the Red Service of Surgery.

Always before there had been the half-conscious dread that something
would happen, that in the end, after all the work, the silver star would
still remain just out of reach, that somehow he would never quite get
it.

But now there could be no question. Even Black Doctor Tanner could not
deny a new contract. The crew of the _Lancet_ would be called back to
Hospital Earth for a full report on the newly contacted race, and their
days as probationary doctors in the General Practice patrol would be
over.

After they had slept themselves out, the doctors prepared the ship for
launching, and made their farewells to the Bruckian spokesman.

"When the contract is ratified," Jack said, "a survey ship will come
here. They will have all of the information that we have gathered, and
they will spend many months gathering more. Tell them everything they
want to know. Don't conceal anything, because once they have completed
their survey, any General Practice Patrol ship in the galaxy will be
able to answer a call for help and have the information they need to
serve you."

They delayed launching hour by hour waiting for a response from Hospital
Earth, but the radio was silent. They thought of a dozen reasons why the
message might have been delayed, but the radio silence continued.
Finally they strapped down and lifted the ship from the planet, still
waiting for a response.

When it finally came, there was no message of congratulations, nor even
any acknowledgment of the new contract. Instead, there was only a terse
message:

      PROCEED TO REFERENCE POINT 43621 SECTION XIX AND STAND BY
      FOR INSPECTION PARTY

Tiger took the message and read it in silence, then handed it to Dal.

"What do they say?" Jack said.

"Read it," Dal said. "They don't mention the contract, just an
inspection party."

"Inspection party! Is that the best they can do for us?"

"They don't sound too enthusiastic," Tiger said. "At least you'd think
they could acknowledge receipt of our report."

"It's probably just part of the routine," Dal said. "Maybe they want to
confirm our reports from our own records before they commit themselves."

But he knew that he was only whistling in the dark. The moment he saw
the terse message, he knew something had gone wrong with the contract.
There would be no notes of congratulation, no returning in triumph and
honor to Hospital Earth.

Whatever the reason for the inspection party, Dal felt certain who the
inspector was going to be.

It had been exciting to dream, but the scarlet cape and the silver star
were still a long way out of reach.




CHAPTER 12

THE SHOWDOWN


It was hours later when their ship reached the contact point
co-ordinates. There had been little talk during the transit; each of
them knew already what the other was thinking, and there wasn't much to
be said. The message had said it for them.

Dal's worst fears were realized when the inspection ship appeared,
converting from Koenig drive within a few miles of the _Lancet_. He had
seen the ship before--a sleek, handsomely outfitted patrol class ship
with the insignia of the Black Service of Pathology emblazoned on its
hull, the private ship of a Four-star Black Doctor.

But none of them anticipated the action taken by the inspection ship as
it drew within lifeboat range of the _Lancet_.

A scooter shot away from its storage rack on the black ship, and a crew
of black-garbed technicians piled into the _Lancet_'s entrance lock,
dressed in the special decontamination suits worn when a ship was
returning from a plague spot into uninfected territory.

"What is this?" Tiger demanded as the technicians started unloading
decontamination gear into the lock. "What are you doing with that
stuff?"

The squad leader looked at him sourly. "You're in quarantine, Doc," he
said. "Class I, all precautions, contact with unidentified pestilence.
If you don't like it, argue with the Black Doctor, I've just got a job
to do."

He started shouting orders to his men, and they scattered throughout the
ship, with blowers and disinfectants, driving antiseptic sprays into
every crack and cranny of the ship's interior, scouring the hull outside
in the rigid pattern prescribed for plague ships. They herded the
doctors into the decontamination lock, stripped them of their clothes,
scrubbed them down and tossed them special sterilized fatigues to wear
with masks and gloves.

"This is idiotic," Jack protested. "We aren't carrying any dangerous
organisms!"

The squad leader shrugged indifferently. "Tell it to the Black Doctor,
not me. All I know is that this ship is under quarantine until it's
officially released, and from what I hear, it's not going to be released
for quite some time."

At last the job was done, and the scooter departed back to the
inspection ship. A few moments later they saw it returning, this time
carrying just three men. In addition to the pilot and one technician,
there was a single passenger: a portly figure dressed in a black robe,
horn-rimmed glasses and cowl.

The scooter grappled the _Lancet_'s side, and Black Doctor Hugo Tanner
climbed wheezing into the entrance lock, followed by the technician. He
stopped halfway into the lock to get his breath, and paused again as the
lock swung closed behind him. Dal was shocked at the physical change in
the man in the few short weeks since he had seen him last. The Black
Doctor's face was gray; every effort of movement brought on paroxysms of
coughing. He looked sick, and he looked tired, yet his jaw was still set
in angry determination.

The doctors stood at attention as he stepped into the control room,
hardly able to conceal their surprise at seeing him. "Well?" the Black
Doctor snapped at them. "What's the trouble with you? You act like
you've seen a ghost or something."

"We--we'd heard that you were in the hospital, sir."

"Did you, now!" the Black Doctor snorted. "Hospital! Bah! I had to tell
the press something to get the hounds off me for a while. These young
puppies seem to think that a Black Doctor can just walk away from his
duties any time he chooses to undergo their fancy surgical procedures.
And you know who's been screaming the loudest to get their hands on me.
The Red Service of Surgery, that's who!"

The Black Doctor glared at Dal Timgar. "Well, I dare say the Red Doctors
will have their chance at me, all in good time. But first there are
certain things which must be taken care of." He looked up at the
attendant. "You're quite certain that the ship has been decontaminated?"

The attendant nodded. "Yes, sir."

"And the crewmen?"

"It's safe to talk to them, sir, as long as you avoid physical contact."

The Black Doctor grunted and wheezed and settled himself down in a seat.
"All right now, gentlemen," he said to the three, "let's have your story
of this affair in the Brucker system, right from the start."

"But we sent in a full report," Tiger said.

"I'm aware of that, you idiot. I have waded through your report, all
thirty-five pages of it, and I only wish you hadn't been so
long-winded. Now I want to hear what happened directly from you. Well?"

The three doctors looked at each other. Then Jack began the story,
starting with the first hesitant "greeting" that had come through to
them. He told everything that had happened without embellishments: their
first analysis of the nature of the problem, the biochemical and medical
survey that they ran on the afflicted people, his own failure to make
the diagnosis, the incident of Fuzzy's sudden affliction, and the
strange solution that had finally come from it. As he talked the Black
Doctor sat back with his eyes half closed, his face blank, listening and
nodding from time to time as the story proceeded.

And Jack was carefully honest and fair in his account. "We were all of
us lost, until Dal Timgar saw the significance of what had happened to
Fuzzy," he said. "His idea of putting the creature through the filter
gave us our first specimen of the isolated virus, and showed us how to
obtain the antibody. Then after we saw what happened with our initial
series of injections, we were really at sea, and by then we couldn't
reach a hospital ship for help of any kind." He went on to relate Dal's
idea that the virus itself might be the intelligent creature, and
recounted the things that happened after Dal went down to talk to the
spokesman again with Fuzzy on his shoulder.

Through it all the Black Doctor listened sourly, glancing occasionally
at Dal and saying nothing. "So is that all?" he said when Jack had
finished.

"Not quite," Jack said. "I want it to be on the record that it was my
failure in diagnosis that got us into trouble. I don't want any
misunderstanding about that. If I'd had the wit to think beyond the end
of my nose, there wouldn't have been any problem."

"I see," the Black Doctor said. He pointed to Dal. "So it was this one
who really came up with the answers and directed the whole program on
this problem, is that right?"

"That's right," Jack said firmly. "He should get all the credit."

Something stirred in Dal's mind and he felt Fuzzy snuggling in tightly
to his side. He could feel the cold hostility in the Black Doctor's
mind, and he started to say something, but the Black Doctor cut him off.
"Do you agree to that also, Dr. Martin?" he asked Tiger.

"I certainly do," Tiger said. "I'll back up the Blue Doctor right down
the line."

The Black Doctor smiled unpleasantly and nodded. "Well, I'm certainly
happy to hear you say that, gentlemen. I might say that it is a very
great relief to me to hear it from your own testimony. Because this time
there shouldn't be any argument from either of you as to just where the
responsibility lies, and I'm relieved to know that I can completely
