"Say, boss," said Winters suddenly. "Look! Tracks in the road! Car
tracks! Somebody's been out here! Logan doesn't have a car!"

"So what?" snarled Vidac. "Get hold of yourself. It could have been
anyone."

A powerful light from the farmhouse suddenly flooded them and Logan's
voice cracked in the night air.

"Who's there?" called the farmer.

"Good evening, Mr. Logan," said Vidac, climbing out of the car. "This is
the governor."

"Vidac!" said Logan, startled. "What do you want?"

"This is what we want!" snarled Winters, whipping his ray gun into view.
"Get back inside!"

"Wha--?" gasped Logan. "What's the meaning of this?"

"You'd better do as the man says, Mr. Logan," said Vidac.

Jane suddenly appeared behind Logan, her hands still soapy from washing
the supper dishes. "Who is it, Father?" she asked, and then seeing Vidac
and Winters she stepped back inside the house.

"Nothing to get alarmed about," said Vidac, pushing Logan into the house
before him. "We just want to have a little talk." He smiled. "Business
talk."

"Isn't it too bad, Winters," said Vidac, "that we just missed supper?"

"What do you want?" demanded Logan belligerently. He stepped in front of
Jane protectively.

"Now don't get excited Mr. Logan," said Vidac, his voice smooth. "We
just want you to sign a little paper, that's all."

"What kind of paper?" asked Logan.

"Say," said Winters suddenly, "ain't you got a kid?"

"If you mean my son, Billy," said Logan, "he's asleep."

"I'd better check," said Winters, starting forward.

"Never mind him," said Vidac. "We haven't got all night and there's
nothing a kid could do."

He pulled out a paper from his pocket and unfolded it, keeping his eyes
on Logan. "Mr. Logan, we're going to foreclose your mortgage."

"Foreclose!" gasped Logan. "But--but I haven't even had time to gather
in my first crop!"

"We've taken a look at your fields and we don't think you're doing a
good job," said Vidac. "In this mortgage you signed there's a clause
that states I can foreclose any time I want."

"But how can you judge a crop by just looking at the fields?" asked
Jane.

"Oh, we have ways, Miss Logan." Vidac smiled. He walked to a near-by
table, and pushing a stack of study spools to the floor, spread the
paper in front of him. He looked up at Logan and indicated the paper.
"Do you have a pen, or would you like to use mine?"

"I'm not signing anything until I read it," snapped Logan.

Vidac smiled and pushed the paper across the table. Logan came forward
and picked it up. He scanned it hurriedly and then glared at Vidac.

"You can't do this!" he snapped. "I won't sign!"

Winters suddenly leaped across the room and grabbed Jane by the wrist,
jamming his gun in her back.

Vidac leered at the farmer. "Have you ever been frozen by a ray gun, Mr.
Logan?"

Logan shook his head.

"Let me tell you about it," said Vidac coolly. "The effects are very
simple, but very powerful. You are paralyzed! You can still see, hear,
think, and breathe. Your heart continues to beat, but otherwise, you are
absolutely powerless. The aftereffects are even worse. The person who
has been frozen comes out completely whole, but"--Vidac suddenly
shuddered--"believe me, Mr. Logan, you feel like ten thousand bells were
vibrating in your brain at one time. It isn't pleasant!"

"Why--why--are you telling me this?" asked Logan.

"You wouldn't want to see your daughter undergo such an experience,
would you?"

"If--if I sign the paper," stammered Logan, "will you leave Jane alone?"

"I give you my word as a spaceman that nothing will happen to her. In
fact, when you sign, you will continue to work the farm as before. Only
you'll be working for me. I wouldn't want to deprive you of your
livelihood."

Suddenly the door to the bedroom opened and young Billy burst into the
room, clad only in his pajamas.

"Don't sign, Pa!" he screamed. "Wait and tell Captain Strong first!"

"Strong!" exclaimed Vidac. "Has he been here?"

Logan nodded his head, and taking Vidac's pen, started to sign the
paper.

"No--no, don't, Pa!" cried Billy. "Don't--!"

Logan paid no attention and finished signing. A look of deep hurt filled
the boy's eyes. "A--a spaceman--" he stammered, "a Solar Guardsman would
never have given up!" Crying, he turned away and buried his head in his
sister's arms. Logan silently gave Vidac the paper and turned away.

"Thank you, Mr. Logan," said Vidac with a smile. "That's all. Good
night!" He turned and motioned for Winters to follow him. "Come on.
Let's get back to the city!"

Billy, Jane, and their father silently watched the two men leave the
house. Even as the roar of the super-charged jet car faded away in the
distance, they still stood in silence.

Finally Logan turned to his son and daughter. "There ain't but one thing
left to do. Go back to Venus as soon as we can get passage. I'm sorry,
Billy, but--"

"That's all right, Pa," said Billy. "I guess I would have done the same
thing--for Jane."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Can't you get any more out of this jalopy?" asked Roger.

Astro shook his head. "I've got her wide open now!"

The big cadet sat hunched over the steering wheel of the small jet car
Strong had used a short time before, racing along the same smooth
highway toward the spaceport on the other side of the hills. Tom was
wedged in between Astro and Roger, his eyes straight ahead on the road.

"Where do we start first?" asked Roger.

"We've got to get a ship. The _Polaris_, if possible. We can't begin to
look for the professor without one. As soon as Vidac learns that we've
escaped, the whole satellite will be crawling with colonists and his
boys, looking for us."

[Illustration: _"We better take it easy, Astro," said Tom. "Turn off the
lights."_]

"Colonists!" cried Astro. "Why would they want to help him?"

"Vidac will think of something to convince them that we're dangerous
criminals," said Roger grimly. "Tom's right. We've got to get the
_Polaris_."

They were just leaving the crystal city behind them and winding through
the hill section surrounding the flat plain. Astro's handling of the jet
car was perfect as he took the curves in the road at full throttle. They
still had a long way to go to reach the spaceport that had been built on
the other side of the hills.

"You sure did a fine job of conversion on these jet boats," said Tom to
Astro. "This baby feels as though she was going to take off."

"I wish it was," said Roger, looking up at the hills on either side of
them. "It would be a lot easier to blast over these things than go
through them."

The car sped up to the last summit that separated them from the
spaceport.

"We'd better take it easy," said Tom. "Turn off the lights, Astro. We'll
ditch this jet car about a mile from the spaceport and walk the rest of
the way."

"Right," said Astro. He gunned the little vehicle for the last burst of
speed necessary to take them over the top. The jet car shuddered under
the extra power and a moment later the spaceport lay spread before them.
Below them, in a five-mile circle, they could see the few remaining
ships of the great fleet. The _Polaris_ was easily recognized, and
fortunately, was on the nearer side of the giant landing area.

"There's home," said Roger.

"Yes," agreed Tom. "And she sure looks good to me--"

The curly-haired cadet suddenly stopped as powerful headlights loomed on
the highway ahead.

"That's Vidac's jet car," said Roger. "I recognize the lights. We've got
to get out of here!"

Astro braked the small vehicle and it screamed to a stop. The three
cadets hastily piled out and raced for the darkness of the surrounding
hills.

No sooner had they disappeared than Vidac's jet car slammed to a stop
beside the deserted jet car. In a flash Vidac was out of the seat and
examining the vehicle. He turned to Winters, holding a small disk in his
hand. "Tom Corbett's identification tag!" said Vidac. "The cadets have
escaped! Organize a search! The orders are _shoot to kill!_"

[Illustration]




CHAPTER 18


Governor Hardy was not to be found. Strong made inquiries around the
Administration Building and among the colonists but he could find no
trace of the governor. The only thing Strong learned was that Hardy had
spent the last two weeks wandering around in the outlying wilderness
areas of the satellite, alone, apparently searching for something. But
the Solar Guard captain realized that it would be a waste of time to
race around the planet searching aimlessly for the governor. He became
more and more convinced that Hardy was hiding. His suspicions were
increased when he found Vidac waiting for him in the deserted lobby of
the Administration Building with a warrant for his arrest. The warrant
had been signed by Hardy.

"Before I place myself in your hands," said Strong, "I want to see the
governor."

"Considering that you committed a crime by aiding the escape of the
Space Cadets," said Vidac, "that will not be possible."

"I demand to see the governor!"

Vidac turned to Winters who was standing by his side. "Take him," he
ordered.

Winters whipped out his paralo-ray gun, and before he could move, a
paralyzing charge froze the Solar Guard captain in his tracks.

"Take him to my quarters," said Vidac. "And stay with him. I'm going to
organize a searching party and find those cadets."

"Right," said Winters.

As Vidac walked away, Winters picked up the paralyzed body of the Solar
Guard officer and carried him awkwardly to the slidestairs. Though under
the effects of the paralo-ray, Strong's mind still continued to
function. Even as Winters carried him across his shoulder like a stick
of wood, Strong was planning his escape. He figured Winters would
release him from the ray charge once inside Vidac's quarters and he was
ready to go into action.

Winters opened the panel to Vidac's spacious office and carried Strong
through to the other side where the lieutenant governor's sleeping
quarters were located. He put the helpless man down on the bed, and
stepping back to the panel, flipped on the neutralizer of the ray gun.
He fired, releasing Strong from the frozen suspension.

Strong felt the jolts of the neutralizer charge but he clamped his teeth
together to keep them from chattering and stayed rigid. He had to remain
still, as if the neutralizer charge had not released him, in order to
make his plan work. Winters waited for Strong to move, and when he
didn't, stepped closer, prodding him with the barrel of the gun. In a
flash Strong leaped up and grabbed the ray gun. Twisting it out of the
surprised man's hand, he brought the weapon down on the man's neck.
Winters dropped to the floor like a stone.

Then Strong scrambled to his feet and cold-bloodedly turned the ray on
Winters, blasting him into immobility. He turned grimly toward the panel
and raced to the slidestairs. If Vidac had a warrant for his arrest,
signed by Hardy, then Vidac knew where Hardy was. If he could follow the
lieutenant governor, he might possibly learn just where the mystery of
Roald began and who was after what and why.

       *       *       *       *       *

After leaving the jet car and climbing into the desolate hills
surrounding Roald City, Tom, Roger, and Astro watched from the safety of
a ridge the quick search Vidac and Winters had made to find them. When
the two men had returned to the superhighway and blasted back toward the
city, taking both jet cars, the three boys made their way slowly through
the night down the opposite side of the hills and headed for the Logan
farm. When the sun star rose over the satellite's horizon, the three
boys were stretched out flat on their stomachs in a field, watching the
morning activity of Jane, Billy, and Hyram Logan about the farm.

"Think we can get them to help us?" asked Roger.

"It's the only thing we can do," said Astro. "If they won't, we might as
well give ourselves up. I'm so hungry I could eat a whole cow!"

"What kind of a cow?" asked Roger. "There aren't any on Roald, remember?
We drink synthetic milk."

"I could even eat a synthetic cow!" was Astro's grim rejoinder.

"Come on, you two," said Tom. "We might as well try it. You think
they're alone?"

"They don't act as though there's anyone around but themselves," said
Roger. "But I don't know--"

"I thought I saw a curtain move at that window on the left a while ago,"
commented Astro, "and all three of them were outside."

"Probably a breeze," said Tom. "You cut over to the right, Astro. I'll
go straight in, and you take the left, Roger. That way, if anything
goes wrong, one or two of us might get away."

"All set?" asked Roger.

"Ready," nodded Astro.

"Let's go."

The three boys separated, and a moment later, when his unit mates were
in position, Tom stood up and walked across the clearing, exposing
himself to the house. Out of the corner of his eye he saw Astro and
Roger moving in on the left and right. Billy was working in the front
yard with his father, mixing chemicals. Jane was standing by the doorway
of the house digging in a bed of flowers. Tom continued to walk right
through the front yard and was only ten feet away from Billy before the
youngster looked up.

"Tom!"

Logan turned and saw the cadet walking toward him. He stared. After a
night scrambling around the hills, Tom looked as if he had been
shoveling coal.

"Hello, Mr. Logan," said Tom, looking around. "Are you alone?"

"Yes," Logan replied. "Where are the other boys?"

"They're coming," said Tom, waving his arm toward his friends.

Astro and Roger rose from their places of concealment and darted
forward.

"Get in the house, quick!" ordered Logan. "Vidac and his flunky Winters
were out here last night and--" He didn't finish. The unmistakable roar
of a jet car approaching rapidly was heard. The cadets raced for the
house, following Jane into the farmer's bedroom, where they hid in a
closet. Jane returned to the front of the house and stood with her
father and Billy to watch the cloud of dust kicked up by the jet car as
it raced along the dirt road toward them.

"If it's them space crawlers again," said Logan to his children, "let me
do the talking."

"Who else could it be?" asked Jane.

"I don't know," said Logan. "But remember, if it is Vidac, we might be
the only thing between those three boys inside and a long term on a
prison rock!"

The jet car entered the cleared area in front of the house and stopped
in a cloud of dust. Logan, grim-faced, followed by Billy and Jane walked
across the yard to the car and waited. The door opened and a man in the
uniform of an enlisted spaceman climbed out.

"Jeff Marshall!" yelled Billy.

"Hello, Mr. Logan, Jane, Billy." Jeff noticed the sudden look of relief
that passed over Logan's face. "Is there something wrong?"

"Not a thing, Jeff," said Logan. "Come on in the house. We've got a
surprise for you."

"Thank you, sir," said Jeff. "But I'm afraid I'm not in the mood for
surprises. The cadets have escaped and the whole countryside is crawling
with Vidac's men looking for them. There's a reward of a thousand
