superior. I was to relay it to Mercury should they accept our proposal
to join forces against--" He stopped.

"Get him out of my sight!" barked Walters.

The guards closed in around the little man and he slowly shuffled out of
the office.

"I wonder how many more there are like him in our organization, Steve?"
The commander had turned to the window and was staring out blindly.

"I don't know, sir," replied Strong. "But I think we'd better be
prepared for trouble."

"Agreed," said Walters, turning to the Solar Guard captain. "What do you
suggest?"

"Since we don't know how many ships they have, where their base is, or
when they plan to attack, I suggest putting the Venus squadrons in
defense pattern A. Meanwhile, call in three additional squadrons from
Mars, Earth, and Luna. That way, we can at least be assured of an even
fight."

"But we don't know if they'll attack here on Venus. Suppose we weaken
Earth's fleet and they attack there?" Walters paused, looking troubled.
Then he sighed. "I guess you're right. Put the plan into effect
immediately. It's the only thing we can do."

At exactly midnight every teleceiver on Venus was suddenly blacked out
for a moment and then came into focus again to reveal the grim features
of Commander Walters.

In homes, restaurants, theaters, arriving and departing space liners, in
every public and private gathering place, the citizens of Venus heard
the announcement.

"As commander in chief of the Solar Guard, I hereby place the entire
planet of Venus under martial law. All public laws are suspended until
further notice. All public officials are hereby relieved of their
authority. A ten P.M. until six A.M. curfew will go into effect
immediately. Anyone caught on the streets between these hours will be
arrested. An attack is expected on the city of Venusport, as well as
other Venusian cities, momentarily. Follow established routine for such
an occurrence. Obey officers and enlisted men of the Solar Guard who are
here on Venus to protect you and your property. That is all!"

       *       *       *       *       *

In the living room of Sinclair's house Tom waited impatiently for the
sound of Sinclair's yacht taking off before attempting to free himself
from the rope on his wrists. But when a half-hour had passed with no
sound from outside, he decided not to waste any more time.

Relaxing completely, the curly-haired cadet began working his wrists
back and forth in the loop of rope. It was slow, painful work, and in no
time the skin was rubbed raw. George and Mrs. Hill watched him,
wide-eyed. They saw the skin of his wrists gradually turn pink, then
red, as the cadet pulled and pushed at the rope. A half-hour had passed
before he felt the rope slipping down over the widest part of his hand.
Slowly, so as not to lose the precious advantage, he pulled with all his
strength, unmindful of the pain. He heard a sharp gasp from Mrs. Hill
and then felt the rope become damp. His wrists were bleeding. But at the
same time he felt the rope slipping over his hands. He gave a quick tug
and the rope slipped off and dropped to the floor, a bloody tangle. He
spun around and untied the foreman and his wife quickly, removing the
gags from their mouths gently.

"Your wrists!" cried Mrs. Hill.

"Don't worry about them, ma'am," said Tom. He looked at Hill. "How long
have you been tied up?"

"Just about an hour before you came," answered the foreman. "I found
Sinclair in front of a teleceiver in his room. It's in a secret panel
and I didn't know it was there. I waited and heard him talking to
someone in Venusian. But he spotted me and pulled a ray gun."

"Do you know where he's gone?" asked Tom.

"No, but I sure wish I did!" said the burly foreman stoutly. "I have
something to settle with him."

"That'll have to wait until the Solar Guard is finished with him. Come
on!" Tom started toward the door.

"Where are we going?" asked Hill.

"To the _Polaris_! I've got to warn the Solar Guard of their plans.
They're going to attack the Venusport garrison and take over Venus!"

"By the stars!" gasped Mrs. Hill. "Here I've been feeding that man all
these years and didn't know I was contributing to a revolution!"

Tom was out of the door and running toward the _Polaris_ before she had
finished talking. George followed right behind him.

As the cadet raced across the dark clearing one hope filled his
mind--that the _Polaris_ would be in the same condition in which they
had left it.

The port was still open where Sinclair had caught him and he climbed
inside the giant ship quickly. As soon as he entered, he snapped on the
emergency lights and searched the ship carefully. After examining every
compartment, and satisfied that there was no one aboard, he made his way
back to the radar bridge. There, he saw immediately why Sinclair had
felt free to leave the ship. All radar and communications equipment had
been completely smashed.

The young cadet returned to the control deck and called down to George
Hill, waiting in the air lock. "George! Get Mrs. Hill aboard quickly.
We're blasting off!"

"Blasting off?" the foreman called back. "But I thought you were going
to contact Venusport!"

"I can't," replied Tom. "Sinclair has smashed the communications and the
radar. We'll have to take our information to Venusport in person. I only
hope he's left the rockets and atomic motors alone."

"How about using the teleceiver in the house?" asked the foreman,
climbing up to the control deck.

"Can't take a chance," said Tom. "This is top secret. They might have
the teleceiver tapped."

"Do you know how to handle this ship alone?" asked George, glancing
around at the great control board. "I don't know anything about a ship
this size."

"I can handle it," said Tom. "Get Mrs. Hill aboard!"

"Here I am, Tommy," said Mrs. Hill, climbing up into the control deck.
"I have some bandages and salve for your wrists."

"There's no time, Mrs. Hill," said Tom. "We've got to--"

"Nonsense!" she interrupted firmly. "You just give me your hands. It'll
take only a minute!"

Tom reluctantly held out his wrists and Mrs. Hill expertly applied the
salve and bandaged the cadet's raw wrists. Admittedly feeling better,
Tom turned to the master switch and found it missing. For a second panic
seized him, until he remembered that Major Connel had hidden it. He felt
under the pilot's chair and breathed easier, pulling out the vital
instrument.

"Better get into acceleration chairs," said Tom, strapping himself into
his seat. "This might be a rough take-off."

"Watch yourself, Tom," cautioned George. "We aren't afraid for
ourselves, but you've got to get to Venusport!"

"If he's left the power deck alone, everything will be O.K."

The young cadet stretched out a trembling hand and switched on the
automatic firing control. Then, crossing his fingers, he flipped on the
main generator and breathed easier as the steady hum surged through the
ship. He thought briefly of Astro and Roger, wishing his two unit mates
were at their stations, and then switched on the power feed to the
energizing pumps. There was a second's wait as the pressure began to
build, and he watched the indicator over his head on the control panel
carefully. When it had reached the proper level, he switched in the
reactant feed, giving it full D-12 rate. He glanced at the astral
chronometer over his head automatically and noted the time.

"Stand by!" he called. "Blast off minus five--four--three--two--one
--_zero_!"

He threw the master switch and a roaring burst of power poured into
the main tubes. The ship bucked slightly, raised itself from the
ground slowly, and then suddenly shot upward. In less than a minute
the _Polaris_ had cleared atmosphere and Tom turned on the
artificial-gravity generators. He made a quick computation on the
planetary calculator, fired the port steering rockets, and sent the
ship in a long arching course for Venusport. Then, unstrapping himself,
he turned to see how Mr. and Mrs. Hill had taken the blast-off.

The foreman and his wife were shaking their heads, still in acceleration
shock, and Tom helped them out of their cushions.

"Oh, my! Do you boys have to go through this all the time?" Mrs. Hill
asked. "It's a wonder to me how a human body can take it."

"I feel pretty much the same way," muttered George.

"A cup of hot tea will fix you up fine," Tom reassured them, and leaving
the ship on automatic control, he went into the small galley off the
control deck and brewed three cups of tea. In a few moments the elderly
couple felt better, and Tom told them of the Nationalists' base and
Connel's plan to wreck the radar station at noon the next day. Both Mr.
and Mrs. Hill were shocked at the scope of the Nationalists' plan.

"Well, they bit off more than they could chew when they decided to buck
the Solar Guard," asserted Tom. "When Commander Walters gets finished
with them, Sinclair and the rest won't have anything left but memories!"

"Tell me something, Tom," said George, looking at the control panel
thoughtfully. "Have you figured out how you're going to land this ship
alone and with no radar?"

"I'll have to use the seat of my pants." Tom smiled, and turned back to
his seat. George and his wife looked at each other and quickly strapped
themselves into their acceleration cushions.

A few moments later Tom began braking the ship with the nose rockets. It
made a slow-climbing arc over the spaceport and then settled slowly,
tailfirst. The stern teleceiver was out of order, and the young cadet
had to rely entirely on "feel," to get the _Polaris_ in safely. He had
calculated his rate of fall, the gravity of Venus, and the power of the
rockets, and was dropping at a predetermined rate. At the critical point
he increased power on the drive rockets, continuing to fall slowly until
he felt the jarring bump of the directional fins touching the ground.

"Touchdown!" he roared triumphantly.

He closed the master switch and turned to look at the smiling faces of
Mr. and Mrs. Hill.

"That was fine, Tom," said George, "but I don't want to do it again."

"Don't be a scaredy cat, George Hill!" taunted Mrs. Hill. "Tom handles
this ship as if he were born on it."

Tom grinned. "We'd better hurry up. There must be something going on.
There aren't any lights on here at the spaceport and all the
administration buildings are dark."

He hurried to the air lock and swung it open, jumping lightly to the
ground.

"Halt!" growled a rough voice. "Get your hands in the air and stay right
where you are!"

Puzzled, Tom did as he was told, announcing, "I'm Space Cadet Tom
Corbett, _Polaris_ unit. I request immediate transportation to Commander
Walters. I have important information for him."

He was momentarily blinded by the glare of a ring of lights around him,
and when he finally could see, he found himself in the middle of a squad
of Solar Guardsmen in battle dress.

"What's the password?" asked a tough sergeant whose shock rifle was
aimed right at Tom's midsection.

"Juggernaut!" replied Tom quietly.

The word sent the sergeant into a frenzy of action. "Peters, Smith, get
the jet car around here!"

"What's up, Sergeant?" asked Tom. "Why is everything so dark?"

"Martial law!" replied the guardsman. "Curfew from ten until six."

"Whew!" gasped Tom. "It looks as if I just made it!"

As George and Mrs. Hill climbed out of the air lock, a jet car raced up
and skidded to a stop in front of them. A moment later Tom and the
couple, accompanied by two of the guardsmen, were speeding through the
dark and empty streets of Venusport. The car was stopped once at a
mid-town check point, and Tom had to repeat the password. They picked up
another jet car, full of guardsmen as escorts, and with the echo of the
exhausts roaring in the empty avenues, they sped to central Solar Guard
headquarters.

Tom had never seen so many enlisted guardsmen in one spot before except
on a parade ground. And he noted with a tinge of excitement that each
man was in battle dress. Arriving at headquarters, they were whisked to
the top floor of the building and ushered into Commander Walters'
office. The commander smiled broadly as the young cadet stepped to the
front of his desk and saluted smartly.

"Cadet Corbett reporting, sir," he said.

In a moment the office was filled with men; E. Philips James, the Solar
Delegate, Captain Strong, fleet commanders, and officers of the line.

"Make your report, Cadet Corbett," said Walters.

Tom spoke quickly and precisely, giving full details on the location of
the base, the approximate number of fighting ships, the armament of
each, the location of supply dumps, and finally of Major Connel's plan
to sabotage the radar at noon the following day. Then, one by one, each
official asked him questions pertinent to their tasks. Fleet commanders
asked about the ships' speed, size, armor; Strong inquired about the
stores and supporting lines of supply; Walters asked for the names of
all people connected with the movement. All of these questions Tom
answered as well as he could.

"Well, gentlemen," said Walters, "thanks to Corbett and the others on
this mission, we have all the information we need to counter the
Nationalists. I propose to follow Major Connel's plan and attack the
base at noon tomorrow. Squadrons A and B will approach from the south
and east at exactly noon. Squadrons C, D, and E will come in from the
north and west as a second wave at 1202. The rest of the fleet will go
in from above at 1205. Supporting squadrons are now on their way from
Earth and Mars. Blast off at six hundred hours. Spaceman's luck!"

"Good work, Tom," said Strong, when the conference broke up.

"Yes, sir," said Tom. "But I can't help worrying about Roger and Astro
and Major Connel. What's going to happen to them, sir?"

Strong hesitated. "I don't know, Tom. I really don't know."




CHAPTER 17


"What time is it, Astro?"

"Exactly eleven o'clock, sir."

"All set?"

"Yes, sir."

"You know what to do. Move out!"

Astro and Major Connel were crouched behind a pile of fuel drums piled
near the communications and radar building in the heart of the
Nationalists' base. Above them, the gigantic tree used as the radar
tower rose straight into the Venusian morning sky.

After helping Tom to escape, Astro had returned to the prison building
for Connel and was surprised to find the place surrounded by green-clad
Nationalist guards. Rather than attempt to release Connel then, Astro
hid and waited for the time set to wreck the radar communications of the
enemy. During the second day, he had successfully eluded the many
patrols looking for him. Once from a hiding place he overheard one of
the men mention Connel. He took a daring chance and approached the
patrol openly. Speaking the Venusian dialect, he learned that Connel had
escaped. That news sent the cadet on a different game of hide-and-seek
as he prowled around the base searching for the Solar Guard officer. He
had found him hiding near the radar tower, and they spent the night
close to the communications building waiting for the time to strike.

Their plan was simple. Astro would enter the building from the front,
while Connel would enter from the rear. Astro would draw attention to
himself, and while the guards inside the building were busy dealing with
him, Connel would come upon them from behind, knock them out of action,
and then destroy the radar equipment.

The two spacemen gave no thought to their own safety. They were
concerned only with accomplishing their objective. Having no way of
knowing whether Tom had made it back to Venusport or whether their
destruction of the communications center would be of any value, they
nevertheless had to proceed on the assumption that Tom had gotten
through.

Astro crawled behind the drums and stopped twenty feet from the door to
wait for several Nationalist officers to leave. They finally got into a
jet car and roared away. Astro nodded to the major waiting to edge
around to the rear and then headed for the main entrance.

Connel saw Astro making his way to the front door and hurried around to
complete his part of the mission. He waited exactly three minutes,
gripped his shock rifle firmly, and then crossed over to the rear of the
building and stepped inside.

Once inside, the major found it difficult to keep from bursting into
laughter. The large ground-floor room was a frenzy of brawling, yelling,
shouting Nationalist guards trying to capture the giant cadet. Astro was
standing in the middle of the floor, swinging his great hamlike fists
methodically, mowing down the guards like tenpins. Two of them were on
his back, trying to choke him, while others crowded in from all sides.
But they could not bring the cadet down. Astro saw Connel, shook
himself, and stood free.

"Stand back!" roared Connel. "The first one of you green monkeys that
makes a move will have his teeth knocked out! Now line up over there
