there's plenty of margin."

The _Astronef_, therefore, continued to sink through what seemed to be a
fathomless ocean of whirling, blazing clouds, and the internal
temperature went on rising slowly but steadily. Their guests, without
showing the slightest sign of any emotion, walked about the upper deck
now, singly and now together, apparently absorbed by the strange scene
about them.

At length, after they had been dropping for some five hours by
_Astronef_ time, one of them, uttering a sharp exclamation, pointed to
an enormous rift about fifty miles away. A dull, red glare was streaming
up out of it. The next moment the brown cloud-floor beneath them seemed
to split up into enormous wreaths of vapour, which whirled up on all
sides of them, and a few minutes later they caught their first glimpse
of the true surface of Jupiter.

It lay, as nearly as they could judge, some two thousand miles beneath
them, a distance which the telescopes reduced to less than twenty; and
they saw for a few moments the world that was in the making. Through
floating seas of misty steam they beheld what seemed to them to be vast
continents shape themselves and melt away into oceans of flames. Whole
mountain ranges of glowing lava were hurled up miles high to take shape
for an instant and then fall away again, leaving fathomless gulfs of
fiery mist in their place.

[Illustration: _Whole mountain ranges of glowing lava were hurled up
miles high._]


Then waves of molten matter rose up again out of the gulfs, tens of
miles high and hundreds of miles long, surged forward, and met with a
concussion like that of millions of earthly thunder-clouds. Minute after
minute they remained writhing and struggling with each other, flinging
up spurts of flaming matter far above their crests. Other waves followed
them, climbing up their bases as a sea-surge runs up the side of a
smooth, slanting rock. Then from the midst of them a jet of living fire
leapt up hundreds of miles into the lurid atmosphere above, and then,
with a crash and a roar which shook the vast Jovian firmament, the
battling lava-waves would split apart and sink down into the
all-surrounding fire-ocean, like two grappling giants who had strangled
each other in their final struggle.

"It's just Hell let loose!" said Murgatroyd to himself as he looked down
upon the terrific scene through one of the port-holes of the
engine-room; "and, with all respect to my lord and her ladyship, those
that come this near almost deserve to stop in it."

Meanwhile, Redgrave and Zaidie and their three guests were so absorbed
in the tremendous spectacle, that for a few moments no one noticed that
they were dropping faster and faster towards the world which Murgatroyd,
according to his lights, had not inaptly described. As for Zaidie, all
her fears were for the time being lost in wonder, until she saw her
husband take a swift glance round upwards and downwards, and then go up
into the conning-tower. She followed him quickly, and said:

"What is the matter, Lenox, are we falling too quickly?"

"Much faster than we should," he replied, sending a signal to Murgatroyd
to increase the force by three-tenths.

The answering signal came back, but still the _Astronef_ continued to
fall with terrific rapidity, and the awful landscape beneath them--a
landscape of fire and chaos--broadened out and became more and more
distinct.

He sent two more signals down in quick succession. Three-fourths of the
whole repulsive power of the engines was now being exerted--a force
which would have been sufficient to hurl the _Astronef_ up from the
surface of the Earth like a feather in a whirlwind. Her downward course
became a little slower, but still she did not stop. Zaidie, white to the
lips, looked down upon the hideous scene beneath and slipped her hand
through Redgrave's arm. He looked at her for an instant and then turned
his head away with a jerk, and sent down the last signal.

The whole energy of the engines was now directing the maximum of the R.
Force against the surface of Jupiter, but still, as every moment passed
in a speechless agony of apprehension, it grew nearer and nearer. The
fire-waves mounted higher and higher, the roar of the fiery surges grew
louder and louder. Then in a momentary lull, he put his arm round her,
drew her close up to him and kissed her and said:

"That's all we can do, dear. We've come too close and he's too strong
for us."

She returned his kiss and said quite steadily:

"Well, at any rate, I'm with you, and it won't last long, will it?"

"Not very long now, I'm afraid," he said between his clenched teeth. And
then he pulled her close to him again, and together they looked down
into the storm-tossed hell towards which they were falling at the rate
of nearly a hundred miles a minute.

Almost the next moment they felt a little jerk beneath their feet--a
jerk upwards; and Redgrave shook himself out of the half stupor into
which he was falling and said:

"Hullo, what's that? I believe we're stopping--yes, we are--and we're
beginning to rise, too. Look, dear, the clouds are coming down upon
us--fast too! I wonder what sort of miracle that is. Ay, what's the
matter, little woman?"

Zaidie's head had dropped heavily on his shoulder. A glance showed him
that she had fainted. He could do nothing more in the conning-tower, so
he picked her up and carried her towards the companion-way, past his
three guests, who were standing in the middle of the upper deck round a
table on which lay a large sheet of paper.

He took her below and laid her on her bed, and in a few minutes he had
brought her to and told her that it was all right. Then he gave her a
drink of brandy-and-water and went back to the upper deck. As he reached
the top of the stairway one of the astronomers came towards him with a
sheet of paper in his hand, smiling gravely, and pointing to a sketch
upon it.

He took the paper under one of the electric lights and looked at it. The
sketch was a plan of the Jovian System. There were some signs written
along one side, which he did not understand, but he divined that they
were calculations. Still, there was no mistaking the diagram. There was
a circle representing the huge bulk of Jupiter; there were four smaller
circles at varying distances in a nearly straight line from it, and
between the nearest of these and the planet was the figure of the
_Astronef_, with an arrow pointing upwards.

"Ah, I see!" he said, forgetting for a moment that the other did not
understand him, "that was the miracle! The four satellites came into
line with us just as the pull of Jupiter was getting too much for our
engines, and their combined pull just turned the scale. Well, thank God
for that, sir, for in a few minutes more we should have been cinders!"

The astronomer smiled again as he took the paper back. Meanwhile the
_Astronef_ was rushing upward like a meteor through the clouds. In ten
minutes the limits of the Jovian atmosphere were passed. Stars and suns
and planets blazed out of the black vault of Space, and the great disc
of the World that Is to Be once more covered the floor of Space beneath
them--an ocean of cloud, covering continents of lava and seas of flame,
the scene of the natal throes of a world which some day will be.

They passed Io and Europa, which changed from new to full moons as they
sped by towards the Sun, and then the golden yellow crescent of Ganymede
also began to fill out to the half and full disc, and by the tenth hour
of Earth-time, after they had risen from its surface, the _Astronef_ was
once more lying beside the gate of the Crystal City.

At midnight on the second night after their return, the ringed shape of
Saturn, attended by his eight satellites, hung in the zenith
magnificently inviting. The _Astronef's_ engines had been replenished
after the exhaustion of their struggle with the might of Jupiter. They
said farewell to their friends of the dying world. The doors of the
air-chamber closed. The signal tinkled in the engine-room, and a few
moments later a blurr of white lights on the brown background of the
surrounding desert was all they could see of the Crystal City under
whose domes they had seen and learnt so much.




CHAPTER XVII


The relative position of the two giants of the Solar System at the
moment when the _Astronef_ left the surface of Ganymede, was such that
she had to make a journey of rather more than 340,000,000 miles before
she passed within the confines of the Saturnine System.

At first her speed, as shown by the observations which Redgrave took
with the instruments which Professor Rennick had designed for the
purpose, was comparatively slow. This was due to the tremendous pull of
Jupiter and its four moons on the fabric of the vessel. The backward
drag rapidly decreased as the pull of Saturn and his system began to
overmaster that of Jupiter.

It so happened, too, that Uranus, the next outer planet of the Solar
System, 1,700,000,000 miles away from the Sun, was approaching its
conjunction with Saturn, and so assisted in producing a constant
acceleration of speed.

Jupiter and his satellites dropped behind, sinking, as it seemed to the
wanderers, down into the bottomless gulf of Space, but still forming by
far the most brilliant and splendid object in the skies. The far-distant
Sun, which, seen from the Saturnian System, has only about a nineteenth
of the superficial extent which it presents to the Earth, dwindled away
rapidly until it began to look like a huge planet, with the Earth,
Venus, Mars, and Mercury as satellites. Beyond the orbit of Saturn,
Uranus, with his eight moons, was shining with the lustre of a star of
the first magnitude, and far above and beyond him again hung the pale
disc of Neptune, the Outer Guard of the Solar System, separated from the
Sun by a gulf of more than 2,750,000,000 miles.

When two-thirds of the distance between Jupiter and Saturn had been
traversed, Ringed Orb lay beneath them like a vast globe surrounded by
an enormous circular ocean of many-coloured fire, divided, as it were,
by circular shores of shade and darkness. On the side opposite to them a
gigantic conical shadow extended beyond the confines of the ocean of
light. It was the shadow of half the globe of Saturn cast by the Sun
across his rings. Three little dark spots were also travelling across
the surface of the rings. They were the shadows of Mimas, Enceladus, and
Tethys, the three inner satellites. Japetus, the most distant, which
revolves at a distance ten times greater than that of the Moon from the
Earth, was rising to their left above the edge of the rings, a pale,
yellow, little disc shining feebly against the black background of
Space. The rest of the eight satellites were hidden behind the enormous
bulk of the planet and the infinitely vaster area of the rings.

Day after day Zaidie and her husband had been exhausting the
possibilities of the English language in attempting to describe to each
other the multiplying marvels of the wondrous scene which they were
approaching at a speed of more than a hundred miles a second, and at
length Zaidie, after nearly an hour's absolute silence, during which
they sat with eyes fastened to their telescopes, looked up and said:

"It's no use, Lenox, all the fine words that we've been trying to think
of have just been wasted. The angels may have a language that you could
describe that in, but we haven't. If it wouldn't be something like
blasphemy I should drop down to the commonplace, and call Saturn a
celestial spinning-top, with bands of light and shadow instead of
colours all round it."

"Not at all a bad simile either," laughed Redgrave, as he got up from
his chair with a yawn and a stretch of his long limbs, "still, it's as
well that you said celestial, for, after all, that's about the best word
we've found yet. Certainly the Ringed World is the most nearly heavenly
thing we've seen so far.

"But," he went on, "I think it's about time we were stopping this
headlong fall of ours. Do you see how the landscape is spreading out
round us? That means that we are dropping pretty fast. Whereabouts would
you like to land? At present we're heading straight for Saturn's north
pole."

"I think I'd rather see what the rings are like first," said Zaidie;
"couldn't we go across them?"

"Certainly we can," he replied, "only we'll have to be a bit careful."

"Careful, what of--collisions? Are you thinking of Proctor's hypothesis
that the rings are formed of multitudes of tiny satellites?"

"Yes, but I should go a little farther than that, I should say that his
rings and his eight satellites are to Saturn what the planets generally
and the ring of the Asteroides are to the Sun, and if that is the
case--I mean if we find the rings made up of myriads of tiny bodies
flying round with Saturn--it might get a bit risky.

"You see the outside ring is a bit over 160,000 miles across, and it
revolves in less than eleven hours. In other words we might find the
ring a sort of celestial maelstrom, and if we once got into the whirl,
and Saturn exerted his full pull on us, we might become a satellite,
too, and go on swinging round with the rest for a good bit of eternity."

"Very well then," she said, "of course we don't want to do anything of
that sort, but there's something else I think we could do," she went on,
taking up a copy of Proctor's "Saturn and its System," which she had
been reading just after breakfast. "You see those rings are, all
together, about 10,000 miles broad; there's a gap of about 1,700 miles
between the big dark one and the middle bright one, and it's nearly
10,000 miles from the edge of the bright ring to the surface of Saturn.
Now why shouldn't we get in between the inner ring and the planet? If
Proctor was right and the rings are made of tiny satellites and there
are myriads of them, of course they'll pull up while Saturn pulls down.
In fact Flammarion says somewhere that along Saturn's equator there is
no weight at all."

"Quite possible," replied Redgrave, "and, if you like, we'll go and
prove it. Of course, if the _Astronef_ weighs absolutely nothing between
Saturn and the rings, we can easily get away. The only thing that I
object to is getting into this 170,000-mile vortex, being whizzed round
with Saturn every ten and a half hours, and sauntering round the Sun at
21,000 miles an hour."

"Don't!" she said. "Really it isn't good to think about these things,
situated as we are. Fancy, in a single year of Saturn there are nearly
25,000 Earth-days. Why, we should each of us be about thirty years older
when we got round, even if we lived, which, of course, we shouldn't. By
the way, how long could we live for, if the worst came to the worst?"

"Given water, about one Earth-year at the outside;" "but, of course, we
shall be home long before that."

"If we don't become one of the satellites of Saturn," she replied, "or
get dragged away by something into the outer depths of Space."

Meanwhile the downward speed of the _Astronef_ had been considerably
checked. The vast circle of the rings seemed to suddenly expand, and
soon it covered the whole floor of the Vault of Space.

As she dropped towards what might be called the limit of the northern
tropic of Saturn, the spectacle presented by the rings became every
minute more and more marvellous--purple and silver, black and gold,
dotted with myriads of brilliant points of many-coloured light, they
stretched upwards like vast rainbows into the Saturnian sky as the
_Astronef's_ position changed with regard to the horizon of the planet.
The nearer they approached the surface, the nearer the gigantic arch of
the many-coloured rings approached the zenith. Sun and stars sank down
behind it, for now they were dropping through the fifteen-year-long
twilight that reigns over that portion of the globe of Saturn which,
during half of his year of thirty terrestrial years, is turned away from
the Sun.

The further they fell towards the rings the more certain it became that
the theory of the great English astronomer was the correct one. Seen
through the telescopes at a distance of only thirty or forty thousand
miles, it became perfectly plain that the outer or darker ring as seen
from the Earth was composed of myriads of tiny bodies so far separated
from each other that the rayless blackness of Space could be seen
through them.

"It's quite evident," said Redgrave, after a long look through his
telescope, "that those are rings of what we should call meteorites on
Earth, atoms of matter which Saturn threw off into Space after the
satellites were formed."

"And I shouldn't wonder, if you will excuse my interrupting you," said
Zaidie, "if the moons themselves have been made up of a lot of these
things going together when they were only gas, or nebula, or something
of that sort. In fact, when Saturn was a good deal younger than he is
now, he may have had a lot more rings and no moons, and now these
aerolites, or whatever they are, can't come together and make moons,
because they've got too solid."

Meanwhile the _Astronef_ was rapidly approaching that portion of
Saturn's surface which was illuminated by the rays of the Sun, streaming
under the lower arch of the inner ring.

As they passed under it the whole scene suddenly changed. The rings
vanished. Overhead was an arch of brilliant light a hundred miles thick,
spanning the whole of the visible heavens. Below lay the sunlit surface
of Saturn divided into light and dark bands of enormous breadth.

The band immediately below them was of a brilliant silver-grey, very
much like the central zone of Jupiter. North of this on the one side
stretched the long shadow of the rings, and southward other bands of
alternating white and gold and deep purple succeeded each other till
they were lost in the curvature of the vast planet. The poles were of
course invisible since the _Astronef_ was now too near the surface; but
on their approach they had seen unmistakable evidence of snow and ice.

As soon as they were exactly under the Ring-arch, Redgrave shut off the
R. Force, and, somewhat to their astonishment, the _Astronef_ began to
revolve slowly on its axis, giving them the idea that the Saturnian
System was revolving round them. The arch seemed to sink beneath their
feet while the belts of the planet rose above them.

"What on earth is the matter?" said Zaidie. "Everything has gone upside
down."

"Which shows," replied Redgrave, "that as soon as the _Astronef_ became
neutral the rings pulled harder than the planet, I suppose because we're
so near to them, and, instead of falling on to Saturn, we shall have to
push up at him."

"Oh yes, I see that," said Zaidie, "but after all it does look a little
bit bewildering, doesn't it, to be on your feet one minute and on your
head the next?"

"It is, rather; but you ought to be getting accustomed to that sort of
thing now. In a few minutes neither you, nor I, nor anything else will
have any weight. We shall be just between the attraction of the rings
and Saturn, so you'd better go and sit down, for if you were to give a
bit of an extra spring in walking you might be knocking that pretty head
of yours against the roof," said Redgrave, as he went to turn the R.
Force on to the edge of the rings.

A vast sea of silver cloud seemed now to descend upon them. Then they
entered it, and for nearly half an hour the _Astronef_ was totally
enveloped in a sea of pearl-grey luminous mist.

