leave and went on board the yacht to give orders for her to be put into
her best trim, and then to have a luxurious half-hour with the Horus
Stone, and indulge in fond imaginings as to how it would look hanging
from a chain of diamonds on the white breast of Miss Nitocris.

When the Professor went to his own sitting-room he found his daughter
waiting to say good-night.

"Niti," he said, as he closed the door, "I don't want to seem
inquisitive, but, frankly, I was astounded at the gracious way in which
you treated that scoundrel Oscarovitch."

"Dad," she replied, with apparent irrelevance, "do you believe in the
forgiveness of sins?"

"Of course not! How could any one who holds the Doctrine do that? We
know that every moral debit must be worked off and turned into a credit
by the sinner, however many lives of suffering it takes to do it. Why do
you ask?"

"So that you might answer as you have done!" she said, with a little
laugh. "Now this Oscarovitch has sinned grievously, not only in this
life but in many others, and I am going to see that he works off at
least some of his debit as you put it somewhat commercially. He loved me
in the old days in Memphis, and he loves me still in the same brutal,
animal way. I know that if he cannot get me by fair means he will try to
take me by force--and I am going to let him do it."

"Niti!"

"Yes, he shall take me; he shall think he had got me safe away from you
and Mark--and when he has got me he shall taste what the hot-and-strong
sort of Christian preachers call the torments of the damned. No, I shall
not kill him. He shall live till he prays to all his gods, if he has
any, that he may die. He shall hunger without eating, thirst without
drinking, lie down without sleeping, have wealth that he cannot spend,
and palaces so hideously haunted that he dare not live in them, until,
when men wish to illustrate the uttermost extreme of human misery, they
shall point to Prince Oscarovitch. I, the Queen, have said it!"

Then, with a swift change of voice and manner, she laid her hands on her
father's shoulders, kissed him, and murmured:

"Good-night, Dad--at least as far as this world is concerned."




CHAPTER XXI

WHAT HAPPENED AT TRELITZ


It was the 6th of June again.

Once more Prince Zastrow rode with Ulik von Kessner and Alexis Vollmar
and the attendant huntsmen up the avenue of pines leading to the gate of
the Castle of Trelitz, but now accompanied by two unseen Presences which
belonged at once to their own world and also to another and wider one.
Once more the great doors opened and they passed into the trophy-decked,
skin-carpeted hall: and once more they were welcomed by the stately,
silken-clad woman who came down the broad staircase to greet her lord
and his guests. Emil von Zastrow, last and worthiest scion of his
ancient line, the very _beau ideal_ of youthful strength and manly
dignity, ran half-way up the stairs to meet his lady and his love, and
then the men went away to their rooms, while the Princess Hermia, true
housewife as well as princess, betook herself to the pleasant task of
making sure that all the preparations for dinner were complete.

The dinner was served in one of the smaller rooms, in the modern wing of
the Castle, on an oval table. The Prince sat at one end faced by his
beautiful consort. To his right sat his guest, Alexis Vollmar, and a
tall, handsome, but somewhat hard-featured woman of about thirty, with
the clear blue eyes and thick, yellow-gold hair which proclaimed her a
daughter of the northern German lowlands. This was Hulda von Tyssen, the
Princess's companion and lady-in-waiting. They were faced by a stout,
powerfully-built man with a full beard and moustache _a la_ Friedrich,
Ulik von Kessner, High Chamberlain of Boravia. Captain Alexis Vollmar
was a typical Russian officer of the younger school, tall, well-set-up,
and good-looking after the Muscovite fashion. He had distinguished
himself in the Far East, but just now he preferred the serene atmosphere
of Boravia to the thunder-laden air of Holy Russia.

The talk was of hunting and war and politics and the chances of the
Russian revolution, and on this latter subject it was perfectly
unrestrained, for all knew that the Powers had made a secret compact by
which they bound themselves, in the event of the fall of the Romanoff
Dynasty and the Arch-Ducal oligarchy--which all Europe would be very
glad to see the last of--to support Prince Zastrow as elective candidate
for the vacant throne.

The Revolutionary leaders had been sounded on the subject, and were
found strongly in favour of the scheme. It meant a return to the ancient
principle of elected monarchy, and Prince Zastrow, though now a German
ruling prince, represented the union of two of the oldest and noblest
families in Russia and Poland. Moreover, he had pledged himself to a
Constitution which, without going to Radical or Socialistic extremes,
embodied all that the moderate and responsible adherents of the
Revolutionary cause desired or considered suitable for the people in
their present stage of political development--which, of course, meant
everything that Oscar Oscarovitch did not want.

After dinner they went out through the long French windows on to a
verandah which overlooked a vast sea of forest, lying dark and seemingly
limitless under the fading daylight and the radiance of the brightening
moon. Since their marriage day the Prince had made it a bargain that
whenever they dined _en famille_, his wife should prepare his coffee
with her own hands. She even roasted the berries and ground them
herself, and, as many a time before, she did it to-night in the
seclusion of the little room set apart for that and similar purposes.
She was alone in the physical sense, for the two watching Presences were
invisible to her, and so, for all she knew, no one saw her measure
twenty drops of a colourless fluid from a little blue bottle into the
coronetted cup of almost transparent porcelain which had been one of her
wedding presents to her husband.

After a couple of cups of coffee and half a dozen half-smoked
cigarettes, the Prince stretched his long legs out, struggled with a
yawn, and said in a sleepy voice:

"My Princess, you must ask our guests to excuse me. I am tired after the
long day in the sun; and so, if I may, I will go to bed."

He rose, and the rest rose at the same moment. He bowed his good-night,
and the two saluted. The Princess followed him into the dining-room.

The unseen watchers stood by the end of the great heavily-hung bed, in
the midst of which lay Prince Zastrow, seemingly sinking into the
slumber of death. Von Kessner leaned over and raised an eyelid, and said
to the Princess, who was standing on the other side, the single word:
"Unconscious." She bent forward for a moment as though she were bidding
a silent farewell to the man to whom she had pledged her maiden troth,
then straightened up and walked like some beautiful simulacrum of a
woman towards the door which Vollmar held open for her....

The earth-hours passed, and the two men kept their watch by the bed,
conversing now and then in whispers between long intervals of anxious
silence, until three strokes sounded from the bell of the Castle clock.
The whole household, save one fair woman, who, in softly-slippered feet,
was pacing the floor of her bedroom, was fast asleep, and the days of
sentries were far past. Von Kessner gently lifted one of the arms lying
on the coverlet of the bed and let it fall. It dropped as the arm of a
man who had just died might have done. Again he raised an eyelid, this
time with some difficulty. The eyeball beneath was fixed and glassy as
that of a corpse. He nodded across the bed to the Russian, and together
they turned the bedclothes down to the foot. Then from under the bed he
pulled out a bundle of grey skins which he spread on the floor beside
the bed. It was a sleeping bag such as hunters use in winter on the
snow-swept plains and forests of Northern Europe. Vollmar turned the
head-flap back. Then they lifted the body of the Prince from the bed,
slid it into the sack, and buttoned the flap down over the face.

"That Egyptian's drug has worked well," whispered Von Kessner.

Vollmar nodded, and whispered back:

"I wish I had a handful of it. But it is time. He will be ready for us
now."

Even as he spoke the locked door opened, as it were of its own accord,
and Phadrig stood in the room dressed in the livery of the Prince's
coachman. Von Kessner and Vollmar turned grey as he bowed, and
whispered:

"The doors are open, Excellencies, and all is ready!"

Then the three lifted the shapeless bag and carried it with noiseless
tread down to the hall and out through the half-open doors to where a
carriage drawn by four black horses stood waiting. Though there was no
one in charge of them, they stood as still as though carved out of
blocks of black marble until the body of the Prince had been laid in the
carriage and Von Kessner and Vollmar had taken their places beside it.
Then Phadrig mounted the box, shook the reins, and the rubber-shod
horses moved silently away at a trot, which, as soon as the main road
was reached, became a gallop only a little less silent than the trot.

The carriage turned aside from the road, and ran down a broad forest
lane till it stopped by the shore of a little sandy inlet. The bow of a
long black boat was resting on the sand, and six closely-blindfolded men
were sitting on the thwarts with oars out. Another stood on the beach
with the painter in his hands. The body of the Prince was carried from
the carriage to the boat, and laid in the stern sheets. Von Kessner and
Vollmar remained on board, and Phadrig went back to the carriage. At a
short word of command the oarsman backed hard, and the boat slid off the
sand into the smooth water of the little cove. Then she shot away and
melted into the light haze which hung over the outside sea.

The boat stopped under the shadow of the long, low-lying black hull of a
four-funnelled destroyer. A rope dropped from the deck and was made fast
by Vollmar in the bow. The blindfolded crew were helped up the ladder
which hung over the side and taken below forward. Then came a sharp
order: "All hands below"; and when the deck was deserted, Von Kessner
and Vollmar went up the ladder and were met on deck by Oscar Oscarovitch
in civilian dress. There was another man beside him in the uniform of a
lieutenant. He slacked off the tackle falls of the davits under which
the boat had brought up, dropped down the ladder and hooked them on.
When he got back to the deck the four men hauled first on one tackle
and then on the other, till the boat was up flush with the deck. The
falls were belayed, and Oscarovitch got into the boat and opened the
flap of the sleeping-sack. He touched the spring of an electric
pocket-lamp and looked upon the calm, cold features of his rival. Then
he buttoned down the flap again and returned to the deck. The four went
down into the cabin: glasses were filled with champagne, and as
Oscarovitch raised his to his lips, he said:

"Count and Captain Vollmar, I am satisfied. Let us drink to the New
Empire of the Russias and the sceptre of Ivan the Terrible!"

"And his illustrious successor!" added Von Kessner.

Within half an hour a small boat was lowered; the Chamberlain and
Vollmar got into it and rowed away toward the cove. The Russian officer
went on to the little bridge, signalled "full speed ahead" to the
engine-room, and then took the wheel. The screws ground the water astern
into foam, the black shape leapt forward and sped away eastward into the
glimmering dawn with its silent passenger lying in the swinging boat,
and the unseen watchers standing by the helmsman....

More earth-hours passed. The sun rose upon a lonely sea. The destroyer
stopped, and a white speck on the eastward horizon rapidly grew into the
white shape of a large yacht flying through the water at a tremendous
speed. In a few minutes she was almost alongside. She swung round in a
sharp curve, slowed down and dropped a boat. Oscarovitch and the
lieutenant lowered the destroyer's boat till it touched the water. The
other came alongside, and the body of Prince Zastrow was transferred to
it, and Oscarovitch followed it. Four men from the yacht's boat jumped
on board the destroyer and hauled hers up. The other was backed to the
ladder and they came on board. A silent salute passed between
Oscarovitch and the lieutenant, and a few minutes later the yacht's boat
was hoisted to the davits, and the white shape was growing smaller and
dimmer amidst the light haze that lay on the water shimmering under the
slanting rays of the rising sun.

Morning grew into noon, noon faded into evening, and evening darkened
into night. The yacht ran into a wide-opening gulf between two
forest-clad points, on the southern of which twinkled the lights of a
large town. These were soon left behind by the flying yacht, and as a
vast sea of fleecy cloud drifted up from the north-east and spread its
veil across the path of the half moon, a little cluster of lights
gleamed out on the port bow. Her bowsprit swerved to the left till it
pointed directly to them. Presently she slowed down and ran into a
little land-locked bay surrounded with dense pine woods which came down
almost to the water's edge, swung round and slowed up alongside a wooden
jetty. From this a broad road, cut straight through the forest, sloped
steeply up to a plateau on which stood a gaunt, grey, turreted castle,
the very picture of the sea-robbers' home that it had been in the days
of Oscarovitch's not very remote ancestors. Up this road and into the
outer gate across the lowered drawbridge the sleeping-sack and the
insensible man within were borne. Through the keep-yard it was taken
into the Castle and up to a large room in the eastern turret,
comfortably furnished, and containing a bed almost as luxurious as that
in which Prince Zastrow had lain down to sleep the evening before.
Oscarovitch preceded the men who carried him, and was met at the door by
a grey-haired, keen-eyed man, who bowed before him, and said in a low
tone:

"May I presume to ask if this is my charge, Highness?"

"It is, Doctor Hugo; and I give him into your hands with every
confidence that you will restore your patient to health as quickly as
any man in Europe could do. I must leave immediately, and so I trust
everything to you. All care must be taken of him. He must want for
nothing that you can give him--except liberty."

Oscarovitch returned the doctor's assenting bow and left the room. In
half an hour the yacht was flying at full speed over the smooth waters
of the Baltic, heading a little to the south of West.




CHAPTER XXII

A TRIP ON THE SOUND


"Good morning, Dad," said Nitocris, as she entered the sitting-room
about half an hour before breakfast the next morning. "What is your
opinion of the European situation now?"

"Good morning, Niti; what is yours?" asked her father, looking at her
with grave eyes and smiling lips.

"As it was yesterday, only rather more so. In his present incarnation,
Prince Oscar Oscarovitch is, I should think, about as black-hearted a
scoundrel as ever polluted the air that honest people breathe."

"I entirely agree with you. And now, believing that, do you still
propose to trust yourself to his tender mercies on board his own yacht,
surrounded, as you will be, by men who, no doubt, are his absolute
slaves?"

"_I_ trust myself to his tender mercies, Dad?" she replied, drawing
herself up and throwing her head back a little; "you seem to have got
hold of the thing by the wrong end, as Brenda would say. That is only
what it will look like. The reality will be that he will blindly trust
himself to _my_ mercies--and I can assure you that he will find them
anything but tender. No, dear, we shall accept His Highness's invitation
to lunch, and then his offer of the hospitality of the yacht for the
trip, which, by the way, I fancy will be more to the eastward than to
the northward----"

"You mean, I suppose, Trelitz and Viborg?"

"Not Trelitz, I think, but Viborg almost certainly. That will be the end
of the abduction as far as I can see from our present plane of
existence."

"Really, Niti--well, well. Of course, I know that you will be perfectly
safe: but what would our good friends on this plane, as you put it, the
Van Huysmans, for instance, think if they could hear you talking so
calmly to your own father about getting yourself abducted by a man whom
you justly think to be one of the most unscrupulous scoundrels on earth!
And, by the way, what is to become of me in the carrying out of this
little scheme of yours? I hope you don't expect me to connive at the
abduction of my own daughter. I have a certain amount of reputation to
lose, you know."

"Oh, if His Highness is the clever villain that we know him to be, I
think we may safely trust him to arrange for your temporary
disappearance from the scene. And whatever he does it will be easy for
you to play the part of the passive victim for the time being. He can't
injure or kill you, for if it came to extremities you have the means of
giving his people such a fright as would probably drive them out of
their senses, just as I could if their master got troublesome. Really,
from a certain point of view, the adventure will have a decidedly
humorous aspect."

"With a very considerable leaven of tragedy."

"Yes, the tragedy will be a logical sequence of the comedy--and, as I
said last night, it will be tragedy. And now suppose we go to breakfast.
I have been up nearly two hours helping Jenny with the packing, and this
lovely air has given me a raging appetite. There's a little more to do
yet, and we shall have His Highness here before long to ask for our
decision and take us off to the yacht."

Here she was quite right, for she had hardly left her father to his
after-breakfast pipe and gone upstairs to help her maid, than
Oscarovitch came into the smoking-room.

"Good morning, Professor Marmion! I need not ask you if you have had a
good night. You look the very picture of a man who has slept the sleep
of the just. And Miss Marmion?"

"Thanks, Your Highness, I think we have both managed to spend the night
to good purpose. The air here is glorious just now. I always think that
sound, dreamless sleep is the best sign that a place is doing you good."

"Oh, undoubtedly, though for some reason or other I did not sleep very
well last night. Something had disagreed with me, I suppose. I seemed to
have a sense of being pursued to the uttermost ends of the earth and
back again by some relentless foe who simply would not allow me to take
a moment's rest. But I didn't come to talk about the stuff that dreams
are made of. I came to ask whether my cruise is to be a lonely one, or
whether I am to have the very great pleasure of your company."

Franklin Marmion, for perhaps the first time in his life, felt
distinctly murderous towards a fellow-creature as he looked at this
splendid specimen of physical humanity, knowing so well the real man who
was hiding behind that fascinating exterior; but he managed to answer
pleasantly enough:

"We have talked the matter over, Prince, and we have come to the
conclusion that your very kind invitation is really too good to be
refused. We know that we are incurring a debt that we shall not be able
to pay, but we are trusting to your generosity to let us off."

"On the contrary, my dear Professor," said Oscarovitch, without the
slightest attempt to conceal the pleasure that the acceptation gave him,
"it is yourself and Miss Marmion who have made me your debtor. In fact,
if you had not found yourselves able to come, I should have run the
_Grashna_ back to Cowes, gone up to London, plunged into a maelstroem of
dissipation, and probably ended by losing a great deal of money at Ascot
and Goodwood. Ah, Miss Marmion, good morning! How well the air of
Copenhagen seems to agree with you! The Professor has just gladdened my
soul by telling me that you have decided to take pity on my loneliness."

"Good morning, Prince!" she replied, putting her hand for a moment in
the one he held out. "Yes, we are coming, if you will have us. In fact,
I have just finished packing."

"Ah, excellent! Well now, since that is happily arranged, it would be a
pity to waste any of this lovely morning. The Sound is like a streak of
blue sky fallen from heaven. My gig is down at the jetty, and I have a
couple of my men here who will convoy your baggage down. If it is
packed, as you say, you need not trouble about it. You will find
everything safe on board."

"Thank you, Prince," said the Professor. "Then I will go and settle up
at the office while Niti puts her hat on. I will have the things sent
down, and we may as well walk to the jetty. It will do me good after
that big breakfast. Jenny had better get into a cab and go down with the
luggage."

When they reached the promenade along the Sound shore Oscarovitch
pointed to a beautifully-shaped, three-masted, two-funnelled white yacht
lying about five hundred yards out, and said:

"That is the _Grashna_, Miss Marmion. I hope you like the look of her."

"She is beautiful!" exclaimed Nitocris, recognising at once the vessel
which had met the Russian destroyer on the early morning of the 7th.
"She almost looks as if she could fly."

"So she can in a sense," laughed the Prince. "Come now, here is the gig.
We will get on board, and you shall see her go through her paces."

Neither she nor her father were strangers to yachts, but when they
mounted the bridge of the _Grashna_ and looked over her from stem to
stern, they had to admit that they had never seen anything quite so
daintily splendid. They had chosen their rooms, and Jenny was below
unpacking. Although, of course, he had a captain on board, the Prince
often sailed the yacht himself when he had guests on board. He had a
genuine love for the beautiful craft, and he took an almost boyish
delight in showing what she could do. She was a twelve-hundred-ton,
triple-screw, turbine-driven boat, and, thanks to the space-economy of
the new system, her builders had been able to stow away fifteen thousand
horse-power in her engine-room, and this when fully developed gave a
speed in smooth water of thirty-five knots or a little over forty
statute miles an hour.

The anchor was up almost as soon as they got on to the bridge, and
Oscarovitch moved the pointer of the telegraph to "Ahead slow." The
quartermaster in the oval wheel-house behind him moved the little wheel
a few spokes to starboard, her mellow whistle tooted, and she glided in
an outward curve through the other yachts and shipping, and gained the
open water.

"Now," he said, turning to Nitocris, "we can begin to move. It is
roughly thirty English miles to Elsinore. If you have never done any
fast travelling at sea and would like to do some now, I can get you
there in about three-quarters of an hour."

"What!" exclaimed the Professor, "thirty miles in forty-five minutes by
sea! That is over forty miles an hour. A wonderful speed."

"Yes," he replied, almost tenderly; "but my beautiful _Grashna_ is a
wonderful craft--at least, I think you will say so when you see what she
