"A Regular will do nicely."

"Most new Opinioners prefer the Special," Wonderson said. "The little
extra simulated handmade touches increase the public's respect."

"In that case I'll take the Special."

"Yes, sir. Though if you could wait a day or two, we will be having in a
new fabric--a simulated Home Loom, complete with natural weaving
mistakes. For the man of status discrimination. A real prestige item."

"Perhaps I'll come back for that," Barrent said. "Right now, I need a
ready-wear."

"Of course, sir," Wonderson said, disappointed but hiding it bravely.
"If you'll wait just one little minute...."

After several fittings, Barrent found himself wearing a black business
suit with a thin edge of white piping around the lapels. To his
inexperienced eye it looked almost exactly like the other suits
Wonderson had on display for bankers, stock brokers, grocers,
accountants, and the like. But for Wonderson, who talked about the
banker's lapel and the insurance agent's drape, the differences were as
clear as the gross status-symbols of Omega. Barrent decided it was just
a question of training.

"There, sir!" Wonderson said. "A perfect fit, and a fabric guaranteed
for a lifetime. All for thirty-nine ninety-five."

"Excellent," Barrent said. "Now, about the money--"

"Yes, sir?"

Barrent took the plunge. "I haven't any."

"You haven't, sir? That's quite unusual."

"Yes, it is," Barrent said. "However, I _do_ have certain articles of
value." From his pocket he took three diamond rings with which the Group
on Omega had supplied him. "These stones are genuine diamonds, as any
jeweler will be glad to attest. If you would take one of them until I
have the money for payment--"

"But, sir," Wonderson said, "diamonds and such have no intrinsic value.
They haven't since '23, when Von Blon wrote the definitive work
destroying the concept of scarcity value."

"Of course," Barrent said, at a loss for words.

Wonderson looked at the rings. "I suppose these have a sentimental
value, though."

"Certainly. We've had them in the family for generations."

"In that case," Wonderson said, "I wouldn't want to deprive you of them.
Please, no arguments, sir! Sentiment is the most priceless of emotions.
I couldn't sleep nights if I took even one of these family heirlooms
from you."

"But there's the matter of payment."

"Pay me at your leisure."

"You mean you'll trust me, even though you don't know me?"

"Most certainly," Wonderson said. He smiled archly. "Trying out your
Opinioner's methods, aren't you? Well, even a child knows that our
civilization is based upon trust, not collateral. It is axiomatic that
even a stranger is to be trusted until he has conclusively and
unmistakably proven otherwise."

"Haven't you ever been cheated?"

"Of course not. Crime is nonexistent these days."

"In that case," Barrent asked, "what about Omega?"

"I beg your pardon?"

"Omega, the prison planet. You must have heard of it."

"I think I have," Wonderson said cautiously. "Well, I should have said
that crime is _almost_ nonexistent. I suppose there will always be a
few congenital criminal types, easily recognizable as such. But I'm
told they don't amount to more than ten or twelve individuals a year out
of a population of nearly two billion." He smiled broadly. "My chances
of meeting one are exceedingly rare."

Barrent thought about the prison ships constantly shuttling back and
forth between Earth and Omega, dumping their human cargo and returning
for more. He wondered where Wonderson got his statistics. For that
matter, he wondered where the police were. He had seen no military
uniform since leaving the starship. He would have liked to ask about it,
but it seemed wiser to discontinue that line of questioning.

"Thank you very much for the credit," Barrent said. "I'll be back with
the payment as soon as possible."

"Of course you will," Wonderson said, warmly shaking Barrent's hand.
"Take your time, sir. No rush at all."

Barrent thanked him again and left the store.

He had a profession now. And if other people believed as Wonderson did,
he had unlimited credit. He was on a planet that seemed, at first
glance, to be a utopia. The utopia presented certain contradictions, of
course. He hoped to find out more about them over the next few days.

Down the block, Barrent found a hotel called The Bide-A-Bit. He engaged
a room for the week, on credit.




Chapter Twenty-Six


In the morning, Barrent asked directions to the nearest branch of the
public library. He decided that he needed as much background out of
books as he could get. With a knowledge of the history and development
of Earth's civilization, he would have a better idea of what to expect
and what to watch out for.

His Opinioner's clothing allowed him access to the closed shelves where
the history books were kept. But the books themselves were
disappointing. Most of them were Earth's ancient history, from earliest
beginnings to the dawn of atomic power. Barrent skimmed through them. As
he read, some memories of prior reading returned to him. He was able to
jump quickly from Periclean Greece to Imperial Rome, to Charlemagne and
the Dark Ages, from the Norman Conquest to the Thirty Years' War, and
then to a rapid survey of the Napoleonic Era. He read with more care
about the World Wars. The book ended with the explosion of the first
atom bombs. The other books on the shelf were simply amplifications of
various stages of history he had found in the first book.

After a great deal of searching, Barrent found a small work entitled,
"The Postwar Dilemma, Volume 1," by Arthur Whittler. It began where the
other histories had left off; with the atomic bombs exploding over
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Barrent sat down and began to read carefully.

He learned about the Cold War of the 1950's, when several nations were
in possession of atomic and hydrogen weapons. Already, the author
stated, the seeds of a massive and stultifying conformity were present
in the nations of the world. In America, there was the frenzied
resistance to communism. In Russia and China, there was the frenzied
resistance to capitalism. One by one, all the nations of the world were
drawn into one camp or the other. For purposes of internal security, all
countries relied upon the newest propaganda and indoctrination
techniques. All countries felt they needed, for survival's sake, a rigid
adherence to state-approved doctrines.

The pressure upon the individual to conform became both stronger and
subtler.

The dangers of war passed. The many societies of Earth began to merge
into a single superstate. But the pressure to conform, instead of
lessening, grew more intense. The need was dictated by the continued
explosive increase in population, and the many problems of unification
across national and ethnic lines. Differences in opinion could be
deadly; too many groups now had access to the supremely deadly hydrogen
bombs.

Under the circumstances, deviant behavior could not be tolerated.

Unification was finally completed. The conquest of space went on, from
moon ship to planet ship to star ship. But Earth became increasingly
rigid in its institutions. A civilization more inflexible than anything
produced by medieval Europe punished any opposition to existing customs,
habits, beliefs. These breaches of the social contract were considered
major crimes as serious as murder or arson. They were punished
similarly. The antique institutions of secret police, political police,
informers, all were used. Every possible device was brought to bear
toward the all-important goal of conformity.

For the nonconformists, there was Omega.

Capital punishment had been banished long before, but there was neither
room nor resources to take the growing number of criminals who crammed
prisons everywhere. The world leaders finally decided to transport these
criminals to a separate prison world, copying a system which the French
had used in Guiana and New Caledonia, and the British had used in
Australia and early North America. Since it was impossible to rule Omega
from Earth, the authorities didn't try. They simply made sure that none
of the prisoners escaped.

That was the end of volume one. A note at the end said that volume two
was to be a study of contemporary Earth. It was entitled _The Status
Civilization_.

The second volume was not on the shelves. Barrent asked the librarian,
and was told that it had been destroyed in the interests of public
safety.

Barrent left the library and went to a little park. He sat and stared at
the ground and tried to think.

He had expected to find an Earth similar to the one described in
Whittler's book. He had been prepared for a police state, tight security
controls, a repressed populace, and a growing air of unrest. But that,
apparently, was the past. So far, he hadn't even seen a policeman. He
had observed no security controls, and the people he had met did not
seem harshly repressed. Quite the contrary. This seemed like a
completely different world....

Except that year after year, the ships came to Omega with their cargoes
of brainwashed prisoners. Who arrested them? Who judged them? What sort
of a society produced them?

He would have to find out the answers himself.




Chapter Twenty-Seven


Early the next morning, Barrent began his exploration. His technique was
simple. He rang doorbells and asked questions. He warned all his
subjects that his real questions might be interspersed with tricks or
nonsense questions, whose purpose was to test the general awareness
level. In that way, Barrent found he could ask anything at all about
Earth, could explore controversial or even nonexistent areas, and do so
without revealing his own ignorance.

There was still the danger that some official would ask for his
credentials, or that the police would mysteriously spring up when least
expected. But he had to take those risks. Starting at the beginning of
Orange Esplanade, Barrent worked his way northward, calling at each
house as he went. His results were uneven, as a selective sampling of
his work shows:

       *       *       *       *       *

(_Citizen A. L. Gotthreid, age 55, occupation home-tender. A strong,
erect woman, imperious but polite, with a no-nonsense air about her._)

"You want to ask me about class and status? Is that it?"

"Yes, ma'am."

"You Opinioners are _always_ asking about class and status. One would
think you'd know all about it by now. But very well. Today, since
everyone is equal, there is only one class. The _middle_ class. The only
question then is--to what portion of the middle class does one belong?
High, low, or middle?"

"And how is that determined?"

"Why, by all sorts of things. The way a person speaks, eats, dresses,
the way he acts in public. His manners. His clothing. You can always
tell your upper middle class man by his clothes. It's quite
unmistakable."

"I see. And the lower middle classes?"

"Well, for one thing they lack creative energy. They wear ready-made
clothing, for example, without taking the trouble to improve upon it.
The same goes for their homes. Mere uninspired adornment won't do, let
me add. That's simply the mark of the _nouveau_ upper middle class. One
doesn't receive such persons in the home."

"Thank you, Citizen Gotthreid. And where would you classify yourself
statuswise?"

(With the very faintest hesitation). "Oh, I've never thought much about
it--upper middle, I suppose."

       *       *       *       *       *

(_Citizen Dreister, age 43, occupation shoe vendor. A slender, mild man,
young-looking for his years._)

"Yes, sir. Myra and I have three children of school age. All boys."

"Could you give me some idea what their education consists of?"

"They learn how to read and write, and how to become good citizens.
They're already starting to learn their trades. The oldest is going into
the family business--shoes. The other two are taking apprenticeship
courses in groceries and retail marketing. That's my wife's family's
business. They also learn how to retain status, and how to utilize
standard techniques for moving upward. That's about what goes on in the
open classes."

"Are there other school classes which are not open?"

"Well, naturally there are the closed classes. Every child attends
them."

"And what do they learn in the closed classes?"

"I don't know. They're closed, as I said."

"Don't the children ever speak about those classes?"

"No. They talk about everything under the sun, but not about that."

"Haven't you any idea what goes on in the closed classes?"

"Sorry, I don't. At a guess--and it's only a guess, mind you--I'd say
it's probably something religious. But you'd have to ask a teacher for
that."

"Thank you, sir. And how do you classify yourself statuswise?"

"Middle middle class. Not much doubt about that."

       *       *       *       *       *

(_Citizen Maryjane Morgan, age 51, occupation school-teacher. A tall,
bony woman._)

"Yes, sir, I think that just about sums up our curriculum at the Little
Beige Schoolhouse."

"Except for the closed classes."

"I beg your pardon, sir?"

"The closed classes. You haven't discussed those."

"I'm afraid I can't."

"Why not, Citizen Morgan?"

"Is this a trick question? Everyone knows that teachers aren't allowed
in the closed classes."

"Who _is_ allowed in?"

"The children, of course."

"But who teaches them?"

"The government is in charge of that."

