surface. The flowers are inconspicuous, borne usually in close spikes,
and destitute of a perigone or having this reduced to small scales or
hairs. The flowers are usually surrounded by more or less dry leaves
(glumes, paleae) which are closely set, so as to nearly conceal the
flowers. The flowers are either hermaphrodite or unisexual.

[Illustration: FIG. 87.--Types of _Glumaceae_. _A_, a sedge, _Carex_
(_Cyperaceae_). [Male], the male; [Female], the female flowers, x 1/2.
_B_, a single male flower, x 2. _C_, a female flower, x 2. _D_,
fruiting spike of another _Carex_, x 1/2. _E_, a single fruit, x 1. _F_,
the same, with the outer envelope removed, and slightly enlarged. _G_,
section of _F_, x 3. _em._ the embryo. _H_, a bulrush, _Scirpus_
(_Cyperaceae_), x 1/2. _I_, a single spikelet, x 2. _J_, a single flower,
x 3. _K_, a spikelet of flowers of the common orchard grass,
_Dactylis_ (_Gramineae_), x 2. _L_, a single flower, x 2. _M_, the base
of a leaf, showing the split sheath encircling the stem, x 1. _N_,
section of a kernel of corn, showing the embryo (_em._), x 2.]

There are two well-marked families, the sedges (_Cyperaceae_) and the
grasses (_Gramineae_). The former have solid, often triangular stems,
and the sheath at the base of the leaves is not split. The commonest
genera are _Carex_ (Fig. 87, _A_, _G_) and _Cyperus_, of which there
are many common species, differing very little and hard to
distinguish. There are several common species of _Carex_ which blossom
early in the spring, the male flowers being quite conspicuous on
account of the large, yellow anthers. The female flowers are in
similar spikes lower down, where the pollen readily falls upon them,
and is caught by the long stigmas. In some other genera, _e.g._ the
bulrushes (_Scirpus_) (Fig. 87, _H_), the flowers are hermaphrodite,
_i.e._ contain both stamens and pistils. The fruit (Fig. 87, _F_) is
seed-like, but really includes the wall of the ovary as well, which is
grown closely to the enclosed seed. The embryo is small, surrounded by
abundant endosperm (Fig. 87, _G_). Very few of the sedges are of any
economic importance, though one, the papyrus of Egypt, was formerly
much valued for its pith, which was manufactured into paper.

The second family, the grasses, on the contrary, includes the most
important of all food plants, all of the grains belonging here. They
differ mainly from the sedges in having, generally, hollow,
cylindrical stems, and the sheath of the leaves split down one side;
the leaves are in two rows, while those of the sedges are in three.
The flowers (Fig. 87, _L_) are usually perfect; the stigmas, two in
number and like plumes, so that they readily catch the pollen which is
blown upon them. A few, like the Indian corn, have the flowers
unisexual; the male flowers are at the top of the stem forming the
"tassel," and the female flowers lower down forming the ear. The
"silk" is composed of the enormously lengthened stigmas. The fruits
resemble those of the sedges, but the embryo is usually larger and
placed at one side of the endosperm (_N_, _em._).

While most of the grasses are comparatively small plants, a few of
them are almost tree-like in their proportions, the species of bamboo
(_Bambusa_) sometimes reaching a height of twenty to thirty metres,
with stems thirty to forty centimetres in diameter.


ORDER V.--_Scitamineae_.

[Illustration: FIG. 88.--_Scitamineae_. _A_, upper part of a flowering
plant of Indian shot (_Canna_), much reduced in size (_Cannaceae_).
_B_, a single flower, x 1/2. _C_, the single stamen (_an._), and
petal-like pistil (_gy._), x 1. _D_, section of the ovary, x 2. _E_,
diagram of the flower. The place of the missing stamens is indicated
by small circles. _F_, fruit, x 1/2. _G_, section of an unripe seed.
_em._ embryo. _p_, perisperm, x 2.]

The plants of this order are all inhabitants of the warmer parts of
the earth, and only a very few occur within the limits of the United
States, and these confined to the extreme south. They are extremely
showy plants, owing to their large leaves and brilliant flowers, and
for this reason are cultivated extensively. Various species of _Canna_
(Fig. 88) are common in gardens, where they are prized for their
large, richly-colored leaves, and clusters of scarlet, orange, or
yellow flowers. The leafy stems arise from thick tubers or root
stocks, and grow rapidly to a height of two metres or more in the
larger species. The leaves, as in all the order, are very large, and
have a thick midrib with lateral veins running to the margin. The
young leaves are folded up like a trumpet. The flowers are irregular
in form, and in _Canna_ only a single stamen is found; or if more are
present, they are reduced to petal-like rudiments. The single, perfect
stamen (Fig. 88, _C_, _an._) has the filament broad and colored like
the petals, and the anther attached to one side. The pistil (_gy._) is
also petal-like. There are three circles of leaves forming the
perigone, the two outer being more or less membranaceous, and only the
three inner petal-like in texture. The ovary (_o_) is inferior, and
covered on the outside with little papillae that afterward form short
spines on the outside of the fruit (_F_).

The seeds are large, but the embryo is very small. A section of a
nearly ripe seed shows the embryo (_em._) occupying the upper part of
the embryo sac which does not nearly fill the seed and contains no
endosperm. The bulk of the seed is derived from the tissue of the body
of the ovule, which in most seeds becomes entirely obliterated by the
growth of the embryo sac. The cells of this tissue become filled with
starch, and serve the same purpose as the endosperm of other seeds.
This tissue is called "perisperm."

Of food plants belonging to this order, the banana (_Musa_) is much
the most important. Others of more or less value are species of
arrowroot (_Maranta_) and ginger (_Zingiber_).

There are three families: I. _Musaceae_ (banana family);
II. _Zingiberaceae_ (ginger family); and III. _Cannaceae_ (_Canna_,
_Maranta_).


ORDER VI.--_Gynandrae_.

By far the greater number of the plants of this order belong to the
orchis family (_Orchideae_), the second family of the order
(_Apostasieae_), being a small one and unrepresented in the United
States. The orchids are in some respects the most highly specialized
of all flowers, and exhibit wonderful variety in the shape and color
of the flowers, which are often of extraordinary beauty, and show
special contrivances for cross-fertilization that are without parallel
among flowering plants.

[Illustration: FIG. 89.--_Gynandrae_. _A_, inflorescence of the showy
orchis (_Orchis spectabilis_), x 1 (_Orchideae_). _B_, a single flower,
with the upper leaves of the perianth turned back to show the column
(_x_). _sp._ the spur attached to the lower petal or lip. _o_, the
ovary, x 1. _C_, the column seen from in front. _an._ the stamen.
_gy._ the stigmatic surface, x 1. _D_, the two pollen masses attached
to a straw, which was inserted into the flower, by means of the viscid
disc (_d_): i, the masses immediately after their withdrawal; ii, iii,
the same a few minutes later, showing the change in position. _E_,
diagram of the flower; the position of the missing stamens indicated
by small circles.]

The flowers are always more or less bilaterally symmetrical
(zygomorphic). The ovary is inferior, and usually twisted so as to
turn the flower completely around. There are two sets of perigone
leaves, three in each, and these are usually much alike except the
lower (through the twisting of the ovary) of the inner set. This
petal, known as the "lip" or "labellum," is usually larger than the
others, and different in color, as well as being frequently of
peculiar shape. In many of them it is also prolonged backward in a
hollow spur (see Fig. 89, _B_). In all of the orchids except the
lady's-slippers (_Cypripedium_) (Fig. 90, _B_), only one perfect
stamen is developed, and this is united with the three styles to form
a special structure known, as the "column" or "gynostemium" (Fig. 89,
_B_, _C_). The pollen spores are usually aggregated into two or four
waxy masses ("pollinia," sing. pollinium), which usually can only be
removed by the agency of insects upon which all but a very few orchids
are absolutely dependent for the pollination of the flowers.

[Illustration: FIG. 90.--Forms of _Orchideae_. _A_, putty-root
(_Aplectrum_), x 1. _B_, yellow lady's-slipper (_Cypripedium_), x 1/2.
_C_, the column of the same, x 1. _an._ one of the two perfect
stamens. _st._ sterile, petal-like stamen. _gy._. stigma. _D_,
_Arethusa_, x 1/2. _E_, section of the column, x 1: _an._ stamen. _gy._
stigma. _F_, the same, seen from in front. _G_, _Habenaria_, x 1. _H_,
_Calopogon_, x 1. In the last the ovary is not twisted, so that the
lip (_L_) lies on the upper side of the flower.]

In the lady-slippers there are two fertile stamens, and a third
sterile one has the form of a large triangular shield terminating the
column (Fig. 90, _C_, _st._).

The ovules of the orchids are extremely small, and are only partly
developed at the time the flower opens, the pollen tube growing very
slowly and the ovules maturing as it grows down through the tissues of
the column. The ripe seeds are excessively numerous, but so fine as to
look like dust.

The orchids are mostly small or moderate-sized plants, few of them
being more than a metre or so in height. All of our native species,
with the exception of a few from the extreme south, grow from fibrous
roots or tubers, but many tropical orchids, as is well known, are
"epiphytes"; that is, they grow upon the trunks and branches of trees.
One genus, _Vanilla_, is a twining epiphyte; the fruit of this plant
furnishes the vanilla of commerce. Aside from this plant, the
economical value of the orchids is small, although a few of them are
used medicinally, but are not specially valuable.

Of the five thousand species known, the great majority are inhabitants
of the tropics, but nevertheless there are within the United States a
number of very beautiful forms. The largest and showiest are the
lady's-slippers, of which we have six species at the north. The most
beautiful is the showy lady's-slipper (_Cypripedium spectabile_),
whose large, pink and white flowers rival in beauty many of the
choicest tropical orchids. Many of the _Habenarias_, including the
yellow and purple fringed orchids, are strikingly beautiful as are the
_Arethuseae_ (_Arethusa_, _Pogonia_, _Calopogon_). The last of these
(Fig. 90, _H_) differs from all our other native orchids in having the
ovary untwisted so that the labellum lies on the upper side of the
flower.

A number of the orchids are saprophytic, growing in soil rich in
decaying vegetable matter, and these forms are often nearly or quite
destitute of chlorophyll, being brownish or yellowish in color, and
with rudimentary leaves. The coral roots (_Corallorhiza_), of which
there are several species, are examples of these, and another closely
related form, the putty-root (_Aplectrum_) (Fig. 90, _A_), has the
flowering stems like those of _Corallorhiza_, but there is a single,
large, plaited leaf sent up later.


ORDER VII.--_Helobiae_.

The last order of the monocotyledons is composed of marsh or water
plants, some of which recall certain of the dicotyledons. Of the three
families, the first, _Juncagineae_, includes a few inconspicuous plants
with grass-like or rush-like leaves, and small, greenish or yellowish
flowers (_e.g._ arrow-grass, _Triglochin_).

The second family (_Alismaceae_) contains several large and showy
species, inhabitants of marshes. Of these the water-plantain
(_Alisma_), a plant with long-stalked, oval, ribbed leaves, and a
much-branched panicle of small, white flowers, is very common in
marshes and ditches, and the various species of arrowhead
(_Sagittaria_) are among the most characteristic of our marsh plants.
The flowers are unisexual; the female flowers are usually borne at the
base of the inflorescence, and the male flowers above. The gynoecium
(Fig. 91, _B_) consists of numerous, separate carpels attached to a
globular receptacle. The sepals are green and much smaller than the
white petals. The leaves (_F_) are broad, and, besides the thickened,
parallel veins, have numerous smaller ones connecting these.

[Illustration: FIG. 91.--Types of _Helobiae_. _A_, inflorescence of
arrowhead (_Sagittaria_), with a single female flower, x 1/2
(_Alismaceae_). _B_, section through the gynoecium, showing the numerous
single carpels, x 3. _C_, a ripe fruit, x 3. _D_, a male flower, x 1.
_E_, a single stamen, x 3. _F_, a leaf of _Sagittaria variabilis_,
x 1/6. _G_, ditch-moss (_Elodea_), with a female flower (_fl._), x 1/2.
(_Hydrocharideae_). _H_, the flower, x 2. _an._ the rudimentary
stamens. _st._ the stigma. _I_, cross-section of the ovary, x 4. _J_,
male inflorescence of eel-grass (_Vallisneria_), x 1. _K_, a single
expanded male flower, x 12. _st._ the stamen. _L_, a female flower,
x 1. _gy._ the stigma.]

The last family is the _Hydrocharideae_. They are submersed aquatics,
or a few of them with long-stalked, floating leaves. Two forms, the
ditch-moss (_Elodea_) (Fig. 91, _G_, _I_) and eel-grass
(_Vallisneria_) are very common in stagnant or slow-running water. In
both of these the plants are completely submersed, but there is a
special arrangement for bringing the flowers to the surface of the
water. Like the arrowhead, the flowers are unisexual, but borne on
different plants. The female flowers (_H_, _L_) are comparatively
large, especially in _Vallisneria_, and are borne on long stalks, by
means of which they reach the surface of the water, where they expand
and are ready for pollination. The male flowers (Fig. 91, _J_, _K_)
are extremely small and borne, many together, surrounded by a
membranous envelope, the whole inflorescence attached by a short
stalk. When the flowers are ready to open, they break away from their
attachment, and the envelope opens, allowing them to escape, and they
immediately rise to the surface where they expand and collect in great
numbers about the open female flowers. Sometimes these are so abundant
during the flowering period (late in summer) that the surface of the
water looks as if flour had been scattered over it. After pollination
is effected, the stem of the female flower coils up like a spring,
drawing the flower beneath the water where the fruit ripens.

The cells of these plants show very beautifully the circulation of the
protoplasm, the movement being very marked and continuing for a long
time under the microscope. To see this the whole leaf of _Elodea_, or
a section of that of _Vallisneria_, may be used.




CHAPTER XVII.

DICOTYLEDONS.


The second sub-class of the angiosperms, the dicotyledons, receive
their name from the two opposite seed leaves or cotyledons with which
the young plant is furnished. These leaves are usually quite different
in shape from the other leaves, and not infrequently are very thick
and fleshy, filling nearly the whole seed, as may be seen in a bean or
pea. The number of the dicotyledons is very large, and very much the
greater number of living spermaphytes belong to this group. They
exhibit much greater variety in the structure of the flowers than the
monocotyledons, and the leaves, which in the latter are with few
exceptions quite uniform in structure, show here almost infinite
variety. Thus the leaves may be simple (undivided); _e.g._ oak, apple;
or compound, as in clover, locust, rose, columbine, etc. The leaves
may be stalked or sessile (attached directly to the stem), or even
grown around the stem, as in some honeysuckles. The edges of the
leaves may be perfectly smooth ("entire"), or they may be variously
lobed, notched, or wavy in many ways. As many of the dicotyledons are
trees or shrubs that lose their leaves annually, special leaves are
developed for the protection of the young leaves during the winter.
These have the form of thick scales, and often are provided with
glands secreting a gummy substance which helps render them
water-proof. These scales are best studied in trees with large, winter
buds, such as the horsechestnut (Fig. 92), hickory, lilac, etc. On
removing the hard, scale leaves, the delicate, young leaves, and often
the flowers, may be found within the bud. If we examine a young shoot
of lilac or buckeye, just as the leaves are expanding in the spring, a
complete series of forms may be seen from the simple, external scales,
through immediate forms, to the complete foliage leaf. The veins of
the leaves are almost always much-branched, the veins either being
given off from one main vein or midrib (feather-veined or
pinnate-veined), as in an apple leaf, or there may be a number of
large veins radiating from the base of the leaf, as in the scarlet
geranium or mallow. Such leaves are said to be palmately veined.

[Illustration: FIG. 92.--End of a branch of a horsechestnut in winter,
showing the buds covered by the thick, brown scale leaves, x 1.]

Some of them are small herbaceous plants, either upright or prostrate
upon the ground, over which they may creep extensively, becoming
rooted at intervals, as in the white clover, or sending out special
runners, as is seen in the strawberry. Others are woody stemmed
plants, persisting from year to year, and often becoming great trees
that live for hundreds of years. Still others are climbing plants,
either twining their stems about the support, like the morning-glory,
hop, honeysuckle, and many others, or having special organs (tendrils)
by which they fasten themselves to the support. These tendrils
originate in different ways. Sometimes, as in the grape and Virginia
creeper, they are reduced branches, either coiling about the support,
or producing little suckers at their tips by which they cling to walls
or the trunks of trees. Other tendrils, as in the poison ivy and the
true ivy, are short roots that fasten themselves firmly in the
crevices of bark or stones. Still other tendrils, as those of the
sweet-pea and clematis, are parts of the leaf.

The stems may be modified into thorns for protection, as we see in
many trees and shrubs, and parts of leaves may be similarly changed,
as in the thistle. The underground stems often become much changed,
forming bulbs, tubers, root stocks, etc. much as in the
monocotyledons. These structures are especially found in plants which
die down to the ground each year, and contain supplies of nourishment
for the rapid growth of the annual shoots.

[Illustration: FIG. 93.--_A_, base of a plant of shepherd's-purse
(_Capsella bursa-pastoris_), x 1/2. _r_, the main root. _B_, upper part
of the inflorescence, x 1. _C_, two leaves: i, from the upper part;
ii, from the base of the plant, x 1. _D_, a flower, x 3. _E_, the
same, with sepals and petals removed, x 3. _F_, petal. _G_, sepal.
_H_, stamen, x 10. _f_, filament. _an._ anther. _I_, a fruit with one
of the valves removed to show the seeds, x 4. _J_, longitudinal
section of a seed, x 8. _K_, the embryo removed from the seed, x 8.
_l_, the first leaves (cotyledons). _st._ the stem ending in the root.
_L_, cross-section of the stem, x 20. _fb._ fibro-vascular bundle.
_M_, a similar section of the main root, x 15. _N_, diagram of the
flower.]

The structure of the tissues, and the peculiarities of the flower and
fruit, will be better understood by a somewhat careful examination of
a typical dicotyledon, and a comparison with this of examples of the
principal orders and families.

One of the commonest of weeds, and at the same time one of the most
convenient plants for studying the characteristics of the
dicotyledons, is the common shepherd's-purse (_Capsella
bursa-pastoris_) (Figs. 93-95).

The plant grows abundantly in waste places, and is in flower nearly
the year round, sometimes being found in flower in midwinter, after a
week or two of warm weather. It is, however, in best condition for
study in the spring and early summer. The plant may at once be
recognized by the heart-shaped pods and small, white, four-petaled
flowers. The plant begins to flower when very small, but continues to
grow until it forms a much-branching plant, half a metre or more in
height. On pulling up the plant, a large tap-root (Fig. 93, _A_, _r_)
is seen, continuous with the main stem above ground. The first root of
the seedling plant continues here as the main root of the plant, as
was the case with the gymnosperms, but not with the monocotyledons.
From this tap-root other small ones branch off, and these divide
repeatedly, forming a complex root system. The main root is very tough
and hard, owing to the formation of woody tissue in it. A
cross-section slightly magnified (Fig. 93, _M_), shows a round,
opaque, white, central area (_x_), the wood, surrounded by a more
transparent, irregular ring (_ph._), the phloem or bast; and outside
of this is the ground tissue and epidermis.

The lower leaves are crowded into a rosette, and are larger than those
higher up, from which they differ also in having a stalk (petiole),
while the upper leaves are sessile. The outline of the leaves varies
much in different plants and in different parts of the same plant,
being sometimes almost entire, sometimes divided into lobes almost to
