
Then the balance again swung toward Nansal. A Nansalian scientist
discovered a compact method of storing power. Oddly enough, it was
similar to the method Dr. Richard Arcot had discovered a hundred
thousand light centuries away! It did not store nearly the power, and
was inefficient, but it was a great improvement over their older method
of generating energy in the ship itself.

The Nansalian ships could be made smaller, and lighter, and more
maneuverable, and at the same time could be equipped with heavier, more
powerful magnetic beam generators.

Very shortly, the Satorians were again at the mercy of Nansal. They
could not fight the faster, more powerful ships of the Nansalians, and
again they went down in defeat.

And again they sued for peace.

This time, Nansal knew better; they went right on developing their fleet
while the diplomats of Sator argued.

But the Satorians weren't fools; they didn't expect Nansal to swallow
the same bait a second time. Sator had another ace up her sleeve.

Ten days after they arrived, every diplomat and courier of the Satorian
delegation committed suicide!

Puzzled, the government of Nansal reported the deaths to Sator at once,
expecting an immediate renewal of hostilities; they were quite sure that
Sator assumed they had been murdered. Nansal was totally unprepared for
what happened; Sator acknowledged the message with respects and said
they would send a new commission.

Two days later, Nansal realized it had been tricked again. A horrible
disease broke out and spread like wildfire. The incubation period was
twelve days; during that time it gave no sign. Then the flesh began to
rot away, and the victim died within hours. No wonder the ambassadors
had committed suicide!

Millions died, including Torlos' own father, during the raging epidemic
that followed. But, purely by lucky accident, the Nansalian medical
research teams came up with a cure and a preventive inoculation before
the disease had spread over the whole planet.

Sator's delegation had inoculated themselves with the disease and, at
the sacrifice of their own lives, had spread it on Nansal. Although the
Satorians had developed the horribly virulent strain of virus, they had
not found a cure; the diplomats knew they were going to die.

Having managed to stop the disease before it swept the planet, the
Nansalians decided to pull a trick of their own. Radio communication
with Sator was cut off in such a way as to lead the Satorian government
to believe that Nansal was dying of the disease.

The scientists of Sator knew that the virus was virulent; in fact, too
virulent for its own good. It killed the host every time, and the virus
could not live outside a living cell. They knew that shortly after every
Nansalian died, the virus, too, would be dead.

Their fleet started for Nansal six months after radio contact had broken
off. Expecting to find Nansal a dead planet, they were totally
unprepared to find them alive and ready for the attack. The Satorian
fleet, vastly surprised to find a living, vigorous enemy, was totally
wiped out.

Since that time, both planets had remained in a state of armed truce.
Neither had developed any weapon which would enable them to gain an
advantage over their enemy. Each was so spy-infested that no move could
pass undiscovered.

Stalemate.




XIX


Torlos spread his hands eloquently. "That is the history of our war. Can
you wonder that my people were suspicious when your ship appeared? Can
you wonder that they drove you away? They were afraid of the men of
Sator; when they saw your weapons, they were afraid for their
civilization.

"On the other hand, why should the men of Sator fear? They knew that our
code of honor would not permit us to make a treacherous attack.

"I regret that my people drove you away, but can you blame them?"

Arcot had to admit that he could not. He turned to Morey. "They were
certainly reasonable in driving us from their cities; experience has
taught them that it's the safest way. A good offense is always the best
defense.

"But experience has taught me that, unlike Torlos, I have to eat. I
wonder if it might not be a good idea to get a little rest too--I'm
bushed."

"Good idea," agreed Morey. "I'll ask Wade to stand guard while we sleep.
If Torlos wants company, he can talk to Wade as well as anyone. I'm due
for some sleep myself."

Arcot, Morey, and Fuller went to their rooms for some rest. Arcot and
Morey were tired, but after an hour, Fuller rose and went down to the
control room where Wade was communicating telepathically with Torlos.

"Hello," Wade greeted him. "I thought you were going to join the
Snoring Chorus."

"I tried to, but I couldn't get in tune. What have you been doing?"

"I've been talking with Torlos--and with fair success. I'm getting the
trick of thought communication," Wade said enthusiastically. "I asked
Torlos if he wanted to sleep, and it seems that they do it regularly,
one day in ten. And when they sleep, they sleep soundly. It's more of a
coma, something like the hibernation of a bear or a possum.

"If you want to do business with Mr. John Doe, and he happens to be
asleep, your business will have to wait. It takes something really
drastic to wake these people up.

"I remember a remark one of my classmates made while I was going to
college. He was totally unconscious of the humor in the thing. He said:
'I've got to go to more lectures. I've been losing a lot of sleep.'

"He intended them to be totally disconnected thoughts, but the rest of
us knew his habits, and we almost knocked ourselves out laughing.

"I was just wondering what would happen if a Nansalian were to drop off
in class. They'd probably have to call an ambulance or something to
carry him home!"

Fuller looked at the giant. "I doubt it. One of his classmates would
just tuck him under his arm and take him on home--or to the next
lecture. Remember, they only weigh about four hundred pounds on Nansal,
which is no more to them than fifty pounds is to us."

"True enough," Wade agreed. "But you know, I'd hate to have him wrap
those arms of his about me. He might get excited, or sneeze or
something, and--_squish!_"

"You and your morbid imagination." Fuller sat down in one of the seats.
"Let's see if we can't get a three-way conversation going; this guy is
interesting."

Arcot and Morey awoke nearly three hours later, and the Earthmen ate
their breakfast, much to Torlos' surprise.

"I can understand that you need far more food than we do," he commented,
"but you only ate a few hours ago. It seems like a tremendous amount of
food to me. How could you possibly grow enough in your cities?"

"So _that's_ why they don't have any farms!" Fuller said.

"Our food is grown out on the plains outside the cities, where there is
room," Arcot explained. "It's difficult, but we have machines to help
us. We could never have developed the cone type of city you have,
however, for we need huge huge quantities of food. If we were to seal
ourselves inside our cities as your people have to protect themselves
from enemies, we would starve to death very quickly."

"You know," Morey said, "I'll have to admit that Torlos' people are a
higher type of creation than we are. Man, and all other animals on
Earth, are parasites of the plant world. We're absolutely incapable of
producing our own foods. We can't gather energy for ourselves. We're
utterly dependent on plants.

"But these men aren't--at least not so much so. They at least generate
their own muscular energy by extracting heat from the air they breathe.
They combine all the best features of plants, reptiles, and mammals. I
don't know where they'd be classified biologically!"

After the meal, they went to the control room and strapped themselves
into the control seats. Arcot checked the fuel gauge.

"We have plenty of lead left," he said to Morey, "and Torlos has assured
me that we will be able to get more on Nansal. I suggest we show him how
the space control works, so that he can tell the Nansalian scientists
about it from personal experience.

"In this sun's gravitational field, we'll lose a lot of power, but as
long as it can be replaced, we're all right."

Turning to the Nansalian, Arcot pointed out towards the little spark of
light that was Torlos' home planet. "Keep your eyes on that, Torlos.
Watch it grow when we use our space control drive."

Arcot pushed the little red switch to the first notch. The air around
them pulsed with power for an instant, then space had readjusted itself.

The point that was Nansal grew to a disc, and then it was swiftly
leaping toward them, welling up to meet them, expanding its bulk with
awesome speed. Torlos watched it tensely.

There was a sudden splintering crash, and Arcot jerked open the circuit
in alarm. They were almost motionless again as the stars reeled about
them.

Torlos had been nervous. Like any man so effected, he had unconsciously
tightened his muscles. His fingers had sunk into the hard plastic of the
arm rest on his chair, and crushed it as though it had been put between
the jaws of a hydraulic press!

"I'm glad we weren't holding hands," said Wade, eyeing the broken
plastic.

"I am very sorry," Torlos thought humbly. "I did not intend to do that.
I forgot myself when I saw that planet rushing at me so fast." His
chagrin was apparent on his face.

Arcot laughed. "It is nothing, Torlos. We are merely astonished at the
terrific strength of your hand. Wade wasn't worried; he was joking!"

Torlos looked relieved, but he looked at the splintered arm rest and
then at his hand. "It is best that I keep my too-strong hands away from
your instruments."

The ship was falling toward Nansal at a relatively slow rate, less than
four miles a second. Arcot accelerated toward the planet for two hours,
then began to decelerate. Five hundred miles above the planet's surface,
their velocity cut the ship into a descending spiral orbit to allow the
atmosphere to check their speed.

The outer lux hull began to heat up, and he closed the relux screens to
cut down the radiation from it. When he opened them again, the ship was
speeding over the broad plains of the planet.

Torlos told Arcot that by far the greater percentage of the surface of
Nansal was land. There was still plenty of water, for their seas were
much deeper than those of Earth. Some of the seas were thirty miles deep
over broad areas--hundreds of square miles. As if to compensate, the
land surfaces were covered with titanic mountain ranges, some of them
over ten miles above sea level.

Torlos, his eyes shining, directed the Earthmen to his home city, the
capital of the world-nation.

"Is there no traffic between the cities here, Torlos?" Morey asked. "We
haven't seen any ships."

"There's continuous traffic," Torlos replied, "but you have come in far
to the north, well away from the regularly scheduled routes. The
commerce must be densely populated with warships as well, and both
warships and commercial craft are made to look as much alike as possible
so that the enemy can not know when ships of war are present and when
they are not, and their attacks are more easily beaten off. They are
forced to live off our commerce while they are here. Before we invented
the magnetic storage device, they were forced to get fuel from our ships
in order to make the return journey; they could not carry enough for the
round trip."

Suddenly his smile broadened, and he pointed out the forward window.
"Our city is behind that next range of mountains!"

They were flying at a height of twenty miles, and the range Torlos
indicated was far off in the blue distance, almost below the horizon. As
they approached them, the mountains seemed to change slowly as their
perspective shifted. They seemed to crawl about on one another like
living things, growing larger and changing from blue to blue-green, and
then to a rich, verdant emerald.

Soon the ship was rocketing smoothly over them. Ahead and below, in the
rocky gorge of the mountains, lay a great cone city, the largest the
Earthmen had yet seen. As they approached, they could see another cone
behind it--the city was a double cone! They resembled the circus tents
of two centuries earlier, connected by a ridge.

"Ah--home!" smiled Torlos. "See--that twin cone idea is new. It was not
thus when I left it, years ago. It is growing, growing--and in that new
section! See? They have bright colors on all the buildings! And already
they are digging foundations out to the left for a third cone!" He was
so excited that it was difficult for Arcot to read his thoughts
coherently.

"But we won't have to build more fortifications," Torlos continued, "if
you will give us the secret of the rays you use!

"But, Arcot, you must hide in the hills now; drop down and deposit me in
the hills. I will walk to the city on foot.

"I will be able to identify myself, and I will soon be inside the city,
telling the Supreme Three that I have salvation and peace for them!"

"I have a better idea," Arcot told him. "It will save you a long walk.
We'll make the ship invisible, and take you close to the city. You can
drop, say ten feet from the ship to the ground, and continue from there.
Will that be all right?"

Torlos agreed that it would.

Invisible, the _Ancient Mariner_ dove down toward the city, stopping
only a few hundred feet from the base of the magnetic wall, near one of
the gigantic beam stations.

"I will come out in a one-man flier, slowly, and at low altitude, toward
that mountain there," Torlos told Arcot, pointing. "Then you may become
visible and follow me into the city.

"You need fear no treachery from my people," he assured them. Then,
smiling: "As if you need fear treachery from the hands of any people!
You have certainly proven your ability to defend yourselves!

"Even if my people were treacherously inclined, they would certainly
have been convinced by your escape from the Satorians. And they have
undoubtedly heard all about it by now through the secret radios of our
spies. After all, I was not the only Nansalian spy there, and some of
the others must surely have escaped in the ships that ran away after I
destroyed the city." Arcot could feel the sadness in his mind as he
thought of the fact that his inadvertent destruction of the city had
undoubtedly killed some of his own people.

Torlos paused a moment, then asked: "Is there any message you wish me to
give the Supreme Council of Three?"

"Yes," replied Arcot. "Repeat to them the offer we so foolishly made to
the Commanding One of Sator. We will give them the molecular ray which
tore the city out of the ground, and, as your people have seen, also
tore a mountain down. We will give them our heat beam, which will melt
anything except the material of which this ship is made. And we will
give them the knowledge to make this material, too.

"Best of all, we will give them the secret of the most terrific energy
source known to mankind; the energy of matter itself. With these in your
hands, Sator will soon be peaceful.

"In return, we ask only two things. They will cost you almost nothing,
but they are invaluable to us. We have lost our way. In the vastness of
space, we can no longer locate our own galaxy. But our own Island
Universe has features which could be distinguished on an astronomical
plate, and we have taken photographs of it which your astronomers can
compare with their own to help us find our way back.

"In addition, we need more fuel--lead wire. Our space control drive does
not use up energy except in the presence of a strong gravitational
field; most of it is drained back into our storage coils, with very
little loss. But we have used it several times near a large sun, and the
power drainage goes up exponentially. We would not have enough to get
back home if we happened to run into any more trouble on the way."

Arcot paused a moment, considering. "Those two things are all we really
need, but we would like to take back more, if your Council is willing.
We would like samples of your books and photographs and other artifacts
of your civilization to take back home to our own people.

"That, and peace, are all we ask."

Torlos nodded. "The things you ask, I am sure the Council will readily
agree to. It seems little enough payment for the things you intend to do
for us."

"Very well, then. We will wait for you. Good luck!"

Torlos turned and jumped out of the airlock. The ship rose high above
him as he suddenly became visible on the plain below. He was running
toward the city in great leaps of twenty feet--graceful, easy leaps that
showed his tremendous power.

Suddenly, a ship was darting down from the city toward him. As it curved
down, Torlos stopped and made certain signals with his arms, then he
stood quietly with his hands in the air.

The ship hovered above him, and two men dropped thirty feet to the
ground and questioned him for several minutes.

Finally, they motioned to the ship, which dropped to ten feet, and the
three men leaped lightly to its door and entered. The door snapped shut,
and the ship shot toward the city. The magnetic wall opened for a
moment, and the ship shot through. Within seconds, if was out of sight,
lost in the busy air traffic above the city.

"Well," said Arcot, "now we go back to the hills and wait."




XX


For two days, the _Ancient Mariner_ lay hidden in the hills. It was
visible all that time, but at least two of the men were watching the sky
every hour of the day. Torlos himself was, they knew, perfectly
trustworthy, but they did not know whether his people were as honorable
as he claimed them to be.

Arcot and Wade were in the control room on the afternoon of the second
day--not Earth days, but the forty-hour Nansalian days--and they had
been quietly discussing the biological differences between themselves
and the inhabitants of this planet.

Suddenly, Wade saw a slowly moving speck in the sky.

"Look, Arcot! There's Torlos!"

They waited, ready for any hostile action as the tiny ship approached
rapidly, circling slowly downward as it came nearer. It landed a few
hundred feet away, and Torlos emerged, running rapidly toward the Earth
ship. Arcot let him in through the airlock.

Torlos smiled broadly. "I had difficulty in convincing the Council that
my story was true. When I told them that you could go faster than light,
they strongly objected. But they had to admit that you had certainly
been able to tear down the mountain very effectively, and they had
received reports of the destruction of the Satorian capitol.

"It seems you first visited the city of Thanso when you came here. The
