he was putting on.

"Hi, boss! Better we eat, huh? Not only am I starving by inches, but if
we don't eat pretty quick we'll get only one meal today instead of
three. Did you eat your candy bar?"

"I sure did, ace."

"Oh, I'm still 'ace'? You can kiss me, then," and she raised her face
toward his.

He kissed her, still tenderly, and they strolled to and through the Main
and into the alcove. James and Lola, the latter looking terribly
strained and worn, had already eaten, but joined them in their
after-breakfast coffee and cigarettes.

"You've checked, of course," Garlock said. "Everything on the beam?"

"Dead center. Even to Lola and her biologists. Everybody's full of joy
and gratitude and stuff--as well as information. And we managed to pry
ourselves loose without waking you two trumpet-of-doom sleepers up. So
we're ready to jump again. I wonder where in _hell_ we'll wind up _this_
time."

"I'm glad you said that, Jim." Garlock said. "It gives me the nerve to
spring a thing on you that I've been mulling around in my mind ever
since we landed here."

"Nerve? You?" James asked, incredulously. "Pass the coffee-pot around
again, Brownie. If that character there said what I heard him say,
this'll make your hair stand straight up on end."

"On our jumps we've had altogether too much power and no control
whatever...." Garlock paused in thought.

"Like a rookie pitcher," Belle suggested.

"Uh-uh," Lola objected. "It _couldn't_ be that wild. He'd have to stand
with his back to the plate and pitch the ball over the center-field
stands and seven blocks down-town."

"Cut the persiflage, you two," Garlock ordered. "Consider three things.
First, as you all know, I've been trying to figure out a generator that
would give us intrinsic control, but I haven't got any farther with it
than we did back on Tellus. Second, consider all the jumps we've made
except this last one. Every time we've taken off, none of us has had his
shield really up. You, Jim, were concentrating on the drive, and so were
wide open to it. The rest of us were at least thinking about it, and so
were more or less open to it. Not one of us has ever ordered it to take
us to any definite place; in fact, I don't believe that anyone of us has
ever even suggested a destination. Each one of us has been thinking, at
the instant of energization of the fields, exactly what you just said,
and with exactly the same emphasis.

"Third, consider this last jump all by itself. It's the first time we've
ever stayed in the same galaxy. It's the first time we've ever gone
where we wanted to. And it's the first time--here's the crux, as I see
it--that any of us has been concentrating on any destination at the
moment of firing the charge. Brownie was willing the _Pleiades_ to this
planet so hard that we all could taste it. The rest of us, if not really
pushing to get here, were at least not opposed to the idea. Check?"

"Check." "That's right." "Yes, I was pushing with all my might," came
from the three listeners, and James went on:

"Are you saying the damn thing's _alive_?"

"No. I'm saying I don't believe in miracles. I don't believe in
coincidence--that concept is as meaningless as that of paradox. I
certainly do _not_ believe that we hit this planet by chance against
odds of almost infinity to one. So I've been looking for a reason. I
found one. It goes against my grain--against everything I've ever
believed--but, since it's the only possible explanation, it must be
true. The only possible director of the Gunther Drive _must_ be the
mind."

"Hell's blowtorches--Now you're _insisting_ that the damn thing's
alive."

"Far from it. It's Brownie who's alive. It was Brownie who got us here.
Nothing else--repeat, _nothing_ else--makes sense."

James pondered for a full minute. "I wouldn't buy it except for one
thing. If you, the hardest-boiled skeptic that ever went unhung, can
feed yourself the whole bowl of such a mess as that, I can at least take
a taste of it. Shoot."

"Okay. You know that we don't know anything really fundamental about
either teleportation or the drive. I'm sure now that the drive is simply
mechanical teleportation. If you tried to 'port yourself without any
idea of where you wanted to go, where do you think you'd land?"

"You might scatter yourself all over space--no, you wouldn't. You
wouldn't move, because it wouldn't be teleportation at all. Destination
is an integral part of the concept."

"Exactly so--but only because you've been conditioned to it all your
life. This thing hasn't been conditioned to anything."

"Like a new-born baby," Lola suggested.

"Life again," James said. "I can't see it--too many bones in it. Pure
luck, even at those odds, makes a lot more sense."

"And to make matters worse," Garlock went on as though neither of them
had spoken. "Just suppose that a man had four minds instead of one and
they weren't working together. Then where would he go?"

This time, James simply whistled; the girls stared, speechless.

"I think we've proved that my school of mathematics was right--the thing
was built to operate purely at random. Fotheringham was wrong. However,
I missed the point that if control is possible, the controller must be a
mind. Such a possibility never occurred to me or anyone working with me.
Or to Fotheringham or to anybody else."

"I can't say I'm sold, but it's easy to test and the results can't be
any worse. Let's go."

"How would you test it?"

"Same way you would. Only way. First, each one of us alone. Then pairs
and threes. Then all four together. Fifteen tests in all. No. Three
destinations for each set-up; near, medium, and far. Except Tellus, of
course; we'd better save that shot until we learn all we can find out.
Everybody not in the set should screen up as solidly as they can set
their blocks--eyes shut, even, and concentrating on something else.
Check?"

James did not express the thought that Tellus must by now be so far away
that no possible effort could reach it; but he could not repress the
implication.

"Check. I'll concentrate on a series of transfinite numbers. Belle, you
work on the possible number of shades of the color green. Lola, on how
many different perfumes you can identify by smell. Jim, hit the button."




CHAPTER 6


Since the tests took much time, and were strictly routine in nature,
there is no need to go into them in detail. At their conclusion, Garlock
said:

"First: either Jim alone, or Lola alone, or Jim and Lola together, can
hit any destination within any galaxy, but can't go from one galaxy to
another.

"Second: either Belle or I, or any combination containing either of us
without the other, has no control at all.

"Third: Belle and I together, or any combination containing both of us,
can go intergalactic under control.

"In spite of confession being supposed to be good for the soul, I don't
like to admit that we've put gravel in the gear-box--do you, Belle?"
Garlock's smile was both rueful and forced.

"You can play _that_ in spades." Belle licked her lips; for the first
time since boarding the starship she was acutely embarrassed. "We'll
have to, of course. It was all my fault--it makes me look like a damned
stupid juvenile delinquent."

"Not by nineteen thousand kilocycles, since neither of us had any idea.
I'll be glad to settle for half the blame."

        *           *           *

"Will you please stop talking Sanskrit?" James asked. "Or lep it, so we
two innocent bystanders can understand it?"

"Will do," and Garlock went on in thought. "Remember what I said about
this drive not being conditioned to anything? I was wrong. Belle and I
have conditioned it, but badly. We've been fighting so much that
something or other in that mess down there has become conditioned to
her; something else to me. My part will play along with anyone except
Belle; hers with anybody except me. Anti-conditioning, you might call
it. Anyway, they lay back their ears and balk."

"Oh, hell!" James snorted. "Talk about gobbledygook! You are still
saying that that conglomeration of copper and silver and steel and
insulation that we built ourselves has got intelligence, and I still
won't buy it."

"By no means. Remember, Jim, that this concept of mechanical
teleportation, and that the mind is the only possible controller, are
absolutely new. We've got to throw out all previous ideas and start new
from scratch. I postulate, as a working hypothesis drawn from original
data as modified by these tests, that that particular conglomeration of
materials generates at least two fields about the properties of which we
know nothing at all. That one of those properties is the tendency to
become preferentially resonant with one mind and preferentially
non-resonant with another. Clear so far?"

"As mud. It's a mighty tough blueprint to read." James scowled in
thought. "However, it's no harder to swallow than Sanderson's Theory of
Teleportation. Or, for that matter, the actual basic coupling between
mind and ordinary muscular action. Does that mean we'll have to rebuild
half a million credits' worth of ... no, you and Belle can work it,
together."

"I don't know." Garlock paced the floor. "I simply can't see any
_possible_. mechanism of coupling."

"Subconscious, perhaps," Belle suggested.

"For my money that whole concept is invalid," Garlock said. "It merely
changes 'I don't know' to 'I can't know' and I don't want any part of
that. However, 'unconscious' could be the answer ... if so, we may have
a lever.... Belle, are you willing to bury your hatchet for about five
minutes--work with me like a partner ought to?"

"I certainly am, Clee. Honestly. Screens down flat, if you say so."

"Half-way's enough, I think--you'll know when we get down there." Her
mind joined his and he went on, "Ignore the machines themselves
completely. Consider only the fields. Feel around with me--keep
tuned!--see if there's anything at all here that we can grab hold of and
manipulate, like an Op field except probably very much finer. I'll be
completely damned if I can see how this type of Gunther generator can
put out a manipulable field, but it must. That's the only--O-W-R-C-H-H!"

This last was a yell of pure mental agony. Both hands flew to his head,
his face turned white, sweat poured, and he slumped down unconscious.

He came to, however, as the other three were stretching him out on a
davenport. Belle was mopping his face with a handkerchief.

"What happened, Clee?" All three were exclaiming at once.

"I found my manipulable field, but a bomb went off in my brain when I
straightened it out." He searched his mind anxiously, then smiled. "But
no damage done--just the opposite. It opened up a Gunther cell I didn't
know I had. Didn't it sock you, too, Belle?"

"Uh-uh," she said, more than half bitterly. "I must not have one. That
makes you a Super-Prime, if I may name a new classification."

"Nonsense! Of course you've got it. Unconscious, of course, like me, but
without it you couldn't have conditioned the field. But why.... Oh, what
bit me was the one conditioned to me."

"Oh, nice!" Belle exclaimed. "Come on, Clee--let's go get mine!"

"Do you want a bit of knowledge _that_ badly, Belle?" Lola asked.
"Besides, wait, he isn't strong enough yet."

"Of course he's strong enough. A little knock like that? _Want_ it! I'd
give my right leg and ... and almost _anything_ for it. It didn't kill
him, so it won't kill me."

"There may be an easier way," Garlock said. "I wouldn't wish a jolt like
that onto my worst enemy. But that had two hundred kilovolts and four
hundred kilogunts behind it. Since I know now where and what the cell
is, I think I can open it up for you without being quite so rough."

"Oh, lovely. Come in, quick! I'm ready now."

        *           *           *

Garlock went in; and wrought. It took longer--half an hour, in fact--but
it was very much easier to take.

"What did it feel like, Belle?" Lola asked, eagerly. "You winced like he
was drilling teeth and struck a couple of nerves."

"Uh-uh. More like being stretched all out of shape. Like having a child,
maybe, in a small way. Let's go, Clee!"

They joined up and went.

"Ha, _there_ you are, you cantankerous little fabrication of nothings!"
Belle said aloud, in a low, throaty, gloating voice. "Take _that_--and
_that_! And now behave yourself. If you don't, mama spank--but _good_!"
Then, breaking connection, "Thanks a million, Clee; you're tall, solid
gold. Do you want to run some more tests, to see which of us is the
intergalactic transporter?"

"Not unless you do."

"Who, me? I'll be tickled to death not to; just like I'd swallowed an
ostrich feather. Back to Tellus, then?"

"Tellus, here we come," Garlock said. "Jim, what are the Tellurian
figures for exactly five hundred miles up?"

"I'll punch 'em--got 'em in my head." James did so. "Shall Brownie and I
set our blocks?"

"No," Belle said. "Nothing can interfere with us now."

"Ready." Garlock sat down in the pilot's seat. "Cluster 'round, chum."

        *           *           *

Belle leaned against the back of the chair and put both arms around
Garlock's neck. "I'm clustered."

"The spot we're shooting at is exactly over the exact center of the
middle blast-pit at Port Gunther. In sync?"

"To a skillionth of a whillionth of a microphase. I'm _exactly_ on and
locked. Shoot."

"Now, you sheet-iron bucket of nuts and bolts, _jump_!" and Garlock
snapped the red switch.

Earth lay beneath them. So did Port Gunther.

