"What about women? Can they own land too?" asked the Very Young Man.

"They have identical rights with men in everything," the Chemist
answered.

"But women surely cannot cultivate their own land?" the Doctor said.
Evidently he was thinking of Lylda's fragile little body, and certainly
if most of the Oroid women were like her, labour in the fields would be
for them quite impossible.

"A few women, by choice, do some of the lighter forms of manual
labor--but they are very few. Nearly every woman marries within a few
years after she receives her land; if it is to be cultivated, her
husband then takes charge of it."

"Is the cultivation of land compulsory?" asked the Big Business Man.

"Only when in a city's district a shortage of food is threatened. Then
the government decides the amount and kind of food needed, and the
citizens, drawn by lot, are ordered to produce it. The government
watches very carefully its food supply. In the case of overproduction,
certain citizens, those less skillful, are ordered to work at something
else.

"This supervision over supply and demand is exercised by the government
not only in the question of food but in manufactures, in fact, in all
industrial activities. A very nice balance is obtained, so that
practically no unnecessary work is done throughout the nation.

"And gentlemen, do you know, as a matter of fact, I think that is the
secret of a race of people being able to live without having to work
most of its waking hours? If your civilization could eliminate all its
unnecessary work, there would be far less work to do."

"I wonder--isn't this balance of supply and demand very difficult to
maintain?" asked the Big Business Man thoughtfully.

"Not nearly so difficult as you would think," the Chemist answered. "In
the case of land cultivation, the government has a large reserve, the
cultivation of which it adjusts to maintain this balance. Thus, in some
districts, the citizens do as they please and are never interfered with.

"The same is true of manufactures. There is no organized business in the
nation--not even so much as the smallest factory--except that conducted
by the government. Each city has its own factories, whose production is
carefully planned exactly to equal the demand."

"Suppose a woman marries and her land is far away from her husband's?
That would be sort of awkward, wouldn't it?" suggested the Very Young
Man.

"Each year at a stated time," the Chemist answered, "transfers of land
are made. There are generally enough people who want to move to make
satisfactory changes of location practical. And then of course, the
government always stands ready to take up any two widely separate pieces
of land, and give others in exchange out of its reserve."

"Suppose you don't like the new land as well?" objected the Very Young
Man.

"Almost all land is of equal value," answered the Chemist. "And of
course, its state of cultivation is always considered."

"You were speaking about not having money," prompted the Very Young Man.

"The idea is simply this: Suppose I wish to cultivate nothing except,
let us say, certain vegetables. I register with the government my
intention and the extent to which I propose to go. I receive the
government's consent. I then take my crops as I harvest them and
exchange them for every other article I need."

"With whom do you exchange them?" asked the Doctor.

"Any one I please--or with the government. Ninety per cent of everything
produced is turned in to the government and other articles are taken
from its stores."

"How is the rate of exchange established?" asked the Big Business Man.

"It is computed by the government. Private exchanges are supposed to be
made at the same rate. It is against the law to cut under the government
rate. But it is done, although apparently not with sufficient frequency
to cause any trouble."

"I should think it would be tremendously complicated and annoying to
make all these exchanges," observed the Big Business Man.

"Not at all," answered the Chemist, "because of the governmental system
of credits. The financial standing of every individual is carefully kept
on record."

"Without any money? I don't get you," said the Very Young Man with a
frown of bewilderment.

The Chemist smiled. "Well, I don't blame you for that. But I think I can
make myself clear. Let us take the case of Loto, for instance, as an
individual. When he comes of age he will be allotted his section of
land. We will assume him to be without family at that time, entirely
dependent on his own resources."

"Would he never have worked before coming of age?" the Very Young Man
asked.

"Children with parents generally devote their entire minority to getting
an education, and to building their bodies properly. Without parents,
they are supported by the government and live in public homes. Such
children, during their adolescence, work for the government a small
portion of their time.

"Now when Loto comes of age and gets his land, located approximately
where he desires it, he will make his choice as to his vocation. Suppose
he wishes not to cultivate his land but to work for the government. He
is given some congenial, suitable employment at which he works
approximately five hours a day. No matter what he elects to do at the
time he comes of age the government opens an account with him. He is
credited with a certain standard unit for his work, which he takes from
the government in supplies at his own convenience."

"What is the unit?" asked the Big Business Man.

"It is the average work produced by the average worker in one
day--purely an arbitrary figure."

"Like our word horse-power?" put in the Doctor.

"Exactly. And all merchandise, food and labor is valued in terms of it.

"Thus you see, every individual has his financial standing--all in
relation to the government. He can let his balance pile up if he is
able, or he can keep it low."

"Suppose he goes into debt?" suggested the Very Young Man.

"In the case of obvious, verified necessity, the government will allow
him a limited credit. Persistent--shall I say willful--debt is a crime."

"I thought at first," said the Big Business Man, "that everybody in this
nation was on the same financial footing--that there was no premium put
upon skill or industriousness. Now I see that one can accumulate, if not
money, at least an inordinate amount of the world's goods."

"Not such an inordinate amount," said the Chemist smiling. "Because
there is no inheritance. A man and woman, combining their worldly
wealth, may by industry acquire more than others, but they are welcome
to enjoy it. And they cannot, in one lifetime, get such a preponderance
of wealth as to cause much envy from those lacking it."

"What happens to this house when you and Lylda die, if Loto cannot have
it?" the Big Business Man asked.

"It is kept in repair by the government and held until some one with a
sufficiently large balance wants to buy it."

"Are all workers paid at the same rate?" asked the Doctor.

"No, but their wages are much nearer equal than in your world."

"You have to hire people to work for you, how do you pay them?" the
Doctor inquired.

"The rate is determined by governmental standard. I pay them by having
the amount deducted from my balance and added to theirs."

"When you built this house, how did you go about doing it?" asked the
Big Business Man.

"I simply went to the government, and they built it for me according to
my own ideas and wishes, deducting its cost from my balance."

"What about the public work to be done?" asked the Big Business Man.
"Caring for the city streets, the making of roads and all that. Do you
have taxes?"

"No," answered the Chemist smiling, "we do not have taxes. Quite the
reverse, we sometimes have dividends.

"The government, you must understand, not only conducts a business
account with each of its citizens, but one with itself also. The value
of articles produced is computed with a profit allowance, so that by a
successful business administration, the government is enabled not only
to meet its public obligations, but to acquire a surplus to its own
credit in the form of accumulated merchandise. This surplus is divided
among the people every five years--a sort of dividend."

"I should think some cities might have much more than others," said the
Big Business Man. "That would cause discontent, wouldn't it?"

"It would probably cause a rush of people to the more successful cities.
But it doesn't happen, because each city reports to the National
government and the whole thing is averaged up. You see it is all quite
simple," the Chemist finished. "And it makes life here very easy to
live, and very worth the living."

Unnoticed by the four interested men, a small compact-looking gray cloud
had come sweeping down from the horizon above the lake and was scudding
across the sky toward Arite. A sudden sharp crack of thunder interrupted
their conversation.

"Hello, a storm!" exclaimed the Chemist, looking out over the lake.
"You've never seen one, have you? Come upstairs."

They followed him into the house and upstairs to its flat roof. From
this point of vantage they saw that the house was built with an interior
courtyard or _patio_. Looking down into this courtyard from the roof
they could see a little, splashing fountain in its center, with flower
beds, a narrow gray path, and several small white benches.

The roof, which was guarded with a breast-high parapet around both its
inner and outer edges, was beautifully laid out with a variety of
flowers and with trellised flower-bearing vines. In one corner were
growing a number of small trees with great fan-shaped leaves of blue and
bearing a large bell-shaped silver blossom.

One end of the roof on the lake side was partially enclosed. Towards
this roofed enclosure the Chemist led his friends. Within it a large
fiber hammock hung between two stone posts. At one side a depression in
the floor perhaps eight feet square was filled with what might have been
blue pine needles, and a fluffy bluish moss. This rustic couch was
covered at one end by a canopy of vines bearing a little white flower.

As they entered the enclosure, it began to rain, and the Chemist slid
forward several panels, closing them in completely. There were shuttered
windows in these walls, through which they could look at the scene
outside--a scene that with the coming storm was weird and beautiful
beyond anything they had ever beheld.

The cloud had spread sufficiently now to blot out the stars from nearly
half of the sky. It was a thick cloud, absolutely opaque, and yet it
caused no appreciable darkness, for the starlight it cut off was
negligible and the silver radiation from the lake had more than doubled
in intensity.

Under the strong wind that had sprung up the lake assumed now an
extraordinary aspect. Its surface was raised into long, sweeping waves
that curved sharply and broke upon themselves. In their tops the silver
phosphorescence glowed and whirled until the whole surface of the lake
seemed filled with a dancing white fire, twisting, turning and seeming
to leap out of the water high into the air.

Several small sailboats, square, flat little catamarans, they looked,
showed black against the water as they scudded for shore, trailing lines
of silver out behind them.

The wind increased in force. Below, on the beach, a huge rock lay in the
water, against which the surf was breaking. Columns of water at times
shot into the air before the face of the rock, and were blown away by
the wind in great clouds of glistening silver. Occasionally it thundered
with a very sharp intense crack accompanied by a jagged bolt of bluish
lightning that zigzagged down from the low-hanging cloud.

Then came the rain in earnest, a solid, heavy torrent, that bent down
the wind and smoothed the surface of the lake. The rain fell almost
vertically, as though it were a tremendous curtain of silver strings.
And each of these strings broke apart into great shining pearls as the
eye followed downward the course of the raindrops.

For perhaps ten minutes the silver torrent poured down. Then suddenly it
ceased. The wind had died away; in the air there was the fresh warm
smell of wet and steaming earth. From the lake rolled up a shimmering
translucent cloud of mist, like an enormous silver fire mounting into
the sky. And then, as the gray cloud swept back behind them, beyond the
city, and the stars gleamed overhead, they saw again that great trail of
star-dust which the Chemist first had seen through his microscope,
hanging in an ever broadening arc across the sky, and ending vaguely at
their feet.




CHAPTER XXII

THE TRIAL


In a few moments more the storm had passed completely; only the wet city
streets, the mist over the lake, and the moist warmth of the air
remained. For some time the three visitors to this extraordinary world
stood silent at the latticed windows, awed by what they had seen. The
noise of the panels as the Chemist slid them back brought them to
themselves.

"A curious land, gentlemen," he remarked quietly.

"It's--it's weird," the Very Young Man ejaculated.

The Chemist led them out across the roof to its other side facing the
city. The street upon which the house stood sloped upwards over the hill
behind. It was wet with the rain and gleamed like a sheet of burnished
silver. And down its sides now ran two little streams of liquid silver
fire.

The street, deserted during the storm, was beginning to fill again with
people returning to their tasks. At the intersection with the next road
above, they could see a line of sleighs passing. Beneath them, before
the wall of the garden a little group of men stood talking; on a
roof-top nearby a woman appeared with a tiny naked infant which she sat
down to nurse in a corner of her garden.

"A city at work," said the Chemist with a wave of his hand. "Shall we go
down and see it?"

His three friends assented readily, the Very Young Man suggesting
promptly that they first visit Lylda's father and Aura.

"He is teaching Loto this morning," said the Chemist smiling.

"Why not go to the court?" suggested the Big Business Man.

"Is the public admitted?" asked the Doctor.

"Nothing is secret here," the Chemist answered. "By all means, we will
go to the court first, if you wish; Lylda should be through very
shortly."

The court of Arite stood about a mile away near the lake shore. As they
left the house and passed through the city streets the respect accorded
the Chemist became increasingly apparent. The three strangers with him
attracted considerable attention, for, although they wore the
conventional robes in which the more prominent citizens were generally
attired, their short hair and the pallid whiteness of their skins made
them objects of curiosity. No crowd gathered; those they passed stared a
little, raised their hands to their foreheads and went their way, yet
underneath these signs of respect there was with some an air of
sullenness, of hostility, that the visitors could not fail to notice.

The Oroid men, in street garb, were dressed generally in a short
metallic-looking tunic of drab, with a brighter-colored girdle. The
women, most of them, wore only a sort of skirt, reaching from waist to
knees; a few had circular discs covering their breasts. There were
hardly any children to be seen, except occasionally a little face
staring at them from a window, or peering down from a roof-top. Once or
twice they passed a woman with an infant slung across her back in a sort
of hammock.

The most common vehicle was the curious form of sleigh in which they had
ridden down through the tunnels. They saw also a few little two-wheeled
carts, with wheels that appeared to be a solid segment of tree-trunk.
All the vehicles were drawn by meek-looking little gray animals like a
small deer without horns.

The court-house of Arite, though a larger building, from the outside was
hardly different than most others in the city. It was distinct, however,
in having on either side of the broad doorway that served as its main
entrance, a large square stone column.

As they entered, passing a guard who saluted them respectfully, the
visitors turned from a hallway and ascended a flight of steps. At the
top they found themselves on a balcony overlooking the one large room
that occupied almost the entire building. The balcony ran around all
three sides (the room was triangular in shape) and was railed with a low
stone parapet. On it were perhaps fifty people, sitting quietly on stone
benches that lay close up behind the parapet. An attendant stood at each
of the corners of the balcony; the one nearest bowed low as the Chemist
and his companions entered silently and took their seats.

From the balcony the entire room below was in plain view. At the apex of
its triangle sat the judge, on a raised dais of white stone with a
golden canopy over it. He was a man about fifty--this leader of the
court--garbed in a long loose robe of white. His hair, that fell on his
shoulders, was snowy white, and around his forehead was a narrow white
band. He held in his hand a sort of scepter of gold with a heavy golden
triangle at its end.

In six raised tiers of unequal length, like a triangular flight of
stairs across the angle of the room, and directly in front of the judge,
was the jury--twenty men and twenty women, seated in alternate rows. The
men wore loose robes of gray; the women robes of blue. On a seat raised
slightly above the others sat a man who evidently was speaker for the
men of the jury. On a similar elevated seat was the woman speaker; this
latter was Lylda.

Near the center of the room, facing the judge and jury were two
triangular spaces about twenty feet across, enclosed with a breast-high
wall of stone. Within each of these enclosures were perhaps ten or
twelve people seated on small stone benches. Directly facing the members
of the jury and between them and the two enclosures, was a small
platform raised about four feet above the floor, with several steps
leading up to it from behind.

A number of attendants dressed in the characteristic short tunics, with
breastplates and a short sword hanging from the waist, stood near the
enclosures, and along the sides of the room.

The Chemist leaned over and whispered to his friends: "Those two
enclosed places in the center are for the witnesses. Over there are
those testifying for the accused; the others are witnesses for the
government. The platform is where the accused stands when----"

He broke off suddenly. An expectant hush seemed to run over the room. A
door at the side opened, and preceded and followed by two attendants a
man entered, who walked slowly across the floor and stood alone upon the
raised platform facing the jury.

He was a man of extraordinarily striking look and demeanor. He stood
considerably over six feet in height, with a remarkably powerful yet
lean body. He was naked except for a cloth breech clout girdled about
his loins. His appearance was not that of an Oroid, for beside his
greater height, and more muscular physique, his skin was distinctly of a
more brownish hue. His hair was cut at the base of the neck in Oroid
fashion; it was black, with streaks of silver running through it. His
features were large and cast in a rugged mold. His mouth was cruel, and
