
"Riandar control," he snarled in an imitation of Gorham's voice.
"Onarati three. Got one of your guys on my back. What's the idea?" He
released the button.

"Oh, boy," he told himself, "I hope that's the right approach." He
looked toward the back of the cabin. If his short contact with Gorham
had told him enough, and if he'd judged correctly ... and if Gorham
was----

The speaker crackled. "Onarati three, Riandar control," it said. "Seven
zero five?"

Don looked down at the card under the panel light. Yes, there it was.
"Give your location."

He mashed the microphone button again. "Seven hundred meters," he
snarled impatiently. "South edge of town. Come on, what's this guy
doing, riding my tail?"

Another voice intruded into the speaker. "Your pardon, Onarati three,"
it said. "This is Rano two four. We cannot read your identification
lights."

Don looked down at the panel, then shook his head in annoyance. He'd
neglected one switch. He reached out and snapped it on. Then he pushed
the mike button again.

"So now you happy?" he demanded. "So why ain't ya telling me something,
instead of coming around with all them blinking lights?"

The other flier sheered away, its blinker off.

"Your pardon," said the speaker. "We were not sure."

Don sighed in relief. That had been too close for comfort. He glanced
down, then blinked and looked again.

"Oh, no!" he growled incredulously. "I left my clothes by the pool."

                    *      *      *      *      *

Kent Michaels opened his eyes. In front of him was a shattered
windshield. The light support struts were bent back. The heavy plastic
had crackled and powdered. He stared at it. It must have been quite an
impact. All he could remember was confused motion, then blackness.

He shook his head to clear his vision, then started to unfasten his
seat belt.

And his whole left side exploded as each individual muscle and nerve
set up a separate protest. He gritted his teeth against the sharp, red
knives of agony.

"Got to reach that belt and get out of here," he told himself. "Wonder
how long I've been out?"

He forced his hand to the buckle, then stopped.

"Oh, sure, you idiot," he said aloud. "Go ahead and let the belt go.
You can't hurt yourself by landing on your thick head."

He forced himself to ignore the agony in his side and shoulder and
looked around the cabin. Evidently, the ship had hit and rolled. He
closed his eyes, trying to remember.

He'd evaded the pass that first guy had made at him. Then, when the
second one showed up and dove in, he'd gone into a dead-duck spin. So
far, so good. Evidently, they'd been fooled. Probably never saw that
gag before. But what had happened after that? He searched his memory.

Oh, sure. He'd spun the ship under this overhang and set it down. And
the ground had double-crossed him. Even a duck couldn't have kept a
foothold on that ledge. He could remember the sudden tilt as the flier
slid over and started to roll. Then everything had happened at once. He
could remember trying to hold off the windshield from beating his
brains out, but---- He opened his eyes. No use trying to analyze that
part of it. Things had become confusing.

No matter how you figured it, he was here, hanging upside down in his
seat belt in a pretty thoroughly wrinkled up ship. He moved his left
arm experimentally.

His side went into screaming agony again.

Well, anyway, the shoulder wasn't broken. It could move--a little.

"Great," he told himself. "Now, how do you get out of this seat belt
without breaking your stupid neck?"

He reached out with his right hand, to feel the padded roof under him.
Well, maybe he could---- He set his teeth and forced his left hand to
the belt release. If he could just hold enough weight with that right
hand so that---- Well, no use worrying about it. Something had to be
done. He pushed against the release. The shoulder screamed almost
aloud. He started levering the buckle apart with his thumb.

Suddenly, the belt let go and he was struggling to put enough power
into his right arm to hold himself away from the approaching roof.

For a seeming eternity, he struggled to maintain his balance and ease
himself down. Then there was a soft bump. He sank into soft, cushioned
blackness.

It was dark when he opened his eyes again. Incuriously, he rolled his
eyes from side to side. He could see nothing. He let himself slip back
into the soft nothingness.

Slowly, he came back to being. For a timeless instant, he examined a
cushion which lay just before his eyes. Then pain messages started
clamoring for attention. There were too many of them to unscramble.
Everything was screaming at once.

He breathed in shallow gasps, then forced himself out of his cramped
position. At last, he managed to get to his knees and crawl out of the
gaping hole where a door had been. Outside, he collapsed to the ground
and lay, panting.

Slowly, he gathered strength and struggled to his feet. At least, his
legs were in working order.

He looked back at the ship, then whistled.

"What a mess! How'd I ever get out of that one?"

He shook his head to clear it, then examined the cave.

The ledge, he discovered, wasn't particularly high. It had just been
enough to roll the ship. The slope of the ground and the back wall of
the cave had done the real damage. He reached out with his right hand
and grabbed a vine. Yes, he could walk himself up the ledge with that.
And that would get him out of here.

He turned back and inched himself inside the flier again. The emergency
food pack was there. Unbroken, too. He fished it out and opened it,
forcing the almost useless left arm to lend a little support as the
right worked at the fastenings.

The food concentrate actually tasted good.

It could be a lot worse, he thought. Those two murderers had jumped him
only a few kilometers from Kordu valley. Unless he was badly mistaken,
this would be Gharu Gorge. It was steep-walled, but it could be
climbed. And once he got to the rim, it would be only a days walk to
Korelanni.

"Not too bad," he told himself. "Anybody for mountain climbing?"

He got to his feet, reeling a little as his side protested against the
indignity of being forced into motion. Probably a broken rib or two, he
thought. He brought his right hand over and ran his fingers delicately
over the left collar bone, from neck to shoulder. Then, he nodded. It
seemed to be in one piece. Might be cracked, but it'd hold together--he
hoped.

Slowly, he started pulling himself up the bank, pausing now and then to
regain his balance and take a new grip.

                    *      *      *      *      *

Lieutenant Narn Hense gave a snort of irritation, then walked across
the guardroom and switched the television off. Those news broadcasts
gave him an acute, three-dimensional pain. It was normal, he supposed,
for propaganda to sneak into a state-controlled broadcast, but did it
have to be so damn----

"Oh, the devil with it," he said aloud. "I just help run the Security
Guard around here. The Commissioner can worry about policy--and
diplomatic relations, too."

He glanced at the clock on his desk, then reached out to grab his hat.

"Better take another look at the guard while I'm at it," he told
himself.

He strode out of the office, hooking his sidearm belt from a hanger as
he went by.

It would be a good idea, he decided, to check post number four first
this time. The landing pad guard had been a little less than perfectly
alert tonight.

"Probably worrying about last night," he told himself. He smiled
reminiscently.

Moresma had been pretty worried and scared when the patrol had brought
him in. They'd gotten him out of the jam and kept him out of trouble,
but it had been close. The local authorities didn't seem to have much
sense of humor when it came to Federation personnel. In fact, they
seemed to welcome incidents that could----

"Funny," he told himself. "There are plenty of Galactics here, too.
They get along fine, but let one of our guardsmen drop a chewing gum
wrapper---- Oh, well. One of those things, I guess." He walked around
the corner of the building and strode down a hedge bordered path.

As he walked, he looked about at the dark Commission buildings. It was
a large compound. There were several posts and it took a large security
guard detachment to give it adequate protection. He glanced up at the
sky.

A blue-lit flier was coming toward him, flying rather low. Suddenly,
its lights blinked out.

Hense looked at the suddenly dark shape incredulously. It seemed to be
arcing down, toward the compound. He started forward at a run.

Either that pilot was out of control, or he was crazy. In any event, he
was going to crash in the compound unless his luck was fantastically
good. He'd been coming in fast, too. The lights had indicated an
official Oredanian ship.

This, he decided, was definitely irregular.

As he got to the pad, the ship came to an abrupt halt overhead. Then,
it came down in a blur of speed. Not more than half a meter from the
pavement, it checked its fall and settled. A door popped open.

Hense flipped his light from his belt and snapped it on. The guard, he
noted approvingly, had been prompt. The man had dashed up and now stood
close by the flier, his weapon at the ready.

A figure came out of the flier and stopped.

"Put out that light!" snapped an annoyed voice.

Hense snapped the switch on his hand light, then stared at the figure
by the flier.

Now, what was this? He wasn't accustomed to taking orders from some
joker that barged in and shot an unauthorized landing. He was the one
who should be giving the orders. He started to raise the light again.

"Leave that light out, hang it," said the voice sharply. "I don't feel
like being a target. And you! Don't point that thing at me! Now come
on, both of you. Let's get out of the open. Take cover!"

Hense shook his head dazedly. It wasn't right, but there didn't seem to
be much room for argument right now. Somehow, that voice carried
authority. Moresma hadn't hesitated. He was following the dim figure
which ran from the side of the flier. The lieutenant turned and headed
for a nearby building. There was a wide overhang there, close to the
ground.

Another ship was screaming in, its lights darkened. As Hense dove for
cover, brilliant light pinpointed the grounded flier. The guard and the
unknown rolled in beside him.

There was a brilliant flash from the landing pad, then a heavy
concussion made Hense's chest contract. Lurid flames rose skyward. The
attacking flier rose sharply and disappeared. Hense looked after it
incredulously.

"Close," commented the new-comer. "Thought for a few seconds I wasn't
going to make it. Sure didn't think they'd be with it that fast." He
turned and the lieutenant examined him curiously.

Even in the dim light, it was obvious he was pretty young. Khlorisana,
as nearly as Hense could tell. Might be a half-caste, of course. But
what was he doing here? Why a near crash landing? And who had the
eternal gall to pull an attack on a grounded ship right in the
Commission compound?

He continued to stare. Come to think of it, what had this joker done
with his clothes? Nothing on him but a pair of shorts.

The other noticed the officer's gaze and looked down.

"Yeah, I know." He grinned. "I got busy a while ago. Forgot to put 'em
back on. Didn't realize I'd left every rag behind till I was well on my
way." He looked at the ground thoughtfully.

"Wonder if they'll trace Korentona through them? Well----" He faced
Hense again.

"I'm Don Michaels," he announced. He held out a large book he had been
carrying under his arm.

"Look," he added. "I've brought in something really hot. How about
taking me over to see the commissioner? I've got to see him right
away."

                    *      *      *      *      *

For more than five years, the ink of First Lieutenant Hense's
commission had been perfectly dry. He'd been in one major campaign and
he'd served on more than one outworld. For his entire commissioned
career, he'd been a Security Guard Officer. And he'd never had a
reputation for being at all tolerant when regulations were broken--or
even bent.

He looked angrily at the man before him.

"I don't care," he said distinctly, "if you're Hosanna, the Great. What
I want to----"

"Oh, be quiet!" Michaels held up an impatient hand. "I hate to be
impolite about this, but it's no joke. I've got something hot
here--really hot. I want to see Commissioner Jackson. And when he finds
out what I've got, he's going to want to see me. Now let's get over and
find him. Move!"

Hense turned and stepped off. This, he decided, wasn't real. He must be
dreaming. He tried to stop, but found it was impossible. He'd been
given definite instructions, and----

He walked toward the path to the Residence. Behind him, he heard the
newcomer's voice.

"You can go back to your post, guard. Better watch it, though. One of
those Royal Guard ships might try a landing. Might be a good idea to
get a few more men out there."

Again, Hense tried to turn around and challenge this fellow. Hang it,
he was the Officer of the Guard. He was supposed to be giving the
