"Well, really, Sir Kenneth," the Queen said with the slightest of
hesitations, "it isn't easy, you know. Telepathy has certain laws,
just like everything else. After all, even a game has laws. Being
telepathic didn't help me to play poker--I still had to learn the
rules. And telepathy has rules, too. A telepath can easily confuse
another telepath by using some of those rules."

"Oh, fine," Malone said. "Well, have you got into contact with his
mind yet?"

"Oh, yes," Her Majesty said happily. "And my goodness, he's certainly
digging up a lot of information, isn't he?"

Malone moaned softly. "But who _is_ he?" he asked after a second.

The Queen stared at the roof of the car in what looked like
concentration. "He hasn't thought of his name yet," she said. "I mean,
at least, if he has, he hasn't mentioned it to me. Really, Sir
Kenneth, you have no idea how difficult all this is."

Malone swallowed with difficulty.

_"Where_ is he, then," said. "Can you tell me that, at least? His
location?"

Her Majesty looked positively desolated with sadness. "I can't be
sure," she said. "I really can't be exactly sure just where he is. He
does keep moving around, I know that. But you have to remember that he
doesn't want me to find him. He certainly doesn't want to be found by
the FBI--would you?"

"Your Majesty," Malone said, "I _am_ the FBI."

"Yes," the Queen said, "but suppose you weren't? He's doing his best
to hide himself, even from me. It's sort of a game he's playing."

"A game!"

Her Majesty looked contrite. "Believe me, Sir Kenneth, the minute I
know exactly where he is, I'll tell you. I promise. Cross my heart and
hope to die--which I can't, of course, being immortal." Nevertheless,
she made an X-mark over her left breast. "All right?"

"All right," Malone said, out of sheer necessity. "Okay. But don't
waste any time telling me. Do it right away. We've _got_ to find that
spy and isolate him somehow."

"Please don't worry yourself, Sir Kenneth," Her Majesty said. "Your
Queen is doing everything she can."

"I know that, Your Majesty," Malone said. "I'm sure of it." Privately,
he wondered just how much even she could do. Then he realized--for
perhaps the ten-thousandth time--that there was no such thing as
wondering privately any more.

"That's quite right, Sir Kenneth," the Queen said sweetly. "And it's
about time you got used to it."

"What's going on?" Boyd said. "More reading minds back there?"

"That's right, Sir Thomas," the Queen said.

"I've about gotten used to it," Boyd said almost cheerfully. "Pretty
soon they'll come and take me away, but I don't mind at all." He
whipped the car around a bend in the road savagely. "Pretty soon
they'll put me with the other sane people and let the bats inherit the
world. But I don't mind at all."

"Sir Thomas!" Her Majesty said in shocked tones.

"Please," Boyd said with a deceptive calmness. "Just Mr. Boyd. Not
even Lieutenant Boyd, or Sergeant Boyd. Just Mr. Boyd. Or, if you
prefer, Tom."

"Sir Thomas," Her Majesty said, "I really can't understand this
sudden--"

"Then don't understand it," Boyd said. "All I know is everybody's
nuts, and I'm sick and tired of it."

A pall of silence fell over the company.

"Look, Tom," Malone began at last.

"Don't you try smoothing me down," Boyd snapped.

Malone's eyebrows rose. "Okay," he said. "I won't smooth you down.
I'll just tell you to shut up, to keep driving--and to show some
respect to Her Majesty."

"I--" Boyd stopped. There was a second of silence.

_"That's_ better," Her Majesty said with satisfaction.

Lady Barbara stretched in the back seat, next to Her Majesty. "This is
certainly a long drive," she said. "Have we got much farther to go?"

"Not too far," Malone said. "We ought to be there soon."

"I--I'm sorry for the way I acted," Barbara said.

"What do you mean, the way you acted?"

"Crying like that," Barbara said with some hesitation. "Making an--
absolute idiot of myself. When that other car--tried to get us."

"Don't worry about it," Malone said. "It was nothing."

"I just--made trouble for you," Barbara said.

Her Majesty touched the girl on the shoulder. "He's not thinking about
the trouble you cause him," she said quietly.

"Of course I'm not," Malone told her. "But I--"

"My dear girl," Her Majesty said, "I believe that Sir Kenneth is, at
least partly, in love with you."

Malone blinked. It was perfectly true--even if he hadn't quite known
it himself until now. Telepaths, he was discovering, were occasionally
handy things to have around.

"In... love...." Barbara said.

"And you, my dear--" Her Majesty began.

"Please, Your Majesty," Lady Barbara said. "No more. Not just now."

The Queen smiled, almost to herself. "Certainly, dear," she said.

The car sped on. In the distance, Malone could see the blot on the
desert that indicated the broad expanse of Yucca Flats Labs. Just the
fact that it could be seen, he knew, didn't mean an awful lot. Malone
had been able to see it for the past fifteen minutes, and it didn't
look as if they'd gained an inch on it. Desert distances are
deceptive.

At long last, however, the main gate of the laboratories hove into
view. Boyd made a left turn off the highway and drove a full seven
miles along the restricted road, right up to the big gate that marked
the entrance of the laboratories themselves. Once again, they were
faced with the army of suspicious guards and security officers.

This time, suspicion was somewhat heightened by the dress of the
visitors. Malone had to explain about six times that the costumes were
part of an FBI arrangement, that he had not stolen his identity cards,
that Boyd's cards were Boyd's, too, and in general that the four of
them were not insane, not spies, and not jokesters out for a lark in
the sunshine.

Malone had expected all of that. He went through the rigmarole
wearily but without any sense of surprise. The one thing he hadn't
been expecting was the man who was waiting for him on the other side
of the gate.

When he'd finished identifying everybody for the fifth or sixth time,
he began to climb back into the car. A familiar voice stopped him
cold.

"Just a minute, Malone," Andrew J. Burris said. He erupted from the
guardhouse like an avenging angel, followed closely by a thin man,
about five feet ten inches in height, with brush-cut brown hair, round
horn-rimmed spectacles, large hands and a small Sir Francis Drake
beard. Malone looked at the two figures blankly.

"Something wrong, Chief?" he said.

Burris came toward the car. The thin gentleman followed him, walking
with an odd bouncing step that must have been acquired, Malone
thought, over years of treading on rubber eggs. "I don't know," Burris
said when he'd reached the door. "When I was in Washington, I seemed
to know--but when I get out here in this desert, everything just goes
haywire." He rubbed at his forehead.

Then he looked into the car. "Hello, Boyd," he said pleasantly.

"Hello, Chief," Boyd said.

Burris blinked. "Boyd, you look like Henry VIII," he said with only
the faintest trace of surprise.

"Doesn't he, though?" Her Majesty said from the rear seat. "I've
noticed that resemblance myself."

Burris gave her a tiny smile. "Oh," he said. "Hello, Your Majesty.
I'm--"

"Andrew J. Burris, Director of the FBI," the Queen finished for him.
"Yes, I know. It's very nice to meet you at last. I've seen you on
television, and over the video phone. You photograph badly, you know."

"I do?" Burris said pleasantly. It was obvious that he was keeping
himself under very tight control.

Malone felt remotely sorry for the man--but only remotely. Burris
might as well know, he thought, what they had all been going through
the past several days.

Her Majesty was saying something about the honorable estate of
knighthood, and the Queen's list. Malone began paying attention when
she came to:"--and I hereby dub thee--" She stopped suddenly, turned
and said: "Sir Kenneth, give me your weapon."

Malone hesitated for a long, long second. But Burris' eye was on him,
and he could interpret the look without much trouble. There was only
one thing for him to do. He pulled out his .44, ejected the cartridges
in his palm (and reminded himself to reload the gun as soon as he got
it back), and handed the weapon to the Queen, butt foremost.

She took the butt of the revolver in her right hand, leaned out the
window of the car, and said in a fine, distinct voice: "Kneel,
Andrew."

Malone watched with wide, astonished eyes as Andrew J. Burris,
Director of the FBI, went to one knee in a low and solemn
genuflection. Queen Elizabeth Thompson nodded her satisfaction.

She tapped Burris gently on each shoulder with the muzzle of the gun.
"I knight thee Sir Andrew," she said. She cleared her throat. "My,
this desert air is dry.... Rise, Sir Andrew, and know that you are
henceforth Knight Commander of the Queen's Own FBI."

"Thank you, Your Majesty," Burris said humbly.

He rose to his feet silently. The Queen withdrew into the car again
and handed the gun back to Malone. He thumbed the cartridges into the
chambers of the cylinder and listened dumbly.

"Your Majesty," Burris said, "this is Dr. Harry Gamble, the head of
Project Isle. Dr. Gamble, this is Her Majesty the Queen; Lady Barbara
Wilson, her--uh--her lady-in-waiting; Sir Kenneth Malone; and King--I
mean Sir Thomas Boyd." He gave the four a single bright impartial
smile. Then he tore his eyes away from the others, and bent his gaze
on Sir Kenneth Malone. "Come over here a minute, Malone," he said,
jerking his thumb over his shoulder. "I want to talk to you."

Malone climbed out of the car and went around to meet Burris. He felt
just a little worried as he followed the Director away from the car.
True, he had sent Burris a long telegram the night before, in code.
But he hadn't expected the man to show up in Yucca Flats. There didn't
seem to be any reason for it.

And when there isn't any reason, Malone told himself sagely, it's a
bad one.

"What's the trouble, Chief?" he asked.

Burris sighed. "None so far," he said quietly. "I got a report from
the Nevada State Patrol, and ran it through R&I. They identified the
men you killed, all right--but it didn't do us any good. They're hired
hoods."

"Who hired them?" Malone said.

Burris shrugged. "Somebody with money," he said. "Hell, men like that
would kill their own grandmothers if the price were right--you know
that. We can't trace them back any farther."

Malone nodded. That was, he had to admit, bad news. But then, when had
he last had any good news?

"We're nowhere near our telepathic spy," Burris said. "We haven't come
any closer than we were when we started. Have you got anything?
Anything at all, no matter how small?"

"Not that I know of, sir," Malone said.

"What about the little old lady--what's her name? Thompson. Anything
from her?"

Malone hesitated. "She has a close fix on the spy, sir," he said
slowly, "but she doesn't seem able to identify him right away."

"What else does she want?" Burris said. "We've made her Queen and
given her a full retinue in costume; we've let her play roulette and
poker with Government money. Does she want to hold a mass execution?
If she does, I can supply some Congressmen, Malone. I'm sure it could
be arranged." He looked at the agent narrowly. "I might even be able
to supply an FBI man or two," he added.

Malone swallowed hard. "I'm trying the best I can, sir," he said.
"What about the others?"

Burris looked even unhappier than usual. "Come along," he said. "I'll
show you."

When they got back to the car, Dr. Gamble was talking spiritedly with
Her Majesty about Roger Bacon. "Before my time, of course," the Queen
was saying, "but I'm sure he was a most interesting man. Now when dear
old Marlowe wrote his _Faust_, he and I had several long discussions
about such matters. Alchemy, Doctor--"

Burris interrupted with: "I beg your pardon, Your Majesty, but we must
get on. Perhaps you'll be able to continue your--ah--audience later."
He turned to Boyd. "Sir Thomas," he said with an effort, "drive
directly to the Westinghouse buildings. Over that way." He pointed.
"Dr. Gamble will ride with you, and the rest of us will follow in the
second car. Let's move."

He stepped back as the project head got into the car, and watched it
roar off. Then he and Malone went to the second car, another FBI
Lincoln. Two agents were sitting in the back seat, with a still figure
between them.

With a shock, Malone recognized William Logan and the agents he'd
detailed to watch the telepath. Logan's face did not seem to have
changed expression since Malone had seen it last, and he wondered
wildly if perhaps it had to be dusted once a week.

He got in behind the wheel and Burris slid in next to him.
