"Ah," Malone said, feeling that something was expected of him, but not
being quite sure what.

Dr. O'Connor frowned. "I must admit," he said, "that the uncertainty as
to the constant _k_, and the lack of any real knowledge as to just what
kind of force is being applied, have held up our work so far." Then his
face smoothed out. "Of course, when we have the teleports to work with,
we may derive a full set of laws which--"

"Never mind that now," Malone said.

"But our work is most important, Mr. Malone," Dr. O'Connor said with a
motion of his eyebrows. "As I'm sure you must understand."

"Oh," Malone said, feeling as if he'd been caught without his homework,
"of course. But if you don't mind--"

"Yes, Mr. Malone?" Dr. O'Connor said smoothly.

"What I want to know," Malone said, "is this: what are the limitations
of this ... uh ... phenomenon?"

Dr. O'Connor brightened visibly. "The limitations are several," he said.
"In the first place, there is the force represented by _f_ in the
equation. This seems to be entirely dependent on the ... ah ... strength
of the subject's personality. That is if we assume that the process is
at all parallel with the phenomena of psychokinesis and levitation. And
there are excellent theoretical reasons for so believing."

"In other words," Malone said, "a man with a strong will would be able
to exert more force than a weaker-willed man?"

"Correct," Dr. O'Connor said. "And another factor is the time, _t_. What
we are measuring here is the span of attention of the individual--the
ability of the subject's mind to concentrate on a given thing for a span
of time. Many people, for example, cannot keep their attention focused
on a single thought for more than a few milliseconds, it seems. They are
... ah ... 'scatter-brained,' as the saying is."

His expression left no doubt that he included Malone in that group.
Malone tried not to look nervous.

Then Dr. O'Connor scowled. "There is another factor which we feel should
be in the equation," he said, "but we have not yet found a precise way
to express it mathematically. You must realize that the mathematical
treatment of psionics is, as yet, in a relatively primitive stage."

"Oh," Malone said. "Of course. Sure. But this other factor--"

"It is what might be called the ... ah ... _volume_ of attention," Dr.
O'Connor said. "That is, the actual amount of space that can be
conceived of and held by the subject, during the time he is
concentrating."

Malone blinked.

"For most people," Dr. O'Connor said, "the awareness of the space
surrounding them is limited to a few inches of moving space, no more. To
put this in a purely physical matrix: one might say that the
'teleportation field' doesn't extend more than a few inches beyond the
skin of the subject. Thus, it would be difficult to teleport anything
really large unless one were able to increase the volume of attention,
or awareness. However, it is difficult to express this notion
mathematically."

"I'll bet," Malone said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. O'Connor shot him a frozen glance. "One of our early attempts," he
said, "was simply to put this in as a volume factor, so that the
left-hand side of the equation, below the line, would read--" He
scribbled again on the paper and held it up:

  m d
  ---- = K
  d3ft2

"Unfortunately, as you can perhaps see," Dr. O'Connor said, "the
equation would not stand up under dimensional analysis."

"Oh, sure," Malone said, adding sympathetically: "That's too bad. But
does that put a limit on how much a man could carry with him? I mean, he
couldn't take a whole building along, or anything like that, could he?"

"I doubt it," Dr. O'Connor said gravely. "That would require a
tremendous volume of space for one to focus his entire attention on, as
a whole, for any useful length of time. It would require a type of mind
that I am not even sure exists."

"In the case of a young, inexperienced boy," Malone said stubbornly,
"would you say that he could carry off anything heavy?"

"Of course not," Dr. O'Connor said. "Nor, as a matter of fact, could he
carry off anything that was securely bolted down; I hope you follow me?"

"I think so," Malone said. "But look here: suppose you handcuffed him
to, say, a radiator or a jail cell bar."

"Yes?"

"Could he get away?"

Dr. O'Connor appeared to consider this with some care. "Well," he said
at last, "he certainly couldn't take the radiator with him, or the cell
bar. If that's what you mean." He hesitated, looked slightly shamefaced,
and then went on: "But you must realize that we lack any really
extensive data on this phenomenon."

"Of course," Malone said.

"That's why I'm so very anxious to get those subjects," Dr. O'Connor
said.

"Dr. O'Connor," Malone said earnestly, "that's just what I had in mind
from the start. I've been going to a lot of extra trouble to make sure
that those kids don't get killed or end up in reform schools or
something, just so you could work with them."

"I appreciate that, Mr. Malone," O'Connor said gravely.

Malone felt as if someone had given him a gold star. Fighting down the
emotion, he went on: "I know right now that I can catch one or two of
them. But I don't know for sure that I can hold one for more than a
fraction of a second."

"I see your problem," Dr. O'Connor said. "Believe me, Mr. Malone. I do
see your problem."

"And is there a way out?" Malone said. "I mean a way I can hold on to
them for--"

"At present," Dr. O'Connor said heavily, "I have no suggestions. I lack
data."

"Oh, fine," Malone said. "We need the kids to get the data, and we need
the data to get the kids." He sighed. "Hooray for our side," he added.

"There does appear to be something of a dilemma here," Dr. O'Connor
admitted sadly.

"Dilemma is putting it mildly," Malone said.

Dr. O'Connor opened his mouth, shut it, opened it again and said: "I
agree."

"Well," Malone said, "maybe one of us will think of something. If
anything does occur to you, let me know at once."

"I certainly will," Dr. O'Connor said. "Believe me, Mr. Malone, I want
you to capture those--kids--just as badly as you want to capture them
yourself."

"I'll try," Malone said at random. He flipped off and turned with a
sense of relief back to Boyd. But it looked as if Henry VIII had been
hit on the head with a cow, or something equally weighty. Boyd looked
glassy-eyed and slightly stunned.

       *       *       *       *       *

"What's the matter with you?" Malone said. "Sick?"

"I'm not sick," Boyd said carefully. "At least I don't think I'm sick.
It's hard to tell."

"What's wrong?"

"Teleporting?" Boyd said. "Juvenile delinquents?"

Malone felt a sudden twinge in the area of his conscience. He realized
that he had told Boyd nothing at all about what had been going on since
the discovery of the notebook two nights ago. He filled his partner in
rapidly while Boyd stood in front of the mirror and rather shakily
attempted to trim his beard.

"That's why I had the car search continue," Malone said. "I was fairly
sure the fault wasn't in the cars, but the boys. But I had to make
absolutely sure."

Boyd said: "Oh," chopped a small section out of the center of his beard
and added: "My hand's shaky."

"Well," Malone said, "that's the story."

"It sure is quite a story," Boyd said. "And I don't want you to think I
don't believe it. Because I don't."

"It's true," Malone said.

"That doesn't affect me," Boyd said. "I'll go along with the gag. But
enough is enough. Vanishing teen-agers. Ridiculous."

"Just so you go along with me," Malone said.

"Oh, I'll go along," Boyd said. "This is my vacation, too, isn't it?
What's the next move, Mastermind?"

"We're going down to that warehouse," Malone said decisively. "I've got
a hunch the kids have been hiding there ever since they left their homes
yesterday."

"Malone," Boyd said.

"What?"

"You mean we're going down to the warehouse _tonight_?" Boyd said.

Malone nodded.

"I might have known," Boyd said. "I might have known."

"Tom," Malone said. "What's wrong?"

"Oh, nothing," Boyd said. "Nothing at all. Everything's fine and dandy.
I think I'm going to commit suicide, but don't let that bother you."

"What happened?" Malone said.

Boyd stared at him. "You happened," he said. "You and the teen-agers and
the warehouse happened. Three days' work--ruined."

Malone scratched his head, found out that his head still hurt and put
his hand down again. "What work?" he said.

"For three days," Boyd said, "I've been taking this blond chick all over
New York. Wining her. Dining her. Spending money as if I were Burris
himself, instead of the common or garden variety of FBI agent. Night
clubs. Theaters. Bars. The works. Malone, we were getting along
famously. It was wonderful."

"And tonight--" Malone said.

"Tonight," Boyd said, "was supposed to be the night. The big night. The
payoff. We've got a date for dinner--T-bone steak, two inches thick,
with mushrooms. At her apartment, Malone."

"You'll have to break it," Malone said sympathetically. "Too bad, but it
can't be helped now. You can pick up a sandwich before you go."

"A sandwich," Boyd said with great dignity, "is not my idea of something
to eat."

"Look, Tom--" Malone began.

"All right, all right," Boyd said tiredly. "Duty is duty. I'll go call
her."

"Fine," Malone said. "And meanwhile, I'll get us a little insurance."

"Insurance?"

"John Henry Fernack," Malone Malone said, "and his Safe and Loft Squad."




XIV.


The warehouse was locked up tight, all right, Malone thought. In the dim
light that surrounded the neighborhood, it stood like a single stone
block, alone near the waterfront. There were other buildings nearby, but
they seemed smaller; the warehouse loomed over Malone and Boyd
threateningly. They stood in a shadow-blacked alley just across the
street, watching the big building nervously, studying it for weak points
and escape areas.

[Illustration]

Boyd whispered softly: "Do you think they have a lookout?"

Malone's voice was equally low. "We'll have to assume they've got at
least one kid posted," he said. "But they can't be watching all the
time. Remember, they can't do everything."

"They don't have to," Boyd said. "They do quite enough for me. Do you
realize that, right now, I could be--"

"Break it up," Malone said. He took a small handset from his pocket and
pressed the stud. "Lynch?" he whispered.

A tinny voice came from the earpiece. "Here, Malone."

"Have you got them located yet?" Malone said.

"Not yet," Lynch's voice replied. "We're working on a triangulation now.
Just hold on for a minute or so. I'll let you know as soon as we've got
results."

The police squads--Lynch and his men, the warehouse precinct men and the
Safe and Loft Squad--had set up a careful cordon around the area, and
were now hard at work trying to determine two things.

First, they had to know whether there was anybody in the building at
all.

Second, they had to be able to locate anyone in the building with
precision.

The silence of the downtown warehouse district helped. They had several
specially designed, highly sensitive directional microphones aimed at
the building from carefully selected spots around the area, trying to
pick up the muffled sounds of speech or motion within the warehouse. The
watchmen in buildings nearby had been warned off for the time being so
that their footsteps wouldn't occlude any results.

Malone waited, feeling nervous and cold. Finally Lynch's voice came
through again. "We're getting something, all right," he said. "There are
obviously several people in there. You were right, Malone."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Thanks," Malone said. "How about that fix?"

"Hold it a second," Lynch said. Wind swept off the river at Malone and
Boyd. Malone closed his eyes and shivered. He could smell fish and
iodine and waste, the odor of the Hudson as it passes the city. Across
the river lights sparkled warmly. Here there was nothing but darkness.

A long time passed, perhaps ten seconds.

Then Lynch's voice was back: "Sergeant McNulty says they're on the top
floor, Malone," he said. "Can't tell how many for sure. But they're
talking and moving around."

"It's a shame these things won't pick up the actual words at a
distance," Malone said.

"Just a general feeling of noise is all we get," Lynch said. "But it
does some good."

"Sure," Malone said. "Now listen carefully: Boyd and I are going in.
Alone."

Lynch's voice whispered: "Right."

"If those mikes pick up any unusual ruckus--any sharp increase in the
noise level--come running," Malone said. "Otherwise, just sit still and
wait for my signal. Got that?"

"Check," Lynch said.

Malone pocketed the radiophone. "O.K., Tom," he whispered. "This is
H-hour--M-minute--and S-second."

"I can spell," Boyd muttered. "Let's move in."

"Wait a minute," Malone said. He took his goggles and brought them down
over his eyes, adjusting the helmet on his head. Boyd did the same.
Malone flicked on the infrared flashlight he held in his hand.

"O.K.?" he whispered.

"Check," Boyd said.

Thanks to the goggles, both of them could see the normally invisible
beams of the infrared flashlight. They'd equipped themselves to move in
darkness without betraying themselves, and they'd be able to see where a
person without equipment would be blind.

       *       *       *       *       *

Malone stayed well within the shadows as he moved silently around to the
alley behind the warehouse and then to a narrow passageway that led to
the building next door. Boyd followed a few feet behind him along the
carefully planned route.

Malone unlocked the small door that led into the ground floor of the
building adjoining. As he did so he heard a sound behind him and called:
"Tom?"

"Hey, Malone," Boyd whispered. "It's--"

Before there was any outcry, Malone rushed back. Boyd was struggling
with a figure in the dimness. Malone grabbed the figure and clamped his
hand over its mouth. It bit him. He swore in a low voice, and clamped
the hand over the mouth again.

It hadn't taken him more than half a second to realize what, whoever it
was who struggled in his arms, it wasn't a boy.

"Shut up!" Malone hissed in her ear. "I won't hurt you."

The struggle stopped immediately. Malone gently eased his hand off the
girl's mouth. She turned and looked at him.

"Kenneth Malone," she said, "you look like a man from Mars."

"Dorothea!" Malone gasped. "What are you doing here? Looking for your
brother?"

"Never mind that," she said. "You play too rough. I'm going home to
mother."

"Answer me!" Malone said.

"All right," Dorothea said. "You must know anyhow, since you're here.
Yes, I'm looking for that fat-headed brother of mine. But now I suppose
it's too late. He'll ... he'll go to prison."

Her voice broke. Malone found his shoulder suddenly occupied by a crying
face.

"No," he said quickly. "No. Please. He won't."

"Really?"

