and moving in two divisions toward Melbourne and Sydney.

The northern half, it was quickly seen, was flying "wild," with no
particular objective, moving in a solid cohort two hundred miles in
length, and devouring game, stock, and humans indiscriminately. It was
the southern division, numbering perhaps a trillion, that was under
command of Bram, and aimed at destroying Melbourne as Adelaide had been
destroyed.

Bram, with his eight beetle steeds, was by this time known and execrated
throughout the world. He was pictured as Anti-Christ, and the fulfilment
of the prophecies of the Rock of Revelations.

And all this while--or, rather, until the telegraph wires were
cut--broken, it was discovered later, by perching beetles--Thomas
Travers was sending out messages from his post at Settler's Station.

       *       *       *       *       *

Soon it was known that prodigious creatures were following in the wake
of the devastating horde. Mantises, fifteen feet in height, winged
things like pterodactyls, longer than bombing airplanes, followed,
preying on the stragglers. But the main bodies never halted, and the
inroads that the destroyers made on their numbers were insignificant.

Before the swarm reached Adelaide the Commonwealth Government had taken
action. Troops had been called out, and all the available airplanes in
the country had been ordered to assemble at Broken Hill, New South
Wales, a strategic point commanding the approaches to Sydney and
Melbourne. Something like four hundred airplanes were assembled, with
several batteries of anti-aircraft guns that had been used in the Great
War. Every amateur aviator in Australia was on the spot, with machines
ranging from tiny Moths to Handley-Pages--anything that could fly.

Nocturnal though the beetles had been, they no longer feared the light
of the sun. In fact, it was ascertained later that they were blind. An
opacity had formed over the crystalline lens of the eye. Blind, they
were no less formidable than with their sight. They existed only to
devour, and their numbers made them irresistible, no matter which way
they turned.

As soon as the vanguard of the dark cloud was sighted from Broken Hill,
the airplanes went aloft. Four hundred planes, each armed with machine
guns, dashed into the serried hosts, drumming out volleys of lead. In a
long line, extending nearly to the limits of the beetle formation, thus
giving each aviator all the room he needed, the planes gave battle.

       *       *       *       *       *

The first terror that fell upon the airmen was the discovery that, even
at close range, the machine gun bullets failed to penetrate the shells.
The force of the impact whirled the beetles around, drove them together
in bunches, sent them groping with weaving tentacles through the
air--but that was all. On the main body of the invaders no impression
was made whatever.

The second terror was the realization that the swarm, driven down here
and there from an altitude of several hundred feet, merely resumed their
progress on the ground, in a succession of gigantic leaps. Within a few
minutes, instead of presenting an inflexible barrier, the line of
airplanes was badly broken, each plane surrounded by swarms of the
monsters.

Then Bram was seen. And that was the third terror, the sight of the
famous beetle steeds, four pairs abreast, with Bram reclining like a
Roman emperor upon the surface of the shells. It is true, Bram had no
inclination to risk his own life in battle. At the first sight of the
aviators he dodged into the thick of the swarm, where no bullet could
reach him. Bram managed to transmit an order, and the beetles drew
together.

Some thought afterward that it was by thought transference he effected
this maneuver, for instantly the beetles, which had hitherto flown in
loose order, became a solid wall, a thousand feet in height, closing in
on the planes. The propellers struck them and snapped short, and as the
planes went weaving down, the hideous monsters leaped into the cockpits
and began their abominable meal.

       *       *       *       *       *

Not a single plane came back. Planes and skeletons, and here and there a
shell of a dead beetle, itself completely devoured, were all that was
found afterward.

The gunners stayed at their posts till the last moment, firing round
after round of shell and shrapnel, with insignificant results. Their
skeletons were found not twenty paces from their guns--where the
Gunners' Monument now stands.

Half an hour after the flight had first been sighted the news was being
radioed to Sydney, Melbourne, and all other Australian cities, advising
instant flight to sea as the only chance of safety. That radio message
was cut short--and men listened and shuddered. After that came the
crowding aboard all craft in the harbors, the tragedies of the _Eustis_,
the _All Australia_, the _Sepphoris_, sunk at their moorings. The
innumerable sea tragedies. The horde of fugitives that landed in New
Zealand. The reign of terror when the mob got out of hand, the burning
of Melbourne, the sack of Sydney.

And south and eastward, like a resistless flood, the beetle swarm came
pouring. Well had Bram boasted that he would make the earth a desert!

       *       *       *       *       *

A hundred miles of poisoned carcasses of sheep, extended outside
Sydney's suburbs, gave the first promise of success. Long mounds of
beetle shells testified to the results; moreover, the beetles that fed
on the carcasses of their fellows, were in turn poisoned and died. But
this was only a drop in the bucket. What counted was that the swift
advance was slowing down. As if exhausted by their efforts, or else
satiated with food, the beetles were doing what the soldiers did.

They were digging in!

Twenty-four miles from Sydney, eighteen outside Melbourne, the advance
was stayed.

Volunteers who went out from those cities reported that the beetles
seemed to be resting in long trenches that they had excavated, so that
only their shells appeared above ground. Trees were covered with
clinging beetles, every wall, every house was invisible beneath the
beetle armor.

Australia had a respite. Perhaps only for a night or day, but still
time to draw breath, time to consider, time for the shiploads of
fugitives to get farther from the continent that had become a shambles.

And then the cry went up, not only from Australia, but from all the
world, "Get Travers!"


CHAPTER X

_At Bay_

Bram put his fingers to his mouth and whistled, a shrill whistle, yet
audible to Dodd, Tommy, and Haidia. Instantly three pairs of beetles
appeared out of the throng. Their tentacles went out, and the two men
and the girl found themselves hoisted separately upon the backs of the
pairs. Next moment they were flying side by side, high in the air above
the surrounding swarm.

They could see one another, but it was impossible for them to make their
voices heard above the rasping of the beetles' legs. Hours went by,
while the moon crossed the sky and dipped toward the horizon. Tommy knew
that the moon would set about the hour of dawn. And the stars were
already beginning to pale when he saw a line of telegraph poles, then
two lines of shining metals, then a small settlement of stone and brick
houses.

Tommy was not familiar with the geography of Australia, but he knew this
must be the transcontinental line.

Whirling onward, the cloud of beetles suddenly swooped downward. For a
moment Tommy could see the frightened occupants of the settlement
crowding into the single street, then he shuddered with sick horror as
he saw them obliterated by the swarm.

There was no struggle, no attempt at flight or resistance. One moment
those forty-odd men were there--the next minute they existed no longer.
There was nothing but a swarm of beetles, walking about like men with
shells upon their backs.

And now Tommy saw evidences of Bram's devilish control of the swarm.
For out of the cloud dropped what seemed to be a phalanx of beetle
guards, the military police of beetledom, and, lashing fiercely with
their tentacles, they drove back all the swarm that sought to join their
companions in their ghoulish feast. There was just so much food and no
more; the rest must seek theirs further.

       *       *       *       *       *

But even beetles, it may be presumed, are not entirely under discipline
at all times. The pair of beetles that bore Tommy, suddenly swooped
apart, ten or a dozen feet from the ground, and dashed into the thick of
the struggling, frenzied mass, flinging their rider to earth.

Tommy struck the soft sand, sat up, half dazed, saw his shell lying a
few feet away from him, and retrieved it just as a couple of the
monsters came swooping down at him.

He looked about him. Not far away stood Dodd and Haidia, with their
shells on their backs. They recognized Tommy and ran toward him.

Not more than twenty yards away stood the railroad station, with several
crates of goods on the platform. Next to it was a substantial house of
stone, with the front door open.

Tommy pointed to it, and Dodd understood and shouted something that was
lost in the furious buzz of the beetles' wings as they devoured their
prey. The three raced for the entrance, gained it unmolested, and closed
the door.

There was a key in the door, and it was light enough for them to see a
chain, which Dodd pulled into position. There was only one story, and
there were three rooms, apparently, with the kitchen. Tommy rushed to
the kitchen door, locked it, too, and, with almost super-human efforts,
dragged the large iron stove against it. He rushed to the window, but it
was a mere loophole, not large enough to admit a child. Nevertheless, he
stood the heavy table on end so that it covered it. Then he ran back.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dodd had already barricaded the window of the larger room, which was a
bed-sitting room, with a heavy wardrobe, and the wooden bedstead,
jamming the two pieces sidewise against the wall, so that they could not
be forced apart without being demolished. He was now busy in the smaller
room, which seemed to be the station-master's office, dragging an iron
safe across the floor. But the window was criss-crossed with iron bars,
and it was evident that the safe, which was locked, contained at times
considerable money, for the window could hardly have been forced save by
a charge of nitro-glycerine or dynamite. However, it was against the
door that Dodd placed the safe, and he stood back, panting.

"Good," said Haidia. "That will hold them."

The two men looked at her doubtfully. Did Haidia know what she was
talking about?

The sun had risen. A long shaft shot into the room. Outside the beetles
were still buzzing as they turned over the vestiges of their prey. There
were as yet no signs of attack. Suddenly Tommy grasped Dodd's arm.

"Look!" he shouted, pointing to a corner which had been in gloom a
moment before.

There was a table there, and on it a telegraphic instrument. Telegraphy
had been one of Tommy's hobbies in boyhood. In a moment he was busy at
the table.

Dot-dash-dot-dash! Then suddenly outside a furious hum, and the impact
of beetle bodies against the front door.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tommy got up, grinning. That was the first, interrupted message from
Tommy that was received.

Through the barred window the three could see the furious efforts of the
beetles to force an entrance. But the very tensile strength of the
beetle-shells, which rendered them impervious to bullets, required a
laminate construction which rendered them powerless against brick or
stone.

Desperately the swarm dashed itself against the walls, until the ground
outside was piled high with stunned beetles. Not the faintest impression
was made on the defenses.

"Watch them, Jim," said Tom. "I'll go see if the rear's secure."

That thought of his seemed to have been anticipated by the beetles, for
as Tommy reached the kitchen the swarm came dashing against door and
window, always recoiling. Tommy came back, grinning all over his face.

"You were right, Haidia," he said. "We've held them all right, and the
tables are turned on Bram. Also I got a message through, I think," he
added to Dodd.

Dash--dot--dash--dot from the instrument. Tommy ran to the table again.
Dash--dot went back. For five minutes Tommy labored, while the beetles
hammered now on one door, now on another, now on the windows. Then Tommy
got up.

"It was some station down the line," he said. "I've told them, and
they're sending a man up here to replace the telegraphist, also a couple
of cops. They think I'm crazy. I told them again. That's the best I
could do."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Dodd! Travers! For the last time--let's talk!"

The cloud of beetles seemed to have thinned, for the sun was shining
into the room. Bram's voice was perfectly audible, though he himself was
invisible; probably he thought it likely that the defenders had obtained
firearms.

"Nothing to say to you, Bram," called Dodd. "We've finished our
discussion on the monotremes."

"I want you fellows to stand in with me," came Bram's plaintive tones.
"It's so lonesome all by one's self, Dodd."

"Ah, you're beginning to find that out, are you?" Dodd could not resist
answering. "You'll be lonelier yet before you're through."

"Dodd, I didn't bring that swarm up here. I swear it. I've been trying
to control them from the beginning. I saw what was coming. I believe I
can avert this horror, drive them into the sea or something like that.
Don't make me desperate, Dodd.

"And listen, old man. About those monotremes--sensible men don't quarrel
over things like that. Why can't we agree to differ?"

"Ah, now you're talking, Bram," Dodd answered. "Only you're too late.
After what's happened here to-day, we'll have no truck with you. That's
final."

"Damn you," shrieked Bram. "I'll batter down this house. I'll--"

"You'll do nothing, Bram, because you can't," Dodd answered. "Travers
has wired full information about your devil-horde, and likewise about
you, and all Australia will be prepared to give you a warm reception
when you arrive."

"I tell you I'm invincible," Bram screamed. "In three days Australia
will be a ruin, a depopulated desert. In a week, all southern Asia, in
three weeks Europe, in two months America."

"You've been taking too many of those pellets, Bram," Dodd answered.
"Stand back now! Stand back, wherever you are, or I'll open the door and
throw the slops over you."

       *       *       *       *       *

Bram's screech rose high above the droning of the wings. In another
moment the interior of the room had grown as black as night. The rattle
of the beetle shells against the four walls of the house was like the
clattering of stage thunder.

All through the darkness Dodd could hear the unhurried clicking of the
key.

At last the rattling ceased. The sun shone in again. The ground all
around the house was packed with fallen beetles, six feet high, a
writhing mass that creaked and clattered as it strove to disengage
itself.

Bram's voice once more: "I'm leaving a guard, Dodd. They'll get you if
you try to leave. But they won't eat you. I'm going to have you three
sliced into little pieces, the Thousand Deaths of the Chinese. The
beetles will eat the parts that are sliced away--and you'll live to
watch them. I'll be back with a stick or two of dynamite to-morrow."

"Yeah, but listen, Bram," Dodd sang out. "Listen, you old marsupial
tiger. When those pipe dreams clear away, I'm going to build a gallows
of beetle-shells reaching to the moon, to hang you on!"

Bram's screech of madness died away. The strident rasping of the
beetles' legs began again. For hours the three heard it; it was not
until nightfall that it died away.

       *       *       *       *       *

Bram had made good his threat, for all around the house, extending as
far as they could see, was the host of beetle-guards. To venture out,
even with their shells about them, was clearly a hazardous undertaking.
There was neither food nor water in the place.

"We'll just have to hold out," said Dodd, breaking one of the long
periods of silence.

Tommy did not answer; he did not hear him, for he was busy at the key.
Suddenly he leaped to his feet.

"God, Jimmy," he cried, "that devil's making good his threat! The
swarm's in South Australia, destroying every living thing, wiping out
whole towns and villages! And they--they believe me now!"

He sank into a chair. For the first time the strain of the awful past
seemed to grip him. Haidia came to his side.

"The beetles are finish," she said in her soft voice.

"How d'you know, Haidia?" demanded Dodd.

"The beetles are finish," Haidia repeated quietly, and that was all that
Dodd could get out of her. But again the key began to click, and Tommy
staggered to the table. Dot--dash--dash--dot. Presently he looked up
once more.

"The swarm's halfway to Adelaide," he said. "They want to know if I can
help them. Help them!" He burst into hysterical laughter.

Toward evening he came back after an hour at the key. "Line must be
broken," he said. "I'm getting nothing."

       *       *       *       *       *

In the moonlight they could see the huge compound eyes of the beetle
guards glittering like enormous diamonds outside. They had not been
conscious of thirst during the day, but now, with the coming of the cool
night their desire for water became paramount.

"Tommy, there must be water in the station," said Dodd. "I'm going to
get a pitcher from the kitchen and risk it, Tommy. Take care of Haidia
if--" he added.

But Haidia laid her hand upon his arm. "Do not go, Jimmydodd," she said.
"We can be thirsty to-night, and to-morrow the beetles will be finish."

"How d'you know?" asked Dodd again. But now he realized that Haidia had
never learned the significance of an interrogation. She only repeated
her statement, and again the two men had to remain content.

The long night passed. Outside the many facets of the beetle eyes.
Inside the two men, desperate with anxiety, not for themselves, but for
the fate of the world, snatching a few moments' sleep from time to time,
then looking up to see those glaring eyes from the silent watchers.

Then dawn came stealing over the desert, and the two shook themselves
free from sleep. And now the eyes were gone.

But there was immense activity among the beetles. They were scurrying to
and fro, and, as they watched, Dodd and Tommy began to see some
significance in their movements.

"Why, they're digging trenches!" Tommy shouted. "That's horrible, Jimmy!
Are they intending to conduct sapping operations against us like
engineers, or what?"

Dodd did not reply, and Tommy hardly expected any answer. As the two
men, now joined by Haidia, watched, they saw that the beetles were
actually digging themselves into the sand.

       *       *       *       *       *

Within the space of an hour, by the time the first shafts of sunlight
began to stream into the room, there was to be seen only the massive,
rounded shells of the monsters as they squatted in the sand.

"Now you may fetch water," said Haidia, smiling at her lover. "No, you
do not need the shells," she added. "The beetles are finish. It is as
the wise men of my people told me."

Wondering, hesitating, Tommy and Dodd unlocked the front door. They
stood upon the threshold ready to bolt back again. But there was no
stirring among the beetle hosts.

Growing bolder, they advanced a few steps; then, shamed by Haidia's
