hunt in packs, too?

As soon as the thought hit him he looked up--not a moment too soon. The
great forms were drifting through the trees, closing in on him. When he
shot two, the others snarled with rage and sank back into the forest.
They didn't leave. Instead of being frightened by the deaths they grew
even more enraged.

Jason sat with his back to the tree and waited until they came close
before he picked them off. With each shot and dying scream the outraged
survivors howled the louder. Some of them fought when they met, venting
their rage. One stood on his hind legs and raked great strips of bark
from a tree. Jason aimed a shot at it, but he was too far away to hit.

There were advantages to having a fever, he realized. Logically he knew
he would live only to sunset, or until his gun was empty. Yet the fact
didn't bother him greatly. Nothing really mattered. He slumped, relaxed
completely, only raising his arm to fire, then letting it drop again.
Every few minutes he had to move to look in back of the tree, and kill
any of them that were stalking him in the blind spot. He wished dimly
that he were leaning against a smaller tree, but it wasn't worth the
effort to go to one.

Sometime in the afternoon he fired his last shot. It killed an animal he
had allowed to get close. He had noticed he was missing the longer
shots. The beast snarled and dropped, the others that were close pulled
back and howled in sympathy. One of them exposed himself and Jason
pulled the trigger.

There was only a slight click. He tried again, in case it was just a
misfire, but there was still only the click. The gun was empty, as was
the spare clip pouch at his belt. There were vague memories of
reloading, though he couldn't remember how many times he had done it.

This, then, was the end. They had all been right, Pyrrus was a match for
him. Though they shouldn't talk. It would kill them all in the end, too.
Pyrrans never died in bed. Old Pyrrans never died, they just got et.

Now that he didn't have to force himself to stay alert and hold the gun,
the fever took hold. He wanted to sleep and he knew it would be a long
sleep. His eyes were almost closed as he watched the wary carnivores
slip closer to him. The first one crept close enough to spring, he could
see the muscles tensing in its leg.

It leaped. Whirling in midair and falling before it reached him. Blood
ran from its gaping mouth and the short shaft of metal projected from
the side of his head.

The two men walked out of the brush and looked down at him. Their mere
presence seemed to have been enough for the carnivores, because they all
vanished.

Grubbers. He had been in such a hurry to reach the city that he had
forgotten about the grubbers. It was good that they were here and Jason
was very glad they had come. He couldn't talk very well, so he smiled to
thank them. But this hurt his lips too much so he went to sleep.




XXIV.


For a strange length of time after that, there were only hazy patches of
memory that impressed themselves on Jason. A sense of movement and large
beasts around him. Walls, wood-smoke, the murmur of voices. None of it
meant very much and he was too tired to care. It was easier and much
better just to let go.

       *       *       *       *       *

"About time," Rhes said. "A couple more days lying there like that and
we would have buried you, even if you were still breathing."

[Illustration]

Jason blinked at him, trying to focus the face that swam above him. He
finally recognized Rhes, and wanted to answer him. But talking only
brought on a spell of body-wracking coughing. Someone held a cup to his
lips and sweet fluid trickled down his throat. He rested, then tried
again.

"How long have I been here?" The voice was thin and sounded far away.
Jason had trouble recognizing it for his own.

"Eight days. And why didn't you listen when I talked to you?" Rhes
said.

"You should have stayed near the ship when you crashed. Didn't you
remember what I said about coming down anywhere on this continent? No
matter, too late to worry about that. Next time listen to what I say.
Our people moved fast and reached the site of the wreck before dark.
They found the broken trees and the spot where the ship had sunk, and at
first thought whoever had been in it had drowned. Then one of the dogs
found your trail, but lost it again in the swamps during the night. They
had a fine time with the mud and the snow and didn't have any luck at
all in finding the spoor again. By the next afternoon they were ready to
send for more help when they heard your firing. Just made it, from what
I hear. Lucky one of them was a talker and could tell the wild dogs to
clear out. Would have had to kill them all otherwise, and that's not
healthy."

"Thanks for saving my neck," Jason said. "That was closer than I like to
come. What happened after? I was sure I was done for, I remember that
much. Diagnosed all the symptoms of pneumonia. Guaranteed fatal in my
condition without treatment. Looks like you were wrong when you said
most of your remedies were useless--they seemed to work well on me."

His voice died off as Rhes shook his head in a slow _no_, lines of worry
sharp-cut into his face. Jason looked around and saw Naxa and another
man. They had the same deeply unhappy expressions as Rhes.

"What is it?" Jason asked, feeling the trouble. "If your remedies didn't
work--what did? Not my medikit. That was empty. I remember losing it or
throwing it away."

"You were dying," Rhes said slowly. "We couldn't cure you. Only a
junkman medicine machine could do that. We got one from the driver of
the food truck."

"But how?" Jason asked, dazed. "You told me the city forbids you
medicine. He couldn't give you his own medikit. Not unless he was--"

Rhes nodded and finished the sentence. "Dead. Of course he was dead. I
killed him myself, with a great deal of pleasure."

This hit Jason hard. He sagged against the pillows and thought of all
those who had died since he had come to Pyrrus. The men who had died to
save him, died so he could live, died because of his ideas. It was a
burden of guilt that he couldn't bear to think about. Would it stop with
Krannon--or would the city people try to avenge his death?

"Don't you realize what that means!" he gasped out the words. "Krannon's
death will turn the city against you. There'll be no more supplies.
They'll attack you when they can, kill your people--"

"Of course we know that!" Rhes leaned forward, his voice hoarse and
intense. "It wasn't an easy decision to come to. We have always had a
trading agreement with the junkmen. The trading trucks were inviolate.
This was our last and only link to the galaxy outside and eventual hope
of contacting them."

"Yet you broke that link to save me--why?"

"Only you can answer that question completely. There was a great attack
on the city and we saw their walls broken, they had to be moved back at
one place. At the same time the spaceship was over the ocean, dropping
bombs of some kind--the flash was reported. Then the ship returned and
_you_ left it in a smaller ship. They fired at you but didn't kill you.
The little ship wasn't destroyed either, we are starting to raise it
now. What does it all mean? We had no way of telling. We only knew it
was something vitally important. You were alive, but would obviously die
before you could talk. The small ship might be repaired to fly, perhaps
that was your plan and that is why you stole it for us. We _couldn't_
let you die, not even if it meant all-out war with the city. The
situation was explained to all of our people who could be reached by
screen and they voted to save you. I killed the junkman for his
medicine, then rode two doryms to death to get here in time.

"Now tell us--what does it mean? What is your plan? How will it help
us?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Guilt leaned on Jason and stifled his mouth. A fragment of an ancient
legend cut across his mind, about the jonah who wrecked the spacer so
all in it died, yet he lived. Was that he? Had he wrecked a world? Could
he dare admit to these people that he had taken the lifeboat only to
save his own life?

The three Pyrrans leaned forward, waiting for his words. Jason closed
his eyes so he wouldn't see their faces. What could he tell them? If he
admitted the truth they would undoubtedly kill him on the spot,
considering it only justice. He wasn't fearful for his own life any
more, but if he died the other deaths would all have been in vain. And
there still was a way to end this planetary war. All the facts were
available now, it was just a matter of putting them together. If only he
wasn't so tired, he could see the solution. It was right there, lurking
around a corner in his brain, waiting to be dragged out.

Whatever he did, he couldn't admit the truth now. If he died all hope
died. He had to lie to gain time, then find the true solution as soon as
he was able. That was all he could do.

"You were right," Jason said haltingly. "The small ship has an
interstellar drive in it. Perhaps it can still be saved. Even if it
can't there is another way. I can't explain now, but I will tell you
when I am rested. Don't worry. The fight is almost over."

They laughed and pounded each other on the back. When they came to shake
his hand as well, he closed his eyes and made believe he was asleep. It
is very hard to be a hypocrite if you aren't trained for it.

Rhes woke him early the next morning. "Do you feel well enough to
travel?" he asked.

"Depends what you mean by travel," Jason told him. "If you mean under my
own power, I doubt if I could get as far as that door."

"You'll be carried," Rhes broke in. "We have a litter swung between two
doryms. Not too comfortable, but you'll get there. But only if you think
you are well enough to move. We called all the people within riding
distance and they are beginning to gather. By this afternoon we will
have enough men and doryms to pull the ship out of the swamp."

"I'll come," Jason said, pushing himself to a sitting position. The
effort exhausted him, bringing a wave of nausea. Only by leaning his
full weight against the wall could he keep from falling back. He sat,
propped there, until he heard shouts and the stamping of heavy feet
outside, and they came to carry him out.

The trip drained away his small store of energy, and he fell into an
exhausted sleep. When he opened his eyes the doryms were standing knee
deep in the swamp and the salvage operation had begun. Ropes vanished
out of sight in the water while lines of struggling animals and men
hauled at them. The beasts bellowed, the men cursed as they slipped and
fell. All of the Pyrrans tugging on the lines weren't male, women were
there as well. Shorter on the average than the men, they were just as
brawny. Their clothing was varied and many-colored, the first touch of
decoration Jason had seen on this planet.

Getting the ship up was a heart-breaking job. The mud sucked at it and
underwater roots caught on the vanes. Divers plunged time and again into
the brown water to cut them free. Progress was incredibly slow, but the
work never stopped. Jason's brain was working even slower. The ship
would be hauled up eventually--what would he do then? He had to have a
new plan by that time, but thinking was impossible work. His thoughts
corkscrewed and he had to fight down the rising feeling of panic.

The sun was low when the ship's nose finally appeared above the water. A
ragged cheer broke out at first sight of that battered cone of metal and
they went ahead with new energy.

Jason was the first one who noticed the dorym weaving towards them. The
dogs saw it, of course, and ran out and sniffed. The rider shouted to
the dogs and kicked angrily at the sides of his mount. Even at this
distance Jason could see the beast's heaving sides and yellow
foam-flecked hide. It was barely able to stagger now and the man jumped
down, running ahead on foot. He was shouting something as he ran that
couldn't be heard above the noise.

There was a single moment when the sounds slacked a bit and the running
man's voice could be heard. He was calling the same word over and over
again. It sounded like _wait_, but Jason couldn't be sure. Others had
heard him though, and the result was instantaneous. They stopped,
unmoving, where they were. Many of those holding the ropes let go of
them. Only the quick action of the anchor men kept the ship from sliding
back under, dragging the harnessed doryms with it. A wave of silence
washed across the swamp in the wake of the running man's shouts. They
could be heard clearly now.

"_Quake! Quake on the way! South--only safe way is south!_"

One by one the ropes dropped back into the water and the Pyrrans turned
to wade to solid land. Before they were well started Rhes' voice cracked
out.

"Stay at work! Get the ship up, it's our only hope now. I'll talk to
Hananas, find out how much time we have."

These solitary people were unused to orders. They stopped and milled
about, reason fighting with the urgent desire to run. One by one they
stepped back to the ropes as they worked out the sense of Rhes' words.
As soon as it was clear the work would continue he turned away.

"What is it? What's happening?" Jason called to him as he ran by.

"It's Hananas," Rhes said, stopping by the litter, waiting for the
newcomer to reach him. "He's a quakeman. They know when quakes are
coming, before they happen."

Hananas ran up, panting and tired. He was a short man, built like a
barrel on stubby legs, a great white beard covering his neck and the top
of his chest. Another time Jason might have laughed at his incongruous
waddle, but not now. There was a charged difference in the air since the
little man had arrived.

"Why didn't ... you have somebody near a plate? I called all over this
area without an answer. Finally ... had to come myself--"

"How much time do we have?" Rhes cut in. "We have to get that ship up
before we pull out."

"Time! Who knows about time!" the graybeard cursed. "Get out or you're
dead."

"Calm down, Han," Rhes said in a quieter voice, taking the oldster's
arms in both his hands. "You know what we're doing here--and how much
depends on getting the ship up. Now how does it feel? This going to be a
fast one or a slow one?"

"Fast. Faster than anything I felt in a long time. She's starting far
away though, if you had a plate here I bet Mach or someone else up near
the firelands would be reporting new eruptions. It's on the way and, if
we don't get out soon, we're not getting out t'all."

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a burble of water as the ship was hauled out a bit farther. No
one talked now and there was a fierce urgency in their movements. Jason
still wasn't sure exactly what had happened.

"Don't shoot me for a foreigner," he said, "but just what is wrong? Are
you expecting earthquakes here, are you sure?"

"Sure!" Hananas screeched. "Of course I'm sure. If I wasn't sure I
wouldn't be a quakeman. It's on the way."

"There's no doubt of that," Rhes added. "I don't know how you can tell
on your planet when quakes or vulcanism are going to start, machines
maybe. We have nothing like that. But quakemen, like Hananas here,
always know about them before they happen. If the word can be passed
fast enough, we get away. The quake is coming all right, the only thing
in doubt is how much time we have."

The work went on and there was a good chance they would die long before
it was finished. All for nothing. The only way Jason could get them to
stop would be to admit the ship was useless. He would be killed then and
the grubber chances would die with him. He chewed his lip as the sun set
and the work continued by torchlight.

Hananas paced around, grumbling under his breath, halting only to glance
at the northern horizon. The people felt his restlessness and
transmitted it to the animals. Dogfights broke out and the doryms pulled
reluctantly at their harnesses. With each passing second their chances
grew slimmer and Jason searched desperately for a way out of the trap of
his own constructing.

"Look--" someone said, and they all turned. The sky to the north was lit
with a red light. There was a rumble in the ground that was felt more
than heard. The surface of the water blurred, then broke into patterns
of tiny waves. Jason turned away from the light, looking at the water
and the ship. It was higher now, the top of the stern exposed. There was
a gaping hole here, blasted through the metal by the spaceship's guns.

"Rhes," he called, his words jammed together in the rush to get them
out. "Look at the ship, at the hole blasted in her stern. I landed on
the rockets and didn't know how badly she was hit. But the guns hit the
star drive!"

Rhes gaped at him unbelievingly as he went on. Improvising, playing by
ear, trying to manufacture lies that rang of the truth.

"I watched them install the drive--it's an auxiliary to the other
engines. It was bolted to the hull right there. It's gone now, blown up.
The boat will never leave this planet, much less go to another star."

He couldn't look Rhes in the eyes after that. He sank back into the furs
that had been propped behind him, feeling the weakness even more. Rhes
was silent and Jason couldn't tell if his story had been believed. Only
when the Pyrran bent and slashed the nearest rope did he know he had
won.

The word passed from man to man and the ropes were cut silently. Behind
them the ship they had labored so hard over, sank back into the water.
None of them watched. Each was locked in his own world of thought as
they formed up to leave. As soon as the doryms were saddled and packed
