"Come back?" asked Chambers wonderingly. "I'm afraid I don't understand.
Is this a joke of some sort?"

"No joke," said Greg grimly. "I thought you might have guessed. I'm
going to leave you here."

"Leave us here?" roared Stutsman.

"Keep your shirt on," snapped Greg. "Just for a while, until we can go
back to the Solar System and finish a little job we're doing. Then we'll
come back and get you."

Craven grimaced. "I thought it would be something like that." He
squinted at Manning through the thick lenses. "You never miss a bet, do
you?"

Greg laughed. "I try not to."

A little silence fell upon the three men and Manning's image.

Greg broke it. "How about your energy collector?" he asked Craven. "Will
it maintain the ship out here? You get cosmic rays. Not too much else,
I'm afraid."

Craven grinned wryly. "You're right, but we can get along. The
accumulators are practically drained, though, and we won't be able to
store anything. Would you mind shooting us over just a little power?
Enough to charge the accumulators a little for emergency use."

He looked over his shoulder, almost apprehensively.

"There might be an emergency out here, you know. Nobody knows anything
about this place."

"I'll give you a little power," Greg agreed.

"Thank you very much," said Craven, half in mockery. "No doubt you think
yourself quite smart, Manning, getting us out here. You know you have us
stranded, that we can't collect more than enough power to live on."

"That's why I did it," Greg said, and vanished.




_CHAPTER NINETEEN_


Craven watched the _Invincible_ gather speed and tear swiftly through
the black, saw it grow tiny and then disappear entirely, either
swallowed by the distance or snapping into the strange super-space that
existed beyond the speed of light.

He turned from the window, chuckling.

Stutsman snarled at him: "What's so funny?"

The scientist glared at the wolfish face and without speaking, walked to
the desk and sat down. He reached for pencil and paper.

Chambers walked over to watch him.

"You've found something, Doctor," he said quietly.

Craven laughed, throatily. "Yes, I have. I've found a lot. Manning
thinks he can keep us out here, but he's wrong. We'll be in the Solar
System less than a week after he gets there."

Chambers stifled a gasp, tried to speak calmly. "You mean this?"

"Of course I mean it. I don't waste my time with foolish jokes."

"You have the secret of material energy?"

"Not that," the scientist growled, "but I have something else as
valuable. I have the secret of Manning's drive: I know what it is that
enables him to exceed the speed of light ... to go ten thousand times as
fast as light ... the Lord knows how much faster if he wanted to."

"No ordinary drive would do that," said Chambers. "It would take more
than power to make a ship go that fast."

"You bet your life it would, and Manning is the boy who's got it. He
uses a space field. I think I can duplicate it."

"And how long will it take you to do this work?"

"About a week," Craven told him. "Perhaps a little longer, perhaps a
little less. But once we go, we'll go as fast as Manning does. We'll be
short on power, but I think I can do something about that, too."

Chambers took a chair beside the desk. "But do we know the way home?"

"We can find it," said Craven.

"But there are no familiar constellations," objected Chambers. "He
dragged us out so far that there isn't a single star that any one of us
can identify."

"I said I'd find the Solar System," Craven declared impatiently, "and I
will. Manning started out for it, didn't he? I saw the way he went. The
Sun is a type G star and all I'll do is look for a type G star."

"But there may be more than one type G star," objected the financier.

"Probably are," Craven agreed, "but there are other ways of finding the
Sun and identifying it."

He volunteered no further information, went back to work with the pad
and pencil. Chambers rose wearily from his chair.

"Tell me when you know what we can do," he said.

"Sure," Craven grunted.

       *       *       *       *       *

"That's the Sun," said Craven. "That faint star between those two
brighter ones."

"Are you sure of it?" demanded Stutsman.

"Of course. I don't make blunders."

"It's the only type G star in that direction," suggested Chambers,
helpfully.

"Not that, either," declared Craven. "In fact, there are several type G
stars. I examined them all and I know I'm right."

"How do you know?" challenged Stutsman.

"Spectroscopic examination. That collector field of ours gathers energy
just like a burning glass. You've seen a burning glass, haven't you?"

He stared at Stutsman, directing the question at him.

Stutsman shuffled awkwardly, unhappily.

"Well," Craven went on, "I used that for a telescope. Gathered the light
from the suns and analyzed it. Of course it didn't act like a real
telescope, produce an image or anything like that, but it was ideal for
spectroscopic work."

They waited for him to explain. Finally, he continued:

"All of the stars I examined were just type G stars, nothing else, but
there was a difference in one of them. First, the spectroscope showed
lines of reflected light passing through oxygen and hydrogen, water
vapor and carbon dioxide. Pure planetary phenomena, never found on a
star itself. Also it showed that a certain per cent of the light was
polarized. Now remember that I examined it for a long time and I found
out something else from the length of observation which convinces me.
The light varied with a periodic irregularity. The chronometers aren't
working exactly right out here, so I can't give you any explanation in
terms of hours. But I find a number of regularly recurring changes in
light intensity and character ... and that proves the presence of a
number of planetary bodies circling the star. That's the only way one
could explain the fluctuations for the G-type star is a steady type. It
doesn't vary greatly and has no light fluctuations to speak of. Not like
the Cepheid and Mira types."

"And that proves it's our Sun?" asked Chambers.

Craven nodded. "Fairly definitely, I'd say."

"How far away is it?" Stutsman wanted to know.

       *       *       *       *       *

Craven snorted. "You would ask something like that."

"But," declared Stutsman, "there are ways of measuring how far a star is
away from any point, measuring both the distance and the size of the
star."

"Okay," agreed Craven, "you find me something solid and within reach
that's measurable. Something, preferably, about 200 million miles or so
across. Then I'll tell you how far we are from the Sun. This ship is not
in an orbit. It's not fixed in space. I have no accurate way of
measuring distances and angles simultaneously and accurately. Especially
angles as small as these would be."

Craven and Stutsman glared at one another.

"It's a long way however you look at it," the financier said. "If we're
going to get there, we'll have to start as soon as possible. How soon
can we start, Doctor?"

"Very soon. I have the gravity concentration field developed and
Manning left me just enough power to get a good start." He chuckled,
took off his glasses, wiped the lenses and put them back on again.
"Imagine him giving me that power!"

"But after we use up that power, what are we going to do?" demanded
Chambers. "This collector lens of yours won't furnish us enough to keep
going."

"You're right," Craven conceded, "but we'll be able to get more. We'll
build up what speed we can and then we'll shut off the drive and let
momentum carry us along. In the meantime our collector will gather power
for us. We're advancing toward the source of radiation now, instead of
away from it. Out here, where there's little gravity stress, fewer
conflicting lines of gravitation, we'll be able to spread out the field,
widen it, make it thousands of miles across. And the new photo-cells
will be a help as well."

"How are the photo-cells coming?" asked Chambers.

Craven grinned. "We'll have a bank of them in within a few hours, and
replace the others as fast as we can. I have practically the whole crew
at work on them. Manning doesn't know it, but he found the limit of
those photo-cells when he was heaving energy at us back in the Solar
System. He blistered them. I wouldn't have thought it possible, but it
was. You have to hand it to Manning and Page. They are a couple of smart
men."

To the eye there was only one slight difference between the old cells
and the new ones. The new type cell, when on no load, appeared milky
white, whereas the old cells on no load were silvery. The granular
surface of the new units was responsible for the difference in
appearance, for each minute section of the surface was covered with even
more minute metallic hexagonal pyramids and prisms.

"Just a little matter of variation in the alloy," Craven explained.
"Crystalization of the alloy, forming those little prisms and pyramids.
As a result, you get a surface thousands of times greater than in the
old type. Helps you absorb every bit of the energy."

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Interplanetarian_ arrowed swiftly starward, driving ahead with
terrific momentum while the collector lens, sweeping up the oncoming
radiations, charged the great banks of accumulators. The G-type star
toward which they were heading was still pale, but the two brighter
stars to either side blazed like fiery jewels against the black of
space.

"You say we'll be only a week or so behind Manning?" asked Chambers.

Craven looked at the financier, his eyes narrowed behind the heavy
lenses. He sucked in his loose lips and turned once again to the control
board.

"Perhaps a little longer," he admitted finally. "We're losing time,
having to go along on momentum in order to collect power. But the nearer
we get to those stars, the more power we'll have and we'll be able to
move faster."

Chambers drummed idly on the arm of his chair, thinking.

"Perhaps there's time yet," he said, half to himself. "With the power
we'll have within the Solar System, we can stop Manning and the
revolution. We can gain control again."

       *       *       *       *       *

Craven was silent, watching the dials.

"Manning might even pass us on the way back to look for us," Chambers
went on. "He thinks we're still out there. He wouldn't expect to find us
where we are, light years from where we started."

Craven shot him a curious look. "I wouldn't be too sure of that. Manning
has a string of some sort tied to us. He's got us tagged ... good and
proper. He's always been able to find us again, no matter where we were.
I have a hunch he'll find us again, even way out here."

Chambers shrugged his shoulders. "It really doesn't matter. Just so we
get close enough to the Sun so we can load those accumulators and jam
the photo-cells full. With a load like that we can beat him hands down."

The financier fell into a silence. He stared out of the vision plate,
watching the stars. Still far away, but so much nearer than they had
been.

His brain hummed with dreams. Old dreams, revived again, old dreams of
conquest and of empire, dreams of a power that held a solar system in
its grip.

Craven broke his chain of thoughts. "Where's our friend Stutsman? I
haven't seen him around lately."

Chambers chuckled good-naturedly. "He's sulking. He seems to have gotten
the idea neither one of us likes him. He's been spending most of his
time back in the engine room with the crew."

"Were you talking about me?" asked a silky voice.

They spun around to see Stutsman standing in the doorway of the control
room. His face was twisted into a wolfish grin and in his right hand he
held a heat gun.

Chambers' voice was sharp, like the note of a clanging bell. "What's
this?"

Stutsman's face twisted into an even more exaggerated grin. "This," he
said, "is mutiny. I'm taking over!" He laughed at them.

"No use calling the crew. They're with me."

"Damn you!" shouted Chambers, taking a step forward. He halted as
Stutsman jerked the pistol up.

"Forget it, Chambers. You're just second man from now on. Maybe not even
second man. You tried out this dictator business and you bungled it. You
went soft. You're taking orders from me from now on. No questions, no
back talk. You do as I say and maybe you won't get hurt."

"You're mad, Stutsman!" cried Chambers. "You can't get away with this."

Stutsman barked out a brittle laugh. "Who is going to stop me?"

"The people," Chambers shouted at him. "The people will. They won't
allow this. When you get back to the Solar System ..."

Stutsman growled, stepping toward Chambers, pistol leveled. "The people
won't have anything to say about this. I'll rule the Solar System the
way I want to. There won't be anyone else who'll have a thing to say
about it. So you dreamed of empire, did you? You dreamed of a solar
dictatorship. Well, watch me! I'll build a real empire. But I'll be the
head of it ... not you."

Craven sat down in his chair, crossed his knees. "Just what do you plan
to do, Dictator Stutsman?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Stutsman fairly foamed at the mouth over the insolence of Craven's
voice. "I'll smash Manning first. I'll wipe him out. This ship will do
it. You said yourself it would. You have ten times the power he has. And
then ..."

Craven raised a hand and waved him into silence. "So you plan to reach
the Solar System, do you? You plan to meet Manning, and destroy his
ship. Nice plan."

"What's wrong with it?" challenged Stutsman.

"Nothing," said Craven calmly. "Absolutely nothing at all ... _except
that we may never reach the Solar System_!"

Stutsman seemed to sag. The wolfish snarl on his lips drooped. His eyes
stared. Then with an effort he braced himself.

"What do you mean? Why can't we?" He gestured toward the vision plate,
toward the tiny yellow star between the two brighter stars.

"That," said Craven, "isn't our Sun. It has planets, but it isn't our
Sun."

Chambers stepped quickly to Craven, reached out a hand and hoisted him
from the chair, shook him.

"You must be joking! That has to be the Sun!"

Craven shrugged free of Chambers' clutch, spoke in an even voice. "I
never joke. We made a mistake, that's all. I hadn't meant to tell you
yet. I had intended to get in close to the star and take on a full load
of power and then try to locate our Sun. But I'm afraid it's a hopeless
task."

"A hopeless task?" shrieked Stutsman. "You are trying to trick me. This
is put up between the two of you. That's the Sun over there. I know it
is!"

"It isn't," said Craven. "Manning tricked us. He started off in the
wrong direction. He made us think he was going straight back to the
Solar System, but he didn't. He circled and went in some other
direction."
