                              _Phil. Trans._, 1781, p. 115.


Account of a comet. [Dated 13th March, 1781. This was _Uranus_.]
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1781, p. 492.


On the parallax of the fixed stars.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1782, p. 82.


Catalogue of double stars.
                       _Phil. Trans._, 1782, p. 112: translation in
                         _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1786, p. 187.


Description of a lamp micrometer and the method of using it.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1782, p. 163.


A paper to obviate some doubts concerning the great magnifying powers used.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1782, p. 173.


A letter from WILLIAM HERSCHEL, Esq., F.R.S., to Sir JOSEPH BANKS,
_Bart._, P.R.S.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1783, p. 1.


Aus einem Schreiben des Hrn. HERSCHEL an mich [BODE], datirt London, den
13ten August, 1783.
[This is a letter forwarding HERSCHEL'S memoir on the Parallax of the
Fixed Stars, etc.]
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1786, p. 258.


On the diameter and magnitude of the _Georgium Sidus_, with a
description of the dark and lucid disk and periphery micrometers.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1783, p. 4.


On the proper motion of the sun and solar system, with an account of
several changes that have happened among the fixed stars since the time
of Mr. FLAMSTEED.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1783, p. 247.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1787, p. 194, p. 224.


Astronomische Nachrichten und Entdeckungen, aus einem franzoesischen
Schreiben desselben an mich [BODE], datirt Datchet, nahe bey Windsor,
den 18. Mai, 1784.

[This letter is on the subject of the use of high magnifying powers, and
gives a _resume_ of his recent papers.]
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1787, p. 211.


On the remarkable appearances at the polar regions of the planet _Mars_,
the inclination of its axis, the position of its poles and its
spheroidical figure; with a few hints relating to its real diameter and
atmosphere.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1784, p. 233.


Account of some observations tending to investigate the construction of
the heavens.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1784, p. 437.


[_Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1788, p. 246, has a summary of this paper by Baron
VON ZACH. See, also, _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1794, p. 213.]


Catalogue of double stars.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1785, p. 40.


On the construction of the heavens.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1785, p. 213.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1788, p. 238.
                      See, also, _same_, 1787, p. 213, and 1794, p. 213.


Aus einem Schreiben des Hrn. HERSCHEL an mich [BODE], datirt Clay Hall,
nahe bey Windsor, den 20. Jul., 1785.
[This is a letter forwarding two memoirs, and giving the prices of
telescopes]
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1788, p. 254.


Catalogue of one thousand new nebulae and clusters of stars.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1786, p. 457.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1791, p. 157,
                              and _same_, 1794, p. 213.


Investigation of the cause of that indistinctness of vision which has
been ascribed to the smallness of the optic pencil.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1786, p. 500.


Remarks on the new comet [1786, II.].
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1787, p. 4.


[Letter from HERSCHEL to BODE on the discovery of two satellites to
_Uranus_, dated Slough, 1787, Feb. 11.]
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1790, p. 253.


An account of the discovery of two satellites revolving round the
_Georgian planet_.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1787, p. 125.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1791, p. 255.


An account of three volcanoes in the moon.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1787, p. 229.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1791, p. 255.


Note on M. MECHAIN'S comet. [1787, I.] [Added to preceding paper.]
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1787, p. 232.


On the _Georgian planet_ and its satellites.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1788, p. 364.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1793, p. 104.


Observations on a comet [1788, II.].
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1789, p. 151.


Catalogue of a second thousand of new nebulae and clusters of stars, with
a few introductory remarks on the construction of the heavens.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1789, p. 212.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1793, p. 104.
                              Also, _same_, 1794, p. 150.


Account of the discovery of a sixth and seventh satellite of the planet
_Saturn_, with remarks on the construction of its ring, its atmosphere,
its rotation on an axis, and its spheroidical figure.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1790, p. 1.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1793, p. 239;
                              _same_, 1796, p. 88; 1797, p. 249.


On the satellites of the planet _Saturn_, and the rotation of its ring
on an axis.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1790, p. 427.


On nebulous stars properly so called.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1791, p. 71.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1801, p. 128.


On the ring of _Saturn_ and the rotation of the fifth satellite upon its
axis.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1792, p. 1.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1796, p. 88.


Miscellaneous observations.

[Account of a comet], p. 23 [1792, I.].

[On the periodical appearance of omicron Ceti], p. 24.

[On the disappearance of the 55th _Herculis_], p. 26.

[Remarkable phenomenon in an eclipse of the moon], p. 27.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1792, p. 23.


Observations on the planet _Venus_.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1793, p. 201.


Observations of a quintuple belt on the planet _Saturn_.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1794, p. 28.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1798, p. 90.


Account of some particulars observed during the late eclipse of the sun.
[1793, September 5th.]
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1794, p. 39.


On the rotation of the planet _Saturn_ upon its axis.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1794, p. 48.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1798, p. 74.


On the nature and construction of the sun and fixed stars.
                             _Phil. Trans._, 1795, p. 46.
                             _Bode's Jahrbuch_, II. Suppl. Band, p. 65.


Description of a forty-foot reflecting telescope.
                             _Phil. Trans._, 1795, p. 347.
                             _Bode's Jahrbuch_, III. Suppl. Band, p. 238.


Additional observations on the comet. [1796, I.]
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1796, p. 131.


On the method of observing the changes that happen to the fixed stars;
with some remarks on the stability of the light of our sun. To which is
added a catalogue of comparative brightness for ascertaining the
permanency of the lustre of stars.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1796, p. 166.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1809, p. 201.


On the periodical star _[alpha] Herculis_; with remarks tending to
establish the rotatory motion of the stars on their axes; to which is
added a second catalogue of the comparative brightness of the stars.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1796, p. 452.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1809, p. 201.


A third catalogue of the comparative brightness of the stars, with an
introductory account of an index to Mr. FLAMSTEED'S observations of the
fixed stars, contained in the second volume of the Historia Coelestis.
To which are added several useful results derived from that index.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1797, p. 293.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1810, p. 143.


Observations of the changeable brightness of the satellites of
_Jupiter_, and of the variation in their apparent magnitudes, with a
determination of the time of their rotatory motions on their axes. To
which is added a measure of the diameter of the second satellite, and an
estimate of the comparative size of all the four.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1797, p. 332.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1801, p. 103.


On the discovery of four additional satellites of the _Georgium Sidus_.
The retrograde motion of its old satellites announced, and the cause of
their disappearance at certain distances from the planet explained.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1798, p. 47.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1801, p. 231.


A fourth catalogue of the comparative brightness of the stars.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1799, p. 121.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1810, p. 143.


On the power of penetrating into space by telescopes, with a comparative
determination of the extent of that power in natural vision, and in
telescopes of various sizes and constructions, illustrated by select
observations.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1800, pp. 49-85.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1804, p. 231.


Investigation of the powers of the prismatic colors to heat and
illuminate objects, with remarks that prove the different refrangibility
of radiant heat. To which is added an inquiry into the method of viewing
the sun advantageously with telescopes of large apertures and high
magnifying powers.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1800, pp. 255-283.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1804, p. 89.


Experiments on the refrangibility of the invisible rays of the sun.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1800, pp. 284-292.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1804, p. 89.


Experiments on the solar and on the terrestrial rays that occasion heat,
with a comparative view of the laws by which light and heat, or rather
the rays that occasion them, are subject, in order to determine whether
they are the same or different.
                               _Phil. Trans._, 1800, pp. 293-326, 437-538.
                               _Gilbert Annal._, X. (1802), pp. 68-78;
                               _same_, XII. (1803), pp. 521-546.


Observations tending to investigate the nature of the sun, in order to
find the causes or symptoms of its variable emission of light and heat,
with remarks on the use that may possibly be drawn from solar
observations.
                       _Phil. Trans._, 1801, pp. 265-318.
                       _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1805, p. 218, and 1806, p. 113.


Ueber den 7 Nebelfleck der 1sten classe des Herschel'schen Verzeichniss,
und ueber _Ceres_ und _Pallas_, vom Herrn Doctor HERSCHEL, aus zwey
Briefen desselben.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1805, p. 211.


Additional observations tending to investigate the symptoms of the
variable emission of the light and heat of the sun, with trials to set
aside darkening glasses by transmitting the solar rays through liquids,
and a few remarks to remove objections that might be made against some
of the arguments contained in the former paper.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1801, pp. 354-362.


Observations on the two lately discovered celestial bodies
[_Ceres and Pallas_].
                  _Phil. Trans._, 1802, pp. 213-232.
                  _Nicholson Journal_, IV. (1808), pp. 120-130, 142-148.


Catalogue of five hundred new nebulae, nebulous stars, planetary nebulae,
and clusters of stars, with remarks on the construction of the heavens.
