little of the technical infelicity which has marked his earlier verse.
Mr. Whiteside's greatest weakness is in the domain of rhyme, a
noticeable error in the present poem being the attempted rhyming of
=hours= with =bars= and =stars=. "I Know a Garden," by Agnes Richmond
Arnold, is a tuneful and beautiful lyric of a somewhat Elizabethan type.
The metre, as the lines are rendered, appears to be quite unusual; but
scansion reveals the fact that it is none other than the octosyllabic
couplet, disguised by the printer's art.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE UNITED AMATEUR for December begins with "A Girl's Ambition," a poem
by Margaret Trafford. The general idea of the piece is both ingenious
and appropriate, but the language and technical development leave
considerable to be desired. In the first place, the rhyming plan is
unfortunate; the opening and concluding couplets of each stanza being
unrhymed. In the second place, the metre is irregular; departing very
widely in places from the iambic heptameter which appears to be the
dominant measure. Miss Trafford should cultivate an ear for rhythm, at
the same time counting very carefully the syllables in each line she
composes. A third point requiring mention is the occasional awkwardness
of expression, a juvenile fault which will doubtless amend itself in
time. Just now we will call attention to only one defect--the
exceedingly forced abbreviation "=dresses'd=" for =dresses would=. "To
My Physician," by M. Estella Shufelt, is a smooth, graceful, and serious
poem whose only possible fault is the infrequency of rhyme. This is not
a technical defect, since the plan of construction is well maintained
throughout; but we believe a poem of this type requires more than one
rhyme to each stanza of eight lines. "The Old Inn," a stirring short
story by Gertrude L. Merkle, is a very promising piece of work, albeit
somewhat conventional and melodramatic. The alliterative romance of
Harry Henders and Hazel Hansen has a genuinely mid-Victorian flavour.
"Dead Men Tell No Tales," a short story by Ida Cochran Haughton, is a
ghastly and gruesome anecdote of the untenanted clay; related by a
village dressmaker. The author reveals much comprehension of rural
psychology in her handling of the theme; an incident which might easily
shake the reason of a sensitive and imaginative person, merely
"unnerves" the two quaint and prim maiden ladies. Poe would have made of
this tale a thing to gasp and tremble at; Mrs. Haughton, with the same
material, constructs genuine though grim comedy!

       *       *       *       *       *

THE UNITED AMATEUR for January contains Editor Lockhart's captivatingly
graceful retrospect of the older amateur journalism, concluding with a
just and eloquent appeal for the revival of our ancient enthusiasm. "Who
Pays," by Helene H. Cole, is a brief and tragic story of considerable
sociological significance. We deplore the use of the false verbal form
=alright=; for while the expression =all right= may well occur in
conversation of the character uttering it, the two words should be
written out in full. "To a Babe," by Olive G. Owen, embodies in
impeccable verse a highly clever and pleasing array of poetical
conceits; and deserves to be ranked amongst the choicest of recent
amateur offerings. "Girls are Like Gold," by Paul J. Campbell, is a
striking and witty adaptation of Thomas Hood's celebrated lines on

    "Gold! Gold! Gold! Gold!
    Bright and yellow, hard and cold."

Mr. Campbell exhibits both ingenuity and metrical ability in this facile
=jeu d'esprit=.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE UNITED AMATEUR for March contains "Love's Scarlet Roses," an
exquisite piece of lyric verse by Mary Henrietta Lehr of California.
Miss Lehr, a scholar and poetic genius of high order, is a prominent
amateur of a few years ago, lately returned to activity after a period
of endeavour in other fields. Her verse is uniformly distinguished by
depth of inspiration, delicacy of sentiment, and grace of structure;
occupying a place amongst the rarest products of amateurdom. Another
poem of remarkable merit in this issue is "The Gods' Return," by Olive
G. Owen. Inspired by a recent article from the pen of Richard Le
Gallienne, these well-wrought lines interpret one of the subtlest yet
most potent of the varied moods created in the human breast by the
momentous occurrences of the age. Looking over the file of THE UNITED
AMATEUR for the present administrative year, one may discover a diverse
and meritorious array of poetry and prose, which amply proves the
contention of Pres. Campbell that a literary official organ is not only
feasible but eminently desirable.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Woodbee= for January introduces to amateurdom a new bard, Mr. J.
Morris Widdows, Hoosier exponent of rural simplicity. Mr. Widdows has
enjoyed considerable success in the professional world as a poet,
song-writer, and musical composer; hence it is no untried or faltering
quill which he brings within our midst. "Stringtown on the Pike," which
adorns the first page of the magazine, is a very pleasing bit of dialect
verse whose accent and cadences suggest the work of the late James
Whitcomb Riley. The metre is gratifyingly correct, and the rusticisms
exceedingly colourful; though the average reader might find it somewhat
difficult to associate the name Miko with Yankee countryside. Such a
praenomen carries with it suggestions of a rich brogue rather than a
nasal drawl. "Personal Liberty," a brilliant short essay by Leo Fritter,
ably and sensibly explodes one of the characteristically specious
arguments of the liquor advocates. Mr. Fritter's legal training aids him
in presenting a clear, polished, and logical arraignment of
anti-prohibition hypocrisy. "Just a Little Love Tale," by Elizabeth M.
Ballou, is a smoothly constructed bit of very light fiction. Mrs.
Haughton's editorial, "A Review of Reviews," is concise and sensible;
giving a merited rebuke to those who seek to create unrest and
dissatisfaction in amateur journalism.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Woodbee= for April is an ample and attractive number, opening with
Dora H. Moitoret's excellent poem in the heroic couplet, "The April
Maiden." The metre of this piece follows the fashion of the nineteenth
rather than of the eighteenth century, having very few "end-stopt" lines
or sense-limiting couplets. The final rhyme of =caprice= and =these= is
somewhat imperfect, the effect being that of an attempted rhyme of =s=
and =z=. "Her Fateful Day," a short story by Maude Dolby, is pleasing
and ingenious despite certain improbabilities. "Ashes of Roses," by
Frieda M. Sanger, belongs to that abnormal and lamentable type of
pseudo-literature known as =vers libre=, and is the first serious
specimen of its kind ever inflicted upon the United. We are sincerely
sorry that one so gifted as Miss Sanger should descend to this hybrid,
makeshift medium, when she could so well express her thoughts either in
legitimate prose or legitimate verse. "Free Verse" has neither the flow
of real verse nor the dignity of real prose. It tends to develop
obnoxious eccentricities of expression, and is closely associated with
bizarre and radical vagaries of thought. It is in nine cases out of ten
a mere refuge of the obtuse, hurried, indolent, ignorant, or negligent
bard who cannot or will not take the time and pains to compose genuine
poetry or even passable verse. It has absolutely no justification for
existence, and should be shunned by every real aspirant to literary
excellence, no matter how many glittering inducements it seems to hold
out. True, a person of very little knowledge or ability can make himself
appear extremely cultured, aesthetic, and aristocratic by juggling a few
empty words in the current fashion; scribbling several lines of unequal
length, each beginning with a capital letter. It is an admirably easy
way to acquire a literary reputation without much effort. As the late
W. S. Gilbert once wrote of a kindred fad:

      "The meaning doesn't matter
      If it's only idle chatter
    Of a transcendental kind."

But we believe that the members of the United are more earnest and solid
in their ambition, hence we advise Miss Sanger to turn her undoubted
talent into more substantial channels. That she possesses genuine poetic
genius is amply evident, even from the specimen of =vers libre= before
us. The labour of real versification will be more arduous, but the
fruits will prove richer in proportion. It is better to glean a little
gold than much fools' gold. Miss Sanger's nephew, Mr. Norman Sanger, is
more conservative in his tastes, and is creditably represented by his
lines on "The Ol' Fishin' Hole." This piece contains many of the
rhythmical defects common to juvenile composition, but is pervaded by a
naturalness and pastoral simplicity which promise well for its young
author. Wider reading and closer rhetorical study will supply all that
Mr. Sanger now lacks. At present we should advise him to seek metrical
regularity by taking some one well defined line as a model, and moulding
all the others to it by counting the syllables and intoning the accents
in each. In the case of the present poem, the very first line will serve
as a perfect guide; its conformity to the iambic heptameter plan being
absolute. The alternating stresses of the fourteen syllables should be
noted and copied:

    "The =days= are =get=-tin' =balm=-y =now=, and =first=-est =thing=
            you =know=."

Two defects of rhyme are to be noted. =By= and =lullaby= cannot properly
be rhymed, since the rhyming syllables are =identical=, instead of
merely =similar=. "=Rapcher=" and =laughter= do not rhyme at all. Miss
Haughton's essay "Is a Lie Ever Justifiable?" forms a prominent feature
of the magazine, and presents some very ingenious though dogmatic
reasoning. Mrs. Haughton's editorial, "United We Stand," is an
exceedingly timely appeal for genuine amateur activity, and should be of
much value in stimulating a renaissance of the Association. The passage
reading "Who has been the latest victim of Cupid? =Whom= of Hymen?"
arouses a query as to the grammatical status of =whom=. We fear this is
what Franklin P. Adams of the =New York Tribune= playfully calls a
"=Cyrilization=." It is, as all readers of "The Conning Tower" can
testify, a remarkably common error; and one into which many of the
leading authors of the age frequently fall. The jingle "A Soldier's
Delight," by George William Stokes, concludes the current issue in
tuneful manner.

Amidst the present dearth of amateur magazines it is ever a delight to
behold =The Woodbee=; meritorious in contents and regular in issuance.
The debt of the United to the Columbus Club is indeed a heavy one.

                                                  H. P. LOVECRAFT,
                                                             Chairman.




                   THE UNITED AMATEUR

 OFFICIAL ORGAN OF THE UNITED AMATEUR PRESS ASSOCIATION

 VOLUME XVI    GEORGETOWN, ILL., JULY, 1917    NUMBER 9


ODE FOR JULY FOURTH, 1917

    As Columbia's brave scions, in anger array'd,
      Once defy'd a proud monarch and built a new nation;
    'Gainst their brothers of Britain unsheath'd the sharp blade
      That hath ne'er met defeat nor endur'd desecration;
          So must we in this hour
          Show our valour and pow'r,
    And dispel the black perils that over us low'r:
      Whilst the sons of Britannia, no longer our foes,
      Will rejoice in our triumphs and strengthen our blows!

    See the banners of Liberty float in the breeze
      That plays light o'er the regions our fathers defended;
    Hear the voice of the million resound o'er the leas,
      As the deeds of the past are proclaim'd and commended;
          And in splendour on high
          Where our flags proudly fly,
    See the folds we tore down flung again to the sky:
      For the Emblem of England, in kinship unfurl'd,
      Shall divide with Old Glory the praise of the world!

    Bury'd now are the hatreds of subject and King,
      And the strife that once sunder'd an Empire hath vanish'd.
    With the fame of the Saxon the heavens shall ring
      As the vultures of darkness are baffled and banish'd:
          And the broad British sea,
          Of her enemies free,
    Shall in tribute bow gladly, Columbia, to thee:
      For the friends of the Right, in the field side by side,
      Form a fabric of Freedom no hand can divide!

                                            H. P. LOVECRAFT.


DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC CRITICISM

=The Conservative= for July opens with Ira A. Cole's delightful and
melodious lines "In Vita Elysium" (Heaven in Life), which present a
strong arraignment of those conventional theologians who deem all things
beautiful reserved for a vague existence after death. While the orthodox
reader may deem the flight of the imagination too free, the rational and
appreciative litterateur will delight in the vigour of imagination and
delicacy of fancy displayed. The metrical structure is beyond reproach
in taste and fluency, the regular and spirited heroic couplets affording
a refreshing contrast to the harsh and languid measures of the day. Mr.
Cole's poetical future is bright indeed, for he possesses an innate
conception of fitness and poetic values which too few of his
contemporaries can boast. We wish to emphasize to those readers who are
familiar with =The Conservative's= editorial policy, that the lines
appear practically without revision; every bold conception and stroke of
genius being Mr. Cole's own. Two couplets in particular delight the ear
and the imagination, proving the author's claim to distinction as a poet
of the purest classical type:

    "Go! Go! vain man, to those unbounded fanes
    Where God's one proven priest--fair Nature--reigns."

    "Uplifted, glad, thy spirit then shall know
    That life is light, and heaven's here below!"

"The Genesis of the Revolutionary War," by Henry Clapham McGavack, is
one of those searchingly keen bits of iconoclastic analysis which have
made Mr. McGavack so famous as an essayist since his advent to the
United. Our author here explodes conclusively a large body of bombastic
legend which false textbooks have inflicted upon successive generations
of innocent American youth. We are shown beyond a doubt that the
Revolution of 1776 was no such one-sided affair as the petty political
"historians" would have us believe, and that our Mother Country indeed
had a strong case before the bar of International justice. It is an
article which makes us doubly proud of our racial and cultural
affiliations.

"Sweet Frailty," a poem by Mary Henrietta Lehr, contains all those
elements of charm, delicacy, and ingenuity which mark its author as one
of amateurdom's most cultivated and gifted members.

Of the editorial column modesty forbids us to speak, but we hope the
amateur public may be duly charitable with our shortcomings as therein
displayed.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Inspiration= for April is a "Tribute Number," dedicated to the
amateur journalists of Great Britain and Canada who have devoted their
lives and fortunes to the cause of civilisation and the Empire. With so
wonderfully inspiring a subject, it is small wonder that the magazine
lives gloriously up to its name. Miss von der Heide shows extreme skill
and sympathy in the editorship of the publication, and in the verses
which she contributes; proving herself worthy indeed of the high place
she has occupied in amateurdom for so many years.

"The Lion's Brood," by Henry Clapham McGavack, exhibits the versatility
of this brilliant writer; for though he is by preference a concise
essayist, he here rises to great heights in the domain of rhetorical
panegyric. His stirring encomium is ingeniously continued by Mr. William
T. Harrington, who adds many merited words of praise for our kindred
across the seas. The present critic's lines are as full of heartfelt
love of England as they are wanting in merit; while the lines of Olive
G. Owen possess both deep fervour and conspicuous merit. Mrs. Griffith's
tribute, "He Conquers who Endures," breathes out the true spirit of the
American nation today, anticipating the official action of a cautious
and slow-moving government. The "Open Letters" of Messrs. Macauley,
Stokes and Martin, speak the brave spirit of the age, and make us the
more sharply regretful of our own rejection for military service.
"Treasure," by Miss von der Heide, is an appealing bit of sentiment,
whose interest is timely indeed.

Viewed as a whole, =The Inspiration= takes first rank amongst the
amateur papers published since March.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Little Budget= for May opens with Paul J. Campbell's meritorious
poem entitled "Signals." Mr. Campbell, always facile in metre, exhibits
increasing power in the realm of poetical imagination, and is entitled
to a substantial place on the slopes of Parnassus. A misprint in the
present version of "Signals" gives =look= when =looked= should appear.

"The Adventures of 'Dido' Plum," by Joseph Parks, is a pleasing story of
military life by one who is himself a soldier. Mr. Parks' brief sketches
form a pleasing feature of the contemporary amateur press, being
distinguished by a naturalness which intensifies their interest as
literal transcripts of the army atmosphere. "Road Song," a tuneful lyric
by Eleanor J. Barnhart, marks the first appearance of that brilliant
author as a poet. Her inexperience in this art, however, is not at all
to be suspected from this fervent and finished composition; which might
well do credit to some of our veteran bards. "Impulse," by Norah Sloane
Stanley, is described as "A Parisian Fragment," and exhibits much
ingenuity in spirit and atmosphere. "Keep a Cheerful Countenance," by
Eugene B. Kuntz, is a poem of great merit despite the doubtful rhyme of
=way= and =quality= in the last stanza. Miss Mappin, in her article on
Milton, displays her ample knowledge of literary history, and even more
than her customary fluency. "The Contented Robin," a poem by Margaret
Mahon, is apt, pleasing and harmonious; whilst Miss Trafford's brief
jingle is quaint and clever. "Spring," by Randolph Trafford (aetat 10)
is full of the exuberant vigour of youth, and speaks well for the future
of this bright young bard.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Little Budget= for June gains distinction from Henry Clapham
McGavack's brilliant essay on American Anglophobia, entitled "Blood is
not Thicker Than Water." This acute analysis of anti-British sentiment
among certain classes in the States reveals a lamentable result of
bigotry and historical ignorance; which may, we hope, be cured by the
new bonds of alliance betwixt the Old and the New Englands. As Mr.
McGavack well demonstrates, most of our Anglophobia is manufactured by
the alleged "historians" who poison the minds of the young through
mendacious textbooks. This species of false teaching, an evil potently
fostered by the Fenians and Sinn Feiners who lurk serpent-like in our
midst, is one which cannot too soon be eradicated; for the cultural
identity and moral unity of the States and the Empire make such sources
of unintelligent prejudice increasingly nauseous and detrimental. We may
add that the textbook treatment of our War between the States is almost
equally unfair, the Northern cause being ridiculously exalted above the
brave and incredibly high-minded attitude of the Confederacy.

Another delightful prose contribution is "Back to Blighty," by Joseph
Parks, a vivid vignette of one phase of military life. "Trinidad and its
Forests," by F. E. M. Hercules, is marked by its author's customary ease
of expression and felicity of diction; presenting many facts of general
interest. The poetry in this issue includes work from the pens of J. E.
Hoag, H. P. Lovecraft, Rev. Eugene B. Kuntz, Beryl Mappin, and the
Editor. Dr. Kuntz's lines to the memory of Phillips Gamwell are animated
with a nobility which well befits their subject, though the rhyme of
=day= and =melody= is not strictly correct. Few amateur poets are able
to achieve the sonorous dignity which Dr. Kuntz imparts to his flowing
Alexandrines, or to select with equal appropriateness the vivid and
musical words that so irresistibly delight the ear and impress the
imagination. Miss Mappin's metrical effort, entitled "Only a Thought,"
betrays some of the crudities of youth; including the attempted rhyme of
=alone= and =home=. The metre, phraseology, and plan of rhyming demand
extensive revision, the following being a possible amended version of
the piece:

    As sad and alone in a distant land
      I sat by the dismal shore,
    My chin laid pensively in my hand,
      And my dreams all of home once more;
    I watch'd and mus'd o'er the sunless sea,
      And study'd the cruel foam;
    For the waves bore an exile's woe to me,
      From my kindred forc'd to roam.

    But lo! floating light upon the wind
      And murm'ing o'er ocean crest,
    Come the thoughts of those I left behind,
      Bringing comfort and love and rest.
    Only a word--aye, only a thought!
