  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

604. What position should be adopted when a person reads or sings when
sitting? Why?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

605. _The muscles of the neck should not be compressed._ If the
muscles of the neck and larynx are compressed by a high cravat, or
other close dressing, not only will the free and energetic movements
of these parts be impeded, but the tones will be feeble and
ineffective. Therefore the dress of the neck, particularly of public
speakers and singers, should be loose and thin. For a warm dress upon
the neck, when the vocal organs are in action, will induce too great a
flow of blood to these parts, which will be attended by subsequent
debility.

[Illustration: Fig. 109.]

_Observations._ 1st. The loss of voice, (_lar-yn-gi'tis_,) which is
prevalent among public speakers, may be ascribed in part to the
injudicious dressing of the neck, and improper position in standing.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

605. How should public speakers dress their necks? Why? What is a
common cause of the loss of voice?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

2d. When individuals have been addressing an audience in a warm room,
or engaged in singing, they should avoid all impressions of a cold
atmosphere, unless adequately protected by an extra garment.

[Illustration: Fig. 110.]

606. _The condition of the air modifies speaking and singing._ As pure
air is more elastic and resonant than impure, and as easy, melodious
speaking or singing requires atmospheric elasticity, so school-rooms
and singing-halls should be well ventilated, if we would be
entertained with soft intonations in reading, or sonorous singing.

_Observation._ The imperfect ventilation of churches and vestries is
another cause of laryngitis among clergymen. This affection is almost
unknown among those who speak in very open rooms, where stoves are not
used.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

Give 2d. observation. 606. Why does easy and melodious speaking
require pure air? What is another cause laryngitis among clergymen?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

607. _The condition of the nasal passages and throat modifies the
voice._ The enunciation of words is rendered more or less distinct, in
proportion as the jaws are separated in speaking, and the fauces and
nasal passages are free from obstruction. For these reasons, the
scholar should be taught to open the mouth adequately when reading,
speaking, or singing, that the sounds formed in the larynx and
modified in the fauces may have an unobstructed egress.

_Observations._ 1st. If the fauces are obstructed by enlarged tonsils,
(a condition by no means uncommon in children,) they should be removed
by a surgical operation, which is not only effective, but safe, and
attended with little suffering. The tonsils are situated on each side
of the base of the tongue, and, when enlarged, they obstruct the
passage through which the air passes to and from the lungs, and the
respiration is not only laborious, but distressing.

2d. When the nasal passages are obstructed, there is a peculiar sound
of the voice, which is called "talking through the nose." This
phenomenon arises, not from the expired air passing through the nose,
but from its not being able to pass through the nasal passages.

608. _The state of the mind and health exerts an influence upon the
vocal organs._ "The organs of the voice, in common with all other
parts of the bodily frame, require the vigor and pliancy of muscle,
and the elasticity and animation of mind, which result from good
health, in order to perform their appropriate functions with energy
and effect. But these indispensable conditions to the exercise of
vocal organs, are, in the case of most learners, very imperfectly
supplied."

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

607. Does the condition of the throat and nasal passages modify the
voice? Name the influences that produce clear enunciation of words.
What is the effect when the nasal passages are obstructed? 608. How
are the vocal organs influenced? What do they require?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

609. "A sedentary mode of life, the want of invigorating exercise,
close and long-continued application of mind, and, perhaps, an
impaired state of health, or a feeble constitution, prevent, in many
instances, the free and forcible use of those muscles on which voice
is dependent. Hence arises the necessity of students of elocution
practising physical exercises adapted to promote general muscular
vigor, as a means of attaining energy in speaking; the power of any
class of muscles being dependent on the vigor of the whole system."

610. "Gymnastic and calisthenic exercises are invaluable aids to the
culture and development of the voice, and should be sedulously
practised when opportunity renders them accessible. But even a slight
degree of physical exercise, in any form adapted to the expansion of
the chest and to the freedom and force of the circulation, will serve
to impart energy and glow to the muscular apparatus of voice, and
clearness to its sound."

611. "There is, therefore, a great advantage in always practising some
preliminary muscular actions, as an immediate preparation for vocal
exercises. The art of cultivating the voice, however, has, in addition
to the various forms of corporeal exercise, practised for the general
purpose of promoting health, its own specific prescription for
securing the vigor of the vocal organs, and modes of exercise adapted
to the training of each class of organs separately."

612. The results of such practice are of indefinite extent. They are
limited only by the energy and perseverance of the student, excepting
perhaps in some instances of imperfect organization. A few weeks of
diligent cultivation are usually sufficient to produce such an effect
on the vocal organs, that persons who commence practice with a feeble
and ineffective utterance, attain, in that short period, the full
command of clear, forcible, and varied tone.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

609. Why are students of elocution in general necessitated to practise
physical exercise? 610. What are invaluable aids in the culture of the
voice? 611. What is said of the art of cultivating the voice? 612. Are
the results of such practices limited? What exception?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

613. _Repetition is essential to distinct articulation of words._ In
teaching a child to articulate a letter or word, in the first
instance, make an effort to induce a proper state of the vocal organs
by which the particular sound is produced. Repeat the letter or word
again and again, until all the parts of the vocal apparatus harmonize
in their movements to produce the given sound. This repetition is as
necessary in learning to read as in singing.

_Observations._ 1st. There is nothing gained by trying to teach a
child to pronounce the letters of the alphabet, before the vocal
organs are so developed that distinct utterance can be given to the
proper sounds.

2d. The drawling method of talking to young children, as well as using
words that are not found in any written language, (called child's
talk,) is decidedly wrong. A child will pronounce and understand the
application of a correct word as quickly as an incorrect one.

614. _No part of the vocal organs is wanting, with those individuals
that stammer, or who have an impediment in their speech._ Some parts
may be more developed than others, but they generally are but
imperfectly under the control of the will, and assume an irregular and
rapid movement, while other parts, the motions of which are essential,
remain comparatively inactive. This can be seen by comparing the
movements of the lips, tongue, and larynx, while attempting to speak,
in a person who stammers, with the movements of the corresponding
parts, while speaking, in an individual who has no such impediment.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

613. Is repetition essential to distinct articulation? What method is
suggested in teaching a child to articulate letters or words? Give
observation 1st. Observation 2d. 614. Are the vocal organs wanting in
stammerers? Why the defect in their articulation of words?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

615. Surgical operations and medical treatment are not highly
advantageous in a majority of these cases. In the young and middle
aged, this defect can be remedied by _patient_ and judicious training.
At first, only those letters and words should be spoken that can be
articulated with distinctness. Let there be repetition, until the
words can be spoken at any time with readiness. Then take for a lesson
other words, more difficult to articulate; and pursue a similar
process of training and repetition, until every part of the vocal
organs can be called into a ready and harmonious action in giving
utterance to any word in common use.

616. _The method of removing foreign bodies from the throat._ It is
not necessary to ascertain which passage the foreign body is in, for
the immediate treatment ought in either case to be the same. Some
person should place one hand on the front of the chest of the
sufferer, and, with the other, give two or three smart blows upon the
back, allowing a few seconds to intervene between them. This treatment
will generally be successful, and cause the substance to be violently
thrown from the throat.

_Observation._ If the foreign body passes into the larynx violent
spasmodic coughing immediately succeeds, which continues until it is
removed or life is extinct. Such cases demand the prompt opening of
the trachea below the larynx by a skilful surgeon.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

615. How can stammering be remedied? 616. What is the method of
removing foreign bodies from the throat?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=




CHAPTER XXXI.

THE SKIN.


617. The skin is a membrane which envelops the muscles and other parts
of the system. In youth, and in females particularly, it is smooth,
soft, and elastic. In middle age, and in males, it is firm and rough
to the touch. In old age, in persons who are emaciated, and about the
flexions of the joints, it is thrown into folds. The interior of the
body, like the exterior, is covered by a skin, which, from the
constantly moistened state of its surface, is called the mucous
membrane. At the various orifices of the body, the exterior skin is
continuous with the internal.


ANATOMY OF THE SKIN.

618. The SKIN, to the naked eye, appears composed of one membrane. But
examination has shown that it consists of two layers of membrane,
namely, the _Cu'ti-cle_, (scarf-skin,) and the _Cu'tis Ve'ra_, (true
skin.) These layers are widely different from each other in structure,
and perform very different offices in the animal economy.

619. The CUTICLE (sometimes called the _ep-i-derm'is_) is the external
layer of the skin. This membrane is thin and semi-transparent, and
resembles a thin shaving of soft, clear horn, and bears the same
relation to other parts of the skin that the rough bark of a tree does
to the liber, or living bark. The cuticle has no perceptible nerves or
blood-vessels; consequently, if it is cut or abraded, no pain will be
felt, and no fluid will ooze from it.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

617. What is the skin? Mention its different appearances in its
different conditions in the human frame. Is the interior of the body,
as well as the exterior, covered by a skin? What is the interior
membrane called? Why has it received this name? 618-636. _Give the
anatomy of the skin._ 618. What is said of the skin? What is said
relative to these layers of membrane? 619. Describe the cuticle. What
name is sometimes applied to the cuticle?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

_Experiment._ Pass a pin through the portion of the cuticle that
skirts the nails, or remove a thin shaving from the palm of the hand,
and no painful sensation will be experienced unless the pin or knife
penetrates deeper than the cuticle.

620. This membrane varies in thickness on different parts of the
body,--from the thin, delicate skin upon the internal flexions of the
joints, to the thickened covering of the soles of the feet. The
greater thickness of the cuticle of the palms of the hands and soles
of the feet, is manifestly the intentional work of the Creator; for it
is perceptible in infants, even at birth, before exercise can have had
any influence.

621. The CUTIS VERA (sometimes called the _co'ri-on_) is composed of
minute fibres, which are collected into small bundles or strands.
These are interwoven with each other so as to constitute a firm,
strong, and flexible web. In the superficial part of the true skin,
the web is so close as to have the appearance of felt-cloth; but more
deeply, the pores become progressively larger, and, upon the lower
surface, have a diameter of about a line, or one twelfth of an inch.
This gives the under surface the appearance of a coarse web. The
strands of the under surface of the true skin are connected with the
fibrous web, in which the sub-cutaneous fat of the body is deposited;
while the upper surface gives support to the sensitive, or papillary
layer, which is bedded upon it.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

Give the experiment. 620. What is said of the thickness of the cuticle
in different parts of the body? 621. Describe the cutis vera. By what
name is it sometimes called? What is the appearance of the upper
surface of the cutis vera? Of the under surface?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

_Observation._ When the skins of animals are immersed in a strong
solution of oak or hemlock bark, a chemical union takes place between
the gelatin, of which the true skin is mostly composed, and the tannin
of the bark. By this process leather is formed, and its peculiar
markings are owing to the papillary layer.

[Illustration: Fig. 111. An ideal representation of the papillae. 1, 1,
The cutis vera. 2, 2, The papillary layer. 3, 3, The arteries of the
papillae. 4, 4, The veins of the papillae. 5, 5, The nerves of the papillae.]

622. The sensitive layer of the skin is thin, soft, uneven, pinkish in
hue, and composed of blood-vessels, which confer its various tints of
red; and of nerves, which give it the faculty of sensation. The
unevenness of this layer is produced by small, elongated, conical
prominences, called _Pa-pil'lae_.

623. Each PAPILLA is composed of a minute artery, vein, and nerve.
Some of the prominences are arranged in concentric ovals, as may be
seen on the ends of the fingers; others are more or less parallel, and
pursue a serpentine course; some suddenly diverge, and again reunite,
as may be seen in the palm of the hand. Papillae are found in every
part of the skin. Consequently, their number is very great.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

How is leather formed? 622. What is the appearance of the sensitive
layer? What causes the unevenness of this layer? Explain fig. 111.
623. Describe the papillae.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

624. The cutis vera contains not only _Arteries_, _Veins_, and
_Nerves_ but _Lymphatics_, _Oil-Glands_ and _Tubes_, and _Perspiratory
Glands_ and _Tubes_.

[Illustration: Fig. 112. The arteries and veins of a section of the skin.
A, A, Arterial branches. B, B, Capillary, or hair-like vessels, in which
the large branches terminate. C, The venous trunk, collecting the blood
from the capillaries.]

625. The ARTERIES AND VEINS of the skin are very numerous. The larger
branches of the arteries pass through the open meshes of the true
skin, and are subdivided into a myriad of minute capillary vessels,
which form a beautiful net-work on the upper surface of the true skin.
This vascular net sends a branch to each of the papillae, which opens
into and terminates in a minute vein. The capillary veins are as
numerous as the arteries which they accompany. They unite and form
larger trunks, as small springs from the hill side coalesce to form
rivulets.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

624. What vessels are found in the cutis vera? Explain fig. 112. 625.
What is said of the cutaneous arteries? Of the cutaneous veins?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

626. The NERVES that are spread over every part of the sensitive layer
of the true skin, proceed from the spinal cord. As a proof of the
great number of nervous filaments in the skin, no part of this tissue
can be punctured with a fine needle without transfixing a nerve, and
inducing pain. In some parts of the system, however, the nerves are
more abundant than in others; where the sense of feeling is most
acute, we find the greatest number of nerves, and those of the largest
size. Those parts that are most exposed to injury are most sensitive.

_Examples._ 1st. The conjunctiva, or skin of the eye, is pained by the
presence of a particle of dust, because it would render vision
imperfect.

2d. The lungs, also, would be injured by the smallest particle of
matter; they are therefore protected by the exquisite sensitiveness of
the lining membrane of the trachea, so that a particle of food or dust
is ejected by a convulsive cough before it reaches the lungs.

627. The nerves are more numerous in the upper than lower extremities;
in greater numbers upon the palm than the back of the hand. They are,
likewise, more abundant and larger at the extremities of the fingers,
and in the lips, than in any other part of the skin.

_Observation._ The proboscis of the elephant, the extremities of the
tails of certain species of monkeys, and the tentacula of some kinds
of fish, receive a more abundant supply of sensitive nerves than other
parts of their systems.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

626. Where do the nerves of the skin proceed from? Are they numerous
in this membrane? How is it proved? What is said of those parts most
exposed to injury? Give example 1st. Example 2d. 627. Mention the
difference in the distribution of the nerves in various parts of the
body. Is this difference found in the lower order of animals?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

628. In the small papillae, the nerve forms a single loop, while in
papillae of larger size, and endowed with a power of more exalted
sensation, the nerve is bent several times upon itself previous to
completing the loop. These little loops spring from a net-work of
nerves, imbedded in the upper porous layer of the true skin, at the
base of the papillae. This net-work of nerves receives its influence
through nerves which take their winding course through the fat
distended openings of the deeper layers of the true skin.

[Illustration: Fig. 113. 1, 1, The cuticle. 2, 2, The colored layer of
the cuticle. 3, 3, The papillary layer, exhibiting the nerves as they
form loops. 4, 4, The net-work of nerves. 5, 5, The true skin. 6, 6, 6,
Three nerves that divide to form the net-work (4, 4.) 7, 7, 7, The
furrows between the papillae. 8, 8, 8, Three papillae magnified fifty
diameters.]

629. The LYMPHATICS are found in great numbers in the true skin, and
they are so minute that they cannot be seen with the naked eye; but
when these hair-like vessels are injected with quicksilver, (a work of
great difficulty,) the surface injected resembles a sheet of silver.
In this way their existence can be imperfectly demonstrated. They are
a part of the vascular net-work situated upon the upper surface of the
true skin. Each papilla is supplied with a lymphatic filament, the
mouth of which opens beneath, and lies in contact with the under
surface of the cuticle. This net-work of vessels communicates through
the open meshes of the true skin with larger lymphatic trunks, that
open into the venous system.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

628. How are the nerves of the small papillae arranged? How in the
large papillae? What does fig. 113 represent? 629. What is said of the
cutaneous lymphatics? How is their existence proved?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

[Illustration: Fig. 114. A plexus of lymphatic vessels in the skin,
considerably magnified from an injected preparation.]

630. The OIL-GLANDS are small bodies imbedded in the true skin. They
connect with the surface of the skin by small tubes, which traverse
the cuticle. In some parts, these glands are wanting; in others, where
their office is most needful, they are abundant, as on the face and
nose, the head, the ears, &c. In some parts, these tubes are spiral;
in others, straight. These glands offer every shade of complexity,
from the simple, straight tube, to a tube divided into numberless
ramifications, and constituting a little rounded tree-like mass, about
the size of a millet seed.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

Of what are they a part? 630. Describe the oil-glands. With what do
they connect? Do they exist in every part of the body? Of what form
are their tubes?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

631. In a few situations, these small glands are worthy of particular
notice, as in the eyelids, where they possess great elegance of
distribution and form, and open by minute pores along the lids; in the
ear-passages, where they produce that amber-colored substance, known
as the _ce-ru'men_, (wax of the ears,) and in the scalp, where they
resemble small clusters of grapes, and open in pairs into the sheath
of the hair, supplying it with a pomatum of Nature's own preparing.
The oil-tubes are sometimes called the _se-ba'ceous fol'li-cles_.

[Illustration: 4. A small hair from the scalp, with its oil-glands. The
glands (A) form a cluster around the shaft of the hair-tube, (C.) These
ducts open into the sheath of the hair, (B.) All the figures, from 1 to
4, are magnified thirty-eight diameters.]

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

631. What is said of these tubes in the eyelids? In the ear? In the
scalp? What are these glands sometimes called?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

_Observation._ Among the inhabitants of cities, and especially in
persons who have a torpid state of the skin, the contents of the
oil-tubes become too dense and dry to escape in the usual manner. Thus
it collects, distends the tube, and remains until removed by art. When
this impacted matter reaches the surface, dust and smoke mix with it,
then it is recognized by small, round, dark spots. These are seen on
the forehead, nose, and other parts of the face. When this matter is
pressed out, the tube gives it a cylindrical form. The parts around
the distended tubes sometimes inflame. This constitutes the disease
called, _"ac'ne punc-ta'ta."_

632. The PERSPIRATORY APPARATUS consists of minute cylindrical tubes,
which pass inward through the cuticle, and terminate in the deeper
meshes of the cutis vera. In their course, each little tube forms a
beautiful spiral coil; and, on arriving at its destination, coils upon
itself in such a way as to constitute an oval-shaped, or globular
ball, called the _perspiratory gland_.

633. The opening of the perspiratory tube on the surface of the
cuticle, namely, "the pores," is also deserving of attention. In
consequence of its extremity being a section of a spirally-twisted
tube, the aperture is oblique in direction, and possesses all the
advantages of a valvular opening, preventing the ingress of foreign
injurious substances to the interior of the tube and gland.

634. "To arrive at something like an estimate of the value of the
perspiratory system, in relation to the rest of the organism, I
counted the perspiratory pores on the palm of the hand, and found 3528
in a square inch. Now each of these pores being the aperture of a
little tube about a quarter of an inch long, it follows, that in a
square inch of skin on the palm of the hand there exists a length of
tube equal to 882 inches, or 73 1/2 feet. Surely such an amount of
drainage as seventy-three feet in every square inch of skin--assuming
this to be the average for the whole body--is something wonderful and
the thought naturally intrudes itself, What if this _drainage_ be
obstructed?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

What is said of the retention of the unctuous matter in the oil-tubes?
632. Of what does the perspiratory apparatus consist? 633. What is
peculiar in the opening of the perspiratory tubes on the surface of
the cuticle? 634. How many perspiratory pores did Dr. Wilson count
upon a square inch of skin on the palm of the hand?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

[Illustration: Fig. 116. A perspiratory gland from the palm of the hand,
magnified forty diameters. 1, 1, A twisted tube composing the gland. 2,
2, The two excretory ducts from the gland. These unite to form one spiral
tube, that perforates the cuticle, (3,) and opens obliquely on its
surface at 4. The gland is imbedded in cells filled with fat, which are
seen at 5, 5.]

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

What does fig. 116 represent?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

635. "Could we need a stronger argument for enforcing the necessity of
attention to the skin? On the pulps of the fingers, where the ridges
of the sensitive layer of the true skin are somewhat finer than in the
palm of the hand, the number of pores on a square inch a little
exceeded that of the palm; and on the heels, where the ridges are
coarser, the number of pores on the square inch was 2268, and the
length of the tube 567 inches, 47 1/4 feet.

636. "To obtain an estimate of the length of tube of the perspiratory
system of the whole surface of the body, I think that 2800 might be
taken as a fair average of the number of pores in the square inch; and
consequently, 700, the number of inches in length. _Now, the number of
square inches of surface in a man of ordinary height and bulk is 2500;
the number of pores, therefore, 7,000,000; and the number of inches of
perspiratory tube is 1,750,000; that is, 145,833 feet, or 48,611
yards, or nearly TWENTY-EIGHT miles!_"--_Wilson._

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

Give other computations in this paragraph. 635. What is said of the
number of these pores on the pulp of the fingers? On the heels? 536.
What is an average number of pores and length of tube of the whole
surface of the body? Give the summary of the number of pores, and
number or inches of perspiratory tube.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=




CHAPTER XXXII.

PHYSIOLOGY OF THE SKIN.


637. The skin invests the whole of the external surface of the body,
following all its prominences and curves, and gives protection to all
the organs it encloses, while each of its several parts has a distinct
use.

638. The cuticle is insensible, and serves as a sheath of protection
to the highly sensitive skin (_cutis vera_) situated beneath it. The
latter feels; but the former blunts the impression which occasions
feeling. In some situations, the cuticle is so dense and thick, as
wholly to exclude ordinary impressions. Of this we see an example in
the ends of the fingers, where the hard and dense nail is the cuticle
modified for the purpose referred to. Were the nervous tissue of the
true skin not thus protected, every sensation would be so acute as to
be unpleasant, and contact with external bodies would cause pain.

639. The cuticle, also, prevents disease, by impeding the evaporation
of the fluids of the true skin, and the absorption of the poisonous
vapors, which necessarily attend various employments. It, however,
affords protection to the system only when unbroken, and then, to the
greatest degree, when covered with a proper amount of oily secretion
from the oil-glands.

640. The cuticle is, originally, a transparent fluid, exuded by the
blood-vessels, and distributed as a thin layer on the surface of the
true skin. While successive layers are formed on the exterior of the
true skin, the external cuticular layers are converted into dry,
flattened scales, by the evaporation of their fluid contents. The
thickness of the cuticle is formed mainly from these scales.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

637-656. _Give the physiology of the skin._ 637. What is said of the
skin? 638. Give a function of the cuticle. Does it vary in thickness
on different parts of the body? Give examples. 630. Mention another
use of the cuticle. 640. What is the cuticle originally?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

641. The cuticle is, therefore, undergoing a constant process of
formation and growth at its under part, to compensate for the wear
that is taking place continually on its surface. A proper thickness of
the cuticle is in this manner preserved; the faculty of sensation and
that of touch are properly regulated; the places of the little scales,
which are continually falling off under the united influence of
friction and ablution, are supplied; and an action necessary, not
merely to the health of the skin, but to that of the entire body, is
established.

642. Whenever the cuticle is exposed to moderate and repeated
friction, it becomes thicker and tougher, as may be seen in the
cuticle of the lady's finger that plies the needle and in the hard or
callous appearance of the hands of farmers masons, and other
mechanics. This enables them to handle the utensils and materials used
in their vocations without pain or inconvenience.

_Observations._ 1st. When the joints of the feet are subjected to
moderate and continued pressure or friction, frequently one or more of
the papillae enlarge. This is accompanied with a thickening of the
layers of the cuticle, which is termed a "callosity," or "corn." These
thickened layers of the cuticle are broad at the top and narrow at the
bottom, and the enlarged mass is conical, with the point innermost.
When pressed upon by a tight shoe, these sensitive papillae cause
pain.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

How is the thickness of the cuticle mainly formed? 641. Describe the
changes of this membrane. Show the necessity of this constant growth.
642. How does moderate and repeated friction affect the cuticle? Give
examples. What is the benefit derived from having the cuticle thus
changed? What is the result if the joints of the feet are subjected to
moderate and continued pressure? What is the form of a "corn"?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

2d. To remove these painful excrescences, take a thick piece of soft
leather, somewhat larger than the corn; in the centre punch a hole of
the size of the summit of the corn, spread the leather with adhesive
plaster, and apply it around the corn. The hole in the leather may be
filled with a paste made of soda and soap, on going to bed. In the
morning, remove it, and wash with warm water. Repeat this for several
successive nights, and the corn will be removed. The only precaution
is, not to repeat the application so as to cause pain.

643. Let a person unaccustomed to manual labor, trundle the hand-cart,
or row a boat, for several successive hours, and the cuticle upon the
palms of the hands, instead of becoming thicker by use, is frequently
separated from the subjacent tissues, by an effusion of serum,
(water,) thrown out by the vessels of the true skin. Had the friction
been moderate, and applied at regular intervals, instead of blisters
being formed upon the inside of the hands, material would have been
thrown out to form new layers upon the lower surface of the cuticle.

644. The cuticle is interesting to us in another point of view,
as being the seat of the color of the skin. The difference of
color between the blonde and the brunette, the European and the
African, lies in the cuticle;--in the deeper, and softer, and
newly-formed layers of that structure. In the whitest skin, the
cells of the cuticle always contain more or less of a peculiar
pigment, incorporated with the elementary granules which enter
into their composition. In the white races, the pigmentary tint
is extremely slight, and less in winter than in the summer season.
In the darker races, on the contrary, it is deep and strongly
