vibratory destruction known to the warfare of that age. Offensive beams,
rods and daggers of frightful power struck and were neutralized by
defensive screens equally capable; the long range and furious dodging
made ordinary solid, or even atomic-explosive projectiles useless; and
both sides were filling all space with such a volume of blanketing
frequencies that such radio-dirigible atomics as were launched could not
be controlled, but darted madly and erratically hither and thither,
finally to be exploded or volatilized harmlessly in mid-space by the
touch of some fiercely insistant, probing beam of force.

Individually, however, the pirate vessels were far more powerful than
those of the fleet, and that superiority soon began to make itself felt.
The power of the smaller ships began to fail as their accumulators
became discharged under the awful drain of the battle, and vessel after
vessel of the Triplanetary fleet was hurled into nothingness by the
concentrated blasts of the pirates' rays. But the Triplanetary forces
had one great advantage. In furious haste the Service men had been
altering the controls of the dirigible atomic torpedoes, so that they
would respond to ultra-wave control; and, few in number though they
were, each was highly effective.

A hard-eyed observer, face almost against his plate and both hands and
both feet manipulating controls, hurled the first torpedo. Propelling
rockets viciously aflame, it twisted and looped around the incandescent
rods of destruction so thickly and starkly outlined, under perfect
control; unaffected by the hideous distortion of all ether-borne
signals. Through a pirate screen it went, and under the terrific blast
of its detonation the entire midsection of the stricken battleship
vanished. It should have been out, cold--but to the amazement of the
observers, both ends kept on fighting with scarcely lessened power! Two
more of the frightful bombs had to be launched--each remaining section
had to be blown to bits--before those terrible beams went out! Not a man
in that great fleet had even an inkling of the truth; that those great
vessels, those awful engines of destruction, did not contain a single
living creature: that they were manned and fought by automatons; robots
controlled by keen-eyed, space-hardened veterans inside the pirates'
planetoid!

But they were to receive an inkling of it. As ship after ship of the
pirate fleet was destroyed, Roger realized that his navy was beaten, and
forthwith all his surviving vessels darted toward the apex of the cone,
where the heaviest battleships were stationed. There each hurled itself
upon a Triplanetary warship, crashing to its own destruction, but in
that destruction insuring the loss of one of the heaviest vessels of the
enemy. Thus passed the _Fearless_, and twenty of the finest space-ships
of the fleet as well. But the ranking officer assumed command, the
war-cone was re-formed, and, yawning maw to the fore, the great
formation shot toward the pirate stronghold, now near at hand. It again
launched its stupendous cylinder of annihilation, but even as the mighty
defensive screens of the planetoid flared into incandescently furious
defense, the battle was interrupted and pirates and Triplanetarians
learned alike that they were not alone in the ether.

Space became suffused with a redly impenetrable opacity, and through
that indescribable pall there came reaching huge arms of force
incredible; writhing, coruscating beams of power which glowed a baleful,
although almost imperceptible, red. A vessel of unheard-of armament and
power, hailing from the then unknown solar system of Nevia, had come to
rest in that space. For months her commander had been searching for one
ultra-precious substance. Now his detectors had found it; and, feeling
neither fear of Triplanetarian weapons nor reluctance to sacrifice those
thousands of Triplanetarian lives, he was about to take it!




CHAPTER 10

WITHIN THE RED VEIL


Nevia, the home planet of the marauding space-ship, would have appeared
peculiar indeed to Terrestrial senses. High in the deep red heavens a
fervent blue sun poured down its flood of brilliant purplish light upon
a world of water. Not a cloud was to be seen in that flaming sky, and
through that dustless atmosphere the eye could see the horizon--a
horizon three times as distant as the one to which we are
accustomed--with a distinctness and clarity impossible in our Terra's
dust-filled air. As that mighty sun dropped below the horizon the sky
would fill suddenly with clouds and rain would fall violently and
steadily until midnight. Then the clouds would vanish as suddenly as
they had come into being, the torrential downpour would cease, and
through that huge world's wonderfully transparent gaseous envelope the
full glory of the firmament would be revealed. Not the firmament as we
know it--for that hot blue sun and Nevia, her one planet-child, were
light-years distant from Old Sol and his numerous brood--but a strange
and glorious firmament containing few constellations familiar to Earthly
eyes.

Out of the vacuum of space a fish-shaped vessel of the void--the vessel
that was to attack so boldly both the massed fleet of Triplanetary and
Roger's planetoid--plunged into the rarefied outer atmosphere, and
crimson beams of force tore shriekingly through the thin air as it
braked its terrific speed. A third of the circumference of Nevia's
mighty globe was traversed before the velocity of the craft could be
reduced sufficiently to make a landing possible. Then, approaching the
twilight zone, the vessel dived vertically downward, and it became
evident that Nevia was neither entirely aqueous nor devoid of
intelligent life. For the blunt nose of the space-ship was pointing
toward what was evidently a half-submerged city, a city whose buildings
were flat-topped, hexagonal towers, exactly alike in size, shape, color,
and material. These buildings were arranged as the cells of a honeycomb
would be if each cell were separated from its neighbors by a relatively
narrow channel of water, and all were built of the same white metal.
Many bridges and more tubes extended through the air from building to
building, and the watery "streets" teemed with swimmers, with surface
craft, and with submarines.

The pilot, stationed immediately below the conical prow of the
space-ship, peered intently through thick windows which afforded
unobstructed vision in every direction. His four huge and contractile
eyes were active, each operating independently in sending its own
message to his peculiar but capable brain. One was watching the
instruments, the others scanned narrowly the immense, swelling curve of
the ship's belly, the water upon which his vessel was to land, and the
floating dock to which it was to be moored. Four hands--if hands they
could be called--manipulated levers and wheels with infinite delicacy of
touch, and with scarcely a splash the immense mass of the Nevian vessel
struck the water and glided to a stop within a foot of its exact berth.

Four mooring bars dropped neatly into their sockets and the
captain-pilot, after locking his controls in neutral, released his
safety straps and leaped lightly from his padded bench to the floor.
Scuttling across the floor and down a runway upon his four short,
powerful, heavily scaled legs, he slipped smoothly into the water and
flashed away, far below the surface. For Nevians are true amphibians.
Their blood is cold; they use with equal comfort and efficiency gills
and lungs for breathing; their scaly bodies are equally at home in the
water or in the air; their broad, flat feet serve equally well for
running about upon a solid surface or for driving their streamlined
bodies through the water at a pace few fishes can equal.

Through the water the Nevian commander darted along, steering his course
accurately by means of his short, vaned tail. Through an opening in a
wall he sped and along a submarine hallway, emerging upon a broad ramp.
He scurried up the incline and into an elevator which lifted him to the
top of the hexagon, directly into the office of the Secretary of
Commerce of all Nevia.

"Welcome, Captain Nerado!" The Secretary waved a tentacular arm and the
visitor sprang lightly upon a softly cushioned bench, where he lay at
ease, facing the official across his low, flat "desk." "We congratulate
you upon the success of your final trial flight. We received all your
reports, even while you were traveling at ten times the velocity of
light. With the last difficulties overcome, you are now ready to start?"

"We are ready," the captain-scientist replied, soberly. "Mechanically,
the ship is as nearly perfect as our finest minds can make her. She is
stocked for two years. All the iron-bearing suns within reach have been
plotted. Everything is ready except the iron. Of course the Council
refused to allow us any of the national supply--how much were you able
to purchase for us in the market?"

"Nearly ten pounds...."

"Ten pounds! Why, the securities we left with you could not have bought
two pounds, even at the price then prevailing!"

"No, but you have friends. Many of us believe in you, and have dipped
into our own resources. You and your fellow scientists of the expedition
have each contributed his entire personal fortune; why should not some
of the rest of us also contribute, as private citizens?"

"Wonderful--we thank you. Ten pounds!" The captain's great triangular
eyes glowed with an intense violet light. "At least a year of cruising.
But ... what if, after all, we should be wrong?"

"In that case you shall have consumed ten pounds of irreplaceable
metal." The Secretary was unmoved. "That is the viewpoint of the Council
and of almost everyone else. It is not the waste of treasure they object
to; it is the fact that ten pounds of iron will be forever lost."

"A high price, truly," the Columbus of Nevia assented. "And after all, I
may be wrong."

"You probably are wrong," his host made startling answer. "It is
practically certain--it is almost a demonstrable mathematical fact--that
no other sun within hundreds of thousands of light-years of our own has
a planet. In all probability Nevia is the only planet in the entire
Universe. We are very probably the only intelligent life in the
Universe. There is only one chance in numberless millions that anywhere
within the cruising range of your newly perfected space-ship there may
be an iron-bearing planet upon which you can effect a landing. There is
a larger chance, however, that you may be able to find a small, cold,
iron-bearing cosmic body--small enough so that you can capture it.
Although there are no mathematics by which to evaluate the probability
of such an occurrence, it is upon that larger chance that some of us are
staking a portion of our wealth. We expect no return whatever, but if
you _should_ by some miracle happen to succeed, what then? Deep seas
being made shallow, civilization extending itself over the globe,
science advancing by leaps and bounds, Nevia becoming populated as she
should be peopled--that, my friend, is a chance well worth taking!"

The Secretary called in a group of guards, who escorted the small
package of priceless metal to the space-ship. Before the massive door
was sealed the friends bade each other farewell.

"... I will keep in touch with you on the ultra-wave," the Captain
concluded. "After all, I do not blame the Council for refusing to allow
the other ship to go out. Ten pounds of iron will be a fearful loss to
the world. If we _should_ find iron, however, see to it that she loses
no time in following us."

"No fear of that! If you find iron she will set out at once, and all
space will soon be full of vessels. Goodbye."

The last opening was sealed and Nerado shot the great vessel into the
air. Up and up, out beyond the last tenuous trace of atmosphere, on and
on through space it flew with ever-increasing velocity until Nevia's
gigantic blue sun had been left so far behind that it became a splendid
blue-white star. Then, projectors cut off to save the precious iron
whose disintegration furnished them power, for week after week Captain
Nerado and his venturesome crew of scientists drifted idly through the
illimitable void.

There is no need to describe in detail Nerado's tremendous voyage.
Suffice it to say that he found a G-type dwarf star possessing
planets--not one planet only, but six ... seven ... eight ... yes, at
least nine! And most of those worlds were themselves centers of
attraction around which were circling one or more worldlets! Nerado
thrilled with joy as he applied a full retarding force, and every
creature aboard that great vessel had to peer into a plate or through a
telescope before he could believe that planets other than Nevia did in
reality exist!

Velocity checked to the merest crawl, as space-speeds go, and with
electro-magnetic detector screens full out, the Nevian vessel crept
toward our sun. Finally the detectors encountered an obstacle, a
conductive substance which the patterns showed conclusively to be
practically pure iron. Iron--an enormous mass of it--floating alone out
in space! Without waiting to investigate the nature, appearance, or
structure of the precious mass, Nerado ordered power into the converters
and drove an enormous softening field of force upon the object--a force
of such a nature that it would condense the metallic iron into an
allotropic modification of much smaller bulk; a red, viscous, extremely
dense and heavy liquid which could be stored conveniently in his tanks.

No sooner had the precious fluid been stored away than the detectors
again broke into an uproar. In one direction was an enormous mass of
iron, scarcely detectable; in another a great number of smaller masses;
in a third an isolated mass, comparatively small in size. Space seemed
to be full of iron, and Nerado drove his most powerful beam toward
distant Nevia and sent an exultant message.

"We have found iron--easily obtained and in unthinkable quantity--not in
fractions of milligrams, but in millions upon unmeasured millions of
tons! Send our sister ship here at once!"

"Nerado!" The captain was called to one of the observation plates as
soon as he had opened his key. "I have been investigating the mass of
iron now nearest us, the small one. It is an artificial structure, a
small space-boat, and there are three creatures in it--monstrosities
certainly, but they must possess some intelligence or they could not be
navigating space."

"What? Impossible!" exclaimed the chief explorer. "Probably, then, the
other was--but no matter, we had to have the iron. Bring the boat in
without converting it, so that we may study at our leisure both the
beings and their mechanisms," and Nerado swung his own visiray beam into
the emergency boat, seeing there the armored figures of Clio Marsden and
the two Triplanetary officers.

"They are indeed intelligent," Nerado commented, as he detected and
silenced Costigan's ultra-beam communicator. "Not, however, as
intelligent as I had supposed," he went on, after studying the peculiar
creatures and their tiny space-ship more in detail. "They have immense
stores of iron, yet use it for nothing other than building material.
They make little and inefficient use of atomic energy. They apparently
have a rudimentary knowledge of ultra-waves, but do not use them
intelligently--they cannot neutralize even these ordinary forces we are
now employing. They are of course more intelligent than the lower
ganoids, or even than some of the higher fishes, but by no stretch of
the imagination can they be compared to us. I am quite relieved--I was
afraid that in my haste I might have slain members of a highly developed
race."

The helpless boat, all her forces neutralized, was brought up close to
the immense flying fish. There flaming knives of force sliced her neatly
into sections and the three rigid armored figures, after being bereft of
their external weapons, were brought through the airlocks and into the
control room, while the pieces of their boat were stored away for future
study. The Nevian scientists first analyzed the air inside the
space-suits of the Terrestrials, then carefully removed the protective
coverings of the captives.

Costigan--fully conscious through it all and now able to move a little,
since the peculiar temporary paralysis was wearing off--braced himself
for he knew not what shock, but it was needless; their grotesque captors
were not torturers. The air, while somewhat more dense than Earth's and
of a peculiar odor, was eminently breathable, and even though the vessel
was motionless in space an almost-normal gravitation gave them a large
fraction of their usual weight.

After the three had been relieved of their pistols and other articles
which the Nevians thought might prove to be weapons, the strange
paralysis was lifted entirely. The Earthly clothing puzzled the captors
immensely, but so strenuous were the objections raised to its removal
that they did not press the point, but fell back to study their find in
detail.

Then faced each other the representatives of the civilizations of two
widely separated solar systems. The Nevians studied the human beings
with interest and curiosity blended largely with loathing and repulsion;
the three Terrestrials regarded the unmoving, expressionless "faces"--if
those coned heads could be said to possess such thing--with horror and
disgust, as well as with other emotions, each according to his type and
training. For to human eyes the Nevian is a fearful thing. Even today
there are few Terrestrials--or Solarians, for that matter--who can look
at a Nevian, eye to eye, without feeling a creeping of the skin and
experiencing a "gone" sensation in the pit of the stomach. The horny,
wrinkled, drought-resisting Martian, whom we all know and rather like,
is a hideous being indeed. The bat-eyed, colorless, hairless,
practically skinless Venerian is worse. But they both are, after all,
remote cousins of Terra's humanity, and we get along with them quite
well whenever we are compelled to visit Mars or Venus. But the Nevians--

The horizontal, flat, fish-like body is not so bad, even supported as it
is by four short, powerful, scaly, flat-footed legs; and terminating as
it does in the weird, four-vaned tail. The neck, even, is endurable,
although it is long and flexible, heavily scaled, and is carried in
whatever eye-wringing loops or curves the owner considers most
convenient or ornamental at the time. Even the smell of a Nevian--a
malodorous reek of over-ripe fish--does in time become tolerable,
especially if sufficiently disguised with creosote, which purely
Terrestrial chemical is the most highly prized perfume of Nevia. But the
head! It is that member that makes the Nevian so appalling to Earthly
eyes, for it is a thing utterly foreign to all Solarian history or
experience. As most Tellurians already know, it is fundamentally a
massive cone, covered with scales, based spearhead-like upon the neck.
Four great sea-green, triangular eyes are spaced equidistant from each
other about half way up the cone. The pupils are contractile at will,
like the eyes of the cat, permitting the Nevian to see equally well in
any ordinary extreme of light or darkness. Immediately below each eye
springs out a long, jointless, boneless, tentacular arm; an arm which at
its extremity divides into eight delicate and sensitive, but very
strong, "fingers." Below each arm is a mouth: a beaked, needle-tusked
orifice of dire potentialities. Finally, under the overhanging edge of
the cone-shaped head are the delicately-frilled organs which serve
either as gills or as nostrils and lungs, as may be desired. To other
Nevians the eyes and other features are highly expressive, but to us
they appear utterly cold and unmoving. Terrestrial senses can detect no
changes of expression in a Nevian's "face." Such were the frightful
beings at whom the three prisoners stared with sinking hearts.

But if we human beings have always considered Nevians grotesque and
repulsive, the feeling has always been mutual. For those "monstrous"
beings are a highly intelligent and extremely sensitive race, and
our--to us--trim and graceful human forms seem to them the very
quintessence of malformation and hideousness.

"Good Heavens, Conway!" Clio exclaimed, shrinking against Costigan as
his left arm flashed around her. "What horrible monstrosities! And they
can't talk--not one of them has made a sound--suppose they can be deaf
and dumb?"

But at the same time Nerado was addressing his fellows.

"What hideous, deformed creatures they are! Truly a low form of life,
even though they do possess some intelligence. They cannot talk, and
have made no signs of having heard our words to them--do you suppose
that they communicate by sight? That those weird contortions of their
peculiarly placed organs serve as speech?"
