the men; while those already packed were wandering loose among the other
animals and men. There was squealing, biting, kicking, and cursing as
animals fouled one another with their loads, or brushed against some
tethered war horse.

Squires were running hither and thither, or aiding their masters to don
armor, lacing helm to hauberk, tying the points of ailette, coude, and
rondel; buckling cuisse and jambe to thigh and leg. The open forges of
armorer and smithy smoked and hissed, and the din of hammer on anvil
rose above the thousand lesser noises of the castle courts, the shouting
of commands, the rattle of steel, the ringing of iron hoof on stone
flags, as these artificers hastened, sweating and cursing, through the
eleventh hour repairs to armor, lance and sword, or to reset a shoe upon
a refractory, plunging beast.

Finally the captains came, armored cap-a-pie, and with them some
semblance of order and quiet out of chaos and bedlam. First the sumpter
beasts, all loaded now, were driven, with a strong escort, to the downs
below the castle and there held to await the column. Then, one by one,
the companies were formed and marched out beneath fluttering pennon and
waving banner to the martial strains of bugle and trumpet.

Last of all came the catapults, those great engines of destruction which
hurled two hundred pound boulders with mighty force against the walls of
beleaguered castles.

And after all had passed through the great gates, Norman of Torn and the
little old man walked side by side from the castle building and mounted
their chargers held by two squires in the center of the courtyard.

Below, on the downs, the column was forming in marching order, and as
the two rode out to join it, the little old man turned to Norman of
Torn, saying,

"I had almost forgot a message I have for you, my son. Father Claude
sent word last evening that he had been called suddenly south, and
that some appointment you had with him must therefore be deferred
until later. He said that you would understand." The old man eyed his
companion narrowly through the eye slit in his helm.

"'Tis passing strange," said Norman of Torn but that was his only
comment. And so they joined the column which moved slowly down toward
the valley and as they passed the cottage of Father Claude, Norman of
Torn saw that the door was closed and that there was no sign of life
about the place. A wave of melancholy passed over him, for the deserted
aspect of the little flower-hedged cote seemed dismally prophetic of a
near future without the beaming, jovial face of his friend and adviser.

Scarcely had the horde of Torn passed out of sight down the east edge of
the valley ere a party of richly dressed knights, coming from the south
by another road along the west bank of the river, crossed over and drew
rein before the cottage of Father Claude.

As their hails were unanswered, one of the party dismounted to enter the
building.

"Have a care, My Lord," cried his companion. "This be over-close to the
Castle Torn and there may easily be more treachery than truth in the
message which called thee thither."

"Fear not," replied Simon de Montfort, "the Devil of Torn hath no
quarrel with me." Striding up the little path, he knocked loudly on the
door. Receiving no reply, he pushed it open and stepped into the dim
light of the interior. There he found his host, the good father Claude,
stretched upon his back on the floor, the breast of his priestly robes
dark with dried and clotted blood.

Turning again to the door, De Montfort summoned a couple of his
companions.

"The secret of the little lost prince of England be a dangerous burden
for a man to carry," he said. "But this convinces me more than any words
the priest might have uttered that the abductor be still in England, and
possibly Prince Richard also."

A search of the cottage revealed the fact that it had been ransacked
thoroughly by the assassin. The contents of drawer and box littered
every room, though that the object was not rich plunder was evidenced by
many pieces of jewelry and money which remained untouched.

"The true object lies here," said De Montfort, pointing to the open
hearth upon which lay the charred remains of many papers and documents.
"All written evidence has been destroyed, but hold what lieth here
beneath the table?" and, stooping, the Earl of Leicester picked up
a sheet of parchment on which a letter had been commenced. It was
addressed to him, and he read it aloud:

Lest some unforeseen chance should prevent the accomplishment of our
meeting, My Lord Earl, I send thee this by one who knoweth not either
its contents or the suspicions which I will narrate herein.

He who bareth this letter, I truly believe to be the lost Prince
Richard. Question him closely, My Lord, and I know that thou wilt be as
positive as I.

Of his past, thou know nearly as much as I, though thou may not know the
wondrous chivalry and true nobility of character of him men call!!!!!

Here the letter stopped, evidently cut short by the dagger of the
assassin.

"Mon Dieu! The damnable luck!" cried De Montfort, "but a second more
and the name we have sought for twenty years would have been writ.
Didst ever see such hellish chance as plays into the hand of the fiend
incarnate since that long gone day when his sword pierced the heart of
Lady Maud by the postern gate beside the Thames? The Devil himself must
watch o'er him.

"There be naught more we can do here," he continued. "I should have been
on my way to Fletching hours since. Come, my gentlemen, we will ride
south by way of Leicester and have the good Fathers there look to the
decent burial of this holy man."

The party mounted and rode rapidly away. Noon found them at Leicester,
and three days later, they rode into the baronial camp at Fletching.

At almost the same hour, the monks of the Abbey of Leicester performed
the last rites of Holy Church for the peace of the soul of Father Claude
and consigned his clay to the churchyard.

And thus another innocent victim of an insatiable hate and vengeance
which had been born in the King's armory twenty years before passed from
the eyes of men.




CHAPTER XVI

While Norman of Torn and his thousand fighting men marched slowly south
on the road toward Dover, the army of Simon de Montfort was preparing
for its advance upon Lewes, where King Henry, with his son Prince
Edward, and his brother, Prince Richard, King of the Romans, together
with the latter's son, were entrenched with their forces, sixty thousand
strong.

Before sunrise on a May morning in the year 1264, the barons' army set
out from its camp at Fletching, nine miles from Lewes and, marching
through dense forests, reached a point two miles from the city,
unobserved.

From here, they ascended the great ridge of the hills up the valley
Combe, the projecting shoulder of the Downs covering their march from
the town. The King's party, however, had no suspicion that an attack was
imminent and, in direct contrast to the methods of the baronial troops,
had spent the preceding night in drunken revelry, so that they were
quite taken by surprise.

It is true that Henry had stationed an outpost upon the summit of the
hill in advance of Lewes, but so lax was discipline in his army that
the soldiers, growing tired of the duty, had abandoned the post toward
morning, and returned to town, leaving but a single man on watch. He,
left alone, had promptly fallen asleep, and thus De Montfort's men found
and captured him within sight of the bell-tower of the Priory of Lewes,
where the King and his royal allies lay peacefully asleep, after their
night of wine and dancing and song.

Had it not been for an incident which now befell, the baronial army
would doubtless have reached the city without being detected, but it
happened that, the evening before, Henry had ordered a foraging party to
ride forth at daybreak, as provisions for both men and beasts were low.

This party had scarcely left the city behind them ere they fell into the
hands of the baronial troops. Though some few were killed or captured,
those who escaped were sufficient to arouse the sleeping army of the
royalists to the close proximity and gravity of their danger.

By this time, the four divisions of De Montfort's army were in full view
of the town. On the left were the Londoners under Nicholas de Segrave;
in the center rode De Clare, with John Fitz-John and William de
Monchensy, at the head of a large division which occupied that branch of
the hill which descended a gentle, unbroken slope to the town. The right
wing was commanded by Henry de Montfort, the oldest son of Simon de
Montfort, and with him was the third son, Guy, as well as John de
Burgh and Humphrey de Bohun. The reserves were under Simon de Montfort
himself.

Thus was the flower of English chivalry pitted against the King and his
party, which included many nobles whose kinsmen were with De Montfort;
so that brother faced brother, and father fought against son, on that
bloody Wednesday, before the old town of Lewes.

Prince Edward was the first of the royal party to take the field and, as
he issued from the castle with his gallant company, banners and
pennons streaming in the breeze and burnished armor and flashing blade
scintillating in the morning sunlight, he made a gorgeous and impressive
spectacle as he hurled himself upon the Londoners, whom he had selected
for attack because of the affront they had put upon his mother that day
at London on the preceding July.

So vicious was his onslaught that the poorly armed and unprotected
burghers, unused to the stern game of war, fell like sheep before the
iron men on their iron shod horses. The long lances, the heavy maces,
the six-bladed battle axes, and the well-tempered swords of the knights
played havoc among them, so that the rout was complete; but, not content
with victory, Prince Edward must glut his vengeance, and so he pursued
the citizens for miles, butchering great numbers of them, while many
more were drowned in attempting to escape across the Ouse.

The left wing of the royalist army, under the King of the Romans and his
gallant son, was not so fortunate, for they met a determined resistance
at the hands of Henry de Montfort.

The central divisions of the two armies seemed well matched also, and
thus the battle continued throughout the day, the greatest advantage
appearing to lie with the King's troops. Had Edward not gone so far
afield in pursuit of the Londoners, the victory might easily have been
on the side of the royalists early in the day, but by thus eliminating
his division after defeating a part of De Montfort's army, it was as
though neither of these two forces had been engaged.

The wily Simon de Montfort had attempted a little ruse which centered
the fighting for a time upon the crest of one of the hills. He had
caused his car to be placed there, with the tents and luggage of many of
his leaders, under a small guard, so that the banners there displayed,
together with the car, led the King of the Romans to believe that the
Earl himself lay there, for Simon de Montfort had but a month or so
before suffered an injury to his hip when his horse fell with him, and
the royalists were not aware that he had recovered sufficiently to again
mount a horse.

And so it was that the forces under the King of the Romans pushed back
the men of Henry de Montfort, and ever and ever closer to the car came
the royalists until they were able to fall upon it, crying out insults
against the old Earl and commanding him to come forth. And when they had
killed the occupants of the car, they found that Simon de Montfort
was not among them, but instead he had fastened there three important
citizens of London, old men and influential, who had opposed him, and
aided and abetted the King.

So great was the wrath of Prince Richard, King of the Romans, that
he fell upon the baronial troops with renewed vigor, and slowly but
steadily beat them back from the town.

This sight, together with the routing of the enemy's left wing by Prince
Edward, so cheered and inspired the royalists that the two remaining
divisions took up the attack with refreshed spirits so that, what a
moment before had hung in the balance, now seemed an assured victory for
King Henry.

Both De Montfort and the King had thrown themselves into the melee
with all their reserves. No longer was there semblance of organization.
Division was inextricably bemingled with division; friend and foe formed
a jumbled confusion of fighting, cursing chaos, over which whipped the
angry pennons and banners of England's noblest houses.

That the mass seemed moving ever away from Lewes indicated that the
King's arms were winning toward victory, and so it might have been had
not a new element been infused into the battle; for now upon the brow of
the hill to the north of them appeared a great horde of armored knights,
and as they came into position where they could view the battle, the
leader raised his sword on high, and, as one man, the thousand broke
into a mad charge.

Both De Montfort and the King ceased fighting as they gazed upon this
body of fresh, well armored, well mounted reinforcements. Whom might
they be? To which side owned they allegiance? And, then, as the
black falcon wing on the banners of the advancing horsemen became
distinguishable, they saw that it was the Outlaw of Torn.

Now he was close upon them, and had there been any doubt before, the
wild battle cry which rang from a thousand fierce throats turned the
hopes of the royalists cold within their breasts.

"For De Montfort! For De Montfort!" and "Down with Henry!" rang loud and
clear above the din of battle.

Instantly the tide turned, and it was by only the barest chance that
the King himself escaped capture, and regained the temporary safety of
Lewes.

The King of the Romans took refuge within an old mill, and here it was
that Norman of Torn found him barricaded. When the door was broken down,
the outlaw entered and dragged the monarch forth with his own hand to
the feet of De Montfort, and would have put him to death had not the
Earl intervened.

"I have yet to see my mark upon the forehead of a King," said Norman of
Torn, "and the temptation be great; but, an you ask it, My Lord Earl,
his life shall be yours to do with as you see fit."

"You have fought well this day, Norman of Torn," replied De Montfort.
"Verily do I believe we owe our victory to you alone; so do not mar the
record of a noble deed by wanton acts of atrocity."

"It is but what they had done to me, were I the prisoner instead,"
retorted the outlaw.

And Simon de Montfort could not answer that, for it was but the simple
truth.

"How comes it, Norman of Torn," asked De Montfort as they rode together
toward Lewes, "that you threw the weight of your sword upon the side of
the barons? Be it because you hate the King more?"

"I do not know that I hate either, My Lord Earl," replied the outlaw. "I
have been taught since birth to hate you all, but why I should hate
was never told me. Possibly it be but a bad habit that will yield to my
maturer years.

"As for why I fought as I did today," he continued, "it be because the
heart of Lady Bertrade, your daughter, be upon your side. Had it been
with the King, her uncle, Norman of Torn had fought otherwise than
he has this day. So you see, My Lord Earl, you owe me no gratitude.
Tomorrow I may be pillaging your friends as of yore."

Simon de Montfort turned to look at him, but the blank wall of his
lowered visor gave no sign of the thoughts that passed beneath.

"You do much for a mere friendship, Norman of Torn," said the Earl
coldly, "and I doubt me not but that my daughter has already forgot you.
An English noblewoman, preparing to become a princess of France, does
not have much thought to waste upon highwaymen." His tone, as well as
his words were studiously arrogant and insulting, for it had stung the
pride of this haughty noble to think that a low-born knave boasted the
friendship of his daughter.

Norman of Torn made no reply, and could the Earl of Leicester have seen
his face, he had been surprised to note that instead of grim hatred and
resentment, the features of the Outlaw of Torn were drawn in lines of
pain and sorrow; for he read in the attitude of the father what he might
expect to receive at the hands of the daughter.




CHAPTER XVII

When those of the royalists who had not deserted the King and fled
precipitately toward the coast had regained the castle and the Priory,
the city was turned over to looting and rapine. In this, Norman of Torn
and his men did not participate, but camped a little apart from the town
until daybreak the following morning, when they started east, toward
Dover.

They marched until late the following evening, passing some twenty miles
out of their way to visit a certain royalist stronghold. The troops
stationed there had fled, having been appraised some few hours earlier,
by fugitives, of the defeat of Henry's army at Lewes.

Norman of Torn searched the castle for the one he sought, but, finding
it entirely deserted, continued his eastward march. Some few miles
farther on, he overtook a party of deserting royalist soldiery, and from
them he easily, by dint of threats, elicited the information he desired:
the direction taken by the refugees from the deserted castle, their
number, and as close a description of the party as the soldiers could
give.

Again he was forced to change the direction of his march, this
time heading northward into Kent. It was dark before he reached his
destination, and saw before him the familiar outlines of the castle
of Roger de Leybourn. This time, the outlaw threw his fierce horde
completely around the embattled pile before he advanced with a score of
sturdy ruffians to reconnoiter.

Making sure that the drawbridge was raised, and that he could not hope
for stealthy entrance there, he crept silently to the rear of the great
building and there, among the bushes, his men searched for the ladder
that Norman of Torn had seen the knavish servant of My Lady Claudia
unearth, that the outlaw might visit the Earl of Buckingham,
unannounced.

Presently they found it, and it was the work of but a moment to raise
it to the sill of the low window, so that soon the twenty stood beside
their chief within the walls of Leybourn.

Noiselessly, they moved through the halls and corridors of the castle
until a maid, bearing a great pasty from the kitchen, turned a sudden
corner and bumped full into the Outlaw of Torn. With a shriek that might
have been heard at Lewes, she dropped the dish upon the stone floor and,
turning, ran, still shrieking at the top of her lungs, straight for the
great dining hall.

So close behind her came the little band of outlaws that scarce had the
guests arisen in consternation from the table at the shrill cries of the
girl than Norman of Torn burst through the great door with twenty drawn
swords at his back.

The hall was filled with knights and gentlewomen and house servants and
men-at-arms. Fifty swords flashed from fifty scabbards as the men of the
party saw the hostile appearance of their visitors, but before a blow
could be struck, Norman of Torn, grasping his sword in his right hand,
raised his left aloft in a gesture for silence.

"Hold!" he cried, and, turning directly to Roger de Leybourn, "I have
no quarrel with thee, My Lord, but again I come for a guest within thy
halls. Methinks thou hast as bad taste in whom thou entertains as didst
