of men there were none.

The day seemed, by contrast with my recent confinement, dazzlingly
bright, the sky a glowing blue.  A gentle breeze kept the red weed
that covered every scrap of unoccupied ground gently swaying.  And oh!
the sweetness of the air!



CHAPTER SIX

THE WORK OF FIFTEEN DAYS


For some time I stood tottering on the mound regardless of my
safety.  Within that noisome den from which I had emerged I had
thought with a narrow intensity only of our immediate security.  I had
not realised what had been happening to the world, had not anticipated
this startling vision of unfamiliar things.  I had expected to see
Sheen in ruins--I found about me the landscape, weird and lurid, of
another planet.

For that moment I touched an emotion beyond the common range of
men, yet one that the poor brutes we dominate know only too well.  I
felt as a rabbit might feel returning to his burrow and suddenly
confronted by the work of a dozen busy navvies digging the foundations
of a house.  I felt the first inkling of a thing that presently grew
quite clear in my mind, that oppressed me for many days, a sense of
dethronement, a persuasion that I was no longer a master, but an
animal among the animals, under the Martian heel.  With us it would be
as with them, to lurk and watch, to run and hide; the fear and empire
of man had passed away.

But so soon as this strangeness had been realised it passed, and my
dominant motive became the hunger of my long and dismal fast.  In the
direction away from the pit I saw, beyond a red-covered wall, a patch
of garden ground unburied.  This gave me a hint, and I went knee-deep,
and sometimes neck-deep, in the red weed.  The density of the
weed gave me a reassuring sense of hiding.  The wall was some six feet
high, and when I attempted to clamber it I found I could not lift my
feet to the crest.  So I went along by the side of it, and came to a
corner and a rockwork that enabled me to get to the top, and tumble
into the garden I coveted.  Here I found some young onions, a couple
of gladiolus bulbs, and a quantity of immature carrots, all of which I
secured, and, scrambling over a ruined wall, went on my way through
scarlet and crimson trees towards Kew--it was like walking through an
avenue of gigantic blood drops--possessed with two ideas: to get more
food, and to limp, as soon and as far as my strength permitted, out of
this accursed unearthly region of the pit.

Some way farther, in a grassy place, was a group of mushrooms which
also I devoured, and then I came upon a brown sheet of flowing shallow
water, where meadows used to be.  These fragments of nourishment served
only to whet my hunger.  At first I was surprised at this flood in a
hot, dry summer, but afterwards I discovered that it was caused by the
tropical exuberance of the red weed.  Directly this extraordinary
growth encountered water it straightway became gigantic and of
unparalleled fecundity.  Its seeds were simply poured down into the
water of the Wey and Thames, and its swiftly growing and Titanic water
fronds speedily choked both those rivers.

At Putney, as I afterwards saw, the bridge was almost lost in a
tangle of this weed, and at Richmond, too, the Thames water poured in
a broad and shallow stream across the meadows of Hampton and
Twickenham.  As the water spread the weed followed them, until the
ruined villas of the Thames valley were for a time lost in this red
swamp, whose margin I explored, and much of the desolation the
Martians had caused was concealed.

In the end the red weed succumbed almost as quickly as it had
spread.  A cankering disease, due, it is believed, to the action of
certain bacteria, presently seized upon it.  Now by the action of
natural selection, all terrestrial plants have acquired a resisting
power against bacterial diseases--they never succumb without a severe
struggle, but the red weed rotted like a thing already dead.  The
fronds became bleached, and then shrivelled and brittle.  They broke
off at the least touch, and the waters that had stimulated their early
growth carried their last vestiges out to sea.

My first act on coming to this water was, of course, to slake my
thirst.  I drank a great deal of it and, moved by an impulse, gnawed
some fronds of red weed; but they were watery, and had a sickly,
metallic taste.  I found the water was sufficiently shallow for me to
wade securely, although the red weed impeded my feet a little; but the
flood evidently got deeper towards the river, and I turned back to
Mortlake.  I managed to make out the road by means of occasional ruins
of its villas and fences and lamps, and so presently I got out of this
spate and made my way to the hill going up towards Roehampton and came
out on Putney Common.

Here the scenery changed from the strange and unfamiliar to the
wreckage of the familiar: patches of ground exhibited the devastation
of a cyclone, and in a few score yards I would come upon perfectly
undisturbed spaces, houses with their blinds trimly drawn and doors
closed, as if they had been left for a day by the owners, or as if
their inhabitants slept within.  The red weed was less abundant; the
tall trees along the lane were free from the red creeper.  I hunted
for food among the trees, finding nothing, and I also raided a couple
of silent houses, but they had already been broken into and ransacked.
I rested for the remainder of the daylight in a shrubbery, being, in
my enfeebled condition, too fatigued to push on.

All this time I saw no human beings, and no signs of the Martians.
I encountered a couple of hungry-looking dogs, but both hurried
circuitously away from the advances I made them.  Near Roehampton I
had seen two human skeletons--not bodies, but skeletons, picked
clean--and in the wood by me I found the crushed and scattered bones
of several cats and rabbits and the skull of a sheep.  But though I
gnawed parts of these in my mouth, there was nothing to be got from
them.

After sunset I struggled on along the road towards Putney, where I
think the Heat-Ray must have been used for some reason.  And in the
garden beyond Roehampton I got a quantity of immature potatoes,
sufficient to stay my hunger.  From this garden one looked down upon
Putney and the river.  The aspect of the place in the dusk was
singularly desolate: blackened trees, blackened, desolate ruins, and
down the hill the sheets of the flooded river, red-tinged with the
weed.  And over all--silence.  It filled me with indescribable terror
to think how swiftly that desolating change had come.

For a time I believed that mankind had been swept out of existence,
and that I stood there alone, the last man left alive.  Hard by the
top of Putney Hill I came upon another skeleton, with the arms
dislocated and removed several yards from the rest of the body.  As I
proceeded I became more and more convinced that the extermination of
mankind was, save for such stragglers as myself, already accomplished
in this part of the world.  The Martians, I thought, had gone on and
left the country desolated, seeking food elsewhere.  Perhaps even now
they were destroying Berlin or Paris, or it might be they had gone
northward.



CHAPTER SEVEN

THE MAN ON PUTNEY HILL


I spent that night in the inn that stands at the top of Putney
Hill, sleeping in a made bed for the first time since my flight to
Leatherhead.  I will not tell the needless trouble I had breaking into
that house--afterwards I found the front door was on the latch--nor
how I ransacked every room for food, until just on the verge of
despair, in what seemed to me to be a servant's bedroom, I found a
rat-gnawed crust and two tins of pineapple.  The place had been
already searched and emptied.  In the bar I afterwards found some
biscuits and sandwiches that had been overlooked.  The latter I could
not eat, they were too rotten, but the former not only stayed my
hunger, but filled my pockets.  I lit no lamps, fearing some Martian
might come beating that part of London for food in the night.  Before
I went to bed I had an interval of restlessness, and prowled from
window to window, peering out for some sign of these monsters.  I
slept little.  As I lay in bed I found myself thinking consecutively--a
thing I do not remember to have done since my last argument with the
curate.  During all the intervening time my mental condition had been
a hurrying succession of vague emotional states or a sort of stupid
receptivity.  But in the night my brain, reinforced, I suppose, by the
food I had eaten, grew clear again, and I thought.

Three things struggled for possession of my mind: the killing of
the curate, the whereabouts of the Martians, and the possible fate of
my wife.  The former gave me no sensation of horror or remorse to
recall; I saw it simply as a thing done, a memory infinitely
disagreeable but quite without the quality of remorse.  I saw myself
then as I see myself now, driven step by step towards that hasty blow,
the creature of a sequence of accidents leading inevitably to that.  I
felt no condemnation; yet the memory, static, unprogressive, haunted
me.  In the silence of the night, with that sense of the nearness of
God that sometimes comes into the stillness and the darkness, I stood
my trial, my only trial, for that moment of wrath and fear.  I
retraced every step of our conversation from the moment when I had
found him crouching beside me, heedless of my thirst, and pointing to
the fire and smoke that streamed up from the ruins of Weybridge.  We
had been incapable of co-operation--grim chance had taken no heed of
that.  Had I foreseen, I should have left him at Halliford.  But I did
not foresee; and crime is to foresee and do.  And I set this down as I
have set all this story down, as it was.  There were no witnesses--all
these things I might have concealed.  But I set it down, and the
reader must form his judgment as he will.

And when, by an effort, I had set aside that picture of a prostrate
body, I faced the problem of the Martians and the fate of my wife.  For
the former I had no data; I could imagine a hundred things, and so,
unhappily, I could for the latter.  And suddenly that night became
terrible.  I found myself sitting up in bed, staring at the dark.  I
found myself praying that the Heat-Ray might have suddenly and
painlessly struck her out of being.  Since the night of my return from
Leatherhead I had not prayed.  I had uttered prayers, fetish prayers,
had prayed as heathens mutter charms when I was in extremity; but now
I prayed indeed, pleading steadfastly and sanely, face to face with
the darkness of God.  Strange night!  Strangest in this, that so soon
as dawn had come, I, who had talked with God, crept out of the house
like a rat leaving its hiding place--a creature scarcely larger, an
inferior animal, a thing that for any passing whim of our masters
might be hunted and killed.  Perhaps they also prayed confidently to
God.  Surely, if we have learned nothing else, this war has taught us
pity--pity for those witless souls that suffer our dominion.

The morning was bright and fine, and the eastern sky glowed pink,
and was fretted with little golden clouds.  In the road that runs from
the top of Putney Hill to Wimbledon was a number of poor vestiges of
the panic torrent that must have poured Londonward on the Sunday night
after the fighting began.  There was a little two-wheeled cart
inscribed with the name of Thomas Lobb, Greengrocer, New Malden, with
a smashed wheel and an abandoned tin trunk; there was a straw hat
trampled into the now hardened mud, and at the top of West Hill a lot
of blood-stained glass about the overturned water trough.  My
movements were languid, my plans of the vaguest.  I had an idea of
going to Leatherhead, though I knew that there I had the poorest
chance of finding my wife.  Certainly, unless death had overtaken them
suddenly, my cousins and she would have fled thence; but it seemed to
me I might find or learn there whither the Surrey people had fled.  I
knew I wanted to find my wife, that my heart ached for her and the
world of men, but I had no clear idea how the finding might be done.  I
was also sharply aware now of my intense loneliness.  From the corner
I went, under cover of a thicket of trees and bushes, to the edge of
Wimbledon Common, stretching wide and far.

That dark expanse was lit in patches by yellow gorse and broom;
there was no red weed to be seen, and as I prowled, hesitating, on the
verge of the open, the sun rose, flooding it all with light and
vitality.  I came upon a busy swarm of little frogs in a swampy place
among the trees.  I stopped to look at them, drawing a lesson from
their stout resolve to live.  And presently, turning suddenly, with an
odd feeling of being watched, I beheld something crouching amid a
clump of bushes.  I stood regarding this.  I made a step towards it,
and it rose up and became a man armed with a cutlass.  I approached
him slowly.  He stood silent and motionless, regarding me.

As I drew nearer I perceived he was dressed in clothes as dusty and
filthy as my own; he looked, indeed, as though he had been dragged
through a culvert.  Nearer, I distinguished the green slime of ditches
mixing with the pale drab of dried clay and shiny, coaly patches.  His
black hair fell over his eyes, and his face was dark and dirty and
sunken, so that at first I did not recognise him.  There was a red cut
across the lower part of his face.

"Stop!" he cried, when I was within ten yards of him, and I
stopped.  His voice was hoarse.  "Where do you come from?" he said.

I thought, surveying him.

"I come from Mortlake," I said.  "I was buried near the pit the
Martians made about their cylinder.  I have worked my way out and
escaped."

"There is no food about here," he said.  "This is my country.  All
this hill down to the river, and back to Clapham, and up to the edge
of the common.  There is only food for one.  Which way are you going?"

I answered slowly.

"I don't know," I said.  "I have been buried in the ruins of a
house thirteen or fourteen days.  I don't know what has happened."

He looked at me doubtfully, then started, and looked with a changed
expression.

"I've no wish to stop about here," said I.  "I think I shall go to
Leatherhead, for my wife was there."

He shot out a pointing finger.

"It is you," said he; "the man from Woking.  And you weren't killed
at Weybridge?"

I recognised him at the same moment.

"You are the artilleryman who came into my garden."

"Good luck!" he said.  "We are lucky ones!  Fancy _you_!"  He put out
a hand, and I took it.  "I crawled up a drain," he said. "But they
didn't kill everyone.  And after they went away I got off towards
Walton across the fields.  But---- It's not sixteen days altogether--and
your hair is grey."  He looked over his shoulder suddenly.  "Only
a rook," he said.  "One gets to know that birds have shadows these
days.  This is a bit open.  Let us crawl under those bushes and talk."

"Have you seen any Martians?" I said.  "Since I crawled out----"

"They've gone away across London," he said.  "I guess they've got a
bigger camp there.  Of a night, all over there, Hampstead way, the sky
is alive with their lights.  It's like a great city, and in the glare
you can just see them moving.  By daylight you can't.  But nearer--I
haven't seen them--" (he counted on his fingers) "five days.  Then I
saw a couple across Hammersmith way carrying something big.  And the
night before last"--he stopped and spoke impressively--"it was just a
matter of lights, but it was something up in the air.  I believe
they've built a flying-machine, and are learning to fly."

I stopped, on hands and knees, for we had come to the bushes.

"Fly!"

"Yes," he said, "fly."

I went on into a little bower, and sat down.

"It is all over with humanity," I said.  "If they can do that they
will simply go round the world."

He nodded.

"They will.  But---- It will relieve things over here a bit.  And
besides----"  He looked at me.  "Aren't you satisfied it _is_ up with
humanity?  I am.  We're down; we're beat."

I stared.  Strange as it may seem, I had not arrived at this fact--a
fact perfectly obvious so soon as he spoke.  I had still held a
vague hope; rather, I had kept a lifelong habit of mind.  He repeated
his words, "We're beat."  They carried absolute conviction.

"It's all over," he said.  "They've lost _one_--just _one_.  And they've
made their footing good and crippled the greatest power in the world.
They've walked over us.  The death of that one at Weybridge was an
accident.  And these are only pioneers.  They kept on coming.  These
green stars--I've seen none these five or six days, but I've no doubt
they're falling somewhere every night.  Nothing's to be done.  We're
under! We're beat!"

I made him no answer.  I sat staring before me, trying in vain to
devise some countervailing thought.

"This isn't a war," said the artilleryman.  "It never was a war,
any more than there's war between man and ants."

Suddenly I recalled the night in the observatory.

"After the tenth shot they fired no more--at least, until the first
cylinder came."

"How do you know?" said the artilleryman.  I explained.  He thought.
"Something wrong with the gun," he said.  "But what if there is?
They'll get it right again.  And even if there's a delay, how can it
alter the end?  It's just men and ants.  There's the ants builds their
cities, live their lives, have wars, revolutions, until the men want
them out of the way, and then they go out of the way.  That's what we
are now--just ants.  Only----"

"Yes," I said.

"We're eatable ants."
