to Chicago."

Chicago--headquarters for Mob Territory. The ore ship had been on a
return trip to Chicago when alerted somehow by the Navy to intercept the
fugitives. _Why?_

"Down there," one of the men gestured briskly with a gun. They climbed
down a ladder into a dark, oily cavern fitfully lit by a flash in
Regan's hand.

"Make yourselves comfortable," Regan told them. "If you get a headache,
don't worry. We were carrying some avgas on the outward run." The flash
winked out and a door clanged on them.

"I can't believe it," Charles said. "That's a top Mob man? Couldn't you
be mistaken?" He groped in the dark and found her. The place did reek of
gasoline.

She clung to him and said: "Hold me, Charles.... Yes that's Jimmy Regan.

"That's what will become top man in the Mob. Jimmy's a charmer at a Las
Vegas Hotel. Jimmy's a gourmet when he orders at the Pump Room and he's
trying to overawe you. Jimmy plays polo too, but he's crippled three of
his own team-mates because he's not very good at it. I kept telling
myself whenever I ran into him that he was just an accident, the Mob
could survive him. But his father acts--funny. There's something with
them, there's some--

"They roll out the carpet when you show up but the people around them
are afraid of them. There's a story I never believed--but I believe it
now. What would happen if my uncle pulled out a pistol and began
screaming and shot a waiter: Jimmy's father did it, they tell me. And
nothing happened except that the waiter was dragged away and everybody
said it was a good thing Mr. Regan saw him reach for his gun and shot
him first. Only the waiter didn't have any gun.

"I saw Jimmy last three years ago. I haven't been in Mob Territory
since. I didn't like it there. Now I know why. Give Mob Territory enough
time and it'll be like New Portsmouth. Something went wrong with them.
We have the Treaty of Las Vegas and a hundred years of peace and there
aren't many people going back and forth between Syndic and Mob except
for a few high-ups like me who have to circulate. Manners. So you pay
duty calls and shut your eyes to what they're really like.

"_This_ is what they're like. This dark, damp stinking compartment. And
my uncle--and all the Falcaros--and you--and I--we aren't like them. Are
we? _Are we?_" Her fingers bit into his arms. She was shaking.

"Easy," he soothed her. "Easy, easy. We're all right. We'll be all
right. I think I've got it figured out. This must be some private
gun-running Jimmy's gone in for. Loaded an ore boat with avgas and ammo
and ran it up the Seaway. If anybody in Syndic Territory gave a damn
they thought it was a load of ore for New Orleans via the Atlantic and
the Gulf. But Jimmy ran his load to Ireland or Iceland, H.Q. A little
private flier of his. He wouldn't dare harm us. There's the Treaty and
you're a Falcaro."

"Treaty," she said. "I tell you they're all in it. Now that I've seen
the Government in action I understand what I saw in Mob Territory.
They've gone rotten, that's all. They've gone rotten. The way he treated
you, because he thought you didn't have his rank! Sometimes my uncle's
high-handed, sometimes he tells a person off, sometimes he lets him know
he's top man in the Syndic and doesn't propose to let anybody teach him
how to suck eggs. But the spirit's different. In the Syndic it's parent
to child. In the Mob it's master to slave. Not based on age, not based
on achievement, but based on the accident of birth. You tell me 'You're
a Falcaro' and that packs weight. Why? Not because I was born a Falcaro
but because they let me stay a Falcaro. If I hadn't been brainy and
quick, they'd have adopted me out before I was ten. They don't do that
in Mob Territory. Whatever chance sends a Regan is a Regan then and
forever. Even if it's a paranoid constitutional inferior like Jimmy's
father. Even if it's a giggling pervert like Jimmy.

"God, Charles, I'm scared.

"At last I know these people and I'm scared. You'd have to see Chicago
to know why. The lakefront palaces, finer than anything in New York.
Regan Memorial Plaza, finer than Scratch Sheet Square--great gilded
marble figures, a hundred running yards of heroic frieze. But the hovels
you see only by chance! Gray brick towers dating from the Third Fire!
The children with faces like weasels, the men with faces like hogs, the
women with figures like beer barrels and all of them glaring at you when
you drive past as if they could cut your throat with joy. I never
understood the look in their eyes until now, and you'll never begin to
understand what I'm talking about until you see their eyes...."

Charles revolted against the idea. It was too gross to go down. It
didn't square with his acquired picture of life in North America and
therefore Lee Falcaro must be somehow mistaken or hysterical. "There,"
he murmured, stroking her hair. "We'll be all right. We'll be all
right." He tried to soothe her.

She twisted out of his arms and raged: "I _won't_ be humored. They're
mad, I tell you. Dick Reiner was right. We've got to wipe out the
Government. But Frank Taylor was right too. We've got to blast the Mob
before they blast us. They've died and decayed into something too
horrible to bear. If we let them stay on the continent, with us their
stink will infect us and poison us to death. We've got to do something.
We've got to do something."

"What?"

It stopped her cold. After a minute she uttered a shaky laugh. "The fat,
sloppy, happy Syndic," she said, "sitting around while the wolves
overseas and the maniacs across the Mississippi are waiting to jump.
Yes--do what?"

Charles Orsino was not good at arguments or indeed at any abstract
thinking. He knew it. He knew the virtues that had commended him to F.
W. Taylor were his energy and an off-hand talent for getting along with
people. But something rang terribly false in Lee's words.

"That kind of thinking doesn't get you anywhere, Lee," he said slowly.
"I didn't absorb much from Uncle Frank, but I did absorb this: you run
into trouble if you make up stories about the world and then act as if
they're true. The Syndic isn't somebody sitting around. The Government
isn't wolves. The Mobsters aren't maniacs. And they aren't waiting to
jump on the Syndic. The Syndic isn't anything that's jumpable. It's some
people and their morale and credit."

"Faith is a beautiful thing," Lee Falcaro said bitterly. "Where'd you
get yours?"

"From the people I knew and worked with. Numbers-runners, bookies,
sluts. Decent citizens."

"And what about the scared and unhappy ones in Riveredge? That sow of a
woman in the D.A.R. who smuggled me aboard a coast raider? The neurotics
and psychotics I found more and more of when I invalidated the Lieberman
findings? Charles, the North American Government didn't scare me
especially. But the thought that they're lined up with a continental
power does. It scares me damnably because it'll be three against one.
Against the Syndic, the Mob, the Government--and our own unbalanced
citizens."

Uncle Frank never let that word "citizens" pass without a tirade. "We
are not a government!" he always yelled. "We are not a government! We
must not think like a government! We must not think in terms of duties
and receipts and disbursements. We must think in terms of the old
loyalties that bound the Syndic together!" Uncle Frank was sedentary,
but he had roused himself once to the point of wrecking a bright young
man's newly installed bookkeeping system for the Medical Center. He had
used a cane, most enthusiastically, and then bellowed: "The next wise
guy who tries to sneak punch-cards into this joint will get them down
his throat! What the hell do we need punch-cards for? Either there's
room enough and doctors enough for the patients or there isn't. If there
is, we take care of them. If there isn't, we put 'em in an ambulance and
take them someplace else. And if I hear one goddammed word about
'efficiency'--" he glared the rest and strode out, puffing and leaning
on Charles' arm. "Efficiency," he growled in the corridor. "Every so
often a wise guy comes to me whimpering that people are getting away
with murder, collections are ten per cent below what they ought to be,
the Falcaro Fund's being milked because fifteen per cent of the dough
goes to people who aren't in need at all, eight per cent of the people
getting old-age pensions aren't really past sixty. Get efficient, these
people tell me. Save money by triple-checking collections. Save money by
tightening up the Fund rules. Save money by a nice big vital-statistics
system so we can check on pensioners. Yeah! Have people who might be
_working_ check on collections instead, and make enemies to boot
whenever we catch somebody short. Make the Fund a grudging Scrooge
instead of an open-handed sugar-daddy--and let people _worry_ about
their chances of making the Fund instead of _knowing_ it'll take care of
them if they're caught short. Set up a vital statistics system from
birth to death, with numbers and finger-prints and house registration
and maybe the gas-chamber if you forget to report a change of address.
You know what's wrong with the wise guys, Charles? Constipation. And
they want to constipate the universe." Charles remembered his uncle
restored to chuckling good humor by the time he had finished
embroidering his spur-of-the-moment theory with elaborate scatological
details.

"The Syndic will stand," he said to Lee Falcaro, thinking of his uncle
who knew what he was doing, thinking of Edward Falcaro who did the right
thing without knowing why, thinking of his good friends in the 101st
Precinct, the roaring happy crowds in Scratch Sheet Square, the
good-hearted men of Riveredge Breakdown Station 26 who had borne with
his sullenness and intolerance simply because that was the way things
were and that was the way you acted. "I don't know what the Mob's up to,
and I got a shock from the Government, and I don't deny that we have a
few miserable people who can't seem to be helped. But you've seen too
much of the Mob and Government and our abnormals. Maybe you don't know
as much as you should about our ordinary people. Anyway, all we can do
is wait."

"Yes," she said. "All we can do is wait. Until Chicago we have each
other."




XVIII


They were too sick with gasoline fumes to count the passing hours or
days. Food was brought to them from time to time, but it tasted like
avgas. They could not think for the sick headaches that pounded
incessantly behind their eyes. When Lee developed vomiting spasms that
would not stop, Charles Orsino pounded on the bulkhead with his fists
and yelled, his voice thunderous in the metal compartment, for an hour.

Somebody came at last--Regan. The light stabbed Charles' eyes when he
opened the door. "Trouble?" Regan asked, smirking.

"Miss Falcaro may be dying," Charles said. His own throat felt as though
it had been gone over with a cobbler's rasp. "I don't have to tell you
your life won't be worth a dime if she dies and it gets back to Syndic
Territory. She's got to be moved and she's got to have medical
attention."

"Death threat from the dago?" Regan was amused. "I have it on your own
testimony that the Syndic is merely morale and people and credit--not a
formidable organization. Yes, there was a mike in here. One reason for
your discomfort. You'll be gratified to learn that I thought most of
your conversation decidedly dull. However, the lady will be of no use to
us dead and we're now in the Seaway entering Lake Michigan. I suppose it
can't do any harm to move you two. Pick her up, will you? I'll let you
lead the way--and I'll remind you that I may not, as the lady said, be a
four-goal polo player but I am a high expert with the handgun. Get
moving."

Charles did not think he could pick his own feet up, but the thought of
pleading weakness to Regan was unbearable. He could try. Staggering, he
got Lee Falcaro over his shoulder and through the door. Regan
courteously stood aside and murmured: "Straight ahead and up the ramp.
I'm giving you my own cabin. We'll be docking soon enough; I'll make
out."

Charles dropped her onto a sybaritic bed in a small but
lavishly-appointed cabin. Regan whistled up a deckhand and a ship's
officer of some sort, who arrived with a medicine chest. "Do what you
can for her, mister," he told the officer. And to the deckhand: "Just
watch them. They aren't to touch anything. If they give you trouble,
you're free to punch them around a bit." He left, whistling.

The officer fussed unhappily over the medicine chest and stalled by
sponging off Lee Falcaro's face and throat. The deckhand watched
impassively. He was a six-footer, and he hadn't spent days inhaling
casing-head fumes. The trip-hammer pounding behind Charles's eyes seemed
to be worsening with the fresher air. He collapsed into a seat and
croaked, with shut eyes: "While you're trying to figure out the
vomiting, can I have a handful of aspirins?"

"Eh? Nothing was said about you. You were in Number Three with her? I
suppose it'll be all right. Here." He poured a dozen tablets into
Charles' hand. "Get him some water, you." The deckhand brought a glass
of water from the adjoining lavatory and Charles washed down some of the
tablets. The officer was reading a booklet, worry written on his face.
"Do you know any medicine?" he finally asked.

The hard-outlined, kidney-shaped ache was beginning to diffuse through
Charles' head, more general now and less excruciating. He felt
deliciously sleepy, but roused himself to answer: "Some athletic trainer
stuff. I don't know--morphine? Curare?"

The officer ruffled through the booklet. "Nothing about vomiting," he
said. "But it says curare for muscular cramp and I guess that's what's
going on. A lipoid suspension to release it slowly into the bloodstream
and give the irritation time to subside. Anyway, I can't kill her if I
watch the dose...."

Charles, through half-opened eyes, saw Lee Falcaro's arm reach behind
the officer's back to his medicine chest. The deckhand's eyes were
turning to the bed--Charles heaved himself to his feet, skyrockets going
off again through his head, and started for the lavatory. The deckhand
grabbed his arm. "Rest, mister! Where do you think you're going?"

"Another glass of water--"

"_I'll_ get it. You heard my orders."

Charles subsided. When he dared to look again, Lee's arm lay alongside
her body and the officer was triple-checking dosages in his booklet
against a pressurized hypodermic spray. The officer sighed and addressed
Lee: "You won't even feel this. Relax." He read his setting on the spray
again, checked it again against the booklet. He touched the syringe to
the skin of Lee's arm and thumbed open the valve. It hissed for a moment
and Charles knew submicroscopic particles of the medication had been
blasted under Lee's skin too fast for nerves to register the shock.

His glass of water came and he gulped it greedily. The officer packed
the pressurized syringe away, folded the chest and said to both of them,
rather vaguely: "That should do it. If, uh, if anything happens--or if
it doesn't work--call me and I'll try something else. Morphine, maybe."

He left and Charles slumped in the chair, the pain ebbing and sleep
beginning to flow over him. Not yet, he told himself. She hooked
something from the chest. He said to the deckhand: "Can I clean the lady
and myself up?"

"Go ahead, mister. You can use it. Just don't try anything."

The man lounged in the door-frame of the lavatory alternately studying
Charles at the wash-basin and Lee on the bed. Charles took off a heavy
layer of oily grease from himself and then took washing tissues to the
bed. Lee Falcaro's spasms were tapering off. As he washed her, she
managed a smile and an unmistakable wink.

"You folks married?" the deckhand asked.

"No," Charles said. Weakly she held up her right arm for the washing
tissue. As he scrubbed the hand, he felt a small cylinder smoothly
transferred from her palm to his. He slid it into a pocket and finished
the job.

The officer popped in again with a carton of milk. "Any better, miss?"
he asked.

"Yes," she whispered.

"Good. Try to drink this." Immensely set up by his success in treatment,
he hovered over her for a quarter of an hour getting the milk down a sip
at a time. It stayed down. He left trailing a favorable prognosis.
Meanwhile, Charles had covertly examined Lee's booty: a pressurized
syringe labeled _morphine sulfate sol_. It was full and ready. He
cracked off the protective cap and waited his chance.

It came when Lee grimaced at him and called the deckhand in a feeble
murmur. She continued to murmur so indistinctly that he bent over trying
to catch the words. Charles leaned forward and emptied the syringe at
one inch range into the taut seat of the deckhand's pants. He scratched
absently and said to Lee: "You'll have to talk up, lady." Then he
giggled, looked bewildered and collapsed on the floor, staring, coked to
the eyebrows.

Lee painfully sat up on the bed. "Porthole," she said.

Charles went to it and struggled with the locking lugs. It opened--and
an alarm bell began to clang through the ship. _Now_ he saw the
