
"Okay...." The nose moved down again, slower this time. Crag began to
breathe easier. Suddenly the nose skidded to the rear, falling, then
the rocket was a motionless blob on the plain.

"That did it." Larkwell's voice was ominous, yet tinged with disgust.

"What happened?" Crag found himself shouting into the lip mike.

"The tail slipped. That's what we get for trying to lower it under these
conditions," Larkwell snarled. "The damn thing's probably smashed."

Crag didn't answer. He moved slowly toward the rocket, playing his torch
over its hull in an attempt to discern its details. He was conscious
that the others had come up and were doing the same thing, but even when
he stood next to it Red Dog was no more than a black shadow.

"Feel it," Larkwell barked, "that's the only way to tell. The torches
are useless." They followed his advice. Crag walked alongside the
rocket, moving his hand over the smooth surface. He had reached the tail
and started back on the opposite side when Larkwell's voice rang in his
ears.

"Smashed!"

"Where?"

"The under side--where she hit the deck. Looks like she came down on a
rock."

Crag hurried back around the rocket, nearly stumbling over Larkwell's
legs. The construction boss was lying on his stomach.

"Under here." Crag dropped to his knees, then to his stomach and moved
alongside Larkwell, playing his beam over the hull. He saw the break
immediately, a ragged, gaping hole where the metal had shattered against
a small rock outcropping. Too big for a weld? Larkwell answered his
unspoken thought.

"You'll play hell getting that welded."

"It might be possible."

"There may be more breaks." They lay there for a moment playing their
beams along the visible underside of Red Dog until they were satisfied
that, in this section at least, there was no more damage.

"What now?" Larkwell asked, when they had crawled back from under the
rocket.

"The plans haven't changed," Crag said stonily. "We repair it ... fix it
up ... move in. That's all there is to it."

"You can't fix it by just saying so," Larkwell growled. "First it's got
to be fixable. It looks like a cooked duck, to me."

"We gotta start back," Nagel said urgently, "oxygen's getting low."

Crag looked at his gauge. Nagel was right. They'd have to get moving. He
was about to give the signal to return to Bandit when Richter spoke up.

"It can be repaired." For a moment there was a startled silence.

"How?"

"The inside of the cabin is lined with foam rubber, the same as in
Bandit--a self-sealing type designed for protection against meteorite
damage."

"So...?" Larkwell asked belligerently.

Richter explained, "It's not porous. If the break were covered with
metal and lined with the foam, it would do a pretty good job of sealing
the cabin."

"You can't patch a leak that big with rubber and expect it to hold,"
Larkwell argued. "Hell, the pressure would blow right through."

"Not if you lined the break with metal first," Richter persisted.

The suggestion startled Crag, coming as it did from a man whom he
regarded as an enemy. For a moment he wondered if the German's instinct
for survival were greater than his patriotism. But the plan sounded
plausible.

He asked Larkwell: "What do you think?"

"Could be," he replied noncommittally. He didn't seem pleased that
Richter was intruding in a sphere which he considered his own.

Crag gave a last look at the silhouette of the fallen giant on the plain
and announced: "We'll try it."

"If it doesn't work, we're in the soup," Larkwell insisted. "Suppose
there are more breaks?"

"We'll patch those, too," Crag snapped. He felt an unreasonable surge of
anger toward the construction boss. He sucked his lip, vexedly, then
turned his torch on his oxygen meter. "We'd better get moving."




CHAPTER 18


Colonel Michael Gotch looked at the agent across the narrow expanse of
his battered desk, then his eyes fell again to the dockets. Four
dockets, four small sheaves of paper, each the capsuled story of a man's
life. The names on the dockets were literally burned into his mind: Adam
Philip Crag, Martin LeRoy Larkwell, Gordon Wells Nagel, Max Edward
Prochaska. Four names, four men, four separate egos who, by the magic of
man, had been transported to a bleak haven on another world. Four men
whose task was to survive an alien hell until the U.N. officially
recognized the United States' claim to sovereignty over the stark lands
of the moon.

But one of the men was a saboteur, an agent whose task was to destroy
the Western claim to ownership by destroying its occupancy of the moon.
That would leave the East free to claim at least equal sovereignty on
the basis that it, too, had established occupancy in a lunar base.

The agent broke into his thoughts. "I'd almost stake my professional
reputation he's your man." He reached over and tapped one of the dockets
significantly.

"The word, the single word, that's what you used to tell me to watch
for. Well, the single word is there--the word that spells traitor. I'd
gone over his record a dozen times before I stumbled on it." He ceased
speaking and watched the Colonel.

"You may be right," Gotch said at last. "That's the kind of slip I'd
pounce on myself." He hesitated.

"Go on," the agent said, as if reading his thoughts.

"There's one thing I didn't tell you because I didn't want to prejudice
your thinking. The psychiatrists agree with you."

"The psychiatrists?" The agent's brow furrowed in a question.

"They've restudied the records exhaustively, ever since we first knew
there was a saboteur in the crew.

"They've weighed their egos, dissected their personalities, analyzed
their capabilities, literally taken them apart and put them together
again. I got their report just this morning." Gotch looked speculatively
at the agent. "Your suspect is also their choice. Only there is no
traitor."

"No traitor?" The agent started visibly. "I don't get you."

"No traitor," Gotch echoed. "This is a tougher nut than that. The
personality profile of one man shows a distinct break." He looked
expectantly at the agent.

"A plant." The agent muttered, the words thoughtfully. "A ringer--a spy
who has adopted the life role of another. That indicates careful
planning, long preparation." He muttered the words aloud, talking to
himself.

"He would have had to cover every contingency--friends, relatives,
acquaintances, skills, hobbies--then, at an exact time and place, our
man was whisked away and he merely stepped in." He shook his head.

"That's the kind of nut that's really tough to crack."

"Crack it," Gotch said.

The agent got to his feet "I'll dig him out," he promised savagely.

       *       *       *       *       *

The drive to rehabilitate Red Dog became a frenzy in Crag's mind. He
drove his crew mercilessly, beset by a terrible sense of urgency. Nor
did he spare himself. They rigged lines in the dark of the moon and
rotated the rocket on its long axis until the break in the hull was
accessible.

Crag viewed it with dismay. It was far longer than he had feared--a
splintered jagged hole whose raw torn edges were bent into the belly of
the ship. They finally solved the problem by using the hatch door of
Drone Charlie as a seal, lining it with sheets of foam from Bandit,
whose interior temperature immediately plummeted to a point where it was
scarcely livable.

Prochaska bore the brunt of this new discomfort. Confined as he was to
the cabin and with little opportunity for physical activity, he nearly
froze until he took to living in his space suit.

Crag began planning the provisioning of Red Dog even before he knew it
could be repaired. During each trip from Bandit he burdened the men with
supplies. Between times he managed to remove the spare oxygen cylinders
carried in Drone Charlie. There was still a scant supply in Drone Baker,
but he decided to leave those until later.

The problems confronting him gnawed at his mind until each small
difficulty assumed giant proportions. Each time he managed to fit the
work into a proper mental perspective a new problem or disaster cropped
up. He grew nervous and irritable. In his frantic haste to complete the
work on Red Dog he found himself begrudging the crew the few hours they
took off each day for sleep. _Take it easy_, he finally told himself.
_Slow down_, Adam. Yet despite his almost hourly resolves to slow down,
he found himself pushing at an ever faster pace. Complete Red Dog ...
complete Red Dog ... became a refrain in his mind.

Larkwell grew sullen and surly, snapping at Richter at the slightest
provocation. Nagel became completely indifferent, and in the process,
completely ineffectual. Crag had long realized that the oxygen man had
reached his physical limits. Now, he knew, Nagel had passed them. Maybe
he was right ... maybe he wouldn't leave the moon.

When the break in Red Dog was repaired, Crag waited, tense and jittery,
while Nagel entered the rocket and pressurized it. It'll work, he told
himself. It's got to work. The short period Nagel remained in the rocket
seemed to extend into hours before he opened the hatch.

"One or two small leaks," he reported wearily. He looked disconsolately
at Crag. "Maybe we can locate them--with a little time."

"Good." Crag nodded, relieved. Another crisis past. He ordered Larkwell
to start pulling the engines. If things went right....

The work didn't progress nearly as fast as he had hoped. For one thing,
the engines weren't designed for removal. They were welded fast against
cross beams spread between the hull. Consequently, the metal sides of
the ship were punctured numerous times before the job was completed.
Each hole required another weld, another patch, and increased the danger
of later disaster.

Crag grew steadily moodier. Larkwell seemed to take a vicious
satisfaction out of each successive disaster. He had adopted an
I-told-you-so attitude that grated Crag's nerves raw. Surprisingly
enough, Richter proved to be a steadying influence, at least to Crag. He
worked quietly, efficiently, seeming to anticipate problems and find
solutions before even Crag recognized them. Despite the fact that he
found himself depending on the German more and more, he was determined
never to relax his surveillance over the man. Richter was an enemy--a
man to be watched.

Larkwell and Nagel were lackadaisically beginning work on the ship's
airlock when Prochaska came on the interphones with an emergency call.

"Gotch calling," he told Crag. "He's hot to get you on the line."

Crag hesitated. "Tell him to go to hell," he said finally. "I'll call
him on the regular hour."

"He said you'd say that," Prochaska informed him amiably, "but he wants
you now."

Another emergency--another hair-raiser. _Gotch is a damn ulcer-maker_,
Crag thought savagely. "Okay, I'm on my way," he said wearily. "Anything
to keep him off my back."

"Can I tell him that?"

"Tell him anything you want," Crag snapped. He debated taking the crew
with him but finally decided against it. They couldn't afford the time.
Reluctantly he put the work party in Larkwell's charge and started back
across the bowl of the crater, each step a deliberate weighted effort.
So much to do. So little time. He trudged through the night, cursing the
fate that had made him Gotch's pawn.

Gotch was crisp and to the point. "Another rocket was launched from east
of the Caspian this morning," he told him.

"Jesus, we need a company of Marines."

"Not this time, Adam."

"Oh ..." Crag muttered the word.

"That's right ... a warhead," Gotch confirmed.

Crag kicked the information around in his mind for a moment. "What do
the computers say?"

"Too early to say for sure, but it looks like it's on the right track."

"Unless it's a direct hit it's no go. We got ten thousand foot walls
rimming this hell-hole."

The Colonel was silent for a moment. "It's not quite that pat," he said
finally.

"Why not?"

"Because of the low gravity. Thousands of tons of rock will be lifted.
Some will escape but the majority will fall back like rain. They'll
smash down over a tremendously large area, Adam. At least that's what
the scientists tell us."

"Okay, in four days we'll be underground," he said with exaggerated
cheerfulness, "as safe as bunnies in their burrows."

"Can you make it that fast?"

"We'll have to. That means well have to use Prochaska. That'll keep you
off the lines except for the regular broadcast hour," he said with
satisfaction.

Gotch snorted: "Go to hell."

"Been on the verge of it ever since we left earth."

"One other thing," Gotch said. "Baby's almost ready to try its wings."

The atomic spaceship! Crag suppressed his excitement with difficulty. He
held down his voice.

"About time," he said laconically.

"Don't give me that blase crap," the Colonel said cheerfully. "I know
exactly how you feel." He informed him that the enemy was proclaiming to
the world they had established a colony on the moon, and had formally
requested the United Nations to recognize their sovereignty over the
lunar world. "How's that for a stack of hogwash?" he ended.

"Pretty good," Crag agreed. "What are we claiming?"

"The same thing. Only we happen to be telling the truth."

"How will the U.N. know that?"

"We'll cross that bridge when we get to it, Adam. Just keep alive and
let us worry about the U.N."

"I'm not going to commit suicide if that's what you're thinking."

"You can--if you don't keep on your toes."

"Meaning...?"

"The saboteur...." His voice fell off for a moment. "I've been wanting
to talk with you about that, Adam. We have a lead. I can't name the man
yet because it's pretty thin evidence. Just keep on your toes."

"I am. I'm a grown boy, remember?"

"More than usual," Gotch persisted. "The enemy is making an all-out
drive to destroy Pickering Base. You can be sure the saboteur will do
his share. The stage is set, Adam."

"For what?"

"For murder."

"Not this lad."

"Don't be too cocky. Remember the Blue Door episode? You're the key
man ... and that makes you the key target. Without you the rest would
be a cinch."

"I'll be careful," Crag promised.

"Doubly careful," Gotch cautioned. "Don't be a sitting duck. I think
maybe we'll have a report for you before long," he added enigmatically.

"If the warhead doesn't get us," Crag reminded him. "And thanks for all
the good news." He laughed mirthlessly. They exchanged a few more words
and cut off. He turned to Prochaska, weighing his gaunt face.

"You get your wish, Max. Climb into your spaceman duds and I'll take you
for a stroll. As of now you're a working man."

"Yippee," Prochaska clowned, "I've joined the international ranks of
workers."

Crag's answering grin was bleak. "You'll be sorry," he said quietly.




CHAPTER 19


The earth was no longer a round full ball. It was a gibbous mass of
