"I guess we'll beat 'em yet!" cried Jack.

"I hope so," replied the professor. "It looks----"

He stopped short, for at that moment a cry arose from the midst of the
giants, and one of them pointed toward the ship. An instant later the
air was darkened with a flight of big oranges, which the queer creatures
seemed to favor as missiles. Probably they found stones too heavy.

"Well, those things can't hurt 'em much with those heavy suits on,"
observed Mr. Henderson. "There, Washington got one right on the head
that time, and it didn't bother him a bit."

Jack had seen the fruit strike the big copper helmet and observed that
the colored man only moved his head slightly in order to get rid of the
orange.

In fact the giants, seeing for themselves that this mode of warfare was
not going to answer, since the two men on the ship continued to cut the
restraining cables, gave it up. There was a good deal of shouting among
them, and a number ran here and there, seemingly gathering up long
poles.

"I wonder if they are going to try the flailing method, and beat poor
Andy and Washington," said Mr. Henderson. "It looks so."

The two rescuers were now about a quarter through their hard task. The
throwing of the oranges had ceased. But the giants were up to a new
trick. They divided into two sections, one taking up a position on one
side of the ship, and the other on the opposite. There were about two
hundred in each crowd, while the others in the horde drew some distance
back.

"They're up to some queer dodge," observed Jack. "What are they placing
those sticks to their mouths for?"

The professor observed the throng curiously for a few seconds. Then he
exclaimed:

"They are using blow-guns! They are going to shoot arrows at Washington
and Andy! We must get them in at once!"

He darted toward a door that opened from the conning tower out on the
deck.

"Don't go!" cried Jack. "It's too late! They are beginning to blow!"

He pointed to the throng of giants. The professor could see their cheeks
puffed out as the big creatures filled their lungs with air and prepared
to expel it through the hollow tubes.

Then there came a sound as if a great wind was blowing. It howled and
roared over the ship, not unlike a hurricane in its fury. But there was
no flight of arrows through the air, such as would have come from
regular blow guns.

"That is strange," said the professor. He thought for a moment. "I have
it!" he cried, "They are trying to blow Washington and Andy off the ship
by the power of their breaths! They are not blowing arrows at them! My,
but they, must have strong lungs!"

And, in truth, that was the plan of the giants. The hollow tubes, made
from some sort of big weed, sent a blast of air at the two men on the
ship's deck, that made them lie flat and cling with both hands to avoid
being sent flying into the midst of the giants, on one side or the
other. But the giants had reckoned without the weight of the diving
suits, and it was those, with the big lead soles of the shoes, that
helped to hold Washington and Andy in place.

"Come back! Come back!" cried the professor, opening the conning tower
door and calling to the two brave men. "Come back, both of you! Do you
hear?"

As the portal slid back the rush of air was almost like that of a
cyclone. Then it suddenly ceased, as the giants saw their plan was not
likely to succeed.

But now there arose from the outer circle of the horde a shout of
triumph. It was caused by the return of those who had, a little while
before, hurried off to the woods. They came back bearing big trees, tall
and slender, stripped of their branches, so that they resembled flag
staffs. It took a dozen giants to carry each one.

The whole throng was soon busy laying the poles in a row in front of the
ship.

"What can they be up to now?" asked Jack.

"It looks as if they were going to slide the ship along on rollers," the
professor replied.

Sure enough this was the giant's plan. A few minutes later those in the
_Mermaid_ felt her moving forward, as the giants, massed behind, shoved.
On to the poles she slid. The ropes were loosened to permit this, but
not enough to enable the boat to rise.

Then the travelers felt the ship being lifted up.

"They are going to carry us away, with the poles for a big stretcher!"
cried the professor.

Looking from the side windows the boys saw that a great crowd of the big
men were on either side of the _Mermaid_, each giant grasping a pole,
and lifting. Farther out were others, holding the ends of the cables
which Washington and Andy had not succeeded in cutting.

The ship was being carried along by a thousand or more giants, as the
ancient warriors, slain in battle, were carried home on the spears of
their comrades.

"This is the end of the _Mermaid_!" murmured Mr. Henderson in sorrowful
tones.

As they looked from the conning tower the professor and the two boys
observed a commotion among the leaders of the giants. They seemed to be
wavering. Suddenly the forward part of the ship sank, as those ahead
laid their poles down on the ground. Then those behind did the same, and
the _Mermaid_, came to a stop, and once more rested on the earth.

"What does this mean?" asked the scientist in wonder.

All at once the entire crowd of giants threw themselves down on their
faces, and there, standing at the bow of the ship, was a giant, half
again as large as any of the others. He was clad in a complete suit of
golden armor on which the changing lights played with beautiful effect,
and in his hand he held an immense golden sword. He pointed the weapon
at the ship as if he had raised it in protection, and his hand was
stretched in commanding gesture over the prostrate giants.

"Perhaps he has come to save us!" cried Mark.




                             CHAPTER XXVII

                            A GREAT JOURNEY


Such indeed, seemed to be the case. The golden-armored giant, after
standing for a few moments in an attitude of command, waved his sword
three times about his head, and uttered a command, in a voice that
sounded like thunder. Then the prostrate ones arose, and, making low
bows hurried away in all directions.

Watching them disappear, the golden one sheathed his weapon and
approached the ship. He caught sight of the professor and the two boys
in the conning tower, for Mark had gone there when he found the ship
being transported, and held up his two hands, the palms outward.

"It is the sign of peace in the language all natives employ," said the
professor. "I think I shall trust him."

Followed by the boys he descended from the little platform in the tower,
and to the door that opened on the deck.

"Shall we go out?" he asked.

"We can't be much worse off," replied Mark. "Let's chance it."

So, not without many misgivings, they slid back the portal and stepped
out to face the strange and terrible being who had so suddenly come to
their rescue.

The giant in the golden armor did not seem surprised to see them. In
fact he acted as though he rather expected them. He continued to hold up
one hand, with the palm, outward, while, with the other, he removed his
helmet and bowed low. Then he cast his sword on the ground and advanced
toward the ship. When within ten feet he sat down on the ground, and
this brought his head nearer the earth, so that his auditors could both
see and hear him to better advantage.

As soon as the giant saw the travelers were outside their ship he began
to speak to them in a voice, which, though he might have meant it to be
low and gentle, was like the bellowing of a bull. At the same time he
made many gestures, pointing to the ship, to himself and to Mark.

"What is he saying, professor?" asked Jack.

"I can't understand all he says," Mr. Henderson replied. "He uses some
words derived from the Latin and some from the Greek. But by piecing it
out here and there, and by interpreting his motions I am able to get at
something."

"And what is it all about?"

"It is a strange story," the scientist replied. "He has only gone about
half way through it. Wait until he finishes and I will tell you."

The golden-armored giant, who had stopped in his narrative while Jack
was speaking, resumed. His gestures became more rapid, and his words
came faster. Several times Mr. Henderson held up his hand for him to
cease, while he puzzled out what was meant.

At one point, the professor seemed much startled, and motioned for the
strange being to repeat the last part of his discourse. When this had
been done Mr. Henderson shook his head as though in doubt.

At length the story was finished, and the lone giant, for there were no
others in sight now, folded his arms and seemed to await what the
professor's answer might be. Mr. Henderson turned to the boys, and to
the others of the _Mermaid's_ company, who, by this time, had joined
him, and said:

"Friends, I have just listened to a strange story. It is so strange
that, but for the fact that our own adventures are verging on the
marvelous, I could hardly believe it. In the first place, this man here
is the king of this country. That is why all the other natives obeyed
him.

"In the second place it seems he has been a passenger in our boat, and
came here from the earth's surface with us!"

"What's that?" cried Jack.

"That explains the strange happenings!" ejaculated Mark. "No wonder I
could never solve the secret of the storeroom."

"You are right, it does," replied Mr. Henderson. "I will not go into all
the details of how it happened, but it seems the big hole through which
we came is only one of two entrances to this inner world. Rather it is
the entrance, and there is another, close to it, which is the exit.
Through the latter a big stream of water spouts up, just as one pours
down through the opening we used.

"Hankos, which is the name of the king, was for many years a student of
science. He longed to see where the big stream of upward spurting water
went, and wanted to know whence came the down-pouring one. So he
undertook a daring experiment.

"He constructed a great cylinder, and, keeping his plans a secret,
conveyed it to the spouting water, entered it, and, by means of pulleys
and levers, after he had shut himself inside, cast himself into the
up-shooting column. He took along compressed air cylinders to supply an
atmosphere he could breathe, and some food to eat, for it appears our
giant friends are something of inventors in their way. The current of
water bore him to the surface of the earth, and he was cast up on the
ocean, in what was probably taken for a waterspout if any one saw it.

"Then a strange thing happened. No sooner did Hankos open his cylinder,
which served him as a boat, than he lost his gigantic size, owing to the
difference of the two atmospheres. He became almost of the same size as
ourselves, except that his skin hung in great folds on him, and he
seemed like a wrinkled old man. His clothes too, were a world too large.

"He had a terrible time before he reached shore, and a hard one after
it, for his strange appearance turned almost every one against him. He
was sorry he had ventured to solve the mystery of the up-shooting stream
of water, for he was worse than an outcast.

"Then he began to plan to get back to his own inner world. But he could
not find the downward stream, and, not knowing the language of the
countries where he landed, he had no means of ascertaining. He traveled
from place to place, always seeking for something that would lead him
back to his own country.

"Finally he heard of us, and of our ship, though how I do not know, as I
thought I had kept it a great secret. By almost superhuman struggles he
made his way to our island. He says he concealed himself aboard the
_Mermaid_ the night before we sailed, but I hardly believe it possible.
It seems----"

"He did it, for I saw him!" interrupted Mark.

"You saw him!" cried Mr. Henderson.

Then Mark told of the many things that had puzzled him so, how he had
seen the queer figure slinking aboard the boat, of the disappearance of
food from time to time, and of the strange noises in the storeroom.

"That bears out what he told me," the professor said. "Hankos says he
used to steal out nights and take what food he could get, and he also
mentions some one, answering to Mark's description, who nearly
discovered him once as he hurried back into the apartment.

"However, it seems to be true, since Mark confirms it. At any rate
Hankos stayed in hiding, and made the entire trip with us, and, just as
we all became overcome with the strange gas he escaped, having begun to
expand to his original giant size, and being unable to remain any longer
in his cramped quarters."

"That's so, he did!" cried Mark. "I saw him come out of the place just
before I lost my senses. It was a terrible sight, and none of you would
believe me when I told you some of the occurrences afterward."

"You must forgive us for that," the professor said. "We have learned
much since then."

"What did Hankos do after he left the ship when it landed in this
country?" asked Jack.

"He traveled until he came to this village, which is the chief one of
this country," replied the professor. "Part of the time he followed us
at a distance, being able to travel very fast."

Mark remembered the strange figure of a giant he had seen on the hill
tops several times, and knew that he had been observing the being who
had played such a queer part in their lives.

"When he came back among his own people," went on Mr. Henderson, "they
would not receive him at first, believing him to be an impostor. But
Hankos convinced them of his identity and was allowed to don the golden
armor, which is the badge of kingship. He had only been in office for a
little while when he heard of the arrival of the strange thing, which
turned out to be our ship. He recognized it from the description, and,
learning that we were likely to be sacrificed to the fury and ignorance
of the giants, he hurried here and saved our lives.

"He says he can never thank us enough for being the means whereby he was
able to get back to his own country, and says the freedom of this whole
inner world is ours. He has given orders that we are to go wherever we
like, and none will molest us. He tells me the land is a wonderful one,
compared to our own, and urges us to make a long journey. He would like
to go with us, only, now that he has resumed his natural size, he can
not get inside the ship."

"Hurrah for King Hankos!" cried Jack and the others joined him in a
hearty cheer.

The giant in the golden armor evidently understood the compliment which
was paid him, for he waved his helmet in the air and responded with a
shout of welcome that made the ground tremble.

Hankos waited until the professor had translated all of the story to the
other travelers. Then the genial giant began to talk some more, and the
professor listened intently.

"He says," spoke Mr. Henderson to his friends, "that we will be supplied
with all the fruit we want, and with the best of the houses to sleep in
on our journey. He also tells me he has great stores of shining stones
and piles of the metal of which his armor is made, and that we are
welcome to as much as we want. If this means unlimited gold and
diamonds, we may make our fortunes."

"Jest let me git ma' hand on a few sparklers an' I'll quit work!"
exclaimed Washington.

"I have told him," the scientist went on, "that we will take advantage
of his kind offer. We will start on our trip in a day or so, after we
have looked over the ship to see if it is not damaged. He tells me the
gold and sparkling stones are several thousand miles away, on top of a
high mountain. We will make that our objective point."

The interview between the king and Mr. Henderson having ended, the
former waved his sword in the air and the swarm of big men came back.
They had been hiding back in the woods. Now their manner was very
different. They carefully, removed the rollers and ropes, and soon there
was brought to the adventurers an immense pile of fine fruits. If our
