body, Zen thought with some satisfaction that Ed and Jake were being
avenged. Not that they deserved vengeance; they had gotten exactly what
was coming to them.

West remained aloof. He glanced around the room but no flicker of
surprise showed on his face. Did he know what had happened here? Cuso,
listening to his lieutenant, glanced once at the craggy man, a look
that was pure suspicious hatred. If it had been possible, Cuso would
have had West skinned alive then and there.

Too much was at stake for that. A flayed man could not reveal his
secrets. He could only die.

Cuso left off kicking his lieutenant and trying to listen to him at the
same time. He turned to West.

"It seems that your people have--departed," he said.

"At least, they do not seem to be here," the craggy man answered. Again
his voice had the deep boom of a bell in it.

"That is interesting," Cuso said.

"I find it so," West answered.

"How was it done?"

West spread his hands in a gesture that said something, or nothing.
"Perhaps it would be best to ask them."

"You know." The words were a statement, not a question.

"It could be," West answered.

"Then how?" Cuso's words sounded like the snap of a bear trap closing.
"I want to know how it was done. No alibis. No evasions. No excuses.
Just the truth." The tone of his voice carried the threat of violence
with it.

West smiled. "Have I alibied or evaded? Did you not see everything in
our center here?"

"I saw many things. That I saw all I do not know."

"You saw what the colonel here--" the craggy man nodded toward Zen,
"--called my super radar."

"Did you show him that?" Zen demanded.

"Of course. I have no secrets from the great Asian. Besides, has he not
promised me a commission as a marshal in the armed forces of his land?"

The words were easily spoken but Zen knew that West was actually
stalling for time. What was he waiting for? Was it the appearance again
of the face that had looked from the air in the center of the room?
Were the vanished people to reappear, armed with new weapons, and take
the Asians prisoners?

"To hell with his commission!" Zen shouted. "He'll never make good on
his promise."

"Shut up, both of you!" Cuso shouted. His voice was a bull bellow of
sound that roared back from the walls of the gallery and was echoed
from the tunnels that led outward. "You are stalling. You are trying to
trick me."

West was silent.

"My dog here says the people vanished." Cuso kicked his lieutenant
again to indicate who was meant. "Howl, dog!"

The lieutenant obeyed. He was in such a state of mind that if Cuso had
told him to die, he would probably have obeyed, as a result of terror
and suggestion.

"Do you want to howl like a dog too?" Cuso said to West.

"Really, the possibility does not concern me," the craggy man answered.
"Did you have that in mind for me?" The tone was conversational.

"West, this is no time to go over," Zen growled.

"I have no such intention, colonel."

"You admitted once that what you wanted most to do was to join the
bronze youth. I'm asking you--"

"_Shut up!_" Cuso screamed. "The next person to open his mouth without
my permission I will have shot out of hand."

"Ah," West said.

The Asian leader started to shout an order at his soldiers to shoot the
craggy man, then changed his mind as he realized that even though he
had the weapons and the men, there was nothing he could gain by killing
the goose that might possibly lay a golden egg. As much as he wanted to
have West killed, for defying him, he knew he would have to save this
pleasure until later.

Cuso swallowed his anger. Since his rage was so great, he had to
swallow several times before he got it all down, after which he looked
as if he were going to choke on it.

"Look, let's be reasonable," he urged.

"I'm willing," Zen said.

"You're not worth a damn to me!" Cuso shouted.

"He is worth something to me," West interposed.

Again the Asian swallowed. If ever he reached the explosion point, his
anger was going to come out as boiling rage. "As I said, let us be
reasonable and talk this over together."

"Glad to," West agreed. "What is more reasonable than a corpse?"

The question took Cuso aback. But only for an instant. "Come to think
of it, you're right. Nothing that I have ever seen is more agreeable
than a corpse, to me, that is. Are you still determined to volunteer
for that position, or should I say _condition_?"

"Any time," West answered. "As I told Kurt some time ago, I am rather
tired of this plane of existence and I would like to see what it's like
over yonder. Not that I don't already know," he added.

"You know what it's like beyond death?" Cuso asked, curious in spite of
himself.

"Certainly," West said, in a sure tone of voice.

Listening, Zen again had the impression that the craggy man was
stalling for time again. On the other hand, he might be telling the
literal truth, he might know what waited at the end of life. If so--Zen
let this possibility slide hastily out of his mind. He had more to
think about now than he had brain cells to use for the task.

"Then what is it like?" Cuso asked.

"You have heard of heaven--"

"Yes."

"That's where I'm going."

As he spoke, West vanished.

A stunned silence held the big gallery. Cuso, his mouth hanging open,
stood leaning forward. On the floor, the lieutenant dared to sit up. He
even dared to speak.

"See! That's the way they went. I couldn't stop 'em."

Cuso shouted an order at his men.

Zen found himself tied hand and foot. A raging maniac paced the floor
beside him. Every now and then Cuso kicked him. Screaming at the top of
his voice, the Asian leader invited Zen to vanish too. It did Zen no
good to try to protest that he was not one of the new people and that
he knew nothing of the method they had used in disappearing.

In Cuso's mind, he was one of them.

He was to be treated as such.




XIII


At first, the lighted matches under his toe nails hurt like the very
devil. He had never known such pain. Then he forgot about the matches
under his toe nails. They started lighting them under his fingers.

"Where did they go?" Cuso screamed. "How did they do it?"

Zen had long since ceased trying to say that he didn't know. Instead of
speaking, he shook his head. This was all he could do. Cuso interpreted
the head shake as a stubborn refusal to answer. He kicked the colonel
in the face.

At the kick, the race mind clicked in. This was the effect Zen had--as
if a third person had suddenly come in on a party line. After that,
the pain from the kick did not seem so important. The torture from the
matches under his nails seemed to diminish also.

Not that the contact with the race mind nullified the pain or made it
any less real. Fire was still fire and torture was still the same. But
neither were very important.

Other things were.

Zen tried to concentrate his attention on the other things. The room,
the shouting Cuso, the two Asians who were holding him down while
the third thrust the matches under his nails, the shivering Cal, the
lieutenant who was over-eager to obey his leader's orders, all these
seemed to become misty and vague. These things were real; there was no
question about that. But his mind was contacting another reality which
made these things different. Time began to lose its meaning.

He wondered if he was fainting. Another question came across his
thoughts, heeled over like a sailing ship moving across the wind. Was
he dying?

There was no shock with the thought. If that was the way it was, then
he was more than ready.

"You are not fainting and you are not dying," the race mind whispered
to him. "Come closer to me."

"How do I come closer to you?"

"Let go." The voice of the race mind was like a whisper from the other
side of infinity. "Let go and come to me."

Dimly, he wondered how one let go. The answer came with the question.
The words meant exactly what they said, the meaning was literal--_let
go_.

As he performed the action that went with the words, the big gallery,
Cuso, the lieutenant, and the torturers faded away and became a part
of a misty world that seemed to have no real existence. Even the pain
vanished.

"Come to me," the race mind whispered, again and again, a luring voice
that drew him irresistibly.

Abruptly, he was back in the gallery. He did not know how long he had
been gone but he realized that some time must have passed, enough to
allow them to set up a portable radio transmitter in the gallery. The
set looked to be very powerful. A yellow-skinned operator was huddling
over the controls.

"In contact with Asian headquarters," Zen thought. He knew his thinking
was correct.

Off somewhere in the distance outside the mountain the night shuddered.
He knew the meaning of the sound. A rocket ship was either landing or
blasting off, probably the latter. A long line of burdened Asians was
moving through the gallery.

At the sight of their loads Zen knew what had gone into the hold of
that ship. The equipment of the hidden center here. He saw parts of the
super radar go past on the backs of sweating Asian soldiers, and he
knew where this was going.

At this knowledge, anguish came up in him. With West's super radar in
their possession, no American secret was safe from prying Asian eyes,
unless some way could be found to shield the frequencies employed.

Such shielding might work for laboratories, but there was no way to
shield troop movements and take-offs and landings. These would be as
public as an advertisement.

His face was wet. He could not understand this until another bucket of
water hit him. An Asian bent over him, saw that his eyes were open, and
grunted with satisfaction. They started again on his fingers.

The radio operator called to Cuso, giving him a message. Zen could not
understand the language but the Asian leader was both startled and
elated. He shouted at the men carrying loads to work faster.

"Not much time left. Big bomb coming."

"What bomb?" Zen thought. With the question came the answer. Warned
by Cuso that their preparations were probably known, the Asians had
decided to launch their super bomb immediately. Turmoil came up inside
Zen at this knowledge.

Real pain came from his finger tips as the torturers began operations
again.

"Do you want to die?" the race mind whispered in his thoughts.

Although he couldn't contact it, the race field could reach him. "You
have suffered all that is required. You have met the law. You may join
me, if you wish."

"I--" Zen shut off his thinking. This was fantasy, the product of
torture and nearing dissolution. His own imagination was tricking him,
he thought.

"This is not your imagination," the answer came. "This is what you call
the race mind."

"But--"

"How do you know? You don't. At this point, you have to accept me on
faith." The thinking flowing smoothly into his mind went into silence,
then came again, stronger than before. "Do you want to die? You have
earned the right."

"No," Zen answered. He screamed the words again. "No. No!"

"The path before you will be difficult."

"I don't care how difficult it is. There's work to be done!" Again he
shouted the words.

"Very well. It is your choice. You may remain among the living for as
long as your strength may last." The voice whispering in his mind went
into silence.

Kurt continued screaming. Pain raced through his consciousness again.
As he came awake he realized that he was screaming at the torturer to
