The diminution in reptilian life was the most noticeable change in the
fauna of northern Caspak.  Here, however, were forms they had not met
elsewhere, several of which were of gigantic proportions.

According to their custom all, with the exception of the man on guard,
sought sleep early, nor, once disposed upon the ground for slumber,
were they long in finding it.  It seemed to Bradley that he had
scarcely closed his eyes when he was brought to his feet, wide awake,
by a piercing scream which was punctuated by the sharp report of a
rifle from the direction of the fire where Tippet stood guard.  As he
ran toward the man, Bradley heard above him the same uncanny wail that
had set every nerve on edge several nights before, and the dismal
flapping of huge wings.  He did not need to look up at the
white-shrouded figure winging slowly away into the night to know that
their grim visitor had returned.

The muscles of his arm, reacting to the sight and sound of the menacing
form, carried his hand to the butt of his pistol; but after he had
drawn the weapon, he immediately returned it to its holster with a
shrug.

"What for?" he muttered.  "Can't waste ammunition."  Then he walked
quickly to where Tippet lay sprawled upon his face.  By this time
James, Brady and Sinclair were at his heels, each with his rifle in
readiness.

"Is he dead, sir?" whispered James as Bradley kneeled beside the
prostrate form.

Bradley turned Tippet over on his back and pressed an ear close to the
other's heart.  In a moment he raised his head.  "Fainted," he
announced.  "Get water.  Hurry!"  Then he loosened Tippet's shirt at
the throat and when the water was brought, threw a cupful in the man's
face.  Slowly Tippet regained consciousness and sat up.  At first he
looked curiously into the faces of the men about him; then an
expression of terror overspread his features.  He shot a startled
glance up into the black void above and then burying his face in his
arms began to sob like a child.

"What's wrong, man?" demanded Bradley.  "Buck up!  Can't play cry-baby.
Waste of energy.  What happened?"

"Wot 'appened, sir!" wailed Tippet.  "Oh, Gord, sir!   Hit came back.
Hit came for me, sir.  Right hit did, sir; strite hat me, sir; hand
with long w'ite 'ands it clawed for me.  Oh, Gord!  Hit almost caught
me, sir.  Hi'm has good as dead; Hi'm a marked man; that's wot Hi ham.
Hit was a-goin' for to carry me horf, sir."

"Stuff and nonsense," snapped Bradley.  "Did you get a good look at it?"

Tippet said that he did--a much better look than he wanted.  The thing
had almost clutched him, and he had looked straight into its
eyes--"dead heyes in a dead face," he had described them.

"Wot was it after bein', do you think?" inquired Brady.

"Hit was Death," moaned Tippet, shuddering, and again a pall of gloom
fell upon the little party.

The following day Tippet walked as one in a trance.  He never spoke
except in reply to a direct question, which more often than not had to
be repeated before it could attract his attention.  He insisted that he
was already a dead man, for if the thing didn't come for him during the
day he would never live through another night of agonized apprehension,
waiting for the frightful end that he was positive was in store for
him.  "I'll see to that," he said, and they all knew that Tippet meant
to take his own life before darkness set in.

Bradley tried to reason with him, in his short, crisp way, but soon saw
the futility of it; nor could he take the man's weapons from him
without subjecting him to almost certain death from any of the
numberless dangers that beset their way.

The entire party was moody and glum.  There was none of the bantering
that had marked their intercourse before, even in the face of blighting
hardships and hideous danger.  This was a new menace that threatened
them, something that they couldn't explain; and so, naturally, it
aroused within them superstitious fear which Tippet's attitude only
tended to augment.  To add further to their gloom, their way led
through a dense forest, where, on account of the underbrush, it was
difficult to make even a mile an hour.  Constant watchfulness was
required to avoid the many snakes of various degrees of repulsiveness
and enormity that infested the wood; and the only ray of hope they had
to cling to was that the forest would, like the majority of Caspakian
forests, prove to be of no considerable extent.

Bradley was in the lead when he came suddenly upon a grotesque creature
of Titanic proportions.  Crouching among the trees, which here
commenced to thin out slightly, Bradley saw what appeared to be an
enormous dragon devouring the carcass of a mammoth.  From frightful
jaws to the tip of its long tail it was fully forty feet in length.
Its body was covered with plates of thick skin which bore a striking
resemblance to armor-plate.  The creature saw Bradley almost at the
same instant that he saw it and reared up on its enormous hind legs
until its head towered a full twenty-five feet above the ground.  From
the cavernous jaws issued a hissing sound of a volume equal to the
escaping steam from the safety-valves of half a dozen locomotives, and
then the creature came for the man.

"Scatter!" shouted Bradley to those behind him; and all but Tippet
heeded the warning.  The man stood as though dazed, and when Bradley
saw the other's danger, he too stopped and wheeling about sent a bullet
into the massive body forcing its way through the trees toward him.
The shot struck the creature in the belly where there was no protecting
armor, eliciting a new note which rose in a shrill whistle and ended in
a wail.  It was then that Tippet appeared to come out of his trance,
for with a cry of terror he turned and fled to the left.  Bradley,
seeing that he had as good an opportunity as the others to escape, now
turned his attention to extricating himself; and as the woods seemed
dense on the right, he ran in that direction, hoping that the close-set
boles would prevent pursuit on the part of the great reptile.  The
dragon paid no further attention to him, however, for Tippet's sudden
break for liberty had attracted its attention; and after Tippet it
went, bowling over small trees, uprooting underbrush and leaving a wake
behind it like that of a small tornado.

Bradley, the moment he had discovered the thing was pursuing Tippet,
had followed it.  He was afraid to fire for fear of hitting the man,
and so it was that he came upon them at the very moment that the
monster lunged its great weight forward upon the doomed man.  The
sharp, three-toed talons of the forelimbs seized poor Tippet, and
Bradley saw the unfortunate fellow lifted high above the ground as the
creature again reared up on its hind legs, immediately transferring
Tippet's body to its gaping jaws, which closed with a sickening,
crunching sound as Tippet's bones cracked beneath the great teeth.

Bradley half raised his rifle to fire again and then lowered it with a
shake of his head.  Tippet was beyond succor--why waste a bullet that
Caspak could never replace?  If he could now escape the further notice
of the monster it would be a wiser act than to throw his life away in
futile revenge.  He saw that the reptile was not looking in his
direction, and so he slipped noiselessly behind the bole of a large
tree and thence quietly faded away in the direction he believed the
others to have taken.  At what he considered a safe distance he halted
and looked back.  Half hidden by the intervening trees he still could
see the huge head and the massive jaws from which protruded the limp
legs of the dead man.  Then, as though struck by the hammer of Thor,
the creature collapsed and crumpled to the ground.  Bradley's single
bullet, penetrating the body through the soft skin of the belly, had
slain the Titan.

A few minutes later, Bradley found the others of the party.  The four
returned cautiously to the spot where the creature lay and after
convincing themselves that it was quite dead, came close to it.  It was
an arduous and gruesome job extricating Tippet's mangled remains from
the powerful jaws, the men working for the most part silently.

"It was the work of the banshee all right," muttered Brady.  "It warned
poor Tippet, it did."

"Hit killed him, that's wot hit did, hand hit'll kill some more of us,"
said James, his lower lip trembling.

"If it was a ghost," interjected Sinclair, "and I don't say as it was;
but if it was, why, it could take on any form it wanted to.  It might
have turned itself into this thing, which ain't no natural thing at
all, just to get poor Tippet.  If it had of been a lion or something
else humanlike it wouldn't look so strange; but this here thing ain't
humanlike.  There ain't no such thing an' never was."

"Bullets don't kill ghosts," said Bradley, "so this couldn't have been
a ghost.  Furthermore, there are no such things.  I've been trying to
place this creature.  Just succeeded.  It's a tyrannosaurus.  Saw
picture of skeleton in magazine.  There's one in New York Natural
History Museum.  Seems to me it said it was found in place called Hell
Creek somewhere in western North America.  Supposed to have lived about
six million years ago."

"Hell Creek's in Montana," said Sinclair.  "I used to punch cows in
Wyoming, an' I've heard of Hell Creek.  Do you s'pose that there
thing's six million years old?"  His tone was skeptical.

"No," replied Bradley; "But it would indicate that the island of
Caprona has stood almost without change for more than six million
years."

The conversation and Bradley's assurance that the creature was not of
supernatural origin helped to raise a trifle the spirits of the men;
and then came another diversion in the form of ravenous meat-eaters
attracted to the spot by the uncanny sense of smell which had apprised
them of the presence of flesh, killed and ready for the eating.

It was a constant battle while they dug a grave and consigned all that
was mortal of John Tippet to his last, lonely resting-place.  Nor would
they leave then; but remained to fashion a rude headstone from a
crumbling out-cropping of sandstone and to gather a mass of the
gorgeous flowers growing in such great profusion around them and heap
the new-made grave with bright blooms.  Upon the headstone Sinclair
scratched in rude characters the words:

  HERE LIES JOHN TIPPET
       ENGLISHMAN
  KILLED BY TYRANNOSAURUS
    10 SEPT. A.D. 1916
         R.I.P.

and Bradley repeated a short prayer before they left their comrade
forever.

For three days the party marched due south through forests and
meadow-land and great park-like areas where countless herbivorous
animals grazed--deer and antelope and bos and the little ecca, the
smallest species of Caspakian horse, about the size of a rabbit.  There
were other horses too; but all were small, the largest being not above
eight hands in height.  Preying continually upon the herbivora were the
meat-eaters, large and small--wolves, hyaenodons, panthers, lions,
tigers, and bears as well as several large and ferocious species of
reptilian life.

On September twelfth the party scaled a line of sandstone cliffs which
crossed their route toward the south; but they crossed them only after
an encounter with the tribe that inhabited the numerous caves which
pitted the face of the escarpment.  That night they camped upon a rocky
plateau which was sparsely wooded with jarrah, and here once again they
were visited by the weird, nocturnal apparition that had already filled
them with a nameless terror.

As on the night of September ninth the first warning came from the
sentinel standing guard over his sleeping companions.  A
terror-stricken cry punctuated by the crack of a rifle brought Bradley,
Sinclair and Brady to their feet in time to see James, with clubbed
rifle, battling with a white-robed figure that hovered on widespread
wings on a level with the Englishman's head.  As they ran, shouting,
forward, it was obvious to them that the weird and terrible apparition
was attempting to seize James; but when it saw the others coming to his
rescue, it desisted, flapping rapidly upward and away, its long, ragged
wings giving forth the peculiarly dismal notes which always
characterized the sound of its flying.

Bradley fired at the vanishing menacer of their peace and safety; but
whether he scored a hit or not, none could tell, though, following the
shot, there was wafted back to them the same piercing wail that had on
other occasions frozen their marrow.

Then they turned toward James, who lay face downward upon the ground,
trembling as with ague.  For a time he could not even speak, but at
last regained sufficient composure to tell them how the thing must have
swooped silently upon him from above and behind as the first
premonition of danger he had received was when the long, clawlike
fingers had clutched him beneath either arm.  In the melee his rifle
had been discharged and he had broken away at the same instant and
turned to defend himself with the butt.  The rest they had seen.

From that instant James was an absolutely broken man.  He maintained
with shaking lips that his doom was sealed, that the thing had marked
him for its own, and that he was as good as dead, nor could any amount
of argument or raillery convince him to the contrary.  He had seen
Tippet marked and claimed and now he had been marked.  Nor were his
constant reiterations of this belief without effect upon the rest of
the party.  Even Bradley felt depressed, though for the sake of the
others he managed to hide it beneath a show of confidence he was far
from feeling.

And on the following day William James was killed by a saber-tooth
tiger--September 13, 1916.  Beneath a jarrah tree on the stony plateau
on the northern edge of the Sto-lu country in the land that Time
forgot, he lies in a lonely grave marked by a rough headstone.

Southward from his grave marched three grim and silent men.  To the
best of Bradley's reckoning they were some twenty-five miles north of
Fort Dinosaur, and that they might reach the fort on the following day,
they plodded on until darkness overtook them.  With comparative safety
fifteen miles away, they made camp at last; but there was no singing
now and no joking.  In the bottom of his heart each prayed that they
might come safely through just this night, for they knew that during
the morrow they would make the final stretch, yet the nerves of each
were taut with strained anticipation of what gruesome thing might flap
down upon them from the black sky, marking another for its own.  Who
would be the next?

As was their custom, they took turns at guard, each man doing two hours
and then arousing the next.  Brady had gone on from eight to ten,
followed by Sinclair from ten to twelve, then Bradley had been
awakened.  Brady would stand the last guard from two to four, as they
had determined to start the moment that it became light enough to
insure comparative safety upon the trail.

The snapping of a twig aroused Brady out of a dead sleep, and as he
opened his eyes, he saw that it was broad daylight and that at twenty
paces from him stood a huge lion.  As the man sprang to his feet, his
rifle ready in his hand, Sinclair awoke and took in the scene in a
single swift glance.  The fire was out and Bradley was nowhere in
sight.  For a long moment the lion and the men eyed one another.  The
latter had no mind to fire if the beast minded its own affairs--they
were only too glad to let it go its way if it would; but the lion was
of a different mind.

Suddenly the long tail snapped stiffly erect, and as though it had been
attached to two trigger fingers the two rifles spoke in unison, for
both men knew this signal only too well--the immediate forerunner of a
deadly charge.  As the brute's head had been raised, his spine had not
been visible; and so they did what they had learned by long experience
was best to do.  Each covered a front leg, and as the tail snapped
aloft, fired.  With a hideous roar the mighty flesh-eater lurched
forward to the ground with both front legs broken.  It was an easy
accomplishment in the instant before the beast charged--after, it would
have been well-nigh an impossible feat.  Brady stepped close in and
finished him with a shot in the base of the brain lest his terrific
roarings should attract his mate or others of their kind.

Then the two men turned and looked at one another.  "Where is
Lieutenant Bradley?" asked Sinclair.  They walked to the fire.  Only a
few smoking embers remained.  A few feet away lay Bradley's rifle.
There was no evidence of a struggle.  The two men circled about the
camp twice and on the last lap Brady stooped and picked up an object
which had lain about ten yards beyond the fire--it was Bradley's cap.
Again the two looked questioningly at one another, and then,
simultaneously, both pairs of eyes swung upward and searched the sky.
A moment later Brady was examining the ground about the spot where
Bradley's cap had lain.  It was one of those little barren, sandy
stretches that they had found only upon this stony plateau.  Brady's
own footsteps showed as plainly as black ink upon white paper; but his
was the only foot that had marred the smooth, windswept surface--there
was no sign that Bradley had crossed the spot upon the surface of the
ground, and yet his cap lay well toward the center of it.

Breakfastless and with shaken nerves the two survivors plunged madly
into the long day's march.  Both were strong, courageous, resourceful
men; but each had reached the limit of human nerve endurance and each
felt that he would rather die than spend another night in the hideous
open of that frightful land.  Vivid in the mind of each was a picture
of Bradley's end, for though neither had witnessed the tragedy, both
could imagine almost precisely what had occurred.  They did not discuss
it--they did not even mention it--yet all day long the thing was
uppermost in the mind of each and mingled with it a similar picture
with himself as victim should they fail to make Fort Dinosaur before
dark.

And so they plunged forward at reckless speed, their clothes, their
hands, their faces torn by the retarding underbrush that reached forth
to hinder them.  Again and again they fell; but be it to their credit
that the one always waited and helped the other and that into the mind
of neither entered the thought or the temptation to desert his
companion--they would reach the fort together if both survived, or
neither would reach it.

They encountered the usual number of savage beasts and reptiles; but
they met them with a courageous recklessness born of desperation, and
by virtue of the very madness of the chances they took, they came
through unscathed and with the minimum of delay.

Shortly after noon they reached the end of the plateau.  Before them
was a drop of two hundred feet to the valley beneath.  To the left, in
the distance, they could see the waters of the great inland sea that
covers a considerable portion of the area of the crater island of
Caprona and at a little lesser distance to the south of the cliffs they
saw a thin spiral of smoke arising above the tree-tops.

The landscape was familiar--each recognized it immediately and knew
that that smoky column marked the spot where Dinosaur had stood.  Was
the fort still there, or did the smoke arise from the smoldering embers
of the building they had helped to fashion for the housing of their
party?  Who could say!

Thirty precious minutes that seemed as many hours to the impatient men
were consumed in locating a precarious way from the summit to the base
of the cliffs that bounded the plateau upon the south, and then once
again they struck off upon level ground toward their goal.  The closer
they approached the fort the greater became their apprehension that all
would not be well.  They pictured the barracks deserted or the small
company massacred and the buildings in ashes.  It was almost in a
frenzy of fear that they broke through the final fringe of jungle and
stood at last upon the verge of the open meadow a half-mile from Fort
Dinosaur.

"Lord!" ejaculated Sinclair.  "They are still there!"  And he fell to
his knees, sobbing.

Brady trembled like a leaf as he crossed himself and gave silent
thanks, for there before them stood the sturdy ramparts of Dinosaur and
from inside the inclosure rose a thin spiral of smoke that marked the
location of the cook-house.  All was well, then, and their comrades
were preparing the evening meal!

Across the clearing they raced as though they had not already covered
in a single day a trackless, primeval country that might easily have
required two days by fresh and untired men.  Within hailing distance
they set up such a loud shouting that presently heads appeared above
the top of the parapet and soon answering shouts were rising from
within Fort Dinosaur.  A moment later three men issued from the
inclosure and came forward to meet the survivors and listen to the
hurried story of the eleven eventful days since they had set out upon
their expedition to the barrier cliffs.  They heard of the deaths of
Tippet and James and of the disappearance of Lieutenant Bradley, and a
new terror settled upon Dinosaur.

Olson, the Irish engineer, with Whitely and Wilson constituted the
remnants of Dinosaur's defenders, and to Brady and Sinclair they
narrated the salient events that had transpired since Bradley and his
party had marched away on September 4th.  They told them of the
infamous act of Baron Friedrich von Schoenvorts and his German crew who
had stolen the U-33, breaking their parole, and steaming away toward
the subterranean opening through the barrier cliffs that carried the
waters of the inland sea into the open Pacific beyond; and of the
cowardly shelling of the fort.

They told of the disappearance of Miss La Rue in the night of September
11th, and of the departure of Bowen Tyler in search of her, accompanied
only by his Airedale, Nobs.  Thus of the original party of eleven
Allies and nine Germans that had constituted the company of the U-33
when she left English waters after her capture by the crew of the
English tug there were but five now to be accounted for at Fort
Dinosaur.  Benson, Tippet, James, and one of the Germans were known to
be dead.  It was assumed that Bradley, Tyler and the girl had already
succumbed to some of the savage denizens of Caspak, while the fate of
the Germans was equally unknown, though it might readily be believed
that they had made good their escape.  They had had ample time to
provision the ship and the refining of the crude oil they had
discovered north of the fort could have insured them an ample supply to
carry them back to Germany.



Chapter 2

