from the world for a time. Afterward, and at any time, she may return
to her place among her comrades, nor need she ever lose touch with
them. Women are a very happy race nowadays, as compared with what they
ever were before in the world's history, and their power of giving
happiness to men has been of course increased in proportion."

"I should imagine it possible," I said, "that the interest which girls
take in their careers as members of the industrial army and candidates
for its distinctions might have an effect to deter them from marriage."

Dr. Leete smiled. "Have no anxiety on that score, Mr. West," he
replied. "The Creator took very good care that whatever other
modifications the dispositions of men and women might with time take
on, their attraction for each other should remain constant. The mere
fact that in an age like yours, when the struggle for existence must
have left people little time for other thoughts, and the future was so
uncertain that to assume parental responsibilities must have often
seemed like a criminal risk, there was even then marrying and giving in
marriage, should be conclusive on this point. As for love nowadays, one
of our authors says that the vacuum left in the minds of men and women
by the absence of care for one's livelihood has been entirely taken up
by the tender passion. That, however, I beg you to believe, is
something of an exaggestion. For the rest, so far is marriage from
being an interference with a woman's career, that the higher positions
in the feminine army of industry are intrusted only to women who have
been both wives and mothers, as they alone fully represent their sex."

"Are credit cards issued to the women just as to the men?"

"Certainly."

"The credits of the women, I suppose, are for smaller sums, owing to
the frequent suspension of their labor on account of family
responsibilities."

"Smaller!" exclaimed Dr. Leete, "oh, no! The maintenance of all our
people is the same. There are no exceptions to that rule, but if any
difference were made on account of the interruptions you speak of, it
would be by making the woman's credit larger, not smaller. Can you
think of any service constituting a stronger claim on the nation's
gratitude than bearing and nursing the nation's children? According to
our view, none deserve so well of the world as good parents. There is
no task so unselfish, so necessarily without return, though the heart
is well rewarded, as the nurture of the children who are to make the
world for one another when we are gone."

"It would seem to follow, from what you have said, that wives are in no
way dependent on their husbands for maintenance."

"Of course they are not," replied Dr. Leete, "nor children on their
parents either, that is, for means of support, though of course they
are for the offices of affection. The child's labor, when he grows up,
will go to increase the common stock, not his parents', who will be
dead, and therefore he is properly nurtured out of the common stock.
The account of every person, man, woman, and child, you must
understand, is always with the nation directly, and never through any
intermediary, except, of course, that parents, to a certain extent, act
for children as their guardians. You see that it is by virtue of the
relation of individuals to the nation, of their membership in it, that
they are entitled to support; and this title is in no way connected
with or affected by their relations to other individuals who are fellow
members of the nation with them. That any person should be dependent
for the means of support upon another would be shocking to the moral
sense as well as indefensible on any rational social theory. What would
become of personal liberty and dignity under such an arrangement? I am
aware that you called yourselves free in the nineteenth century. The
meaning of the word could not then, however, have been at all what it
is at present, or you certainly would not have applied it to a society
of which nearly every member was in a position of galling personal
dependence upon others as to the very means of life, the poor upon the
rich, or employed upon employer, women upon men, children upon parents.
Instead of distributing the product of the nation directly to its
members, which would seem the most natural and obvious method, it would
actually appear that you had given your minds to devising a plan of
hand to hand distribution, involving the maximum of personal
humiliation to all classes of recipients.

"As regards the dependence of women upon men for support, which then
was usual, of course, natural attraction in case of marriages of love
may often have made it endurable, though for spirited women I should
fancy it must always have remained humiliating. What, then, must it
have been in the innumerable cases where women, with or without the
form of marriage, had to sell themselves to men to get their living?
Even your contemporaries, callous as they were to most of the revolting
aspects of their society, seem to have had an idea that this was not
quite as it should be; but, it was still only for pity's sake that they
deplored the lot of the women. It did not occur to them that it was
robbery as well as cruelty when men seized for themselves the whole
product of the world and left women to beg and wheedle for their share.
Why--but bless me, Mr. West, I am really running on at a remarkable
rate, just as if the robbery, the sorrow, and the shame which those
poor women endured were not over a century since, or as if you were
responsible for what you no doubt deplored as much as I do."

"I must bear my share of responsibility for the world as it then was,"
I replied. "All I can say in extenuation is that until the nation was
ripe for the present system of organized production and distribution,
no radical improvement in the position of woman was possible. The root
of her disability, as you say, was her personal dependence upon man for
her livelihood, and I can imagine no other mode of social organization
than that you have adopted, which would have set woman free of man at
the same time that it set men free of one another. I suppose, by the
way, that so entire a change in the position of women cannot have taken
place without affecting in marked ways the social relations of the
sexes. That will be a very interesting study for me."

"The change you will observe," said Dr. Leete, "will chiefly be, I
think, the entire frankness and unconstraint which now characterizes
those relations, as compared with the artificiality which seems to have
marked them in your time. The sexes now meet with the ease of perfect
equals, suitors to each other for nothing but love. In your time the
fact that women were dependent for support on men made the woman in
reality the one chiefly benefited by marriage. This fact, so far as we
can judge from contemporary records, appears to have been coarsely
enough recognized among the lower classes, while among the more
polished it was glossed over by a system of elaborate conventionalities
which aimed to carry the precisely opposite meaning, namely, that the
man was the party chiefly benefited. To keep up this convention it was
essential that he should always seem the suitor. Nothing was therefore
considered more shocking to the proprieties than that a woman should
betray a fondness for a man before he had indicated a desire to marry
her. Why, we actually have in our libraries books, by authors of your
day, written for no other purpose than to discuss the question whether,
under any conceivable circumstances, a woman might, without discredit
to her sex, reveal an unsolicited love. All this seems exquisitely
absurd to us, and yet we know that, given your circumstances, the
problem might have a serious side. When for a woman to proffer her love
to a man was in effect to invite him to assume the burden of her
support, it is easy to see that pride and delicacy might well have
checked the promptings of the heart. When you go out into our society,
Mr. West, you must be prepared to be often cross-questioned on this
point by our young people, who are naturally much interested in this
aspect of old-fashioned manners."[1]

"And so the girls of the twentieth century tell their love."

"If they choose," replied Dr. Leete. "There is no more pretense of a
concealment of feeling on their part than on the part of their lovers.
Coquetry would be as much despised in a girl as in a man. Affected
coldness, which in your day rarely deceived a lover, would deceive him
wholly now, for no one thinks of practicing it."

"One result which must follow from the independence of women I can see
for myself," I said. "There can be no marriages now except those of
inclination."

"That is a matter of course," replied Dr. Leete.

"Think of a world in which there are nothing but matches of pure love!
Ah me, Dr. Leete, how far you are from being able to understand what an
astonishing phenomenon such a world seems to a man of the nineteenth
century!"

"I can, however, to some extent, imagine it," replied the doctor. "But
the fact you celebrate, that there are nothing but love matches, means
even more, perhaps, than you probably at first realize. It means that
for the first time in human history the principle of sexual selection,
with its tendency to preserve and transmit the better types of the
race, and let the inferior types drop out, has unhindered operation.
The necessities of poverty, the need of having a home, no longer tempt
women to accept as the fathers of their children men whom they neither
can love nor respect. Wealth and rank no longer divert attention from
personal qualities. Gold no longer 'gilds the straitened forehead of
the fool.' The gifts of person, mind, and disposition; beauty, wit,
eloquence, kindness, generosity, geniality, courage, are sure of
transmission to posterity. Every generation is sifted through a little
finer mesh than the last. The attributes that human nature admires are
preserved, those that repel it are left behind. There are, of course, a
great many women who with love must mingle admiration, and seek to wed
greatly, but these not the less obey the same law, for to wed greatly
now is not to marry men of fortune or title, but those who have risen
above their fellows by the solidity or brilliance of their services to
humanity. These form nowadays the only aristocracy with which alliance
is distinction.

"You were speaking, a day or two ago, of the physical superiority of
our people to your contemporaries. Perhaps more important than any of
the causes I mentioned then as tending to race purification has been
the effect of untrammeled sexual selection upon the quality of two or
three successive generations. I believe that when you have made a
fuller study of our people you will find in them not only a physical,
but a mental and moral improvement. It would be strange if it were not
so, for not only is one of the great laws of nature now freely working
out the salvation of the race, but a profound moral sentiment has come
to its support. Individualism, which in your day was the animating idea
of society, not only was fatal to any vital sentiment of brotherhood
and common interest among living men, but equally to any realization of
the responsibility of the living for the generation to follow. To-day
this sense of responsibility, practically unrecognized in all previous
ages, has become one of the great ethical ideas of the race,
reinforcing, with an intense conviction of duty, the natural impulse to
seek in marriage the best and noblest of the other sex. The result is,
that not all the encouragements and incentives of every sort which we
have provided to develop industry, talent, genius, excellence of
whatever kind, are comparable in their effect on our young men with the
fact that our women sit aloft as judges of the race and reserve
themselves to reward the winners. Of all the whips, and spurs, and
baits, and prizes, there is none like the thought of the radiant faces
which the laggards will find averted.

"Celibates nowadays are almost invariably men who have failed to acquit
themselves creditably in the work of life. The woman must be a
courageous one, with a very evil sort of courage, too, whom pity for
one of these unfortunates should lead to defy the opinion of her
generation--for otherwise she is free--so far as to accept him for a
husband. I should add that, more exacting and difficult to resist than
any other element in that opinion, she would find the sentiment of her
own sex. Our women have risen to the full height of their
responsibility as the wardens of the world to come, to whose keeping
the keys of the future are confided. Their feeling of duty in this
respect amounts to a sense of religious consecration. It is a cult in
which they educate their daughters from childhood."

After going to my room that night, I sat up late to read a romance of
Berrian, handed me by Dr. Leete, the plot of which turned on a
situation suggested by his last words, concerning the modern view of
parental responsibility. A similar situation would almost certainly
have been treated by a nineteenth century romancist so as to excite the
morbid sympathy of the reader with the sentimental selfishness of the
lovers, and his resentment toward the unwritten law which they
outraged. I need not describe--for who has not read "Ruth Elton"?--how
different is the course which Berrian takes, and with what tremendous
effect he enforces the principle which he states: "Over the unborn our
power is that of God, and our responsibility like His toward us. As we
acquit ourselves toward them, so let Him deal with us."


[1] I may say that Dr. Leete's warning has been fully justified by my
experience. The amount and intensity of amusement which the young
people of this day, and the young women especially, are able to extract
from what they are pleased to call the oddities of courtship in the
nineteenth century, appear unlimited.



Chapter 26

I think if a person were ever excusable for losing track of the days of
the week, the circumstances excused me. Indeed, if I had been told that
the method of reckoning time had been wholly changed and the days were
now counted in lots of five, ten, or fifteen instead of seven, I should
have been in no way surprised after what I had already heard and seen
of the twentieth century. The first time that any inquiry as to the
days of the week occurred to me was the morning following the
conversation related in the last chapter. At the breakfast table Dr.
Leete asked me if I would care to hear a sermon.

"Is it Sunday, then?" I exclaimed.

"Yes," he replied. "It was on Friday, you see, when we made the lucky
discovery of the buried chamber to which we owe your society this
morning. It was on Saturday morning, soon after midnight, that you
first awoke, and Sunday afternoon when you awoke the second time with
faculties fully regained."

"So you still have Sundays and sermons," I said. "We had prophets who
foretold that long before this time the world would have dispensed with
both. I am very curious to know how the ecclesiastical systems fit in
with the rest of your social arrangements. I suppose you have a sort of
national church with official clergymen."

Dr. Leete laughed, and Mrs. Leete and Edith seemed greatly amused.

"Why, Mr. West," Edith said, "what odd people you must think us. You
were quite done with national religious establishments in the
nineteenth century, and did you fancy we had gone back to them?"

"But how can voluntary churches and an unofficial clerical profession
be reconciled with national ownership of all buildings, and the
industrial service required of all men?" I answered.

"The religious practices of the people have naturally changed
considerably in a century," replied Dr. Leete; "but supposing them to
have remained unchanged, our social system would accommodate them
perfectly. The nation supplies any person or number of persons with
buildings on guarantee of the rent, and they remain tenants while they
pay it. As for the clergymen, if a number of persons wish the services
of an individual for any particular end of their own, apart from the
general service of the nation, they can always secure it, with that
individual's own consent, of course, just as we secure the service of
our editors, by contributing from their credit cards an indemnity to
the nation for the loss of his services in general industry. This
indemnity paid the nation for the individual answers to the salary in
your day paid to the individual himself; and the various applications
of this principle leave private initiative full play in all details to
which national control is not applicable. Now, as to hearing a sermon
to-day, if you wish to do so, you can either go to a church to hear it
or stay at home."

"How am I to hear it if I stay at home?"

"Simply by accompanying us to the music room at the proper hour and
selecting an easy chair. There are some who still prefer to hear
sermons in church, but most of our preaching, like our musical
performances, is not in public, but delivered in acoustically prepared
chambers, connected by wire with subscribers' houses. If you prefer to
go to a church I shall be glad to accompany you, but I really don't
believe you are likely to hear anywhere a better discourse than you
will at home. I see by the paper that Mr. Barton is to preach this
morning, and he preaches only by telephone, and to audiences often
reaching 150,000."

"The novelty of the experience of hearing a sermon under such
circumstances would incline me to be one of Mr. Barton's hearers, if
for no other reason," I said.

An hour or two later, as I sat reading in the library, Edith came for
me, and I followed her to the music room, where Dr. and Mrs. Leete were
waiting. We had not more than seated ourselves comfortably when the
tinkle of a bell was heard, and a few moments after the voice of a man,
at the pitch of ordinary conversation, addressed us, with an effect of
proceeding from an invisible person in the room. This was what the
voice said:


MR. BARTON'S SERMON

"We have had among us, during the past week, a critic from the
nineteenth century, a living representative of the epoch of our
great-grandparents. It would be strange if a fact so extraordinary had
not somewhat strongly affected our imaginations. Perhaps most of us
have been stimulated to some effort to realize the society of a century
ago, and figure to ourselves what it must have been like to live then.
In inviting you now to consider certain reflections upon this subject
which have occurred to me, I presume that I shall rather follow than
divert the course of your own thoughts."


Edith whispered something to her father at this point, to which he
nodded assent and turned to me.

"Mr. West," he said, "Edith suggests that you may find it slightly
embarrassing to listen to a discourse on the lines Mr. Barton is laying
down, and if so, you need not be cheated out of a sermon. She will
connect us with Mr. Sweetser's speaking room if you say so, and I can
still promise you a very good discourse."

"No, no," I said. "Believe me, I would much rather hear what Mr. Barton
has to say."

"As you please," replied my host.

When her father spoke to me Edith had touched a screw, and the voice of
Mr. Barton had ceased abruptly. Now at another touch the room was once
more filled with the earnest sympathetic tones which had already
impressed me most favorably.

"I venture to assume that one effect has been common with us as a
result of this effort at retrospection, and that it has been to leave
us more than ever amazed at the stupendous change which one brief
century has made in the material and moral conditions of humanity.

"Still, as regards the contrast between the poverty of the nation and
the world in the nineteenth century and their wealth now, it is not
greater, possibly, than had been before seen in human history, perhaps
not greater, for example, than that between the poverty of this country
during the earliest colonial period of the seventeenth century and the
relatively great wealth it had attained at the close of the nineteenth,
or between the England of William the Conqueror and that of Victoria.
Although the aggregate riches of a nation did not then, as now, afford
any accurate criterion of the masses of its people, yet instances like
these afford partial parallels for the merely material side of the
contrast between the nineteenth and the twentieth centuries. It is when
we contemplate the moral aspect of that contrast that we find ourselves
in the presence of a phenomenon for which history offers no precedent,
however far back we may cast our eye. One might almost be excused who
should exclaim, 'Here, surely, is something like a miracle!'
Nevertheless, when we give over idle wonder, and begin to examine the
seeming prodigy critically, we find it no prodigy at all, much less a
miracle. It is not necessary to suppose a moral new birth of humanity,
or a wholesale destruction of the wicked and survival of the good, to
account for the fact before us. It finds its simple and obvious
explanation in the reaction of a changed environment upon human nature.
It means merely that a form of society which was founded on the pseudo
self-interest of selfishness, and appealed solely to the anti-social
and brutal side of human nature, has been replaced by institutions
based on the true self-interest of a rational unselfishness, and
appealing to the social and generous instincts of men.

"My friends, if you would see men again the beasts of prey they seemed
in the nineteenth century, all you have to do is to restore the old
social and industrial system, which taught them to view their natural
prey in their fellow-men, and find their gain in the loss of others. No
doubt it seems to you that no necessity, however dire, would have
tempted you to subsist on what superior skill or strength enabled you
to wrest from others equally needy. But suppose it were not merely your
own life that you were responsible for. I know well that there must
have been many a man among our ancestors who, if it had been merely a
question of his own life, would sooner have given it up than nourished
it by bread snatched from others. But this he was not permitted to do.
He had dear lives dependent on him. Men loved women in those days, as
now. God knows how they dared be fathers, but they had babies as sweet,
no doubt, to them as ours to us, whom they must feed, clothe, educate.
The gentlest creatures are fierce when they have young to provide for,
and in that wolfish society the struggle for bread borrowed a peculiar
desperation from the tenderest sentiments. For the sake of those
dependent on him, a man might not choose, but must plunge into the foul
fight--cheat, overreach, supplant, defraud, buy below worth and sell
above, break down the business by which his neighbor fed his young
ones, tempt men to buy what they ought not and to sell what they should
not, grind his laborers, sweat his debtors, cozen his creditors. Though
a man sought it carefully with tears, it was hard to find a way in
which he could earn a living and provide for his family except by
pressing in before some weaker rival and taking the food from his
mouth. Even the ministers of religion were not exempt from this cruel
necessity. While they warned their flocks against the love of money,
regard for their families compelled them to keep an outlook for the
