
On the handsome face of the boy a grim smile played, and ever and anon
he threw a taunting challenge to the foes that faced him.  In this and
other ways his manner of fighting was similar to that which had always
marked me on the field of combat.

Perhaps it was this vague likeness which made me love the boy, while
the awful havoc that his sword played amongst the blacks filled my soul
with a tremendous respect for him.

For my part, I was fighting as I had fought a thousand times
before--now sidestepping a wicked thrust, now stepping quickly in to
let my sword's point drink deep in a foeman's heart, before it buried
itself in the throat of his companion.

We were having a merry time of it, we two, when a great body of Issus'
own guards were ordered into the arena.  On they came with fierce
cries, while from every side the armed prisoners swarmed upon them.

For half an hour it was as though all hell had broken loose.  In the
walled confines of the arena we fought in an inextricable
mass--howling, cursing, blood-streaked demons; and ever the sword of
the young red man flashed beside me.

Slowly and by repeated commands I had succeeded in drawing the
prisoners into a rough formation about us, so that at last we fought
formed into a rude circle in the centre of which were the doomed maids.

Many had gone down on both sides, but by far the greater havoc had been
wrought in the ranks of the guards of Issus.  I could see messengers
running swiftly through the audience, and as they passed the nobles
there unsheathed their swords and sprang into the arena.  They were
going to annihilate us by force of numbers--that was quite evidently
their plan.

I caught a glimpse of Issus leaning far forward upon her throne, her
hideous countenance distorted in a horrid grimace of hate and rage, in
which I thought I could distinguish an expression of fear.  It was that
face that inspired me to the thing that followed.

Quickly I ordered fifty of the prisoners to drop back behind us and
form a new circle about the maidens.

"Remain and protect them until I return," I commanded.

Then, turning to those who formed the outer line, I cried, "Down with
Issus!  Follow me to the throne; we will reap vengeance where vengeance
is deserved."

The youth at my side was the first to take up the cry of "Down with
Issus!" and then at my back and from all sides rose a hoarse shout, "To
the throne!  To the throne!"

As one man we moved, an irresistible fighting mass, over the bodies of
dead and dying foes toward the gorgeous throne of the Martian deity.
Hordes of the doughtiest fighting-men of the First Born poured from the
audience to check our progress.  We mowed them down before us as they
had been paper men.

"To the seats, some of you!" I cried as we approached the arena's
barrier wall.  "Ten of us can take the throne," for I had seen that
Issus' guards had for the most part entered the fray within the arena.

On both sides of me the prisoners broke to left and right for the
seats, vaulting the low wall with dripping swords lusting for the
crowded victims who awaited them.

In another moment the entire amphitheatre was filled with the shrieks
of the dying and the wounded, mingled with the clash of arms and
triumphant shouts of the victors.

Side by side the young red man and I, with perhaps a dozen others,
fought our way to the foot of the throne.  The remaining guards,
reinforced by the high dignitaries and nobles of the First Born, closed
in between us and Issus, who sat leaning far forward upon her carved
sorapus bench, now screaming high-pitched commands to her following,
now hurling blighting curses upon those who sought to desecrate her
godhood.

The frightened slaves about her trembled in wide-eyed expectancy,
knowing not whether to pray for our victory or our defeat.  Several
among them, proud daughters no doubt of some of Barsoom's noblest
warriors, snatched swords from the hands of the fallen and fell upon
the guards of Issus, but they were soon cut down; glorious martyrs to a
hopeless cause.

The men with us fought well, but never since Tars Tarkas and I fought
out that long, hot afternoon shoulder to shoulder against the hordes of
Warhoon in the dead sea bottom before Thark, had I seen two men fight
to such good purpose and with such unconquerable ferocity as the young
red man and I fought that day before the throne of Issus, Goddess of
Death, and of Life Eternal.

Man by man those who stood between us and the carven sorapus wood bench
went down before our blades.  Others swarmed in to fill the breach, but
inch by inch, foot by foot we won nearer and nearer to our goal.

Presently a cry went up from a section of the stands near by--"Rise
slaves!"  "Rise slaves!" it rose and fell until it swelled to a mighty
volume of sound that swept in great billows around the entire
amphitheatre.

For an instant, as though by common assent, we ceased our fighting to
look for the meaning of this new note nor did it take but a moment to
translate its significance.  In all parts of the structure the female
slaves were falling upon their masters with whatever weapon came first
to hand.  A dagger snatched from the harness of her mistress was waved
aloft by some fair slave, its shimmering blade crimson with the
lifeblood of its owner; swords plucked from the bodies of the dead
about them; heavy ornaments which could be turned into bludgeons--such
were the implements with which these fair women wreaked the long-pent
vengeance which at best could but partially recompense them for the
unspeakable cruelties and indignities which their black masters had
heaped upon them.  And those who could find no other weapons used their
strong fingers and their gleaming teeth.

It was at once a sight to make one shudder and to cheer; but in a brief
second we were engaged once more in our own battle with only the
unquenchable battle cry of the women to remind us that they still
fought--"Rise slaves!" "Rise slaves!"

Only a single thin rank of men now stood between us and Issus.  Her
face was blue with terror.  Foam flecked her lips.  She seemed too
paralysed with fear to move.  Only the youth and I fought now.  The
others all had fallen, and I was like to have gone down too from a
nasty long-sword cut had not a hand reached out from behind my
adversary and clutched his elbow as the blade was falling upon me.  The
youth sprang to my side and ran his sword through the fellow before he
could recover to deliver another blow.

I should have died even then but for that as my sword was tight wedged
in the breastbone of a Dator of the First Born.  As the fellow went
down I snatched his sword from him and over his prostrate body looked
into the eyes of the one whose quick hand had saved me from the first
cut of his sword--it was Phaidor, daughter of Matai Shang.

"Fly, my Prince!" she cried.  "It is useless to fight them longer.  All
within the arena are dead.  All who charged the throne are dead but you
and this youth.  Only among the seats are there left any of your
fighting-men, and they and the slave women are fast being cut down.
Listen!  You can scarce hear the battle-cry of the women now for nearly
all are dead.  For each one of you there are ten thousand blacks within
the domains of the First Born.  Break for the open and the sea of
Korus.  With your mighty sword arm you may yet win to the Golden Cliffs
and the templed gardens of the Holy Therns.  There tell your story to
Matai Shang, my father.  He will keep you, and together you may find a
way to rescue me.  Fly while there is yet a bare chance for flight."

But that was not my mission, nor could I see much to be preferred in
the cruel hospitality of the Holy Therns to that of the First Born.

"Down with Issus!" I shouted, and together the boy and I took up the
fight once more.  Two blacks went down with our swords in their vitals,
and we stood face to face with Issus.  As my sword went up to end her
horrid career her paralysis left her, and with an ear-piercing shriek
she turned to flee.  Directly behind her a black gulf suddenly yawned
in the flooring of the dais.  She sprang for the opening with the youth
and I close at her heels.  Her scattered guard rallied at her cry and
rushed for us.  A blow fell upon the head of the youth.  He staggered
and would have fallen, but I caught him in my left arm and turned to
face an infuriated mob of religious fanatics crazed by the affront I
had put upon their goddess, just as Issus disappeared into the black
depths beneath me.




CHAPTER XII

DOOMED TO DIE


For an instant I stood there before they fell upon me, but the first
rush of them forced me back a step or two.  My foot felt for the floor
but found only empty space.  I had backed into the pit which had
received Issus.  For a second I toppled there upon the brink.  Then I
too with the boy still tightly clutched in my arms pitched backward
into the black abyss.

We struck a polished chute, the opening above us closed as magically as
it had opened, and we shot down, unharmed, into a dimly lighted
apartment far below the arena.

As I rose to my feet the first thing I saw was the malignant
countenance of Issus glaring at me through the heavy bars of a grated
door at one side of the chamber.

"Rash mortal!" she shrilled.  "You shall pay the awful penalty for your
blasphemy in this secret cell.  Here you shall lie alone and in
darkness with the carcass of your accomplice festering in its
rottenness by your side, until crazed by loneliness and hunger you feed
upon the crawling maggots that were once a man."

That was all.  In another instant she was gone, and the dim light which
had filled the cell faded into Cimmerian blackness.

"Pleasant old lady," said a voice at my side.

"Who speaks?" I asked.

"'Tis I, your companion, who has had the honour this day of fighting
shoulder to shoulder with the greatest warrior that ever wore metal
upon Barsoom."

"I thank God that you are not dead," I said.  "I feared for that nasty
cut upon your head."

"It but stunned me," he replied.  "A mere scratch."

"Maybe it were as well had it been final," I said.  "We seem to be in a
pretty fix here with a splendid chance of dying of starvation and
thirst."

"Where are we?"

"Beneath the arena," I replied.  "We tumbled down the shaft that
swallowed Issus as she was almost at our mercy."

He laughed a low laugh of pleasure and relief, and then reaching out
through the inky blackness he sought my shoulder and pulled my ear
close to his mouth.

"Nothing could be better," he whispered.  "There are secrets within the
secrets of Issus of which Issus herself does not dream."

"What do you mean?"

"I laboured with the other slaves a year since in the remodelling of
these subterranean galleries, and at that time we found below these an
ancient system of corridors and chambers that had been sealed up for
ages.  The blacks in charge of the work explored them, taking several
of us along to do whatever work there might be occasion for.  I know
the entire system perfectly.

"There are miles of corridors honeycombing the ground beneath the
gardens and the temple itself, and there is one passage that leads down
to and connects with the lower regions that open on the water shaft
that gives passage to Omean.

"If we can reach the submarine undetected we may yet make the sea in
which there are many islands where the blacks never go.  There we may
live for a time, and who knows what may transpire to aid us to escape?"

He had spoken all in a low whisper, evidently fearing spying ears even
here, and so I answered him in the same subdued tone.

"Lead back to Shador, my friend," I whispered.  "Xodar, the black, is
there.  We were to attempt our escape together, so I cannot desert him."

"No," said the boy, "one cannot desert a friend.  It were better to be
recaptured ourselves than that."

Then he commenced groping his way about the floor of the dark chamber
searching for the trap that led to the corridors beneath.  At length he
summoned me by a low, "S-s-t," and I crept toward the sound of his
voice to find him kneeling on the brink of an opening in the floor.

"There is a drop here of about ten feet," he whispered.  "Hang by your
hands and you will alight safely on a level floor of soft sand."

Very quietly I lowered myself from the inky cell above into the inky
pit below.  So utterly dark was it that we could not see our hands at
an inch from our noses.  Never, I think, have I known such complete
absence of light as existed in the pits of Issus.

For an instant I hung in mid air.  There is a strange sensation
connected with an experience of that nature which is quite difficult to
describe.  When the feet tread empty air and the distance below is
shrouded in darkness there is a feeling akin to panic at the thought of
releasing the hold and taking the plunge into unknown depths.

Although the boy had told me that it was but ten feet to the floor
below I experienced the same thrills as though I were hanging above a
bottomless pit.  Then I released my hold and dropped--four feet to a
soft cushion of sand.

The boy followed me.

"Raise me to your shoulders," he said, "and I will replace the trap."

This done he took me by the hand, leading me very slowly, with much
feeling about and frequent halts to assure himself that he did not
stray into wrong passageways.

Presently we commenced the descent of a very steep incline.

"It will not be long," he said, "before we shall have light.  At the
lower levels we meet the same stratum of phosphorescent rock that
illuminates Omean."

Never shall I forget that trip through the pits of Issus.  While it was
devoid of important incidents yet it was filled for me with a strange
charm of excitement and adventure which I think must have hinged
principally on the unguessable antiquity of these long-forgotten
corridors.  The things which the Stygian darkness hid from my objective
eye could not have been half so wonderful as the pictures which my
imagination wrought as it conjured to life again the ancient peoples of
this dying world and set them once more to the labours, the intrigues,
the mysteries and the cruelties which they had practised to make their
last stand against the swarming hordes of the dead sea bottoms that had
driven them step by step to the uttermost pinnacle of the world where
they were now intrenched behind an impenetrable barrier of superstition.

In addition to the green men there had been three principal races upon
Barsoom.  The blacks, the whites, and a race of yellow men.  As the
waters of the planet dried and the seas receded, all other resources
dwindled until life upon the planet became a constant battle for
survival.

The various races had made war upon one another for ages, and the three
higher types had easily bested the green savages of the water places of
the world, but now that the receding seas necessitated constant
abandonment of their fortified cities and forced upon them a more or
less nomadic life in which they became separated into smaller
communities they soon fell prey to the fierce hordes of green men.  The
result was a partial amalgamation of the blacks, whites and yellows,
the result of which is shown in the present splendid race of red men.

I had always supposed that all traces of the original races had
disappeared from the face of Mars, yet within the past four days I had
found both whites and blacks in great multitudes.  Could it be possible
that in some far-off corner of the planet there still existed a remnant
of the ancient race of yellow men?
