which contain it. Fungi and these degenerates which lack chlorophyll
usually grow in dark, shady woods.


Wild Honeysuckle; Pink, Purple, or Wild Azalea; Pinxter-flower

_Rhododendron nudiflorum_

_Flowers--_Crimson pink, purplish or rose pink, to nearly white, 1-1/2
to 2 in. across, faintly fragrant, clustered, opening before or with the
leaves, and developed from cone-like, scaly brown buds. Calyx minute,
5-parted; corolla funnel-shaped, the tube narrow, hairy, with 5 regular,
spreading lobes; 5 long red stamens; 1 pistil, declined, protruding.
_Stem:_ Shrubby, usually simple below, but branching above, 2 to 6 ft.
high. _Leaves:_ Usually clustered, deciduous, oblong, acute at both
ends, hairy on midrib.

_Preferred Habitat_--Moist, rocky woods, or dry woods and thickets.

_Flowering Season_--April-May.

_Distribution_--Maine to Illinois, and southward to the Gulf.

Woods and hillsides are glowing with fragrant, rosy masses of this
lovely azalea, the Pinxter-bloem or Whitsunday flower of the Dutch
colonists, long before the seventh Sunday after Easter. Among our
earliest exports, this hardy shrub, the Swamp Azalea, and the superb
flame-colored species of the Alleghanies, were sent early in the
eighteenth century to the old country, and there crossed with _A.
Pontica_ of southern Europe by the Belgian horticulturists, to whom we
owe the Ghent azaleas, the final triumphs of the hybridizer, that
glorify the shrubberies on our own lawns to-day. The azalea became the
national flower of Flanders. These hardy species lose their leaves in
winter, whereas the hothouse varieties of _A. Indica_, a native of China
and Japan, have thickish leaves, almost if not quite evergreen. A few of
the latter stand our northern winters, especially the pure white variety
now quite commonly planted in cemetery lots. In that delightfully
enthusiastic little book, "The Garden's Story," Mr. Ellwanger says of
the Ghent Azalea: "In it I find a charm presented by no other flower.
Its soft tints of buff, sulphur, and primrose; its dazzling shades of
apricot, salmon, orange, and vermilion are always a fresh revelation of
color. They have no parallel among flowers, and exist only in opals,
sunset skies, and the flush of autumn woods." Certainly American
horticulturists were not clever in allowing the industry of raising
these plants from our native stock to thrive on foreign soil.

From Maine to Florida and westward to Texas, chiefly near the coast,
in low, wet places only need we look for the Swamp Pink or
Honeysuckle, White or Clammy Azalea (_Rhododendron viscosum_), a more
hairy species than the Pinxter-flower, with a very sticky, glandular
corolla tube, and deliciously fragrant blossoms, by no means
invariably white. John Burroughs is not the only one who has passed
"several patches of swamp honeysuckles, red with blossoms"
("Wake-Robin"). But as this species does not bloom until June and
July, when the sun quickly bleaches the delicate flowers, it is true
we most frequently find them white, merely tinged with pink. The
leaves are well developed before the blossoms appear.


American or Great Rhododendron; Great Laurel; Rose Tree, or Bay

_Rhododendron maximum_

_Flowers_--Rose pink, varying to white, greenish in the throat, spotted
with yellow or orange, in broad clusters set like a bouquet among
leaves, and developed from scaly, cone-like buds; pedicels sticky-hairy.
Calyx 5-parted minute; corolla 5-lobed, broadly bell-shaped, 2 in. broad
or less; usually 10 stamens, equally spreading; 1 pistil. _Stem:_
Sometimes a tree attaining a height of 40 ft., usually 6 to 20 ft.,
shrubby, woody. _Leaves:_ Evergreen, drooping in winter, leathery, dark
green on both sides, lance-oblong, 4 to 10 in. long, entire edged,
narrowing into stout petioles.

_Preferred Habitat_--Mountainous woodland, hillsides near streams.

_Flowering Season_--June-July.

_Distribution_--Uncommon from Ohio and New England to Nova Scotia;
abundant through the Alleghanies to Georgia.

When this most magnificent of our native shrubs covers whole
mountainsides throughout the Alleghany region with bloom, one stands
awed in the presence of such overwhelming beauty. Nowhere else does
the rhododendron attain such size or luxuriance. There it produces a
tall trunk, and towers among the trees; it spreads its branches far
and wide until they interlock and form almost impenetrable thickets
locally called "hells" where pioneer explorers wandered, lost
themselves and perished; it glorifies the loneliest mountain road with
superb bouquets of its delicate flowers set among dark, glossy foliage
scarcely less attractive. The mountain in bloom is worth travelling a
thousand miles to see.

Rhododendrons, azaleas, and laurels fall under a common ban pronounced
by bee-keepers. The bees which transfer pollen from blossom to blossom
while gathering nectar, manufacture honey said to be poisonous. Cattle
know enough to let all this foliage alone. Apparently the ants fear no
more evil results from the nectar than the bees themselves; and were it
not for the sticky parts nearest the flowers, on which they crawl to
meet their death, the blossom's true benefactors would find little
refreshment left.


Mountain or American Laurel; Calico Bush; Spoonwood; Calmoun;
Broad-leaved Kalmia

_Kalmia latifolia_

_Flowers_--Buds and new flowers bright rose pink, afterward fading
white, and only lined with pink, 1 in. across or less, numerous, in
terminal clusters. Calyx small, 5-parted, sticky; corolla like a
5-pointed saucer, with 10 projections on outside; 10 arching stamens, an
anther lodged in each projection; 1 pistil. _Stem:_ Shrubby, woody,
stiffly branched, 2 to 20 ft. high. _Leaves:_ Evergreen, entire, oval to
elliptic, pointed at both ends, tapering into petioles. _Fruit:_ A
round, brown capsule, with the style long remaining on it.

_Preferred Habitat_--Sandy or rocky woods, especially in hilly or
mountainous country.

_Flowering Season_--May-June.

_Distribution_--New Brunswick and Ontario, southward to the Gulf of
Mexico, and westward to Ohio.

It would be well if Americans, imitating the Japanese in making
pilgrimages to scenes of supreme natural beauty, visited the mountains,
rocky, woody hillsides, ravines, and tree-girt uplands when the laurel
is in its glory; when masses of its pink and white blossoms, set among
the dark evergreen leaves, flush the landscape like Aurora, and are
reflected from the pools of streams and the serene depths of mountain
lakes. Peter Kalm, a Swedish pupil of Linnaeus, who travelled here early
in the eighteenth century, was more impressed by its beauty than that of
any other flower. He introduced the plant to Europe, where it is known
as kalmia, and extensively cultivated on fine estates that are thrown
open to the public during the flowering season. Even a flower is not
without honor, save in its own country. We have only to prepare a border
of leaf mould, take up the young plant without injuring the roots or
allowing them to dry, hurry them into the ground, and prune back the
bush a little, to establish it in our gardens, where it will bloom
freely after the second year. Lime in the soil and manure are fatal to
it as well as to rhododendrons and azaleas. All they require is a mulch
of leaves kept on winter and summer that their fine fibrous roots may
never dry out.

All the kalmias resort to a most ingenious device for compelling insect
visitors to carry their pollen from blossom to blossom. A newly-opened
flower has its stigma erected where the incoming bee must leave on its
sticky surface the four minute orange-like grains carried from the
anther of another flower on the hairy underside of her body. Now, each
anther is tucked away in one of the ten little pockets of the
saucer-shaped blossom, and the elastic filaments are strained upward
like a bow. After hovering above the nectary, the bee has only to
descend toward it, when her leg, touching against one of the
hair-triggers of the spring trap, pop! goes the little anther-gun,
discharging pollen from its bores as it flies upward. So delicately is
the mechanism adjusted, the slightest jar or rough handling releases the
anthers; but, on the other hand, should insects be excluded by a net
stretched over the plant, the flowers will fall off and wither without
firing off their pollen-charged guns. At least, this is true in the
great majority of tests. As in the case of hothouse flowers, no fertile
seed is set when nets keep away the laurel's benefactors. One has only
to touch the hair-trigger with the end of a pin to see how exquisitely
delicate is this provision for cross-fertilization.

However much we may be cautioned by the apiculturists against honey made
from laurel nectar, the bees themselves ignore all warnings and
apparently without evil results--happily for the flowers dependent upon
them and their kin. Mr. Frank R. Cheshire, in "Bees and Bee-keeping,"
the standard English work on the subject, writes: "During the celebrated
Retreat of the Ten Thousand, as recorded by Xenophon in his 'Anabasis,'
the soldiers regaled themselves upon some honey found near Trebizonde,
where were many bee-hives. Intoxication with vomiting was the result.
Some were so overcome", he states, "as to be incapable of standing. Not a
soldier died, but very many were greatly weakened for several days."
Tournefort endeavored to ascertain whether this account was corroborated
by anything ascertainable in the locality, and had good reason to be
satisfied respecting it. He concluded that the honey had been gathered
from a shrub growing in the neighborhood of Trebizonde, which is well
known there as producing the before-mentioned effects. It is now agreed
that the plants were species of rhododendron and azaleas. Lamberti
confirms Xenophon's account by stating that similar effects are produced
by honey of Colchis, where the same shrubs are common. In 1790, even,
fatal cases occurred in America in consequence of eating wild honey,
which was traced to _Kalmia latifolia_ by an inquiry instituted under
direction of the American government.

Sheep-laurel, Lamb-kill, Wicky, Calf-kill, Sheep-poison, Narrow-leaved
Laurel (_K. angustifolia_), and so on through a list of folk-names
testifying chiefly to the plant's wickedness in the pasture, may be
especially deadly food for cattle, but it certainly is a feast to the
eyes. However much we may admire the small, deep crimson-pink flowers
that we find in June and July in moist fields or swampy ground or on the
hillsides, few of us will agree with Thoreau, who claimed that it is
"handsomer than the Mountain Laurel." The low shrub may be only six
inches high, or it may attain three feet. The narrow evergreen leaves,
pale on the underside, have a tendency to form groups of threes,
standing upright when newly put forth, but bent downward with the
weight of age. A peculiarity of the plant is that clusters of leaves
usually terminate the woody stem, for the flowers grow in whorls or in
clusters at the side of it below.


Trailing Arbutus; Mayflower; Ground Laurel

_Epigaea repens_

_Flowers_--Pink, fading to nearly white, very fragrant, about 1/2 in.
across when expanded, few or many in clusters at ends of branches. Calyx
of 5 dry overlapping sepals; corolla salver-shaped, the slender, hairy
tube spreading into 5 equal lobes; 10 stamens; 1 pistil with a
column-like style and a 5-lobed stigma. _Stem:_ Spreading over the
ground (_Epigaea_ = on the earth); woody, the leafy twigs covered with
rusty hairs. _Leaves:_ Alternate, oval, rounded at the base, smooth
above, more or less hairy below, evergreen, weather-worn, on short,
rusty, hairy petioles.

_Preferred Habitat_--Light sandy loam in woods, especially under
evergreen trees, or in mossy, rocky places.

_Flowering Season_--March-May.

_Distribution_--Newfoundland to Florida, west to Kentucky and the
Northwest Territory.

Can words describe the fragrance of the very breath of spring--that
delicious commingling of the perfume of arbutus, the odor of pines, and
the snow-soaked soil just warming into life? Those who know the flower
only as it is sold in the city streets, tied with wet, dirty string
into tight bunches, withered and forlorn, can have little idea of the
joy of finding the pink, pearly blossoms freshly opened among the
withered leaves of oak and chestnut, moss and pine needles in which they
nestle close to the cold earth in the leafless, windy northern forest.
Even in Florida, where broad patches carpet the woods in February, one
misses something of the arbutus's accustomed charm simply because there
are no slushy remnants of snowdrifts, no reminders of winter hardships
in the vicinity. There can be no glad surprise at finding dainty spring
flowers in a land of perpetual summer. Little wonder that the Pilgrim
Fathers, after the first awful winter on the "stern New England coast,"
loved this early messenger of hope and gladness above the frozen ground
at Plymouth. In an introductory note to his poem "The Mayflowers,"
Whittier states that the name was familiar in England, as the
application of it to the historic vessel shows; but it was applied by
the English, and still is, to the hawthorn. Its use in New England in
connection with the Trailing Arbutus dates from a very early day, some
claiming that the first Pilgrims so used it in affectionate memory of
the vessel and its English flower association.

  "Sad Mayflower! watched by winter stars,
  And nursed by winter gales,
  With petals of the sleeted spars,
  And leaves of frozen sails!

  "But warmer suns ere long shall bring
  To life the frozen sod,
  And through dead leaves of hope shall spring
  Afresh the flowers of God!"

There is little use trying to coax this shyest of sylvan flowers into
our gardens where other members of its family, rhododendrons, laurels,
and azaleas make themselves delightfully at home. It is wild as a hawk,
an untamable creature that slowly pines to death when brought into
contact with civilization. Greedy street venders, who ruthlessly tear up
the plant by the yard, and others without even the excuse of eking out a
paltry income by its sale, have already exterminated it within a wide
radius of our Eastern cities. How curious that the majority of people
show their appreciation of a flower's beauty only by selfishly,
ignorantly picking every specimen they can find!


Creeping Wintergreen; Checker-berry; Partridge-berry; Mountain Tea;
Ground Tea, Deer, Box, or Spice Berry

_Gaultheria procumbens_

_Flowers_--White, small, usually solitary, nodding from a leaf axil.
Corolla rounded bell-shape, 5-toothed; calyx 5-parted, persistent; 10
included stamens, their anther-sacs opening by a pore at the top.
_Stem:_ Creeping above or below ground, its branches 2 to 6 in. high.
_Leaves:_ Mostly clustered at top of branches; alternate, glossy,
leathery, evergreen, much darker above than underneath, oval to oblong,
very finely saw-edged; the entire plant aromatic. _Fruit:_ Bright red,
mealy, spicy, berry-like; ripe in October.

_Preferred Habitat_--Cool woods, especially under evergreens.

_Flowering Season_--June-September.

_Distribution_--Newfoundland to Georgia, westward to Michigan and
Manitoba.

"Where cornels arch their cool, dark boughs o'er beds of wintergreen,"
wrote Bryant; yet it is safe to say that nine colonies out of ten of
this hardy little plant are under evergreens, not dogwood trees. Poets
make us feel the _spirit_ of Nature in a wonderful way, but--look out
for their facts!

Omnivorous children who are addicted to birch-chewing prefer these
tender yellow-green leaves tinged with red, when newly put forth in
June--"Youngsters" rural New Englanders call them then. In some sections
a kind of tea is steeped from the leaves, which also furnish the
old-fashioned embrocation, wintergreen oil. Late in the year the glossy
bronze carpet of old leaves dotted over with vivid red "berries" invites
much trampling by hungry birds and beasts, especially deer and bears,
not to mention well-fed humans. Coveys of Bob Whites and packs of grouse
will plunge beneath the snow for fare so delicious as this spicy, mealy
fruit that hangs on the plant till spring, of course for the benefit of
just such colonizing agents as they. Quite a different species,
belonging to another family, bears the true partridge-berry, albeit the
wintergreen shares with it a number of popular names. In a strict sense
neither of these plants produces a berry; for the fruit of the true
Partridge Vine (_Mitchella repens_) is a double drupe, or stone bearer,
each half containing four hard, seed-like nutlets; while the
wintergreen's so-called berry is merely the calyx grown thick, fleshy,
and gayly colored--only a coating for the five-celled ovary that
contains the minute seeds. Little baskets of wintergreen berries bring
none too high prices in the fancy fruit and grocery shops when we
calculate how many charming plants such unnatural use of them
sacrifices.




PRIMROSE FAMILY _(Primulaceae)_


Four-leaved or Whorled Loosestrife; Crosswort

_Lysimachia quadrifolia_

_Flowers_--Yellow, streaked with, dark red, 1/2 in. across or less; each
on a thread-like, spreading footstem from a leaf axil. Calyx, 5 to 7
parted; corolla of 5 to 7 spreading lobes, and as many stamens inserted
on the throat; 1 pistil. _Stem:_ Slender, erect, 1 to 3 ft. tall, leafy.
_Leaves:_ In whorls of 4 (rarely in 3's to 7's), lance-shaped or oblong,
entire, black dotted.

