Whitneyville Foundery, near New Haven, Conn.

Keuffel & Esser, 71 Nassau st., N.Y., the best place to get 1st-class
Drawing Materials, Swiss Instruments, and Rubber Triangles and Curves.

Foot Lathes--E.P. Ryder's improved--220 Center st., N.Y.

Those wanting latest improved Hub and Spoke Machinery, address
Kettenring, Strong & Lauster, Defiance, Ohio.

For tinmans' tools, presses, etc., apply to Mays & Bliss, Brooklyn, N.Y.

Mill-stone dressing diamond machine, simple, effective, durable. Also,
Glazier's diamonds. John Dickinson, 64 Nassau st., New York.

Send 3-cent stamp for a circular on the uses of Soluble Glass, or
Silicates of Soda and Potash. Manufactured by L. & J.W. Feuchtwanger,
Chemists and Drug Importers, 55 Cedar st., New York.

Glynn's Anti-Incrustator for Steam Boiler--The only reliable
preventative. No foaming, and does not attack metals of boiler. Liberal
terms to Agents. C.D. Fredricks, 587 Broadway, New York.

Cold Rolled--Shafting, piston rods, pump rods, Collins pat. double
compression couplings, manufactured by Jones & Laughlins, Pittsburgh,
Pa.

For solid wrought-iron beams, etc., see advertisement. Address Union
Iron Mille, Pittsburgh, Pa., for lithograph, etc.

Machinists, boiler makers, tinners, and workers of sheet metals read
advertisement of the Parker Power Presses.

Diamond carbon, formed into wedge or other shapes for pointing and
edging tools or cutters for drilling and working stone, etc. Send stamp
for circular. John Dickinson, 64 Nassau st., New York.

The paper that meets the eye of manufacturers throughout the United
States--Boston Bulletin, $4.00 a year. Advertisements 17c. a line.

Winans' boiler powder, 11 Wall st., N.Y., removes Incrustations without
injury or foaming; 12 years in use. Beware of Imitations.

       *       *       *       *       *




ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.


_Correspondents who expect to receive answers to their letters must,
in all cases, sign their names. We have a right to know those who seek
information from us; besides, as sometimes happens we may prefer to
address correspondents by mail.

SPECIAL NOTE.--This column is designed for the general interest and
instruction of our readers, not for gratuitous replies to questions of
a purely business or personal nature. We will publish such inquiries,
however, when paid for as advertisemets at $1.00 a line, under the head
of "Business and Personal."

All reference to back numbers should be by volume and page._

       *       *       *       *       *

C.H.G., of N.Y.--To make pure nitrate of silver, dissolve pure silver in
pure nitric acid, evaporate the solution to dryness, or, if crystals are
preferred, evaporate until the solution is sufficiently concentrated
to form crystals. If you can not get pure silver, you may purify it by
dissolving coin in nitric acid, filtering the solution and precipitating
the silver in the form of a chloride by hydrochloric acid. Next wash the
precipitate with hot water until the washings cease to redden litmus
paper. Next mix the pure chloride of silver while yet moist with its own
weight of pure crystallized carbonate of soda, place the mixture in a
covered porcelain crucible and heat very gradually until the fusing
point of silver is reached. The reduced silver will be pure and may be
removed by breaking the crucible. Wash the button thoroughly with hot
water to remove the flux. In dissolving the pure silver thus obtained in
nitric acid, it is better to use an excess of acid; the excess will be
driven off by heat in evaporation.

G.B., of Iowa.--Nominal horse power is merely a conventional expression
for diameter of cylinder and length of stroke, and does not apply to the
actual power of the engine. It is found by multiplying the cube root of
the stroke in feet by the square of the diameter in inches and dividing
the product by 47. This rule is based upon the postulate established by
Watt, that the speed of a piston with two feet stroke is 160 feet per
minute, and that for longer strokes the speed varies as the cube roots
of the length of the stroke. It is needless to say this rule is not
observed in modern practice, yet the expression, nominal horse power, is
like many other relics of past time still retained. The above rule does
not apply to high pressure engines. For such engines Bourne has given
the following rule: Multiply the square of the diameter of the cylinder
in inches by the cube root of the stroke in feet, and divide by 15.6.
The real power of an engine is estimated from the mean effective
pressure in the cylinder--not the boiler--and the speed of the piston.
Your data are insufficient to determine the horse power of your boiler.
The horse power of boilers is estimated from the extent of heating
surface when the grate and all other things are correctly proportioned,
but with them as with engines, only actual test will positively
determine it. The pipe you mention ought to be enlarged as proposed.

W.H.R., of Mass.--Pressure acts independently of the mode of
application. A tun laid upon the head of a wedge would produce the same
effect as though it were applied through toggles. When, however, a
weight is dropped its effect increases as the square of its velocity.

J.B., of N.Y.--We recommend you to get "Appleton's Dictionary of
Mechanics." Also send for descriptive catalogue to Henry Carey Baird,
Philadelphia, from which you will be able to judge for yourself what
works are suited to your requirements.

T.D.H., of Mass.--Ammonia, in a weak solution, may be used to cleanse
the scalp, but is not recommended for the purpose. Borax in solution is
better. The supposed preservation of the color of the hair by its use is
a mistake.

F.B.H., of Ill.--So far as we know, nothing better than the flax seed
bag has been discovered for packing the lower end of tubes in artesian
wells. We have never heard of any trouble arising from the method and
think you will have none.

L.G. of Mass.--Express the decimal ratio of the diameter of a circle to
the circumference to which you refer, as a mixed vulgar fraction, and
you will have what you ask for, if we understand your query.

A.H.S., of Sandwich Islands.--We know of no substance that in our
opinion, could be used advantageously to paint the interior of
sheet-iron evaporating pans for concentrating cane juice.

L.B., of Wis.--We would be glad to assist you but the data you furnish
are not sufficient. The accurate solution of such a problem involves the
higher mathematics.

A.H.M.--All animal and mineral oils are destructive to rubber. Linseed
oil will not dissolve it. Oils should not be allowed to get on rubber
belting.

T.W.J., of Pa.--For your rollers try some emery mixed in a solution of
gum shellac in good alcohol.

E.B., of Mass.--The patent can be corrected by reissue.

J.M.T., of Ind.--To find the proper area for a safety valve port, when
the evaporating surface is properly proportioned to the engine power,
multiply the square of the diameter of the piston in inches by the speed
in feet of the piston per minute, and divide the product by 375 times
the pressure on the boiler per square inch. Having decided upon the
length of the lever, the distance of the valve stem from the fulcrum,
and the point from which the weight will be suspended, the weight
necessary will be found by multiplying the area of the valve port in
inches into the pressure per square inch in the boiler in pounds, and
this product into the distance of the center of the valve stem from
the fulcrum in inches, and dividing the product thus obtained by the
distance from the fulcrum to the point of suspension of the weight in
inches. The quotient will give the weight in pounds.

A.K.S., of Ohio.--The inclination of the poles of a planet to the plane
of its orbit, determines its zones and also its seasons. The inclination
of the earth's axis is twenty-three and one half degrees. This places
the tropics the same distance each side of the equator, and the polar
circles the same distance from the poles. The torrid zone is therefore
forty-seven degrees wide, and the temperate zones each forty-three
degrees wide. As the planets vary in their inclination of their axis
to the planes of their orbits, it follows that their zones and seasons
differ from those of the earth.

W.H.C., of Texas.--The teeth of a circular wood saw to be driven by
foot-power, should be not larger than those of the ordinary hand
crosscut. The fly-wheel ought to have a rim weighing from eighty to one
hundred pounds, and it should be, for a 12-inch saw, not less than a
foot in diameter. It should be placed on the saw arbor. The belt should
not run on the fly-wheel, but on a special pulley, and the treadle and
crank motion should be so adjusted that the foot will move through an
arc of from 10 to 12 inches.

A.H.B., of Pa.--We advise you to use a battery in coating the small
gray castings, of which you write, with copper. It will be all the more
satisfactory in the end. The best polishing material to put in with them
in the tumbler we think would be leather cuttings and sweepings.
They will not need returning to the tumbler after being coppered.
We recommend you to get "Byrne's Practical Metalworkers Assistant,"
published by Henry Carey Baird, Philadelphia.

J.H.G., of Tenn.--Don't put oil in your boiler to prevent incrustation.
It will not probably do any good, and it will cause much foaming, while
besides that it is a waste of heat, it is injurious to engines.

S.S.R., of Tenn.--No ammoniacal engines are, so far as we are aware,
running in this country.

C.E.C., of Ohio.--The varnish for patterns is common shellac varnish. It
is sometimes made black by lampblack.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECENT AMERICAN AND FOREIGN PATENTS.


_Under this heading we shall publish weekly notes of some of the more
prominent home and foreign patents_.

       *       *       *       *       *

MOP.--Philip Cook, Jr., Sioux City, Iowa.--This invention relates to a
new and useful improvement in mops, whereby they are so arranged that
they may be wrung or freed from water when in use by moving the slides
connected with the handle and head of the mop.

VENTILATING HORSE COVER.--Charles P. Eager, Boston., Mass.--This
invention relates to a new horse cover, which is so arranged that it
will be entirely waterproof, and nevertheless permit a free escape of
air from the body of the animal.

CAR COUPLING.--S.O. Campbell, Tipton, Mo.--This invention relates to a
new car coupling, which is so arranged that it will be self-coupling
and retain the coupling pin ready to lock as long as the link is not
inserted.

GAS STOVE.--Wm. J. Hays, New York city.--This invention has for its
object to construct a gas stove, with an extender radiating surface, and
with proper air channels, so that with a comparatively small amount of
heat, the air in an ordinary-sized room can be properly warmed.

SCRIBE HOOK FOR WEATHER BOARDING.--John Nester, Portland, Oregon.--This
invention relates to a new scribe hook for weather-boards, which will be
generally useful and adaptable to the purposes for which it is intended
and to provide an adjustable spur and marker.

RAILROAD SMOKE CONVEYER.--Lemuel Powell, Milford, Conn.--The object of
this invention is to prevent the smoke and ashes, issuing from the smoke
stack of a locomotive, from entering the cars of the train and from
thereby preventing the proper ventilation of the cars.

DRILL FOR BORING POLYGONAL HOLES.--J.C. Broadley, Franklin, N.J.--This
invention relates to a new implement for boring polygonal, oval,
star-shaped, or holes of other suitable form, in metal, wood, or other
material. The invention consists chiefly in arranging the pattern, which
regulates the shape of the hole to be bored, on the upper part of the
drill shank, and in having the bit shanks, which are pivoted to the
lower part of the drill shank, held by means of springs against the
inner edges of the inverted cup-shaped pattern.

ROOFING.--H.G. Noble, Selma, Ala.--This invention relates to
improvements in roofing, and consists in covering roofs with sheet
metal, laid on the rafters and nailed down at the edges, so as to be
considerably concaved between them, the joints on the rafters being
covered by inverted caps or troughs. The concave form of the sheet
is designed to prevent the sheet metal from cracking, to which it is
subject by expansion and contraction when laid on flat.

WASHING MACHINE.--John J. Kimball Naperville, Ill.--This invention
relates to improvements in washing machines, and consists in an improved
arrangement of operating mechanism for revolving a vertically suspended
shaft with a crank at the top, and carrying within the tub a corrugated
or roughened rubber, for action on the clothes. The invention also
comprises an improved arrangement of the rubber, whereby it is made
capable of sliding up or down on the shaft, according to the amount of
clothes to be acted on.

BOLT CUTTER.--O.E. Butler and S.P. Dunham Marshalltown, Iowa.--This
invention relates to improvements in hand instruments for cutting bolts,
and consists in the combination with the handles of an instrument,
such as patented to the inventors, January 19, 1869, as an improved
instrument for sharpening horseshoes, of a cutting pin of peculiar
construction, whereby the said tool is adapted, when this cutter is
applied in substitution of the cutter and jaw, is used for sharpening
horseshoes, to cut off the ends of bolts with great facility.

SHAFT TUG LUGS FOR HARNESS.--T.J. Magruder, Marion, Ohio.--This
invention relates to improvements in the construction and application of
shaft tug lugs for harness, and consists in forming the said lugs with
broad and long plates, properly curved to suit the curve of the pad, and
connecting the latter to the under sides of the skirts and to the
pads in a way to stiffen the skirt and to hold the stud securely from
breaking loose, the said lugs being made solid with a screw nut at the
end to confine the bearing straps, or hollow, with female screw threads
near the base, and bolts screwing into the said female threads to secure
the bearing straps and to admit of readily applying or removing the
straps so that the harness may be adapted for use either as single or
double harness.

HARNESS BUCKLE.--J.W. Burch, Fayette, Miss.--The object of this
invention is to provide buckles for harness and other uses, with tongues
constructed in the form of leather punches, whereby they may be used at
any time required for punching holes.

HUMMING-WHEEL TOY.--A.F. Able, New Orleans, La.--This invention relates
to improvements in humming wheel toys, having for its object to provide
an improved holding apparatus for supporting and maintaining the proper
tension on the cords, and designed to support the cords of two or more
wheels at the same time.

COMBINED CLOTHES IRONING TABLE AND CLOTHES DRYER.--William P. Adams,
Brooklyn, N.Y.--This invention relates to a new and useful improvement
in an article for the laundry, and consists in an adjustable ironing
table, and in combination therewith a clothes dryer.

SEED AND GRAIN STRIPPER.--J.F. King and H.A. Rice, Louisiana, Mo.--The
object of this invention is to provide a seed and grain stripper,
with light and strong fingers, capable of adjustment as to hight, and
arranged in a way to vary the spaces between the teeth at the point of
stripping the heads for straw of different sizes.

CLOTHES WRINGER.--M.M. Follett, Lake City, Minn.--This invention relates
to a new apparatus for applying pressure to the rollers of a wringer
with an object of obtaining equal and adjustable power without any
danger to the rubber of the rollers or to the articles to be dried.

AUGER HANDLE.--James Swan, Seymour, Conn.--The object of this invention
is to provide a cheap, simple, and durable handle for augurs for boring
in wood, one which shall require no fitting except to make the augur
enter the socket, and which shall be of such size and shape that the
shanks of ordinary augurs shall enter without any fitting at all.

CANDLESTICK.--H. Zahn, San Francisco, Cal.--This invention relates to a
new and useful improvement in candlesticks, and consists in the use of a
thumb screw in combination with the candlestick tube, whereby the candle
