No sooner had he repeated the words, meanwhile concentrating with
all the force of his newly trained will upon the single idea of
seeing and hearing what was happening on the unknown, yet quite
knowable planet--no sooner had his head sunk on his chest than he
became aware of a strange sound.

On all sides unseen apparatus gave forth a medley of subdued jars
and clankings. A variety of hissing sounds also were distinguishable.
And meanwhile Smith was staring hard, with the eyes he had borrowed
along with the ears, at a pair of human hands.

These hands were manipulating a group of highly polished levers and
hand-wheels. So long as his borrowed sight was fixed upon that group
Smith was entirely ignorant of the surroundings. All he could
surmise was that his agents operated some sort of machinery.

Then the agent glanced up; and Smith got his first shock. For he now
saw a cluster of indicating dials, such as one may see on the
instrument board of any automobile; but the trained engineer found
himself absolutely unable to interpret one of them. They were marked
with unknown figures!

Nevertheless, the engineer received an unmistakable impression,
quite as vivid as though something had been said aloud. "Progress;
all safe," was the thought-image that came to him.

He listened closely in hope of hearing a spoken word. Also, he tried
his best to make his agent look around the place. Other people might
be within sight. However, for a couple of minutes the oddly familiar
hands kept manipulating the unfamiliar instruments.

Then, somewhere quite close at hand, a deep-toned gong sounded a
single stroke. Instantly the agent looked up; and Smith saw that he
was inspecting the interior of a large engine-room. He had time to
note the huge bulk of a horizontal cylinder, perhaps fifty feet in
diameter, in the immediate background; also a variety of other
mechanisms, more like immensely enlarged editions of laboratory
apparatus than ordinary engines. Smith looked in vain for the
compact form of a dynamo or motor, and listened in vain for the
sound of either. Then, in swift succession, came two strokes on the
unseen gong, followed by a shrill whistle.

Smith's borrowed eyes became fixed upon that group of dials again.
Their indicators began to shift, some rapidly, some slowly. Once the
agent gave a swift glance through a round window--the place seemed
to be lighted by ordinary daylight--and Smith saw something
unrecognizable flit by.

A little further progress, and then came three strokes on the gong,
followed by a low thrumming. In response to these, the agent
deliberately picked out two levers, and pulled them down. When his
glance returned to the dials, one of them showed immense
acceleration.

By and by came another triple clanging, another pair of levers was
pulled down, and instantly the jarring and clanking gave way to a
decided rumble, low and distinct, but so powerful that it shook the
air. At the same time the agent quit his post and went over to the
giant horizontal cylinder.

Now Smith could see that this vast structure was merely part of an
engine whose dimensions were quite beyond any former experience. It
was a simple affair, being merely a reciprocal machine like the most
elementary form of steam engine. But, instead of being operated by
steam, it was a chemical machine; Smith's trained eyes told him that
the cylinder was really an enormous retort. And he noted with
further perplexity that the prodigious piston-rod not only moved
with terrific speed, but in a strictly back-and-forth motion; its
far end did not revolve.

The agent seemed satisfied with it all. He turned about and
walked--so far as Smith could sense in the usual manner of earth's
humans--back to the dials again. Just then a door opened a short
distance away and another man entered.

Smith would have mistaken him for the employee of some garage. He
was dressed in a suit of greasy blue overalls; and as he advanced
toward the eyes Smith was using, he looked about the room with
practiced glance. He merely nodded to Smith's man, who returned the
nod just as silently; and such was the extreme brevity of it all,
Smith was afterward unable to describe the man.

His agent, thus relieved of his duty temporarily, strolled out
another door, which took him through a narrow corridor and another
door, opening on to some sort of a balcony, or deck. Smith fully
expected to look upon an ocean.

Instead, he found himself gazing into a sea of clouds. He was in
some sort of aircraft!

Next moment, quite as though it had all been prearranged, a large
sky-cruiser hove into sight perhaps a quarter of a mile away. It
seemed to materialize out of the clouds, and rapidly bore down upon
the craft in which the agent stood.

But the practical man of the earth was eying the air-ship in
increasing amazement. For it was truly a ship; a huge vessel
wonderfully like one of the old-fashioned freighters which used to
sail the seas of the earth. What was more, it had four tall, sloping
masts, each spread with something remarkably like canvas; and that
whole incredible hulk was actually swinging in mid air!

Looking closer, Smith saw that the masts were exceedingly tall; they
held enough canvas to propel ten ships. And each stick sloped back
at so sharp an angle--much sharper than forty-five degrees--that the
wind not only blew the craft along in its course, but actually
supported it as well.

It meant a wind which would make a hurricane seem tame. Either that,
or air with greater density than any Smith knew about.

Suddenly the cruiser came about into the wind, and at the same
instant it began to take in sail, all the sheets furling in unison.
Simultaneously great finlike wings shot out of slits in the sides of
the hull; and immediately they began to beat the air, back and
forth, back and forth, with the speed and motion of swallows.

So this was the meaning of the giant reciprocal engine! Instead of
the screw propeller which characterized earth's aircraft, these
vessels employed the true bird principle, combining it with the
simple methods of primitive sailing craft.

As soon as the ship stopped its wind-driven rush and began to employ
its wings, the speed straightway slackened; and the ships began to
descend. About the same time the figures of several people appeared
on what might be called the bridge; and assuming that these people
were as large as the man whom Smith had seen enter the engine-room--a
chap of average height--then that ship, in proportion, was all of a
mile long!

But Smith's awe was not shared by his agent, who turned
indifferently away and looked about the sky as though in search of
other sights. In doing so, he leaned over the deck's railing; and
Smith saw the sheer sides of the giant ship, extending fore and aft
almost indefinitely; while far overhead billowed vast clouds of
white cloth. The vessel was now under sail.

About a mile higher up, and almost that distance to one side, the
agent's eyes made out two tiny specks. He watched them closely for a
moment as they pitched and tossed queerly about; then darted into
the engine-room, secured a pair of binoculars of an old, squat
pattern, and swiftly focused upon the nearer of the two.

Smith instantly sensed a disaster. The object was a small air-craft,
of a sort entirely strange to the engineer; yet he knew that it was
disabled. One of its queer wings was broken and fluttering, as the
little machine dropped, tumbling and twisting erratically, in an
inexplicably slow fashion toward the unseen ground. Smith glimpsed a
single figure, presumably strapped in the seat.

Then the focus changed to cover the other machine. It was of the
same type; and Smith saw that it was swooping in a steep spiral, its
driver leaning over in his seat, looking down.

Next moment the two were in focus together. Every second they
dropped closer and closer to Smith's borrowed eyes. And in less time
than it takes to tell it, they had come so close that when the
occupant of the disabled craft lurched heavily to one side, Smith
could plainly make out the long, flying hair of a woman.

She was unconscious, and strapped in!

Her craft capsized. At the same time the other driver--a
man--maneuvered so as to spiral exactly around the wreck as it fell.
When it came right side up again--now only a half a mile away--he
drove down so close that his machine nearly grazed the woman's head.
As he did so, he leaned over and tried to unfasten her. But the
unsteadiness of her craft prevented this.

He made a second try. This time his own machine narrowly escaped
injury; he steered it hastily away from that damaged wing. And then
he made a supreme effort.

Bringing his machine directly across the top of the other as it once
more righted itself, he touched one of his controls, so that his own
flier's spiral increased in steepness. Straightening up, he poised
himself while he coolly measured the distance; and then he calmly
leaped a matter of ten or twelve feet, over and down to the top of
the other craft.

The shock of his landing steadied it. Clinging fast with one hand,
the man bent and unbuckled the woman's strap. Next instant he had
lifted her, a dead weight, into his arms and then over his
shoulders.

His own machine was still scooting downward, its speed even greater
than that of the broken flier. When the man saw it swinging past and
below him, he instantly clambered, burden and all, to the edge of
the cockpit. For a second he stood, balancing precariously; and
then, half jumping, half diving, he plunged once more.

Man and woman landed in a heap in the sound machine. In a flash the
rescuer snatched his controls, and tried with all his might to
"straighten out." But it began to skid; and Smith saw, despite the
shakiness with which his excited agent held the binoculars, that the
craft was hopelessly out of control. Next instant the man caught
sight of the ship, not a hundred yards away; and steered straight
for her.

Smith's agent rushed back to the engine-room, where he immediately
located a new group of instruments. Smith recognized a telephone and
some wireless apparatus; then found himself staring into some sort
of a compound mirror system. Probably it was an illuminated tunnel
affair, opening into a long white cabin. Seemingly the place was an
emergency-ward.

A moment later the unconscious forms of the two aviators were
brought within perhaps twenty feet. Smith could hear nothing; the
apparatus seemed made for looking only. But he saw the doctors hurry
in, saw restoratives administered, and saw both people revive.

The man was first to become conscious. He looked around, seemed to
take in the situation at a glance, and swiftly got to his feet. The
doctors laid restraining hands upon him, but he shook them off with
a laugh.

He was a powerfully built man, considerably taller than normal and
very deep in the chest. He was decidedly blond, and good looking in
a cheerful, reckless sort of way.

His concern was for the woman. She regained her senses in half a
minute, and shortly was sitting up and looking around. And Smith,
ordinarily unobservant of the other sex, found himself staring with
all his eyes.

She was young; for that matter, the man was under thirty, also. And
the white bandage on her forehead only emphasized the dark eyes and
vivid coloring of her face. Smith was half angry that he could not
see her more distinctly. He decided that every feature was
exquisitely modeled, that he had never seen such delicate lines, nor
eyes as large, as appealing and as soft.

Then he was watching the man again. He approached the woman and took
her outstretched hand. He was laughing easily; she, smiling
tremulously and gratefully. They looked into one another's eyes
quite as though there were no one else in the cabin to be looked at.
Next second one of the doctors stepped up bruskly, and Smith saw a
swift blush come to the girl's cheeks. The man reddened, too, and
turned away laughing to hide his confusion.

Smith's connection with his agent ended right there. When he
reported to the other three, later on, he had to admit that, so far
as he knew, the man and the girl were still holding hands.






IV

NEW HEARTS FOR OLD





Billie's experience was totally different. She found herself
transformed into a mental humming-bird.

Her mind seemed to be darting with infinite rapidity, here and there
throughout the universe. She got only the most lightninglike glimpse
of any one spot; flash after flash of unfamiliar, indescribable
situations succeeded each other like the speeded-up scenes of a
photoplay farce. For an unguessable length of time this
helter-skelter process occupied her mind.

Then there came a scene which stayed. It was dim at first; she was
more thoroughly aware of the sound of voices than anything else.
Then she saw clearly.

She--that is, her agent--was in some sort of a room, giving
instructions to a group of white-clad figures. Before Billie could
concentrate upon what was being said the talk ceased; and next
moment, amid perfect silence, the agent bent over something which
lay on a high table.

Whereupon Billie got a severe jolt. For, unless she was most
woefully mistaken, the thing she was now looking at was the
unconscious form of a patient; the place was the operating-room of a
hospital; and the eyes she was using belonged to a surgeon.

She watched breathlessly. The surgeon's nimble fingers proceeded
with the utmost unconcern to open wide the patient's torso. Other
pairs of hands, belonging to nurses, aided in this; and Billie found
the intricate process decidedly interesting rather than otherwise.
Of course she was spared the odor of blood.

As soon as the ribs were entirely displaced, the lungs were
carefully laid aside. Extraordinary delicacy seemed called for here.
Billie shortly began to wonder if it were not high time to quit when
her agent, assisted as before, calmly exposed the patient's heart to
full view.

Billie could see it throbbing; more, she could hear it. She watched
in wonder for the next step.

They consisted in forcibly untangling the mass of tubes and arteries
all about the organ. Presently everything was clear; and then,
without delay, the nurses brought forward a strange-looking device.

It was of silver, shaped like a flattened egg, and a trifle smaller
than that laboring, human blood-pump; To it was attached a pair of
long, flexible, silver pipes, which led to Billie knew not where.
And near one extremity the egg was provided with eight curious
nozzles.

At times the flying hands partly interfered with Billie's vision;
yet she saw nearly all that amazing process, from beginning to end.
To put it briefly, the eight nozzles were boldly introduced, almost
at a single operation, into tiny incisions in the eight
corresponding tubes of the heart. In they were forced, until they
filled the arteries and veins; and once inserted, silver clamps were
instantly tightened on the outsides of the tubes. All this was done
in two or three seconds; and when all was complete, the heart itself
had been entirely isolated and its place absolutely taken by that
little silver egg.

The patient gave no sign that anything out of the ordinary had
occurred. Not a drop of blood had been spilled except in the process
of getting at the organ; but now, with a few deft motions of certain
instruments, the heart was sliced away from the surrounding tissues,
the tubes were severed, and the whole powerful pump, still beating
faintly, was removed from the body altogether.

Next, the surgeon proceeded to stanch the bleeding of the tubes;
that is, of the stubs projecting below those tight silver nozzles.
This done, the nimble fingers calmly replaced the lungs and other
items, quite as though they were reassembling a piece of machinery.
Lastly, the opening was sewed up in a manner which would have
delighted any seamstress.

The two long silver pipes were left protruding. Now, for the first
time, Billie saw where they led to.

On a stand alongisde the operating-table stood an extremely small,
flat box, with its lid open. The pipes ended there. And as the
surgeon inspected the outfit Billie saw that it comprised, in
effect, a pair of diminutive air-pumps. There were two tiny dials, a
regulating device, some sort of an automatic electric switch, and
what looked like a steel storage tank; all on a watchlike scale.

Looking more closely, Billie made out two pairs of electric wires
running from this case to another of the same size. The surgeon
lifted its lid, disclosing two electric storage batteries, each with
its own circuit.

In short, the arrangement provided duplicate sources, in vest-pocket
size, of power for operating a mechanical heart. The electricity
worked the air-pumps, which in turn supplied the little silver
egg--implanted in the patient--with both pressure and vacuum, while
doubtless the artificial organ itself housed a valve system which
did the rest. The regulating device kept the blood circulating at
the proper rate.

The surgeon seemed satisfied with it all, and, after another
critical examination of the patient, glanced about the room,
straightened up, took a deep breath, and spoke:

"Quick work. Thanks very much, everybody."

And Billie did not know which to be the more astonished at: the fact
that the voice was unmistakably a woman's, or that she, Billie, was
able to understand all that was said. She did not fully appreciate
until afterward that it was her own brain which did the translating;
the surgeon's subconscious mind had merely furnished a thought-image
which would have been exactly the same, regardless of language.

"Any special instructions, Surgeon Aldor?" inquired one of the
white-clad, face-swathed figures.

"No. The usual handling. Simply keep the batteries charged in
rotation."

The surgeon took off a mouth mask and a blood-soaked apron, and then
swiftly washed her hands. Next she stepped briskly from the room;
and the architect who was using her eyes rejoiced to see the
door-knobs of the standard height of thirty-five inches, indicating
that this agent of hers was of about her own height. From the sound
of her footsteps, however, Billie concluded that she was somewhat
heavier than herself.

Reaching another room, the surgeon proceeded to don hat and coat.
Next, she stepped in front of a long mirror; but the action was so
quick, and it took Billie so completely by surprise, she was not
able to inspect the image closely. To be frank, she looked first at
the woman's clothes, finding that her suit was a very trim affair of
blue leather, cut in a semi-military fashion. Slashes of dark-red
material across the sleeves were repeated about the collar, while
the cap, a jaunty affair with a bell crown, matched the suit. The
lower ends of the breeches, much like ordinary riding trousers, were
tucked into high lace-up boots of red leather.

Before Billie could see any more other than that the surgeon was
small-featured in striking contrast to the robustness of her body,
she stepped from the room. A moment later an automatic elevator took
her to a lower floor, where she was greeted by a person whom Billie
assumed to be a head nurse.

"Anything out of the ordinary, surgeon?"

"No," with a bruskness which was startling by comparison with her
cheeriness upstairs. "I understand that Dr. Norbith wishes to go
home as soon as possible?"

"Yes."

"He may go as soon as the cast is hard. Make sure his machine is a
smooth one."

The nurse simply nodded as the surgeon stepped on, through a very
ordinary pair of sliding doors, and so on out into an anteroom and
thence to a porch, where she stood looking into the street for a
moment.

It was exceedingly broad, and lined on both sides with imposing
structures whose architecture was entirely strange to Billie. She
would liked to have examined them all in detail; but she had no
control over her agent, who straightway walked down a short flight
of steps and thence to a sidewalk.

Here Billie became perfectly willing to neglect the architecture.
People were coming and going; people apparently quite as human as
herself. Except for a certain gorgeous voluminousness of dress, they
seemed for the most part simply men and women of affairs.

For it was comparatively easy to distinguish the sexes. The women's
garments, while not making any display of the strictly feminine
lines, nevertheless did not attempt to disguise them. Billie saw
that loose breeches had completely displaced the skirt with these
women; while the men invariably wore either knickerbockers or some
other form of short trousers; so that the general effect was very
youthful. She saw no men with beards, although several wore their
hair long, down to their shoulders, as though to compensate for
those women who chose to wear theirs short.

The surgeon seemed to have more leisure than most doctors. She stood
for some minutes, greeting perhaps a score of passers-by, all of
whom seemed to be proud of the acquaintance. Presently, however, the
sidewalk became temporarily clear of pedestrians; and then Billie
heard the surgeon mutter something to herself, such as was past all
understanding at the time:

"The fools! The poor, ignorant cattle!"

