air under the influence of rays of uranium has been made by various
physicists, particularly by Professor Rutherford, and has shown that
the laws of the phenomenon are the same as those of the ionization due
to the action of the Roentgen rays.

[Footnote 32: In his work on _L'Evolution de la Matiere_, M. Gustave
Le Bon recalls that in 1897 he published several notes in the Academie
des Sciences, in which he asserted that the properties of uranium were
only a particular case of a very general law, and that the radiations
emitted did not polarize, and were akin by their properties to the X
rays.]

It was natural to ask one's self if the property discovered in salts
of uranium was peculiar to this body, or if it were not, to a more or
less degree, a general property of matter. Madame Curie and M.
Schmidt, independently of each other, made systematic researches in
order to solve the question; various compounds of nearly all the
simple bodies at present known were thus passed in review, and it was
established that radioactivity was particularly perceptible in the
compounds of uranium and thorium, and that it was an atomic property
linked to the matter endowed with it, and following it in all its
combinations. In the course of her researches Madame Curie observed
that certain pitchblendes (oxide of uranium ore, containing also
barium, bismuth, etc.) were four times more active (activity being
measured by the phenomenon of the ionization of the air) than metallic
uranium. Now, no compound containing any other active metal than
uranium or thorium ought to show itself more active than those metals
themselves, since the property belongs to their atoms. It seemed,
therefore, probable that there existed in pitchblendes some substance
yet unknown, in small quantities and more radioactive than uranium.

M. and Madame Curie then commenced those celebrated experiments which
brought them to the discovery of radium. Their method of research has
been justly compared in originality and importance to the process of
spectrum analysis. To isolate a radioactive substance, the first thing
is to measure the activity of a certain compound suspected of
containing this substance, and this compound is chemically separated.
We then again take in hand all the products obtained, and by measuring
their activity anew, it is ascertained whether the substance sought
for has remained in one of these products, or is divided among them,
and if so, in what proportion. The spectroscopic reaction which we may
use in the course of this separation is a thousand times less
sensitive than observation of the activity by means of the
electrometer.

Though the principle on which the operation of the concentration of
the radium rests is admirable in its simplicity, its application is
nevertheless very laborious. Tons of uranium residues have to be
treated in order to obtain a few decigrammes of pure salts of radium.
Radium is characterised by a special spectrum, and its atomic weight,
as determined by Madame Curie, is 225; it is consequently the higher
homologue of barium in one of the groups of Mendeleef. Salts of radium
have in general the same chemical properties as the corresponding
salts of barium, but are distinguished from them by the differences of
solubility which allow of their separation, and by their enormous
activity, which is about a hundred thousand times greater than that of
uranium.

Radium produces various chemical and some very intense physiological
reactions. Its salts are luminous in the dark, but this luminosity, at
first very bright, gradually diminishes as the salts get older. We
have here to do with a secondary reaction correlative to the
production of the emanation, after which radium undergoes the
transformations which will be studied later on.

The method of analysis founded by M. and Madame Curie has enabled
other bodies presenting sensible radioactivity to be discovered. The
alkaline metals appear to possess this property in a slight degree.
Recently fallen snow and mineral waters manifest marked action. The
phenomenon may often be due, however, to a radioactivity induced by
radiations already existing in the atmosphere. But this radioactivity
hardly attains the ten-thousandth part of that presented by uranium,
or the ten-millionth of that appertaining to radium.

Two other bodies, polonium and actinium, the one characterised by the
special nature of the radiations it emits and the other by a
particular spectrum, seem likewise to exist in pitchblende. These
chemical properties have not yet been perfectly defined; thus M.
Debierne, who discovered actinium, has been able to note the active
property which seems to belong to it, sometimes in lanthanum,
sometimes in neodynium.[33] It is proved that all extremely
radioactive bodies are the seat of incessant transformations, and even
now we cannot state the conditions under which they present themselves
in a strictly determined form.

[Footnote 33: Polonium has now been shown to be no new element, but
one of the transformation products of radium. Radium itself is also
thought to be derived in some manner, not yet ascertained, from
uranium. The same is the case with actinium, which is said to come in
the long run from uranium, but not so directly as does radium. All
this is described in Professor Rutherford's _Radioactive
Transformations_ (London, 1906).--ED.]


Sec. 3. THE RADIATION OF THE RADIOACTIVE BODIES AND THE EMANATION

To acquire exact notions as to the nature of the rays emitted by the
radioactive bodies, it was necessary to try to cause magnetic or
electric forces to act on them so as to see whether they behaved in
the same way as light and the X rays, or whether like the cathode rays
they were deviated by a magnetic field. This work was effected by
Professor Giesel, then by M. Becquerel, Professor Rutherford, and by
many other experimenters after them. All the methods which have
already been mentioned in principle have been employed in order to
discover whether they were electrified, and, if so, by electricity of
what sign, to measure their speed, and to ascertain their degree of
penetration.

The general result has been to distinguish three sorts of radiations,
designated by the letters alpha, beta, gamma.

The alpha rays are positively charged, and are projected at a speed
which may attain the tenth of that of light; M.H. Becquerel has shown
by the aid of photography that they are deviated by a magnet, and
Professor Rutherford has, on his side, studied this deviation by the
electrical method. The relation of the charge to the mass is, in the
case of these rays, of the same order as in that of the ions of
electrolysis. They may therefore be considered as exactly analogous to
the canal rays of Goldstein, and we may attribute them to a material
transport of corpuscles of the magnitude of atoms. The relatively
considerable size of these corpuscles renders them very absorbable. A
flight of a few millimetres in a gas suffices to reduce their number
by one-half. They have great ionizing power.

The beta rays are on all points similar to the cathode rays; they are,
as M. and Madame Curie have shown, negatively charged, and the charge
they carry is always the same. Their size is that of the electrons,
and their velocity is generally greater than that of the cathode rays,
while it may become almost that of light. They have about a hundred
times less ionizing power than the alpha rays.

The gamma rays were discovered by M. Villard.[34] They may be compared
to the X rays; like the latter, they are not deviated by the magnetic
field, and are also extremely penetrating. A strip of aluminium five
millimetres thick will stop the other kinds, but will allow them to
pass. On the other hand, their ionizing power is 10,000 times less
than that of the alpha rays.

[Footnote 34: This is admitted by Professor Rutherford (_Radio-Activity_,
Camb., 1904, p. 141) and Professor Soddy (_Radio-Activity_, London,
1904, p. 66). Neither Mr Whetham, in his Recent _Development of
Physical Science_ (London, 1904) nor the Hon. R.J. Strutt in _The
Becquerel Rays_ (London, same date), both of whom deal with the
historical side of the subject, seem to have noticed the fact.--ED.]

To these radiations there sometimes are added in the course of
experiments secondary radiations analogous to those of M. Sagnac, and
produced when the alpha, beta, or gamma rays meet various substances.
This complication has often led to some errors of observation.

Phosphorescence and fluorescence seem especially to result from the
alpha and beta rays, particularly from the alpha rays, to which
belongs the most important part of the total energy of the radiation.
Sir W. Crookes has invented a curious little apparatus, the
spinthariscope, which enables us to examine the phosphorescence of the
blende excited by these rays. By means of a magnifying glass, a screen
covered with sulphide of zinc is kept under observation, and in front
of it is disposed, at a distance of about half a millimetre, a
fragment of some salt of radium. We then perceive multitudes of
brilliant points on the screen, which appear and at once disappear,
producing a scintillating effect. It seems probable that every
particle falling on the screen produces by its impact a disturbance in
the neighbouring region, and it is this disturbance which the eye
perceives as a luminous point. Thus, says Sir W. Crookes, each drop of
rain falling on the surface of still water is not perceived as a drop
of rain, but by reason of the slight splash which it causes at the
moment of impact, and which is manifested by ridges and waves
spreading themselves in circles.

The various radioactive substances do not all give radiations of
identical constitution. Radium and thorium possess in somewhat large
proportions the three kinds of rays, and it is the same with actinium.
Polonium contains especially alpha rays and a few gamma rays.[35] In
the case of uranium, the alpha rays have extremely slight penetrating
power, and cannot even impress photographic plates. But the widest
difference between the substances proceeds from the emanation. Radium,
in addition to the three groups of rays alpha, beta, and gamma,
disengages continuously an extremely subtle emanation, seemingly
almost imponderable, but which may be, for many reasons, looked upon
as a vapour of which the elastic force is extremely feeble.

[Footnote 35: It has now been shown that polonium when freshly
separated emits beta rays also; see Dr Logeman's paper in _Proceedings
of the Royal Society_, A., 6th September 1906.--ED.]

M. and Madame Curie discovered as early as 1899 that every substance
placed in the neighbourhood of radium, itself acquired a radioactivity
which persisted for several hours after the removal of the radium.
This induced radioactivity seems to be carried to other bodies by the
intermediary of a gas. It goes round obstacles, but there must exist
between the radium and the substance a free and continuous space for
the activation to take place; it cannot, for instance, do so through a
wall of glass.

In the case of compounds of thorium Professor Rutherford discovered a
similar phenomenon; since then, various physicists, Professor Soddy,
Miss Brooks, Miss Gates, M. Danne, and others, have studied the
properties of these emanations.

The substance emanated can neither be weighed nor can its elastic
force be ascertained; but its transformations may be followed, as it
is luminous, and it is even more certainly characterised by its
essential property, i.e. its radioactivity. We also see that it can be
decanted like a gas, that it will divide itself between two tubes of
different capacity in obedience to the law of Mariotte, and will
condense in a refrigerated tube in accordance with the principle of
Watt, while it even complies with the law of Gay-Lussac.

The activity of the emanation vanishes quickly, and at the end of four
days it has diminished by one-half. If a salt of radium is heated, the
emanation becomes more abundant, and the residue, which, however, does
not sensibly diminish in weight, will have lost all its radioactivity,
and will only recover it by degrees. Professor Rutherford,
notwithstanding many different attempts, has been unable to make this
emanation enter into any chemical reaction. If it be a gaseous body,
it must form part of the argon group, and, like its other members, be
perfectly inert.

By studying the spectrum of the gas disengaged by a solution of salt
of radium, Sir William Ramsay and Professor Soddy remarked that when
the gas is radioactive there are first obtained rays of gases
belonging to the argon family, then by degrees, as the activity
disappears, the spectrum slowly changes, and finally presents the
characteristic aspect of helium.

We know that the existence of this gas was first discovered by
spectrum analysis in the sun. Later its presence was noted in our
atmosphere, and in a few minerals which happen to be the very ones
from which radium has been obtained. It might therefore have been the
case that it pre-existed in the gases extracted from radium; but a
remarkable experiment by M. Curie and Sir James Dewar seems to show
convincingly that this cannot be so. The spectrum of helium never
appears at first in the gas proceeding from pure bromide of radium;
but it shows itself, on the other hand, very distinctly, after the
radioactive transformations undergone by the salt.

All these strange phenomena suggest bold hypotheses, but to construct
them with any solidity they must be supported by the greatest possible
number of facts. Before admitting a definite explanation of the
phenomena which have their seat in the curious substances discovered
by them, M. and Madame Curie considered, with a great deal of reason,
that they ought first to enrich our knowledge with the exact and
precise facts relating to these bodies and to the effects produced by
the radiations they emit.

Thus M. Curie particularly set himself to study the manner in which
the radioactivity of the emanation is dissipated, and the
radioactivity that this emanation can induce on all bodies. The
radioactivity of the emanation diminishes in accordance with an
exponential law. The constant of time which characterises this
decrease is easily and exactly determined, and has a fixed value,
independent of the conditions of the experiment as well as of the
nature of the gas which is in contact with the radium and becomes
charged with the emanation. The regularity of the phenomenon is so
great that it can be used to measure time: in 3985 seconds[36] the
activity is always reduced one-half.

[Footnote 36: According to Professor Rutherford, in 3.77 days.--ED]

Radioactivity induced on any body which has been for a long time in
presence of a salt of radium disappears more rapidly. The phenomenon
appears, moreover, more complex, and the formula which expresses the
manner in which the activity diminishes must contain two exponentials.
To find it theoretically we have to imagine that the emanation first
deposits on the body in question a substance which is destroyed in
giving birth to a second, this latter disappearing in its turn by
generating a third. The initial and final substances would be
radioactive, but the intermediary one, not. If, moreover, the bodies
acted on are brought to a temperature of over 700 deg., they appear to
lose by volatilisation certain substances condensed in them, and at
the same time their activity disappears.

The other radioactive bodies behave in a similar way. Bodies which
contain actinium are particularly rich in emanations. Uranium, on the
contrary, has none.[37] This body, nevertheless, is the seat of
transformations comparable to those which the study of emanations
reveals in radium; Sir W. Crookes has separated from uranium a matter
which is now called uranium X. This matter is at first much more
active than its parent, but its activity diminishes rapidly, while the
ordinary uranium, which at the time of the separation loses its
activity, regains it by degrees. In the same way, Professors
Rutherford and Soddy have discovered a so-called thorium X to be the
stage through which ordinary thorium has to pass in order to produce
its emanation.[38]

[Footnote 37: Professor Rutherford has lately stated that uranium may
possibly produce an emanation, but that its rate of decay must be too
swift for its presence to be verified (see _Radioactive
Transformations_, p. 161).--ED.]

[Footnote 38: An actinium X was also discovered by Professor Giesel
(_Jahrbuch d. Radioaktivitat_, i. p. 358, 1904). Since the above was
written, another product has been found to intervene between the X
substance and the emanation in the case of actinium and thorium. They
have been named radio-actinium and radio-thorium respectively.--ED.]

It is not possible to give a complete table which should, as it were,
represent the genealogical tree of the various radioactive substances.
Several authors have endeavoured to do so, but in a premature manner;
all the affiliations are not at the present time yet perfectly known,
and it will no doubt be acknowledged some day that identical states
have been described under different names.[39]

[Footnote 39: Such a table is given on p. 169 of Rutherford's
_Radioactive Transformations_.--ED.]


Sec. 4. THE DISAGGREGATION OF MATTER AND ATOMIC ENERGY

In spite of uncertainties which are not yet entirely removed, it
cannot be denied that many experiments render it probable that in
radioactive bodies we find ourselves witnessing veritable
transformations of matter.

Professor Rutherford, Professor Soddy, and several other physicists,
have come to regard these phenomena in the following way. A
radioactive body is composed of atoms which have little stability, and
are able to detach themselves spontaneously from the parent substance,
and at the same time to divide themselves into two essential component
parts, the negative electron and its residue the positive ion. The
first-named constitutes the beta, and the second the alpha rays.

The emanation is certainly composed of alpha ions with a few molecules
agglomerated round them. Professor Rutherford has, in fact,
demonstrated that the emanation is charged with positive electricity;
and this emanation may, in turn, be destroyed by giving birth to new
bodies.

After the loss of the atoms which are carried off by the radiation,
the remainder of the body acquires new properties, but it may still be
radioactive, and again lose atoms. The various stages that we meet
with in the evolution of the radioactive substance or of its
emanation, correspond to the various degrees of atomic disaggregation.
Professors Rutherford and Soddy have described them clearly in the
case of uranium and radium. As regards thorium the results are less
satisfactory. The evolution should continue until a stable atomic
condition is finally reached, which, because of this stability, is no
longer radioactive. Thus, for instance, radium would finally be
transformed into helium.[40]

[Footnote 40: This opinion, no doubt formed when Sir William Ramsay's
discovery of the formation of helium from the radium emanation was
first made known, is now less tenable. The latest theory is that the
alpha particle is in fact an atom of helium, and that the final
transformation product of radium and the other radioactive substances
is lead. Cf. Rutherford, op. cit. passim.--ED.]

It is possible, by considerations analogous to those set forth above
in other cases, to arrive at an idea of the total number of particles
per second expelled by one gramme of radium; Professor Rutherford in
his most recent evaluation finds that this number approaches 2.5 x
10^{11}.[41] By calculating from the atomic weight the number of atoms
probably contained in this gramme of radium, and supposing each
particle liberated to correspond to the destruction of one atom, it is
found that one half of the radium should disappear in 1280 years;[42]
and from this we may conceive that it has not yet been possible to
discover any sensible loss of weight. Sir W. Ramsay and Professor
Soddy attained a like result by endeavouring to estimate the mass of
the emanation by the quantity of helium produced.

[Footnote 41: See _Radioactive Transformations_ (p. 251). Professor
Rutherford says that "each of the alpha ray products present in one
gram of radium product (_sic_) expels 6.2 x 10^{10} alpha particles
per second." He also remarks on "the experimental difficulty of
accurately determining the number of alpha particles expelled from
radium per second."--ED.]

[Footnote 42: See Rutherford, op. cit. p. 150.--ED.]

If radium transforms itself in such a way that its activity does not
persist throughout the ages, it loses little by little the provision
of energy it had in the beginning, and its properties furnish no valid
argument to oppose to the principle of the conservation of energy. To
put everything right, we have only to recognise that radium possessed
in the potential state at its formation a finite quantity of energy
which is consumed little by little. In the same manner, a chemical
system composed, for instance, of zinc and sulphuric acid, also
contains in the potential state energy which, if we retard the
reaction by any suitable arrangement--such as by amalgamating the zinc
and by constituting with its elements a battery which we cause to act
on a resistance--may be made to exhaust itself as slowly as one may
desire.

There can, therefore, be nothing in any way surprising in the fact
that a combination which, like the atomic combination of radium, is
not stable--since it disaggregates itself,--is capable of
spontaneously liberating energy, but what may be a little astonishing,
at first sight, is the considerable amount of this energy.

M. Curie has calculated directly, by the aid of the calorimeter, the
quantity of energy liberated, measuring it entirely in the form of
heat. The disengagement of heat accounted for in a grain of radium is
uniform, and amounts to 100 calories per hour. It must therefore be
admitted that an atom of radium, in disaggregating itself, liberates
30,000 times more energy than a molecule of hydrogen when the latter
combines with an atom of oxygen to form a molecule of water.

We may ask ourselves how the atomic edifice of the active body can be
constructed, to contain so great a provision of energy. We will remark
that such a question might be asked concerning cases known from the
most remote antiquity, like that of the chemical systems, without any
satisfactory answer ever being given. This failure surprises no one,
for we get used to everything--even to defeat.

When we come to deal with a new problem we have really no right to
show ourselves more exacting; yet there are found persons who refuse
to admit the hypothesis of the atomic disaggregation of radium because
they cannot have set before them a detailed plan of that complex whole
known to us as an atom.

The most natural idea is perhaps the one suggested by comparison with
those astronomical phenomena where our observation most readily allows
us to comprehend the laws of motion. It corresponds likewise to the
tendency ever present in the mind of man, to compare the infinitely
small with the infinitely great. The atom may be regarded as a sort of
solar system in which electrons in considerable numbers gravitate
round the sun formed by the positive ion. It may happen that certain
of these electrons are no longer retained in their orbit by the
electric attraction of the rest of the atom, and may be projected from
it like a small planet or comet which escapes towards the stellar
spaces. The phenomena of the emission of light compels us to think
that the corpuscles revolve round the nucleus with extreme velocities,
or at the rate of thousands of billions of evolutions per second. It
is easy to conceive from this that, notwithstanding its lightness, an
atom thus constituted may possess an enormous energy.[43]

[Footnote 43: This view of the case has been made very clear by M.
Gustave le Bon in _L'Evolution de la Matiere_ (Paris, 1906). See
especially pp. 36-52, where the amount of the supposed intra-atomic
energy is calculated.--ED.]

Other authors imagine that the energy of the corpuscles is principally
due to the extremely rapid rotations of those elements on their own
axes. Lord Kelvin lately drew up on another model the plan of a
radioactive atom capable of ejecting an electron with a considerable
_vis viva_. He supposes a spherical atom formed of concentric layers
of positive and negative electricity disposed in such a way that its
external action is null, and that, nevertheless, the force emanated
from the centre may be repellent for certain values when the electron
is within it.

