credits for their capture--dead or alive!"

Logan patted the sergeant on the shoulder. "Stop worrying, Jeff. The
cadets are in the house."

"What?"

Logan nodded his head. "Come on inside." He paused and spoke to his son.
"Billy, you scoot down the road to the bend and watch the main highway.
If anyone turns off into our road, you let me know right away!"

"Yes, sir," replied Billy and dashed down the road. Jeff followed Jane
and Logan into the house, and a few moments later, after exchanging
enthusiastic greetings, he and the cadets waited hungrily for Jane to
prepare breakfast.

Finishing the hearty meal in short order and sipping hot bracing coffee,
the three cadets took turns in telling Jeff of their conversations with
Strong, their escape, and their near encounter with Vidac on the highway
the night before.

"What made you come out here, Jeff?" Tom finally asked.

"Well, when I discovered that you had escaped, I knew you'd head for one
of two places, the spaceport or here. I hung around the spaceport all
night waiting for you to show up, and when you didn't, I came here."

"That's dangerous," said Logan. "If you figured it that way, Vidac can
do the same thing. I wouldn't want him to find you boys here. Not that I
don't want to help you, but Vidac might try to connect me with you and
the missing professor. I couldn't take a risk like that with Billy and
Jane. We're in enough trouble."

The farmer then told them how Vidac had forced him to sign a release on
his land while threatening Jane with a ray gun.

"We have to get to the bottom of this mess," said Tom. "The only trouble
is we don't know what he's after or why he's trying to frame us."

"Well," said Roger, glancing at his watch, "whatever we decide, we'd
better do it quickly. It's almost noon."

"Noon!" exclaimed Logan. "Why it can't be more than nine at the most!"
He pulled out a large gold watch from his coverall pocket. "Sure--it's a
quarter to nine!"

Jeff looked at his watch. "Same here!" He smiled. "You must be wrong,
Roger."

"You probably forgot to wind it," said Tom. He glanced casually at his
own watch and suddenly exclaimed. "Say, my watch has three-thirty!"

"And mine says four twenty-two!" cried Astro.

Roger and Tom looked at each other, eyes widening.

"You don't think--?" began Tom, hardly daring to breathe.

"Yes, I do!" said Roger. "Remember what happened to the instruments?"

[Illustration]

"Uranium!" exclaimed Astro.

The word echoed in the kitchen like the blast of a bomb. The boys looked
at each other, too startled to explain to Logan and Jane, who, though
they were listening intently, were unable to fathom the boys' reasoning.

"Where were you last night?" asked Jeff quickly.

Roger described as nearly as he could remember the exact route that they
had traveled in making their way to the Logan farm.

"Hey, I think I've got the answer, fellows!" Tom suddenly exclaimed.
"If Vidac came out here last night and took over Mr. Logan's farm, and
we're falsely accused of getting rid of the professor, and the professor
is missing, there must be something to tie it all together. Vidac
wouldn't do the things he's done, unless he's got a rocket-blasting good
reason!"

Roger quickly added, "And he wouldn't try to buck Captain Strong unless
he was playing for high stakes!"

"Right," said Tom. "The only thing that could have caused our watches to
go haywire, like the ships instruments, would be uranium. Lots of
uranium. And uranium is the only thing valuable enough to make Vidac
take such long chances."

"But how can you tell it's uranium?" asked Logan.

"Our watches are not ordinary timepieces, sir," explained Tom. "They are
specially constructed for use in space travel. Each watch is
electrically controlled and highly sensitive."

"Electric?" repeated Logan in amazement. "Electric wrist watches? That
small thing?"

Tom smiled. "Each is charged by a miniature power pack, sir."

"The uranium deposits out in the hills affected these watches,"
continued Astro, "the same way they affected the electronic instruments
on the spaceships coming in to Roald."

"I'll tell you what," said Jeff. "I'll make a check."

"Wait a minute," said Logan. "I just remembered something--"

"What, sir?" asked Tom.

"Professor Sykes! He was out here poking around in my fields and up in
the hills from dawn till dark. Said he was making some soil tests. I
yelled at him for stepping all over some baby fruit trees."

"That's it, then," said Roger grimly. "This area is jumping with
uranium and Vidac now has title to the land!"

"Don't be so sure," said Tom. "We still need proof."

"Isn't using force to take the land away proof enough?" snapped Logan.

"Wait a minute!" said Jeff. "If you want proof, I know where to get it."

"Where?" asked Tom.

"The professor's work journal!"

"Think he'd record it in there?" asked Tom. "It's pretty valuable
information."

"Yes," said Jeff. "He even logs the amount of coffee he drinks in the
morning! He puts down everything!"

"You think the journal is still in the lab?" asked Tom.

"Sure it is. I saw it before I left."

"Then we've got Vidac right where we want him!" exclaimed Roger.

"No, we haven't," said Tom. "We haven't got the professor to prove it!
Vidac's still the boss on this hunk of space rock, and we're still
wanted for murder!"

The door burst open and Billy raced into the room. "A jet car just
turned off the highway! It's coming here!"

"We've got to get out of here!" said Tom. He turned to Jeff. "If it's
Vidac, tell him you've come to take Jane out on a date. That should
explain your presence. Then get the professor's journal and give it to
Captain Strong. He'll know what to do!"

Roger and Astro were cramming food in their pockets. "Come on, Tom,"
said Roger. "I can hear the jets."

"What are you boys going to do?" asked Jane.

"Try to get to the _Polaris_," replied Tom. "Then we'll hunt for the
professor. If we don't find him, we're sunk. He's the key to the whole
thing."

Astro and Roger had tumbled out the window and were racing toward the
safety of the near-by hills. Tom gave Jeff a final handshake and dived
out the window after them. Running toward the clump of bushes where
Astro and Roger had just disappeared, he dived for cover, just as
Vidac's car roared into the clearing. The boys saw Vidac and Bush get
out of the car, and after inspecting Jeff's, turn and stride into the
house.

"Come on," said Tom. "We've got to get to the _Polaris!_"

The three boys turned away and hurried from the farm. In a few minutes,
after scrambling to the top of the nearest hill, they turned back to
look down on the farmhouse and saw Jeff escorting Jane to his car.

"So far so good," said Tom. "Let's go."

They walked off and were soon lost in the tangle of scrub grass and dry
gullies, their destination the _Polaris_ and the solution to the mystery
of Professor Sykes's disappearance.




CHAPTER 19


Strong's plan to follow Vidac in order to locate Hardy had paid off.
While Vidac and Bush were rounding up citizens of Roald City and sending
them out to search for the Space Cadets, the Solar Guard captain had
checked the frequency setting on the communicator in the lieutenant
governor's jet car. Then hiding in Professor Sykes's laboratory, Strong
tuned the lab communicator to the same frequency and waited. He knew he
was taking a chance. Vidac might not contact the governor on that
setting if he contacted the governor at all, but there was no other way
at the moment. Strong waited three hours before hearing the click of
Vidac's communicator on the laboratory speaker.

"Able One to Able Two. Can you hear me, Able Two? Come in, Able Two!"
Vidac's voice crackled through the set.

Strong listened intently and was rewarded by the sound of another click
and another voice speaking.

"Able Two to Able One. Come in."

"I've got Strong," reported Vidac, "and the cadets are somewhere in the
hills between here and the spaceport. I've just organized the colonists
into searching parties and am about to leave."

"Good. Contact me the minute you find them."

"Right. Keep an eye out for them. They might try to reach the
spaceport."

"Very well. I've set up an alarm on the outer hatch. No one can get
aboard without my knowing it."

"Right. Able One out."

"Able Two out."

Strong heard the clicks of the two communicators and sat back, breathing
hard. He had recognized the voice of Able Two instantly. It was Governor
Hardy. He was at the spaceport, hiding aboard a spaceship. But why?
Could he be mixed up in this affair?

Pacing the floor restlessly, Strong tried to figure out the connection.
Hardy's reputation was spotless. It seemed inconceivable that he could
be involved with Vidac. And yet Hardy had selected Vidac as his
right-hand man. And Vidac couldn't have gotten away with his treatment
of the colonists unless Hardy had silently endorsed his orders.

The Solar Guard captain left the laboratory and watched the colonists as
they milled around in front of the Administration Building. Vidac's jet
car was in the middle of the group of men and Strong saw him jump up on
top of the car and begin addressing them. He couldn't hear the
lieutenant governor's words, but he knew the men were being urged to
hunt the cadets down like common criminals. He watched until Vidac
rocketed off in his jet car, followed by a stream of colonists in
various types of vehicles. In a few moments the area in front of the
Administration Building was quiet and deserted. Strong began searching
for a jet car.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jeff Marshall turned sideways in his seat and looked at the pretty face
of Jane Logan. Her brow was furrowed with worry.

"Are you afraid?" asked Jeff as he guided the car down the private road
leading to the highway.

"I'm frightened to death!" murmured Jane. "That man Vidac is so
ruthless!"

Jeff grunted. "I have to agree with you there. But Tom is right. We need
proof before we can stop him."

The girl shrank back. As far as one could see, the road was lined with
jet cars. Colonists with paralo-ray guns and anything that could be used
as a weapon were scrambling around in the hills.

"What does it mean?" asked Jane.

"I don't know," replied Jeff. "But I think it's a search for the
cadets!"

"Oh, no!" cried Jane.

"I hope they'll let us through," said Jeff. He pressed down on the
accelerator and started moving along the line of cars. On either side of
the highway, he saw colonists beating the bushes, looking behind rocks
and boulders, shouting at each other as they pressed their hunt for
Astro, Tom, and Roger. Jeff managed to get halfway past the line of cars
when ahead of him another jet car pulled out across the highway,
blocking it. He was forced to stop.

"Hold on there!" roared a man suddenly appearing at the side of the car,
holding a paralo-ray gun pointed directly at Jeff.

Jeff looked at him in mock surprise. "What's going on here?" he asked.

"Who are you?" demanded the man roughly.

"Jeff Marshall. And this is Jane Logan. What's all the fuss about?"

"We're looking for the Space Cadets. They murdered old Professor Sykes!"
snapped the man. His eyes narrowed and he looked at Jeff closely. "You
were pretty chummy with them, weren't you?" he asked.

"Sure, I knew them," replied Jeff calmly. "But if they've done anything
to the professor, I want them caught as badly as you do. I've been the
professor's assistant for years. He's--he's like a father to me."

Several of the other men had gathered around the car and were listening.
"That's right, Joe," said a man on the outside of the group. "This
feller's okay. And that's Logan's daughter, all right. They ain't done
nothing."

"When was the last time you saw the cadets?" demanded the man called
Joe.

"Why, a couple of days ago," Jeff replied.

There was a long pause while the man continued to look at Jeff
ominously. Finally he stepped back and lowered the paralo-ray gun. "All
right, go on. But if you see those murdering cadets, let us know. We're
out to get them, and when we do, we're going to--"

"But what right have you to do this on your own?" cried Jane.

"We ain't," said Joe. "Governor Vidac made us all special deputies this
morning."

"But we'd do it, anyway," cried someone from the rear of the crowd.
"Those Space Cadets are guilty and we're going to see that they get
what's coming to them!" There was a roar of agreement.

Jeff nodded, stepped on the accelerator, and eased the car slowly
through the group of men. As soon as he was free, he stepped down hard
and sent the jet car racing along the highway back toward Roald City.

"Jeff--Jeff," asked Jane despairingly, "do you think they'll catch the
boys?"

"I don't know," replied Jeff grimly. "But if they are caught, the only
way we can save them is to find the professor's journal and pray that
the uranium report is in it."

"But you said the information would be there," said Jane.

"When you need something as badly as we need that report," replied Jeff,
"you never find it."

       *       *       *       *       *

The three Space Cadets were watching their pursuers from a high ridge.
They had been driven back all day, and now they could go no farther.
Caught while climbing down the other side of the hills from the Logan
farm, they had narrowly escaped detection at the very beginning and had
been racing from cover to cover ever since. Now there was no place to
go. It was only a question of time before the colonists would reach the
top of the ridge and find them.

"What do you think they'll do?" asked Roger.

"We'll be sent off this satellite so fast," answered Tom, "you'll get
sick from acceleration."

"Why?" asked Astro.

"Vidac won't want us hanging around. Not since Captain Strong is here.
He'll give us a trial within an hour, sentence us to life on a prison
rock, and delegate some of his boys to take us back. We don't have a
chance."

Astro let out a low animal-like growl. "If that happens," said the giant
Venusian, "I'll get off that rock someway, somehow. And I'll find Mr.
Vidac. And when I do--"

"No need to talk like that now," said Tom. "Let's just not get caught!"

"But how?" asked Roger. "Look, over there! They've already reached the
top of that ridge on the left. The party on the right will be up there
soon too. We're trapped!"

"Wait a minute," said Astro. He picked up a huge boulder and hefted it
in his arms. "We can stand them off all day by tumbling rocks down on
them."

"And kill innocent people who don't know what they're doing?" asked Tom.
"No--put it down, Astro!"

"All right, brains!" snapped Roger. "What have you got to suggest?"

"There's only one thing we can do!" said Tom. "Down on the side of the
hill here I noticed a small cave. Two of us could squeeze inside."

