stylus and five of the attack rockets. The space pencil was the only
thing that could write on the computing board. It had to be found. "Next
time around," Rip called to the others. He then led the way full speed
ahead until they reached the safety of shadow again.

Rip suspected the stylus was somewhere above the rock and probably
wouldn't return to the surface for some minutes. While he was wondering
what to do, there was a chorus of yells. A rocket sped between the
Planeteers and shot off into space.

"Our own rockets are after us," Trudeau gasped. There hadn't been time
to collect them all after Rip's unwilling attack on the Frenchman had
scattered them. Now the sun was setting them off. Another flashed past,
fortunately over their heads. The sun's heat was causing them to fire
unevenly.

"Three more to go," Koa called. "Watch out!"

Only two went, and they were far enough away to offer no danger.

Santos had been fishing around in the instrument case. Suddenly he
produced another stylus. "It was under the sextant," he explained
triumphantly.

"If we get through this, I'll propose you for ten more stripes," Rip
vowed. "We'll make you the highest ranking sergeant that ever made a
private's life miserable."

Working slowly but more safely, Rip figured that slightly more than two
and a half tubes would do the trick.

Now to fire them. That meant finding a thorium crystal properly placed
and big enough. There were plenty of crystals, so that was no problem.
The next step was for Kemp to cut holes with his torch, so that the
thrust of the rocket fuel would be counter to the direction in which the
asteroid was spinning.

Rip explained to all hands what had to be done. The burden would fall on
Kemp, who would need a helper. Rip took that job himself. He took one
oxygen tank from Kemp. Koa took the other, leaving the torchman with only
his torch.

Then Rip took a container of chemical fuel from Bradshaw. Working while
running, he lashed the two containers together with his safety line. Then
he improvised a rope sling so they could hang on his back.

Kemp, meanwhile, assembled his torch and put the proper cutting nozzle in
place. When he was ready, he moved over to Rip's side and connected the
torch hoses to the tanks the lieutenant carried. Kemp had the torch
mechanism strapped to his own back. It was essentially a high-pressure
pump that drew oxygen and fuel from the tanks and forced them through
the nozzle, under terrific pressure.

When he had finished, he pressed the trigger that started the cutting
torch going. The fuel ignited about a half inch in front of the nozzle.
The nozzle had two holes in it, one for oxygen and the other for fuel.
The holes were placed and angled to keep the flame always a half inch
away, otherwise the nozzle itself would melt.

"How do we work this?" Kemp asked.

"We'll get ahead of the others," Rip explained. "Keep up speed until
we're running at the forward sun line. Then, when the crystal we want
comes around into the shadow, we stop running and work until it spins
back into the sunshine again."

Rip estimated the axis on which the asteroid was spinning and selected
a crystal in the right position. He had to be careful, otherwise their
counterblast might do nothing more than start the gray planet wobbling.

He and Kemp ran ahead of the others. The Planeteers and their prisoners
were running at a speed that kept them right in the middle of the dark
area.

It was like running on a treadmill. The Planeteers were making good
speed, but were actually staying in the same place relative to the sun's
position, keeping the turning asteroid between them and the sun.

Rip and Kemp ran forward until they were right at the sun line. Then they
slowed down, holding position and waiting for the crystal they had chosen
to reach them. As it came across the sun line into darkness, they stopped
running and rode the crystal through the shadow until it reached the sun
again. Then the two Planeteers ran back across the dark zone to meet the
crystal as it came around again. There was only a few minutes' working
time each revolution.

Kemp worked fast, and the first hole deepened. Rip helped as best he
could by pushing away the chunks of thorium that Kemp cut free, but it
was essentially a one-man job.

As Kemp neared the bottom of the first hole, Rip reviewed his plan and
realized he had overlooked something. These weren't nuclear bombs; they
were simple tubes of chemical fuel. The tubes wouldn't destroy the hole
Kemp was cutting.

He reached a quick decision and called Koa to join them. Koa appeared as
Kemp pulled his torch from the hole and started running again to avoid
the sun. Rip and Koa ran right along with him, crossing the dark zone to
meet the crystal as it came around again.

"There's no reason to drill three holes," Rip explained as they ran.
"We'll use one hole for all three charges. They don't have to be fired
all at once."

"How do we fire them?" Koa asked.

"Electrically. Who has the igniters and the hand dynamo?"

"Dowst has the igniters. One of the Connies is carrying the dynamo."

Speaking of the Connies--Rip hadn't seen the Consops cruiser recently. He
looked up, searching for its exhaust, and finally found it, some distance
away.

The Connie commander was stalemated for the time being. He couldn't land
his cruiser on a spinning asteroid, and he had no more boats. Rip thought
he probably was just waiting around for any opportunity that might
present itself.

The Federation cruisers should be arriving. He studied his chronometer.
No, the nearest one, the _Sagittarius_ from Mercury, wasn't due for
another ten minutes or so. He turned up his helmet communicator and
ordered all hands to watch for the exhaust of a nuclear drive cruiser,
then turned it down again and gave Koa instructions.

"Have Trudeau turn his load over to a Connie and collect the igniters and
the dynamo. We'll need wire, too. Who has that?"

"Another Connie."

"Get a reel. Cut off a few hundred feet and connect the dynamo to one end
and an igniter to the other."

The crystal came around again, and Kemp got to work. Rip stood by, again
reviewing all steps. They couldn't afford to make a mistake. He had no
margin for error.

Kemp finished the hole a few seconds before the crystal turned into the
sunlight again. Rip told him to keep the torch going. There might be some
last minute cutting to do. Then the lieutenant hurried off at an angle to
where Dominico was plodding along with the fuel tubes.

Koa had turned the tube he carried over to a Connie. Rip got it and told
Dominico to follow him. Then he angled back across the asteroid to where
Kemp was holding position.

The asteroid turned twice before Koa arrived. He had a coil of wire slung
over his arm, and he carried the dynamo in one hand and an igniter in the
other, the two connected by the wire.

Rip took the igniter. "Uncoil the wire," he directed. "Go to its full
length at right angles to the hole. We have to time this exactly right.
When the crystal comes around again, I'll shove the tube into the hole,
then scurry for cover. When I'm clear I'll yell, and you pump the dynamo.
Dominico and Kemp stay with Koa. Make sure no one is in the way of the
blast."

Koa unreeled the wire, moving away from Rip. The lieutenant pushed the
igniter into one end of the fuel tube and crimped it tightly with his
gloved hand.

Koa and the others were as far away as they could get now, the wire
stretching between them and Rip. Kemp had made sure no one was running
near the line of blast.

Rip watched for the crystal. It would be coming around any second now. He
held the tube with the igniter projecting behind him, ready for the hole
to appear.

Koa's voice echoed in his helmet. "All set, Lieutenant."

The crystal appeared across the sun line and moved toward him. He met it,
slowed his speed, put the end of the tube into the hole, and shoved. Kemp
had allowed enough clearance. The tube slid into place. Rip turned and
angled off as fast as he could glide. When he was far enough away from
the blast line he called, "Fire!"

Koa squeezed the dynamo handle. The machine whined, and current shot
through the wire. A column of orange fire spurted from the crystal.

Rip watched the stars instead of the exhaust. He kept running as it
burned soundlessly. In air, the noise would have deafened him. In airless
space, there was nothing to carry the sound.

The apparent motion of the stars was definitely slowing. The spinning
wouldn't cease entirely, but it would slow down enough to give them more
time to work.

The tube reached _Brennschluss_, and Rip called orders. "Same process.
Get ready to repeat."

While Koa was connecting another igniter to the wire, Rip took a tube
from Dominico. "Take your space knife and saw through the tube you have
left. We'll need about three-fifths of it. Keep both pieces."

Dominico pulled his knife, pressed the release, and the gas capsule shot
the blade out. He got to work.

Koa called that he was ready. Rip took the wired igniter from him and
thrust it into the tube Dominico had given him.

As the crystal came around again, the process was repeated. The hole was
undamaged.

There was more time to get clear because of the asteroid's slower speed.
The second tube slowed the rock even more, so that they had to wait long
minutes while the crystal came around again.

Rip did some estimating. He wanted to be sure the next charge would do
nothing more than slow the asteroid to a stop. If the charge were too
heavy, it would reverse the spin. He didn't want to make a career of
running on the asteroid. He was tired, and he knew his men were getting
weary, too. He could see it in their strides.

He decided it would be best to use a little less fuel rather than a
little more. If the asteroid failed to stop its spin completely, they
could always set off a small charge or two.

"Hold it," he ordered. "We'll use the small end of Dominico's tube and
save the big one."

The fuel was a solid mass, so cutting the tube in two sections caused no
difficulty. Rip pushed the igniter into the small section, seated it in
the hole, and hurried to cover. As he watched the fuel burn, he wondered
why the last nuclear charge had started the spin. He had made a mistake
somewhere. The earlier blasts had been set so they wouldn't cause a spin.
He made a mental note to look at the place where the charge had exploded.

The rocket fuel slowed the asteroid down to a point where it was barely
turning, and Rip was glad he had been cautious. The heavier charge would
have reversed it a little. He directed the placing of a very small charge
and was moving away from it so Koa could set it off when Santos suddenly
yelled, "Sir! The Connie is coming!"

Rip called, "Fire the charge, Koa," then looked up. The Consops cruiser
was moving slowly toward them. The canny Connie had been waiting for
something to happen on the asteroid, Rip guessed. When the spinning
slowed and then stopped, the Connie probably had decided that now was
the time for a final try.

"Where is the communicator?" Rip asked the sergeant major.

"One of the Connies has it."

"Get it. I'll notify Terra base of what happened."

Koa found the Connie with the communicator, tested it to be sure the
prisoner hadn't sabotaged it, and brought it to Rip.

"This is Foster to Terra base. Over."

"Come in, Foster."

Rip explained briefly what had happened and asked, "How is our orbit?
I haven't had time to take sightings."

"You're free of the sun," Terra base answered. "Your orbit will have to
be corrected sometime within the next few hours. The last blast pushed
you off course."

"That's a small matter," Rip stated. "Unless we can think of something
fast, this will be a Connie asteroid by then. The Consops cruiser is
moving in on us. He's careful, because he isn't sure of the situation.
But even at his present speed he'll be here in ten minutes."

"Stand by." Terra base was silent for a few moments, then the voice
replied, "I think we have an answer for you, Foster. Terra base off.
Go ahead, MacFife."

A Scottish burr thick enough to saw boards came out of the communicator.
"Foster, this is MacFife, commander on the _Aquila_. Y'can't see me on
account of I'm on yer sunny side. But, lad, I'm closer to ye than the
Connie. We did it this way to keep the asteroid between us and him. Also,
lad, if ye'll take a look up at Gemini, ye'll see somethin' ye'll like.
Look at Alhena, in the Twins' feet. Then, lad, if ye'll be patient the
while, ye'll have a grandstand seat for a real big show."

Rip tilted his bubble back and stared upward at the constellation of the
Twins. He said softly, "By Gemini!" For there, a half degree south of
the star Alhena, was the clean line of a nuclear cruiser's exhaust. The
_Sagittarius_, out of Mercury, had arrived.

He cut the communicator off for a moment and spoke exultantly to his men.
"Stand easy, you hairy Planeteers. Forget the Connie. He doesn't know it,
but he's caught. He's caught between the Archer and the Eagle!"




CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

Courtesy--With Claws


Sagittarius, constellation of the Archer, and Aquila, constellation of
the Eagle, had given the two Federation patrol cruisers their names. The
Eagle was commanded by a tough Scotsman, and the Archer by a Frenchman.

Commander MacFife spoke through the communicator. "Switch bands to
universal, lad. Me'n Galliene are goin' to talk this Connie into a braw
mess. MacFife off."

Rip guessed that the two cruiser commanders had been in communication
while enroute to the asteroid and had cooked up some kind of plan. He
turned the band switch to the universal frequency with which all
long-range communicators were equipped. Each of the Earth groups had its
own frequency, and so did the Martians and Jovians. But all could meet
and talk on the universal band.

Special scrambling devices prevented eavesdropping on regular
frequencies, so there was no danger that the Connie had overheard the
plan. Rip wondered what it was. He knew the cruisers had to be careful
not to cross the thin line that might lead to war.

The _Sagittarius_ loomed closer, decelerating with a tremendous exhaust.
The Connie couldn't have failed to see it, Rip knew. He was right. The
Consops cruiser suddenly blasted more heavily, rushing in the direction
away from the Federation ship. The direction was toward the asteroid.

At the same moment, the _Aquila_ flashed above the horizon, also
decelerating. The Connie was caught squarely.

A suave voice spoke on the universal band. "This is Federation SCN
_Sagittarius_, calling the Consolidation cruiser near the asteroid.
Please reply."

Rip waited anxiously. The Connie would hear, because every control room
monitored the universal band.

A heavy, reluctant voice replied after a pause of over a minute.

"This is Consolidation cruiser Sixteen. You are breaking the law,
_Sagittarius_. Your missile ports are open, and they are pointing at me.
Close them at once, or I will report this."

The suave voice, with its hint of French accent, replied, "Ah, my friend!
Do not be alarmed. We have had a slight accident to our control circuit,
and the ports are jammed open. We are trying to repair the situation. But
I assure you that we have only the friendliest of intentions."

Rip grinned. This was about the same as a man holding a cocked pistol at
another man's head and assuring him that it was nothing but a nervous arm
