exonerate you two, at any rate."

Jack Alvarez's jaw went slack and he stared at the Black Doctor as
though he hadn't heard him properly. "Exonerate us?" he said. "Exonerate
us from what?"

"From the charges of incompetence, malpractice and conduct unbecoming to
a physician which I am lodging against your colleague in the Red Service
here," the Black Doctor said angrily. "Of course, I was confident that
neither of you two could have contributed very much to this bungling
mess, but it is reassuring to have your own statements of that fact on
the record. They should carry more weight in a Council hearing than any
plea I might make in your behalf."

"But--but what do you mean by a Council hearing?" Tiger stammered. "I
don't understand you! This--this problem is _solved_. We solved it as a
patrol team, all of us. We sent in a brand new medical service contract
from those people...."

"Oh, yes. _That!_" The Black Doctor drew a long pink dispatch sheet from
an inner pocket and opened it out. The doctors could see the photo
reproductions of their signatures at the bottom. "Fortunately--for you
two--this bit of nonsense was brought to my attention at the first relay
station that received it. I personally accepted it and withdrew it from
the circuit before it could reach Hospital Earth for filing."

Slowly, as they watched him, he ripped the pink dispatch sheet into a
dozen pieces and tossed it into the disposal vent. "So much for that,"
he said slowly. "I can choose to overlook your foolishness in trying to
cloud the important issues with a so-called 'contract' to divert
attention, but I'm afraid I can't pay much attention to it, nor allow it
to appear in the general report. And of course I am forced to classify
the _Lancet_ as a plague ship until a bacteriological and virological
examination has been completed on both ship and crew. The planet itself
will be considered a galactic plague spot until proper measures have
been taken to insure its decontamination."

The Black Doctor drew some papers from another pocket and turned to Dal
Timgar. "As for you, the charges are clear enough. You have broken the
most fundamental rules of good judgment and good medicine in handling
the 31 Brucker affair. You have permitted a General Practice Patrol ship
to approach a potentially dangerous plague spot without any notification
of higher authorities. You have undertaken a biochemical and medical
survey for which you had neither the proper equipment nor the training
qualifications, and you exposed your ship and your crewmates to an
incredible risk in landing on such a planet. You are responsible for
untold--possibly fatal--damage to over two hundred individuals of the
race that called on you for help. You have even subjected the creature
that depends upon your own race for its life and support to virtual
slavery and possible destruction; and finally, you had the audacity to
try to cover up your bungling with claims of arranging a medical service
contract with an uninvestigated race."

The Black Doctor broke off as an attendant came in the door and
whispered something in his ear. Doctor Tanner shook his head angrily, "I
can't be bothered now!"

"They say it's urgent, sir."

"Yes, it's always urgent." The Black Doctor heaved to his feet. "If it
weren't for this miserable incompetent here, I wouldn't have to be
taking precious time away from my more important duties." He scowled at
the _Lancet_ crewmen. "You will excuse me for a moment," he said, and
disappeared into the communications room.

The moment he was gone from the room, Jack and Tiger were talking at
once. "He couldn't really be serious," Tiger said. "It's impossible! Not
one of those charges would hold up under investigation."

"Well, I think it's a frame-up," Jack said, his voice tight with anger.
"I knew that some people on Hospital Earth were out to get you, but I
don't see how a Four-star Black Doctor could be a party to such a thing.
Either someone has been misinforming him, or he just doesn't understand
what happened."

Dal shook his head. "He understands, all right, and he's the one who's
determined to get me out of medicine. This is a flimsy excuse, but he
has to use it, because it's now or never. He knows that if we bring in a
contract with a new planet, and it's formally ratified, we'll all get
our Stars and he'd never be able to block me again. And Black Doctor
Tanner is going to be certain that I don't get that Star, or die
trying."

"But this is completely unfair," Jack protested. "He's turning our own
words against you! You can bet that he'll have a survey crew down on
that planet in no time, bringing home a contract just the same as the
one we wrote, and there won't be any questions asked about it."

"Except that I'll be out of the service," Dal said. "Don't worry. You'll
get the credit in the long run. When all the dust settles, he'll be sure
that you two are named as agents for the contract. He doesn't want to
hurt you, it's me that he's out to get."

"Well, he won't get away with it," Tiger said. "We can see to that. It's
not too late to retract our stories. If he thinks he can get rid of you
with something that wasn't your fault, he's going to find out that he
has to get rid of a lot more than just you."

But Dal was shaking his head. "Not this time, Tiger. This time you keep
out of it."

"What do you mean, keep out of it?" Tiger cried. "Do you think I'm going
to stand by quietly and watch him cut you down?"

"That's exactly what you're going to do," Dal said sharply. "I meant
what I said. I want you to keep your mouth shut. Don't say anything more
at all, just let it be."

"But I can't stand by and do nothing! When a friend of mine needs
help--"

"Can't you get it through your thick skull that this time I don't want
your help?" Dal said. "Do me a favor this time. _Leave me alone._ Don't
stick your thumb in the pie."

Tiger just stared at the little Garvian. "Look, Dal, all I'm trying to
do--"

"I know what you're trying to do," Dal snapped, "and I don't want any
part of it. I don't need your help, I don't _want_ it. Why do you have
to force it down my throat?"

There was a long silence. Then Tiger spread his hands helplessly.
"Okay," he said, "if that's the way you want it." He turned away from
Dal, his big shoulders slumping. "I've only been trying to make up for
some of the dirty breaks you've been handed since you came to Hospital
Earth."

"I know that," Dal said, "and I've appreciated it. Sometimes it's been
the only thing that's kept me going. But that doesn't mean that you own
me. Friendship is one thing; proprietorship is something else. I'm not
your private property."

He saw the look on Tiger's face, as though he had suddenly turned and
slapped him viciously across the face. "Look, I know it sounds awful,
but I can't help it. I don't want to hurt you, and I don't want to
change things with us, but _I'm a person just like you are_. I can't go
on leaning on you any longer. Everybody has to stand on his own
somewhere along the line. You do, and I do, too. And that goes for Jack,
too."

They heard the door to the communications shack open, and the Black
Doctor was back in the room. "Well?" he said. "Am I interrupting
something?" He glanced sharply at the tight-lipped doctors. "The call
was from the survey section," he went on blandly. "A survey crew is on
its way to 31 Brucker to start gathering some useful information on the
situation. But that is neither here nor there. You have heard the
charges against the Red Doctor here. Is there anything any of you want
to say?"

Tiger and Jack looked at each other. The silence in the room was
profound.

The Black Doctor turned to Dal. "And what about you?"

"I have something to say, but I'd like to talk to you alone."

"As you wish. You two will return to your quarters and stay there."

"The attendant, too," Dal said.

The Black Doctor's eyes glinted and met Dal's for a moment. Then he
shrugged and nodded to his attendant. "Step outside, please. We have a
private matter to discuss."

The Black Doctor turned his attention to the papers on the desk as Dal
stood before him with Fuzzy sitting in the crook of his arm. From the
moment that the notice of the inspection ship's approach had come to the
_Lancet_, Dal had known what was coming. He had been certain what the
purpose of the detainment was, and who the inspector would be, yet he
had not really been worried. In the back of his mind, a small,
comfortable thought had been sustaining him.

It didn't really matter how hostile or angry Black Doctor Tanner might
be; he knew that in a last-ditch stand there was one way the Black
Doctor could be handled.

He remembered the dramatic shift from hostility to friendliness among
the Bruckians when he had come down from the ship with Fuzzy on his
shoulder. Before then, he had never considered using his curious power
to protect himself and gain an end; but since then, without even
consciously bringing it to mind, he had known that the next time would
be easier. If it ever came to a showdown with Black Doctor Tanner, a
trap from which he couldn't free himself, there was still this way. _The
Black Doctor would never know what happened_, he thought. _It would just
seem to him, suddenly, that he had been looking at things the wrong way.
No one would ever know._

But he knew, even as the thought came to mind, that this was not so.
Now, face to face with the showdown, he knew that it was no good. One
person would know what had happened: himself. On 31 Brucker, he had
convinced himself that the end justified the means; here it was
different.

For a moment, as Black Doctor Tanner stared up at him through the
horn-rimmed glasses, Dal wavered. Why should he hesitate to protect
himself? he thought angrily. This attack against him was false and
unfair, trumped up for the sole purpose of destroying his hopes and
driving him out of the Service. Why shouldn't he grasp at any means,
fair or unfair, to fight it?

But he could hear the echo of Black Doctor Arnquist's words in his mind:
_I beg of you not to use it. No matter what happens, don't use it._ Of
course, Doctor Arnquist would never know, for sure, that he had broken
faith ... but _he_ would know....

"Well," Black Doctor Tanner was saying, "speak up. I can't waste much
more time dealing with you. If you have something to say, say it."

Dal sighed. He lifted Fuzzy down and slipped him gently into his jacket
pocket. "These charges against me are not true," he said.

The Black Doctor shrugged. "Your own crewmates support them with their
statements."

"That's not the point. They're not true, and you know it as well as I
do. You've deliberately rigged them up to build a case against me."

The Black Doctor's face turned dark and his hands clenched on the papers
on the desk. "Are you suggesting that I have nothing better to do than
to rig false charges against one probationer out of seventy-five
thousand traveling the galaxy?"

"I'm suggesting that we are alone here," Dal said. "Nobody else is
listening. Just for once, right now, we can be honest. We both know
what you're trying to do to me. I'd just like to hear you admit it
once."

The Black Doctor slammed his fist down on the table. "I don't have to
listen to insolence like this," he roared.

"Yes, you do," Dal said. "Just this once. Then I'll be through."
Suddenly Dal's words were tumbling out of control, and his whole body
was trembling with anger. "You have been determined from the very
beginning that I should never finish the medical training that I
started. You've tried to block me time after time, in every way you
could think of. You've almost succeeded, but never quite made it until
this time. But now you _have_ to make it. If that contract were to go
through I'd get my Star, and you'd never again be able to do anything
about it. So it's now or never if you're going to break me."

"Nonsense!" the Black Doctor stormed. "I wouldn't lower myself to meddle
with your kind. The charges speak for themselves."

"Not if you look at them carefully. You claim I failed to notify
Hospital Earth that we had entered a plague area--but our records of our
contact with the planet prove that we did only what any patrol ship
would have done when the call came in. We didn't have enough information
to know that there was a plague there, and when we finally did know the
truth we could no longer make contact with Hospital Earth. You claim
that I brought harm to two hundred of the natives there, yet if you
study our notes and records, you will see that our errors there were
unavoidable. We couldn't have done anything else under the
circumstances, and if we hadn't done what we did, we would have been
ignoring the basic principles of diagnosis and treatment which we've
been taught. And your charges don't mention that by possibly harming two
hundred of the Bruckians, we found a way to save two million of them
from absolute destruction."

The Black Doctor glared at him. "The charges will stand up, I'll see to
that."

"Oh, I'm sure you will! You can ram them through and make them stick
before anybody ever has a chance to examine them carefully. You have the
power to do it. And by the time an impartial judge could review all the
records, your survey ship will have been there and gathered so much more
data and muddied up the field so thoroughly that no one will ever be
certain that the charges aren't true. But you and I know that they
wouldn't really hold up under inspection. We know that they're false
right down the line and that you're the one who is responsible for
them."

The Black Doctor grew darker, and he trembled with rage as he drew
himself to his feet. Dal could feel his hatred almost like a physical
blow and his voice was almost a shriek.

"All right," he said, "if you insist, then the charges are lies, made up
specifically to break you, and I'm going to push them through if I have
to jeopardize my reputation to do it. You could have bowed out
gracefully at any time along the way and saved yourself dishonor and
disgrace, but you wouldn't do it. Now, I'm going to force you to. I've
worked my lifetime long to build the reputation of Hospital Earth and of
the Earthmen that go out to all the planets as representatives. I've
worked to make the Confederation respect Hospital Earth and the Earthmen
who are her doctors. You don't belong here with us. You forced yourself
in, you aren't an Earthman and you don't have the means or resources to
be a doctor from Hospital Earth. If you succeed, a thousand others will
follow in your footsteps, chipping away at the reputation that we have
worked to build, and I'm not going to allow one incompetent alien
bungler pretending to be a surgeon to walk in and destroy the thing I've
fought to build--"

The Black Doctor's voice had grown shrill, almost out of control. But
now suddenly he broke off, his mouth still working, and his face went
deathly white. The finger he was pointing at Dal wavered and fell. He
clutched at his chest, his breath coming in great gasps and staggered
back into the chair. "Something's happened," his voice croaked. "I can't
breathe."

Dal stared at him in horror for a moment, then leaped across the room
and jammed his thumb against the alarm bell.




CHAPTER 13

THE TRIAL


Red Doctor Dal Timgar knew at once that there would be no problem in
diagnosis here. The Black Doctor slumped back in his seat, gasping for
air, his face twisted in pain as he labored just to keep on breathing.
