can do. Now, if you will take advice, you and Miss Marmion will go into
shelter, for it will begin to blow soon."

Behind the wheel-house was an observation room, as it would be called in
the States, running nearly the whole length of the bridge, and fronted
with thick plate glass. They went in, and Oscarovitch turned the pointer
to half-speed. There was no increase in vibration, but the shore began
to slip away behind them faster and faster, and the northern suburbs of
Copenhagen rose ahead and fell astern as though they were part of a
swiftly moving panorama. Then the pointer went down to full speed, and
the Prince, after a word to the quartermaster, joined them in the
bridge-house and closed the door.

"You will need all your eyes to see much of the shore now," he said; "I
have given her her wings."

Nitocris felt a shudder in the carpeted floor. Looking ahead she saw the
bow lift slightly. Then a smooth, green swathe of water curled up on
either side. She looked aft, and saw a broad torrent of froth, foaming
like a furious, rapid stream away from the stern. The houses and trees
on the shore seemed to run into each other, and slide out of sight
almost before the eye could rest upon them. The water alongside was
merely a blue-green blur. Nitocris involuntarily held her breath as
though she had been out on deck.

"It is wonderful, Prince!" she said, almost in a whisper. "That alleged
express from Hamburg was nothing to this: and yet how steadily she moves
in spite of the speed. I should have thought that it would have nearly
shaken us to jelly."

"That is the turbines, dear," said her father, who was already wondering
whether Oscarovitch was doing this just to show how hopeless any pursuit
of such a vessel would be. "They are a marvellous means of applying
steam power. Lieutenant Parsons is robbing the sea of one, at least, of
its worst terrors."

"Yes," added the Prince, "we are travelling a little over forty miles an
hour; and if you got that speed out of reciprocating engines you would
scarcely be able to lie on the deck without holding on to something, yet
here we are as comfortable as though we were standing in a
drawing-room."

"You have given us a new experience to begin with," said Nitocris,
thinking how nice it would be to take her wedding trip with Merrill in
such a craft as this. "Why, look at the two shores coming together,
Dad!"

"No, excuse me," said Oscarovitch, "we are only about half-way to the
Gate of the Baltic yet. That land on the right is the island of Hvreen.
When we have passed that you will soon see the heights of Elsinore and
Helsingborg rising ahead. There are only about two and a half miles
between Denmark and Sweden there."

"Oh yes, of course. I am forgetting my geography," laughed Nitocris, as
the low, wooded patch of land came rushing towards them as though it
were adrift on a fast-flowing stream. "Goodness, what a speed!"

"A very wonderful craft, Prince," added the Professor, as the island
drifted past; "she quite inclines me towards a breach of the tenth
commandment. Now that you have given us this taste of the delights of
speed, I think that if I were a millionaire, I should try to build one
to beat her."

"Exactly," laughed Oscarovitch. "It is marvellous this fascination of
speed. Your poet, Henley, touched the pulse of the times when he wrote
those splendid lines of his. But surely, Professor, _you_ would not have
very much difficulty in leaving all far behind. A man to whom
mathematical impossibilities are as easy as an addition sum ought to be
able to realise the dream of the ages and solve the problem of aerial
navigation."

He looked him straight in the eyes as he said this. He fully believed in
the possibility of human flight, given the transcendent genius who could
work out the equation of weight and power. Perhaps that genius might be
with him now in the bridge-house. His vivid imagination was already
picturing the lovely girl at his side crowned Empress of the Russias and
the East, and himself in command of an aerial navy, beneath whose
assault the armies and navies and fortresses of the rest of the world
would be as so many toys to play with and destroy.

"If I could do that, and I do not think it would be so very difficult
after all," said Franklin Marmion, returning his glance, "I would not
do it. It would put too much power in the hands of a few men, and we
have enough of that already. The owner of a fleet of aerial warships
would be above all human law. He could terrorise the earth, and make
mankind his slaves. Life would become unendurable under such conditions.
Commercialism, which only means slavery plus the liberty to starve, is
bad enough, but it is at least possible. The other would be impossible.
There is no man quite honest enough to be trusted with such a power as
that. I have worked the thing out, and it is perfectly feasible, but I
burnt my designs and calculations."

"What!" exclaimed Oscarovitch, flushing in spite of his effort to keep
the blood back from his face. "You have solved the problem, and won't
make use of the greatest invention of all the ages! Surely, Professor,
that is a little quixotic, is it not?"

"Who am I that I should bring a curse upon humanity, Prince?" he
answered gravely. "Do you not kill each other fast enough now? No, the
world is not fit for such a development yet. My results will remain my
own until Tom Hood's ideal of good government has been realised."

"And what was that, Dad?" asked Nitocris, who had a double reason for
being interested in the conversation. "If I ever knew it, I have
forgotten it."

"Despotism, Niti--and an angel from heaven for the despot," he replied,
with another look into the Prince's eyes which brought him to the
conclusion that the sooner his presence on board the _Grashna_ was
dispensed with the better for his plans. There was a sense of quiet
mastery in Franklin Marmion's manner which made him uneasy.

"Ah! there is the famous fortress, is it not? the home of Hamlet and
Ophelia and the Ghost!" she exclaimed, pointing ahead to where a
grey-blue mass was rising out of the water. "Do you believe in ghosts,
Prince?" she added suddenly, flashing a glance at him which seemed to
pierce his brain like a ray of unearthly light.

"Ghosts? No, Miss Marmion. I'm afraid I am too hopelessly materialistic
for that. I never saw or heard of an authentic ghost, and I do not
propose to believe until I see."

"We have a ghost at 'The Wilderness,'--the wraith of a poor young lady
who killed herself after some royal blackguard had abused his own
hospitality. She often comes to visit me in my study," said the
Professor, as though he were relating the most ordinary occurrence.

"Ah," smiled the Prince, "that is very interesting: but, of course, it
would be in the power of a man like yourself to have experiences which
are denied to ordinary mortals. Still, granted all that, I confess that
I have often wondered whether or not I should be frightened if I really
did see a ghost."

"Yes, I wonder?" murmured Nitocris, with a great deal more meaning than
he had any idea of just then.

All three felt that the conversation was getting a little difficult, and
they were not sorry when the rapid rising of the rock of Elsinore made
it necessary for Oscarovitch to go out to the engine telegraph.

"His Highness doesn't believe in ghosts now," whispered Nitocris to her
father, when the door shut behind him, "but I think he will before very
long. I wonder what he is really going to do? I've half a mind to----"

"No, no, Niti," he said quickly; "keep this side of the Border till you
really have to cross it. What on earth, literally, would happen if he
came back and found me standing here alone?"

"Oh, of course I didn't mean it," she smiled. "It would be very poor
sport to spoil both the comedy and the tragedy before the curtain goes
up. I wonder if the drama will begin to-night? I shouldn't be
surprised."

"Nor I," said the Professor, a trifle grimly. "I didn't at all like his
looks when I was talking about the flying machine. The brute looked as
if he were quite capable of locking me up and starving or torturing me
until I gave him the secret. My word, I should like to see him try! I'd
have him grovelling at my feet in five minutes."

The door opened and Oscarovitch came in. He took off the cap which had
been pulled tight over his eyes, and said:

"Well, we have arrived! Almost exactly forty-five minutes. There is
Elsinore, there is Kronborg, King Frederick's sixteenth-century castle,
and there is Marienlyst, which is to Copenhagen what Brighton is to
London, only, I must say, in a much more refined sense. Now what is
your pleasure, Miss Marmion? We have still nearly two hours before
lunch, so, if you would like an hour's stroll ashore, the gig will be
ready in a couple of minutes."

"Thank you, Prince," she said with a rewarding smile. "Dad, what do you
think? It all looks very beautiful under this sun and sky."

"Which, of course, means that you want to go ashore, Niti," said her
father. "For my own part, I certainly should like a little walk on new
ground. I have never been here before."

"Then, of course we will go," said Oscarovitch, opening the door and
going to the telegraph.

The yacht came to a standstill in a few minutes, and the gig was waiting
at the foot of the gangway ladder. They spent a very pleasant hour
ashore, and what they saw, you may read of in your Murray and Baedeker,
wherefore there is no need to set it down here. When they came aboard
again, lunch was almost ready, and the steward presented his master and
the Professor with quite exceptional cocktails in the smoking-room. Then
they went and had a wash, and the mellow gong sounded.

I am not very fond of those descriptions in stories which read like
extracts from an upholsterer's price-list, nor yet those accounts of
meals that, after all, are only menus writ large, so it may suffice to
say that the saloon of the _Grashna_ was an arrangement of sandal-wood
panels, framed in thin silver filigree, and hung with exquisite little
masterpieces in water-colour, and black and white, and crayon, mostly
sea-scapes, with here and there a beautiful head with living eyes which
followed you everywhere; that the rich yellow of the panels was enhanced
by _portieres_ and curtains of deep golden-bronze silk, and that the
domed ceiling was of pale, sky-blue enamel spangled with the
constellations of the northern heavens, which at night lit up the whole
saloon with a soft electric radiance. As for the lunch, it was as nearly
perfect as the best-paid chef afloat could make it, after his master had
asked him as a personal favour to do so.

They ran back quietly to Copenhagen at twenty knots, and Oscarovitch and
the Professor went ashore to send off a few telegrams, leaving Nitocris,
for her own reasons, to make herself at home on the yacht. They returned
in time to dress for dinner and enjoy a stroll on the broad upper deck,
and watch the sunset over the town and the quickly-increasing sparkle of
the myriad lights on shore and sea. When they came up after dinner,
these lights were only represented by a luminous haze glimmering under
the stars to the northward. The _Grashna_ was heading nearly due south
at an easy speed towards the Baltic Islands.

Something told both Nitocris and her father that the decisive hour would
come soon, and they were both prepared for its advent.




CHAPTER XXIII

THE DISAPPEARANCE OF THE PROFESSOR


The Prince and the Professor sat up in the smoking-room for a
considerable time after Nitocris had retired. Oscarovitch was doing his
utmost to persuade his guest to revoke his decision as to the creation
of the aerial warships. Franklin Marmion's simple announcement, which he
never thought for a moment of disbelieving, had filled his mind with new
ideas, which were rapidly taking the shape of gorgeous dreams of an
empire such as mortal man had never ruled over before. All his present
designs faded away into mere trivialities in comparison with this
splendid conception. He pictured Nitocris, as his consort, Empress of
the air, and himself Lord of earth and sea and sky. But all his subtle
arguments, all his delicately-put suggestions, and his skilfully framed
promises failed to produce the slightest effect upon the genially
inflexible man, who quietly turned them all aside, as a grown man might
deal with the arguments of a boy.

The thought that this man who was lying back in his deep-seated
armchair, holding a cigar in a white, delicately-shaped hand which was
strong enough to shake the world to its foundations, should possess
such a tremendous power and yet refuse to use it, as quietly as he might
have declined an invitation to dinner, exasperated him almost beyond the
bounds of patience. If he would only join forces with him what glories
might they not achieve, what splendours of power and possession might
not be theirs! Here was universal empire, in one sense, only a couple of
yards away from him! In another it was more distant than the suns which
flame in Space beyond the Milky Way. It was maddening, but it was true,
and he knew the man well enough now to feel absolutely assured that no
extremity of mental or physical torment would wring the priceless secret
from him.

Well, if it had to be, it must be. If he could not learn the secret, at
least no one else should. Before morning it would be buried for ever
under the waters of the Baltic, and he would revenge himself on the
daughter for that which the father refused to do. If Franklin Marmion
would not give him the sceptre of the World-Empire, then Nitocris should
be his wife and Empress if she would, and if not, his slave and
plaything, as he had sworn to Phadrig the Egyptian. The fortress-castle
of Oscarburg, on the lonely wooded shore of Viborg Bay, had kept many a
secret safely before now, and it would keep this one. Every retainer in
the Castle, every man, woman, and child on the estates for leagues
around, was his, body and soul, as their fathers before them had been
the blind, unquestioning serfs of his fathers. There his word was law,
and his will was fate. There was no "liberty" within his domains, since
no man wanted it, or would have understood it had it been given to him.

When their argument was over they parted, apparently the best of
friends. Franklin Marmion went to bed calmly curious as to what was
going to happen, and Oscarovitch paid a visit to his captain.

A little after three that morning he opened the door of the Professor's
state-room very gently and looked in. The room was dark, and he
listened. A soft, just audible sound of breathing came from the bed. It
was the breathing of a man fast asleep. He pressed the spring of his
electric lamp, and turned the thin ray on to the water-bottle in the
rack over the wash-stand. It was half-empty, and a glass stood on the
table in the middle of the room. Then the ray fell on the face of the
sleeping man. It was as Prince Zastrow's face had been the last night he
went to sleep in the Castle of Trelitz--rather the face of a corpse than
that of a living man. His captain stood behind him, and he turned and
whispered:

"He is ready. Are the men below?"

"All, Highness, save Grovno at the wheel and Hartog on the look-out.
They will see nothing, as they did before," came the whispered reply.

"Very well, then. You and I can manage this between us. You have the
line?"

The captain nodded, and they went into the room, softly closing the
door. In a few minutes they came out again, carrying between them a long
bundle of blankets lashed from end to end with thin line. They took it
aft along the alloway and out on to the lower deck by the stern. Two
iron doors of a port used for coaling stood open on the starboard side.
On the deck lay a couple of pigs of iron lashed together. These the
captain made fast to one end of the bundle and lifted them towards the
port. Oscarovitch took hold of the other end. They lifted it. The
weights dropped outside the port, and the bundle followed them. The
captain started up, clasped his hands to his forehead, and said in a
gasping whisper:

"Holy God, Highness, what have we done?"

"What do you mean, Derevskin? You have obeyed my orders; that is all. Is
it not enough for you?"

"Yes, Highness--but who or what was that man? Was he really a man?"

"Are you mad, Derevskin?"

"No, Highness, I hope not: but did you hear--or, rather, did you not
hear?"

"What, you fool?"

"He--it--the body--it made no splash when it touched the water!"

The stammered words struck Oscarovitch like so many puffs of frozen air.
No, the body of Franklin Marmion _had_ made no splash. It had vanished
through the port into silence. That was all. He beat back his own terror
with the exertion of all his will-power, and said in a sneering
whisper:

"Derevskin, you are either mad or drunk; but I will forgive you this
time because you have obeyed. Go to bed, and don't forget to be either
sober or sane when I come on deck."

The captain bowed his head, and went forward with shambling steps and
shaking limbs. Oscarovitch closed the port with hands which all his
force could not keep steady, and betook himself to bed, to lie awake for
the rest of the short summer night wondering vainly what really had
happened.

He had had his bath and dressed soon after six, and went on deck. The
captain was on the bridge, and he joined him.

"Good morning, Derevskin!"

"I have the honour to wish Your Highness good morning!"

"Nothing happened during the night worth reporting, I suppose?"

"No, Highness, nothing."

"Very good: but I have slept badly, and you look as if you had been on
the bridge all night. Perhaps it is necessary among all these islands,
and I am pleased that you are so watchful, especially as I have guests
on board. Come down to your room now and send your steward for a bottle.
It will do neither of us any harm."

There was a somewhat lengthy conversation over this early breakfast of
champagne and biscuits after the door had been closed and locked, and
when it was finished, Oscarovitch and his captain understood each other
as completely as was necessary.

An hour later he saw Nitocris walking about the upper deck looking pale
and anxious. He went to her and said in a tone which intentionally
betrayed his own nervousness:

"Good morning, Miss Marmion! Have you seen anything of the Professor?"

"No, Prince, I have not. I went to his room just now and knocked. There
was no reply and I opened the door. The room was empty, but he had
evidently been to bed. Is he not on deck?"

"No, Miss Marmion, he is not. He said last night that he would like his
bath about six, and the steward I sent to valet him went to his room and
found it as you say. I have had the ship searched high and low, and from
stem to stern, and there is no sign of him. I have had every one
questioned, and no one has seen anything of him since last night."

"Oh, my poor, poor Dad, I have lost him! Yes, I suppose it must have
been that. He has walked overboard."

"Walked overboard, Miss Marmion?"

"Yes, yes, it must be that. Prince Oscarovitch, my father, like most
very clever men, had one dangerous failing. He walked in his sleep and
did things unconsciously. That was why he told you about the ghost at
'The Wilderness' just as though he really had seen it. Yes, he must have
got up in the night and come on deck, and walked overboard, and so I
have lost the best friend I ever had, or shall have. You must excuse
me, Prince. I must go to my room. The very sunlight seems horrible now.
Jenny will look after me. Good morning!"

Her face was white and her eyes were staring at nothing. She spoke with
a horrible, stony calm which, crime-hardened as he was, sent a thrilling
shiver through his nerves. A spasm of remorse shook him; then his
self-control came back, and he offered her his arm in silence. He led
her down to the saloon, and gave her into Jenny's charge. Then he went
on deck again, lit a cigar, and proceeded to congratulate himself on the
great good fortune which had, from his point of view at least, so
happily explained away the disappearance of Franklin Marmion.




CHAPTER XXIV

THE LUST THAT WAS--AND IS


Nitocris kept her room until nearly seven the following evening.
Oscarovitch made frequent enquiries of Jenny as to her condition, and
always received the same reply. Her mistress was in a semi-unconscious
state, and she could only rouse her every now and then to take a little
nourishment. Unfortunately there was no doctor on board. He had had news
in Copenhagen that his mother was lying very ill at Hamburg, and, as the
cruise was then intended to be only a very short one, he had been given
leave to go to her.

The Prince wished to go back to Copenhagen, but this Nitocris absolutely
refused. She had determined to fight her sorrow alone, and when she had
conquered it, she would go back to England and her friends--which was
exactly what Oscarovitch had determined she should not do. She was
absolutely at his mercy now. He would be something worse than a fool to
let such a golden opportunity go by--and so the _Grashna's_ bowsprit was
kept pointing eastward, and the leagues between her and Oscarburg were
being flung behind her as fast as the whirling screws could devour them.

The only question that he had to ask himself was: How? and to that an
easy answer at once suggested itself: The Horus Stone.

When he went down to what he expected would be a lonely dinner, he was
more than agreeably surprised to find Nitocris dressed in a black
evening costume, which was the nearest approach to mourning that her
available wardrobe made possible, already in the saloon.

He bowed to her with a gesture of reverence, which meant far more than
mere formal politeness, and said in a low tone:

"Miss Marmion, I need not say how pleased I am to find that you are able
to leave your room. May I hope that you will be able to dine?"

"Yes, Prince," she replied, in the same cold, mechanical voice in which
she had answered the tidings of her father's death. "The worst is over
