the two upper abruptly cut off at the apex, and separated by a slight
indentation or notch more or less broad and shallow at the top; all the
lobes entire, or 2-3 sublobed, or coarsely toothed; base truncate, acute
or heart-shaped; leafstalks as long or longer than the blade, slender,
enlarged at the base; stipules 1-2 inches long, pale yellow, oblong,
often persisting till the leaf is fully developed.

=Inflorescence.=--Late May or early June. Flowers conspicuous, solitary,
terminal, held erect by a stout stem, tulip-shaped, 1-1/2-2 inches long,
opening at the top about 2 inches. There are two triangular bracts which
fall as the flower opens; three greenish, concave sepals, at length
reflexed; six greenish-yellow petals with an orange spot near the base
of each; numerous stamens somewhat shorter than the petals; and pistils
clinging together about a central axis.

=Fruit.=--Cone-like, formed of numerous carpels, often abortive, which
fall away from the axis at maturity; each long, flat carpel encloses in
the cavity at its base one or two orange seeds which hang out for a time
on flexible, silk-like threads.

=Horticultural Value.=--An ornamental tree of great merit; hardy except
in the coldest parts of New England; difficult to transplant, but
growing rapidly when established; comes into leaf rather early and holds
its foliage till mid-fall, shedding it in a short time when mature;
adapts itself readily to good, light soils, but grows best in moist
loam. It has few disfiguring insect enemies. Mostly propagated by seed,
but sometimes successfully collected; for sale in the leading nurseries
and usually obtainable in large quantities. Of abnormal forms offered by
nurserymen, one has an upright habit approaching that of the Lombardy
poplar; another has variegated leaves, and another leaves without lobes.

[Illustration: PLATE LIII.--Liriodendron Tulipifera.]

  1. Winter bud, terminal.
  2. Opening leaf-bud with stipules.
  3. Flowering branch.
  4. Fruit.
  5. Fruit with many carpels removed.
  6. Carpel with seeds.




LAURACEAE. LAUREL FAMILY.


=Sassafras officinale, Nees.=

_Sassafras Sassafras, Karst._

SASSAFRAS.

=Habitat and Range.=--In various soils and situations; sandy or rich
woods, along the borders of peaty swamps.

     Provinces of Quebec and Ontario.

Maine,--this tree grows not beyond Black Point (Scarboro, Cumberland
county) eastward (Josselyn's _New England Rarities_, 1672); not reported
again by botanists for more than two hundred years; rediscovered at
Wells in 1895 (Walter Deane) and North Berwick in 1896 (J. C. Parlin);
New Hampshire,--lower Merrimac valley, eastward to the coast and along
the Connecticut valley to Bellows Falls; Vermont,--occasional south of
the center; Pownal (Robbins, Eggleston); Hartland and Brattleboro
(Bates), Vernon (Grant); Massachusetts,--common especially in the
eastern sections; Rhode Island and Connecticut,--common.

     South to Florida; west to Michigan, Iowa, Kansas, and Texas.

=Habit.=--Generally a shrub or small tree but sometimes reaching a
height of 40-50 feet and a trunk diameter of 2-4 feet; attaining a
maximum in the southern and southwestern states of 80-100 feet in height
and a trunk diameter of 6-7 feet; head open, flattish or rounded;
branches at varying angles, stout, crooked, and irregular; spray bushy;
marked in winter by the contrasting reddish-brown of the trunk, the
bright yellowish-green of the shoots and the prominent flower-buds, in
early spring by the drooping racemes of yellow flowers, in autumn by the
rich yellow or red-tinted foliage and handsome fruit, at all seasons by
the aromatic odor and spicy flavor of all parts of the tree, especially
the bark of the root.

=Bark.=--Bark of trunk deep reddish-brown, deeply and firmly ridged in
old trees, in young trees greenish-gray, finely and irregularly striate,
the outer layer often curiously splitting, resembling a sort of filagree
work; branchlets reddish-brown, marked with warts of russet brown;
season's shoots at first minutely pubescent, in the fall more or less
mottled, bright yellowish-green.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Flower-buds conspicuous, terminal, ovate to
elliptical, the outer scales rather loose, more or less pubescent, the
inner glossy, pubescent; lateral buds much smaller. Leaves simple,
alternate, often opposite, 3-5 inches long, two-thirds as wide,
downy-tomentose when young, at maturity smooth, yellowish-green above,
lighter beneath, with midrib conspicuous and minutely hairy; outline of
two forms, one oval to oblong, entire, usually rounded at the apex,
wedge-shaped at base; the other oval to obovate, mitten-shaped or
3-lobed to about the center, with rounded sinuses; apex obtuse or
rounded; base wedge-shaped; leafstalk about 1 inch long; stipules none.

=Inflorescence.=--April or early May. Appearing with the leaves in
slender, bracted, greenish-yellow, corymbous racemes, from terminal buds
of the preceding season, sterile and fertile flowers on separate
trees,--sterile flowers with 9 stamens, each of the three inner with two
stalked orange-colored glands, anthers 4-celled, ovary abortive or
wanting: fertile flowers with 6 rudimentary stamens in one row; ovary
ovoid; style short.

=Fruit.=--Generally scanty, drupes, ovoid, deep blue, with club-shaped,
bright red stalk.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy throughout New England; adapted to a great
variety of soils, but prefers a stony, well-drained loam or gravel. Its
irregular masses of foliage, which color so brilliantly in the fall,
make it an extremely interesting tree in plantations, but it has always
been rare in nurseries and difficult to transplant; suckers, however,
can be moved readily. Propagated easily from seed.

[Illustration: PLATE LIV.--Sassafras officinale.]

  1. Winter buds.
  2. Branch with sterile flowers.
  3. Sterile flower.
  4. Branch with fertile flowers.
  5. Fertile flower.
  6. Fruiting branch.




HAMAMELIDACEAE. WITCH HAZEL FAMILY.


=Liquidambar Styraciflua, L.=

SWEET GUM.

=Habitat and Range.=--Low, wet soil, swamps, moist woods.

Connecticut,--restricted to the southwest corner of the state, not far
from the seacoast; Darien to Five Mile river, probably the northeastern
limit of its natural growth.

     South to Florida; west to Missouri and Texas.

=Habit.=--Tree 40-60 feet high, with a trunk diameter of 10 inches to 2
feet, attaining a height of 150 feet and a diameter of 3-5 feet in the
Ohio and Mississippi valleys; trunk tall and straight; branches rather
small for the diameter and height of the tree, the lower mostly
horizontal or declining; branchlets beset with numerous short, rather
stout, curved twigs; head wide-spreading, ovoid or narrow-pyramidal,
symmetrical; conspicuous in summer by its deep green, shining foliage,
in autumn by the splendor of its coloring, and in winter by the
long-stemmed, globular fruit, which does not fall till spring.

=Bark.=--Trunk gray or grayish-brown, in old trees deeply furrowed and
broken up into rather small, thickish, loose scales; branches
brown-gray; branchlets with or without prominent corky ridges on the
upper side; young twigs yellowish.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds ovate, reddish-brown, glossy, acute.
Leaves simple, alternate, regular, 3-4 inches in diameter, dark green
turning to reds, purples, and yellows in autumn, cut into the figure of
a star by 5-7 equal, pointed lobes, glandular-serrate, smooth, shining
on the upper surface, fragrant when bruised; base more or less
heart-shaped; stalk slender.

=Inflorescence.=--May. Developing from a bud of the season; sterile
flowers in an erect or spreading, cylindrical catkin; calyx none; petals
none, stamens many, intermixed with minute scales: fertile flowers
numerous, gathered in a long peduncled head; calyx consisting of fine
scales; corolla none; pistil with 2-celled ovary and 2 long styles.

=Fruit.=--In spherical, woody heads, about 1 inch in diameter, suspended
by a slender thread: a sort of aggregate fruit made up of the hardened,
coherent ovaries, holding on till spring, each containing one or two
perfect seeds.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy along the southern shores of New England;
grows in good wet or dry soils, preferring clays. Young plants are
tender in Massachusetts, but if protected a few seasons until well
established make hardy trees of medium size. It is offered by
nurserymen, but must be frequently transplanted to be moved with safety;
rate of growth rather slow and nearly uniform to maturity. Propagated
from seed.

[Illustration: PLATE LV.--Liquidambar styraciflua.]

  1. Winter buds.
  2. Flowering branch.
  3. Sterile flower.
  4. Fertile flower.
  5. Fruiting branch.




PLATANACEAE. PLANE-TREE FAMILY.


=Platanus occidentalis, L.=

BUTTONWOOD. SYCAMORE. BUTTONBALL. PLANE TREE.

=Habitat and Range.=--Near streams, river bottoms, and low, damp woods.

     Ontario.

Maine,--apparently restricted to York county; New Hampshire,--Merrimac
valley towards the coast; along the Connecticut as far as Walpole;
Vermont,--scattering along the river shores, quite abundant along the
Hoosac in Pownal (Eggleston); Massachusetts,--occasional; Rhode Island
and Connecticut,--rather common.

     South to Florida; west to Minnesota, Nebraska, Kansas, and Texas.

=Habit.=--A tree of the first magnitude, 50-100 feet and upwards in
height, with a diameter of 3-8 feet; reaching in the rich alluvium of
the Ohio and Mississippi valleys a maximum of 125 feet in height and a
diameter of 20 feet; the largest tree of the New England forest,
conspicuous by its great height, massive trunk and branches, and by its
magnificent, wide-spreading, dome-shaped or pyramidal, open head. The
sunlight, streaming through the large-leafed, rusty foliage, reveals the
curiously mottled patchwork bark; and the long-stemmed, globular fruit
swings to every breeze till spring comes again.

The lower branches are often very long and almost horizontal, and the
branchlets frequently have a tufted, broom-like appearance, due probably
to the action of a fungous disease on the young growth.

=Bark.=--Bark of trunk and large branches dark greenish-gray, sometimes
rough and closely adherent, but usually flaking off in broad, thin,
brittle scales, exposing the green or buff inner bark, which becomes
nearly white on exposure; branchlets light brown, sometimes ridgy
towards the ends, marked with numerous inconspicuous dots.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds short, ovate, obtuse, enclosed in the
swollen base of a petiole, and, after the fall of the leaf, encircled
by the leaf-scar. Leaves simple, alternate, 5-6 inches long, 7-10 wide,
pubescent on both sides when young, at maturity light rusty-green above,
light green beneath, finally smooth, turning yellow in autumn,
coriaceous; outline reniform; margin coarse-toothed or sinuate-lobed,
the short lobes ending in a sharp point; base heart-shaped to nearly
truncate; leafstalk 1-2 inches long, swollen at the base; stipules
sheathing, often united, forming a sort of ruffle.

=Inflorescence.=--May. In crowded spherical heads; flowers of both kinds
with insignificant calyx and corolla,--sterile heads from terminal or
lateral buds of the preceding season, on short and pendulous stems;
stamens few, usually 4, anthers 2-celled: fertile heads from shoots of
the season, on long, slender stems, made up of closely compacted ovate
ovaries with intermingled scales, ovaries surmounted by hairy one-sided
recurved styles, with bright red stigmas.

=Fruit.=--In heads, mostly solitary, about 1 inch in diameter,
persistent till spring: nutlets small, hairy, 1-seeded.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy throughout New England; prefers a deep,
rich, loamy soil near water, but grows in almost any situation; of more
rapid growth than almost any other native tree, and formerly planted
freely in ornamental grounds and on streets, but fungous diseases
disfigure it so seriously, and the late frosts so often kill the young
leaves that it is now seldom obtainable in nurseries; usually propagated
from seed. The European plane, now largely grown in some nurseries, is a
suitable substitute.

[Illustration: PLATE LVI.--Platanus occidentalis.]

  1. Winter buds.
  2. Flowering branch with sterile and fertile heads.
  3. Stamen.
  4. Pistil.
  5. Fruiting branch.
  6. Stipule.
  7. Bud with enclosing base of leafstalk.




POMACEAE. APPLE FAMILY.


Trees or shrubs; leaves simple or pinnate, mostly alternate, with
stipules free from the leafstalk and usually soon falling; flowers
regular, perfect; calyx 5-lobed; calyx-tube adnate to ovary; petals 5,
inserted on the disk which lines the calyx-tube; stamens usually many,
distinct, inserted with the petals; carpels of the ovary 1-5, partially
or entirely united with each other; ovules 1-2 in each carpel; styles
1-5; fruit a fleshy pome, often berry-like or drupe-like, formed by
consolidation of the carpels with the calyx-tube.


PYRUS. MALUS. AMELANCHIER. CRATAEGUS.


=Pyrus Americana, DC.=

_Sorbus Americana, Marsh._

MOUNTAIN ASH.

=Habitat and Range.=--River banks, cool woods, swamps, and mountains.

     Newfoundland to Manitoba.

Maine,--common; New Hampshire,--common along the watersheds of the
Connecticut and Merrimac rivers and on the slopes of the White
mountains; Vermont,--abundant far up the slopes of the Green mountains;
Massachusetts,--Graylock, Wachusett, Watatic, and other mountainous
regions; rare eastward; Rhode Island and Connecticut,--occasional in the
northern sections.

     South, in cold swamps and along the mountains to North Carolina;
     west to Michigan and Minnesota.

