Seaton, who had opened his mouth, shut it again ludicrously, without
saying a word, and Margaret gave him a startled glance.

"Now I _have_ said it!" she exclaimed. "I'm not afraid of him, boys,
really. What do you want me to do?"

Seaton plunged in.

"What we were trying to get up nerve enough to say is that he'd be a
good man on the astronomy job," and Crane added quickly:

"He undoubtedly knows more about it than I do, and it would be a pity to
lose the chance of using him. Besides, Dick and I think it rather
dangerous to leave him so much time to himself, in which to work up a
plan against us."

"He's cooking one right now, I'll bet a hat," Seaton put in, and Crane
added:

"If you are sure that you have no objections, Miss Spencer, we might go
below, where we can have it dark, and all three of us see what we can
make of the stargazing. We are really losing an unusual opportunity."

Margaret hid gallantly any reluctance she might have felt.

"I wouldn't deserve to be here if I can't work with the Doctor and hate
him at the same time."

"Good for you, Peg, you're a regular fellow!" Seaton exclaimed. "You're
a trump!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Finally, the enormous velocity of the cruiser was sufficiently reduced
to effect a landing, a copper-bearing sun was located, and a course was
laid toward its nearest planet.

As the vessel approached its goal a deep undercurrent of excitement kept
all the passengers feverishly occupied. They watched the distant globe
grow larger, glowing through its atmosphere more and more clearly as a
great disk of white light, its outline softened by the air about it. Two
satellites were close beside it. Its sun, a great, blazing orb, a little
nearer than the planet, looked so great and so hot that Margaret became
uneasy.

"Isn't it dangerous to get so close, Dick? We might burn up, mightn't
we?"

"Not without an atmosphere," he laughed.

"Oh," murmured the girl apologetically, "I might have known that."

Dropping rapidly into the atmosphere of the planet, they measured its
density and analyzed it in apparatus installed for that purpose, finding
that its composition was very similar to the Earth's air and that its
pressure was not enough greater to be uncomfortable. When within one
thousand feet of the surface, Seaton weighed a five-pound weight upon a
spring-balance, finding that it weighed five and a half pounds, thus
ascertaining that the planet was either somewhat larger than the Earth
or more dense. The ground was almost hidden by a rank growth of
vegetation, but here and there appeared glade-like openings.

Seaton glanced at the faces about him. Tense interest marked them all.
Dorothy's cheeks were flushed, her eyes shone. She looked at him with
awe and pride.

"A strange world, Dorothy," he said gravely. "You are not afraid?"

"Not with you," she answered. "I am only thrilled with wonder."

"Columbus at San Salvador," said Margaret, her dark eyes paying their
tribute of admiration.

A dark flush mounted swiftly into Seaton's brown face and he sought to
throw most of the burden upon Crane, but catching upon his face also a
look of praise, almost of tenderness, he quickly turned to the controls.

"Man the boats!" he ordered an imaginary crew, and the Skylark descended
rapidly.

Landing upon one of the open spaces, they found the ground solid and
stepped out. What had appeared to be a glade was in reality a rock, or
rather, a ledge of apparently solid metal, with scarcely a loose
fragment to be seen. At one end of the ledge rose a giant tree
wonderfully symmetrical, but of a peculiar form. Its branches were
longer at the top than at the bottom, and it possessed broad, dark-green
leaves, long thorns, and odd, flexible, shoot-like tendrils. It stood as
an outpost of the dense vegetation beyond. Totally unlike the forests of
Earth were those fern-like trees, towering two hundred feet into the
air. They were of an intensely vivid green and stood motionless in the
still, hot air of noonday. Not a sign of animal life was to be seen; the
whole landscape seemed asleep.

The five strangers stood near their vessel, conversing in low tones and
enjoying the sensation of solid ground beneath their feet. After a few
minutes DuQuesne remarked:

"This is undoubtedly a newer planet than ours. I should say that it was
in the Carboniferous age. Aren't those trees like those in the
coal-measures, Seaton?"

"True as time, Blackie--there probably won't be a human race here for
ages, unless we bring out some colonists."

Seaton kicked at one of the loose lumps of metal questioningly with his
heavy shoe, finding that it was as immovable as though it were part of
the ledge. Bending over, he found that it required all his great
strength to lift it and he stared at it with an expression of surprise,
which turned to amazement as he peered closer.

"DuQuesne! Look at this!"

       *       *       *       *       *

DuQuesne studied the metal, and was shaken out of his habitual
taciturnity.

"Platinum, by all the little gods!"

"We'll grab some of this while the grabbing's good," announced Seaton,
and the few visible lumps were rolled into the car. "If we had a pickaxe
we could chop some more off one of those sharp ledges down there."

"There's an axe in the shop," replied DuQuesne. "I'll go get it. Go
ahead, I'll soon be with you."

"Keep close together," warned Crane as the four moved slowly down the
slope. "This is none too safe, Dick."

"No, it isn't, Mart. But we've got to see whether we can't find some
copper, and I would like to get some more of this stuff, too. I don't
think it's platinum, I believe that it's X."

As they reached the broken projections, Margaret glanced back over her
shoulder and screamed. The others saw that her face was white and her
eyes wide with horror, and Seaton instinctively drew his pistol as he
whirled about, only to check his finger on the trigger and lower his
hand.

"Nothing but X-plosive bullets," he growled in disgust, and in helpless
silence the four watched an unspeakably hideous monster slowly appear
from behind the Skylark. Its four huge, squat legs supported a body at
least a hundred feet long, pursy and ungainly; at the extremity of a
long and sinuous neck a comparatively small head seemed composed
entirely of a cavernous mouth armed with row upon row of carnivorous
teeth. Dorothy gasped with terror and both girls shrank closer to the
two men, who maintained a baffled silence as the huge beast passed his
revolting head along the hull of the vessel.

"I dare not shoot, Martin," Seaton whispered, "it would wreck the bus.
Have you got any solid bullets?"

"No. We must hide behind these small ledges until it goes away,"
answered Crane, his eyes upon Margaret's colorless face. "You two hide
behind that one, we will take this one."

"Oh, well, it's nothing to worry about, anyway. We can kill him as soon
as he gets far enough away from the boat," said Seaton as, with Dorothy
clinging to him, he dropped behind one of the ledges. Margaret, her
staring eyes fixed upon the monster, remained standing until Crane
touched her gently and drew her down beside him.

"He will go away soon," his even voice assured her. "We are in no
danger."

In spite of their predicament, a feeling of happiness flowed through
Crane's whole being as he crouched beside the wall of metal with one arm
protectingly around Margaret, and he longed to protect her through life
as he was protecting her then. Accustomed as he was to dangerous
situations, he felt no fear. He felt only a great tenderness for the
girl by his side, who had ceased trembling but was still staring
wide-eyed at the monster through a crevice.

"Scared, Peggy?" he whispered.

"Not now, Martin, but if you weren't here I would die of fright."

At this reply his arm tightened involuntarily, but he forced it to
relax.

"It will not be long," he promised himself silently, "until she is back
at home among her friends, and then...."

There came the crack of a rifle from the Skylark. There was an awful
roar from the dinosaur, which was quickly silenced by a stream of
machine-gun bullets.

"Blackie's on the job--let's go!" cried Seaton, and they raced up the
slope. Making a detour to avoid the writhing and mutilated mass they
plunged through the opening door. DuQuesne shut it behind them and in
overwhelming relief, the adventurers huddled together as from the
wilderness without there arose an appalling tumult.

       *       *       *       *       *

The scene, so quiet a few moments before, was instantly changed. The
trees, the swamp, and the air seemed filled with monsters so hideous as
to stagger the imagination. Winged lizards of prodigious size hurtled
through the air, plunging to death against the armored hull.
Indescribable flying monsters, with feathers like birds, but with the
fangs of tigers, attacked viciously. Dorothy screamed and started back
as a scorpion-like thing with a body ten feet in length leaped at the
window in front of her, its terrible sting spraying the glass with
venom. As it fell to the ground, a huge spider--if an eight-legged
creature with spines instead of hair, many-faceted eyes, and a bloated,
globular body weighing hundreds of pounds, may be called a
spider--leaped upon it and, mighty mandibles against poisonous sting,
the furious battle raged. Several twelve-foot cockroaches climbed nimbly
across the fallen timber of the morass and began feeding voraciously
upon the body of the dead dinosaur, only to be driven away by another
animal, which all three men recognized instantly as that king of all
prehistoric creatures, the saber-toothed tiger. This newcomer, a tawny
beast towering fifteen feet high at the shoulder, had a mouth
disproportionate even to his great size--a mouth armed with four great
tiger-teeth more than three feet in length. He had barely begun his
meal, however, when he was challenged by another nightmare, a something
apparently half-way between a dinosaur and a crocodile. At the first
note the tiger charged. Clawing, striking, rending each other with their
terrible teeth, a veritable avalanche of bloodthirsty rage, the
combatants stormed up and down the little island. But the fighters were
rudely interrupted, and the earthly visitors discovered that in this
primitive world it was not only animal life that was dangerous.

[Illustration: The great tree standing on the farther edge of the island
suddenly bent over, lashing out like a snake and grasping both. It
transfixed them with the terrible thorns, which were now seen to be
armed with needlepoints and to possess barbs like fish-hooks.]

The great tree standing on the farther edge of the island suddenly bent
over, lashing out like a snake and grasping both. It transfixed them
with the terrible thorns, which were now seen to be armed with
needlepoints and to possess barbs like fish-hooks. It ripped at them
with the long branches, which were veritable spears. The broad leaves,
armed with revolting sucking disks, closed about the two animals, while
the long, slender twigs, each of which was now seen to have an eye at
its extremity, waved about, watching each movement of the captives from
a safe distance.

If the struggle between the two animals had been awful, this was
Titanic. The air was torn by the roars of the reptile, the screams of
the great cat, and the shrieks of the tree. The very ground rocked with
the ferocity of the conflict. There could be but one result--soon the
tree, having absorbed the two gladiators, resumed its upright position
in all its beauty.

The members of the little group stared at each other, sick at heart.

"This is NO place to start a copper-mine. I think we'd better beat it,"
remarked Seaton presently, wiping drops of perspiration from his
forehead.

"I think so," acquiesced Crane. "We found air and Earth-like conditions
here; we probably will elsewhere."

"Are you all right, Dottie?" asked Seaton.

"All right, Dicky," she replied, the color flowing back into her cheeks.
"It scared me stiff, and I think I have a lot of white hairs right now,
but I wouldn't have missed it for anything."

She paused an instant, and continued:

"Dick, there must be a queer streak of brutality in me, but would you
mind blowing up that frightful tree? I wouldn't mind its nature if it
were ugly--but look at it! It's so deceptively beautiful! You wouldn't
think it had the disposition of a fiend, would you?"

       *       *       *       *       *

A general laugh relieved the nervous tension, and Seaton stepped
impulsively toward DuQuesne with his hand outstretched.

"You've squared your account, Blackie. Say the word and the war's all
off."

DuQuesne ignored the hand and glanced coldly at the group of eager,
friendly faces.

"Don't be sentimental," he remarked evenly as he turned away to his
room. "Emotional scenes pain me. I gave my word to act as one of the
party."

"Well, may I be kicked to death by little red spiders!" exclaimed
Seaton, dumbfounded, as the other disappeared. "He ain't a man, he's a
fish!"

"He's a machine. I always thought so, and now I know it," stated
Margaret, and the others nodded agreement.

"Well, we'll sure pull his cork as soon as we get back!" snapped Seaton.
"He asked for it, and we'll give him both barrels!"

"I know I acted the fool out there," Margaret apologized, flushing hotly
and looking at Crane. "I don't know what made me act so stupid. I used
to have a little nerve."

"You were a regular little brick, Peg," Seaton returned instantly. "Both
you girls are all to the good--the right kind to have along in ticklish
places."

Crane held out his steady hand and took Margaret's in a warm clasp.

"For a girl in your weakened condition you were wonderful. You have no
reason to reproach yourself."

Tears filled the dark eyes, but were held back bravely as she held her
head erect and returned the pressure of his hand.

"Just so you don't leave me behind next time," she returned lightly, and
the last word concerning the incident had been said.

Seaton applied the power and soon they were approaching another planet,
which was surrounded by a dense fog. Descending slowly, they found it to
be a mass of boiling-hot steam and rank vapors, under enormous pressure.

The next planet they found to have a clear atmosphere, but the ground
had a peculiar, barren look; and analysis of the gaseous envelope proved
it to be composed almost entirely of chlorin. No life of an earthly type
could be possible upon such a world, and a search for copper, even with
the suits and helmets, would probably be fruitless if not impossible.

"Well," remarked Seaton as they were again in space, "we've got enough
copper to visit several more worlds--several more solar systems, if
necessary. But there's a nice, hopeful-looking planet right in front of
us. It may be the one we're looking for."

Arrived in the belt of atmosphere, they tested it as before, and found
it satisfactory.




CHAPTER XII

The Mastery of Mind Over Matter


They descended rapidly, directly over a large and imposing city in the
middle of a vast, level, beautifully-planted plain. While they were
watching it, the city vanished and the plain was transformed into a
heavily-timbered mountain summit, the valleys falling away upon all
sides as far as the eye could reach.

"Well, I'll say that's SOME mirage!" exclaimed Seaton, rubbing his eyes
in astonishment. "I've seen mirages before, but never anything like
