people were nearly panic-stricken when they saw you rip that mountain
down and uproot the magnetic ray station. No one ship had ever done that
before!

"But the fact that several guards had seen me materialize out of thin
air, plus the fact that they knew you could make yourselves invisible,
convinced them that my story was true.

"They want to talk to you, and they say that they will gladly grant your
requests. But you must promise them one thing--you must stay away from
any of our people, for they are afraid of disease. Bacteria that do not
bother you very much might be deadly to us. The Supreme Council of Three
is willing to take the risk, but they will not allow anyone else to be
exposed."

"We will keep apart from your people if the Council wishes," Arcot
agreed, "but there is no real danger. We are so vastly different from
you that it will be impossible for you to get our diseases, or for us to
contract yours. However, if the Council wants it, we will do as they
ask."

Torlos at once went back to his ship and headed toward the city.

Arcot followed in the _Ancient Mariner_, keeping about three hundred
feet to the rear.

When they reached the magnetic screen of the city, one of the beam
stations cut its power for a few moments, leaving a gap for the two
ships to glide smoothly through.

On the roofs of the buildings, men and women were collected, watching
the shining, polished hull of the strange ship as it moved silently
above them.

Torlos led them to the great central building and dropped to the huge
landing field beside it. All around them, in regular rows, the great
hulls of the Nansal battleships were arranged. Arcot landed the _Ancient
Mariner_ and shut off the power.

"I think Wade is the man to go with me this time," Arcot said. "He has
learned to communicate with Torlos quite well. We will each carry both
pistols and wear our power suits. And we'll be in radio communication
with you at all times.

"I don't think they'll start anything we don't like this time, but I'm
not as confident as I was, and I'm not going to take any useless
chances. This time I'm going to make arrangements. If I die here,
there's going to be a very costly funeral, and these men are going to
pay the costs!

"I'll call you every three minutes, Morey. If I don't, check up on me.
If you still don't get an answer, take this place apart because you
won't be able to hurt us then.

"I'm going to tell Torlos about our precautions. If the building shields
the radio, I'll be listening for you and I'll retrace my steps until I
can contact you again. Right? Then come on, Wade!" Arcot, fully
equipped, strode down the corridor to the airlock.

Torlos was waiting for them with another man, whom Torlos explained was
a high-ranking officer of the fleet. Torlos, it seemed, was without
official rank. He was a secret service agent without official status,
and therefore an officer had been assigned to accompany the Earthmen.

Torlos seemed to be relaxing in the soft, warm sunlight of his native
world. It had been years since he had seen that yellow sun except from
the windows of a space flier. Now he could walk around in the clear air
of the planet of his birth.

Arcot explained to him the precautions they had taken against trouble
here, and Torlos smiled. "You have certainly learned greater caution. I
can't blame you. We certainly seem little different from the men of
Sator; we can only stand on trial. But I know you will be safe."

They walked across the great court, which was covered with a soft,
springy turf of green. The hot sun shining down on them, the brilliant
colors of the buildings, the towering walls of the magnificent edifice
they were approaching, and, behind them, the shining hull of the
_Ancient Mariner_ set among the dark, needle-shaped Nansalian ships, all
combined to make a picture that would remain in their minds for a long
time.

Here, there were no guards watching them as they were conducted to the
meeting of the Supreme Council of Three.

They went into the main entrance of the towering government building and
stepped into the great hall on the ground floor. It was like the
interior of an ancient Gothic cathedral, beautiful and dignified. Great
pillars of green stone rose in graceful, fluted columns, smoothly
curving out like the branches of some stylized tree to meet in arches
that rose high in pleasing curves to a point midway between four
pillars. The walls were made of a dark green stone as a background; on
them had been traced designs in colored tile.

The whole hall was a thing of colored beauty; the color gave it life, as
the yellow sunlight gave life to the trees of the mountains.

They crossed the great hall and came at last to the elevator. Its door
was made of narrow strips of metal, so bound together that the whole
made a flexible, but strong sheet. In principle, the doors worked like
the cover of an antique roll-top desk. The idea was old, but these men
had made their elevator doors very attractive by the addition of color.
In no way did they detract from the dignified grace of the magnificent
hall.

Torlos turned to Arcot. "I wonder if it would not be wise to shut off
your radio as we enter the elevator. Might not the magnetic force affect
it?"

"Probably," Arcot agreed. He contacted Morey and told him that the radio
would be cut off for a short while. "But it won't be more than three
minutes," Arcot finished. "If it is--you know what to do."

As they entered the elevator, Torlos smiled at the two Earthmen. "We
will ascend more gradually this time, so that the acceleration won't be
so tiring to you." He moved the controls carefully, and by gentle steps
they rose to the sixty-third floor of the giant building.

As they stepped out of the elevator, Torlos pointed toward an open
window that stretched widely across one wall. Below them, they could see
the _Ancient Mariner_.

"Your radio contact should be good," Torlos commented.

Wade put in a call to Morey, and to his relief, he made contact
immediately.

The officer was leading them down a green stone corridor toward a simple
door. He opened it, and they entered the room beyond.

In the center of the room was a large triangular table. At a place at
the center of each side sat one man on a slightly raised chair, while on
each side of him sat a number of other men.

Torlos stopped at the door and saluted. Then he spoke in rapid, liquid
syllables to the men sitting at the table, halting once or twice and
showing evident embarrassment as he did so.

He paused, and one of the three men in command replied rapidly in a
pleasant voice that had none of the harsh command that Arcot had noticed
in the voice of the Satorian Commanding One. Arcot liked the voice and
the man.

Judging by Earth standards, he was past middle age--whatever that might
be on Nansal--with crisp black hair that was bleaching slightly. His
face showed the signs of worry that the making of momentous decisions
always leaves, but although the face was strong with authority, there
was a gentleness that comes with a feeling of kindly power.

Wade was talking rapidly into the radio, describing the scene before
them to Morey. He described the great table of dark wood, and the men
about it, some in the blue uniform of the military, and some in the
loose, soft garments of the civilian. Their colored fabrics,
individually in good taste and harmony, were frequently badly out of
harmony with the costume of a neighbor, a difficulty accompanying this
brightly tinted clothing.

Torlos turned to Arcot. "The Supreme council asks that you be seated at
the table, in the places left for you." He paused, then quickly added:
"I have told them of your precautions, and they have said: 'A wise man,
having been received treacherously once, will not again be trapped.'
They approve of your policy of caution.

"The men who sit at the raised portions of the table are the Supreme
Three; the others are their advisors who know the details of Science,
Business, and War. No one man can know all the branches of human
endeavor, and this is but a meeting place of those who know best the
individual lines. The Supreme Three are elected from the advisors in
case of the death of one of the Three, and they act as co-ordinators for
the rest.

"The man of Science is to your left; directly before you is the man of
Business, and to your right is the Commander of the Military.

"To whom do you wish to speak first?"

Arcot considered for a moment, then: "I must first tell the Scientist
what it is I have, then tell the Commander how he can use it, and
finally I will tell the Businessman what will be needed."

Arcot had noticed that the military officers all wore holsters for their
pneumatic pistols, but they were conspicuously empty. He was both
pleased and embarrassed. What should he do--he, who carried two deadly
pistols. He decided on the least conspicuous course and left them where
they were.

Arcot projected his thoughts at Torlos. "We have come a vast distance
across space, from another galaxy. Let your astronomer tell them what
distance that represents."

Arcot paused while Torlos put the thoughts into the words of the
Nansalian language. A moment later, one of the scientists, a tall,
powerfully built man, even for these men of giant strength, rose and
spoke to the others. When he was seated, a second rose and spoke also,
with an expression of puzzled wonder.

"He says," Torlos translated, "that his science has taught him that a
speed such as you say you have made is impossible, but the fact that you
are here proves his science wrong.

"He reasoned that since your kind live on no planet of this system, you
must come from another star. Since his science says that this is just as
impossible as coming from another galaxy, he is convinced of the fallacy
in the theories."

Arcot smiled. The sound reasoning was creditable; the man did not label
as "impossible" something which was proven by the presence of the two
Earthmen.

Arcot tried to explain the physical concepts behind his space-strain
drive, but communication broke down rapidly; Torlos, a warrior, not a
scientist, could not comprehend the ideas, and was completely unable to
translate them into his own language.

"The Chief Physicist suggests that you think directly at him," Torlos
finally told Arcot. "He suggests that the thoughts might be more
familiar to him than to me." He grinned. "And they certainly aren't
clear to me!"

Arcot projected his thoughts directly toward the physicist; to his
surprise, the man was a perfect receiver. He had a natural gift for it.
Quickly, Arcot outlined the system that had made his intergalactic
voyage possible.

The physicist smiled when Arcot was finished, and tried to reply, but he
was not a good transmitter. Torlos aided him.

"He says that the science of your people is far ahead of us. The
conceptions are totally foreign to his mind, and he can only barely
grasp the significance of the idea of bent emptiness that you have given
him. He says, however, that he can fully appreciate the possibility that
you have shown him. He has given your message to the Three, and they are
anxious to hear of the weapons you have."

Arcot drew the molecular pistol, and holding it up for all to see,
projected the general theory of its operation toward the physicist.

To the Chief Physicist of Nansal, the idea of molecular energy was an
old one; he had been making use of it all his life, and it was well
known that the muscles used the heat of air to do their work. He
understood well how it worked, but not until Arcot projected into his
mind the mental impression of how the Earthmen had thrown one sun into
another did he realize the vast power of the ray.

Awed, the man translated the idea to his fellows.

Then Arcot drew the heat pistol and explained how the annihilation of
matter within it was converted into pure heat by the relux lens.

"I will show you how they work," Arcot continued. "Could we have a lump
of metal of some kind?"

The Scientist spoke into an intercom microphone, and within a few
minutes, a large lump of iron--a broken casting--was brought in. Arcot
suspended it on the molecular beam while Wade melted it with the heat
beam. It melted and collapsed into a ball that glowed brilliantly and
flamed as its surface burned in the oxygen of the air. Wade cut off his
heat ray, and the ball quickly cooled under the influence of the
molecular beam until Arcot lowered it to the floor, a perfect sphere
crusted with ice and frost.

Arcot continued for the better part of an hour to explain to the Council
exactly what he had, how they could be used, and what materials and
processes were needed to make them.

When he was finished, the Supreme Three conferred for several minutes.
Then the Scientist asked, through Torlos: "How can we repay you for
these things you have given us?"

"First, we need lead to fuel our ship." Arcot gave them the exact
specifications for the lead wire they needed.

He received his answer from the man of Business and Manufacturing. "We
can give you that easily, for lead is cheap. Indeed, it seems hardly
enough to repay you."

"The second thing we need," Arcot continued, "is information. We became
lost in space and are unable to find our way home. I would like to
explain the case to the Astronomer."

The Astronomer proved to be a man of powerful intelligence as well as
powerful physique, and was a better transmitter than receiver. It took
every bit of Arcot's powerful mind to project his thoughts to the man.

He explained the dilemma that he and his friends were in, and told him
how he could recognize the Galaxy on his plates. The Astronomer said he
thought he knew of such a nebula, but he would like to compare his own
photographs with Arcot's to make sure.

"In return," Arcot told him, "we will give you another weapon--a weapon,
this time, to defeat the astronomer's greatest enemy, distance. It is an
electrical telescope which will permit you to see life on every planet
of this system. With it, you can see a man at a distance ten times as
great as the distance from Nansal to your sun!"

Eagerly, the Astronomer questioned Arcot concerning the telectroscope,
but others were clamoring for Arcot's attention.

The Biologist was foremost among the contenders; he seemed worried about
the possibility of the alien Earthmen carrying pathogenic bacteria.

"Torlos has told us that you have an entirely different internal
organization. What is it that is different? I can't believe that he has
correctly understood you."

Arcot explained the differences as carefully as possible. By the time he
was finished, the Biologist felt sure that any such creature was
sufficiently far removed from them to be harmless biologically, but he
wanted to study the Man of Earth further.

Arcot had brought along a collection of medical books as a possible aid
in case of accident. He offered to give these to Nansal in exchange for
a collection of Nansalian medical texts. The English would have to be
worked out with the aid of a dictionary and a primary working aid which
Arcot would supply. Arcot also asked for a skeleton to take with him,
and the Biologist readily agreed.

"We'd like to give you one in return," Arcot grinned, "But we only
brought four along, and, unfortunately, we are using them at the
moment."

The Biologist smiled back and assured him that they would not think of
taking a piece of apparatus so vitally necessary to the Earthmen.

The Military Leader was the man who demanded attention next. Arcot had a
long conference with him, and they decided that the best way for the
Military Leader to learn the war potential of the _Ancient Mariner_ was
to personally see a demonstration of its powers.

The Council decided that the Three would go on the trip. The Military
Commander picked two of his aides to go, and the Scientist picked the
Astronomer and the Physicist. The head of Business and Manufacturing
declined to bring any of his advisors.

"We would learn nothing," he told Arcot, "and would only be in the way.
I, myself, am going only because I am one of the Three."

"Very well," said Arcot. "Let's get started."




XXI


The party descended to the ground floor and walked out to the ship. They
filed into the airlock, and in the power room they looked in amazement
at the tiny machines that ran the ship. The long black cylinder of the
main power unit for the molecular drive looked weak and futile compared
to the bulky machines that ran their own ships. The power storage coils,
with their fields of intense, dead blackness, interested the Physicist
immensely.

The ship was a constant source of wonder to them all. They investigated
the laboratory and then went up to the second floor. Morey and Fuller
greeted them at the door, and each of the four Earthmen took a group
around the ship, explaining as they went.

The library was a point of great interest, exceeded only by the control
room. Arcot found some difficulty in taking care of all his visitors;
there were only four chairs in the control room. The Three could sit
down, but Arcot needed the fourth chair to pilot the ship. The rest of
the party had to hold on as best they could, which was not too difficult
for men of such physical strength; they were accustomed to high
accelerations in their elevators.

Morey, Wade, and Fuller strapped themselves into the seats at the ray
projectors at the sides and stern.

Arcot wanted to demonstrate the effectiveness of the ship's armament
first, and then the maneuverability. He picked a barren hillside for the
first demonstration. It was a great rocky cliff, high above the timber
line, towering almost vertically a thousand feet above them.

Wade triggered his molecular projector, and a pale beam reached out
toward the cliff. Instantly, the cliff leaped ten miles into the air,
whining and roaring as it shot up through the atmosphere. Then it
started to fall. Heated by its motion through the air, it struck the
mountaintop as a mass of red hot rock which shattered into fragments
with a terrific roar! The rocks rolled and bounced down the
mountainside, their path traced by a line of steam clouds.

Then, at Arcot's order, the heat beams were all turned on the mountain
at full power. In less than a minute, the peak began to melt, sending
streamers of lava down the sides. The beams began to eat out a crater in
the center, where the rock began to boil furiously under the terrific
energy of the heat beams.

Then Arcot shut off the heat beams and turned on the molecular ray.

The molecules of the molten rock were traveling at high velocities--the
heat was terrific. Arcot could see that the rock was boiling quite
freely. When the molecular beam hit it, every one of those fast moving
molecules shot upward together! With the roar of a meteor, it plunged
toward space at five miles a second!

It had dropped to absolute zero when the beam hit it, but at that speed
through the air, it didn't stay cold long! Arcot followed it up in the
_Ancient Mariner_. It was going too slowly for him. The air had slowed
it down and heated it up, so Arcot hit it with the molecular ray again,
converting the heat back into velocity.

By the time they reached free space, Arcot had maneuvered the lump of
rock into an orbit around the planet.

