"Of course. But who, specifically, does the teaching in the closed
classes?"

"I have no idea, sir. It's none of my business. The closed classes are
an ancient and respected institution. What goes on in them is quite
possibly of a religious nature. But that's only a guess. Whatever it is,
it's none of my business. Nor is it yours, young man, Opinioner or not."

"Thank you, Citizen Morgan."

       *       *       *       *       *

(_Citizen Edgar Nief, age 107, occupation retired officer. A tall,
stooped man with cane, icy blue eyes undimmed by age._)

"A little louder, please. What was that question again?"

"About the armed forces. Specifically I asked--"

"I remember now. Yes, young man, I was a colonel in the Twenty-first
North American Spaceborne Commando, which was a regular unit of the
Earth Defense Corps."

"And did you retire from the service?"

"No, the service retired from me."

"I beg pardon, sir?"

"You heard me correctly, young man. It happened just sixty-three years
ago. The Earth Armed Forces were demobilized, except for the police
whom I cannot count. But all regular units were demobilized."

"Why was that done, sir?"

"There wasn't anyone to fight. Wasn't even anyone to guard against, or
so I was told. Damned foolish business, I say."

"Why, sir?"

"Because an old soldier knows that you can never tell when an enemy
might spring up. It could happen now. And then where would we be?"

"Couldn't the armies be formed again?"

"Certainly. But the present generation has no concept of serving under
arms. There are no leaders left, outside of a few useless old fools like
me. It would take years for an effective force, effectively led, to be
formed."

"And in the meantime, Earth is completely open to invasion from the
outside?"

"Yes, except for the police units. And I seriously doubt their
reliability under fire."

"Could you tell me about the police?"

"There is nothing I know about them. I have never bothered my head about
non-military matters."

"But it is conceivable that the police have now taken over the functions
of the army, isn't it? That the police constitute a sizable and
disciplined paramilitary force?"

"It is possible, sir. Anything is possible."

       *       *       *       *       *

(_Citizen Moertin Honners, age 31, occupation verbalizer. A slim,
languid man with an earnest, boyish face and smooth, corn-blond hair._)

"You are a verbalizer, Citizen Honners?"

"I am, sir. Though perhaps 'author' would be a better word, if you don't
mind."

"Of course. Citizen Honners, are you presently engaged in writing for
any of the periodicals I see on the dissemination stands?"

"Certainly not! These are written by incompetent hacks for the dubious
delectation of the lower middle class. The stories, in case you didn't
know, are taken line by line from the works of various popular writers
of the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. The people who do the work
merely substitute adjectives and adverbs. Occasionally, I'm told, a more
daring hack will substitute a verb, or even a noun. But that is rare.
The editors of such periodicals frown upon sweeping innovations."

"And you are not engaged in such work?"

"Absolutely not! My work is noncommercial. I am a Creative Conrad
Specialist."

"Would you mind telling me what that means, Citizen Honners?"

"I'd be happy to. My own particular field of endeavor lies in
re-creating the works of Joseph Conrad, an author who lived in the
pre-atomic era."

"How do you go about re-creating those works, sir?"

"Well, at present I am engaged in my fifth re-creation of _Lord Jim_. To
do it, I steep myself as thoroughly as possible in the original work.
Then I set about rewriting it as Conrad would have written it if he had
lived today. It is a labor which calls for extreme diligence, and for
the utmost in artistic integrity. A single slip could mar the
re-creation. As you can see, it calls for a preliminary mastery of
Conrad's vocabulary, themes, plots, characters, mood, approach, and so
on. All this goes in, and yet the book cannot be a slavish _repeat_. It
must have something new to say, just as Conrad would have said it."

"And have you succeeded?"

"The critics have been generous, and my publisher gives me every
encouragement."

"When you have finished your fifth re-creation of _Lord Jim_, what do
you plan to do?"

"First I shall take a long rest. Then I shall re-create one of Conrad's
minor works. _The Planter of Malata_, perhaps."

"I see. Is re-creation the rule in all the arts?"

"It is the goal of the true aspiring artist, no matter what medium he
has chosen to work in. Art is a cruel mistress, I fear."

       *       *       *       *       *

(_Citizen Willis Ouerka, age 8, occupation student. A cheerful,
black-haired, sun-tanned boy._)

"I'm sorry, Mr. Opinioner, my parents aren't home right now."

"That's perfectly all right, Willis. Do you mind if I ask you a question
or two?"

"I don't mind. What's that you got under your jacket, Mister? It
bulges."

"I'll ask the questions, Willis, if you don't mind.... Now, do you like
school?"

"It's all right."

"What courses do you take?"

"Well, there's reading and writing and status appreciation, and courses
in art, music, architecture, literature, ballet, and theater. The usual
stuff."

"I see. That's in the open classes?"

"Sure."

"Do you also attend a closed class?"

"Sure I do. Every day."

"Do you mind talking about it?"

"I don't mind. Is that bulge a gun? I know what guns are. Some of the
big boys were passing around pictures at lunchtime a couple days ago and
I peeked. Is it a gun?"

"No. My suit doesn't fit very well, that's all. Now then. Would you mind
telling me what you do in the closed class?"

"I don't mind."

"What happens, then?"

"I don't remember."

"Come now, Willis."

"Really, Mr. Opinioner. We all go into this classroom, and we come out
two hours later for recess. But that's all. I can't remember anything
else. I've talked with the other kids. They can't remember either."

"Strange...."

"No, sir. If we were supposed to remember, it wouldn't be _closed_."

"Perhaps so. Do you remember what the room looks like, or who your
teacher is for the closed class?"

"No, sir. I really don't remember anything at all about it."

"Thank you. Willis."

       *       *       *       *       *

(_Citizen Cuchulain Dent, age 37, occupation inventor. A prematurely
bald man with ironic, heavy-lidded eyes._)

"Yep, that's right. I'm an inventor specializing in games. I brought
out _Triangulate--Or Else!_ last year. It's been pretty popular. Have
you seen it?"

"I'm afraid not."

"Sort of a cute game. It's a simulated lost-in-space thing. The players
are given incomplete data for their miniature computers, additional
information as they win it. Space hazards for penalties. Lots of
flashing lights and stuff like that. Very big seller."

"Do you invent anything else, Citizen Dent?"

"When I was a kid, I worked up an improved seeder harvester. Designed to
be approximately three times as efficient as the present models. And
would you believe it, I really thought I had a chance of selling it."

"Did you sell it?"

"Of course not. At that time I didn't realize that the patent office was
closed permanently except for the games section."

"Were you angry about that?"

"A little angry at the time. But I soon realized that the models we have
are plenty good enough. There's no need for more efficient or more
ingenious inventions. Folks today are satisfied with what they've got.
Besides, new inventions would be of no service to mankind. Earth's birth
and death rate are stable, and there's enough for everyone. To produce a
new invention, you'd have to retool an entire factory. That would be
almost impossible, since all the factories today are automatic and
self-repairing. That's why there's a moratorium on invention, except in
the novelty game field."

"How do you feel about it?"

"What's there to feel? That's how things are."

"Would you like to have things different?"

"Maybe. But being an inventor, I'm classified as a potentially unstable
character anyhow."

       *       *       *       *       *

(_Citizen Barn Threnten, age 41, occupation atomics engineer
specializing in spacecraft design. A nervous, intelligent-looking man
with sad brown eyes._)

"You want to know what I do in my job? I'm sorry you asked that,
Citizen, because I don't do a thing except walk around the factory.
Union rules require one stand-by human for every robot or robotized
operation. That's what I do. I just stand by."

"You sound dissatisfied, Citizen Threnten."

"I am. I wanted to be an atomics engineer. I trained for it. Then when I
graduated, I found out my knowledge was fifty years out of date. Even if
I learned what was going on now, I'd have no place to use it."

"Why not?"

"Because everything in atomics is automatized. I don't know if the
majority of the population knows that, but it's true. From raw material
to finished product, it's all completely automatic. The only human
participation in the program is quantity-control in terms of population
indexes. And even that is minimal."

"What happens if a part of an automatic factory breaks down?"

"It gets fixed by robot repair units."

"And if they break down?"

"The damned things are self-repairing. All I can do is stand by and
watch, and fill out a report. Which is a ridiculous position for a man
who considers himself an engineer."

"Why don't you turn to some other field?"

"No use. I've checked, and the rest of the engineers are in the same
position I'm in, watching automatic processes which they don't
understand. Name your field: food processing, automobile manufacture,
construction, biochem., it's all the same. Either stand-by engineers or
no engineers at all."

"This is true for spaceflight also?"

"Sure. No member of the spacepilot's union has been off Earth for close
to fifty years. They wouldn't know how to operate a ship."

"I see. All the ships are set for automatic."

"Exactly. Permanently and irrevocably automatic."

"What would happen if these ships ran into an unprecedented situation?"

"That's hard to say. The ships can't think, you know; they simply follow
pre-set programs. If the ships ran into a situation for which they were
not programmed, they'd be paralyzed, at least temporarily. I think they
have an optimum-choice selector which is supposed to take over
unstructured situations; but it's never been tried out. At best, it
would react sluggishly. At worst, it wouldn't work at all. And that
would be fine by me."

"Do you really mean that?"

"I certainly do. I'm sick of standing around watching a machine do the
same thing day after day. Most of the professional men I know feel the
same way. We want to do something. Anything. Did you know that a hundred
years ago human-piloted starships were exploring the planets of other
solar systems?"

"Yes."

"Well, that's what we should be doing now. Moving outward, exploring,
advancing. That's what we need."

"I agree. But don't you think you're saying rather dangerous things?"

"I know I am. But frankly, I just don't care any longer. Let them ship
me to Omega if they want to. I'm doing no good here."

"Then you've heard about Omega?"

"Anyone connected with starships knows about Omega. Round trips between
Omega and Earth, that's all our ships do. It's a terrible world.
Personally, I put the blame on the clergy."

"The clergy?"

"Absolutely. Those sanctimonious fools with their endless drivel about
the Church of the Spirit of Mankind Incarnate. It's enough to make a man
wish for a little evil...."

       *       *       *       *       *

(_Citizen Father Boeren, age 51, occupation clergyman. A stately,
plum-shaped man wearing a saffron robe and white sandals._)

