
"How many?"

"Seven."

Trigger flushed, straightened up, eyes blazing, and pronounced a very
unladylike word.

"Excuse me," she added a moment later. "I got carried away."

"Perfectly all right," said the Commissioner.

"I've been getting just a bit fed up anyway," Trigger went on, voice and
color still high, "with people knocking me for a loop one way or another
whenever they happen to feel like it!"

"Don't blame you a bit," he said.

"And please don't think I don't appreciate your calling in all those
experts. I do. It's just their sneaky, underhanded, secretive methods I
don't go for!"

"Exactly how I feel about it," said the Commissioner.

Trigger stared at him suspiciously. "You're a pretty sneaky type
yourself!" she said. "Well, excuse the blowup, Holati. They probably had
some reason for it. Have they found out anything at all with all the
spraying and investigating?"

"Oh, yes. They seem to have made considerable progress. The last report
I had from them--about a month ago--shows that the original amnesia has
been completely resolved."

Trigger looked surprised. "If it's been resolved," she said reasonably,
"why don't I remember what happened?"

"You aren't supposed to become conscious of it before the final
interview--I don't know the reason for that. But the memory is available
now. On tap, so to speak. They'll give you a cue, and then you'll
remember it."

"Just like that, eh?" She paused. "So the Psychology Service is
Whatzzit."

"Whatzzit?" said the Commissioner.

She explained about Whatzzit. He grinned.

"Yes," he said. "They're the ones who've been giving the instructions,
as far as you're concerned."

Trigger was silent a moment. "I've heard," she said, "the eggheads have
terrific pull when they want to use it. You don't hear much about them
otherwise. Let me think just a little."

"Go ahead," said Holati.

A minute ticked away.

"What it boils down to so far," Trigger said then, "is still pretty much
what you told me on Maccadon. The Psychology Service thinks I know
something that might help clean up the plasmoid problem. Or at least
help explain it."

He nodded.

"And the people who've been trying to grab me very probably are doing it
for exactly the same reason."

He nodded again. "That's almost certain."

"Do you think the eggheads might already have figured out what the
connection is?"

The Commissioner shook his head. "If they had, we'd be doing something
about it. The Federation Council is very nervous!"

"Well...." Trigger said. She pursed her lips. "That Lyad...." she said.

"What about her?"

"She tried to hire me," said Trigger. "Major Quillan reported it, I
suppose?"

"Sure."

"And it wouldn't be just to steal some stupid plasmoid. Especially since
you say a number of small ones are already available. Then there're the
ones that raiders picked up in the Hub. She probably has a collection by
now."

He nodded. "Probably."

"She seems to know quite a bit about what's been going on...."

"Very likely she does."

"Let's grab her!" said Trigger. "We can do it quietly. And she's too big
to be mind-blocked. We'd get part of the answer. Perhaps all of it!"

Something flared briefly in the Commissioner's small gray eyes. He
reached over and patted her knee.

"You're a girl after my own heart, Trigger girl," he said. "I'm for it.
But half the Council would have fainted dead away if they'd heard you
make that suggestion!"

"They're as touchy as that?" she asked, disappointed.

"Yes--and you can't quite blame them. Fumbles could be pretty bad. When
it comes to someone around Lyad's level, our own group is restricted to
defensive counteraction. If we get evidence against her, it'll be up to
the diplomats to decide what's to be done about it. Tactfully. We
wouldn't be further involved."

Trigger nodded, watching him. "Go on."

"Well, defensive counteraction can cover a lot of things, of course. If
we actually run into the First Lady while we're engaged in it, we'll
hold her--as long as we can. And from all accounts, now that she's
showed up to take personal charge of things around here, we can expect
some very fast, very direct action from Lyad."

"How fast?"

"My own guess," said the Commissioner, "would be around a week. If she
hasn't moved by then, we might help things along a little."

"Make a few of those openings for her, eh? Well, that doesn't sound too
bad." Trigger reflected. "Then there's Point Number Two," she said.

"What's that?"

She grimaced. "I'm not real keen on it," she confessed, "but I think
we'd better do something about that interview with Whatzzit I ducked out
of. If they still want to talk to me--"

"They do. Very much so."

"What's that business about their saying it was okay now for me to go on
to Manon?"

Commissioner Tate tugged gently at his left ear lobe. "Frankly," he
said, "that's something that shook me a little."

"Shook you? Why?"

"It's that matter of experts coming in grades. The upper ranks in the
Psychology Service are extremely busy people, I understand. After your
first interview we were shifted upward promptly. A couple of middling
high-bracket investigators took over for a while. But after the fourth
interview I was told I'd have to bring you to the Hub to let somebody
really competent handle the next stage of whatever they've been doing.
They said they couldn't spare anybody of that caliber for a trip to
Manon."

"Was _that_ the real reason we went to Maccadon?" Trigger asked,
startled.

"Sure. But we still hadn't got anywhere near the Service's top level
then. As I get it, their topnotchers don't spend much time on individual
cases. They keep busy with things on the scale of our more bothersome
planetary cultures--and there are supposed to be only a hundred or so of
them in that category. So I was more than a little surprised when the
Service informed me finally one of those people was coming to Maccadon
to conduct your ninth interview."

"One of the real eggheads!" Trigger smiled nervously. "And then I just
took off! They can't have too good an opinion of me at the moment, you
know."

"Apparently that didn't upset them in the least," the Commissioner
said. "They told me to stay calm and make sure you got to Manon all
right. Then they said they had a ship operating in this area, and they'd
route it over to Manon after you arrived here."

"A ship?" Trigger asked.

"I've seen a few of their ships--they looked like oversized flying
mountains. Camouflage jobs. What they actually are is spacegoing
superlaboratories, from what I've heard. This one has a couple of those
topnotchers on board, and one of them will take you on. It's due here in
a day or so."

Trigger had paled somewhat. "You know," she said, "I feel a little
shaken myself now."

"I'm not surprised," said the Commissioner.

She shook her head. "Well if they're topnotchers, they must know what
they're doing." She gave him a smile. "Looks like I'm something
extremely unusual! Like a bothersome planetary culture.... Weak joke,"
she added.

The Commissioner ignored the weak joke. "There's another thing," he said
thoughtfully.

"What's that?"

"When I mentioned your reluctance about being interviewed, they told me
not to worry about it--that you wouldn't try to duck out again. That's
why I was surprised when you brought up the matter of the interview
yourself just now."

"Now that is odd," Trigger admitted after a pause. "How would they
know?"

"Right," he said. He sighed. "Guess we're both a little out of our depth
there. I've come close to getting impatient with them a few times--had
the feeling they were stalling me off and holding back information. But
presumably they do know what they're doing." He glanced at his watch.
"That hour's about up now, by the way."

"Well, if there's something else that should be discussed I can break my
dinner date," Trigger said, somewhat reluctantly. "I had a chance to
talk with Brule at the spaceport for a while, when we came in this
morning."

"I wasn't suggesting that," said Holati. "There still are things to be
discussed, but a few hours one way or the other won't make any
difference. We'll get together again around lunch tomorrow. Then you'll
be filled in pretty well on all the main points of this business."

Trigger nodded. "Fine."

"What I had in mind right now was that the Service people suggested
having you look over their last report on you after your arrival. You'd
have just enough time for that before going to keep your date. Care to
do it?"

"I certainly would!" Trigger said.

The transmitter signaled for attention while she was studying the
report. Holati Tate went off to answer it. The report was rather
lengthy, and Trigger was still going over it when he got back. He sat
down again and waited.

When she looked up finally, he asked, "Can you make much sense of it?"

"Not very much," Trigger admitted. "It just states what seems to have
happened. Not how or why. Apparently they did get me to develop a total
recall of that knocked-out period in the last interview--I even reported
hearing you and Doctor Azol moving around and talking in the next
compartment."

He nodded. "I remember enough of my conversation with Azol to be able to
verify that part of it."

"Then, some time before I actually fell down," said Trigger, "I was
apparently already in that mysterious coma. Getting deeper into it. It
started when I walked away from Mantelish's group, without having any
particular reason for doing it. I just walked. Then I was in another
compartment by myself and still walking, and the stuff kept getting
deeper, until I lost physical control of myself and fell down. Then I
lay there a while until you came down that aisle and saw me. And after
you'd picked me up and put me in that chair--just like that, everything
clears up! Except that I don't remember what happened and think I've
just left Mantelish to go looking for you. I don't even wonder how I
happen to be sitting there in a chair!"

The Commissioner smiled briefly. "That's right. You didn't."

Her slim fingers tapped the pages of the report, the green stone in the
ring he'd given her to wear reflecting little flashes of light. "They
seem quite positive that nobody else came near me during that period.
And that nobody had used a hypno-spray on me or shot a hypodermic pellet
into me--anything like that--before the seizure or whatever it was came
on. How do you suppose they could be so sure of that?"

"I wouldn't know," Holati said. "But I think we might as well assume
they're right."

"I suppose so. What it seems to boil down to is they're saying I was
undergoing something like a very much slowed-down, very profound
emotional shock--source still undetermined, but profound enough to knock
me completely out for a while. Only they also say that--for a whole list
of reasons--it couldn't possibly have been an emotional shock after all!
And when the effect left, it went instantaneously. That would be just
the reverse to the pattern of an emotional shock, wouldn't it?"

"Yes," he said. "That occurred to me too, but it didn't explain anything
to me. Possibly it's explained something to the Psychology Service."

"Well," Trigger said, "it's certainly all very odd. Very disagreeable,
too!" She laid the report down on the arm of her chair and looked at the
Commissioner. "Guess I'd better run now," she said. "But there was
something you said before that made me wonder. There was really very
little of Doctor Azol left after that plasmoid got through with him."

He nodded. "True."

"It wasn't Azol, was it?"

"No."

"Man, oh, man!" Trigger jumped up, bent over his chair and gave him a
quick peck on an ear tip. "If I ask one more question, we'll be sitting
here the next two hours. I'll run instead! See you around lunchtime,
Commissioner!"

"Right, Trigger," he said, getting up.

He closed the door behind her and went back to the transmitter. He
looked rather unhappy.

"Yes?" said a voice in the transmitter.

"She just left," Commissioner Tate said. "Get on the beam and stay
there!"




18


"Well," Trigger said, regarding Brule critically, "I just meant to say
that you're getting the least little bit plump here and there, under all
that tan. I'll admit it doesn't show yet when you're dressed."

Brule smiled tolerantly. In silver swimming trunks and sandals, he was
obviously a very handsome hunk of young man, and he knew it. So did
Trigger. So did a quartet of predatory young females eyeing them
speculatively from a table only twenty feet away.

"I've come swimming here quite a bit since they opened the Center," he
said. He flexed his right arm and regarded his biceps complacently.
"That's just streamlined muscle you're looking at, sweetheart!"

Trigger reached over and poked the biceps with a finger tip. "Muscle?"
she said, smiling at him. "It dents. See?"

He clasped his other hand over hers and squeezed it lightly.

"Oh, golly, Brule!" she said happily. "I'm so glad I'm back!"

He gave her the smile. "You're not the only glad one!"

She looked around, humming softly. They were having dinner in one of the
Grand Commerce Center's restaurants. This one happened to be beneath the
surface of the artificial swimming lake installed in the Center--a giant
grotto surrounded by green-gold chasms of water on every side.
Underwater swimmers and bottom walkers moved past beyond the wide
windows. A streak of silvery swiftness against a dark red canyon wall
before her was trying to keep away from a trio of pursuing spear
fishermen. Even the lake fish were Hub imports, advertised as such by
the Center.

Her eyes widened suddenly. "Hey!" she said.

"What?"

"That group of people up there!"

Brule looked. "What about them?"

"No suits, you idiot!"

He grinned. "Oh, a lot of them do that. Okay by Federation law, you
know. And seeing Manon's so close to becoming open Federation territory,
we haven't tried to enforce minor Precol regulations much lately."

"Well--" Trigger began. He was still smiling. "Have you been doing it?"
she inquired suspiciously.

"Swimming in the raw? Certainly. Depends on the company. If you weren't
such a little prude, I'd have suggested it tonight. Want to try it
later?"

Trigger colored. Prude again, she thought. "Nope," she said. "There are
