
Forrester took his first breath. "Well," he said, "I could be dishonest,
not to mention ungallant, and tell you I was sorry."

"But?" Diana said.

"Being of sound mind and sound body, I'm a long way from being sorry."

And Diana dropped her eyes and blushed.

Forrester could barely believe it.

But it did show a part of the Goddess's personality that was entirely
new to him. He was sure that any of the Gods or Goddesses could sense
when a Veil of Heaven was forming near them, and get prepared before it
was well enough developed to allow for passage. But Diana--who was,
after all, one of the traditionally virgin Goddesses, like Pallas
Athena--had chosen to pretend surprise.

Forrester had a further hunch, too. He thought she might have
deliberately vanished her _chiton_ only a second or so before he
entered. And that put a different--and a very interesting--face on
things.

Not to mention, he thought, an entire figure.

But he didn't say anything. That wasn't his main business in Diana's
apartment. Instead, he watched her smile briskly and say: "Well, you're
here, anyhow, kid, and I guess that's enough for me. Want a drink? I
could whip up some nectar--and maybe an ambrosia sandwich?"

"I'll take the drink," Forrester said. "I'm not really hungry, thanks."

Diana held out her hands, fingers curved inward, and a crystal cup of
clear, golden liquid appeared in each--matter transmission, of course,
not magic. She handed one over to Forrester, who took it and looked the
Goddess straight in the eyes.

"Thanks," he said. "Diana, I've got some questions to ask you, and I
hope I'll get the answers."

She touched the rim of her cup to his. Her voice was very soft, but she
didn't hesitate in the least. "I'll answer any questions I have to. Sit
down."

They found chairs along the walls of the room and sat facing one
another. Forrester took a sip of his drink, settled back, and tried to
think where to begin. Well, God or no God, Zeus had the key to that one.
He had said it years ago, and it had passed almost into legend:

"Begin at the beginning, go on until you reach the end, and then stop."

Very well, Forrester thought. He cleared his throat. Diana looked at him
inquiringly.

"I don't know how far into the noose I'm putting my head with this one,
Diana," he said. "But I trust you--and I've got to ask somebody."

"Go ahead," she said quietly.

"First question. The original Dionysus is dead, isn't he?"

She paused for a moment before answering. "Yes, he is."

"And I was scheduled to take his place."

"That's right."

"As a full God," Forrester said.

Diana nodded.

There was a little silence.

"Diana," Forrester said, "what are the Gods?"

She got up and crossed to the window. Looking out, she said: "Before I
answer that, I want you to tell me what you think we are."

"Men and women," he said. "More or less human, like myself. Except
you've somehow managed to get so far ahead of any kind of science Earth
knows that, even today, your effects can only be explained as 'magic' or
'miracle.'"

"How could we get that far ahead of you?"

Forrester took a leap in the dark to the only conclusion he could see.
"You're not from Earth," he said. "You're from another planet." The
words sounded strange in his own ears--but Diana didn't even act
surprised.

"That's right," she said. "We're from another planet--or, rather, from
several other planets."

"_Several?_" Forrester exclaimed. "But--oh. I see. Pan, for instance--"

Diana nodded. "Pan isn't even really humanoid. His home is a planet
where his type of goatlike life evolved. Neither Pluto nor Neptune is
humanoid, either; they're a little closer than Pan, but not really very
close when you get a good look. The rest of the Gods are humanoid--but
not human."

"Wait a minute," Forrester said. "Venus is human. Or, anyhow, she's a
replacement, just the way I was slated to be a replacement for
Dionysus."

Diana drained her cup and clapped her hands together on it. The cup
vanished. Forrester did the same to his own. "Correct," she said. "Venus
just--just disappeared once. They got an Etruscan girl to replace her.
She's not the only replacement, either."

Forrester stared. "Who else?"

"You tell me."

He thought the list of Gods over. "Zeus," he said.

Diana smiled. "Yes, Zeus is a long way from the great hero of the
legends, isn't he? Using the old calendar, Zeus died in about 1100 B.C.,
not too long after the close of the Trojan War. As far as anybody knows,
Neptune did the actual killing, but it's pretty clear that the original
idea wasn't his."

"Hera's," Forrester guessed.

"Of course," Diana said. "What she wanted was a figurehead she could
control--and that's what she got. Though I'm not sure she's entirely
happy with the change. If the original Zeus was a little harder to
control, at least he seems to have had an original thought now and
again."

Forrester sat quietly for a time, waiting for the shock to pass. "What
about Dionysus?"

Diana shrugged. "He--well, as far as anybody's ever been able to tell,
it was suicide. About three years ago, and it drove Hera pretty wild,
trying to find a substitute in a hurry. I suspect he was bored with the
wine, women and song. He'd had a long time of it. And, too, he'd had
some little disagreements with Hera. As you may have gathered, she is
not exactly a safe person to have as an enemy. He probably figured she'd
get him sooner or later, so he might as well save her the trouble."

"And Hera had to rush to get a replacement? Why couldn't there just have
been some sort of explanation, while the rest of you ran things?"

"Because the rest of us couldn't run things. Not for long, anyhow. It's
all a question of power."

"Power?" Forrester said.

"Everything we have," Diana said, "is derived, directly or indirectly,
from the workings of one machine. Though 'machine' is a long way from
the right word for it--it bears about as much resemblance to what you
think of as a machine as a television set does to a window. There just
isn't a word for it in any language you know."

"And all the Gods have to work the machine at once?"

"Something like that." Diana came back from the window and sat down
facing him again. "It operates through the nervous systems of the beings
in circuit with it, each one of them in contact with one of the power
nodes of the machine. And if one of the nodes is unoccupied, then the
machine's out of balance. It will run for a while, but eventually it
will simply wreck itself. Every one of the fifteen nodes has to be
occupied. Otherwise--chaos."

Forrester nodded. "So when Dionysus died--"

"We had to find a replacement in a hurry. The machine's been running out
of balance for about as long as it can stand right now."

Forrester closed his eyes. "I'm not sure I get the picture."

"Well, look at it this way: suppose you have a wheel."

"All right," Forrester said obligingly. "I have a wheel."

"And this wheel has fifteen weights on it. They're spaced equally around
the rim, and the wheel's revolving at high speed."

Forrester kept his eyes closed. When he had the wheel nicely spinning,
he said: "Okay. Now what?"

"Well," Diana said, "as long as the weights stay in place, the wheel
spins evenly. But if you remove one of the weights, the wheel's out of
balance. It starts to wobble."

Forrester took one of the weights (Dionysus, a rather large, jolly
weight) off the wheel in his mind. It wobbled. "Right," he said.

"It can take the wobble for a little while. But unless the balance is
restored in time, the wheel will eventually break."

Hurriedly, Forrester put Dionysus back on the wheel. The wobble stopped.
"Oh," he said. "I see."

"Our power machine works in that sort of way. That is, it requires all
fifteen occupants. Dionysus has been dead for three years now, and
that's about the outside limit. Unless he's replaced soon, the machine
will be ruined."

Forrester opened his eyes. The wheel spun away and disappeared. "So you
found me to replace Dionysus. I had to look like him, so the mortals
wouldn't see any difference. And the psychological similarity--"

"That's right," Diana said. "It's the same as the wheel again. If you
remove a weight, you've got to put back a weight of the same magnitude.
Otherwise, the wheel's still out of balance."

"And since the power machine works through the nervous system--"

"The governing factor is that similarity. You've got to be of the same
magnitude as Dionysus. Of course, you don't have to be an _identical_
copy. The machine can be adjusted for _slight_ differences."

"I see," Forrester said. "And the fifteen power nodes--" Another idea
occurred to him. "Wait a minute. If there are only fifteen power nodes,
then how come there were so many different Gods and Goddesses among the
Greeks? There were a lot more than fifteen back then."

"Of course there were," Diana said, "but they weren't real Gods. As a
matter of fact, some of them didn't really exist."

Forrester frowned. "How's that again?"

"They were just disguises for one of the regular fifteen. Aesculapius,
for instance, the old God of medicine, was Hermes/Mercury in
disguise--he took the name in honor of a physician of the time. He would
have raised the man to demi-Godhood, but Aesculapius died unexpectedly,
and we thought taking his 'spirit' into the Pantheon was good public
relations."

"How about the others?" Forrester said. "They weren't all disguises,
were they?"

"Of course not. Some of them were demi-Gods, just like yourself. Their
power was derived, like yours, from the Pantheon instead of directly
through the machine. And then there were the satyrs and centaurs, and
suchlike beings. That was public relations, too--mainly Zeus' idea, I
understand. The original Zeus, of course."

"Of course," Forrester said.

"The satyrs and such were artificial life-forms, created, maintained and
controlled by the machine itself. It's equipped with what you might call
a cybernetic brain--although that's pretty inadequate as a description.
Vulcan could do a better job of explaining."

"Perfectly all right. I don't understand that kind of thing anyhow."

"Well, in that case, let me put it this way. The machine controlled
these artificial forms, but they could be taken over by any one of the
Gods or demi-Gods for special purposes. As I say, it was public
relations--and a good way to keep the populace impressed--and under
control."

"The creatures aren't around nowadays," Forrester pointed out.

"Nowadays we don't need them," Diana said. "There are other
methods--better public relations, I suppose."

Forrester didn't know he was going to ask his next question until he
heard himself doing so. But it was the question he really wanted to ask;
he knew that as soon as he knew he asked it.

"Why?" he said.

Diana looked at him with a puzzled expression. "Why? What do you mean?"

"Why go on being Gods? Why dominate humanity?"

"I suppose I could answer your question with another question--why not?
But I won't. Instead, let me remind you of some things. Look what we've
done during the last century. The great wars that wrecked Europe--you
don't see any possibility of more of those, do you? And the threat of
atomic war is gone, too, isn't it?"

"Well, yes," Forrester said, "but--"

"But we still have wars," Diana said. "Sure we do. The male animal just
wouldn't be happy if he didn't have a chance to go out and get himself
blown to bits once in a while. Don't ask _me_ to explain that--I'm not a
male."

Forrester agreed silently. Diana was not a male. It was the most
understated statement he had ever heard.

"But anyhow," Diana said, "they want wars, so they have wars. Mars sees
that the wars stay small and keep within the Martian Conventions,
though, so any really widespread damage or destruction, or any wanton
attacks on civilians, are a thing of the past. And it's not only wars,
kid. It's everything."

"What do you mean, everything?"

"Man needs a god, a personal god. When he doesn't have one ready to
hand, he makes one up--and look at the havoc that has caused. A god of
vengeance, a god who cheers you on to kill your enemies.... You've
studied history. Tell me about the gods of various nations. Tell me
about Thor and Baal and the original bloodthirsty Yahweh. People _need_
gods."

"Now wait a minute," Forrester objected. "The Chinese--"

"Oh, sure," Diana said. "There are exceptions. But you can't bank on the
exceptions. If you want a reasonably safe, sane and happy humanity, then
you'd better make sure your gods are not going to start screaming for
war against the neighbors or against the infidels or against--well,
against anybody and everybody. There's only one way to make sure, kid.
We've found that way. We _are_ the Gods."

Forrester digested that one slowly. "It sounds great, but it's pretty
altruistic. And while I don't want to impugn anybody's motives, it does
seem to me that--"

"That we ought to be getting something out of it ourselves, above and
beyond the pure joy of helping humanity. Sure. You're perfectly right.
And we _do_ get something out of it."

"Like what?"

Diana grinned. She looked more like a tomboy than ever before. "Fun,"
