orders. In fact, he should have this fellow in the detention cell by
now, waiting for the major to see him in the morning. He paused in
mid-stride.

"Never mind stopping, lieutenant," Michaels told him. "Just keep going.
I want to see the commissioner before Stern's people figure out
something really good."

Hense gave up. He must be asleep. It was the only possible answer. Of
course, that was bad, too. On some stations, an Officer of the Guard
was permitted to take a nap between guard checks. But Major Kovacs had
some sort of a thing about that. He'd made it clear that there was
plenty of time for napping during off-watch time. His officers, he said
positively, would never sleep while their men were on guard.

And he made checks, too. Hense struggled with himself. He had to wake
up.

It was insane. How, he wondered, could a guy be asleep and
dreaming--and know it? And, knowing it, why couldn't he wake himself
up? This was pure fantasy. Yeah, dream stuff. He waited nervously.

Any time now, the major could be coming around to check the guardroom.
Then the roof would fall in. Any minute now, he could expect to hear a
window-shattering roar.

"Halt!"

It was the Residence Guard. Post number two.

"All right," Michaels' voice was low. "Hold up. Answer him. Have him
continue his tour, and let's be on our way."

Hense stopped. "Officer of the Guard," he said loudly.

"Advance, one, to be recognized."

Hense sighed and stepped forward, then halted again at the guard's
command.

The man flashed a light on him, then raised his weapon to his face and
snapped it to the raise position again.

"I recognize you, sir. Any special instructions?"

"None. Just continue on your post."

Inwardly, Hense was reaching the boiling point. That hadn't been what
he'd intended to say, dammit! He----

"Pardon, sir," the guard was saying, "but how about this man here?"

Now, Hense realized, there must be something really going on. Dream
creatures just couldn't walk out of a man's mind and show up in front
of an alert guard. Or had he completely lost gyro synch? He----

Michaels broke in again. "It's all right, guard. Just continue on your
post. And keep an especially sharp lookout from now on."

"Yes, sir." The guard snapped his weapon up to his face again, then
holstered it and turned to continue his tour.

Hense looked after him.

It wasn't a dream. It was a nightmare.

He resumed his pacing, toward the Residence.

"Oh, well," he thought resignedly, "might as well relax and enjoy it.
Wonder what'll happen next."

Commissioner Jackson himself came to the door.

"What was that fire, lieutenant?" he demanded. He noticed Michaels.

"And what have we here?" He drew his head back a little, frowning.

Don interrupted. "Are you Commissioner Jackson?"

"Yes. But----"

"Good! Here, take this." Don shoved the book out. "And let's go into
your office."

Benton Jackson looked incredulously at the figure before him. He
reached out and accepted the book, then turned.

"Another of those!" he said softly.

Hense followed them inside. There were, he was discovering, peculiar
things about this dream business. He had completed his mission. He
hadn't been dismissed. But he could wait here, or he could tag along
and see what happened.

"Well, now," he told himself. "Things are looking up."

Jackson walked over to his desk, snapping on the room lights as he
passed them. He sat down and placed the book on the desk.

"Well," he demanded, "what's next?"

Don Michaels reached over the desk and flipped the book open.

"Page seven oh one," he said simply. "Read it. Then, I'll start telling
you a lot of things." He hesitated.

"You _can_ read Oredanian script, I hope?"

Jackson nodded in annoyance. "Of course. Part of my business." He
flipped over the pages, looking at numbers. Then he glanced up.

"How about the lieutenant?"

Don faced about. "Oh," he said. "Sorry. You can go back to your
guardroom, lieutenant. I'm sorry I had to get rough with you, but I was
in a hurry. Still am, for that matter. Only one more thing. For the
love of all that's holy, have your people keep a sharp lookout for the
rest of the night. I've a hunch Stern's people will try almost anything
right now, short of risking full-scale battle."

Hense shook his head dazedly. Jackson looked up from the book.

"It's all right, lieutenant," he said. "Go ahead. And you might take
this man's word on the heavy guard. If we've got what I think we've
got, and if Stern knows it, he might even risk a battle."

Hense suddenly realized he was no longer under any kind of restraint.

And, he realized, this had been no dream.

He had actually been ordered around like some recruit. And that by some
no-good, naked native kid.

His guard had been pushed around. Unauthorized orders had been given to
them.

And they'd obeyed those orders--without question.

In fact, the whole compound had been virtually taken over.

And all by this same kid.

And the commissioner said it was all right?

Hense turned away. He'd----

He took a step, then reconsidered. He had a better idea.

"This place," he said savagely, "has just plain gone to hell!" He
stalked through the door.

The commissioner's amused voice followed him.

"Not yet," it said, "but it very possibly might, lieutenant. Don't
forget to double your guard."

                    *      *      *      *      *

As the door closed, Jackson looked at Don, a smile wrinkling the
corners of his eyes.

"Afraid you were just a little rough on him," he said. "He'll get over
it, but it's pretty unsettling, you know." He shrugged.

"But you haven't introduced yourself. Special Corps?"

Don looked at him blankly, then shook his head.

[Illustration]

"I'm afraid I don't know what that is," he admitted.

Jackson examined him carefully. "Hm-m-m," he said slowly. "Interesting!
Tell me, how long have you been ordering people around like this?"

Don spread his hands. "Why, I don't really know," he said. "You see,
I----"

Jackson held up a hand, smiling. "Never mind. Do you always go around
... ah ... dressed like that?"

Don glanced down, then grinned. "I'm sorry, sir, but I was in something
of a dither a while ago. Truth is, I forgot to dress after I----"

"Wait a minute." Again, Jackson held up a hand. "Start at the
beginning. While you're giving me the story, I'll have some clothes
brought in for you." He touched a button on his desk, then leaned back.

"All right," he said, "let's have it. First, of course, who are you?"

While Don was talking, an impassive aide brought an outfit for him. He
slipped into the clothing as he finished his account.

"So," he concluded, "all we need to do now is to force a conclave and
it's all over. From what Gorham told me, I'm pretty sure I can tear
Stern apart myself." His eyes clouded.

"Of course, there's Mr. Masterson. I guess they've got him in one of
the torture cells."

Jackson waved a hand. "There's no problem about Masterson. We'll have
him over here by morning.

"And I have an idea your father is all right. From what you tell me,
I'd say he used one of the evasion tricks they teach Guard pilots.
Then, he probably made a safe landing." He leaned forward and snapped
down the key on his intercom.

"Emergency operation schedule, Lorenz," he said, "as of now. Have the
department heads report here immediately. Have Communications get out
an immediate message to Deloran Base. I want at least three squadrons,
and I want 'em now. Tell 'em to burn the grass." He lifted the switch
and turned to Don.

"I'm not going to take any chances from here on," he remarked. "We'll
send a squadron of fighters along with you to pick up young Waern and
the clan leaders. That way, they'll have protection." He frowned.

"Now, that leaves us with only one more problem."

Don looked up questioningly and the commissioner nodded.

"We'll have to find someone to represent the Waernu before the
conclave. And he'll have to be acceptable to the Waernu."

"That's simple. They've already picked me."

"Won't work now. You can bring them before the clans, of course. But
they'd be in a hole if you got snapped out on civil charges right in
the middle of the conclave."

"Civil charges?"

"That's right. Little matter of that body out in the flier. You know,
and I know, the story on that. It's clearly line of duty. But up to the
decision of the conclave, you're vulnerable. Remember, Stern can claim
Gorham as a police agent. So, you were resisting arrest. Catch?"

"Ow!" Don looked down at the floor. Then he shrugged.

"But Stern has no way of knowing what happened to Gorham."

"Admitted." Jackson smiled. "But he might guess. You'd have to be
consulting with his people for some time before the conclave, you know.
And he'd have time to figure things out. Here you are. Here's the clan
book. But where's Gorham? And Gorham went up to find that book. Adds
up, you see."

"You mean I've got to stay under cover from now on?"

"Not necessarily. The clan warden doesn't have to be identified ahead
of time. Usually, it's just an honorary job, any way. But this time, he
might really have to perform his traditional duty." He looked at Don
seriously.

"Remember the private conversation between claimant and prime minister?
About that time, the warden is the only protection the claimant has.

"And this is one time a claimant may really need protection."

                    *      *      *      *      *

Daniel Stern slapped a folder down on his desk and got to his feet. He
circled the large office, then stopped, looking down at Gorham's vacant
desk.

What had happened to Gorham? Papers were stacked all over his own desk.
And they should be here. Most of them had been old Jake's concern. He
hadn't realized how much detail the old man had controlled.

But where was Gorham? He'd come in from Riandar. Reports showed that
much. Then, his flier had suddenly dashed over and landed on the
Federation pad. They'd tried to stop him, but----

Something must have gone wrong up there at Riandar. Something must have
made Gorham decide to come back and make a separate deal of his own.
But why? There was that pile of clothes in the Waern house. Had he----?

Maybe that blast had killed Gorham and destroyed his evidence.

He looked around hopefully. It was possible. No effort had been made to
restrain him. He still controlled the Ministry. No effort had been made
to limit his authority.

He picked up a sheet of paper. Oh, no? They didn't want to limit
him--they wanted everything. Here was this demand for a conclave.

And with that Waern kid running around loose, that was bad.

And he had no one to talk to! Of all the people in this palace, not a
single one could serve as confidant. With Gorham gone----

He shuffled through the papers. Yes, here was the formal demand for a
conclave. He looked at it unhappily.

And here was the transcript of the Waern claim. It looked too good.

He tossed the papers back to the desk. It was good, and he knew it.
He'd seen the originals in the heraldric files. They were destroyed, of
course. But here was a photo of that clan book!

And worse, here was the notice from the Resident Commissioner that the
claimant had requested protective intervention from the Galactic
Federation. That was really bad. He could remember his interview with
the commissioner on that.

Jackson had always been something of a problem. He was a stubborn man.
But up to now, he'd always backed down--if enough pressure was put on
him. This time? Hah!

He'd come in, bringing that rancher--that Kent Michaels. Stern frowned.

Hadn't old Jake said that guy had been shot down--was dead?

He hadn't looked very dead. As councilor of the Waern clan, Michaels
