(c) esparto, straw, and (d) lignocelluloses. Papers being exposed to
the natural disintegrating agencies, more especially oxygen, water (and
hydrolysing agents generally), and micro-organisms, the relative
resistance of the above groups of raw materials is discussed as an
important condition of value. The indirect influence of the ordinary
sizing and 'filling' materials is discussed. The paper-making quality of
the fibrous raw materials is also discussed, not merely from the point
of view of the form and dimensions of the ultimate fibres, but their
capacity for 'colloidal hydration.' This is complementary to the action
of rosin, i.e. resin acids, in the engine-sizing of papers; and the
proof of the potency of this factor is seen in the superior effects
obtained in sizing jointly with solutions of cellulose and, more
particularly, viscose and rosin. Wurster's much-cited monograph of the
subject of rosin-sizing ['Le Collage des Papiers,' Bull. Mulhouse, 1878]
neglects to take into consideration the contribution of the cellulose
hydrates to the total and complex sizing effect, and hence gives a
partial view only of the function of the resin acids.

In further illustration of fundamental principles various developments
in the textile industries are discussed, e.g. the bleaching of jute,
cotton, and flax, and special developments in the spinning of rhea and
flax.

The concluding lecture deals with later progress in the industrial
applications of cellulose derivatives, chiefly the sulphocarbonate
(viscose); the nitrates, in their applications to explosives, on the one
hand, and the spinning of artificial fibres (lustra-cellulose), on the
other; and the cellulose acetates.


~La Viscose et le Viscoide.~

C. H. BARDY (Bull. Soc. d'Enc. Ind. Nationale, 1900, March).

This is a report presented to the Committee of Economic Arts of the
above Society, dealing with the industrial progress in products obtained
by means of the sulphocarbonate of cellulose (viscose).

The following developments are noted:

_Engine-sized Papers._--The viscose, by coating the fibres with
regenerated cellulose hydrate, adds very much to the tensile strength of
papers. Increase of 40-60 p.ct. is attainable by addition of cellulose
in this form from 1-4 p.ct. on the weight of the paper.

_Viscoid._--Solid aggregates are formed by incorporating viscose with
mineral matters, hydrocarbons, &c. Products are cast or moulded into
convenient forms, and, after purification and sufficient ageing, are
available for various structural uses.

_Paint._--The viscose is used as a vehicle for pigments, the mixture
being used either as a paint or for coating papers with fine surfaces,
such as required in the reproduction of photo-blocks. In these
applications the extraordinary viscosity of the product conditions the
economic use of the cellulose in competition with oils, on the one hand,
and organic colloids, such as gelatine, casein, &c., on the other.

By suitable alteration of the formula for making the paint a product is
obtained which has an extraordinary power of removing paint from old
painted surfaces. The product has been officially adopted by the French
Admiralty, and receives extensive application in removing the paint from
ships.

_Films._--Films are produced from the viscose itself in various ways.
Plane or flat by solidifying the viscose on glass surfaces, removing the
by-products and rolling the films. The film is also produced by
applying the viscose on textile fabrics, drying down, and fixing on a
stenter machine, then washing away the alkaline by-products from the
fixed film. A large number of industrial effects are obtained by
suitably varying the mixtures applied.

_Cellulose-indiarubber._--The viscose, in its concentrated form, can be
incorporated with rubber-hydrocarbon mixtures, and these mixtures can be
used both as water-proofing films, as applied to textiles, or can be
solidified into the class of goods known as 'mechanicals.' The cellulose
not only cheapens the mixture, but produces new technical effects.

_Spinning._--The viscose is spun by special methods, patented by C. H.
Stearn. As produced in thread form, the diameters are approximately
those of natural silk. In commercial form it is a multiple thread (of 15
or more units) at from 50-200 deniers on the silk counts. It is a thread
of high lustre, and more nearly approaches the normal cellulose in
chemical properties than any of the other artificial silks. It can also
be spun in threads of very much larger diameter, which can be used as a
substitute for horsehair, for carbonising for incandescent electric
lamps, &c.

_Cellulose Esters._--These are conveniently made from cellulose,
regenerated from the solution as sulphocarbonate. The tetracetate is
made from this product on the industrial scale. Nitrates are
conveniently made by treatment with the ordinary mixed acids. For fuller
details the original report may be consulted.


VISKOS.

R. W. STREHLENERT (Svensk Kemisk Tidskrift, Stockholm, 1900, p. 185).

A report on the industrial development of viscose, covering essentially
the same ground as the above.


~Ueber die Viscose.~

B. M. MARGOSCHES (Reprint from Zeitschrift fuer die gesammte
Textil-Industrie, 1900-01, Nos. 14-20).[11]


~Report of Committee on the Deterioration of Paper.~

(Soc. of Arts, 1898.)

(p. 304) The Report of a Representative Committee appointed by the
Society of Arts to inquire into the question of qualities of book papers
in relation to their several applications, and more especially for
documents of permanent value.

The report first discusses the two directions of depreciation of papers
in use: (1) Actual disintegration shown by loss of resistance to
fracture by simple strain, and by loss of elasticity--i.e. increase of
brittleness; (2) discolouration. These are independent effects, but
often concurrent. They are the result of chemical changes of the
cellulose basis of the paper, brought about by acids or oxidants used in
the process of manufacture, and not completely removed from the pulp, or
by acid products of bleaching--e.g. oxycelluloses or chlorinated
derivatives; again, by the changes of starch used as a 'sizing' agent,
or by oxidations induced by rosin constituents when the rosin is used in
excess. Discolouration is an attendant phenomenon of these changes, but
is more frequently due to the presence of the lower-grade celluloses
(esparto and straw) and the lignocelluloses (mechanical wood-pulp).

The physical and chemical qualities of papers depending primarily upon
their fibrous or pulp basis, and in a secondary degree upon the kind and
proportion of the constituents added for the purpose of filling and
'sizing,' the report concludes with the following recommendations,
positive and negative, under these heads:

The Committee find that the practical evidence as to permanence fully
confirms the classification given in the Cantor Lectures on 'Cellulose,'
1897 [J. Soc. Arts, xlv. 690-696], and which ranges the paper-making
fibres in four classes:

(A) Cotton, flax, and hemp (rhea).

(B) Wood celluloses, (a) sulphite process and (b) soda and
'sulphate' process.

(C) Esparto and straw celluloses.

(D) Mechanical wood-pulp.

In regard, therefore, to papers for books and documents of permanent
value, the selection must be taken in this order, and always with due
regard to the fulfilment of the conditions of normal treatment above
dealt with as common to all papers.

The Committee have been desirous of bringing their investigations to a
practical conclusion in specific terms--viz. by the suggestion of
standards of quality. It is evident that in the majority of cases there
is little fault to find with the practical adjustments which rule the
trade. They are, therefore, satisfied to limit their specific findings
to the following--viz. (1) normal standard of quality for book-papers
required for publications of permanent value. For such papers they
specify as follows:

Fibres: Not less than 70 p.ct of fibres of class A; class D excluded.

Sizing: Not more than 2 p.ct. rosin, and finished with the normal
acidity of pure alum; starch excluded.

Loading: Not more than 10 p.ct. total mineral matter (ash).

(2) With regard to written documents, it must be evident that the proper
materials are those of class A, and that the paper should be pure and
sized with gelatin, and not with rosin. All imitations of high-class
writing-papers which are, in fact, merely disguised printing-papers,
should be carefully avoided.

_Appendix._--To the Report is added 'Abstracts of Papers' in
'Mittheilungen aus den Koniglichen Technischen Versuchsanstalten,
Berlin,' for the years 1885-1896 inclusive--which is, in fact, a summary
of the investigations of the Institution in connection with paper and
paper-standards.

       *       *       *       *       *

(p. 273) ~Special Industrial Developments.~--From the point of view of the
chemist there has been a very large development of the cellulose
industries during the last five years. This is not so much marked by the
gradual and progressive growth of the well-established industries, as by
the success of the newer ones, with the attendant forecast of enormous
developments of the industries in artificial products, the manufacture
of which rests upon a purely chemical basis. We can, of course, only
treat them from this limited standpoint, and so far as they involve and
elucidate chemical principles.


~I. Chemical Treatments of Raw Materials.~

(a) ~Flax-spinning.~--The treatment of the roving on the spinning-frame
by the addition of reagents to the macerating liquid--otherwise and
usually hot water--continues to be justified by results. The technical
basis of the process and the reactions determined in the spinning-trough
by the alkaline salts used--chiefly sulphite and phosphate of soda--is
set forth in the original work, p. 280. Since that time a sufficient
period has elapsed to judge the effects, both technical and industrial,
by the results of a commercial undertaking based on the exclusive use of
the process. Such a concern is the Irish Flax Spinning Company of
Belfast. At this mill the experience is uniform and fully established
that by means of the process the drawing, i.e. spinning, quality of
inferior flaxes is very considerably appreciated, enabling the spinner
to use such flaxes for yarns of fineness which are unattainable by the
ordinary method of spinning through hot water. Notwithstanding the
success of this undertaking the development of the method is still
inconsiderable. It is none the less a further and forcible demonstration
of the existence of margins of increased technical effect which it is
the work of the scientific technologist to exploit.

(b) ~Wood-pulp and Methods of Manufacture.~--There is a steady growth in
the consumption of wood-pulps (cellulose) relatively to other materials.
In regard to the paper-trade of the world, this continues to be one of
the most prominent characteristics of its evolution. In the United
Kingdom the conditions of its competition are of a more special kind by
reason of the firm foothold of esparto, which is a most important staple
in the manufacture of fine printings. Whereas the consumption of esparto
remains nearly stationary at about 200,000 tons per annum, the
importation of wood-pulps has shown the extraordinary rate of increase
of doubling itself every five years. But in the group 'wood-pulps' the
trade returns have until recently included the 'mechanical' or ground
wood-pulps. From 1898 we have separate returns for the chemical or
cellulose pulps, and in 1899 the tonnage reached nearly to that of
esparto, with a total money value about 80 p.ct. greater. When it is
remembered that this is one of the newer chemical industries in
cellulose products, and that these large commercial results have been
accomplished during a period of twenty years, we are impressed with the
scope of the industrial outlook to the chemist, afforded by the arts of
which cellulose is the foundation.

It may be noted that there have been no important developments in the
purely chemical processes involved in the several systems of preparing
cellulose from wood. The acid methods (bisulphite processes) have
developed much more extensively than the alkaline, the latter including
the caustic soda and the mixed sulphide ('Dahl') process. The bisulphite
processes depended in the earlier stages upon the efficiency of
lead-lined digesters. But the problem of acid-resisting linings has been
much more perfectly solved in later years in the various types of cement
and other silicate linings now in use. The relative permanency of these
linings has had an important effect on the costs of production. Further
economies result from the use of digesters of enormous capacity, dealing
with as much as 100 tons of wood at one operation. As a combined result
of economic production and active competition, the selling prices of
'sulphite pulp' have moved steadily downwards in relation to other
half-stuffs and raw materials. As a necessary consequence the prices of
those which it has gradually displaced have depreciated, and a study of
the price and tonnage-equilibrium as between rags, esparto, and
wood-pulp over a series of years forms an interesting object-lesson in
the struggle for survival which is an especial mark of modern industry.
For these matters the reader is referred to the special literature of
the paper-making industry.[12]

It is not a little remarkable that the main by-product of these
bisulphite processes--the sulphonated derivatives of the lignone
constituents of the wood--is still for the most part an absolute waste,
notwithstanding the many investigations of technologists and attempts to
convert it to industrial use (see p. 149). Seeing that it represents a
percentage on the wood pulped equal to that of the cellulose obtained,
it is a waste of potentially valuable material which can only be termed
colossal. Moreover, as a waste to be discharged into water-courses, it
becomes a source of burden and expense to the manufacturer, and with the
increasing restrictions on the pollution of rivers it is in many
localities a difficulty to be reckoned with only by the cessation of the
industry. The problem in such cases becomes that of dealing with it
destructively, i.e. by evaporation and burning. In this treatment the
obviously high calorific value of the dissolved organic matter (lignone)
appears on the 'credit' side. But where calcium and magnesium
bisulphites are used, the residue from calcination is practically
without value. It appears, however, that by substituting soda as the
base the alkali is recoverable in such a form as to be directly
available for the alkaline-sulphide or 'Dahl' process. As a more
complicated alternative the soda admits of being recovered on the lines
of the old black-ash or Leblanc process, and the sulphur by the now
well-established 'Chance' process, for which, of course, an addition of
lime is necessary to the fully evaporated liquors previously to
calcining. The engineering features of the system, so far as regards
evaporating and calcining, are the same. For economic working there is
required (a) evaporation by multiple effect and (b) calcining on the
continuous rotary principle. For the latter a special modification has
been devised so that the draught of air is concurrent with the movement
of the charge in the furnace, securing a progressively increasing
temperature within the furnace. This interesting development of the
chemical engineering of wood-pulp systems has been elaborated by two
well-known technologists, Drewson and Dorenfeldt, and readers who wish
to inform themselves in detail of these developments are referred to the
various publications of these inventors.

Assuming the present necessity of a destructive treatment of the
by-products of the bisulphite processes, the scheme has many advantages.
The soda-bisulphite liquors are more economically prepared; the pulp
obtained is superior in paper-making quality to that resulting from the
lime or magnesia (bisulphite) processes: it is more economically
bleached.

Then, as pointed out, the soda may on the one plan be obtained in a form
in which it is immediately available as a powerful hydrolysing alkali in
the manufacture of a 'soda' pulp. These two systems become, therefore,
in a new sense complementary to one another. Lastly, it is obvious that
the employment of soda as the base opens out a new vista for developing
the electrolytic processes of decomposing common salt.

The authors have assisted in preparing plans for a comprehensive
industrial scheme combining all these more modern developments. In this
scheme it is only the combination which is novel, and as it involves no
new principles in the chemical treatments of the materials we are not
further concerned with it than to have briefly sketched its economic
basis. This may be summed up in result in the important question of cost
and selling price, and the estimate is well grounded that by means of
this scheme _bleached wood-pulp_ can be sold on the English market at
10l. a ton. It is important to note this figure and to compare it with
the prices of twenty years ago. The fall has been continuous,
notwithstanding the influence of the opposing factors of increasing
consumption, exhaustion of accessible supply of timber, and relative
appreciation of the essential costs of steam, chemicals, and labour. It
is important in forecasting the future, since the youngest and
apparently most promising of the 'artificial' cellulose industries
employs wood-cellulose by preference as its raw material (see p. 173).

As a last point it must be considered that as chemists we are bound to
anticipate the realisation of value in the soluble by-products of the
bisulphite processes. Outside the intrinsic interest attaching to the
solution of this problem, it carries with it the promise of a further
economy in the production of wood-cellulose.

~Bleaching of Vegetable Textiles.~--By far the largest of these industries
are those which are engaged in producing the 'pure white' on cotton and
flax goods. The process, considered chemically, is simply that of
isolating a pure cellulose, and we endeavoured to give due prominence to
this view in the original work. It is important to insist upon it for
the reason that this view gives the due proportion of chemical value to
the several contributory treatments--alkaline hydrolyses (caustic lime
and soda boils), hypochlorite oxidations, and incidental acid treatments
(souring). The first of these is by far the largest contributor of
'chemical work,' though the second, by being the agent for the actual
whitening effect or bleaching action proper, occupies a position of
often exaggerated importance.

In bleaching processes there has been no radical change of system on the
large scale since the introduction of the 'Mather' kier in 1885, and the
associated change from lime and ash boiling to the caustic soda
circulating boil with reduced volume of lye, which this mechanical
device rendered practicable. It is outside the scope of this work to
follow up this branch of technology in any detail, and we cannot discuss
the evolution of systems on variations of detail where no essential
principle is involved. But we have to notice a very recent development
which has only just begun its industrial career, and which does give
effect to a principle of treatment not previously applied. This is
tersely stated by its originator, William Mather,[13] in the
expression, 'it is more economical to make liquids pass through cloth
than to make cloth pass through liquids.' The starting point of this
development is the invention of a complete self-contained machine in
which a rolled batch of cloth can receive a succession of chemical
treatments, with accessory washings--the solutions, or wash waters,
being circulated through the cloth. The essential fact on which this
system is based is that a perfect liquid circulation can be maintained
from selvedge to selvedge through the folds of a tightly rolled batch of
cloth. Such circulation is therefore quite independent of the diameter
of the batch. If we consider a cloth under chemical treatment with
solutions, it is clear that the reactions and interchanges of soluble
matters within the cloth, within the twisted elements of the yarn, and
