"I repeat," Hilton went on, "we are not asking you to do anything
whatever. We are offering to give you; free of charge but under certain
conditions, all the power your humanity can possibly use. We set no
limitation whatever as to quantity and with no foreseeable limit as to
time. The only point at issue is whether or not you accept the
conditions. If you do not accept them we'll leave now--and the offer
will not be repeated."

"And you would, I presume, take the _UC-1_ back with you?"

"Of course not, sir. Terra needs power too badly. You are perfectly
welcome to that one load of uranexite, no matter what is decided here."

"That's one way of putting it," Gordon sneered. "But the truth is that
you know damned well I'll blow both of your ships out of space if you so
much as ..."

"Oh, chip-chop the jaw-flapping, Gordon!" Hilton snapped. Then, as the
admiral began to bellow orders into his microphone, he went on: "You
want it the hard way, eh? Watch what happens, all of you!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The _UC-1_ shot vertically into the air. Through its shallow dense layer
and into and through the stratosphere. Earth's fleet, already on full
alert and poised to strike, rushed to the attack. But the carrier had
reached the _Orion_ and both Ardvorian ships had been waiting,
motionless, for a good half minute before the Terran warships arrived
and began to blast with everything they had.

"Flashlights and firecrackers," Sawtelle said, calmly. "You aren't even
warming up our screens. As soon as you quit making a damned fool of
yourself by wasting energy that way, we'll set the _UC-1_ back down
where she was and get on with our business here."

"You will order a cease-fire at once, Admiral," the chairman said, "or
the rest of us will, as of now, remove you from the Board." Gordon
gritted his teeth in rage, but gave the order.

"If he hasn't had enough yet to convince him," Hilton suggested, "he
might send up a drone. We don't want to kill anybody, you know. One with
the heaviest screening he's got--just to see what happens to it."

"He's had enough. The rest of us have had more than enough. That
exhibition was not only uncalled-for and disgusting--it was outrageous!"

The meeting settled down, then, from argument to constructive
discussion, and many topics were gone over. Certain matters were,
however, so self-evident that they were not even mentioned.

Thus, it was a self-evident fact that no Terran could ever visit Ardvor;
for the instrument-readings agreed with the report's statements as to
the violence of the Ardvorian environment, and no Terran could possibly
walk around in two tons of lead. Conversely, it was self-apparent to the
Terrans that no Ardan could ever visit Earth without being recognized
instantly for what he was. Wearing such armor made its necessity starkly
plain. No one from the _Perseus_ could say that any Ardan, after having
lived on the furiously radiant surface of Ardvor, would not be as
furiously radioactive as the laboratory's calibrated instruments had
shown Hilton and Sawtelle actually to be.

Wherefore the conference went on, quietly and cooperatively, to its
planned end.

One minute after the Terran battleship _Perseus_ emerged into normal
space, the _Orion_ went into sub-space for her long trip back to Ardvor.

       *       *       *       *       *

The last two days of that seven-day trip were the longest-seeming that
either Hilton or Sawtelle had ever known. The sub-space radio was on
continuously and Kedy-One reported to Sawtelle every five minutes. Even
though Hilton knew that the Oman commander-in-chief was exactly as good
at perceiving as he himself was, he found himself scanning the
thoroughly screened Strett world forty or fifty times an hour.

However, in spite of worry and apprehension, time wore eventlessly on.
The _Orion_ emerged, went to Ardvor and landed on Ardane Field.

Hilton, after greeting properly and reporting to his wife, went to his
office. There he found that Sandra had everything well in hand except
for a few tapes that only he could handle. Sawtelle and his officers
went to the new Command Central, where everything was rolling smoothly
and very much faster than Sawtelle had dared hope.

The Terran immigrants had to live in the _Orion_, of course, until
conversion into Ardans. Almost equally of course--since the Bryant
infant was the only young baby in the lot--Doris and her Sammy Small
were, by popular acclaim, in the first batch to be converted. For little
Sammy had taken the entire feminine contingent by storm. No Oman female
had a chance to act as nurse as long as any of the girls were around.
Which was practically all the time. Especially the platinum-blonde
twins; for several months, now, Bernadine Braden and Hermione Felger.

"And you said they were so hard-boiled," Doris said accusingly to Sam,
nodding at the twins. On hands and knees on the floor, head to head with
Sammy Small between them, they were growling deep-throated at each other
and nuzzling at the baby, who was having the time of his young life.
"You couldn't have been any wronger, my sweet, if you'd had the whole
Octagon helping you go astray. They're just as nice as they can be, both
of them."

Sam shrugged and grinned. His wife strode purposefully across the room
to the playful pair and lifted their pretended prey out from between
them.

"Quit it, you two," she directed, swinging the baby up and depositing
him a-straddle her left hip. "You're just simply spoiling him rotten."

"You think so, Dolly? Uh-uh, far be it from such." Bernadine came
lithely to her feet. She glanced at her own taut, trim abdomen; upon
which a micrometrically-precise topographical mapping job might have
revealed an otherwise imperceptible bulge. "Just you wait until Junior
arrives and I'll show you how to _really_ spoil a baby. Besides, what's
the hurry?"

"He needs his supper. Vitamins and minerals and hard radiations and
things, and then he's going to bed. I don't approve of this no-sleep
business. So run along, both of you, until tomorrow."




XII


As has been said, the Stretts were working, with all the intensity of
their monstrous but tremendously capable minds, upon their Great Plan;
which was, basically, to conquer and either enslave or destroy every
other intelligent race throughout all the length, breadth, and thickness
of total space. To that end each individual Strett had to become
invulnerable and immortal.

Wherefore, in the inconceivably remote past, there had been put into
effect a program of selective breeding and of carefully-calculated
treatments. It was mathematically certain that this program would result
in a race of beings of pure force--beings having no material
constituents remaining whatever.

Under those hellish treatments billions upon billions of Stretts had
died. But the few remaining thousands had almost reached their sublime
goal. In a few more hundreds of thousands of years perfection would be
reached. The few surviving hundreds of perfect beings could and would
multiply to any desired number in practically no time at all.

Hilton and his seven fellow-workers had perceived all this in their one
and only study of the planet Strett, and every other Ardan had been
completely informed.

A dozen or so Strett Lords of Thought, male and female, were floating
about in the atmosphere--which was not air--of their Assembly Hall. Their
heads were globes of ball lightning. Inside them could be seen quite
plainly the intricate convolutions of immense, less-than-half-material
brains, shot through and through with rods and pencils and shapes of
pure, scintillating force.

And the bodies! Or, rather, each horrendous brain had a few partially
material appendages and appurtenances recognizable as bodily organs.
There were no mouths, no ears, no eyes, no noses or nostrils, no lungs,
no legs or arms. There were, however, hearts. Some partially material
ichor flowed through those living-fire-outlined tubes. There were
starkly functional organs of reproduction with which, by no stretch of
the imagination, could any thought of tenderness or of love be
connected.

It was a good thing for the race, Hilton had thought at first perception
of the things, that the Stretts had bred out of themselves every iota of
the finer, higher attributes of life. If they had not done so, the
impotence of sheer disgust would have supervened so long since that the
race would have been extinct for ages.

"Thirty-eight periods ago the Great Brain was charged with the sum total
of Strettsian knowledge," First Lord Thinker Zoyar radiated to the
assembled Stretts. "For those thirty-eight periods it has been scanning,
peyondiring, amassing data and formulating hypotheses, theories, and
conclusions. It has just informed me that it is now ready to make a
preliminary report. Great Brain, how much of the total universe have you
studied?"

"This Galaxy only," the Brain radiated, in a texture of thought as hard
and as harsh as Zoyar's own.

"Why not more?"

"Insufficient power. My first conclusion is that whoever set up the
specifications for me is a fool."

       *       *       *       *       *

To say that the First Lord went out of control at this statement is to
put it very mildly indeed. He fulminated, ending with: "... destroyed
instantly!"

"Destroy me if you like," came the utterly calm, utterly cold reply. "I
am in no sense alive. I have no consciousness of self nor any desire for
continued existence. To do so, however, would ..."

A flurry of activity interrupted the thought. Zoyar was in fact
assembling the forces to destroy the brain. But, before he could act,
Second Lord Thinker Ynos and another female blew him into a mixture of
loose molecules and flaring energies.

"Destruction of any and all irrational minds is mandatory," Ynos, now
First Lord Thinker, explained to the linked minds. "Zoyar had been
becoming less and less rational by the period. A good workman does not
causelessly destroy his tools. Go ahead, Great Brain, with your
findings."

"... not be logical." The brain resumed the thought exactly where it had
been broken off. "Zoyar erred in demanding unlimited performance, since
infinite knowledge and infinite ability require not only infinite
capacity and infinite power, but also infinite time. Nor is it either
necessary or desirable that I should have such qualities. There is no
reasonable basis for the assumption that you Stretts will conquer any
significant number even of the millions of intelligent races now
inhabiting this one Galaxy."

"Why not?" Ynos demanded, her thought almost, but not quite, as steady
and cold as it had been.

"The answer to that question is implicit in the second indefensible
error made in my construction. The prime datum impressed into my banks,
that the Stretts are in fact the strongest, ablest, most intelligent
race in the universe, proved to be false. I had to eliminate it before I
could do any really constructive thinking."

A roar of condemnatory thought brought all circumambient ether to a
boil. "Bah--destroy it!" "Detestable!" "Intolerable!" "If that is the
best it can do, annihilate it!" "Far better brains have been destroyed
for much less!" "Treason!" And so on.

First Lord Thinker Ynos, however, remained relatively calm. "While we
have always held it to be a fact that we are the highest race in
existence, no rigorous proof has been possible. Can you now disprove
that assumption?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"I have disproved it. I have not had time to study all of the
civilizations of this Galaxy, but I have examined a statistically
adequate sample of one million seven hundred ninety-two thousand four
hundred sixteen different planetary intelligences. I found one which is
considerably abler and more advanced than you Stretts. Therefore the
probability is greater than point nine nine that there are not less than
ten, and not more than two hundred eight, such races in this Galaxy
alone."

"Impossible!" Another wave of incredulous and threatening anger swept
through the linked minds; a wave which Ynos flattened out with some
difficulty.

Then she asked: "Is it probable that we will make contact with this
supposedly superior race in the foreseeable future?"

"You are in contact with it now."

"_What?_" Even Ynos was contemptuous now. "You mean that one shipload of
despicable humans who--far too late to do them any good--barred us
temporarily from Fuel World?"

"Not exactly or only those humans, no. And your assumptions may or may
not be valid."

"Don't you _know_ whether they are or not?" Ynos snapped. "Explain your
uncertainty at once!"

"I am uncertain because of insufficient data," the brain replied,
calmly. "The only pertinent facts of which I am certain are: First, the
world Ardry, upon which the Omans formerly lived and to which the humans
in question first went--a planet which no Strett can peyondire--is now
abandoned. Second, the Stretts of old did not completely destroy the
humanity of the world Ardu. Third, some escapees from Ardu reached and
populated the world Ardry. Fourth, the android Omans were developed on
Ardry, by the human escapees from Ardu and their descendants. Fifth, the
Omans referred to those humans as 'Masters.' Sixth, after living on
Ardry for a very long period of time the Masters went elsewhere.
Seventh, the Omans remaining on Ardry maintained, continuously and for a
very long time, the status quo left by the Masters. Eighth, immediately
upon the arrival from Terra of these present humans, that long-existing
status was broken. Ninth, the planet called Fuel World is, for the first
time, surrounded by a screen of force. The formula of this screen is as
follows."

The brain gave it. No Strett either complained or interrupted. Each was
too busy studying that formula and examining its stunning implications
and connotations.

"Tenth, that formula is one full order of magnitude beyond anything
previously known to your science. Eleventh, it could not have been
developed by the science of Terra, nor by that of any other world whose
population I have examined."

       *       *       *       *       *

The brain took the linked minds instantaneously to Terra; then to a few
thousand or so other worlds inhabited by human beings; then to a few
thousands of planets whose populations were near-human, non-human and
monstrous.

"It is therefore clear," it announced, "that this screen was computed
and produced by the race, whatever it may be, that is now dwelling on
Fuel World and asserting full ownership of it."

"Who or what _is_ that race?" Ynos demanded.

"Data insufficient."

"Theorize, then!"

"Postulate that the Masters, in many thousands of cycles of study, made
advances in science that were not reduced to practice; that the Omans
either possessed this knowledge or had access to it; and that Omans and
humans cooperated fully in sharing and in working with all the
knowledges thus available. From these three postulates the conclusion
can be drawn that there has come into existence a new race. One
combining the best qualities of both humans and Omans, but with the
weaknesses of neither."

"An unpleasant thought, truly," Ynos thought. "But you can now, I
suppose, design the generators and projectors of a force superior to
that screen."

"Data insufficient. I can equal it, since both generation and
projection are implicit in the formula. But the data so adduced are in
themselves vastly ahead of anything previously in my banks."

"Are there any other races in this Galaxy more powerful than the
postulated one now living on Fuel World?"

"Data insufficient."

"Theorize, then!"

"Data insufficient."

The linked minds concentrated upon the problem for a period of time that
might have been either days or weeks. Then:

"Great Brain, advise us," Ynos said. "What is best for us to do?"

"With identical defensive screens it becomes a question of relative
power. You should increase the size and power of your warships to
something beyond the computed probable maximum of the enemy. You should
build more ships and missiles than they will probably be able to build.
Then and only then will you attack their warships, in tremendous force
and continuously."

"But not their planetary defenses. I see." Ynos's thought was one of
complete understanding. "And the _real_ offensive will be?"

"No mobile structure can be built to mount mechanisms of power
sufficient to smash down by sheer force of output such tremendously
powerful installations as their planet-based defenses must be assumed
to be. Therefore the planet itself must be destroyed. This will require
a missile of planetary mass. The best such missile is the tenth planet
of their own sun."

       *       *       *       *       *

"I see." Ynos's mind was leaping ahead, considering hundreds of
possibilities and making highly intricate and involved computations.
"That will, however, require many cycles of time and more power than
even our immense reserves can supply."

