Chasles, Halliwell, and Libri, in the _Comptes rendus_, 1839, Vol. IX, p.
447, and in Vols. VIII, XVI, XVII of the same journal.

[340] J. Marquardt, _La vie privee des Romains_, Vol. II (French trans.),
p. 505, Paris, 1893.

[341] In a Plimpton manuscript of the arithmetic of Boethius of the
thirteenth century, for example, the Roman numerals are all replaced by the
Arabic, and the same is true in the first printed edition of the book. (See
Smith's _Rara Arithmetica_, pp. 434, 25-27.) D. E. Smith also copied from a
manuscript of the arithmetic in the Laurentian library at Florence, of
1370, the following forms, [Forged numerals

[342] Halliwell, in his _Rara Mathematica, _p. 107, states that the
disputed passage is not in a manuscript belonging to Mr. Ames, nor in one
at Trinity College. See also Woepcke, in _Propagation_, pp. 37 and 42. It
was the evident corruption of the texts in such editions of Boethius as
those of Venice, 1499, Basel, 1546 and 1570, that led Woepcke to publish
his work _Sur l'introduction de l'arithmetique indienne en Occident_.

[343] They are found in none of the very ancient manuscripts, as, for
example, in the ninth-century (?) codex in the Laurentian library which one
of the authors has examined. It should be said, however, that the disputed
passage was written after the arithmetic, for it contains a reference to
that work. See the Friedlein ed., p. 397.

[344] Smith, _Rara Arithmetica_, p. 66.

[345] J. L. Heiberg, _Philologus_, Vol. XLIII, p. 507.

[346] "Nosse autem huius artis dispicientem, quid sint digiti, quid
articuli, quid compositi, quid incompositi numeri." [Friedlein ed., p.
395.]

[347] _De ratione abaci._ In this he describes "quandam formulam, quam ob
honorem sui praeceptoris mensam Pythagoream nominabant ... a posterioribus
appellabatur abacus." This, as pictured in the text, is the common Gerbert
abacus. In the edition in Migne's _Patrologia Latina_, Vol. LXIII, an
ordinary multiplication table (sometimes called Pythagorean abacus) is
given in the illustration.

[348] "Habebant enim diverse formatos apices vel caracteres." See the
reference to Gerbert on p. 117.

[349] C. Henry, "Sur l'origine de quelques notations mathematiques," _Revue
Archeologique_, 1879, derives these from the initial letters used as
abbreviations for the names of the numerals, a theory that finds few
supporters.

[350] E.g., it appears in Schonerus, _Algorithmus Demonstratus_, Nuernberg,
1534, f. A4. In England it appeared in the earliest English arithmetical
manuscript known, _The Crafte of Nombrynge_: "¶ fforthermore ye most
vndirstonde that in this craft ben vsid teen figurys, as here bene writen
for ensampul, [Numerals] ... in the quych we vse teen figurys of Inde.
Questio. ¶ why ten fyguris of Inde? Solucio. for as I have sayd afore thei
were fonde fyrst in Inde of a kynge of that Cuntre, that was called Algor."
See Smith, _An Early English Algorism_, loc. cit.

[351] Friedlein ed., p. 397.

[352] Carlsruhe codex of Gerlando.

[353] Munich codex of Gerlando.

[354] Carlsruhe codex of Bernelinus.

[355] Munich codex of Bernelinus.

[356] Turchill, c. 1200.

[357] Anon. MS., thirteenth century, Alexandrian Library, Rome.

[358] Twelfth-century Boethius, Friedlein, p. 396.

[359] Vatican codex, tenth century, Boethius.

[360] a, h, i, are from the Friedlein ed.; the original in the manuscript
from which a is taken contains a zero symbol, as do all of the six plates
given by Friedlein. b-e from the Boncompagni _Bulletino_, Vol. X, p. 596; f
ibid., Vol. XV, p. 186; g _Memorie della classe di sci., Reale Acc. dei
Lincei_, An. CCLXXIV (1876-1877), April, 1877. A twelfth-century
arithmetician, possibly John of Luna (Hispalensis, of Seville, c. 1150),
speaks of the great diversity of these forms even in his day, saying: "Est
autem in aliquibus figuram istarum apud multos diuersitas. Quidam enim
septimam hanc figuram representant [Symbol] alii autem sic [Symbol], uel
sic [Symbol]. Quidam vero quartam sic [Symbol]." [Boncompagni, _Trattati_,
Vol. II, p. 28.]

[361] Loc. cit., p. 59.

[362] Ibid., p. 101.

[363] Loc. cit., p. 396.

[364] Khosr[=u] I, who began to reign in 531 A.D. See W. S. W Vaux,
_Persia, _London, 1875, p. 169; Th. Noeldeke, _Aufsaetze zur persichen
Geschichte_, Leipzig, 1887, p. 113, and his article in the ninth edition of
the _Encyclopaedia Britannica_.

[365] Colebrooke, _Essays_, Vol. II, p. 504, on the authority of Ibn
al-Adam[=i], astronomer, in a work published by his continuator Al-Q[=a]sim
in 920 A.D.; Al-B[=i]r[=u]n[=i], _India, _Vol. II, p. 15.

[366] H. Suter, _Die Mathematiker_ etc., pp. 4-5, states that
Al-Faz[=a]r[=i] died between 796 and 806.

[367] Suter, loc. cit., p. 63.

[368] Suter, loc. cit., p. 74.

[369] Suter, _Das Mathematiker-Verzeichniss im Fihrist_. The references to
Suter, unless otherwise stated, are to his later work _Die Mathematiker und
Astronomen der Araber_ etc.

[370] Suter, _Fihrist_, p. 37, no date.

[371] Suter, _Fihrist_, p. 38, no date.

[372] Possibly late tenth, since he refers to one arithmetical work which
is entitled _Book of the Cyphers_ in his _Chronology_, English ed., p. 132.
Suter, _Die Mathematiker_ etc., pp. 98-100, does not mention this work; see
the _Nachtraege und Berichtigungen_, pp. 170-172.

[373] Suter, pp. 96-97.

[374] Suter, p. 111.

[375] Suter, p. 124. As the name shows, he came from the West.

[376] Suter, p. 138.

[377] Hankel, _Zur Geschichte der Mathematik_, p. 256, refers to him as
writing on the Hindu art of reckoning; Suter, p. 162.

[378] [Greek: Psephophoria kat' Indous], Greek ed., C. I. Gerhardt, Halle,
1865; and German translation, _Das Rechenbuch des Maximus Planudes_, H.
Waeschke, Halle, 1878.

[379] "Sur une donnee historique relative a l'emploi des chiffres indiens
par les Arabes," Tortolini's _Annali di scienze mat. e fis._, 1855.

[380] Suter, p. 80.

[381] Suter, p. 68.

[382] Sprenger also calls attention to this fact, in the _Zeitschrift d.
deutschen morgenlaend. Gesellschaft_, Vol. XLV, p. 367.

[383] Libri, _Histoire des mathematiques_, Vol. I, p. 147.

[384] "Dictant la paix a l'empereur de Constantinople, l'Arabe victorieux
demandait des manuscrits et des savans." [Libri, loc. cit., p. 108.]

[385] Persian _bagadata_, "God-given."

[386] One of the Abbassides, the (at least pretended) descendants of
`Al-Abb[=a]s, uncle and adviser of Mo[h.]ammed.

[387] E. Reclus, _Asia_, American ed., N. Y., 1891, Vol. IV, p. 227.

[388] _Historical Sketches_, Vol. III, chap. iii.

[389] On its prominence at that period see Villicus, p. 70.

[390] See pp. 4-5.

[391] Smith, D. E., in the _Cantor Festschrift_, 1909, note pp. 10-11. See
also F. Woepcke, _Propagation_.

[392] Enestroem, in _Bibliotheca Mathematica_, Vol. I (3), p. 499; Cantor,
_Geschichte_, Vol. I (3), p. 671.

[393] Cited in Chapter I. It begins: "Dixit algoritmi: laudes deo rectori
nostro atque defensori dicamus dignas." It is devoted entirely to the
fundamental operations and contains no applications.

[394] M. Steinschneider, "Die Mathematik bei den Juden," _Bibliotheca
Mathematica_, Vol. VIII (2), p. 99. See also the reference to this writer
in Chapter I.

[395] Part of this work has been translated from a Leyden MS. by F.
Woepcke, _Propagation_, and more recently by H. Suter, _Bibliotheca
Mathematica_, Vol. VII (3), pp. 113-119.

[396] A. Neander, _General History of the Christian Religion and Church_,
5th American ed., Boston, 1855, Vol. III, p. 335.

[397] Beazley, loc. cit., Vol. I, p. 49.

[398] Beazley, loc. cit., Vol. I, pp. 50, 460.

[399] See pp. 7-8.

[400] The name also appears as Mo[h.]ammed Ab[=u]'l-Q[=a]sim, and Ibn
Hauqal. Beazley, loc. cit., Vol. I, p. 45.

[401] _Kit[=a]b al-mas[=a]lik wa'l-mam[=a]lik._

[402] Reinaud, _Mem. sur l'Inde_; in Gerhardt, _Etudes_, p. 18.

[403] Born at Shiraz in 1193. He himself had traveled from India to Europe.

[404] _Gulistan_ (_Rose Garden_), Gateway the third, XXII. Sir Edwin
Arnold's translation, N. Y., 1899, p. 177.

[405] Cunningham, loc. cit., p. 81.

[406] Putnam, _Books_, Vol. I, p. 227:

 "Non semel externas peregrino tramite terras
  Jam peragravit ovans, sophiae deductus amore,
  Si quid forte novi librorum seu studiorum
  Quod secum ferret, terris reperiret in illis.
  Hic quoque Romuleum venit devotus ad urbem."

("More than once he has traveled joyfully through remote regions and by
strange roads, led on by his zeal for knowledge and seeking to discover in
foreign lands novelties in books or in studies which he could take back
with him. And this zealous student journeyed to the city of Romulus.")

[407] A. Neander, _General History of the Christian Religion and Church_,
5th American ed., Boston, 1855, Vol. III, p. 89, note 4; Libri, _Histoire_,
Vol. I, p. 143.

[408] Cunningham, loc. cit., p. 81.

[409] Heyd, loc. cit., Vol. I, p. 4.

[410] Ibid., p. 5.

[411] Ibid., p. 21.

[412] Ibid., p. 23.

[413] Libri, _Histoire_, Vol. I, p. 167.

[414] Picavet, _Gerbert, un pape philosophe, d'apres l'histoire et d'apres
la legende_, Paris, 1897, p. 19.

[415] Beazley, loc. cit., Vol. I, chap, i, and p. 54 seq.

[416] Ibid., p. 57.

[417] Libri, _Histoire_, Vol. I, p. 110, n., citing authorities, and p.
152.

[418] Possibly the old tradition, "Prima dedit nautis usum magnetis
Amalphis," is true so far as it means the modern form of compass card. See
Beazley, loc. cit., Vol. II, p. 398.

[419] R. C. Dutt, loc. cit., Vol. II, p. 312.

[420] E. J. Payne, in _The Cambridge Modern History_, London, 1902, Vol. I,
chap. i.

[421] Geo. Phillips, "The Identity of Marco Polo's Zaitun with Changchau,
in T'oung pao," _Archives pour servir a l'etude de l'histoire de l'Asie
orientale_, Leyden, 1890, Vol. I, p. 218. W. Heyd, _Geschichte des
Levanthandels im Mittelalter_, Vol. II, p. 216.

The Palazzo dei Poli, where Marco was born and died, still stands in the
Corte del Milione, in Venice. The best description of the Polo travels, and
of other travels of the later Middle Ages, is found in C. R. Beazley's
_Dawn of Modern Geography_, Vol. III, chap, ii, and Part II.

[422] Heyd, loc. cit., Vol. II, p. 220; H. Yule, in _Encyclopaedia
Britannica_, 9th (10th) or 11th ed., article "China." The handbook cited is
Pegolotti's _Libro di divisamenti di paesi_, chapters i-ii, where it is
implied that $60,000 would be a likely amount for a merchant going to China
to invest in his trip.

[423] Cunningham, loc. cit., p. 194.

[424] I.e. a commission house.

[425] Cunningham, loc. cit., p. 186.

[426] J. R. Green, _Short History of the English People_, New York, 1890,
p. 66.

[427] W. Besant, _London_, New York, 1892, p. 43.

[428] _Baldakin_, _baldekin_, _baldachino_.

[429] Italian _Baldacco_.

[430] J. K. Mumford, _Oriental Rugs_, New York, 1901, p. 18.

[431] Or Girbert, the Latin forms _Gerbertus_ and _Girbertus_ appearing
indifferently in the documents of his time.

[432] See, for example, J. C. Heilbronner, _Historia matheseos universae_,
p. 740.

[433] "Obscuro loco natum," as an old chronicle of Aurillac has it.

[434] N. Bubnov, _Gerberti postea Silvestri II papae opera mathematica_,
Berlin, 1899, is the most complete and reliable source of information;
Picavet, loc. cit., _Gerbert_ etc.; Olleris, _Oeuvres de Gerbert_, Paris,
1867; Havet, _Lettres de Gerbert_, Paris, 1889 ; H. Weissenborn, _Gerbert;
Beitraege zur Kenntnis der Mathematik des Mittelalters_, Berlin, 1888, and
_Zur Geschichte der Einfuehrung der jetzigen Ziffern in Europa durch
Gerbert_, Berlin, 1892; Buedinger, _Ueber Gerberts wissenschaftliche und
politische Stellung_, Cassel, 1851; Richer, "Historiarum liber III," in
Bubnov, loc. cit., pp. 376-381; Nagl, _Gerbert und die Rechenkunst des 10.
Jahrhunderts_, Vienna, 1888.

[435] Richer tells of the visit to Aurillac by Borel, a Spanish nobleman,
just as Gerbert was entering into young manhood. He relates how
affectionately the abbot received him, asking if there were men in Spain
well versed in the arts. Upon Borel's reply in the affirmative, the abbot
asked that one of his young men might accompany him upon his return, that
he might carry on his studies there.

[436] Vicus Ausona. Hatto also appears as Atton and Hatton.

[437] This is all that we know of his sojourn in Spain, and this comes from
his pupil Richer. The stories told by Adhemar of Chabanois, an apparently
ignorant and certainly untrustworthy contemporary, of his going to Cordova,
are unsupported. (See e.g. Picavet, p. 34.) Nevertheless this testimony is
still accepted: K. von Raumer, for example (_Geschichte der Paedagogik_, 6th
ed., 1890, Vol. I, p. 6), says "Mathematik studierte man im Mittelalter bei
den Arabern in Spanien. Zu ihnen gieng Gerbert, nachmaliger Pabst Sylvester
II."

[438] Thus in a letter to Aldaberon he says: "Quos post repperimus
speretis, id est VIII volumina Boeti de astrologia, praeclarissima quoque
figurarum geometriae, aliaque non minus admiranda" (Epist. 8). Also in a
letter to Rainard (Epist. 130), he says: "Ex tuis sumptibus fac ut michi
scribantur M. Manlius (Manilius in one MS.) de astrologia."

[439] Picavet, loc. cit., p. 31.

[440] Picavet, loc. cit., p. 36.

[441] Havet, loc. cit., p. vii.

[442] Picavet, loc. cit., p. 37.

[443] "Con sinistre arti conseguri la dignita del Pontificato.... Lasciato
poi l' abito, e 'l monasterio, e datosi tutto in potere del diavolo."
[Quoted in Bombelli, _L'antica numerazione Italica_, Rome, 1876, p. 41 n.]

[444] He writes from Rheims in 984 to one Lupitus, in Barcelona, saying:
"Itaque librum de astrologia translatum a te michi petenti dirige,"
presumably referring to some Arabic treatise. [Epist. no. 24 of the Havet
collection, p. 19.]

[445] See Bubnov, loc. cit., p. x.

[446] Olleris, loc. cit., p. 361, l. 15, for Bernelinus; and Bubnov, loc.
