either, but you'll agree that since my precognizer said no ship but
Bors's is coming here--and he precognized every one of the prizes before
they arrived--you'll concede that the Mekinese aren't coming here. So
you're going out to meet them."

He saw Bors, and breathed an audible sigh of relief.

"Bors!" he said in a changed tone. "I'm glad you're back!"

Bors said grimly, "Majesty, I've very bad news."

King Humphrey shrugged. He spoke in a listless voice.

"I doubt it differs from ours. You captured a passenger-liner off Mekin,
you will remember. You sent it here. When it arrived we found that all
its passengers knew that Kandar was not occupied and that the fleet sent
to capture it had not reported back."

"My news is worse," said Bors. "The continued existence of our fleet,
and the fact that it defeated a Mekinese force, is common knowledge on
at least five planets--all of them now in revolt against Mekin."

The king's expression had reached the limit of reaction to disaster. It
did not change. He looked almost apathetic.

"Mekin," he said dully, "sent a second squadron to Kandar to investigate
the rumors of defeat. We have a very tiny force there--three ships. Of
course our ships won't attack the Mekinese, but they might as well.
Knowing that we destroyed their first fleet and that we still live,
Mekin will assuredly retaliate."

"And not only on Kandar," said Bors. "On Tralee and Garen and Cassis and
Meriden--"

Morgan interrupted.

"Majesty! All this is more reason to listen to me! I've been telling you
that all my Talents agree--"

King Humphrey interrupted tonelessly, "We've made our final
arrangements, Bors. We are going to release the cargo-ships and the
passenger-ship you sent us. We will use them as messengers. We are
going to send a message of surrender, to Mekin."

Bors swallowed. His most dismal forebodings had produced nothing more
hopeless than this moment.

"Majesty--"

"We have to sacrifice," said the king in a leaden voice, "not only our
lives but our self-respect, to try to gain something less than the total
annihilation of Kandar. We shall tell the Mekinese that we will return
to Kandar and form up in space. If they send a small force to accept our
surrender, they shall have it. If they prefer to destroy us, they can do
that also. But we submit ourselves to punishment for having resisted the
original fleet. We admit our guilt. And we beg Mekin not to avenge that
resistance upon our people, who are not guilty."

Bors tried to speak, and could not. There was a sodden, utterly
unresilient stillness in the room, as if all the high officers of the
fleet were corpses and the king himself, though he spoke, was not less
dead.

Then Morgan moved decisively. He moved away from the spot where he had
been engaged in impassioned argument. He took Bors by the arm, and
hustled him through the door.

"Come along!" he said urgently. "Something's got to be done! You have
the knack of thinking of things to do! The king's intentions--"

The door closed behind him and he broke off. He wiped sweat from his
forehead with one hand while he thrust Bors on with the other. They came
to a cabin evidently assigned to him. Gwenlyn waited there.

"Craziness!" said Morgan bitterly. "Craziness! I get the finest group of
Talents that ever existed! I teach them to think! I instruct them! And
they can't think of what is going to happen. And everything depends on
it! Everything!"

"When will the _Sylva_ be back?" demanded Bors.

Morgan automatically looked at his watch. Gwenlyn opened her mouth to
speak. Morgan shook his head impatiently. Gwenlyn was silent.

"My ship-arrival Talent's with the _Sylva_," said Morgan harassedly. "We
sent him to Kandar to find out if the Mekinese fleet's coming there, and
when. It isn't coming here. He said so."

"It'll go to Kandar," said Bors bitterly, "to destroy it. I imagine
we'll go there too, to be destroyed."

"But it's insane!" protested Morgan. "Look! You captured a
passenger-ship off Mekin. Right?"

"Yes."

"You sent it here with all its passengers. Right?"

"Yes."

"One of the passengers said he was a clairvoyant. Hah!" Morgan expressed
the ultimate of disgust. "He was a fortune-teller! He didn't know there
was anything better than that! A fortune-teller! But he's a Talent! He's
a born charlatan, but he's an authentic Talent, and he doesn't know what
that is! He thinks predictions as Madame Porvis thinks scandals! And
they're just as crazy! But he _is_ a Talent and they have to be right!"

Bors said, "You're going to take Gwenlyn away from here,--and fast!"

Morgan paid no attention. He was embittered, and agitated, and in
particular, he was frustrated.

"It's all madness!" he protested almost hysterically. "Here we've got a
firm precognition that King Humphrey's going to open parliament on
Kandar next year, and there's another one--"

Gwenlyn said quickly, "Which you won't tell!"

"Which I won't tell. But something's got to happen! Something's got to
be done! And this crazy Talent gives me a crazy precognition and looks
proud because I can't make sense of it! What the hell can you make out
of a precognition that Mekin will be defeated when an enemy fleet
submits to destruction, lying still in space? There's no sense to it!
_My_ Talents wouldn't think of anything idiotic like that! They've got
better sense! But when this lunatic said it, they could precognize it
too! It's so! They couldn't think of it themselves, but when this
Mekinese Talent does, they know it's true. But it can't be!"

Bors said coldly, "The fleet's going to be destroyed, certainly. If that
will defeat Mekin. But Gwenlyn is not to stay aboard to be destroyed
with it! How are you going to get her away?"

"The king's waiting for the _Sylva_ to come back," Morgan said
indignantly, "so he'll know--my ship-arrival Talent went to find out--if
the Mekin fleet's going to Kandar, and when. He insists that if they
know the fleet exists, they know where it is and will come here looking
for it. But Madame Porvis couldn't have told that in her daydreaming.
She didn't _know_ what planet we're circling! She couldn't have spread
that fact by contagion!"

"She spread plenty more!" said Bors. "Her daydreams were too damned
true!"

Gwenlyn said, "It's a contradiction in terms for a fleet to win a battle
by letting itself be destroyed. Perhaps the Captain--"

"It's also a contradiction in terms," said Bors bitterly, "for all our
troubles to come because we won a victory. Now we regret that we weren't
all killed. But it's madness for the king to propose to get us all
slaughtered in hope of rousing the Mekinese better nature!"

"Maybe you can resolve it, Captain," said Gwenlyn thoughtfully. "Could
it be that it isn't a contradiction but only a paradox?"

Bors spread his hands helplessly. Of all times and circumstances, this
particular moment and situation seemed the least occasion for quibbling
over words.

Then he said, "Yes.... It could be a paradox. If this prediction by that
wild Talent is true, there is a way it could win a fight. I don't
believe it, but I'm going to put something in motion. Nothing can make
matters worse!"

He turned and strode back to the council room where King Humphrey and
the high commanders of his fleet sat like dead men, waiting for the
moment to be killed, to no purpose.




Chapter 12


Bors got nowhere, of course. His proposal had all the ear-marks of
lunacy of purest ray serene. He proposed urgently to equip all the ships
of the fleet with the low-power overdrive fields. It could be done in
days. Instructions were already distributed and would have been studied
and understood. The fleet would then go to Kandar--if it appeared that
the Mekinese grand fleet would go there--and set up a dummy fleet of
target-globes in war array. This would be a fleet, but not of fighting
ships. It would be a fleet of metal-foil inflated balloons.

One actual fighting ship, he stipulated, would form part of this
illusory space-navy. He volunteered the _Horus_ for it. That ship would
signal to the Mekinese when they arrived. It would make the king's
proposal to surrender, on the Mekinese promise to spare the civilian
population of Kandar. If the enemy admiral agreed to these terms and the
king believed him, then the true Kandarian fleet could appear and yield
to its overwhelmingly-powerful enemy. If the admiral arrogantly refused
to pledge safety to Kandar's population, then the dummy formation might
be destroyed, but the fleet would fight. Hopelessly and
uselessly--though the new low-power drive worked well in action--but it
would fight.

The First Admiral said stonily, "If I were in the position of the
Mekinese admiral, and I agreed to terms of capitulation, and if it were
then shown to me that the basis of the terms was a deceit, I would not
feel bound by my promise. When the actual fleet appeared, I would blast
it for questioning my honor."

Bors looked at him with hot eyes. The king said drearily, "No, Bors. We
must act in good faith. We cannot question the Mekinese good faith as
you propose, and then expect them to believe in ours. The admiral is
right. We can fight and bring destruction on our people, or we can place
ourselves at the mercy of Mekin. There can be only one choice. We
sacrifice ourselves, but we keep our honor."

"I deny," said Bors savagely, "that any man keeps his honor who enslaves
his fellows, as you will do in surrendering. I resign my commission in
your service, Majesty."

King Humphrey nodded wearily.

"Very well. You have served us admirably, Bors. I wish I thought you
were right in this matter. I would rather follow your advice than my
convictions. Your resignation is accepted."

An hour later, fuming, Bors paced back and forth across the floor of a
cabin in the flagship. The Pretender of Tralee entered. The older man
looked wryly amused.

"It was a most improper thing to do. You resigned your commission and
then ordered the low-power fields built on all ships."

"To the contrary," said Bors, "I spread the news that I had resigned my
commission _because_ the low-power fields were _not_ to be installed to
give us a fighting chance!"

The Pretender sat down and regarded his nephew quizzically.

"But is it so important? To use tables of calculations instead of
computers?"

"Yes," said Bors. "It is important. I should know. I've used the
low-power fields in combat. Nobody else has."

The old man said without reproof, "The First Admiral is indignant. The
fields were not ordered on the ground that they're an untested device
and that at least once such a field blew out, leaving your ship, the
_Isis_, so helpless that it had to be abandoned."

"True," agreed Bors. He made no defense. The attitude of the First
Admiral would have been perfectly logical in ordinary times. Anything
like the new intermediate, low-power overdrive field should have been
proposed through channels, examined by a duly-appointed commission of
officers, reported on, the report evaluated, and then painstaking and
lengthy tests made and the report on the tests evaluated. Then it should
have been submitted to another commission of officers of higher rank,
who would estimate the kind and amount of modification of standard
equipment the new device required, its susceptibility to accident and/or
obsolescence, the ease of repair, the cost of installation and the
length of time in-port required to install it. Somewhere along the line
there should also have been a report on the ease with which it could be
integrated into other apparatus and standard operational procedures, and
there should have been reports on its possible tactical value, the
probable number of times it would be useful, the degree of its utility
and whether the excessive discomfort of going into and out of overdrive
at extremely short intervals would have an adverse effect on crew
morale. Under normal circumstances a ship might have been equipped, for
testing purposes, in six to ten years, and in ten years more all new
ships might be equipped. But it would be well over a generation before
its use was general.

The older man said, "Since your resignation's been accepted, you'll be
put on the _Sylva_ when it comes back. You won't be taken to Kandar with
the fleet."

Bors's hands clenched.

"They'll say I resigned to stay out of the fight!"

"No," said his uncle mildly. "They'll say you resigned to avoid
surrender. I'm being evicted with you. I'm to be dumped on the
hospitality of your friend, Morgan, too. Humphrey is a very kindly man.
Abominably so. But I am tired of being an exile. I'd really rather stay
with the fleet. But he stands on his dignity to preserve our lives. I'm
not sure what for, in a universe where such things as Mekin can happen."

"They happen," growled Bors, "because we value peace and quiet as much
as the Mekinese do power, and much less than freedom. We compromise."

He paced up and down.

"Up to now," he said harshly, "every effort made against Mekin has been
defensive. Twenty-two worlds, in turn, have fallen because they only
wanted to _stop_ Mekin. It's time for some world to resolve very solidly
to _smash_ Mekin, to act with honest anger against a thing that should
be hated. It's got to be done!"

"The time for such a resolution," said his uncle, gently, "went by long
ago."

There was sudden voice from the compartment speaker.

"_Co-o-o-ntact!_"

There was the hissing sound of doors closing. The peculiarly-muffled
silence of a closed compartment fell. The Pretender said quietly, "If
this is the Mekinese fleet, everything is solved. But your friends of
Talents, Incorporated will have to be wrong. They insist the grand fleet
will not come here."

Bors rasped, "I wish I were in that control room! But at least we've got
missiles they can't intercept!"

"Except that they won't be fired, they're a great improvement," the
Pretender said mildly.

He sat at ease. Time passed. Presently the tiny compartment
air-refresher hummed, bringing down the CO{2} content of the air. It cut
off. Bors paced up and down, up and down. He pictured what might be
happening outside. It could be that the grand fleet of Mekin had
appeared and now drove proudly toward Glamis. It could be that the fleet
was offering surrender. There would be near-mutiny on many of its ships.
There would be monumental frustration. Junior officers, in particular,
would have examined the low-power overdrive tables, and would have
studied longingly the reports of Bors's use of low-power overdrive
against an enemy squadron off Meriden. They would yearn passionately to
have their ships equipped with apparatus by which it could vanish from a
place where it was a target to reappear elsewhere, unharmed, and make
the enemy its target. Two fleets equipped with the new device might
checkmate each other. But one fleet....

The speaker said curtly:

"_Captain Bors, a single ship has broken out of overdrive. It
identifies itself as the ship_ Liberty, _of Cela. It declares that it
has come to place itself under your command._"

Bors stared. He had forgotten about the two Cela-built ships which the
Deccan rebels told him about--the first of which had gone on a trial run
with a Mekinese crew and failed to return, and the second of which, with
a Celan crew, had gone off to look for Bors and his marauders.

