the overcast."

"Talk you in?"

"That's right. My instruments are obsolete."

"Great Halstead! What else?"

"I have an Ion drive. Plus two radioactive."

"Oh no!--And you still want to come in?"

"I have to. My passenger's in shock. She's going to have a baby."

"All right--I'll try to get you down in one piece."

"Have an ambulance ready," Kennon said.

Kennon lowered the Egg through the overcast. Ground control picked him
up smoothly and took him down as though it had been rehearsed. The Egg
touched down in the radioactive area of the port. Decontamination jets
hissed, sluicing the ship to remove surface contamination.

"Ochsner! what sort of a ship is that?" Ground Control's startled voice
came over the annunciator.

"It's an old one," Kennon said.

"That's a gross understatement. Stand by for boarders. Ambulance coming
up."

Kennon opened the airlock and two radiation-suited men entered. "At
least you had sense enough to wear protective clothing in this hotbox,"
one said as they carefully unwebbed Copper and carried her out of the
lock. "You wait here. The Port Captain wants to see you."

"Where are you taking her? What Center?" Kennon asked.

"What should you care? You've nearly killed her. The idea of taking
a pregnant woman up in this death trap! What in Fleming's name's the
matter with your brain?"

"I had to," Kennon said. "I had to. It was a matter of life and death."
For once, he thought wryly, the cliche was true.

The Betan's face behind the transparent helmet was disgusted and
unbelieving. "I hear that sort of thing every day," he said. "Am I
supposed to believe it?"

"You'd believe it if you'd have been where I was," Kennon muttered.
"Now--whe're are you taking her?" he demanded.

The man arched blond eyebrows. "To the local Medical Center--where else?
There's only one in this area."

"Thanks," Kennon said.

He watched the ambulance flit off as he waited for the Spaceport Patrol.
There was no further need for the protection suit, so he peeled it off
and hung it in the control-room locker. Copper was right, he mused. It
did itch.

The Port Captain's men were late as usual--moving gingerly through the
radiation area. A noncom gestured for him to enter their carryall. "Port
Captain wants to see you," he said.

"I know," Kennon replied.

"You should have waited upstairs."

"I couldn't. It was a matter of medicine," Kennon said.

The noncom's face sobered. "Why didn't you say so? All you said was that
it was an emergency."

"I've been away. I forgot."

"You shouldn't have done that. You're a Betan, aren't you?"

Kennon nodded.

They drove to the Port Office, where Kennon expected--and got--a bad
time from the port officials. He filled out numerous forms, signed
affidavits, explained his unauthorized landing, showed his spaceman's
ticket, defended his act of piloting without an up-to-date license,
signed more forms, entered a claim for salvage rights to the Egg, and
finally when the Legal Division, the Traffic Control Division, the
Spaceport Safety Office, Customs, Immigration, and Travelers Aid had
finished with him, he was ushered into the presence of the Port Captain.

The red-faced chunky officer eyed him with a cold stare. "You'll be
lucky, young man, if you get out of this with a year in Correction. Your
story doesn't hang together."

It didn't, Kennon thought. But there was no sense telling all of it to
a Port Captain. Under no circumstances could the man be any help to him.
He had neither the power nor the prestige to request a Brotherhood Board
of Inquiry. In rank, he was hardly more than a glorified Traffic Control
officer. It would do no good to tell him an improbable tale of slavery
on a distant planet. The only thing to do was wait out the storm and
hope it would pass. If worst came to worst he'd use his rank, but he'd
made enough stir already. He doubted if the Captain had authority to
order him into Detention--but he was certain to get a lecture. These
minor officials loved to tell someone off. He gritted his teeth. He'd
endure it for Copper's sake--and to get out of here quietly. Alexander
would undoubtedly have agents posted by now, and his only chance for
temporary freedom of action was to get out of here with as little fuss
as possible.

He sat quietly, his flushed face and tight jaw muscles betraying his
impatience as the Captain paced up and down and talked on and on. The
man sounded like he could go for hours. With increasing impatience
Kennon listened to the cadenced flow of complaint and condemnation,
occasionally inserting a "Yes, sir" or "Sorry, sir" or "No, sir" as the
words flowed around him.

However, there had to be a breaking point somewhere, and the monotony
was beginning to wear his temper thin. Another five minutes, he
reflected, was about all he could take.

The door chime rang softly.

"Come in," the Port Captain said, breaking off in mid-tirade. The change
in his manner was so abrupt that Kennon couldn't help smiling.

A young blond man in an interne's gray uniform entered the room.

"Yes, Doctor," the Port Captain said. "What can I do for you?"

"Do you have a Jac Kennon here? Dr. Jac Kennon?"

"Did you say doctor?" the Port Captain said in a half-strangled voice.

"You never let me tell you," Kennon said mildly, "that my landing here
was a matter of medicine. Technically you have contributed to a delay in
treatment."

The Port Captain's face paled. "Why didn't you say something?" he said.

"Against your gale of wind I would be but a faint breeze," Kennon said
coldly. He turned to the interne. "I'm Dr. Kennon." They bowed formally
to each other.

"I'm Smalley, sir, from the medical center. Dr. Brainard sends his
compliments and requests that you join him for consultation."

"The Port Captain--" Kennon began.

"Don't worry about it, Doctor. I'll relinquish responsibility to Dr.
Brainard," the Captain said.

"I have placed a formal written request with your office," Smalley said
stiffly. "You are relieved of further charge. Dr. Kennon is urgently
needed. It is a matter of medicine."

The Captain looked relieved. On Beta it was poor policy to interfere
with the doings of doctors and engineers--or even doctors of philosophy.

"Very well. He's yours--and I'm glad to be rid of him." The Port Captain
bowed to Kennon and Smalley and stalked out of the office.

"Pompous little man," Kennon observed, "but he certainly can talk."

"Oh--you know these Administrative people," the interne said
depreciatingly. "One mustn't mind them. They're necessary nuisances."
He eyed Kennon curiously. "How is it that you didn't stand on your
professional rights?"

"I have my reasons--but they have nothing to do with medicine."

"Oh--I see. Ethical." The interne's voice was faintly sarcastic.

"Manners, Doctor--manners." Kennon's voice was gentle but the interne
flushed a dull red.

"Sorry, sir."

"Don't mention it. It's normal for a graduate to confuse liberty with
license." Kennon smiled. "Don't worry. I shan't report you."

"That's good of you, sir." Smalley's face registered relief. Demerits
were difficult to erase--particularly ones of courtesy.

Kennon wondered if the young man would report himself. He doubted it.
The interne didn't look the type--probably he was dated for some obscure
job, like a general practitioner. He shrugged. It took all kinds to make
a profession. Even the Smalleys had their place.

"That girl you brought in," Smalley said as they entered a white
car emblazoned with the three crosses, red, blue, and green, that
represented the three fields of medicine. "She's an interesting case.
I've never seen space shock before. And the patient herself--one would
hardly believe she was a Betan."

"She isn't," Kennon said.

"So?" Blond eyebrows rose in inverted U's of surprise. "But that's
hardly possible. Our tests indicate-"

"Don't you think that this is a matter for Dr. Brainard?" Kennon said
icily. "Protocol--"

"Of course. Stupid of me--but the case is so interesting. Half the
center staff have seen her already. I wasn't proposing to discuss the
case. It wouldn't be proper. Even though you are only a veterinarian."

"Only?" Kennon's voice was hard. "I shouldn't have to remind you of
this, Mr. Smalley--but I have been for the past two years on a world of
bad manners. I expected better here at home."

Smalley flushed to the roots of his straw-colored hair. "Sorry, Doctor,"
he muttered. "I don't know what's the matter with me."

"I can tell you," Kennon said. "You've just graduated."

"How did you know?" Smalley said.

"I was a graduate once, myself--not too long ago."

"How long, sir?"

"Class of Eighty-seven."

"That's twelve years ago," Smalley said.

Kennon nodded. Ten years lost. Not bad--not bad at all. But Alexander
could have done a lot in ten years.

"I meant no disrespect," Smalley said worriedly.

"I know it. But if you intend to practice on Beta, you'd better
polish your professional manner. Now where I was, it didn't make much
difference. Laymen often called me 'Doc.'"

Smalley was properly shocked. "I hope you didn't encourage them, sir."

"It was impossible to discourage them," Kennon said. "After all, when
the man who hires you--"

"Oh--entrepreneurs," Smalley said in a tone that explained everything.

* * *

The car stopped in front of the Medical Center's staff entrance. "This
way, sir," Smalley said. He led the way down a green-tiled corridor
to an elevator--then down another corridor past a pair of soft-footed
nurses who eyed them curiously--looking at Kennon's tunic and sandals
with mild disapproval in their eyes. Smalley stopped and knocked softly
on a closed door.

"Enter," said a pleasant baritone voice from the annunciator.

"Dr. Brainard--Dr. Kennon," Smalley said.

Kennon liked the man instantly. A plump, pink-cheeked man of middle
age, with prematurely white hair, Dr. Will Brainard combined a fatherly
appearance with an impression of quick intelligence. The fat that
sheathed his stocky body had obviously not touched his mind. Brainard
rose from the deep chair near the window where he had been sitting,
knocked the ashes from his pipe, and bowed stiffly. His eyes--sharp
points of blue in the smooth pinkness of his face--surveyed Kennon
curiously.

"So you're the young man who takes untrained pregnant women for rides in
old-fashioned spacers," he said. "Didn't you know what would happen?"

"I was in a hurry, Doctor," Kennon said.

"Obviously. Now tell me about it." Brainard looked at the eager-faced
interne standing behind Kennon. "That will be all, Smalley," he said.

Kennon waited until the door closed. "Ordinarily," he said, "I'd never
have done a thing like that, but there were some very pressing reasons.
However, I should have given her an injection of Somnol before we
started. I'm criminally liable. If anything happens to her--" His voice
was tight with worry.

"You'd give her an injection?" Brainard said. "I hope you didn't mean
that."

"But I did, sir. I've given thousands of Lani injections."

"What's a Lani?"

"She is, sir. The impression has been that her race isn't human."

"Nonsense--it's obvious she is."

"A Brotherhood Court of Inquiry didn't think so."

"Hmm. Is that so?"

"Yes, sir.--But before I go on, tell me, how is she?"

"Oh, she'll be fine. A little mental therapy and plenty of rest are all
she needs. She's a remarkably healthy young woman. But this is beside
the point. There are a number of unusual features about this case that
need investigation." Brainard took a standard hospital form from his
desk. "Mind if I ask you some questions, Doctor?"

"Not at all but you are due for some unpleasant shocks as you go through
that form."

"I believe I can survive them," Brainard said dryly.

"This is professional confidence--" Kennon began.

"Of course, of course," Brainard said impatiently. "Now let's get on
with it."

* * *

"This is the most amazing tale I've ever heard," Brainard said slowly.
"Are you certain you are telling the truth?"

Kennon grinned. "I don't blame you for not believing me--but the
evidence is conclusive, and there is enough documentary evidence in
the space ship--and in the fact of the ship itself to prove what I am
saying. Laboratory tests here will establish the fact that Copper's
child is also mine. And as for Flora, a Brotherhood Investigation Team
can prove that part."

"That will be attended to," Brainard said grimly.

"But how did you deduce she wasn't from a Betan colony?" Kennon asked.

Brainard smiled. "That wasn't hard. Her sun tan and the condition of her
feet proved she was a practicing nudist. No Betan girl ever practices
nudism to my knowledge. Besides, the I.D. tattoo under her left arm and
the V on her hip are no marks of our culture. Then there was another
thing--the serological analysis revealed no gerontal antibodies. She
had never received an injection of longevity compound in her life. This
might occur, but it's highly improbable. The evidence indicates that
she's extra-Betan."

Kennon nodded.

"But this business of her being fifteen years old! That's impossible.
She has the development of a woman of twenty-five."

"Remember the Alpha V colony?" Kennon said.




"Of course--oh--I see! It could be something like that.
Certainly--strong yellow G-type sun--an isolated colony serviced at
twenty-year intervals--there was a marked physical precocity."

"And if this had been continued for several millennia?" Kennon asked.

"Hmm--I see. Yes, it's possible. On Alpha V the colonists grew from
infancy to maturity in fifteen years."

"And wasn't Heaven one of our early colonies?"

"Yes--it was established after the Great Schism near the end of the
First Millennium--when science and religion split irrevocably on this
world. We packed the whole lot of them off to a world of their own where
they could develop as they pleased. They called it Heaven--odd name for
a fogworld--but there's no accounting for tastes." Brainard chuckled.

"I thought that was the case, but I couldn't remember. My ancient
history is pretty weak."

"You should read more," Brainard said. "But as I see it--this girl is of
Betan ancestry providing your theory and the facts coincide."

"Which could also explain why an outworld species of agerone would be
toxic. They tried to prolong Lani life and met with failure. Our plants
are mutant forms."

"Just as we are a mutant race," Brainard said, "or partly mutant." He
sighed. "You have brought us a great deal of trouble, Kennon. You are
bringing matters to a head. If our investigations prove your statements,
we are morally bound to open the Lani question. And if those people are
of Betan origin--that fellow Alexander will have plenty to answer for."

"I don't believe it is really his fault," Kennon said slowly. "I don't
think he has ever known the truth."

"Why didn't you tell him?"

"The answer to that should be obvious. Even though I trusted him
completely, I could never be sure. He has a Free Trader background
and those people can't he trusted where money's concerned. The whole
Kardonian culture is an outgrowth of Free Traderism: small business,
independent corporation, linear trusts, and all the cutthroat
competition such a culture would naturally have. It's a regular jungle
of Free Enterprise. I couldn't predict how he would react. He could
either act in a moral manner and make restitution, or he could quietly
cut our throats and go on with his business."

"I see. The temptation to cut a throat might be overwhelming."

"They fight commercial wars," Kennon said.

"Disgusting--utterly uncivilized! Under the circumstances you had no
other course. Still, they have no moral right to enslave human beings."

"There is always the element of doubt. Maybe they didn't know. After
all, an impartial court declared the Lani alien--and the Betan mutation
isn't known throughout the Brotherhood."

"One doesn't go around broadcasting data on the variations of one's germ
plasm," Brainard said. "That's a private affair--a matter of personal
privacy."

"And public safety?"
