before one are as dangerous as so many snakes. But as we circled round
in our battling I noted that all of Phorenice's quarry lay peaceful
and still. By the Gods! but she could play a fine sword, this dainty
Empress. She touched life with every thrust.

Yes, it was plain to see, now an example was given, that the throne of
Atlantis had been won, not by a lovely face and a subtle tongue alone;
and (as a fighter myself) I did not like Phorenice the less for the
knowledge. I could but see her out of the corner of my eye, and that
only now and again, for the fishers, despite their ill-knowledge of
fence, and the clumsiness of their weapons, had heavy numbers, and most
savage ferocity; and as they made so confident of being able to pull
us down, it required more than a little hard battling to keep them from
doing it. Ay, by the Gods! it was at times a fight my heart warmed to,
and if I had not contrived to pluck a shield from one fool who came too
vain-gloriously near me with one, I could not swear they would not have
dragged me down by sheer ravening savageness.

And always above the burly uproar of the fight came very pleasantly to
my ears Phorenice's cry of "Deucalion!" which she chose as her battle
shout. I knew her, of course, to be a past-mistress of the art of
compliment, and it was no new thing for me to hear the name roared out
above a battle din, but it was given there under circumstances which
were peculiar, and for the life of me I could not help being tickled by
the flattery.

Condemn my weakness how you will, but I came very near then to liking
the Empress of Atlantis in the way she wished. And as for that other
woman who should have filled my mind, I will confess that the stress of
the moment, and the fury of the engagement, had driven both her and her
strait completely out beyond the marches of my memory. Of such frail
stuff are we made, even those of us who esteem ourselves the strongest.

Now it is a temptation few men born to the sword can resist, to throw
themselves heart and soul into a fight for a fight's sake, and it seems
that women can be bitten with the same fierce infection. The attack
slackened and halted. We stood in the middle of a ring of twisted dead,
and the rest of the fishers and their women who hemmed us in shrank back
out of reach of our weapons.

It was the moment for a truce, and the moment when a few strong words
would have sent them back cowering to their huts, and given us free
passage to go where we chose. But no, this Phorenice must needs sing a
hymn to her sword and mine, gloating over our feats and invulnerability;
and then she must needs ask payment for the bearers of her litter whom
they had killed, and then speak balefully of the burnings, and the
skinnings, and the sawings asunder with which this fishers' quarter
would be treated in the near future, till they learned the virtues of
deportment and genteel manners.

"It makes your backs creep, does it?" said Phorenice. "I do not wonder.
This severity must have its unpleasant side. But why do you not put it
beyond my power to give the order? Either you must think yourselves Gods
or me no Goddess, or you would not have gone on so far. Come now, you
nasty-smelling people, follow out your theory, and if you make a good
fight of it, I swear by my face I will be lenient with those who do not
fall."

But there was no pressing up to meet our swords. They still ringed us
in, savage and sullen, beyond the ring of their own dead, and would
neither run back to the houses, nor give us the game of further fight.
There was a certain stubborn bravery about them that one could not but
admire, and for myself I determined that next time it became my duty
to raise troops, I would catch a handful of these men, and teach them
handiness with the utensils of war, and train them to loyalty and
faithfulness. But presently from behind their ranks a stone flew, and
though it whizzed between the Empress and myself, and struck down a
fisher, it showed that they had brought a new method into their attack,
and it behoved us to take thought and meet it.

I looked round me up and down the beach. There was no sign of a rescue.
"Phorenice," I said in the court tongue, which these barbarous fishers
would know little enough of, "I take it that a whiff of the sea-breeze
would come very pleasant after all this warm play. As you can show such
pretty sword work, will you cut me a way down to the beach, and I will
do my poor best to keep these creatures from snapping at our heels?"

"Oh!" cried she. "Then I am to have a courtier for a husband after all.
Why have you kept back your flattering speeches till now? Is that your
trick to make me love you?"

"I will think out the reason for it another time."

"Ah, these stern, commanding husbands," said she, "how they do press
upon their little wives!" and with that leaped over the ring of dead
before her, and cut and stabbed a way through those that stood between
her and the waters which creamed and crashed upon the beach. Gods!
what a charge she made. It made me tingle with admiration as I followed
sideways behind her, guarding the rear. And I am a man that has spent so
many years in battling, that it takes something far out of the common to
move me to any enthusiasm in this matter.

There were two boats creaking and washing about in the edge of the surf,
but in one, happily, the wicker-work which made its frame was crushed
by the weight of the waves into a shapeless bundle of sticks, and would
take half a day to replace. So that, let us but get the other craft
afloat, and we should be free from further embroiling. But the fishers
were quick to see the object of this new manoeuvre. "Guard the boat,"
they shouted. "Smash her; slit her skin with your knives! Tear her with
your fingers! Swim her out to sea! Oh, at least take the paddles!"

But, if these clumsy fishers could run, Phorenice was like a legged
snake for speed. She was down beside the boat before any could reach
it, laughing and shouting out that she could beat them at every point.
Myself, I was slower of foot; and, besides, there was some that offered
me a fight on the road, and I was not wishful to baulk them; and
moreover, the fewer we left clamouring behind, the fewer there would be
to speed our going with their stones. Still I came to the beach in good
order, and laid hands on the flimsy boat and tipped her dry.

"Fighting is no trade for, me," I cried, "whilst you are here,
Phorenice. Guard me my back and walk out into the water."

I took the boat, thrusting it afloat, and wading with it till two lines
of the surf were past. The fishers swarmed round us, active as fish in
their native element, and strove mightily to get hands on the boat and
slit the hides which covered it with their eager fingers. But I had a
spare hand, and a short stabbing-knife for such close-quarter work, and
here, there, and everywhere was Phorenice the Empress, with her thirsty
dripping sword. By the Gods! I laughed with sheer delight at seeing her
art of fence.

But the swirl of a great fish into the shallows, and the squeal of
a fisher as he was dragged down and home away into the deep, made me
mindful of foes that no skill can conquer, and no bravery avoid. Without
taking time to give the Empress a word of warning, I stooped, and flung
an arm round her, and threw her up out of the water into the boat, and
then thrust on with all my might, driving the flimsy craft out to
sea, whilst my legs crept under me for fear of the beasts which swam
invisible beneath the muddied waters.

To the fishers, inured to these horrid perils by daily association,
the seizing of one of their number meant little, and they pressed on,
careless of their dull lives, eager only to snatch the jewels which
still flaunted on Phorenice's breast. Of the vengeance that might come
after they recked nothing; let them but get the wherewithal for one
night's good debauch, and they would forget that such a thing as the
morning of a morrow could have existence.

Two fellows I caught and killed that, diving down beneath, tried to slit
the skin of the boat out of sight under the water; and Phorenice cared
for all those that tried to put a hand on the gunwales. Yes, and she did
more than that. A huge long-necked turtle that was stirred out of the
mud by the turmoil, came up to daylight, and swung its great horn-lipped
mouth to this side and that, seeking for a prey. The fishers near it
dodged and dived. I, thrusting at the stern of the boat, could only hope
it would pass me by and so offered an easy mark. It scurried towards
me, champing its noisy lips, and beating the water into spray with its
flippers.

But Phorenice was quick with a remedy and a rescue. She passed her sword
through one of the fishers that pressed her, and then thrust the body
towards the turtle. The great neck swooped towards it; the long slimy
feelers which protruded from its head quivered and snuffled; and then
the horny green jaws crunched on it, and drew it down out of sight.

The boat was in deep water now, and Phorenice called upon me to come in
over the side, she the while balancing nicely so that the flimsy thing
should not be overset. The fishers had given up their pursuit, finding
that they earned nothing but lopped-off arms and split faces by coming
within swing of this terrible sword of their Empress, and so contented
themselves with volleying jagged stones in the hopes of stunning us or
splitting the boat. However, Phorenice crouched in the stern, holding
the two shields--her own golden target, and the rough hide buckler I
had won--and so protected both of us whilst I paddled, and though many
stones clattered against the shields, and hit the hide covering of the
boat, so that it resounded like a drum, none of them did damage, and we
drew quickly out of their range.




12. THE DRUG OF OUR LADY THE MOON


Our Lord the Sun was riding towards the end of His day, and the smoke
from a burning mountain fanned black and forbidding before His face.
Phorenice wrung the water from her clothes and shivered. "Work hard with
those paddles, Deucalion, and take me in through the water-gate and let
me be restored to my comforts again. That merchant would rue if he saw
how his pretty garments were spoiled, and I rue, too, being a woman,
and remembering that he at least has no others I can take in place of
these." She looked at me sidelong, tossing back the short red hair from
her eyes. "What think you of my wisdom in coming where we have come
without an escort?"

"The Empress can do no wrong," I quoted the old formula with a smile.

"At least I have shown you that I can fight. I caught you looking your
approval of me quite pleasantly once or twice. You were a difficult man
to thaw, Deucalion, but you warm perceptibly as you keep on being near
me. La, sir, we shall be a pair of rustic sweethearts yet, if this
goes on. I am glad I thought of the device of going near those smelly
fishers."

So she had taken me out in the litter unattended for the plain purpose
of inviting a fight, and showing me her skill at arms, and perhaps, too,
of seeing in person how I also carried myself in a moment of stress.
Well, if we were to live on together as husband and wife, it was good
that each should know to a nicety the other's powers; and also, I am too
much of an old battler and too much enamoured with the glorious handling
of arms to quarrel very deeply with any one who offers me a tough
upstanding fight. Still for the life of me, I could not help comparing
Phorenice with another woman. With a similar chance open before us, Nais
had robbed me of the struggle through a sheer pity for those squalid
rebels who did not even call her chieftain; whilst here was this Empress
frittering away two score of the hardiest of her subjects merely to
gratify a whim.

Yet, loyal to my vow as a priest, and to the commands set upon me by the
high council on the Sacred Mountain, I tried to put away these wayward
thoughts and comparisons. As I rowed over the swingings of the waves
towards the forts which guard the harbour's mouth, I sent prayers to the
High Gods to give my tongue dexterity, and They through Their love for
the country of Atlantis, and the harassed people, whom it was my deep
wish to serve, granted me that power of speech which Phorenice loved.
Her eyes glowed upon me as I talked.

This beach of the fishers where we had had our passage at arms is safe
from ship attack from without, by reason of a chain of jagged rocks
which spring up from the deep, and run from the harbour side to the end
of the city wall. The fishers know the passes, and can oftentimes get
through to the open water beyond without touching a stone; or if they
do see a danger of hitting on the reef, leap out and carry their light
boats in their hands till the water floats them again. But here I had
neither the knowledge nor the dexterity, and, thought I, now the High
Gods will show finally if They wish this woman who has defiled them to
reign on in Atlantis, and if also They wish me to serve as her husband.

I cried these things in my heart, and waited to receive the omen. There
was no half-answer. A great wave rose in the lagoon behind us, a wave
such as could have only been caused by an earth tremor, and on its sleek
back we were hurled forward and thrown clear of the reefs with their
seaweeds licking round us, without so much as seeing a stone of the
barrier. I bowed my head as I rowed on towards the harbour forts. It was
plain that not yet would the High Gods take vengeance for the insults
which this lovely woman had offered Them.

The sentries in the two forts beat drums at one another in their
accustomed rotation, and in the growing dusk were going to pay little
enough attention to the fishingboat which lay against the great chain
clamouring to have it lowered. But luckily a pair of officers were
taking the air of the evening in a stone-dropping turret of the roof
of the nearer fort, and these recognised the tone of our shouts. They
silenced the drums, torches were lowered to make sure of our faces, and
then with a splash the great chain was dropped into the water to give us
passage.

A galley lay inside, nuzzling the harbour wall, and presently the ladder
of ropes was let down from the top of the nearest fort, and a crew came
down to man the oars. There were the customary changes of raiment too,
given as presents by the officers of the fort, and these we put on in
the cabin of the galley in place of the sodden clothes we wore. There
are fevers to be gained by carrying wet clothes after sunset, and though
from personal experience I have learned that these may be warded off
with drugs, I noticed with some grim amusement that the Empress had
sufficiently little of the Goddess about her to fear very much the
ailments which are due to frail humanity.

The galley rowed swiftly across the calm waters of the harbour, and made
fast to the rings of gold on the royal quay, and whilst we were waiting
for litters to be brought, I watched a lantern lit in the boat
which stood guard over Phorenice's mammoth. The huge red beast stood
shoulder-deep in the harbour water, with trunk up-turned. It was tamed
now, and the light of the boat's lantern fell on the little ripples sent
out by its tremblings. But I did not choose to intercede or ask
mercy for it. If the mammoth sank deeper in the harbour mud, and was
swallowed, I could have borne the loss with equanimity.

To tell the truth, that ride on the great beast's back had impressed me
unfavourably. In fact, it put into me a sense of helplessness that
was wellnigh intolerable. Perhaps circumstances have made me unduly
self-reliant: on that others must judge. But I will own to having a
preference for walking on my own proper feet, as the Gods in fashioning
our shapes most certainly intended. On my own feet I am able to guard my
own head and neck, and have done on four continents, throughout a long
and active life, and on many a thousand occasions. But on the back of
that detestable mammoth, pah! I grew as nervous as a child or a dastard.

However, I had little enough leisure for personal megrims just then.
Whilst we waited, Phorenice asked the port-captain (who must needs come
up officiously to make his salutations) after the disposal of Nais,
and was told that she had been clapped into a dungeon beneath the royal
pyramid, and the officer of the guard there had given his bond for her
safe-keeping.

"It is to be hoped he understands his work," said the Empress. "That
pretty Nais knows the pyramid better than most, and it may be he will
be sent to the tormentors for putting her in a cell which had a secret
outlet. You would feel pleasure if the girl escaped, Deucalion?"

"Assuredly," said I, knowing how useless it would be to make a secret of
the matter. "I have no enmity against Nais."

"But I have," said she viciously, "and I am still minded to lock your
faith to me by that wedding gift you know of."

"The thing shall be done," I said. "Before all, the Empress of
Atlantis."

"Poof! Deucalion, you are too stiff and formal. You ought to be mightily
honoured that I condescend to be jealous of your favours. Your hand,
sir, please, to help me into the litter. And now come in beside me,
and keep me warm against the night air. Ho! you guards there with the
torches! Keep farther back against the street walls. The perfume you are
burning stifles me."

Again there was a feast that night in the royal banqueting-hall; again I
sat beside Phorenice on the raised dais which stands beneath the symbols
of the snake and the out-stretched hand. What had been taken for granted
before about our forthcoming relationship was this time proclaimed
openly; the Empress herself acknowledged me as her husband that was to
be; and all that curled and jewelled throng of courtiers hailed me as
greater than themselves, by reason of this woman's choice. There was
method, too, in their salutation. Some rumour must have got about of my
preference for the older and simpler habits, and there was no drinking
wine to my health after the new and (as I considered) impertinent
manner. Decorously, each lord and lady there came forward, and each in
turn spilt a goblet at my feet; and when I called any up, whether man
or woman, to receive tit-bits from my platter, it was eaten simply and
thankfully, and not kissed or pocketed with any extravagant gesture.

The flaring jets of earth-breath showed me, too, so I thought, a plainer
habit of dress, and a more sober mien amongst this thoughtless mob
of banqueters. And, indeed, it must have been plain to notice, for
Phorenice, leaning over till the ruddy curls on her shoulder brushed
my face, chided me in a playful whisper as having usurped her high
authority already.

"Oh, sir," she pleaded mockingly, "do not make your rule over us too
ascetic. I have given no orders for this change, but to-night there are
no perfumes in the air; the food is so plain and I have half a mind to
