they started out, Hananas leading the way. Within minutes they were all
moving, a single file that vanished into the darkness.

Jason's litter had to be left behind, it would have been smashed to
pieces in the night march. Rhes pulled him up into the saddle before
him, locking his body into place with a steel-hard arm. The trek
continued.

When they left the swamp they changed directions sharply. A little later
Jason knew why, when the southern sky exploded. Flames lit the scene
brightly, ashes sifted down and hot lumps of rock crashed into the
trees. They steamed when they hit, and if it hadn't been for the earlier
rain they would have been faced with a forest fire as well.

Something large loomed up next to the line of march, and when they
crossed an open space Jason looked at it in the reflected light from the
sky.

"Rhes--" he choked, pointing. Rhes looked at the great beast moving next
to them, shaggy body and twisted horns as high as their shoulders, then
looked away. He wasn't frightened or apparently interested. Jason looked
around then and began to understand.

All of the fleeing animals made no sound, that's why he hadn't noticed
them before. But on both sides dark forms ran between the trees. Some he
recognized, most of them he didn't. For a few minutes a pack of wild
dogs ran near them, even mingling with the domesticated dogs. No notice
was taken. Flying things flapped overhead. Under the greater threat of
the volcanoes all other battles were forgotten. Life respected life. A
herd of fat, piglike beasts with curling tusks, blundered through the
line. The doryms slowed, picking their steps carefully so they wouldn't
step on them. Smaller animals sometimes clung to the backs of the bigger
ones, riding untouched a while, before they leaped off.

Pounded mercilessly by the saddle, Jason fell wearily into a light
sleep. It was shot through with dreams of the rushing animals, hurrying
on forever in silence. With his eyes open or shut he saw the same
endless stream of beasts.

It all meant something, and he frowned as he tried to think what.
Animals running, Pyrran animals.

He sat bolt upright suddenly, wide awake, staring down in comprehension.

"What is it?" Rhes asked.

"Go on," Jason said. "Get us out of this, and get us out safely. I told
you the lifeboat wasn't the only answer. I know how your people can get
what they want--end the war now. There _is_ a way, and I know how it can
be done."




XXV.


There were few coherent memories of the ride. Some things stood out
sharply like the spaceship-sized lump of burning scoria that had plunged
into a lake near them, showering the line with hot drops of water. But
mostly it was just a seemingly endless ride, with Jason still too weak
to care much about it. By dawn the danger area was behind them and the
march had slowed to a walk. The animals had vanished as the quake was
left behind, going their own ways, still in silent armistice.

The peace of mutually shared danger was over, Jason found that out when
they stopped to rest and eat. He and Rhes went to sit on the soft grass,
near a fallen tree. A wild dog had arrived there first. It lay under the
log, muscles tensed, the ruddy morning light striking a red glint from
its eyes. Rhes faced it, not three meters away, without moving a muscle.
He made no attempt to reach one of his weapons or to call for help.
Jason stood still as well, hoping the Pyrran knew what he was doing.

With no warning at all the dog sprang straight at them. Jason fell
backwards as Rhes pushed him aside. The Pyrran dropped at the same
time--only now his hand held the long knife, yanked from the sheath
strapped to his thigh. With unseen speed the knife came up, the dog
twisted in midair, trying to bite it. Instead it sank in behind the
dog's forelegs, the beast's own weight tearing a deadly gaping wound the
length of its body. It was still alive when it hit the ground, but Rhes
was astraddle it, pulling back the bony-plated head to cut the soft
throat underneath.

The Pyrran carefully cleaned his knife on the dead animal's fur, then
returned it to the sheath. "They're usually no trouble," he said
quietly, "but it was excited. Probably lost the rest of the pack in the
quake." His actions were the direct opposite of the city Pyrrans. He had
not looked for trouble nor started the fight. Instead he had avoided it
as long as he could. But when the beast charged it had been neatly and
efficiently dispatched. Now, instead of gloating over his victory, he
seemed troubled over an unnecessary death.

It made sense. Everything on Pyrrus made sense. Now he knew how the
deadly planetary battle had started--and he knew how it could be ended.
All the deaths had _not_ been in vain. Each one had helped him along the
road a little more towards the final destination. There was just one
final thing to be done.

Rhes was watching him now, and he knew they shared the same thoughts.
"Explain yourself," Rhes said. "What did you mean when you said we could
wipe out the junkmen and get our freedom?"

Jason didn't bother to correct the misquote, it was best they consider
him a hundred per cent on their side.

"Get the others together and I'll tell you. I particularly want to see
Naxa and any other talkers who are here."

       *       *       *       *       *

They gathered quickly when the word was passed. All of them knew that
the junkman had been killed to save this off-worlder, that their hope of
salvation lay with him. Jason looked at the crowd of faces turned
towards him and reached for the right words to tell them what had to be
done. It didn't help to know that many of them would be killed doing it.

"The small star ship can't be used," he said. "You all saw that it was
ruined beyond repair. But that was the easy way out. The hard way is
still left. Though some of you may die, in the long run it will be the
best solution.

"We are going to invade the city, break through the perimeter. I know
how it can be done ..."

[Illustration]

A mutter of sound spread across the crowd. Some of them looked excited,
happy with the thought of killing their hereditary enemies. Others
stared at Jason as if he were mad. A few were dazed at the magnitude of
the thought, this carrying of the battle to the stronghold of the
heavily armed enemy. They quieted when Jason raised his hand.

"I know it sounds impossible," he said. "But let me explain. Something
must be done--and now is the time to do it. The situation can only get
worse from now on. The city Pyrr ... the junkmen can get along without
your food, their concentrates taste awful but they sustain life. But
they are going to turn against you in every way they can. No more metals
for your tools or replacements for your electronic equipment. Their
hatred will probably make them seek out your farms and destroy them from
the ship. All of this won't be comfortable--and there will be worse to
come. In the city they are losing their war against this planet. Each
year there are less of them, and some day they will all be dead. Knowing
how they feel I am sure they will destroy their ship first, and the
entire planet as well, if that is possible."

"How can we stop them?" someone called out.

"By hitting _now_," Jason answered. "I know all the details of the city
and I know how the defenses are set up. Their perimeter is designed to
protect them from animal life, but we could break through it if we were
really determined."

"What good would that do?" Rhes snapped. "We crack the perimeter and
they draw back--then counter-attack in force. How can we stand against
their weapons?"

"We won't have to. Their spaceport touches the perimeter, and I know the
exact spot where the ship stands. That is the place where we will break
through. There is no formal guard on the ship and only a few people in
the area. We will capture the ship. Whether we can fly it or not is
unimportant. Who controls the ship controls Pyrrus. Once there we
threaten to destroy it if they don't meet our terms. They have the
choice of mass suicide or co-operation. I hope they have the brains to
co-operate."

His words shocked them into silence for an instant, then they surged
into a wave of sound. There was no agreement, just excitement, and Rhes
finally brought them to order.

"Quiet!" he shouted. "Wait until Jason finishes before you decide. We
still haven't heard how this proposed invasion is to be accomplished."

"The plan I have depends on the talkers." Jason said. "Is Naxa there?"
He waited until the fur-wrapped man had pushed to the front. "I want to
know more about the talkers, Naxa. I know you can speak to doryms and
the dogs here--but what about the wild animals? Can you make them do
what you want?"

"They're animals ... course we can talk t'them. Th'more talkers, th'more
power. Make 'em do just what we want."

"Then the attack will work," Jason said excitedly. "Could you get your
talkers all on one side of the city--the opposite side from the
spaceport--and stir the animals up? Make them attack the perimeter?"

"Could we!" Naxa shouted, carried away by the idea. "We'd bring in
animals from all over, start th'biggest attack they ev'r saw!"

"Then that's it. Your talkers will launch the attack on the far side of
the perimeter. If you keep out of sight, the guards will have no idea
that it is anything more than an animal attack. I've seen how they work.
As an attack mounts they call for reserves inside the city and drain men
away from the other parts of the perimeter. At the height of the battle,
when they have all their forces committed across the city, I'll lead the
attack that will break through and capture the ship. That's the plan and
it's going to work."

Jason sat down then, half fell down, drained of strength. He lay and
listened as the debate went back and forth, Rhes ordering it and keeping
it going. Difficulties were raised and eliminated. No one could find a
basic fault with the plan. There were plenty of flaws in it, things that
might go wrong, but Jason didn't mention them. These people wanted his
idea to work and they were going to make it work.

It finally broke up and they moved away. Rhes came over to Jason.

"The basics are settled," he said. "All here are in agreement. They are
spreading the word by messenger to all the talkers. The talkers are the
heart of the attack, and the more we have, the better it will go off. We
don't dare use the screens to call them, there is a good chance that the
junkmen can intercept our messages. It will take five days before we are
ready to go ahead."

"I'll need all of that time if I'm to be any good," Jason said. "Now
let's get some rest."




XXVI.


"It's a strange feeling," Jason said. "I've never really seen the
perimeter from this side before. Ugly is about the only word for it."

He lay on his stomach next to Rhes, looking through a screen of leaves,
downhill towards the perimeter. They were both wrapped in heavy furs, in
spite of the midday heat, with thick leggings and leather gauntlets to
protect their hands. The gravity and the heat were already making Jason
dizzy, but he forced himself to ignore this.

Ahead, on the far side of a burnt corridor, stood the perimeter. A high
wall, of varying height and texture, seemingly made of everything in the
world. It was impossible to tell what it had originally been constructed
of. Generations of attackers had bruised, broken, and undermined it.
Repairs had been quickly made, patches thrust roughly into place and
fixed there. Crude masonry crumbled and gave way to a rat's nest of
woven timbers. This overlapped a length of pitted metal, large plates
riveted together. Even this metal had been eaten through and bursting
sandbags spilled out of a jagged hole. Over the surface of the wall
detector wires and charged cables looped and hung. At odd intervals
automatic flame-throwers thrust their nozzles over the wall above and
swept the base of the wall clear of any life that might have come close.

"Those flame things can cause us trouble," Rhes said. "That one covers
the area where you want to break in."

"It'll be no problem," Jason assured him. "It may look like it is firing
a random pattern, but it's really not. It varies a simple sweep just
enough to fool an animal, but was never meant to keep men out. Look for
yourself. It fires at regularly repeated two, four, three and one minute
intervals."

They crawled back to the hollow where Naxa and the others waited for
them. There were only thirty men in the party. What they had to do could
only be done with a fast, light force. Their strongest weapon was
surprise. Once that was gone their other weapons wouldn't hold out for
seconds against the city guns. Everyone looked uncomfortable in the fur
and leather wrappings, and some of the men had loosened them to cool
off.

"Wrap up," Jason ordered. "None of you have been this close to the
perimeter before and you don't understand how deadly it is here. Naxa is
keeping the larger animals away and you all can handle the smaller
ones. That isn't the danger. Every thorn is poisoned, and even the
blades of grass carry a deadly sting. Watch out for insects of any kind
and once we start moving breathe only through the wet cloths."

"He's right," Naxa snorted. "N'ver been closer'n this m'self. Death,
death up by that wall. Do like 'e says."

       *       *       *       *       *

They could only wait then, honing down already needle-sharp crossbow
bolts, and glancing up at the slowly moving sun. Only Naxa didn't share
the unrest. He sat, eyes unfocused, feeling the movement of animal life
in the jungle around them.

"On the way," he said. "Biggest thing I 'ver heard. Not a beast 'tween
here and the mountains, ain't howlin' 'is lungs out, runnin' towards the
city."

Jason was aware of part of it. A tension in the air and a wave of
intensified anger and hatred. It would work, he knew, if they could only
keep the attack confined to a small area. The talkers had seemed sure of
it. They had stalked out quietly that morning, a thin line of ragged
men, moving out in a mental sweep that would round up the Pyrran life
and send it charging against the city.

"They hit!" Naxa said suddenly.

The men were on their feet now, staring in the direction of the city.
Jason had felt the twist as the attack had been driven home, and knew
that this was it. There was the sound of shots and a heavy booming far
away. Thin streamers of smoke began to blow above the treetops.

"Let's get into position," Rhes said.

Around them the jungle howled with an echo of hatred. The half-sentient
plants writhed and the air was thick with small flying things. Naxa
sweated and mumbled as he turned back the animals that crashed towards
them. By the time they reached the last screen of foliage before the
burned-out area, they had lost four men. One had been stung by an
insect, Jason got the medikit to him in time, but he was so sick he had
to turn back. The other three were bitten or scratched and treatment
came too late. Their swollen, twisted bodies were left behind on the
trail.

"Dam' beasts hurt m'head," Naxa muttered. "When we go in?"

"Not yet," Rhes said. "We wait for the signal."

One of the men carried the radio. He sat it down carefully, then threw
the aerial over a branch. The set was shielded so no radiation leaked
out to give them away. It was turned on, but only a hiss of atmospheric
static came from the speaker.

"We could have timed it--" Rhes said.

"No we couldn't," Jason told him. "Not accurately. We want to hit that
wall at the height of the attack, when our chances are best. Even if
they hear the message it won't mean a thing to them inside. And a few
minutes later it won't matter."

The sound from the speaker changed. A voice spoke a short sentence, then
cut off.

"_Bring me three barrels of flour._"

"Let's go," Rhes urged as he started forward.

"Wait," Jason said, taking him by the arm. "I'm timing the
flame-thrower. It's due in ... _there_!" A blast of fire sprayed the
ground, then turned off. "We have four minutes to the next one--we hit
the long period!"

       *       *       *       *       *

They ran, stumbling in the soft ashes, tripping over charred bones and
rusted metal. Two men grabbed Jason under the arm and half-carried him
across the ground. It hadn't been planned that way, but it saved
precious seconds. They dropped him against the wall and he fumbled out
the bombs he had made. The charges from Krannon's gun, taken when he was
killed, had been hooked together with a firing circuit. All the moves
had been rehearsed carefully and they went smoothly now.

Jason had picked the metal wall as being the best spot to break in. It
offered the most resistance to the native life, so the chances were it
wouldn't be reinforced with sandbags or fill, the way other parts of the
wall were. If he was wrong, they were all dead.

The first men had slapped their wads of sticky congealed sap against the
wall. Jason pressed the charges into them and they stuck, a roughly
rectangular pattern as high as a man. While he did this the detonating
wire was run out to its length and the raiders pressed back against the
base of the wall. Jason stumbled through the ashes to the detonator,
fell on it and pressed the switch at the same time.
