
Simon had heard enough. If Charles's hired commanders would not command,
he would.

"Follow me, Thierry." Simon swung his horse around to ride toward the
rear of the column. His face was hot with anger.

Simon felt little sympathy for Charles; he had chosen these men. But
Simon de Gobignon, at least, was not going to let himself be set upon
and murdered by a crowd of commoners, even if those commoners had ample
justification. Nor was he going to allow French arms--if these
blackguards Charles d'Anjou had hired could be said to represent French
arms--to be disgraced. He had learned somewhat about leading fighting
men in the last year. He could do what was needful, since no one else
seemed about to.

He galloped past the files of mounted knights who crowded the road
beside the Tiber. Beyond them were the foot soldiers. If those
Burgundians who executed the Roman delegation were any example, the
men-at-arms might be more reliable than the knights. Simon searched the
column for the sort of men he needed.

He saw, just past the end of the line of mounted men, two score or more
of archers in blue tunics with longbows slung over their backs. He was
not experienced with the use of the longbow in battle, but what he had
heard about its long range suggested that it might be very useful just
now.

"Suivez-moi!" he shouted. The archers stared at him and drew themselves
up straighter, but looked puzzled. Of course, Simon thought. The longbow
was a weapon favored by the English. He beckoned with his hand, and the
Englishmen ran to him. Good.

"My lord, I speak un peu Francais," said one of them, whose crested
helmet marked him as a sergeant. "If you give your orders to me, very
slowly--"

"Good," said Simon, pleased with the man's readiness to cooperate. He
explained what he wanted.

"Suivez-moi," Simon called again to the longbowmen, and their sergeant
repeated, "Follow me," in English. He trotted off, keeping the dark
brown mare to a pace that would allow running men to follow him.

When they came to Charles and his three mutinous lieutenants, still
arguing, the Roman mob had advanced close enough for Simon to be able to
make out individuals. They were almost all men, as far as he could see,
with a shouting, fist-shaking woman here and there, and mostly dressed
in the plain browns and grays, whites and blacks, of common folk. Men
with swords and spears made up the forefront. A few men on horseback
with lances and banners rode on the flanks of the mob. Someone was
carrying a red and white banner, a design of keys and towers.

For a moment Simon hesitated. He did not want to kill these people.

But there was no way of stopping the Romans, and no one else was able or
willing to act. If he did nothing, Charles's army would be destroyed and
Simon would probably be killed along with everyone else.

He remembered something Roland, his true father, had told him many years
ago: _No one who wants to live through a battle can afford to feel sorry
for the men he is trying to kill. Make sure you kill them first, and
then you can mourn for them afterward._

Putting his sympathy for the Romans out of his mind, Simon began to give
orders to his archers. He deployed them in a line stretching from the
Tiber to a thick grove of trees to the east. Through their sergeant he
told them to shoot at the front and center of the oncoming Romans. He
noticed that the voices of Count Charles and his antagonists had fallen
silent.

_They are watching me_, he thought, and hoped no one would try to stop
him.

When the Englishmen had their arrows nocked and their bows drawn and
aimed, Simon shouted, "Tirez!"

They understood that well enough.

The arrows flew in flat curves across the narrowing distance between
Count Charles's army and the Roman citizens. Simon saw men falling and
others tripping over them.

"Encore!" Simon cried, but then looking back at his little troop of
archers saw to his surprise that the Englishmen had already loaded and
fired a second time. He had not known that the longbow could be fired
again and again so quickly, much more quickly than the crossbow. Screams
of panic and pain arose from the mob before him.

_I am killing poor people who are trying to defend their city._

A pang of shame swept through him, and he hesitated before giving the
next order. But he remembered Roland's advice. The longer it took to
drive these Romans back inside their gates, the more blood would be
shed, and the more likely that lives would be lost on his side.

"Fire into the midst of the crowd," he told the English sergeant.

The arrows arced high into the overcast sky and fell like dark streaks
of rain. The Romans were milling about, some trying to help the wounded,
some running away, some shouting orders or pleas, trying to control the
confusion.

Simon rode out in front of the bowmen.

"Advance and keep firing," he called to the sergeant. "Keep it up, keep
pushing them back."

He heard an arrow whistle past him. So the Romans also had some archers
among them. He was too excited to feel any fear.

The longbowmen marched out into the field, stopping at intervals to load
and fire, then advancing again. They hardly had to aim. Anywhere the
arrows fell in the mob, packed closer together in retreat, they would
wound or kill. Simon heard shouts and screams of terror from across the
field. The Romans were falling over one another, trying to get away.
None of the poor devils was wearing armor.

Where were the professional defenders of the city, Simon wondered.

The great crowd was falling back toward the city's gates. Like the
debris left by a wave receding from shore, bodies, dark clumps, lay
thick in the stubble of the harvested fields. Simon saw a man throw his
arms around the trunk of an olive tree and slowly slide to the ground.
He saw the red and white banner fall, then someone pick it up and run
with it. Three men lay draped over low stone walls, arms and legs
twitching.

The farmers' fields between Count Charles's army and the walls of Rome
were littered with the dead, the dying, and the struggling wounded.
Simon wanted to call back the archers. He felt as if he had loosed a
great rock from the top of a hill and it was rolling downward,
unstoppable, destroying everything in its path.

The Romans were running desperately, and the pity he had forced himself
not to feel while he was fighting them rose up to overwhelm him. His
heart lodged in his throat like a rock, and tears crept out of the
corners of his eyes.

_In God's name, what have I done?_

"Magnificent, Simon! You did admirably."

Charles d'Anjou had ridden up beside him and was grinning out at the
carnage in the fields of stubble. His dark eyes were alight with
pleasure. He struck Simon on his mailed back, one of those hard blows he
was fond of.

"What presence of mind! What initiative!" He lowered his voice. "You
could not have done better if we had planned it ahead of time. You saved
me a fortune in gold."

He spurred his black and white charger closer to Simon's mare and leaned
over to kiss him emphatically on the cheek, his stubble scratching
Simon's face.

"I don't understand," said Simon.

Charles drew back and looked at him with narrowed eyes. "You don't?
Well, you did the right thing. We'll talk about it later."

He turned and shouted at his three commanders. "You see, idiots! One
French knight with his head on his shoulders can do what all of you and
all your knights could not."

"We were not attempting to do anything," du Mont said sourly, pushing
his helmet back off his bowl-shaped hair.

"Those were the bowmen I brought from Lincoln you used, Monseigneur de
Gobignon," said FitzTrinian. "You did not have my permission."

In his present mood, Simon wished the pock-marked knight would make an
issue of it.

"Do not make yourself more ridiculous than you already are, Sire
Alistair," said Charles.

"We still have not settled this question of pay," said Dietrich of
Regensburg.

"Go pick the purses of those dead men out there," said Charles with a
scornful laugh.

Again Simon was sickened by Charles's manner. He had expected that the
count would punish his rebellious commanders. Hanging would be an
excellent idea. Flog them out of the army, at least. Instead, he
continued to argue with them, even banter with them, as if they were
all a pack of merchants in a money changer's shop.

To get away from the wretched business, Simon kicked his dark brown mare
into motion and, followed by Thierry, rode out toward the city. He
wished desperately that he were back in Perugia with Sophia.

He had seen enough killing in Orvieto, especially the night of the
attack on the Palazzo Monaldeschi, to harden him. Still, it made his
heart feel heavy as stone in his chest to see so many lives cut short.
And by his command.

What pain it must be to die. To have your life stopped, forever.

He recalled the arrow that had whizzed past him. He could easily have
been killed.

He rode toward the walls of Rome until they towered over him. The crowd
of citizens who had come out to stop Count Charles was gone--those able
to flee. There were only the dead and dying scattered in the stubble
field around him. Simon tried to avoid looking at the wounded. If it had
been one or two men, as it had been that day at Orvieto when de Verceuil
ordered the crossbowmen to fire into the crowd, he would have tried to
help them. But there were too many here.

His contingent of English archers marched past him on their way back to
the main army, their work done. They gave him a cheer, and he, in spite
of his heavy heart, did as a good leader should and smiled and waved.

"Good work, my friends! Well done."

He looked ahead again, and saw that the nearest gate, the one through
which most of the retreating citizens had run, hung open. He pulled his
horse to a stop.

_I am not going to be the first of these invaders to enter Rome. I have
no right to be here._

Five horsemen appeared suddenly in the gateway. More resistance?

These men were richly dressed, their scarlet capes billowing as they
rode toward him. Their hands were empty of weapons.

The rider in the lead was a man with a glossy black beard and a sharply
hooked nose. He reminded Simon a little of the Contessa di Monaldeschi.

"I am Duke Gaetano Orsini," said the bearded man. "These gentlemen
represent the families of Colonna, Frangipani, Papareschi, and Caetani.
We have come to greet Count Charles, and to welcome him to Rome." These
men, Simon thought, must come from some of the families whose fortified
towers loomed over the city.

Their sudden appearance made Simon angry. It was all happening backward.
They should have come out first and made peace with Count Charles, and
then there would have been no need for all this butchery.

Simon identified himself. "I will take you to Count Charles." The Roman
nobles doffed their velvet caps to Simon, and he touched the brim of his
helmet.

As their horses trotted across the field, Simon observed Orsini's gaze
traveling coldly over the bodies of the fallen Romans. Some of them,
still alive, called out to him pleadingly. He ignored them.

Simon could not resist saying, "If you had come out to welcome Count
Charles before these others did, much bloodshed might have been
prevented."

Orsini shrugged. "Necessary bloodshed. The mob that threatened Count
Charles was incited by the Ghibellino faction in Rome. They tried to get
the city militia to join them, but we held the professionals back.
Indeed, we have heard you killed one of the leaders of the popolo
minuto, the lower orders, Leone Pedulla. That was well done. His loss
will be a blessing to this city, as will the loss of these other
troublemakers."

Simon felt as disgusted with this man as he had with Charles's marshals.
Unable to keep order in their own city, the nobility of Rome approved
the slaughter of their people by foreign invaders. It was despicable.
Count Charles would have to deal with them, but he himself would speak
no more to these poltroons who called themselves gentlemen.

They rode in silence toward the advancing Angevin army of Count Charles.
The count's black and red lion banner fluttered over his steel coronet.
He was riding toward Rome again with his commanders behind him as if all
their differences were settled.

Charles and his leaders reined up before the new delegation from Rome.
The Count of Anjou greeted these representatives of the great families
of Rome with courtesy, dismounting and embracing Gaetano Orsini. He
assured each Roman nobleman, Simon interpreting, how happy he was to see
him.

"I believe it would be best if my men and I were to camp outside the
city walls for tonight," he said, looking down his large nose at Orsini.

"I was just about to suggest that," said Orsini. "The city is quite
crowded."

"Perhaps less crowded now." Charles laughed, with a nod at the fields
where wailing men and women were walking, trying to find their dead and
bear them away for burial. "At any rate, I will enter the city
tomorrow."

"All will be prepared for Your Signory. The loyal supporters of the
Parte Guelfo are eager to greet you. You will be made an honorary
patrician. There will be banners, cheering crowds, music. The militia
will parade for you. It will be a true Roman triumph." Orsini was all
smiles and flourishes.

Charles smiled. "A triumph. Yes, and I assume that a triumph will
include tribute?"

Orsini's smile faded. "Tribute?"

Charles nodded slowly. "To be exact, I will require three thousand
florins to be delivered to me tomorrow morning before I enter the city,
to compensate my men, whose pay is in arrears. I will have further
requirements, but I will not press you for all at once. Three thousand
florins will be enough for tomorrow."

Simon saw von Regensburg and FitzTrinian grinning at each other.

Orsini's mouth worked several times after Simon translated Charles's
demand for three thousand florins. "But, Your Signory, we welcome you as
our protector, not as one who comes to--to take from us."

Charles laughed and threw his arms wide. "Protectors cost money, my dear
Orsini. I am sure the great city of Rome can scrape together three
thousand florins by tomorrow. It will not be necessary for me to send my
army into the city to help you find the money, will it?"

"Not at all necessary, Your Signory," said Orsini, bowing, his face
flushed to the roots of his black beard.

These Guelfo nobles apparently had thought that the count of Anjou had
come to Rome purely out of some high-minded desire to serve the pope and
the Church, Simon thought. They were starting to learn what Simon
himself had gradually come to realize: that Count Charles did nothing
that did not first and foremost benefit himself.

As for himself, Simon's deepest wish was to get away from all this
slaughter and pillage and dishonor, and the sooner the better.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Rome is an old whore who lies down for every strong man who comes
along," said Count Charles. "All we needed was to show our resolution
when that mob came at us, and Rome fell over backward."

The two men sat across from each other at a small camp table in
Charles's tent, sharing wine and succulent roast pork killed and cooked
by Anjou's equerries. Simon stared into the flames of a six-branched
candlestick standing on Charles's armor chest at the side of the tent,
and thought that he would far rather be exploring the wonders of Rome he
had heard so much about--the Colosseum, the Lateran Palace, the Forum,
the catacombs.

Simon remembered his mother's warning of years ago: _Charles d'Anjou
uses people._ How often, with Charles, had he suspected, feared, that
she was right? But those boyhood years in Charles's household, Simon's
weapons training under Charles, his feeling that King Louis was a sort
of father to him and Count Charles a sort of uncle, all made him want to
trust Charles. But it was becoming impossible to do that, especially
since Avignon, when Charles asked him to betray the king's confidence.
Even now, though he wished they could get back on their old footing, he
found himself wondering whether that old footing had been an illusion.
Perhaps all along Charles had been kind to him only the better to use
him.

He was terribly afraid that he knew what Charles wanted to talk to him
about tonight. He had seen the sorry quality of Charles's army, and he
had been impelled, almost against his will, to take the lead when the
Roman mob was attacking. If Simon were in Charles's position, he knew
what he would want.

"You did just the right thing today, Simon," Charles said. "Those three
cutthroats would never have let themselves be overrun, nor would I. But
I hadn't paid them in a while, no fault of mine, and they saw that as an
excuse to try to extract a promise from me of an additional monthly five
florins per knight and increases for the common soldiers as well. They
thought the sight of that mob would force me to yield to them."

_So their refusal to act was a pretense_, Simon thought. But he began to
feel disgusted with himself. Of all of them, he was the only one who had
been duped.

Charles went on. "They were testing my courage. They did not know me
well. They know me better now. I would have stood my ground until they
were forced to turn and defend themselves. But you settled things by
taking those archers out into the field and driving the rabble off. And
a good thing you did, because the situation _was_ risky. They might have
waited too long to attack, and we might have lost lives unnecessarily.
It was a dangerous game they were playing."

_And a dangerous game you were playing_, Simon thought. He leaned
forward, resting his elbows on the table. Charles had used him, just as
Mother had warned, and he felt angry enough to speak frankly.

"It was mutiny. In my opinion you should have hanged those men. They are
little better than routiers. But all you did was haggle with them."

Sipping from his goblet, Charles lounged back on his cot and laughed.
"Ah, Simon, I forget sometimes that you have never been in a war. This
is the way it always is. Especially at the beginning. These men--du
Mont, FitzTrinian, von Regensburg, and their followers--are hirelings,
and when one goes shopping for an army, one buys, not the best there is,
but only the best that is on the market."

Simon wanted to lean back as Charles had done, but there was no back to
the stool he sat on. Charles's furnishings were as meager as everything
else about his army.

"I fear for you, uncle, I really do. Not only are your knights
undisciplined, but you are so few in number." He instantly regretted
saying that. It would give Charles an opening to ask him for help.

Charles smiled complacently. "And you think Manfred von Hohenstaufen,
with his host of Saracens and Sicilians, will march up here and chew me
up, is that it?"

"Well--perhaps."

Charles swirled his wine cup and drank from it. "A bigger army would
have cost me far more to ship and far more to pay, feed, and quarter
while I am here. I needed this much of an army to establish myself in
Rome. I do not need more until I actually make war on Manfred, and that
may be as much as a year from now. Tomorrow I will enter Rome in
triumph, and I will have myself declared chief senator of Rome.
Eventually Guy le Gros--Pope Clement, he is calling himself--will crown
me king of southern Italy and Sicily. As my renown spreads, fighting men
will come flocking from all over to join my cause. And they will have to
come in on my terms. Then I will be ready to march south."

The whole reason Charles had first sent Simon to Italy--to engineer the
conquest of the Saracens by Christians and Tartars--was that no longer
important to him? Charles had said nothing about the Tartars since Simon
arrived in Ostia last night.

"The new Holy Father has already proclaimed his approval of the Tartar
alliance," Simon ventured.

"Excellent," said Charles, nodding. He stood up and poured more wine for
himself and Simon.

Sitting down again on his camp bed, he went on. "Your guardianship of
the Tartars, too, has been superb, Simon. You proved that I judged
wisely in picking you for that task. I am delighted."

Feeling pleased with himself, Simon took a long drink of the heavy red
Roman wine. "Then, since the pope has publicly given his approval, shall
I escort the Tartars to your brother the king, so they can plan the
crusade?"

"The crusade?" Charles lay back on his cot, propped up on one elbow, and
stared into his wine cup and said nothing further.

"Would it not be safest to conduct them to the king at once?" Simon
pressed him. "Our enemies may still try to kill them, even though the
alliance is proclaimed."

Charles shook his head. "The last attempt to kill them was many months
ago."

True, Simon thought. The stalker in black seemed to have given up or
disappeared.

"Yes, but that Sienese attack on Orvieto--"

Charles interrupted. "De Verceuil got the Tartars out of Orvieto safely.
And that attack was aimed at the pope, not the Tartars. After all, who
has been trying to kill the Tartars, and why? Manfred's agents, because
they knew that if the pope approved the Tartar alliance, my brother
would then give me permission to march against Manfred."

Simon remembered King Louis saying he wanted to be ready to launch his
crusade by 1270, now only five years away.

"But preparations for a crusade take many years," Simon said. "Should
not the Tartars go to the king now, so they can begin to plan?"

"I do not think they should visit my brother just yet," said Charles.
"His mind so easily fills up with dreams of recapturing Jerusalem."
Simon caught a faint note of mockery in Charles's voice. "The presence
of the Tartars at his court might distract him from his more immediate
responsibilities."

"Then what will we do with the Tartars?" Simon asked, nettled.

"Let them remain with le Gros's court in Viterbo. It honors the pope to
have those strange men from the unknown East at his coronation. Then,
when he comes here to present me with the crown, let them come, too, as
my guests. Indeed, they can stay with me after that. They will be safer
with me than they would be anywhere else in Italy. And it might interest
them to see how Christians make war."

_They would be safer still in France._

He could have taken Sophia and the Tartars to France together, leaving
the Tartars safe and well guarded with King Louis, and then going on
with Sophia to Gobignon. And getting away from Charles and his war.

"How many more months will I have to stay in Viterbo guarding the
Tartars?" he said with some irritation.

Charles put down his wine goblet suddenly and stood up. He seemed to
fill the tent. The candles on the chest lit his face from below, casting
ghastly shadows over his olive complexion.

"Simon, I feel I can speak more frankly to you than I ever have. It is
nearly two years since I asked you to undertake the guarding of the
Tartars. The way you acted today showed me that you've learned a great
deal in that time. You have seen the world. You have seen combat. You
have learned to lead."

_He praises me because I was so quick to mow down a hundred or so
commoners_, thought Simon.

"Thank you, uncle," he said tonelessly.

"I did not summon you from Viterbo just so you could accompany me from
Ostia to Rome, Simon. You saw what my routiers--as you called them--are
like. And when I am inside the city I will be in much greater danger
from that Roman canaille than I was in the field today. I need a good
leader with me whom I can trust. I want you to stay here in Rome with
me."

Simon's chest ached as if chains were wrapped around it.

"How long?"

"At least two months. By then Sire Adam Fourre, my chief vassal from
Anjou, will be here with seventy knights and three hundred men. A small
force, but one I can depend on. I will feel more in control of these
brigands then."

"But who will guard the Tartars while I am here?" he asked, desperately
trying to think of an excuse that would get him back to Sophia.

Charles shrugged. "De Verceuil can look after them."

For over a year now he had been guarding the Tartars with his life, at
Charles's request. Now Charles hardly seemed concerned about them. It
was bewildering.

_And when will I see Sophia again?_ he cried inwardly.

He could simply refuse to stay in Italy a moment longer. He could just
get up right now and leave, go to Viterbo and find Sophia.

No, he could not do that. He had come to Italy to _redeem_ the name of
the house of Gobignon, not besmirch it further. What a scandal if the
king's brother were to charge that Simon de Gobignon turned his back on
him when he was in peril. What would the king and the nobles say of him
then in France? He must see this through, at least until Charles was
securely established in Rome.

But pray God Charles did not ask him to stay with him beyond that.

"You do not need to go back to the Tartars at all," Charles said. "It
seems to me that phase of things is settled. I think it would be more
important for you to go home, this summer, to Gobignon."

Simon's heart leapt with amazement and joy as the words sank in. "Yes!
Yes--I want to--very much," he blurted out. "I want that more than
anything else."

_If I can take Sophia with me._

Charles came around the table and laid a heavy hand on Simon's shoulder.
Simon, still seated, had to twist his neck to look up at him.

"Do you remember when we first spoke of your guarding the Tartars I
promised even greater opportunities for glory? I said that you would
ride in triumph through fallen cities."

"Yes," said Simon after hesitating a moment. He knew where Charles was
leading this, and felt a hollow of dread growing in his stomach.

Charles bent down, bringing his face close to Simon's, his hand still
pressing on Simon's shoulder. The Count of Anjou's eyes glowed green in
the candlelight, and Simon felt paralyzed by his gaze, as if Charles
were a basilisk.

"Simon de Gobignon," Charles said solemnly. "I invite you to join me in
the conquest of Sicily, and to share with me in the spoils. I ask you to
bring the army of Gobignon to this war."

_God's blood, protect me!_

"I cannot make my vassals come here," Simon ventured. His voice sounded
weak in his ears.

Charles's face came closer still.

"_Make_ them come? They will beg you to _let_ them come. This will be
the greatest war since you were a child."

Simon gathered his thoughts. "Their obligations to me are limited. Many
owe me only thirty days' service. Some are not required to serve outside
Gobignon boundaries, need only fight if we are invaded."

"Your father brought four hundred knights and two thousand men-at-arms
with him on the crusade my brother and I led into Egypt."

_Yes, and lost them all._

"But that was a crusade, and the ordinary obligations did not apply,"
Simon said.

"This will be a crusade. The pope is going to declare Manfred an
infidel, an enemy of the Church, and proclaim a crusade against him. But
this will not be like crusading in Outremer, where there is nothing to
be gained but sand and palm trees and--spiritual benefits." Again Simon
heard that hint of mockery in Charles's voice. "Southern Italy and
Sicily are the wealthiest lands in Europe. Riches for everybody! Just go
back and tell your seigneurs and knights about that. They will plead
with you to lead them hither." He smiled sarcastically. "I know what a
dedicated farmer you are. So get the harvest in--and then bring your
army south for the real harvest. The prospect of wintering in Italy
instead of in the north should delight them."

In all his life, Simon thought, he had never wanted anything less than
to lead the knights and men of Gobignon to Charles's war. He thought of
Gobignon, so far away in the northeast corner of France. What business
did his people have in Italy? Inevitably, many Gobignon men would die,
and how would Simon face their families?

But, sadly, he realized Charles was right in his prediction. Simon could
think of dozens of young barons and knights in the Gobignon domain who
would ride singing to a war waged for glory and riches.

He chose his words carefully, not wanting to offend Charles. "This
question of the crown of Sicily--it does not touch Gobignon in any way
that I can see. It would not be right for me to lead my people to war
over it."

Surprisingly, Charles smiled. "I understand, Simon." He patted Simon's
back. He straightened up and strode back to the other side of the table
and sat again.

"You do see my point, uncle?" Simon said nervously.

Charles nodded, still smiling. "Why, indeed, should the Count de
Gobignon come to the aid of the Count d'Anjou? I am glad to see a bit of
