terrestrial analogies held their ground. The dark belts running parallel
to the equator, first seen at Naples in 1630, continued to be
associated--as Herschel had associated them in 1781--with Jovian
trade-winds, in raising which the deficient power of the sun was
supposed to be compensated by added swiftness of rotation. But opinion
was not permitted to halt here.

In 1860 G. P. Bond of Cambridge (U.S.) derived some remarkable
indications from experiments on the light of Jupiter.[1042] They showed
that fourteen times more of the photographic rays striking it are
reflected by the planet than by our moon, and that, unlike the moon,
which sends its densest rays from the margin, Jupiter is brightest near
the centre. But the most perplexing part of his results was that Jupiter
actually seemed to give out more light than he received. Bond, however,
rightly considered his data too uncertain for the support of so bold an
assumption as that of original luminosity, and, even if the presence of
native light were proved, thought that it might emanate from auroral
clouds of the terrestrial kind. The conception of a sun-like planet was
still a remote, and seemed an extravagant one.

Only since it was adopted and enforced by Zoellner in 1865,[1043] can it
be regarded as permanently acquired to science. The rapid changes in the
cloud-belts both of Jupiter and Saturn, he remarked, attest a high
internal temperature. For we know that all atmospheric movements on the
earth are sun-heat transformed into motion. But sun-heat at the distance
of Jupiter possesses but 1/27, at that of Saturn 1/100 of its force
here. The large amount of energy, then, obviously exerted in those
remote firmaments must have some other source, to be found nowhere else
than in their own active and all-pervading fires, not yet banked in with
a thick solid crust.

The same acute investigator dwelt, in 1871,[1044] on the similarity
between the modes of rotation of the great planets and of the sun,
applying the same principles of explanation to each case. The fact of
this similarity is undoubted. Cassini[1045] and Schroeter both noticed
that markings on Jupiter travelled quicker the nearer they were to his
equator; and Cassini even hinted at their possible assimilation to
sun-spots.[1046] It is now well ascertained that, as a rule (not without
exceptions), equatorial spots give a period some 5-1/2 minutes shorter
than those in latitudes of about 30 deg. But, as Mr. Denning has pointed
out,[1047] no single period will satisfy the observations either of
different markings at the same epoch, or of the same markings at
different epochs. Accelerations and retardations, depending upon
processes of growth or change, take place in very much the same kind of
way as in solar maculae, inevitably suggesting similarity of origin.

The interesting query as to Jupiter's surface incandescence has been
studied since Bond's time with the aid of all the appliances furnished
to physical inquirers by modern inventiveness, yet without bringing to
it a categorical reply. Zoellner in 1865, Mueller in 1893, estimated his
albedo at 0.62 and 0.75 respectively, that of fresh-fallen snow being
0.78, and of white paper 0.70.[1048] But the disc of Jupiter is by no
means purely white. The general ground is tinged with ochre; the polar
zones are leaden or fawn coloured; large spaces are at times stained or
suffused with chocolate-browns and rosy hues. It is occasionally seen
ruled from pole to pole with dusky bars, and is never wholly free from
obscure markings. The reflection, then, by it, as a whole, of about 70
per cent. of the rays impinging upon it, might well suggest some
original reinforcement.

Nevertheless, the spectroscope gives little countenance to the
supposition of any considerable permanent light-emission. The spectrum
of Jupiter, as examined by Huggins, 1862-64, and by Vogel, 1871-73,
shows the familiar Fraunhofer rays belonging to reflected sunlight. But
it also shows lines of native absorption. Some of these are identical
with those produced by the action of our own atmosphere, especially one
or more groups due to aqueous vapours; others are of unknown origin;
and it is remarkable that one among the latter--a strong band in the
red--agrees in position with a dark line in the spectra of some ruddy
stars.[1049] There is, besides, a general absorption of blue rays,
intensified--as Le Sueur observed at Melbourne in 1869[1050]--in the
dusky markings, evidently through an increase of depth in the atmospheric
strata traversed by the light proceeding from them.

All these observations, however (setting aside the stellar line as of
doubtful significance), point to a cool planetary atmosphere. One
spectrograph, it is true, taken by Dr. Henry Draper, September 27,
1879,[1051] seemed to attest the action of intrinsic light; but the
peculiarity was referred by Dr. Vogel, with convincing clearness, to a
flaw in the film.[1052] So far, then, native emissions from any part of
Jupiter's diversified surface have not been detected; and, indeed, the
blackness of the shadows cast by his satellites on his disc sufficiently
proves that he sends out virtually none but reflected light.[1053] This
conclusion, however, by no means invalidates that of his high internal
temperature.

The curious phenomena attending Jovian satellite-transits may be
explained, partly as effects of contrast, partly as due to temporary
obscurations of the small discs projected on the large disc of Jupiter.
At their first entry upon its marginal parts, which are several times
less luminous than those near the centre, they invariably show as bright
spots, then usually vanish as the background gains lustre, to reappear,
after crossing the disc, thrown into relief, as before, against the
dusky limb. But instances are not rare, more especially of the third and
fourth satellites standing out, during the entire middle part of their
course, in such inky darkness as to be mistaken for their own shadows.
The earliest witness of a "black transit" was Cassini, September 2,
1665; Roemer in 1677, and Maraldi in 1707 and 1713, made similar
observations, which have been multiplied in recent years. In some cases
the process of darkening has been visibly attended by the formation, or
emergence into view, of spots on the transiting body, as noted by the
two Bonds at Harvard, March 18, 1848.[1054] The third satellite was seen
by Dawes, half dark, half bright, when crossing Jupiter's disc, August
21, 1867;[1055] one-third dark by Davidson of California, January 15,
1884, under the same circumstances;[1056] and unmistakably spotted, both
on and off the planet, by Schroeter, Secchi, Dawes, and Lassell.

The first satellite sometimes looks dusky, but never absolutely black,
in travelling over the disc of Jupiter. The second appears uniformly
white--a circumstance attributed by Dr. Spitta[1057] to its high albedo.
The singularly different aspects, even during successive transits, of
the third and fourth satellites, are connected by Professor Holden[1058]
with the varied luminosity of the segments of the planetary surface they
are projected upon, and W. H. Pickering inclines to the same opinion;
but fluctuations in their own brightness[1059] may be a concurrent
cause. Herschel concluded in 1797 that, like our moon, they always turn
the same face towards their primary, and as regards the outer satellite,
Engelmann's researches in 1871, and C. E. Burton's in 1873, made this
almost certain; while both for the third and fourth Jovian moons it was
completely assured by W. H. Pickering's and A. E. Douglass's
observations at Arequipa in 1892,[1060] and at Flagstaff in
1894-95.[1061] Strangely enough, however, the interior members of the
system have preserved a relatively swift rotation, notwithstanding the
enormous checking influence upon it of Jove-raised tides.

All the satellites are stated, on good authority, to be more or less
egg-shaped. On September 8, 1890, Barnard saw the first elongated and
bisected by a bright equatorial belt, during one of its dark
transits;[1062] and his observation, repeated August 3, 1891, was
completely verified by Schaeberle and Campbell, who ascertained,
moreover, that the longer axis of the prolate body was directed towards
Jupiter's centre.[1063] The ellipticity of its companions was determined
by Pickering and Douglass; indeed, that of No. 3 had long previously
been noticed by Secchi.[1064] No. 3 also shows equatorial stripes,
perceived in 1891 by Schaeberle and Campbell,[1065] and evident later to
Pickering and Douglass;[1066] nor need we hesitate to admit as authentic
their records of similar, though less conspicuous markings on the other
satellites. A constitution analogous to that of Jupiter himself was thus
unexpectedly suggested; and Vogel's detection of lines--or traces of
lines--in their spectra, agreeing with absorption-rays derived from
their primary, lends support to the conjecture that they possess gaseous
envelopes similar to his.

The system of Jupiter, as it was discovered by Galileo, and investigated
by Laplace, appeared in its outward aspect so symmetrical, and displayed
in its inner mechanism such harmonious dynamical relations, that it
might well have been deemed complete. Nevertheless, a new member has
been added to it. Near midnight on September 9, 1892, Professor Barnard
discerned with the Lick 36-inch "a tiny speck of light," closely
following the planet.[1067] He instantly divined its nature, watched its
hurried disappearance in the adjacent glare, and made sure of the
reality of his discovery on the ensuing night. It was a delicate
business throughout, the Liliputian luminary subsiding into invisibility
before the slightest glint of Jovian light, and tarrying, only for brief
intervals, far enough from the disc to admit of its exclusion by means
of an occulting plate. The new satellite is estimated to be of the
thirteenth stellar magnitude, and, if equally reflective of light with
its next neighbour, Io (satellite No. 1), its diameter must be about one
hundred miles. It revolves at a distance of 112,500 miles from Jupiter's
centre, and of 68,000 from his bulging equatorial surface. Its period of
11h. 57m. 23s. is just two hours longer than Jupiter's period of
rotation, so that Phobos still remains a unique example of a secondary
body revolving faster than its primary rotates. Jupiter's innermost moon
conforms in its motions strictly, indeed inevitably, to the plane of his
equatorial protuberance, following, however, a sensibly elliptical path
the major axis of which is in rapid revolution.[1068] Its very
insignificance raises the suspicion that it may not prove solitary.
Possibly it belongs to a zone peopled by asteroidal satellites. More
than fifteen thousand such small bodies could be furnished out of the
materials of a single full-sized satellite spoiled in the making. But we
must be content for the present to register the fact without seeking to
penetrate the meaning of its existence. Very high and very fine
telescopic power is needed for its perception. Outside the United
States, it has been very little observed. The only instruments in this
country successfully employed for its detection are, we believe, Dr.
Common's 5-foot reflector and Mr. Newall's 25-inch refractor.

In the course of his observations on Jupiter at Brussels in 1878, M.
Niesten was struck with a rosy cloud attached to a whitish zone beneath
the dark southern equatorial band.[1069] Its size was enormous. At the
distance of Jupiter, its measured dimensions of 13" by 3" implied a real
extension in longitude of 30,000, in latitude of something short of
7,000 miles. The earliest record of its appearance seems to be by
Professor Pritchett, director of the Morrison Observatory (U.S.), who
figured and described it July 9, 1878.[1070] It was again delineated
August 9, by Tempel at Florence.[1071] In the following year it
attracted the wonder and attention of almost every possessor of a
telescope. Its colour had by that time deepened into a full brick-red,
and was set off by contrast with a white equatorial spot of unusual
brilliancy. During three ensuing years these remarkable objects
continued to offer a visible and striking illustration of the compound
nature of the planet's rotation. The red spot completed a circuit in
nine hours fifty-five minutes thirty-six seconds; the white spot in
about five and a half minutes less. Their _relative_ motion was thus no
less than 260 miles an hour, bringing them together in the same meridian
at intervals of forty-four days ten hours forty-two minutes. Neither,
however, preserved continuously the same uniform rate of travel. The
period of each had lengthened by some seconds in 1883, while sudden
displacements, associated with the recovery of lustre after recurrent
fadings, were observed in the position of the white spot,[1072]
recalling the leap forward of a reviving sun-spot. Just the opposite
effect attended the rekindling of the companion object. While
semi-extinct, in 1882-84, it lost little motion; but a fresh access of
retardation was observed by Professor Young[1073] in connection with its
brightening in 1886. This suggests very strongly that the red spot is
_fed from below_. A shining aureola of "faculae," described by Bredichin
at Moscow, and by Lohse at Potsdam, as encircling it in September,
1879,[1074] was held to strengthen the solar analogy.

The conspicuous visibility of this astonishing object lasted three
years. When the planet returned to opposition in 1882-83, it had faded
so considerably that Ricco's uncertain glimpse of it at Palermo, May 31,
1883, was expected to be the last. It had, nevertheless, begun to
recover in December, and presented to Mr. Denning in the beginning of
1886 much the same aspect as in October, 1882.[1075] Observed by him in
an intermediate stage, February 25, 1885, when "a mere skeleton of its
former self," it bore a striking likeness to an "elliptical ring"
descried in the same latitude by Mr. Gledhill in 1869-70. This, indeed,
might be called the preliminary sketch for the famous object brought to
perfection ten years later, but which Mr. H. C. Russell of Sydney saw
and drew still unfinished in June, 1876,[1076] before it had separated
from its matrix, the dusky south tropical belt. In earlier times, too, a
marking "at once fixed and transient" had been repeatedly perceived
attached to the southernmost of the central belts. It gave Cassini in
1665 a rotation-period of nine hours fifty-six minutes,[1077] reappeared
and vanished eight times during the next forty-three years, and was last
seen by Maraldi in 1713. It was, however, very much smaller than the
recent object, and showed no unusual colour.[1078]

The assiduous observations made on the "Great Red Spot" by Mr. Denning
at Bristol and by Professor Hough at Chicago afforded grounds only for
negative conclusions as to its nature. It certainly did _not_ represent
the outpourings of a Jovian volcano; it was in no sense attached to the
Jovian soil--if the phrase have any application to that planet; it was
_not_ a mere disclosure of a glowing mass elsewhere seethed over by
rolling vapours. It was, indeed, certainly not self-luminous, a
satellite projected upon it in transit having been seen to show as
bright as upon the dusky equatorial bands. A fundamental objection to
all three hypotheses is that the rotation of the spot was variable. It
did not then ride at anchor, but floated free. Some held that its
surface was depressed below the average cloud-level, and that the cavity
was filled with vapours. Professor Wilson, on the other hand, observing
with the 16-inch equatorial of the Goodsell Observatory in Minnesota,
received a persistent impression of the object "being at a higher level
than the other markings."[1079] A crucial experiment on this point was
proposed by Mr. Stanley Williams in 1890.[1080] A dark spot moving
faster along the same parallel was timed to overtake the red spot
towards the end of July. A unique opportunity hence appeared to be at
hand of determining the relative vertical depths of the two formations,
one of which must inevitably, it was thought, pass above the other. No
forecast included a third alternative, which was nevertheless adopted by
the dark spot. It evaded the obstacle in its path by skirting round its
southern edge.[1081] Nothing, then, was gained by the conjunction,
beyond an additional proof of the singular repellent influence exerted
by the red spot over the markings in its vicinity. It has, for example,
gradually carved out a deep bay for its accommodation in the gray belt
just north of it. The effect was not at first steadily present. A
premonitory excavation was drawn by Schwabe at Dessau, September 5,
1831, and again by Trouvelot, Barnard, and Elvins in 1879; yet there was
no sign of it in the following year. Its development can be traced in
Dr. Boeddicker's beautiful delineations of Jupiter, made with the
Parsonstown 3-foot reflector, from 1881 to 1886.[1082] They record the
belt as straight in 1881, but as strongly indented from January, 1883;
and the cavity now promises to outlast the spot. So long as it survives,
however, the forces at work in the spot can have lost little of their
activity. For it must be remembered that the belt has a shorter
rotation-period than the red spot, which, accordingly (as Mr. Elvins of
Toronto has pointed out), breasts and diverts, by its interior energy, a
current of flowing matter, ever ready to fill up its natural bed, and
override the barrier of obstruction.

The famous spot was described by Keeler in 1889, as "of a pale pink
colour, slightly lighter in the middle. Its outline was a fairly true
ellipse, framed in by bright white clouds."[1083] The fading
continuously in progress from 1887 was temporarily interrupted in 1891.
The revival, indeed, was brief. Professor Barnard wrote in August, 1892:
"The great red spot is still visible, but it has just passed through a
crisis that seemingly threatened its very existence. For the past month
it has been all but impossible to catch the feeblest trace of the spot,
though the ever-persistent bay in the equatorial belt close north of it,
and which has been so intimately connected with the history of the red
spot, has been as conspicuous as ever. It is now, however, possible to
detect traces of the entire spot. An obscuring medium seems to have been
passing over it, and has now drifted somewhat preceding the spot."[1084]

The object is now always inconspicuous, and often practically invisible,
and may be said to float passively in the environing medium.[1085] Yet
there are sparks beneath the ashes. A rosy tinge faintly suffused it in
April, 1900,[1086] and its absolute end may still be remote.

The extreme complexity of the planet's surface-movements has been
strikingly evinced by Mr. Stanley Williams's detailed investigations. He
enumerated in 1896[1087] nine principal currents, all flowing parallel
to the equator, but unsymmetrically placed north and south of it, and
showing scant signs of conformity to the solar rule of retardation with
increase of latitude. The linear rate of the planet's equatorial
rotation was spectroscopically determined by Belopolsky and Deslandres
in 1895. Both found it to fall short of the calculated speed, whence an
enlargement, by self-refraction, of the apparent disc was
inferred.[1088]

Jupiter was systematically photographed with the Lick 36-inch telescope
during the oppositions of 1890, 1891, and 1892, the image thrown on the
plates (after eightfold direct enlargement) being one inch in diameter.
Mr. Stanley Williams's measurements and discussion of the set for 1891
showed the high value of the materials thus collected, although much
more minute details can be seen than can at present be photographed. The
red spot shows as "very distinctly annular" in several of these
pictures.[1089] Recently, the planet has been portrayed by Deslandres
with the 62-foot Meudon refractor.[1090] The extreme actinic feebleness
of the equatorial bands was strikingly apparent on his plates.

In 1870, Mr. Ranyard[1091]--whose death, December 14, 1894, was a
serious loss to astronomy--acting upon an earlier suggestion of Sir
William Huggins, collected records of unusual appearances on the disc of
Jupiter, with a view to investigate the question of their recurrence at
regular intervals. He concluded that the development of the deeper
tinges of colour, and of the equatorial "port-hole" markings girdling
the globe in regular alternations of bright and dusky, agreed, so far as
could be ascertained, with epochs of sun-spot maximum. The further
inquiries of Dr. Lohse at Bothkamp in 1873[1092] went to strengthen the
coincidence, which had been anticipated _a priori_ by Zoellner in
1871.[1093] Moreover, separate and distinct evidence was alleged by Mr.
Denning in 1899 of decennial outbreaks of disturbance in north temperate
regions.[1094] It may, indeed, be taken for granted that what Hahn terms
the universal pulse of the solar system[1095] affects the vicissitudes
of Jupiter; but the law of those vicissitudes is far from being so
obviously subordinate to the rhythmical flow of central disturbance as
are certain terrestrial phenomena. The great planet, being in fact
himself a "semi-sun," may be regarded as an originator, no less than a
recipient, of agitating influences, the combined effects of which may
well appear insubordinate to any obvious law.

It is likely that Saturn is in a still earlier stage of planetary
development than Jupiter. He is the lightest for his size of all the
planets. In fact, he would float in water. And since his density is
shown, by the amount of his equatorial bulging, to increase
centrally,[1096] it follows that his superficial materials must be of a
specific gravity so low as to be inconsistent, on any probable
supposition, with the solid or liquid states. Moreover, the chief
arguments in favour of the high temperature of Jupiter, apply, with
increased force, to Saturn; so that it may be concluded, without much
risk of error, that a large proportion of his bulky globe, 73,000 miles
in diameter, is composed of heated vapours, kept in active and agitated
circulation by the process of cooling.

His unique set of appendages has, since the middle of the last century,
formed the subject of searching and fruitful inquiries, both theoretical
and telescopic. The mechanical problem of the stability of Saturn's
rings was left by Laplace in a very unsatisfactory condition.
Considering them as rotating solid bodies, he pointed out that they
could not maintain their position unless their weight were in some way
unsymmetrically distributed; but made no attempt to determine the kind
or amount of irregularity needed to secure this end. Some observations
by Herschel gave astronomers an excuse for taking for granted the
fulfilment of the condition thus vaguely postulated; and the question
remained in abeyance until once more brought prominently forward by the
discovery of the dusky ring in 1850.

The younger Bond led the way, among modern observers, in denying the
solidity of the structure. The fluctuations in its aspect were, he
asserted in 1851,[1097] inconsistent with such a hypothesis. The fine
dark lines of division, frequently detected in both bright rings, and as
frequently relapsing into imperceptibility, were due, in his opinion, to
the real nobility of their particles, and indicated a fluid formation.
Professor Benjamin Peirce of Harvard University immediately followed
with a demonstration, on abstract grounds, of their non-solidity.[1098]
Streams of some fluid denser than water were, he maintained, the
physical reality giving rise to the anomalous appearance first disclosed
by Galileo's telescope.

The mechanism of Saturn's rings, proposed as the subject of the Adams
Prize, was dealt with by James Clerk Maxwell in 1857. His investigation
forms the groundwork of all that is at present known in the matter. Its
upshot was to show that neither solid nor fluid rings could continue to
exist, and that the only possible composition of the system was by an
aggregated multitude of unconnected particles, each revolving
independently in a period corresponding to its distance from the
planet.[1099] This idea of a satellite-formation had been, remarkably
enough, several times entertained and lost sight of. It was first put
forward by Roberval in the seventeenth century, again by Jacques Cassini
in 1715, and with perfect definiteness by Wright of Durham in
1750.[1100] Little heed, however, was taken of these casual
anticipations of a truth which reappeared, a virtual novelty, as the
legitimate outcome of the most refined modern methods.

The details of telescopic observation accord, on the whole, admirably
with this hypothesis. The displacements or disappearance of secondary
dividing-lines--the singular striated appearance, first remarked by
Short in the eighteenth century, last by Perrotin and Lockyer at Nice,
March 18, 1884[1101]--show the effects of waves of disturbance
traversing a moving mass of gravitating particles;[1102] the broken and
changing line of the planet's shadow on the ring gives evidence of
variety in the planes of the orbits described by those particles. The
whole ring-system, too, appears to be somewhat elliptical.[1103]

The satellite-theory has derived unlooked-for support from photometric
inquiries. Professor Seeliger pointed out in 1888[1104] that the
unvarying brilliancy of the outer rings under all angles of
illumination, from 0 deg. to 30 deg., can be explained from no other
point of view. Nor does the constitution of the obscure inner ring
offer any difficulty. For it is doubtless formed of similar small
bodies to those aggregated in the lucid members of the system, only much
more thinly strewn, and reflecting, consequently, much less light. It is
not, indeed, at first easy to see why these sparser flights should show
as a dense dark shading on the body of Saturn. Yet this is invariably the
case. The objection has been urged by Professor Hastings of Baltimore.
The brightest parts of these appendages, he remarked,[1105] are more
lustrous than the globe they encircle; but if the inner ring consists of
identical materials, possessing presumably an equal reflective capacity,
the mere fact of their scanty distribution would not cause them to show
as dark against the same globe. Professor Seeliger, however,
replied[1106] that the darkening is due to the never-ending swarms of
their separate shadows transiting the planet's disc. Sunlight is not,
indeed, wholly excluded. Many rays come and go between the open ranks of
the meteorites. For the dusky ring is transparent. The planet it
encloses shows through it, as if veiled with a strip of crape. A
beautiful illustration of its quality in this respect was derived by
Professor Barnard from an eclipse of Japetus, November 1, 1889.[1107]
The eighth moon remained steadily visible during its passage through the
shadow of the inner ring, but with a progressive loss of lustre in
approaching its bright neighbour. There was no breach of continuity. The
satellite met no gap, corresponding to that between the dusky ring and
the body of Saturn, through which it could shine with undiminished
light, but was slowly lost sight of as it plunged into deeper and deeper
gloom. The important facts were thus established, that the brilliant and
obscure rings merge into each other, and that the latter thins out
towards the Saturnian globe.

The meteoric constitution of these appendages was beautifully
demonstrated in 1895 by Professor Keeler,[1108] then director of the
Alleghany Observatory, Pittsburgh. From spectrographs taken with the
slit adjusted to coincidence with the equatorial plane of the system, he
determined the comparative radial velocities of its different parts. And
these supply a crucial test of Clerk Maxwell's theory. For if the rings
were solid, the swiftest rates of rotation should be at their outer
edges, corresponding to wider circles described in the same period;
while, if they are pulverulent, the inverse relation must hold good.
This proved to be actually the case. The motion slowed off outward, in
agreement with the diminishing speed of particles travelling freely,
each in its own orbit. Keeler's result was promptly confirmed by
Campbell,[1109] as well as by Deslandres and Belopolsky.

A question of singular interest, and one which we cannot refrain from
putting to ourselves, is--whether we see in the rings of Saturn a
finished structure, destined to play a permanent part in the economy of
the system; or whether they represent merely a stage in the process of
development out of the chaotic state in which it is impossible to doubt
that the materials of all planets were originally merged. M. Otto Struve
attempted to give a definite answer to this important query.

A study of early and later records of observations disclosed to him, in
1851, an apparent progressive approach of the inner edge of the bright
ring to the planet. The rate of approach he estimated at about
fifty-seven English miles a year, or 11,000 miles during the 194 years
elapsed since the time of Huygens.[1110] Were it to continue, a collapse
of the system must be far advanced within three centuries. But was the
change real or illusory--a plausible, but deceptive inference from
insecure data? M. Struve resolved to put it to the test. A set of
elaborately careful micrometrical measures of the dimensions of Saturn's
rings, executed by himself at Pulkowa in the autumn of 1851, was
provided as a standard of future comparison; and he was enabled to renew
them, under closely similar circumstances, in 1882.[1111] But the
expected diminution of the space between Saturn's globe and his rings
had not taken place. A slight extension in the width of the system, both
outward and inward, was indeed, hinted at; and it is worth notice that
just such a separation of the rings was indicated by Clerk Maxwell's
theory, so that there is an _a priori_ likelihood of its being in
progress. Yet Hall's measures in 1884-87[1112] failed to supply evidence
of alteration with time; and Barnard's, executed at Lick in
1894-95,[1113] showed no sensible divergence from them. Hence, much
weight cannot be laid upon Huygens's drawings and descriptions, which
had been held to prove conclusively a partial filling up, since 1657, of
the interval between the ring and the planet.[1114]

The rings of Saturn replace, in Professor G. H. Darwin's view,[1115] an
abortive satellite, scattered by tidal action into annular form. For
they lie closer to the planet than is consistent with the integrity of a
revolving body of reasonable bulk. The limit of possible existence for
such a mass was fixed by Roche of Montpellier, in 1848,[1116] at 2.44
mean radii of its primary; while the outer edge of the ring-system is
distant 2.38 radii of Saturn from his centre. The virtual discovery of
its pulverulent condition dates, then, according to Professor Darwin,
from 1848. He conjectures that the appendage will eventually disappear,
partly through the dispersal of its constituent particles inward, and
their subsidence upon the planet's surface, partly by their dispersal
outward, to a region beyond "Roche's limit," where coalescence might
proceed unhindered by the strain of unequal attractions. One modest
satellite, revolving inside Mimas, would then be all that was left of
the singular appurtenances we now contemplate with admiration.

There seems reason to admit that Kirkwood's law of commensurability has
had some effect in bringing about the present distribution of the matter
composing them. Here the influential bodies are Saturn's moons, while
the divisions and boundaries of the rings represent the spaces where
their disturbing action conspires to eliminate revolving particles.
Kirkwood, in fact, showed, in 1867,[1117] that a body circulating in the
chasm between the bright rings known as "Cassini's division," would have
a period nearly commensurable with those of _four_ out of the eight
moons; and Meyer of Geneva subsequently calculated all such
combinations, with the result of bringing out coincidences between
regions of maximum perturbation and the limiting and dividing lines of
the system.[1118] This is in itself a strong confirmation of the view
that the rings are made up of independently revolving small bodies.

On December 7, 1876, Professor Asaph Hall discovered at Washington a
bright equatorial spot on Saturn, which he followed and measured through
above sixty rotations, each performed in ten hours fourteen minutes
twenty-four seconds.[1119] This, he was careful to add, represented the
period, not necessarily of the _planet_, but only of the individual
spot. The only previous determination of Saturn's axial movement
(setting aside some insecure estimates by Schroeter) was Herschel's in
1794, giving a period of ten hours sixteen minutes. The substantial
accuracy of Hall's result was verified by Mr. Denning in 1891.[1120] In
May and June of that year, ten vague bright markings near the equator
were watched by Mr. Stanley Williams, who derived from them a rotation
period only two seconds shorter than that determined at Washington.
Nevertheless, similarly placed spots gave in 1892 and 1893 notably
quicker rates;[1121] so that the task of timing the general drift of the
Saturnian surface by the displacements of such objects is hampered, to
an indefinite extent, by their individual proper motions.

Saturn's outermost satellite, Japetus, is markedly variable--so variable
that it sends us, when brightest, just 4-1/2 times as much light as when
faintest. Moreover, its fluctuations depend upon its orbital position in
such a way as to make it a conspicuous telescopic object when west, a
scarcely discernible one when east of the planet. Herschel's
inference[1122] of a partially obscured globe turning always the same
face towards its primary seems the only admissible one, and is confirmed
by Pickering's measurements of the varying intensity of its light. He
remarked further that the dusky and brilliant hemispheres must be so
posited as to divide the disc, viewed from Saturn, into nearly equal
parts; so that this Saturnian moon, even when "full," appears very
imperfectly illuminated over one-half of its surface.[1123]

Zoellner estimated the albedo of Saturn at 0.51, Mueller at 0.88, a value
impossibly high, considering that the spectrum includes no vestige of
original emissions. Closely similar to that of Jupiter, it shows the
distinctive dark line in the red (wave-length 618), which we may call
the "red-star line"; and Janssen, from the summit of Etna in 1867[1124]
found traces in it of aqueous absorption. The light from the ring
appears to be pure reflected sunshine unmodified by original atmospheric
action.[1125]

Uranus, when favourably situated, can easily be seen with the naked eye
as a star between the fifth and sixth magnitudes. There is indeed, some
reason to suppose that he had been detected as a wandering orb by savage
"watchers of the skies" in the Pacific long before he swam into
Herschel's ken. Nevertheless, inquiries into his physical habitudes are
still in an early stage. They are exceedingly difficult of execution,
even with the best and largest modern telescopes; and their results
remain clouded with uncertainty.

It will be remembered that Uranus presents the unusual spectacle of a
system of satellites travelling nearly at right angles to the plane of
the ecliptic. The existence of this anomaly gives a special interest to
investigations of his axial movement, which might be presumed, from the
analogy of the other planets, to be executed in the same tilted plane.
Yet this is far from being certainly the case.

Mr. Buffham in 1870-72 caught traces of bright markings on the Uranian
disc, doubtfully suggesting a rotation in about twelve hours in a plane
_not_ coincident with that in which his satellites circulate.[1126]
Dusky bands resembling those of Jupiter, but very faint, were barely
perceptible to Professor Young at Princeton in 1883. Yet, though almost
necessarily inferred to be equatorial, they made a considerable angle
with the trend of the satellites' orbits.[1127] More distinctly by the
brothers Henry, with the aid of their fine refractor, two gray parallel
rulings, separated by a brilliant zone, were discerned every clear night
at Paris from January to June, 1884.[1128] What were taken to be the
polar regions appeared comparatively dusky. The direction of the
equatorial rulings (for so we may safely call them) made an angle of 40
deg. with the satellites' line of travel. Similar observations were made
at Nice by MM. Perrotin and Thollon, March to June, 1884, a lucid spot
near the equator, in addition, indicating rotation in a period of about
ten hours.[1129] The discrepancy was, however, considerably reduced by
Perrotin's study of the planet in 1889 with the new 30-inch
equatoreal.[1130] The dark bands, thus viewed to better advantage than
in 1884, appeared to deviate no more than 10 deg. from the satellites'
orbit-plane. No definitive results, on the other hand, were derived by
Professors Holden, Schaeberle, and Keeler from their observations of
Uranus in 1889-90 with the potent instrument on Mount Hamilton.
Shadings, it is true, were almost always, though faintly, seen; but
they appeared under an anomalous, possibly an illusory aspect. They
consisted, not of parallel, but of forked bands.[1131]

Measurements of the little sea-green disc which represents to us the
massive bulk of Uranus, by Young, Schiaparelli,[1132] Safarik, H. C.
Wilson[1133] and Perrotin, prove it to be quite distinctly _bulged_. The
compression at once caught Barnard's trained eye in 1894,[1134] when he
undertook at Lick a micrometrical investigation of the system; and he
was surprised to perceive that the major axis of the elliptical surface
made an angle of about 28 deg. with the line of travel pursued by the
satellites. Nothing more can be learned on this curious subject for some
years, since the pole of the planet is just now turned nearly towards
the earth; but Barnard's conclusion is unlikely to be seriously
modified. He fixed the mean diameter of Uranus at 34,900 miles. But this
estimate was materially reduced through Dr. See's elimination of
irradiative effects by means of daylight measures, executed at
Washington in 1901.[1135]

The visual spectrum of this planet was first examined by Father Secchi
in 1869, and later, with more advantages for accuracy, by Huggins,
Vogel,[1136] and Keeler.[1137] It is a very remarkable one. In lieu of
the reflected Fraunhofer lines, imperceptible perhaps through feebleness
of light, six broad bands of original absorption appear, one
corresponding to the blue-green ray of hydrogen (F), another to the
"red-star line" of Jupiter and Saturn, the rest as yet unidentified. The
hydrogen band seems much too strong and diffuse to be the mere echo of a
solar line, and might accordingly be held to imply the presence of free
hydrogen in the Uranian atmosphere. This, however, would be difficult of
reconcilement with Keeler's identification of an absorption-group in the
yellow with a telluric waterband.

Notwithstanding its high albedo--0.62, according to Zoellner--proof is
wanting that any of the light of Uranus is inherent. Mr. Albert Taylor
announced, indeed, in 1889, his detection, with Common's giant
reflector, of bright flutings in its spectrum;[1138] but Professor
Keeler's examination proved them to be merely contrast effects.[1139]
Sir William and Lady Huggins, moreover, obtained about the same time a
photograph purely solar in character. The spectrum it represented was
crossed by numerous Fraunhofer lines, and by no others. It was, then,
presumably composed entirely of reflected light.

       *       *       *       *       *

Judging from the indications of an almost evanescent spectrum, Neptune,
as regards physical condition, is the twin of Uranus, as Saturn of
Jupiter. Of the circumstances of his rotation we are as good as
completely ignorant. Mr. Maxwell Hall, indeed, noticed at Jamaica, in
November and December, 1883, certain rhythmical fluctuations of
brightness, suggesting revolution on an axis in slightly less than eight
hours;[1140] but Professor Pickering reduces the supposed variability to
an amount altogether too small for certain perception, and Dr. G. Mueller
denies its existence _in toto_. It is true their observations were not
precisely contemporaneous with those of Mr. Hall[1141] who believes the
partial obscurations recorded by himself to have been of a passing kind,
and to have suddenly ceased after a fortnight of prevalence. Their less
conspicuous renewal was visible to him in November, 1884, confirming a
rotation period of 7.92 hours.

It was ascertained at first by indirect means that the orbit of
Neptune's satellite is inclined about 20 deg. to his equator. Mr.
Marth[1142] having drawn attention to the rapid shifting of its plane of
motion, M. Tisserand and Professor Newcomb[1143] independently published
the conclusion that such shifting necessarily results from Neptune's
ellipsoidal shape. The movement is of the kind exemplified--although
with inverted relations--in the precession of the equinoxes. The pole of
the satellite, owing to the pull of Neptune's equatorial protuberance,
describes a circle round the pole of his equator in a retrograde
direction, and in a period of over five hundred years. The amount of
compression indicated for the primary body is, at the outside, 1/85;
whence it can be inferred that Neptune possesses a lower rotatory
velocity than the other giant planets. Direct verification of the trend
theoretically inferred for the satellite's movement was obtained by Dr.
See in 1899. The Washington 26-inch refractor disclosed to him, under
exceptionally favourable conditions, a set of equatorial belts on the
disc of Neptune, and they took just the direction prescribed by theory.
Their objective reality cannot be doubted, although Barnard was unable,
either with the Lick or the Yerkes telescope,[1144] to detect any
definite markings on this planet. Its diameter was found by him to be
32,900 miles.

The possibility that Neptune may not be the most remote body circling
round the sun has been contemplated ever since he has been known to
exist. Within the last few years the position at a given epoch of a
planet far beyond his orbital verge has been approximately fixed by two
separate investigators.

Professor George Forbes of Edinburgh adopted in 1880 a novel plan of
search for unknown members of the solar system, the first idea of which
was thrown out by M. Flammarion in November, 1879.[1145] It depends upon
the movements of comets. It is well known that those of moderately short
periods are, for a reason already explained, connected with the larger
planets in such a way that the cometary aphelia fall near some planetary
orbit. Jupiter claims a large retinue of such partial dependents,
Neptune owns six, and there are two considerable groups, the farthest
distances of which from the sun lie respectively near 100 and 300 times
that of the earth. At each of these vast intervals, one involving a
period of 1,000, the other of 5,000 years, Professor Forbes maintains
that an unseen planet circulates. He even computed elements for the
nearer of the two, and fixed its place on the celestial sphere;[1146]
but the photographic searches made for it by Dr. Roberts at Crowborough
and by Mr. Wilson at Daramona proved unavailing. Undeterred by
Deichmueller's discouraging opinion that cometary orbits extending beyond
the recognised bounds of the solar system are too imperfectly known to
serve as the basis of trustworthy conclusions,[1147] the Edinburgh
Professor returned to the attack in 1901.[1148] He now sought to prove
that the lost comet of 1556 actually returned in 1844, but with elements
so transformed by ultra-Neptunian perturbations as to have escaped
immediate identification. If so, the "wanted" planet has just entered
the sign Libra, and, being larger than Jupiter, should be possible to
find.

Almost simultaneously with Forbes, Professor Todd set about groping for
the same object by the help of a totally different set of indications.
Adams's approved method commended itself to him; but the hypothetical
divagations of Neptune having scarcely yet had time to develop, he was
thrown back upon the "residual errors" of Uranus. They gave him a
virtually identical situation for the new planet with that derived from
the clustering of cometary aphelia.[1149] Yet its assigned distance was
little more than half that of the nearer of Professor Forbes's remote
pair, and it completed a revolution in 375 instead of 1,000 years. The
agreement in them between the positions determined, on separate grounds,
for the ultra-Neptunian traveller was merely an odd coincidence; nor can
we be certain, until it is seen, that we have really got into touch with
it.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 965: _Phil. Trans._, vol. lxxiv., p. 260.]

[Footnote 966: _Novae Observationes_, p. 105.]

[Footnote 967: _Phil. Trans._, vol. i., p. 243.]

[Footnote 968: _Mem. de l'Ac._, 1720, p. 146.]

[Footnote 969: _Phil. Trans._, vol. lxxiv., p. 273.]

[Footnote 970: A large work, entitled _Areographische Fragmente_, in
which Schroeter embodied the results of his labours on Mars, 1785-1803,
narrowly escaped the conflagration of 1813, and was published at Leyden
in 1881.]

[Footnote 971: _Beitraege_, p. 124.]

[Footnote 972: _Mem. R. A. Soc._, vol. xxxii., p. 183.]

[Footnote 973: _Astr. Nach._, No. 1,468.]

[Footnote 974: _Observatory_, vol. viii., p. 437.]

[Footnote 975: _Month. Not._, vols. xxviii., p. 37; xxix., p. 232;
xxxiii., p. 552.]

[Footnote 976: Flammarion, _L'Astronomie_, t. i., p. 266.]

[Footnote 977: Smyth, _Cel. Cycle_, vol. i., p. 148 (1st ed.).]

[Footnote 978: _Phil. Trans._, vol. cxxi., p. 417.]

[Footnote 979: _Month. Not._, vol. xxv., p. 227.]

[Footnote 980: _Phil. Mag._, vol. xxxiv., p. 75.]

[Footnote 981: Proctor, _Quart. Jour. of Science_, vol. x., p. 185;
Maunder, _Sunday Mag._, January, February, March, 1882; Campbell, _Publ.
Astr. Pac. Soc._, vol. vi., p. 273.]

[Footnote 982: _Am. Jour. of Sc._, vol. xxviii., p. 163.]

[Footnote 983: Burton, _Trans. Roy. Dublin Soc._, vol. i., 1880, p.
169.]

[Footnote 984: _Month. Not._, vol. xxvii., p. 179; _Astroph. Journ._,
vol. i., p. 193.]

[Footnote 985: _Untersuchungen ueber die Spectra der Planeten_, p. 20;
_Astroph. Journ._, vol. i., p. 203.]

[Footnote 986: _Publ. Astr. Pac. Soc._, vols. vi., p. 228; ix., p. 109;
_Astr. and Astroph._, vol. xiii., p. 752; _Astroph. Jour._, vol. ii., p.
28.]

[Footnote 987: _Ibid._, vol. v., p. 328.]

[Footnote 988: _Ibid._, vols. i., p. 311; iii., p. 254.]

[Footnote 989: C. Christiansen, _Beiblaetter_, 1886, p. 532.]

[Footnote 990: _Astr. and Astrophysics_, vol. xi., p. 671.]

[Footnote 991: Flammarion, _La Planete Mars_, p. 574.]

[Footnote 992: _Memoires Couronnes_, t. xxxix.]

[Footnote 993: Lockyer, _Nature_, vol. xlvi., p. 447.]

[Footnote 994: _Mem. Spettr. Italiani_, t. xi., p. 28.]

[Footnote 995: _Bull. Astr._, t. iii., p. 324.]

[Footnote 996: _Journ. Brit. Astr. Ass._, vol. i., p. 88.]

[Footnote 997: _Publ. Pac. Astr. Soc._, vol. ii., p. 299; Percival
Lowell, _Mars_, 1896; _Annals of the Lowell Observatory_, vol. ii.,
1900.]

[Footnote 998: _Old and New Astr._, p. 545.]

[Footnote 999: _L'Astronomie_, t. xi., p. 445.]

[Footnote 1000: _La Planete Mars_, p. 588.]

[Footnote 1001: _Month. Notices_, vol. lvi., p. 166.]

[Footnote 1002: _L'Astronomie_, t. viii.]

[Footnote 1003: _Astr. Nach._, No. 3,271; _Astr. and Astrophysics_, vol.
xiii., p. 716.]

[Footnote 1004: _Month. Not._, vol. xxxviii., p. 41; _Mem. Roy. Astr.
Soc._, vol. xliv., p. 123.]

[Footnote 1005: _Astr. and Astrophysics_, vol. xi., p. 668.]

[Footnote 1006: _Ibid._, p. 850.]

[Footnote 1007: _Comptes Rendus_, t. cxv., p. 379.]

[Footnote 1008: _Astr. Jour._, No. 384; _Publ. Astr. Pac. Soc._, vol.
vi., p. 109. _Cf. Observatory_ vol. xvii., pp. 295-336.]

[Footnote 1009: See Mr. Wentworth Erck's remarks in _Trans. Roy. Dublin
Soc._, vol. i., p. 29.]

[Footnote 1010: _Month. Not._, vol. xxxviii., p. 206.]

[Footnote 1011: _Annals Harvard Coll. Obs._, vol. xi., pt. ii., p. 217.]

[Footnote 1012: Young, _Gen. Astr._, p. 366.]

[Footnote 1013: Campbell, _Publ. Pac. Astr. Soc._, vol. vi., p. 270.]

[Footnote 1014: _Astr. Nach._, No. 3,319.]

[Footnote 1015: _Witch of Atlas_, stanza iii. I am indebted to Dr.
Garnett for the reference.]

[Footnote 1016: Recommended by Chandler, _Astr. Jour._, No. 452.]

[Footnote 1017: _Harvard Circulars_, Nos. 36, 37, 51.]

[Footnote 1018: _Astr. Nach._, No. 3,687.]

[Footnote 1019: Montangerand, _Comptes Rendus_, March 11, 1901.]

[Footnote 1020: Pickering, _Astroph. Jour._, vol. xiii., p. 277.]

[Footnote 1021: _Harvard Circular_, No. 58.]

[Footnote 1022: _Astr. Nach._, No. 752.]

[Footnote 1023: L. Niesten, _Annuaire_, Bruxelles, 1881, p. 269.]

[Footnote 1024: According to Svedstrup (_Astr. Nach._, Nos. 2,240-41),
the inclination to the ecliptic of the "mean asteroid's" orbit is = 6
deg.]

[Footnote 1025: _Smiths._ Report, 1876, p. 358; _The Asteroids_
(Kirkwood), p. 42, 1888.]

[Footnote 1026: Tisserand, _Annuaire_, Paris, 1891, p. B. 15; Newcomb,
_Astr. Jour._, No. 477; Backlund, _Bull. Astr._, t. xvii., p. 81;
Parmentier, _Bull. Soc. Astr. de France_, March, 1896; Observatory, vol.
xviii., p. 207.]

[Footnote 1027: Berberich, _Astr. Nach._, No. 3,088.]

[Footnote 1028: _Bull. Astr._, t. xviii., p. 39.]

[Footnote 1029: _The Asteroids_, p. 48; _Publ. Astr. Pac. Soc._, vols.
ii., p. 48; iii., p. 95.]

[Footnote 1030: _Comptes Rendus_, t. xxxvii., p. 797.]

[Footnote 1031: _Bull. Astr._, t. v., p. 180.]

[Footnote 1032: _Annuaire_, Bruxelles, 1881, p. 243.]

[Footnote 1033: _Johns Hopkins Un. Circular_, January, 1895;
_Observatory_, vol. xviii., p. 127.]

[Footnote 1034: _Harvard Annals_, vol. xi., part ii., p. 294.]

[Footnote 1035: _Astr. Nach._, Nos. 2,724-5.]

[Footnote 1036: _Month. Not._, vol. lxi., p. 69.]

[Footnote 1037: _Astroph. Jour._, vol. vii., p. 25.]

[Footnote 1038: _Spectra der Planeten_, p. 24.]

[Footnote 1039: Tome i., p. 93.]

[Footnote 1040: _Berlinische Monatsschrift_, 1785, p. 211.]

[Footnote 1041: _Month. Not._, vol. xiii., p. 40.]

[Footnote 1042: _Mem. Am. Ac._, vol. viii., p. 221.]

[Footnote 1043: _Photom. Unters._, p. 303.]
