                              _Phil. Trans._, 1802, pp. 477-528.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1807, p. 113.


Observations of the transit of _Mercury_ over the sun's disk, to which
is added an investigation of the causes which often prevent the proper
action of mirrors.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1803, pp. 214-232.


Account of the changes which have happened during the last twenty-five
years in the relative situation of double stars, with an investigation
of the cause to which they are owing.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1803, pp. 339-382.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1808, pp. 154-178.


Continuation of the account of the changes that have happened in the
relative situation of double stars.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1804, pp. 353-384.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1808, p. 226.


Aus einem Schreiben des Herrn Doctor HERSCHEL, datirt Slough, bey
Windsor, den 31. May, 1804.

[Relates to his theory of the relation between the solar radiation and
the price of wheat.]
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1808, p. 226.


Experiments for ascertaining how far telescopes will enable us to
determine very small angles, and to distinguish the real from the
spurious diameters of celestial and terrestrial objects, with an
application of the results of those experiments to a series of
observations on the nature and magnitude of Mr. HARDING'S lately
discovered star [_Juno_ (1804),].
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1805, pp. 31-70.


On the direction and velocity of the motion of the sun and solar system.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1805, pp. 233-256.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, IV. Suppl. Band, p. 67.


Observations on the singular figure of the planet _Saturn_.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1805, pp. 272-280.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1809, p. 197.


On the quantity and velocity of solar motion.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1806, pp. 205-237.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1811, p. 224.


Observations and remarks on the figure, climate, and atmosphere of
_Saturn_ and its ring.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1806, pp. 455-467.
                              _Gilbert Annal._, XXXIV. (1810), pp. 82-105.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1810, p. 228.


Experiments for investigating the cause of the colored concentric rings
discovered by Sir I. NEWTON between two object-glasses laid one upon
another.
                   _Phil. Trans._, 1807, pp. 180-233.
                   _Annal. de Chimie_, LXX., 1809, pp. 154-181, 293-321;
                   _same_, LXXI., 1809, pp. 5-40.


Observations on the nature of the new celestial body [_Vesta_]
discovered by Dr. OLBERS, and of the comet which was expected to appear
last January in its return from the sun. [1806, II.]
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1807, pp. 260-266.


Observations of a comet [1807, I.] made with a view to investigate its
magnitude and the nature of its illumination, to which is added an
account of a new irregularity lately perceived in the apparent figure of
the planet _Saturn_.
                        _Phil. Trans._, 1808, pp. 145-163.
                        _Gilbert Annal._, XXXVI. (1810), pp. 389-393.
                        _Zach, Monat. Corresp._, XX. (1809), pp. 512-514.


Continuation of experiments for investigating the cause of colored
concentric rings and other appearances of a similar nature.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1809, pp. 259-302.


Supplement to the first and second part of the paper of experiments for
investigating the cause of colored concentric rings between
object-glasses, and other appearances of a similar nature.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1810, pp. 149-177.
                              _Gilbert Annal._, XLVI., 1814, pp. 22-79.


Astronomical observations relating to the construction of the heavens,
arranged for the purpose of a critical examination, the result of which
appears to throw some new light upon the organization of the celestial
bodies.
                           _Phil. Trans._, 1811, pp. 269-336.
                           _Journ. de Phys._, LXXV., 1812, pp. 121-167.


Observations of a comet, with remarks on the construction of its
different parts [1811, I.].
           _Phil. Trans._, 1812, pp. 115-143.
           _Journ. de Phys._, LXXVII., 1813, pp. 125-135.
           _Zach, Monat. Corresp._, XXVIII., 1813, pp. 455-469, 558-568.
           _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1816, p. 185.


Observations of a second comet, with remarks on its construction
[1811, II.].
                           _Phil. Trans._, 1812, pp. 229-237.
                           _Nicholson Journ._, XXXV., 1813, pp. 193-199.
                           _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1816, p. 203.


Astronomical observations relating to the sidereal part of the heavens,
and its connection with the nebulous part, arranged for the purpose of a
critical examination.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1814. pp. 248-284.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1818, pp. 97-118.


A series of observations of the satellites of the _Georgian planet_,
including a passage through the node of their orbits, with an
introductory account of the telescopic apparatus that has been used on
this occasion, and a final exposition of some calculated particulars
deduced from the observations.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1815, pp. 293-362.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1819, p. 232-242.


Astronomical observations and experiments tending to investigate the
local arrangement of the celestial bodies in space, and to determine the
extent and condition of the Milky Way.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1817, pp. 302-331.
                              _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1821, p. 149.


Astronomical observations and experiments selected for the purpose of
ascertaining the relative distances of clusters of stars, and of
investigating how far the power of our telescopes may be expected to
reach into space, when directed to ambiguous celestial objects.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1818, pp. 429-470.


On the places of one hundred and forty-five new double stars (1821).
                            _Mem. Roy. Ast. Soc._, 1, 1822, pp. 166-181.



II.--LIST OF WORKS RELATING TO THE LIFE AND WRITINGS OF WILLIAM
HERSCHEL.

                 [Arranged alphabetically by authors.]

_N.B.--In general, the notices of his life to be found in Encyclopaedias
of Biography, etc., are not included here._


ARAGO (F.)
    Analyse de la vie et des travaux de Sir WILLIAM HERSCHEL [from
_Annuaire du Bureau des Longitudes_, 1842]. Paris, 1843. 18mo.
        [See also the _Annuaire_ for 1834, for an account of HERSCHEL'S
        work on double stars.]


ARAGO (F.)
    Biographies of Distinguished Scientific Men. Translated by Admiral
      W. H. SMYTH, Rev. B. POWELL, and ROBERT GRANT, Esq. HERSCHEL.
        First series, p. 258. Boston, 1859. 8vo.


ARAGO (F.)
    HERSCHEL. [Translated from the French.]
        Smithsonian Report. 1870. p. 197. 8vo.


AUWERS (A.)
    WILLIAM HERSCHEL'S Verzeichnisse von Nebelflecken und Sternhaufen
      bearbeitet von A. AUWERS.
        From the _Koenigsberg Observations_. 1862. Folio.


BESSEL (F. W.)
    Sir WILLIAM HERSCHEL. [From the _Koenigsberger Allgemeine Zeitung_, 1,
      1843, No. 37, _et seq._, reprinted in his] _Abhandlungen_, vol iii.,
      p. 468. Leipzig, 1876. 4to.


D'ARREST (H. L.)
    Verzeichniss von Sir WILLIAM HERSCHEL'S Nebelflecken _erster_ und
      _vierter_ Classe, aus den Beobachtungen berechnet und auf 1850
      reducirt.
        _Abhandlungen der Math. Phys. Classe der K. Saechs Gesells. d.
          Wissenschaften_, Band iii. [1857], p. 359.


DUNKIN (E.)
    Obituary Notices of Astronomers, p. 86. Sir WILLIAM HERSCHEL,
      K.C.H., F.R.S., 1738-1822.
        London, 1879. 12mo.


FETIS (F. J.)
    Biographie universelle des Musiciens [Article HERSCHEL].
        Paris, 1835-37. 8vo.


FORBES (J. D.)
    Sir WILLIAM HERSCHEL [being Sec. 2 of Dissertation vi.].
        Encyclopaedia Britannica, eighth edition.
        Vol. i.,_Dissertations_, p. 838.


FOURIER (J.)
    Eloge historique de Sir WILLIAM HERSCHEL, prononce dans la seance
      publique de l'Academie royale des sciences le 7 Juin, 1824.

       _Historie de l'Academie Royale des Sciences de l'Institut de France_,
         _tome_ vi., _annee_ 1823, p. lxi.


HARDING (C. L.)
    Des Herrn Dr. HERSCHEL'S Untersuchungen ueber die Natur der
      Sonnenstrahlen, aus dem englischen uebersetzt. Erstes Heft.
      [Translations from _Phil. Trans._, 1800.] Celle, 1801. 16mo.


HASTINGS (C. S.)
    See HOLDEN _and_ HASTINGS.


HERSCHEL (Carolina.)
    An Account of a new Comet. [1786, II.]
        _Phil. Trans._, 1787, vol. LXXVII., p. 1.


HERSCHEL (Carolina.)
    An Account of the Discovery of a Comet. [1793, I.]
        _Phil. Trans._, 1794, vol. LXXXIV., p. 1.


HERSCHEL (Carolina.)
    Account of the Discovery of a Comet. [1795, II.]
        _Phil. Trans._, 1796, vol. LXXXVI., p. 131.


HERSCHEL (Carolina.)
    Catalogue of Stars taken from FLAMSTEED'S observations contained in
      the second volume of his _Historia Coelestis_, and not inserted
      in the British Catalogue; to which is added a collection of errata
      which should be noticed in the same volume; with remarks by W.
      HERSCHEL. London, 1798. Folio.


HERSCHEL (Carolina.)
    Verzeichniss von 74 Sternen FLAMSTEEDS von denen keine beobachtungen
      in der _Hist. Coel. Brit._ vorkommen.
        _Bode's Jahrbuch_, 1806, p. 255


[HERSCHEL (Carolina.)]
    [Notice of her Life.]
        _Monthly Notices Roy. Ast. Soc._, vol. 8, p. 64; _also_, _Memoirs
          Roy. Ast. Soc._, vol. 17, p. 120.


[HERSCHEL (Carolina.)]
    Memoir and Correspondence of CAROLINE HERSCHEL. By Mrs. JOHN
      HERSCHEL. With portraits. London, 1876. 12mo.


HERSCHEL (J. F. W.)
    Article _Telescope_, in Encyclopaedia Britannica, eighth edition.
      [This article (illustrated) gives most of the important features of
      Sir WILLIAM HERSCHEL'S manner of grinding and polishing specula.]


HERSCHEL (J. F. W.)
    Catalogue of Nebulae and Clusters of Stars. [General and systematic
      reduction of all Sir W. HERSCHEL'S observations brought into
      connection with all other similar ones.]
        _Phil. Trans._, 1864. Page 1. 4to.


HERSCHEL (J. F. W.)
    A Synopsis of all Sir WILLIAM HERSCHEL'S Micrometrical Measurements,
      etc., of Double Stars, together with a Catalogue of those Stars . . .
      for 1880.
        _Mem. Roy. Ast. Soc._, vol. 35, p. 21. Lond., 1867. 4to.

HERSCHEL (J. F. W.)
    Additional Identifications of Double Stars in the Synoptic
      Catalogues of Sir WILLIAM HERSCHEL'S Micrometrical Measurements,
      etc.
        _Monthly Notices Roy. Ast. Soc._, vol. 28, p. 151. London, 1868.
         8vo.


HERSCHEL (Mrs. John.)
    Memoir and Correspondence of CAROLINE HERSCHEL. With portraits.
        London, 1876. 12mo.


HERSCHEL (W.)
    [Solution of a prize question. _See_ this book, page 46.]
        _Ladies' Diary_, 1779.


HERSCHEL (W.)
