      Each speeds like a heav'n-sent dart;
    Who can measure the gladness and aid they've brought--
      These thoughts--to the breaking heart?

The first line of the original, "=Far away= in a =distant= land," is
lamentably pleonastic; whilst the identity or intended identity of the
second and fourth rhymes is undesirable. In a verse of this type, it is
not well to repeat a rhyme immediately. In the second stanza the first
and third lines and the fifth and seventh are unrhymed, a variation from
the original design which is not sanctioned by custom. Once a poet
decides on his metre and plan of rhyme, he should maintain them
unchanged throughout the poem. In the foregoing revised version, all
these defects have been remedied. Miss Trafford's poem, "After a Dream,"
shows much promise both technically and in the thought. The final line
of the first stanza, "And the joy it contains is much," is very weak;
and should be changed to read: "And of joy it contains so much." In
writing the definite article, Miss Trafford mistakenly uses the
contracted form =th'= when full syllabic value is to be given. This
contraction is employed only when the article is metrically placed as a
proclitic before another word, and is thereby shorn of its separate
pronunciation as follows:

    =Th' ambitious= bard a nobler theme essays.

The illustrated bit of humor by George William Stokes deserves mention
as presenting one of the cleverest drawings to appear lately in the
amateur press. It is difficult to decide in which domain Mr. Stokes
shines the more brightly, literature or pictorial art. His heading for
=The Little Budget= is a masterpiece of its kind.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Pippin= for May brings once more to our notice amateurdom's
foremost high-school club, the Appleton aggregation, whose existence is
due to Mr. Maurice W. Moe's untiring efforts. "Doings of the Pippins,"
by Joseph Harriman, is a terse and informing chronicle of recent
activity. "Once Upon a Time," by Florence A. Miller, is a bit of
humorous verse whose metre might be improved by the use of greater care.
"Some Cloth!," by John Ingold, is an exceedingly clever piece of wit;
which, though avowedly Irish, bears the characteristic hall-mark of
native American humor. The delightful exaggerations recall some of the
brightest spots in American light literature. "Speed," by Matilda
Harriman, is an interesting sketch recalling Poe's "Mellonta Tauta," in
its imaginative flights. "From Over the Threshold," by Ruth Ryan, shows
much promise in the realm of fiction. "Once an Amateur, Always an
Amateur" is one of those rare bits of prose with which our distinguished
Critical member, Mr. Moe, favours us. We are proud of the unshaken
amateur allegiance of so brilliant a personality, and trust that some
day he may realise his dream of "an attic or basement printshop." "The
Press Club," by Ruth Schumaker, is a pleasing sketch, as is also Miss
Kelly's "Our Club and the United." We trust that the Appleton Club may
safely weather the hard times of which Miss Kelly complains.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE UNITED AMATEUR for May contains a captivating and graceful sketch by
W. Edwin Gibson, entitled "Beauty." Mr. Gibson is one of our younger
members who bids fair to become prominent in the coming amateur
generation. Of the month's poetry, we may mention with particular
commendation Miss von der Heide's "Worship," though through some error,
possibly typographical, the final line of the second stanza seems to
lack two syllables. "When Dreams Come True," by Kathleen Foster Smith,
is likewise of more than common merit, though the word =hear= in the
second line of the second stanza is probably a misprint for =heard=.
"Smile," by O. M. Blood, is ingenious though scarcely novel. Its chief
defects are inequalities in the lines, which care should be able to
correct. The first line contains two superfluous syllables, while the
fourth line contains one too many. The ninth line of the final section
contains two syllables too many, as do the tenth and eleventh lines as
well. The rhyme of =appear= and =disappear= is incorrect, since
syllables in rhyme should be merely similar--not the same. Mr. Blood
requires much practice in poetry, but undoubtedly possesses the germ of
success. "To the U. A. P. A.," by Matthew Hilson, is acceptable in
construction and delightful in sentiment, laying strata on the new
Anglo-American unity--the one redeeming feature of the present
international crisis. THE UNITED AMATEUR closes with a quotation from
Euripides, which we will not attempt to review here, since the author
has been receiving critical attention from far abler men for many
centuries!

                                                  H. P. LOVECRAFT,
                                                             Chairman.


NEWS NOTES

Maurice W. Moe, Chief of our Department of Private Criticism, is trying
a novel experiment this summer for the sake of his health. He has
undertaken a labourer's work on one of the new buildings of Lawrence
College, lifting planks, shovelling mud, and wheeling bags of cement
like a seasoned workingman. While painful at first, the regimen is
proving actually beneficial, and Mr. Moe is proud of the physical
prowess he is beginning to exhibit. One of our amateur poetasters
recently perpetrated the following four lines on the unusual occurrence
of a learned instructor working manually upon a college building:

                     To M. W. M.

    Behold the labourer, who builds the walls
    That soon shall shine as Learning's sacred halls;
    A man so apt at ev'ry art and trade,
    He well might govern what his hands have made!




                          _THE
                     UNITED AMATEUR_

 OFFICIAL ORGAN OF THE UNITED AMATEUR PRESS ASSOCIATION

 VOLUME XVII    ATHOL, MASS., NOVEMBER, 1917    NUMBER 2


A Reminiscence of Dr. Samuel Johnson

Humphry Littlewit, Esq.

The Privilege of Reminiscence, however rambling or tiresome, is one
generally allow'd to the very aged; indeed, 'tis frequently by means of
such Recollections that the obscure occurrences of History, and the
lesser Anecdotes of the Great, are transmitted to Posterity.

Tho' many of my readers have at times observ'd and remark'd a Sort of
antique Flow in my Stile of Writing, it hath pleased me to pass amongst
the Members of this Generation as a young Man, giving out the Fiction
that I was born in 1890, in =America=. I am now, however, resolv'd to
unburthen myself of a secret which I have hitherto kept thro' Dread of
Incredulity; and to impart to the Publick a true knowledge of my long
years, in order to gratifie their taste for authentick Information of an
Age with whose famous Personages I was on familiar Terms. Be it then
known that I was born on the family Estate in =Devonshire=, of the 10th
day of August, 1690, (or in the new =Gregorian= Stile of Reckoning, the
20th of August) being therefore now in my 228th year. Coming early to
=London=, I saw as a Child many of the celebrated Men of King
=William's= Reign, including the lamented Mr. =Dryden=, who sat much at
the Tables of =Will's= Coffee-House. With Mr. =Addison= and Dr. =Swift=
I later became very well acquainted, and was an even more familiar
Friend to Mr. =Pope=, whom I knew and respected till the Day of his
Death. But since it is of my more recent Associate, the late Dr.
=Johnson=, that I am at this time desir'd to write; I will pass over my
Youth for the present.

I had first Knowledge of the Doctor in May of the year 1738, tho' I did
not at that Time meet him. Mr. =Pope= had just compleated his Epilogue
to his Satires, (the Piece beginning: "Not twice a Twelvemonth you
appear in Print.") and had arrang'd for its Publication. On the very Day
it appear'd, there was also publish'd a Satire in Imitation of
=Juvenal=, entituled "=London=," by the then unknown =Johnson=; and this
so struck the Town, that many Gentlemen of Taste declared, it was the
Work of a greater Poet than Mr. =Pope=. Notwithstanding what some
Detractors have said of Mr. =Pope's= petty Jealousy, he gave the Verses
of his new Rival no small Praise; and having learnt thro' Mr.
=Richardson= who the Poet was, told me, "that Mr. =Johnson= wou'd soon
be =deterre=."

I had no personal Acquaintances with the Doctor till 1763, when I was
presented to him at the =Mitre= Tavern by Mr. =James Boswell=, a young
=Scotchman= of excellent Family and great Learning, but small Wit, whose
metrical Effusions I had sometimes revis'd.

Dr. =Johnson=, as I beheld him, was a full, pursy Man, very ill drest,
and of slovenly Aspect. I recall him to have worn a bushy Bob-Wig,
untyed and without Powder, and much too small for his Head. His Cloaths
were of rusty brown, much wrinkled, and with more than one Button
missing. His Face, too full to be handsom, was likewise marred by the
Effects of some scrofulous Disorder; and his Head was continually
rolling about in a sort of convulsive way. Of this Infirmity, indeed, I
had known before; having heard of it from Mr. =Pope=, who took the
Trouble to make particular Inquiries.

Being nearly seventy-three, full nineteen Years older than Dr.
=Johnson=, (I say Doctor, tho' his Degree came not till two Years
afterward) I naturally expected him to have some Regard for my Age; and
was therefore not in that Fear of him, which others confess'd. On my
asking him what he thought of my favourable Notice of his Dictionary in
=The Londoner=, my periodical Paper, he said: "Sir, I possess no
Recollection of having perus'd your Paper, and have not a great Interest
in the Opinions of the less thoughtful Part of Mankind." Being more than
a little piqued at the Incivility of one whose Celebrity made me
solicitous of his Approbation, I ventur'd to retaliate in kind, and told
him, I was surpris'd that a Man of Sense shou'd judge the Thoughtfulness
of one whose Productions he admitted never having read. "Why, Sir,"
reply'd =Johnson=, "I do not require to become familiar with a Man's
Writings in order to estimate the Superficiality of his Attainments,
when he plainly shews it by his Eagerness to mention his own Productions
in the first Question he puts to me." Having thus become Friends, we
convers'd on many Matters. When, to agree with him, I said I was
distrustful of the Authenticity of =Ossian's= Poems, Mr. =Johnson= said:
"That, Sir, does not do your Understanding particular Credit; for what
all the Town is sensible of, is no great Discovery for a =Grub-Street=
Critick to make. You might as well say, you have a strong Suspicion that
=Milton= wrote 'Paradise Lost!'"

I thereafter saw =Johnson= very frequently, most often at Meetings of
THE LITERARY CLUB, which was founded the next Year by the Doctor,
together with Mr. =Burke=, the parliamentary Orator, Mr. =Beauclerk=, a
Gentleman of Fashion, Mr. =Langton=, a pious Man and Captain of Militia,
Sir =J. Reynolds=, the widely known Painter, Dr. =Goldsmith=, the Prose
and poetick Writer, Dr. =Nugent=, father-in-law to Mr. =Burke=, Sir
=John Hawkins=, Mr. =Anthony Chamier=, and my self. We assembled
generally at seven o'clock of an Evening, once a Week, at the
=Turk's-Head=, in =Gerrard-Street=, =Soho=, till that Tavern was sold
and made into a private Dwelling; after which Event we mov'd our
Gatherings successively to =Prince's= in =Sackville-Street=, =Le
Tellier's= in =Dover-Street=, and =Parsloe's= and the =Thatched House=
in =St. James's-Street=. In these Meetings we preserv'd a remarkable
Degree of Amity and Tranquillity, which contrasts very favourably with
some of the Dissensions and Disruptions I observe in the literary and
amateur Press Associations of today. This Tranquillity was the more
remarkable, because we had amongst us Gentlemen of very opposed
Opinions. Dr. =Johnson= and I, as well as many others, were high Tories;
whilst Mr. =Burke= was a Whig, and against the =American= War, many of
his Speeches on that Subject having been widely publish'd. The least
congenial Member was one of the Founders, Sir =John Hawkins=, who hath
since written many misrepresentations of our Society. Sir =John=, an
eccentrick Fellow, once declin'd to pay his part of the Reckoning for
Supper, because 'twas his Custom at Home to eat no Supper. Later he
insulted Mr. =Burke= in so intolerable a Manner, that we all took Pains
to shew our Disapproval; after which Incident he came no more to our
Meetings. However, he never openly fell out with the Doctor, and was the
Executor of his Will; tho' Mr. =Boswell= and others have Reason to
question the genuineness of his Attachment. Other and later Members of
the CLUB were Mr. =David Garrick=, the Actor and early Friend of Dr.
=Johnson=, Messieurs =Tho.= and =Jos. Warton=, Dr. =Adam Smith=, Dr.
=Percy=, Author of the "Reliques," Mr. =Edw. Gibbon=, the Historian, Dr.
=Burney=, the Musician, Mr. =Malone=, the Critick, and Mr. =Boswell=.
Mr. =Garrick= obtain'd Admittance only with Difficulty; for the Doctor,
notwithstanding his great Friendship, was for ever affecting to decry
the Stage and all Things connected with it. =Johnson=, indeed, had a
most singular Habit of speaking for =Davy= when others were against him,
and of arguing against him, when others were for him. I have no Doubt
but that he sincerely lov'd Mr. =Garrick=, for he never alluded to him
as he did to =Foote=, who was a very coarse Fellow despite his comick
Genius. Mr. =Gibbon= was none too well lik'd, for he had an odious
sneering Way which offended even those of us who most admir'd his
historical Productions. Mr. =Goldsmith=, a little Man very vain of his
Dress and very deficient in Brilliancy of Conversation, was my
particular Favourite; since I was equally unable to shine in the
Discourse. He was vastly jealous of Dr. =Johnson=, tho' none the less
liking and respecting him. I remember that once a Foreigner, a =German=,
I think, was in our Company; and that whilst =Goldsmith= was speaking,
he observ'd the Doctor preparing to utter something. Unconsciously
looking upon =Goldsmith= as a meer Encumbrance when compar'd to the
greater Man, the Foreigner bluntly interrupted him and incurr'd his
lasting Hostility by crying, "Hush, Toctor =Shonson= iss going to
speak!"

In this luminous Company I was tolerated more because of my Years than
for my Wit or Learning; being no Match at all for the rest. My
Friendship for the celebrated Monsieur =Voltaire= was ever a Cause of
Annoyance to the Doctor; who was deeply orthodox, and who us'd to say of
the =French= Philosopher: "Vir est acerrimi Ingenii et paucarum
Literarum."

Mr. =Boswell=, a little teazing Fellow whom I had known for some Time
previously, us'd to make Sport of my aukward Manners and old-fashion'd
Wig and Cloaths. Once coming in a little the worse for Wine (to which he
was addicted) he endeavour'd to lampoon me by means of an Impromptu in
verse, writ on the Surface of the Table; but lacking the Aid he usually
had in his Composition, he made a bad grammatical Blunder. I told him,
he shou'd not try to pasquinade the Source of his Poesy. At another Time
=Bozzy= (as we us'd to call him) complain'd of my Harshness toward new
Writers in the Articles I prepar'd for The Monthly Review. He said, I
push'd every Aspirant off the Slopes of Parnassus. "Sir," I reply'd,
"you are mistaken. They who lose their Hold do so from their own Want of
Strength; but desiring to conceal their Weakness, they attribute the
absence of Success to the first Critick that mentions them." I am glad
to recall that Dr. =Johnson= upheld me in this Matter.

Dr. =Johnson= was second to no Man in the Pains he took to revise the
bad Verses of others; indeed, 'tis said that in the book of poor blind
old Mrs. =Williams=, there are scarce two lines which are not the
Doctor's. At one Time =Johnson= recited to me some lines by a Servant to
the Duke of =Leeds=, which had so amus'd him, that he had got them by
Heart. They are on the Duke's Wedding, and so much resemble in Quality
the Work of other and more recent poetick Dunces, that I cannot forbear
copying them:

    "When the Duke of =Leeds= shall marry'd be
    To a fine young Lady of high Quality
    How happy will that Gentlewoman be
    In his Grace of =Leeds'= good Company."

I ask'd the Doctor, if he had ever try'd making Sense of this Piece; and
upon his saying he had not, I amus'd myself with the following Amendment
of it:

    When Gallant LEEDS auspiciously shall wed
    The virtuous Fair, of antient Lineage bred,
    How must the Maid rejoice with conscious Pride
    To win so great an Husband to her Side!

On shewing this to Dr. =Johnson=, he said, "Sir, you have straightened
out the Feet, but you have put neither Wit nor Poetry into the Lines."

It wou'd afford me Gratification to tell more of my Experiences with Dr.
=Johnson= and his circle of Wits; but I am an old Man, and easily
fatigued. I seem to ramble along without much Logick or Continuity when
I endeavour to recall the Past; and fear I light upon but few Incidents
which others have not before discuss'd. Shou'd my present Recollections
meet with Favour, I might later set down some further Anecdotes of old
Times of which I am the only Survivor. I recall many Things of =Sam
Johnson= and his Club, having kept up my Membership in the Latter long
after the Doctor's Death, at which I sincerely mourn'd. I remember how
=John Burgoyne=, Esq., the General, whose Dramatick and Poetical Works
were printed after his Death, was blackballed by three Votes; probably
because of his unfortunate Defeat in the =American= War, at =Saratoga=.
Poor =John=! His Son fared better, I think, and was made a Baronet. But
I am very tired. I am old, very old; it is Time for my Afternoon Nap.


DEPARTMENT _of_ PUBLIC CRITICISM

=The Dabbler=, for September, in the entire unexpectedness and splendor
of its appearance, must be counted as one of the most effective of
recent rebukes to the pessimists. There have been several such rebukes,
and those who had already prepared themselves for another barren year in
amateur journalism are beginning to realize that even history cannot be
relied upon to repeat itself indefinitely. =The Dabbler= is issued by
H. L. Lindquist of Chicago, and contains 16 pages, exclusive of the
covers. The initial letters and a few incidental adornments are printed
in green, and the title-page, with its harmonious arrangement of type
and decoration, is a delight to the eye. The typography, throughout, is
almost flawless, and the contents, in general, are worthy of the care
with which they have been presented to the reader. Paul J. Campbell, in
his article, "What Does Amateur Journalism Mean to You?" once again
defines the peculiar benefits and pleasures to be derived from our
hobby, and warns away all those who come to it because of an idle
curiosity, or a vain desire for self-glorification, or any motive other
than a true impulse toward mental development and literary culture. "A
Critical Review," by Frank C. Reighter, is devoted to the July
=Brooklynite=, and subjects that publication to a well-nigh exhaustive
analysis and criticism. The article is both interesting and instructive
and reveals Mr. Reighter as an acute and capable critic. The verses with
which he concludes his remarks are particularly clever and melodious,
and furnish an excellent example of light verse when it is written by
one possessing a natural aptitude for that form of expression. Jennie M.
Kendall, in her fragment, "The One Thing Needful," makes a modern
business woman give her opinion of idle wives, which she does in
forceful, although not always accurate, English. "U. A. P. A. Convention
Echoes," by Litta Voelchert; "The Old-Timer's Comeback," by L. J. Cohen;
and "The Only Hope of A. J.," by W. E. Mellinger, consist of
reminiscence, assurance and advice, from three well-known amateur
journalists. The articles were obviously written somewhat hastily but
are, nevertheless, very interesting and suggestive. H. L. Lindquist, in
"At It Again," tells how he severed his connection with amateur
journalism six years ago--being occupied with several professional
ventures--only to find that the old passion would not die and finally
compelled him to return to his early love. Those who have seen the
result of Mr. Lindquist's acquiescence in his Fate will gain some idea
of what his activity must have meant in other days.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Dabbler=, for October, follows hard upon its predecessor and, in
all essentials, is of equal merit. "Hiking in the Rocky Mountain
National Park," by Louis H. Kerber, Jr., is a well-written account of a
tour through some of America's most wonderful scenery, and reflects
great credit on Mr. Kerber's powers of observation. "Day-Dreams," by
Frank C. Reighter, is a didactic poem and so labors under an initial
handicap in attempting to hold the attention of the reader. The
technique of the poet, however, is deserving of praise, and if a fault
must be pointed out, it is in the forced pronunciation of the word
"idea" in the last line, which seems too cheap a device to appear in
poetry, even when, as in the present case, it is used intentionally.
"Dominion Day in Winnipeg," by W. B. Stoddard, is an account of a
patriotic celebration in Canada and was evidently witnessed by the
writer on his recent--and somewhat protracted--travels. "Ecstasy," a
poem, by Eleanor J. Barnhart, begins rather promisingly but we do not
proceed very far before detecting various crudities of craftsmanship.
Lines like the following:

    "The changing fire splendor of sky opals, rare,"

and

    "Like sea gulls swift soaring in tireless sky flight,"

and, once again,

    "Till star gleams bright glittering high in mid-sky,"

contain the germ of true poetry, but when we read them we are aware not
only of a harsh and difficult combination of consonants but also of an
entire absence of metrical swing and grace. In fact, we get an
