knuckles was driven backward by the impact with the hard metal. Bands
of writhing metal encompassed his body, pinning his arms to his side
and lifting him bodily from the ground. There he hung, kicking and
struggling in mid-air, supported by nothing he could see. He closed
his eyes and felt of the thing that held him. Cold, hard metal it
was--implacable and unyielding.

Clank, clank. The monster was walking with long, jerky strides. The
pressure against his ribs brought a gasp of agony from his lips. Each
jarring step was an individual and excruciating torture. His breath
was cut off by the relentless constriction of one of the tentacles
which now encircled his neck. It wouldn't be long now.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then, when everything had turned black and he had given up hope, he
was dumped unceremoniously on the hard floor of the cabin. A harsh
laugh greeted him as he struggled weakly to his knees.

"Thought you could put one over on Al Cadorna, did you?" a voice
rasped.

The room spun round as he tried to regain his feet. A mist swam
before his eyes. Al Cadorna! The most picturesque figure in gangland.
Credited with a dozen killings and with ill-gotten wealth untold, this
leader of the underworld openly boasted that the police had never
gotten anything on him. And they hadn't. So it was a criminal who had
laid hands on Shelton's robots, not a foreign spy. Worse and worse. He
thought of what they might be able to do with these invisible
mechanical things: make gunmen out of them; safe blowers; house
breakers. Why, society would be at their mercy; banks defenceless; the
mints, even--

"Stand up on your pins, you worm! Let's have a look at you!" The
muzzle of an automatic was thrust in his abdomen, prodding
insistently. Things stabilized in the room and he looked up into the
cruelest face he had ever seen, and recognizable from the many
pictures which had appeared in the yellow press.

Eddie took in the surroundings at a glance. He was in a low-ceilinged
room that was almost unfurnished. In one corner there was a replica of
Shelton's robot control, teleview disc and all. Carlos had just pulled
the switch and the robot was taking visible form. The man who prodded
him with the automatic was Cadorna, no doubt of that. His evil leer
and yellow eyes marked him at once. The other occupant of the room was
a big square-built man with a patch over one eye and strips of
adhesive tape across his nose--his antagonist of the night before.
Must have sneaked off after he came to; it was safer to send one of
the robots after the _verdammt Amerikaner_. Eddie restrained a chuckle
at the thought.

"Nothing to laugh at, kid!" Cadorna snarled. "You're goin' for a nice
long ride pretty quick. Know that?"

Eddie's head was clearing rapidly, but he pretended to sway on his
feet. Lina and her father were not in sight. If only he could spar for
a little time.

"What's the idea?" he asked. "Haven't you guys got enough?"

"That's our business. We know what we're doin', and when you butted in
you just signed your own papers. Dead men don't talk, you know, kid!"

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a door at the other side of the room. If only he could see
whether Lina was in there; whether she was alive.

"Tie him up, Gus!" Cadorna kept the pistol pressed into the pit of
Eddie's stomach as he gave the order. "Hands and feet--and make it a
good job, you wiener."

Eddie shouted then. "Lina!" Resistance was useless, but it would give
him some satisfaction to know she still lived even though Cadorna
pulled that trigger in the next instant. No reply came from beyond
that door.

"So!" Cadorna grinned maliciously. "Another victim! Carlos first, then
you, and now--Al Cadorna. If you're worrying about her, kid, you
needn't. She'll be perfectly safe with me."

Eddie's roar of rage shook the rafters. Heedless of consequences, he
brought his knee up suddenly and violently. Cadorna sank to the floor
with a groan, his pistol clattering harmlessly on the rough planks. In
a flash Eddie retrieved it, dropping behind the prostrate form of the
stricken gangster. Gus had fired and missed. Now he dared not shoot
for fear of hitting his chief. Eddie's gun spat fire and the big
German clapped his hands over his heart, his good eye widening in
surprise. Then he reeled and pitched forward on his face. A feminine
cry sounded from the adjoining room and Eddie's heart skipped a beat
when he heard it.

Carlos was padding across the floor, trying to get into a position
where he could fire without endangering Cadorna. Eddie swung his
pistol around and pulled the trigger. A miss! He fired again, but too
late. Fingers of steel had gripped his wrist and the king of gangland
rolled over on him, twisting the gun from his hand. Clubbed now, the
pistol was raised high over that distorted, malicious face. Eddie
tried to twist away from under the blow as it started its downward
swing, then a thousand steam hammers hit him all at once and ...
blackness....

       *       *       *       *       *

Something was pounding insistently at the doors of his consciousness.
He must pull himself together! They'd left him for dead and he
was--almost. But voices as loud and raucous as those would waken the
dead. He groaned with pain when he attempted to move his head.

"That for you, you rat." It was Cadorna's voice. "Try to take my
woman, will you?"

The pounding resolved itself into the angry barking of an automatic.
Someone squealed with mortal agony. Eddie opened his eyes cautiously
and saw that the room was full of people. The pungent odor of burned
powder assailed his nostrils. There was Cadorna and Carlos, David
Shelton and Lina. An undersized, dapper youth stood over the body of
the big German, his hands outstretched before his horror-stricken
face. A moment he stood thus, like a statue. Then his knees gave way
beneath him and he crumpled into a grotesque heap beside the man who
had been called Gus. Such was the manner of Cadorna's dealing with
those who displeased him.

The door to the adjoining room was open. Lina and her father had been
kept in there, with the little thug as their guard. Evidently Cadorna
had caught him trying to force his attentions on the girl. Good thing
he'd killed him.

Lina was sobbing and the sound brought increased agony to the helpless
Eddie. He lay still where they had placed him, beside the table which
supported the robot control apparatus. His cheek was against the floor
and he saw that a little pool of blood was forming there, blood drawn
by the butt of Cadorna's pistol when it contacted with his skull. He
was bound hand and foot. They hadn't thought him dead, after all.
Keeping him for that ride and a watery grave. Couldn't afford to leave
his body around where it might be found.

"What are you going to do with us?" Shelton was asking, his voice
bravely defiant. Game old sport at that, he was.

"Don't fret over your daughter. Al Cadorna's her protector now, and
she'll be taken care of better'n she's ever been. But you--that's
somethin' else again. First off, you're goin' to give Carlos the dope
on these trick metals in your machines. He couldn't analyze 'em, or
whatever you call it. Then you're goin' to have a nice long ride with
your friend over there."

"You'll go to the chair for this, Cadorna. And I'll never tell you the
secret of the alloys."

"Tell him, Dad," Lina was crying. "He'll let us go if you do."

"The hell I will, girlie. What I said, goes. We'll make him talk
first, too," Cadorna snarled.

"Never!" Shelton shouted.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lina had seen Eddie and, with a little cry, she bounded across the
room. Carlos was after her like a panther.

"Hands off that dame!" Cadorna yelled. "Let her cry over the boy
friend if she wants to. Won't do her any good. You get busy and set
one of the tin soldiers goin'. Make the old buzzard talk."

Carlos muttered sullenly as he started the motor-generator. Give him a
chance and he'd knife Cadorna in the back--for Lina.

The girl was kneeling at Eddie's side now, examining his bleeding
scalp. He opened one eye and gazed at her solemnly, pursing his lips
in a warning to silence. She caught her breath and nodded in
understanding.

Cadorna was shouting like a madman. "Keep the damn thing so I can see
it, you spig! They make me bug-house when you blink 'em off. Besides,
I don't trust you."

The bold Cadorna was afraid of something he couldn't see! An idea
flashed across Eddie's quickening mind. But he was helpless--bound so
tightly that the cords cut his wrists.

One of the robots was clanking across the room. Lina looked up in
momentary terror and Eddie saw her eyes stray over the table top where
Carlos was working.

"Want to grab the old one?" the Chilean called.

"Yes. Pick him up and squeeze him till his ribs crack. He'll talk."

Lina let a little moan escape her lips. Eddie was watching as the iron
monster approached the scientist and flung its tentacles around his
madly struggling form. Lina was fussing with him, trying to turn him
over. Cadorna's back was to them, his face thrust into that of
Shelton, who was fighting desperately to avoid the crushing grip of
the robot.

"Give him a squeeze, Carlos."

       *       *       *       *       *

Shelton's yell brought another low moan from the girl's set lips. She
was working furiously at Eddie's bonds. Lord, she had a knife! Good
girl! Must have found it on the table. His hands were free and he
wriggled his fingers to bring them to life. Then his feet. He was able
to move. Lina whispered in his ear.

"All right?" she asked anxiously.

"Yes," he whispered. Somehow their lips touched and Eddie felt his
heart pound at his temples. New life came to him with a rush of
exaltation.

Shelton was crying out in pain and Lina sprang to her feet. "You
beast!" she shouted at Cadorna. "Let him go."

Then she was across the room, tearing at the unyielding metal bands
that pinioned her father and slowly crushed him. Cadorna laughed
mirthlessly.

"Tell him to give me the dope," he retorted. "Then I'll let him
go--for a while."

Shelton's head hung on his chest, rolling weakly from side to side.
Eddie doubted whether he could speak if he wished to. The Chilean was
working at the controls, increasing the tension of those terrible
tentacles. Eddie raised himself to his knees, watching Cadorna
narrowly. He fingered the knife Lina had used in freeing him. No, he
couldn't use that. The Chilean would cry out and queer everything. He
laid it on the floor, within easy reach.

Cadorna was cursing now, first Shelton and then the girl. His rage was
maniacal. "Another notch!" he bellowed.

Eddie rose silently and clamped his fingers on the Chilean's windpipe.
Lina's eyes widened as she saw. She did everything in her power to
keep Cadorna's attention occupied as Eddie sunk those fingers into
Carlos' throat. The Chilean's eyes popped from his head as he
struggled furiously to tear away the steel-sinewed hand that had
stopped off his breath. Death was staring him in the face, and he
could not cry out. His strength left suddenly as the fingers dug in
deeper, and Eddie shook him as he would a rat. In a surprisingly short
time he had slumped to the floor, and not until his squirmings ceased
did Eddie loose that awful grip.

"Another notch, you spiggoty!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Eddie bent over the controls. Lina's pleadings mingled with the curses
of Cadorna. She was cajoling now--telling the brute she'd go with him
gladly if only he'd free her father; promising anything, everything,
in the desperate attempt to keep him from discovering that his last
henchman was out of the picture. But her words served only to spur
Eddie to swifter action. He twirled the knobs of the dual control. The
second robot was fading from view. He'd give Cadorna a dose of the
thing he really feared. He eased off a little on the other control,
releasing the pressure on poor Shelton's ribs as much as he dared.

The position indicator of the second robot moved slightly as Eddie
started the invisible monster toward the yelling gangster. He watched
the screen closely. It was quite a trick, at that, controlling these
things you couldn't see. All you had to go by were these sketchy
representations in the teleview; tiny flecks of light that outlined
the various movable members of the robot.

"Eddie!" Lina screamed suddenly. "Look out!"

But he had seen Cadorna wheel around as he watched his image on the
screen. At that moment a tentacle was writhing its way around his
thick neck. A bullet whistled past Eddie's ear and buried itself
harmlessly in the wall.

Then from the blasphemous mouth of the king of gangland there came a
shriek of awful fear. The tightening tentacle shut it off in a choking
gurgle. Cadorna was captured at last--by a monster he could not see, a
monster that struck terror to his craven soul.

It was the work of but a moment to free David Shelton from the grip of
the other robot. The tortured man tottered into Lina's arms for
support.

Eddie played with Cadorna now, releasing the grip from his throat and
pinioning his arms instead. With rapid fingers he manipulated the
controls until the screaming gangster was raised high in the air by
the unseen arms of the robot.

"Another notch, Al," he chortled.

Cadorna yelled anew as the clamps tightened, "For God's sake, kid,
quit it! Let me down. I'll do anything you say."

"Yeah?" Eddie moved one of the rheostat knobs a trifle.

The prince of racketeers was whimpering now, like a baby. The sharp
snap of a rib punctured his outcries.

"Another notch," said Eddie grimly.

But the king of the underworld had fainted.

       *       *       *       *       *

An hour later Eddie Vail surveyed the scene complacently. Lina had
washed the blood from his head and face and bandaged his wound.
Luckily, Cardorna's blow had been a glancing one. The girl was fussing
over her father, now, and the scientist was on the point of resenting
her attentions; swore he could take care of himself; he wasn't a baby.
Carlos and his chief were trussed up like mummies, and had been
snarling at each other ever since the Chilean recovered his senses,
each blaming the other for their predicament. The robots stood
motionless by the wall.

This would be a big haul for the police. Plenty of evidence to send
Cadorna to the chair now. The murder of Butch Collins, the undersized
thug, had been witnessed by three of them. No, four: Carlos would
squeal. He was that kind. There would be rejoicing in the underworld
too, for Cadorna had many enemies. They'd be killing each other off in
droves though, for the leaders of rival gangs would be battling for
his place.

"Guess we'll have to dump them in the limousine," he remarked to
Shelton. "Drive them to the nearest town and turn them over to the
authorities."

"Yes. Then they can come back for the bodies of the other two."
Shelton grimaced as he contemplated the sprawled figures.

"What about your robots?" Eddie asked.

"Why, I'll go ahead with my original plans, of course." The scientist
looked surprised.

"Dad!" Lina turned beseeching eyes on Eddie and his heart performed
amazingly as he looked into their depths.

"And why not?" asked her father dolefully. "They'll insure the peace
of the world. They'll--"

"Listen, Mr. Shelton," Eddie interrupted. "If you'll think a little
you'll realize that they'll do no such thing. Has any new and terrible
engine of destruction ever accomplished that result? No--the enemy
always finds a way of combating the new weapon and of devising another
still more terrible. You've discovered a marvelous thing, but its
value is quite problematical."

"How can they ever combat a thing they cannot see?"

"Easily. Why, I could devise a teleview attachment in two days that
would make them visible. Photo-electric cells are capable of detecting
ultra-violet light as you well know. Radium glows under its rays. Why
not coat a teleview screen with some radio-active material?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Shelton frowned thoughtfully. "You're right. Vail," he said, after a
moment of silence; "absolutely right. It was only a dream."

With dragging feet he walked to the transmitter, his expression grim
in the realization of failure. He started the motor-generator with a
gesture of finality.

"What are you going to do?" Eddie asked fearfully.
