"Gee, that girl has courage!" Clee murmured.

For a moment the two men looked at each other. Jim was thinking about
the opened door, and the chance they had to get out. But Clee's mind
was on something else.

"Well, Jim," he said, "you and I have a nasty job ahead."

Jim looked at Clee wonderingly as he took out his pipe and stuck it in
the crack of the door, allowing him to remove his foot. Clee explained
to him what Xantra had told him with the thought-sending helmets;
reminded him of what they had learned from Vivian about the lumps on
their necks. After he had finished he said quietly but decisively:

"Now, we're going to try and remove whatever is under these lumps.
Have you got anything sharp? Your knife? Something with an edge on
it?"

It would mean escape from the domination of Xantra's will!--from his
terrible stabbing punishment!--if they could remove them! Jim breathed
a little quicker in his excitement.

"But once we do it--if we _can_ do it--it'll mean that we'll have to
make our break to escape right away," he reminded Clee. "We'll be
caught if Xantra wills us to come to him and we don't appear!"

"You know what will happen to Vivian if we delay the attempt." Clee
reminded him levelly: and Jim knew that Clee was right--that their
break for freedom must start right then and there....

       *       *       *       *       *

He looked through his pockets and produced some cigarettes, matches, a
pipe, a nailfile and some utterly useless odds and ends. Clee's hands
came out of his pockets empty. "I've got nothing at all," he said--and
picked up the nailfile and looked at it questioningly. "We'll have to
use this, I guess.... Well, I'm first."

He lay face down on the floor and loosened his collar. Quietly, he
made several suggestions. "Light a match and heat the tip in the
flame," he said. "The point's pretty dull, but cut as deep and quick
and clean as you can. If I yell, pay no attention; I'll try to hold
still. Unless it bleeds very much, best not make a bandage; we've
nothing clean enough."

That was all he said; and Jim, his heart beating like mad, and a lump
in his throat, could find no words at all. He sterilized the tip of
the file as directed, studied the lump a moment, then, after a rough,
affectionate shake of his friend's shoulder, he knelt close to his
task. One quick hard cut; a sharp gasp from Clee; a repetition; then
two more times crossways--and a firm, spongelike metallic disc lay
revealed. Then the worst--raising it a little, and breaking the
several fine wires that led from it through the flesh within....

Clee lay panting, the sweat running down the deep wrinkles of pain on
his face. Dark blood oozed from the jagged wound. But he smiled a
little, and some of the pain-wrinkles in his face smoothed away, when
Jim showed him the disk....

For a short time Clee rested, quieting his nerves, while Jim staunched
the flow of blood.

And then it was Jim's turn; and he bore the sharp agony as stoically
as Clee....

It was perhaps a strange thing; but at this great moment in the lives
of the two men they felt no need to talk. For the few minutes they
rested after they had done, no word was spoken; but in that time a
bond of friendship was formed that only death could ever break....

       *       *       *       *       *

They did not rest long. Every moment brought them nearer to the
inevitable discovery of what they had done. Their muscles were still
quivering, the wounds on their necks still slowly bleeding, when Clee
rose and aroused Jim. The most dangerous, desperate part of their wild
revolt lay just ahead.

They were able to make but the vaguest of plans, not knowing what to
anticipate outside. They only knew that they would first have to
strike boldly for possession of the control alcove--which, without
doubt meant they would have, somehow, to kill Xantra--to find and kill
a man they could not see, yet who could see them. An enormous task.
And only the first of several.

For a moment, realizing this, they hesitated at the door. But the die
had been cast; there was nothing for them to do but go forward--and
quickly; so, giving Jim a final warning that they must stick together,
Clee opened wide the door and stepped out into the corridor.

What he saw there halted, him in his tracks.

"The slaves!" gasped Jim, and involuntarily both Earth-men backed into
the room again. The creatures they had seen at once followed them
inside.

There were four of them. As tall as men, they were, and the general
cast of their bodies was identical. But they were different in
shocking little details. Their heads were much larger, and in the
shape of inverted pears, like those of hydrocephalics; their eyes,
popped and dull. The thin lips beneath their stubs of noses were ever
writhing and twisting in horrible grimaces. And, worst, their skins
were sickly-white, and were absolutely bald of hair. The only clothes
they wore were loin-cloths and very large sandals, which exposed to
full view their chunky, muscular bodies.

All this the two men took in at a glance. They knew they could never
hope to cope, unarmed, with four such creatures as these, so they
stood with their backs to the wall, alertly awaiting their first
move.

"Easy," warned Clee. "They're probably only coming to take us in hand,
as Vivian said."

       *       *       *       *       *

The nearest of the slaves stepped a little closer to the two men, and
by the twitching of its eyelids and the increased mouthings of its
lips it was apparent that the creature was highly excited. A high,
variable moaning sound came from its throat. Curiously, boldly, it
looked Clee all over--and then it did an amazing thing. Seeing the
blood on the back of his neck, it swung him around, put its writhing
lips to the still-bleeding wound and dog-like licked it clean.

The gesture was altogether a friendly one.

Another of the slaves of Xantra went up and did the same to Jim, and
the two men looked at each other with relief. This meant that the
removal of the disks had not been understood by the creatures!

It was with growing hope that they allowed themselves to be conducted
from their cell, through the sloping corridor into a doorway they had
passed coming in, and down a curving flight of steps into a large room
below. They were in the space at the very bottom of the ship, for,
through the redly-glowing transparent walls that curved on each side
and below, they could see the infinite deeps of star-filled space.
Three other slaves were there, waiting for them. At the far side of
the room their guide pointed to two small stalls, with a partition
between, which they understood were to be their beds. They were across
from a long row of similar ones.

"Making us right at home," commented Jim. "I wonder if they'll serve
cakes and tea."

"Wish they would," added Clee; "I'm getting damned hungry. But we've
got work to do--and we've got to do it quick!"

His eyes swept the room, looking among the sparse furnishings for
something they might be able to use as a weapon. He saw nothing, but
the sight of the lump on the neck of a nearby slave gave him an idea.

"I wonder if these slaves would fight for us if we removed the lumps
from their necks," he said musingly, his eyes narrow. "I wish there
were some way to talk to them...."

       *       *       *       *       *

He looked from one to another of the animal-men making a circle about
them, wondering what to do; then quickly he made his decision. "Jim,
I'm going to try. It'll have to be done by signs; I've got to make
them understand, and get their permission."

At once he raised his hand to get the slaves' attention; then, raising
both fists high in the air, he shook them violently, at the same time
gritting his teeth, working his face, and growling in animal anger at
something overhead. He was trying to show the slaves his anger at
Xantra, above.

The slaves fell away from him in surprise and alarm, not understanding
what he was trying to put across. He continued his demonstration,
hopping about furiously, but still without result. Then Jim cried out:

"Touch the place on your neck!"

Clee did so, and the result was startling. Quickly there ran around
the circle throaty growls of anger, and every slave raised a hand to
the lump on its neck. Evidently they had all felt the awful
punishment-pain of their master.

Heartened by this, Clee extended his pantomime. Stopping his
demonstration of anger, he put one finger on the wound on his neck and
fell to the floor, writhing in simulated pain. As he lay there
groaning, the easily aroused animal-men moaned with him in sympathy.
Then Jim, inspired, stepped into the act. Taking out his nailfile, he
bent over the prostrate Clee and pretended to cut into his neck,
making a great show of removing something and throwing it away; and as
he did so Clee jumped to his feet and grinned and hopped about the
room in a wildly exaggerated affectation of joy and relief. Then he
stopped his acting and carefully showed the slaves the wounds in his
and Jim's necks, by finger movements doing his best to make it clear
that they had removed something from there.

And then, taking no chances, he repeated the whole pantomime, Jim, at
the proper place, acting his part as before.

       *       *       *       *       *

When at last he stopped and looked around, he was over-joyed at his
apparent success in putting across the idea. All over the room the
animal-men were repeating his show in its various phases.

"Now I've got to take the disk out of one of them," said Clee, "and
it's a mighty dangerous thing to attempt! You see how easily their
emotions are aroused. If I hurt too much--!"

"I know," responded Jim, "but we've got to risk it, for if we succeed
we've got a good bunch of tough fighters at our backs. We need every
bit of help we can get!"

Carefully they made their few preparations, and Clee, again by acting,
indicated to one of the animal-men what he wanted to do. He seemed to
make himself well understood, for without hesitation the creature lay
face down on the floor. The others all gathered around as Clee bent
over it, and Jim scanned their faces closely for any sign of suspicion
or resentment. Seeing none, he told Clee to start; then held his
breath in awful suspense.

The disk appeared near the surface, and with a quick slice Clee made
his first incision. With the cut, the prone slave bucked and snarled.
Clee murmured soothing words to it in English, and, as the creature
quieted down, made another cut. Again came the bucking and throaty
protest; and this time, to Jim's dismay, he saw in the bestial faces
of the animal-men around them a sympathetic swing of emotional
protest. A little more, now; and Clee would be able to take the disk
out; but would the slaves restrain themselves until then?

Again Clee allowed the brute body under him to calm down. Then, as he
was about to cut once more, from somewhere above in the space ship
came the piercing scream of a woman. Something was happening to
Vivian.

       *       *       *       *       *

Clee half started to rise, to run to her aid, but he forced himself to
be reasonable. Weaponless, visible, he could never hope to rescue an
invisible girl from someone he couldn't even see. He was on the point
of making valuable allies; in just a few moments more--! He decided to
hurry through with the job he had undertaken.

All below had heard the scream. The circle around him was shifting
uncertainly, and peculiar sounds were coming out of the brutes'
twisting mouths as he bent again over their fellow on the floor.

Clee's hand was trembling like an aspen leaf as he prepared to make
the next incision. He was completely unnerved, and with the utmost
efforts of his will he was unable to control the nailfile. And he had
to hurry!

He sliced as straight as he could at the bleeding lump; the slave
moved; and the point of the file slipped deep into the creature's
flesh!

At that, with a snarling growl the brute below arched from the floor
and flung Clee sprawling. From all around the circle came menacing
growls as the bleeding animal-man lumbered to its feet and came after
him in a definite attack. Jim, not at that moment the center of their
attention, pushed one of the slaves in the way of the charging brute
and the two of them half fell; and before they could recover their
balance Clee was on his feet making after Jim to the steps that led up
out of the room.

"Up!" came Jim's shout. "Fast! We've made them enemies!"

Above them on the stairs was descending another slave, innocent of
what had transpired below, and the two men bowled it over in their
haste to get past. All the way to the bottom of the stairs it tumbled;
and that delayed pursuit for the moment needed by the Earth-men to
gain the upper corridor. Quickly they darted through the door; there
was no way they could lock or block it, so they had to run on. Taking
to the left, they found themselves in the little entrance room, and
from there their only course led up the corridor leading to Xantra's
quarters and the control alcove.

Arrived there, the two men found the door ajar, but they paused
irresolute before it, hardly daring to go in. They had no choice,
however, for behind, only fifteen feet away, came the van of the
animal-men. They pushed through the door, closed and bolted it, then,
wheeling tigerishly, surveyed the room.

       *       *       *       *       *

They saw no one.

They were not relieved at this. Xantra might well be there; he, as
well as Vivian, would be invisible to them. And he had every
opportunity of striking first; even then he might be preparing to deal
with them, if he was in the room. The slaves were not attempting to
break in the door to get them--and this was ominous: it argued that
the master was there.

The two men stood motionless at the door, peering intently at the rug
in search of telltale footprints. Then Clee touched Jim's shoulder and
whispered faintly in his ear:

"Cloves! Smell it?"

Jim nodded. Slowly, on guard every second, they advanced to the
alcove. They saw no sign of anyone there, though the odor of cloves
was stronger. Jim grabbed a chair and held it ready, and Clee followed
suit with a small, heavy tabouret. Cautiously, methodically, the two
men began to reconnoitre the large room, examining foot by foot the
rug in search of the faint clear prints that would reveal the presence
of their enemy. The smell of cloves was beginning to dull their brains
a little. Clee saw the danger in this, and whispered to Jim:

"Faster! Xantra may be insidiously anaesthetizing us! We've got to
find where he is--quick!"

They hastened their search, feeling more and more sure that Xantra was
close by. And not till then did Clee remember that he had a way to
discover Xantra's location. Jim heard him curse under his breath; saw
him put down the tabouret and take out his tobacco; and knew at once
what he was about to do. He went close to Clee, to guard him with his
chair against possible attack.

       *       *       *       *       *

The face of Clee's wrist watch was glowing brightly; it took only a
second to find with the package of tobacco a spot which cut the dial's
unnatural glow. As they found it the skin on the two men's bodies
prickled all over. The line from the dial to the package of tobacco,
if continued, would reach a spot on the floor not six feet away. And
looking carefully there they could barely make out, in the bent hairs
of the rug, a broken outline that might have been made by a prone
figure.

As they prepared to jump they heard from that place a low sigh--and
just before them appeared the distinct print of a human hand. Xantra
was rising! And coincident with this a sudden banging at the door told
them that the slaves at last had started to break in!

As one man the two Earthlings leaped on Xantra; he would have to be
taken care of first. When they had fastened on his rising body they
punched and pounded it furiously. Though their enemy was undoubtedly
only half conscious, the sudden attack aroused him and he resisted
vigorously. But then Clee made a lucky connection on what he felt to
be his jaw, and the invisible form in their arms went limp.

"Get a rope--wire--anything to bind him with--quick!" yelled Clee.
"I'll hold him!"

The pounding at the door was increasing ominously is Jim dashed over
to the work-table. Rapidly he looked for something suitable, and in a
few seconds was back with a length of stout wire which they quickly
wrapped around the ankles and wrists of the limp form Clee was
holding. As the wire touched Xantra it gradually disappeared from
their sight, but their fingers reassured them that he was tightly
bound.

Then they were at the door, which, shivering and bending from the
