body. When the lower surface of the cut is irritated, the muscles of the
{164} parts below the section are violently contracted. Hence, we conclude
that, in respect to the movements ordered by the will, the spinal cord is
not their source; but that it acts only as a conductor, and is,
accordingly, the great motor nerve of the body.

[Sidenote: 31. What singular fact is noticed? What does the result show?]

31. DIRECTION OF THE FIBRES OF THE CORD.--If one lateral half of the spinal
cord be cut, or injured, a very singular fact is observed. All voluntary
power over the muscles of the corresponding half of the body is lost, but
the sensibility of that side remains undiminished. This result seems to
show that the motor fibres of the cord pursue a direct course, while its
sensory fibres are bent from their course. And this has been proved to be
the fact; for immediately after the posterior roots--the conductors of
sensory impressions--join the posterior columns, they enter the gray matter
of the cord, and passing over, ascend to the brain on the opposite side.
Accordingly, the sensory fibres from the right and left sides interlace
each other in the gray matter; this arrangement has been termed the
_decussation_, or crossing of these fibres. This condition serves to
explain how a disease or injury of the cord may cause a paralysis of motion
in one leg, and a loss of sensation in the other.

[Sidenote: 32. Direction of the anterior or motor columns? In the cord
itself? In the medulla oblongata? The decussation?]

32. The direction of the anterior, or motor columns of the cord, is
downward from the brain. In the cord itself, the course of the motor fibres
is for the most part, a direct one; but in the medulla oblongata, or upper
extremity of the cord, and therefore early in their career, these fibres
decussate, or cross from side to side in a mass; and not separately, as in
the case of the posterior fibres just mentioned. This arrangement is termed
the _decussation_ of the anterior columns of the medulla.

[Sidenote: 33. Result of the double interlacing of fibres? Where is the
seat of pain when the right hand is hurt? The moving of the foot? Loss of
sensation in one side of the body?]

33. From this double interlacing of fibres results a {165} crossed action
between the original and terminal extremity of all nerve-fibres which pass
through the medulla; namely, those of all the spinal nerves. Consequently,
if the right hand be hurt, the left side of the brain feels the pain; and
if the left foot move, it is the right hemisphere which dictates its
movement. For the same reason, when a loss of sensation and power of motion
affecting the right side of the body alone is observed, the physiologist
understands that the brain has been invaded by disease upon its left side.
This affection is termed _hemiplegia_, or the "half-stroke." The
full-stroke, which often follows the rupture of a blood-vessel in the
brain, is commonly called _paralysis_.

[Sidenote: 34. What other important use has the cord? What is the activity
denominated?]

34. THE REFLEX ACTION OF THE CORD.--We have already considered the cord as
the great motor and sensory nerve of the body, but it has another and
extremely important use. By virtue of the gray matter, which occupies its
central portion, it plays the part of an independent nerve centre. The
spinal cord not only conducts some impressions to the brain, but it also
arrests others; and, as it is expressed, "reflects" them into movements by
its own power. This mode of nervous activity is denominated the _Reflex
Action_ of the cord.

[Sidenote: 35. Example of the fowl? Centipede? Frog? What do they prove?]

35. A familiar example of this power of the cord is found in the violent
movements which agitate a fowl after its head has been cut off. The
cold-blooded animals also exhibit reflex movements in an astonishing
degree. A decapitated centipede will run rapidly forward, and will
seemingly strive to overturn, or else climb over obstacles placed in its
way. A frog similarly mutilated will sustain its headless body upon its
feet, in the standing posture, just as it might do if it were still alive.
If pushed over, it will regain its feet; and if the feet are irritated, it
will {166} jump forward. There can be no doubt that, in the lower animals,
movements may take place which are completely divorced from the will,
sensation, and consciousness; for in those animals, as well as in man,
these faculties have their principal seat within the brain.

[Sidenote: 36. What is necessary in most cases to awaken reflex movements?
In the case of the fowl? Convulsions which follow decapitation?]

36. An irritation is necessary, in most instances, to awaken reflex
movements. In the case of the decapitated fowl, its muscles are excited to
convulsive action by reason of its being thrown upon the hard ground and
roughly handled. Let it be treated differently, and the convulsions will
not take place: let it be laid gently upon soft cotton, and the body will
remain comparatively quiet. It may comfort some people to know that the
convulsions which follow decapitation are not attended with pain; nor are
they a necessary part of the "act of death," as some suppose.

[Sidenote: 37. Actions in the human body distinct from voluntary efforts?]

37. In the human body, likewise, actions are excited that are entirely
distinct from the ordinary voluntary efforts. It is not permissible,
desirable, nor even necessary to decapitate a man that the body may be
disconnected from his brain, in order to test the effect of irritation upon
the spinal cord; although the bodies of beheaded criminals have been
experimented upon, and caused to move by powerful galvanic batteries. The
resort to such means of experiment is rendered unnecessary by the
occurrence of certain deplorable cases of disease and injury, which
effectually sever all communication between the brain and a large part of
the body.

[Sidenote: 38. Reflex action after injury of the cord? Why not due to the
muscles?]

38. Thus, the cord may be so far injured, as the result of accident, as to
terminate all sensation and voluntary motion in the lower half of the body,
the patient seemingly becoming lifeless and powerless from the waist
downward. And yet, by tickling or pinching either foot, the leg {167} of
the same side may be made to jerk, or even to kick with considerable force;
but, unless the patient is observing his limbs, he is wholly unconscious of
these movements, which are, therefore, performed independently of the
brain. And they are in nowise due to the muscles of the limb; for, if the
cord itself becomes diseased below the point of injury, the muscles cease
to contract.

[Sidenote: 39. What are the requisites for the production of this form of
nervous action?]

39. For the production of this form of nervous action three things are
requisite--(1) a nerve to conduct messages from the surface of the body,
one of that variety formerly described as sensory, but which are now
incapable of awakening sensation; (2) a portion of uninjured spinal cord
which shall reflect or convert impressions into impulses; and (3) a motor
nerve to conduct impulses outward to the muscles. The power of the cord to
enforce reflex acts resides in the gray matter, into which the reflex
nerves enter and from which they depart, by means of their posterior and
anterior roots respectively.

[Sidenote: 40. Why do we not readily recognize the reflex activity of the
cord in our own bodies? How best studied in others? Example?]

40. THE USES OF THE REFLEX ACTION.--The reflex activity of the cord is
exhibited in the healthy body in many ways, but since it is never
accompanied with sensation, we do not readily recognize it in our own
bodies. Reflex movements are best studied in the cases of other persons,
when the conditions enable us to distinguish between acts that are
consciously, and those that are unconsciously performed. For example, if
the foot of a person soundly asleep be tickled or pinched, it will be
quickly withdrawn from the irritation.

[Sidenote: 41. Similar movements? Arm of a person? Melted wax or heated
coin on the hand?]

41. Similar movements may be observed in cases where the consciousness and
sensation are temporarily obliterated by disease, or by means of narcotic
poisons. If the arm of a person who has been rendered insensible by {168}
chloroform, be raised, and then allowed to fall, it will be noticed that
the limb does not drop instantly, like a lifeless member, but a certain
amount of rigidity remains in its muscles, which resists or breaks the
force of its descent. Again, when a substance like melted sealing-wax, or a
heated coin, falls upon the hand, the limb is snatched away at once, even
before the feeling of pain has been recognized by the brain. When jolted in
a rapidly moving car, we involuntarily step forward or backward, so as to
preserve the centre of gravity of the body.

[Sidenote: 42. Result of healthful reflex activity? When may the reflex
energy be deficient?]

42. These and similar acts are executed by the same mechanism as that
previously described in the case of paralysis from an injury of the spinal
cord. The muscles thus called into play, are those which are ordinarily
under the sway of the will, but which in these cases act through this
reflex action of the cord, altogether independently of the will. A
healthful reflex activity produces an elasticity, or "tone," of the
voluntary muscular system, which, in a great measure, explains the
existence in the young and vigorous of a feeling of buoyancy and reserve
power. Its possessor is restlessly active, and it may appropriately be said
of him, "he rejoiceth as a strong man to run a race." But this reflex
energy may be deficient. This is true when the blood is poor and wanting in
its solid ingredients, or the circulation is feeble; the muscles, then, are
flabby and weak, and the person himself is said to be "nerveless," or
indisposed to exertion. Shivering from cold, and trembling from fear, may,
in part, be referred to a temporary loss of tone, resulting from a powerful
impression upon the brain.

[Sidenote: 43. Excess of this activity in disease? Hydrophobia, etc.? The
difference in severity of the convulsions?]

43. An excess of this activity may also be observed in disease. In this
condition, the excitability of the cord is unnaturally aroused, and
frequent and violent movements {169} of the limbs and body, called
convulsions, are the result. The convulsions of young children, and the
nervous agitation of _chorea_, or St. Vitus's dance, are reflex in
character; as are also the symptoms attending poisoning by strychnine, and
those terrible diseases, _tetanus_, or "locked jaw," and _hydrophobia_. The
severity of the convulsions is not the same in all cases of these
disorders; but, in those last mentioned the most violent spasmodic
movements are provoked by the slightest form of irritation--such as the
sound of pouring water, the sight of any glittering object, the glancing of
a mirror, the contact of cool air, or even the touch of the bedclothes.

[Sidenote: 44. Another variety of reflex motions? What are they? What is
stated of the mind in connection with these movements?]

44. Another variety of reflex motions takes place in certain involuntary
muscles, and over these the cord exercises supreme control. They are
principally those movements which aid the performance of digestion and
nutrition, the valve-action of the pylorus, and other movements of the
stomach and intestines. In these movements the mind shares no part. And it
is well that this is so; for since the mind is largely occupied with
affairs external to the body, it acts irregularly, becomes fatigued, and
needs frequent rest. The spinal cord, on the contrary, is well fitted for
the form of work on which depends the growth and support of the body, as it
acts uniformly, and with a machine-like regularity.

[Sidenote: 45. Consciousness in these operations? Physical wants?]

45. These operations are not accompanied by consciousness; for, as a
general rule, the attention is only called to them when they become
disordered. Many a person does not know where his stomach is situated,
until he discovers its position by reason of a feeling of distress within
it, produced by giving that organ improper work to perform. In this manner
the higher and nobler faculties of the mind are liberated from the simply
routine duties of the {170} body; and we are thus left to direct the
attention, the reason, and the will to the accomplishment of the great ends
of our existence. If it were otherwise, we could only find time to attend
to our ordinary physical wants.

[Sidenote: 46. How many objects may the reflex activity be said to have?
State the first. The second. The third.]

46. The objects of the reflex activity of the cord are threefold. In the
first place, it acts as the protector of man, in his unconscious moments.
It is his unseen guardian, always ready to act, never growing weary, and
never requiring sleep. Nor does its faithful action wholly cease with the
cessation of life in other parts. In the second place, it is the regulator
of numerous involuntary motions that are necessary to the nutrition of the
body. Here its actions are entirely independent of the brain, and are
performed in a secret and automatic manner. And, thirdly, it acts as a
substitute, and regulates involuntary movements in the muscles usually
under the influence of the will. It thus takes the place of the higher
faculties in performing habitual acts, and permits them to extend their
operations more and more beyond the body and its material wants.

[Sidenote: 47. How does the medulla oblongata resemble the cord?]

47. THE FUNCTIONS OF THE MEDULLA OBLONGATA.--The prolongation of the spinal
cord, within the skull, has been previously spoken of as the medulla
oblongata. It resembles the cord, in being composed of both white and gray
matter, and in conducting sensory and motor influences. It likewise gives
rise to certain nerves, which are here called cranial nerves (from
_cranium_, the skull). All except two of these important nerves spring from
the medulla, or the parts immediately adjoining it; the exceptions are the
two nerves taking part in the special senses of sight and smell, which
nerves have their origin at the base of the cerebrum.

[Sidenote: 48. What final fact is observed in the crossing of the motor
columns?]

48. The decussation, or crossing of the motor columns, has been previously
described, when treating of the {171} direction of the nerve-fibres of the
cord; and the singular fact has been alluded to, that when one side of the
brain is injured, its effects are limited to the opposite side of the body.
One more fact remains to be observed in this connection, namely, this
crossed action does not usually take place in the cranial nerves.
Accordingly, when apoplexy, or the rupture of a blood-vessel, occurs in the
right hemisphere of the cerebrum, the left side of the body is paralyzed,
but the right side of the face is affected; this is because that part of
the body is supplied by the cranial nerves.

[Sidenote: 49. The pneumogastric nerve? The feelings aroused by it? The
"vital knot?"]

49. A portion of the medulla presides over the important function of
respiration, and from it arises the _pneumogastric_ nerve, so called
because its branches serve both the lungs and stomach. The feelings of
hunger, thirst, and the desire for air are aroused by means of this nerve.
The wounding of the gray matter of the medulla, even of a small portion of
it, near the origin of the pneumogastric nerve, at once stops the action of
the lungs and causes death. In consequence of the importance of this part,
it has been termed the "vital knot." We find, also, that its location
within the skull is exceedingly well protected, it being quite beyond the
reach of any ordinary form of harm from without.

[Sidenote: 50. The uses of the smaller gray masses at the base of the
brain?]

50. THE FUNCTIONS OF THE CRANIAL GANGLIA.--The uses of the smaller gray
masses lying at the base of the brain are not well ascertained; and, on
account of their position, so remote from the surface, it would, at first,
seem well-nigh impossible to study them. But, from the results following
diseases in these parts, and from experiments upon inferior animals, they
are becoming gradually better understood; and there is reason to believe
that eventually the physiological office of each part will be clearly
ascertained and defined. It is believed, however, but not {172} absolutely
proven, that the anterior masses, like the anterior roots of the spinal
nerves and the anterior columns of the cord, are concerned in the
production of motion; in fact, that they are the central organs of that
function. The posterior gray masses are, on the contrary, supposed to be
the seat of sensation.

[Sidenote: 51. Function of the cerebellum? When it is diseased?]

51. THE FUNCTION OF THE CEREBELLUM.--The function of the cerebellum, or
"little brain," is the direction of the movements of the voluntary muscles.
When this organ is the seat of disease or injury, it is usually observed
that the person is unable to execute orderly and regular acts, but moves in
a confused manner as if in a state of intoxication. Like the larger brain,
or cerebrum, it appears to be devoid of feeling; but it takes no part in
the operations of the mind.

[Sidenote: 52. Where is the seat of the mind? The subordination of the
other organs? The gray matter?]

52. THE FUNCTION OF THE CEREBRUM.--The cerebrum, or brain proper, is the
seat of the mind; or, speaking more exactly, it is the material instrument
by which the mind acts; and, as it occupies the highest position in the
body, so it fulfils the loftiest uses. All the other organs are subordinate
to it: the senses are its messengers, which bring it information from the
outer world, and the organs of motion are its servants, which execute its
commands. Here, as in the nervous apparatus of lower grade already
considered, the gray matter is the element of power; and, in proportion as
this substance increases in extent, and in proportion to the number of
convolutions in the hemispheres, do the mental faculties expand.

[Sidenote: 53. What is stated of men in connection with the size of their
brain? With the brains of other animals?]

53. There have been a few, but only a few, men of distinguished ability
whose brains have been comparatively small in size; the rule being that
great men possess large brains. The relative weight of the brain of man, as
{173} compared with the weight of the body, does not, in all instances,
exceed that of the inferior animals; the canary and other singing-birds
have a greater relative amount of nervous matter than man; but man
surpasses all other creatures in the size of the hemispheres of the
cerebrum, and in the amount of gray substance which they contain.

[Sidenote: 54. Sensitiveness of the brain substance? The removal of a
portion of the brain? State the remarkable case mentioned?]

54. It is a singular fact that this cerebral substance is insensitive, and
may be cut without causing pain. The removal of a considerable quantity of
the brain has taken place, as the result of accident, without causing
death, and without even affecting seriously the intellect. A remarkable
case of injury of the brain is recorded, in which, from the accidental
explosion of gunpowder used in blasting a rock, the "tamping-iron" was
driven directly through the skull of a man. This iron rod, three feet and
seven inches long, an inch and a quarter in diameter, and weighing more
than thirteen pounds, entered the head below the ear and passed out at the
top of the skull, carrying with it portions of the brain and fragments of
bone. The man sustained the loss of sight on one side, but otherwise
