
WATER METERS. OIL METERS.

PRICES LARGELY REDUCED.


RIVAL STEAM PUMPS

$35 & UPWARDS

JOHN. H. MCGOWAN & CO.

CINCINNATI OHIO.


PATENTS AT AUCTION.

Regular Monthly Sales by George W. Keeler, Auctioneer. For terms,
address NEW YORK PATENT EXCHANGE, 67 Liberty Street, New York.


50 PERFUMED CHROMO AND MOTTO CARDS, 10C. _Name in Gold and Jet._ Seavy
Bros., Northford, Ct.


WARRANTED WATCHES ONLY $3 EACH

$12 WATCHES

FOR ONLY $3 EACH.

A BANKRUPT STOCK OF WATCHES,

_Warranted for One Year._

[Illustration]

This bankrupt stock of Watches must be closed out in 90 days. THE
FORMER PRICE OF THESE WATCHES WAS $12.00 EACH. They are silvered case
and open face, all one style, and of French manufacture, the movements
of which being well known the world over for their fine finish. They
are used on RAILROADS and STEAMBOATS, where ACCURATE TIME is required,
and give good satisfaction. Think of it, a $12.00 Watch for ONLY
$3.00, and WARRANTED ONE YEAR FOR TIME.

CINCINNATI. O., October 1st, 1878.

The Walters Importing Co. is an old established and very reliable
house, and we cheerfully recommend them.

CINCINNATI POST.

After the closure of sale of this bankrupt stock of Watches, which
will continue 90 days from date of this paper, no order will be filled
at less than $12.00 each; so please send your order at once. With each
Watch we furnish our SPECIAL WARRANTEE FOR ONE YEAR FOR ACCURATE TIME.
We will forward the Watch promptly on receipt of $3.00, or will send
C.O.D. if customers desire and remit $1.00 on account.

Address all orders to WALTERS IMPORTING CO., 180 ELM STREET,
CINCINNATI, O.

-->TO WATCH SPECULATORS: We call particular I attention to these
Watches, as they sell readily at from $12.00 to $20.00 each.

-->_Cut this Advertisement Out._

WARRANTED WATCHES ONLY $3 EACH


$10 to $1000

Invested in Wall St. Stocks makes fortunes every month. Books sent
free explaining everything.

Address BAXTER & CO., Bankers, 17 Wall St., N. Y.


[Illustration]

PATENT PORTABLE CHUCK JAWS.

Improved Solid Emery Wheels, for grinding Iron and Brass Castings.
Tools, etc. Manufactured by AM. TWIST DRILL CO., Woonsocket, R. I.


LATHES, PLANERS, SHAPERS

Drills, Bolt and Gear Cutters, Milling Machines. Special Machinery. E.
GOULD & EBERHARDT, Newark, N. J.


U. S. PIANO CO.,

163 BLEECKER ST., N. Y.,

Manufacturers of strictly first-class Pianos. We sell DIRECT to
Families from OUR OWN Factory at LOWEST WHOLESALE price. Beautiful NEW
7 1-3 Octave, Rosewood Pianos. Sent on trial. Thousands in use. HEAVY
DISCOUNT to CASH buyers. DON'T buy until you read our Catalogue. It
will INTEREST you--Mailed FREE.


[Illustration]

MEDAL & PREMIUM AWARDED TO

[Illustration]

ALCOTT'S

TURBINE WATER WHEELS

MANUFACT'D AT MOUNT HOLLY N. J.


MOWRY CAR & WHEEL WORKS,

MANUFACTURERS OF

CARS AND CAR WHEELS of all descriptions,

Wheels and Axles, Chilled Tires, Engine, Car and Bridge Castings, of
any pattern, furnished to order at short notice. Also Street Car Turn
Tables.

WHEELS OF ALL SIZES CONSTANTLY ON HAND.

OFFICE, 27 1-2 W. THIRD ST., CINCINNATI, O.

Works, Eastern Avenue and Lewis Street.


C. W. LE COUNT, SOUTH NORWALK, CONN., Mfr. of Lathe Dogs, Iron and
Steel Expanding Mandrels of all sizes. A specialty made of Amateurs'
Mandrels and Dogs.


[Illustration]

BARNES' FOOT POWER MACHINERY.

13 Different machines with which Builders, Cabinet Makers, Wagon
Makers, and Jobbers in miscellaneous work can compete as to QUALITY
AND PRICE with steam power manufacturing; also Amateurs' supplies.

MACHINES SENT ON TRIAL.

Say where you read this, and send for catalogue and prices.

W. F. & JOHN BARNES, Rockford, Winnebago Co., Ill.


AMERICAN NOVELTIES
wanted for English trade. 1,000 Sewing Machines to be sold cheap.
Apply BRITANNIA COMPANY, Colchester, England.


[Illustration: Anvil

FISHER & NORRIS TRENTON N. J.]

Retail 9 CENTS PER POUND.

Warranted of the hardest temper, and _never_ to settle.

ESTABLISHED 1843

Steel Horn, warranted not to break and Face of _Best Cast Steel_.

BETTER THAN ANY ENGLISH MAKE, AND ONLY ONE THAT IS FULLY

!! WARRANTED !!

50 SIZES, FROM 1-2 LB. TO 800 LBS.

Catalogues furnished on application.


A VALUABLE WORK.

THE STEAM ENGINE.

The Relative Proportions of the Steam Engine. A course of Lectures on
the Steam Engine delivered to the students of Dynamical Engineering in
the University of Pennsylvania. By WM. D. MARKS, Whitney Professor
of Dynamical Engineering. With numerous Illustrations. 12mo. Flexible
cloth. $1.50.

"A valuable addition to the literature of the Steam Engine, and one
which will be appreciated by engineers in practice as well as by
students."--_Pittsburgh American Manufacturer_.

"A valuable work, and one which will meet with a favorable reception.
* * * There is much need and much room for a rational and practical
method for proportioning the various parts of the steam engine, and
in this respect your work is very welcome."--_Augustus Jay Du Bois,
Ph.D., Yale College_.

*** For sale by all Booksellers, or will be sent by mail, postpaid,
upon receipt of price, by

J. B. LIPPINCOTT & CO., PUBLISHERS,

715 AND 717 MARKET ST., PHILADELPHIA.


[Illustration]

SHEPARD'S CELEBRATED

$50 Screw Cutting Foot Lathe.

Foot and Power Lathes, Drill Presses, Scrolls, Circular and Band Saws,
Saw Attachments, Chucks, Mandrils, Twist Drills, Dogs, Calipers, etc.
Send for catalogue of outfits for amateurs or artisans.

H. L. SHEPARD & CO.,

331, 333, 335, & 337 West Front Street,

CINCINNATI, OHIO.


[Illustration]

TELEPHONES.

_25 per cent. Discount._

SPECIAL OFFER

OUR NEW IMPROVED DOUBLE COILED METALIC TELEPHONE IS THE FINEST IN THE
WORLD, and the only completely satisfactory low priced instrument,
with SPRING CALL ATTACHMENT, made by PRACTICAL MACHINISTS on
scientific principles; warranted to work ONE MILE, unaffected by
changes in the weather. We will send to one address ONE SAMPLE SET,
comprising two Telephones, two walnut holders, six copper bound
insulators and 200 feet heavy wire, AT 25 PER CENT. DISCOUNT from
REGULAR RATES, which is $3.00 for the $4.00 instruments. This offer
WILL NOT hold good after JAN. 15, 1879, as our goods will then be
sufficiently well known to sell through the trade, and we shall be
obliged to strictly maintain the retail price. Any person of ordinary
intelligence can put them up by following directions sent with each
pair. We have sold during the last three months nearly 1000 of these
instruments, and have HUNDREDS OF TESTIMONIALS from all parts of the
country. We GUARANTEE all instruments sold. For any Telephone that
fails to work, we will REFUND THE MONEY and pay all charges. Ask any
Commercial Agency, and you will find we are good for all we agree to
do.

Name this paper when you write.

KENT, WOODMAN & CO., 25 CONGRESS ST., BOSTON, MASS.


THE DEFIANCE
METALLIC PLANES

TRADE MARK
[Illustration]

"THE BATTLE AXE."

ARE THE BEST IN THE WORLD.

Send for a full descriptive circular and price list to the
manufacturers, the

BAILEY WRINGING MACHINE CO., 99 CHAMBERS ST., NEW YORK.


[Illustration]

BEST AND CHEAPEST

FOOT POWER

SCREW CUTTING

ENGINE LATHES

SEE FULL DESCRIPTION IN SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN JULY 27

SEND FOR ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE

GOODNOW & WIGHTMAN 176 WASHINGTON ST BOSTON MASS.


_THE ONLY GRAND PRIZE_ FOR SEWING MACHINES, AT THE EXPOSITION
UNIVERSELLE, PARIS, 1878, WAS AWARDED, OVER 80 COMPETITORS, TO WHEELER
& WILSON MFG. CO. NEW YORK CITY, AND BRIDGEPORT, CONN.


Round Writing

Useful for Everybody

Book of Instructions & Pens

Sent on receipt of $1.50

KEUFFEL & ESSER, 127 FULTON ST., N. Y.,

Importers and Manuf'rers of Drawing Materials.


AMERICAN STANDARD

GAUGE AND TOOL WORKS.

22d and WOOD STS., PHILADELPHIA.

Standard Gauges and Measuring Implements, Hardened Steel Turning
Mandrels, Adjustable Blade Reamers, Patent Tool Holders, Lathe
Drivers, etc. JOHN RICHARDS & CO.,


[Illustration]

WARRANTED THE BEST.
