tough, or pulpy matter, without any good pollen-grains, and they never shed
their contents; they were in the state designated by Gartner as contabescent,
which term I will for the future use. (5/2. 'Beitrage zur Kenntniss der
Befruchtung' 1844 page 116.) In one flower all the anthers were contabescent
excepting two which appeared to the naked eye sound; but under the microscope
about two-thirds of the pollen-grains were seen to be small and shrivelled. In
another plant, in which all the anthers appeared sound, many of the pollen-
grains were shrivelled and of unequal sizes. I counted the seeds produced by
seven plants (1 to 7) in the first lot of eight plants, probably the product of
parents fertilised by their own-form shortest stamens, and the seeds produced by
three plants in the other two lots, almost certainly the product of parents
fertilised by their own-form mid-length stamens.

[PLANT 1.

This long-styled plant was allowed during 1863 to be freely and legitimately
fertilised by an adjoining illegitimate mid-styled plant, but it did not yield a
single seed-capsule. It was then removed and planted in a remote place close to
a brother long-styled plant Number 2, so that it must have been freely though
illegitimately fertilised; under these circumstances it did not yield during
1864 and 1865 a single capsule. I should here state that a legitimate or
ordinary long-styled plant, when growing isolated, and freely though
illegitimately fertilised by insects with its own pollen, yielded an immense
number of capsules, which contained on an average 21.5 seeds.

PLANT 2.

This long-styled plant, after flowering during 1863 close to an illegitimate
mid-styled plant, produced less than twenty capsules, which contained on an
average between four and five seeds. When subsequently growing in company with
Number 1, by which it will have been illegitimately fertilised, it yielded in
1866 not a single capsule, but in 1865 it yielded twenty-two capsules: the best
of these, fifteen in number, were examined; eight contained no seed, and the
remaining seven contained on an average only three seeds, and these seeds were
so small and shrivelled that I doubt whether they would have germinated.

PLANTS 3 AND 4.

These two long-styled plants, after being freely and legitimately fertilised
during 1863 by the same illegitimate mid-styled plant as in the last case, were
as miserably sterile as Number 2.

PLANT 5.

This long-styled plant, after flowering in 1863 close to an illegitimate mid-
styled plant, yielded only four capsules, which altogether included only five
seeds. During 1864, 1865, and 1866, it was surrounded either by illegitimate or
legitimate plants of the other two forms; but it did not yield a single capsule.
It was a superfluous experiment, but I likewise artificially fertilised in a
legitimate manner twelve flowers; but not one of these produced a capsule; so
that this plant was almost absolutely barren.

PLANT 6.

This long-styled plant, after flowering during the favourable year of 1866,
surrounded by illegitimate plants of the other two forms, did not produce a
single capsule.

PLANT 7.

This long-styled plant was the most fertile of the eight plants of the first
lot. During 1865 it was surrounded by illegitimate plants of various parentage,
many of which were highly fertile, and must thus have been legitimately
fertilised. It produced a good many capsules, ten of which yielded an average of
36.1 seeds, with a maximum of 47 and a minimum of 22; so that this plant
produced 39 per cent of the full number of seeds. During 1864 it was surrounded
by legitimate and illegitimate plants of the other two forms; and nine capsules
(one poor one being rejected) yielded an average of 41.9 seeds, with a maximum
of 56 and a minimum of 28; so that, under these favourable circumstances, this
plant, the most fertile of the first lot, did not yield, when legitimately
fertilised, quite 45 per cent of the full complement of seeds.]

In the second lot of plants in the present class, descended from the long-styled
form, almost certainly fertilised with pollen from its own mid-length stamens,
the plants, as already stated, were not nearly so dwarfed or so sterile as in
the first lot. All produced plenty of capsules. I counted the number of seeds in
only three plants, namely Numbers 8, 9, and 10.

[PLANT 8.

This plant was allowed to be freely fertilised in 1864 by legitimate and
illegitimate plants of the other two forms, and ten capsules yielded on an
average 41.1 seeds, with a maximum of 73 and a minimum of 11. Hence this plant
produced only 44 per cent of the full complement of seeds.

PLANT 9.

This long-styled plant was allowed in 1865 to be freely fertilised by
illegitimate plants of the other two forms, most of which were moderately
fertile. Fifteen capsules yielded on an average 57.1 seeds, with a maximum of 86
and a minimum of 23. Hence the plant yielded 61 per cent of the full complement
of seeds.

PLANT 10.

This long-styled plant was freely fertilised at the same time and in the same
manner as the last. Ten capsules yielded an average of 44.2 seeds, with a
maximum of 69 and a minimum of 25; hence this plant yielded 47 per cent of the
full complement of seeds.]

The nineteen long-styled plants of the third lot, of the same parentage as the
last lot, were treated differently; for they flowered during 1867 by themselves
so that they must have been illegitimately fertilised by one another. It has
already been stated that a legitimate long-styled plant, growing by itself and
visited by insects, yielded an average of 21.5 seeds per capsule, with a maximum
of 35; but, to judge fairly of its fertility, it ought to have been observed
during successive seasons. We may also infer from analogy that, if several
legitimate long-styled plants were to fertilise one another, the average number
of seeds would be increased; but how much increased I do not know; hence I have
no perfectly fair standard of comparison by which to judge of the fertility of
the three following plants of the present lot, the seeds of which I counted.

[PLANT 11.

This long-styled plant produced a large crop of capsules, and in this respect
was one of the most fertile of the whole lot of nineteen plants. But the average
from ten capsules was only 35.9 seeds, with a maximum of 60 and a minimum of 8.

PLANT 12.

This long-styled plant produced very few capsules; and ten yielded an average of
only 15.4 seeds, with a maximum of 30 and a minimum of 4.

PLANT 13.

This plant offers an anomalous case; it flowered profusely, yet produced very
few capsules; but these contained numerous seeds. Ten capsules yielded an
average of 71.9 seeds, with a maximum of 95 and a minimum of 29. Considering
that this plant was illegitimate and illegitimately fertilised by its brother
long-styled seedlings, the average and the maximum are so remarkably high that I
cannot at all understand the case. We should remember that the average for a
legitimate plant legitimately fertilised is 93 seeds.]

CLASS 3. ILLEGITIMATE PLANTS RAISED FROM A SHORT-STYLED PARENT FERTILISED WITH
POLLEN FROM OWN-FORM MID-LENGTH STAMENS.

I raised from this union nine plants, of which eight were short-styled and one
long-styled; so that there seems to be a strong tendency in this form to
reproduce, when self-fertilised, the parent-form; but the tendency is not so
strong as with the long-styled. These nine plants never attained the full height
of legitimate plants growing close to them. The anthers were contabescent in
many of the flowers on several plants.

[PLANT 14.

This short-styled plant was allowed during 1865 to be freely and legitimately
fertilised by illegitimate plants descended from self-fertilised mid-, long- and
short-styled plants. Fifteen capsules yielded an average of 28.3 seeds, with a
maximum of 51 and a minimum of 11; hence this plant produced only 33 per cent of
the proper number of seeds. The seeds themselves were small and irregular in
shape. Although so sterile on the female side, none of the anthers were
contabescent.

PLANT 15.

This short-styled plant, treated like the last during the same year, yielded an
average, from fifteen capsules, of 27 seeds, with a maximum of 49 and a minimum
of 7. But two poor capsules may be rejected, and then the average rises to 32.6,
with the same maximum of 49 and a minimum of 20; so that this plant attained 38
per cent of the normal standard of fertility, and was rather more fertile than
the last, yet many of the anthers were contabescent.

PLANT 16.

This short-styled plant, treated like the two last, yielded from ten capsules an
average of 77.8 seeds, with a maximum of 97 and a minimum of 60; so that this
plant produced 94 per cent of the full number of seeds.

PLANT 17.

This, the one long-styled plant of the same parentage as the last three plants,
when freely and legitimately fertilised in the same manner as the last, yielded
an average from ten capsules of 76.3 rather poor seeds, with a maximum of 88 and
a minimum of 57. Hence this plant produced 82 per cent of the proper number of
seeds. Twelve flowers enclosed in a net were artificially and legitimately
fertilised with pollen from a legitimate short-styled plant; and nine capsules
yielded an average of 82.5 seeds, with a maximum of 98 and a minimum of 51; so
that its fertility was increased by the action of pollen from a legitimate
plant, but still did not reach the normal standard.]

CLASS 4. ILLEGITIMATE PLANTS RAISED FROM A MID-STYLED PARENT FERTILISED WITH
POLLEN FROM OWN-FORM LONGEST STAMENS.

After two trials, I succeeded in raising only four plants from this illegitimate
union. These proved to be three mid-styled and one long-styled; but from so
small a number we can hardly judge of the tendency in mid-styled plants when
self-fertilised to reproduce the same form. These four plants never attained
their full and normal height; the long-styled plant had several of its anthers
contabescent.

[PLANT 18.

This mid-styled plant, when freely and legitimately fertilised during 1865 by
illegitimate plants descended from self-fertilised long-, short-, and mid-styled
plants, yielded an average from ten capsules of 102.6 seeds, with a maximum of
131 and a minimum of 63: hence this plant did not produce quite 80 per cent of
the normal number of seeds. Twelve flowers were artificially and legitimately
fertilised with pollen from a legitimate long-styled plant, and yielded from
nine capsules an average of 116.1 seeds, which were finer than in the previous
case, with a maximum of 135 and a minimum of 75; so that, as with Plant 17,
pollen from a legitimate plant increased the fertility, but did not bring it up
to the full standard.

PLANT 19.

This mid-styled plant, fertilised in the same manner and at the same period as
the last, yielded an average from ten capsules of 73.4 seeds, with a maximum of
87 and a minimum of 64: hence this plant produced only 56 per cent of the full
number of seeds. Thirteen flowers were artificially and legitimately fertilised
with pollen from a legitimate long-styled plant, and yielded ten capsules with
an average of 95.6 seeds; so that the application of pollen from a legitimate
plant added, as in the two previous cases, to the fertility, but did not bring
it up to the proper standard.

PLANT 20.

This long-styled plant, of the same parentage with the two last mid-styled
plants, and freely fertilised in the same manner, yielded an average from ten
capsules of 69.6 seeds, with a maximum of 83 and a minimum of 52: hence this
plant produced 75 per cent of the full number of seeds.]

CLASS 5. ILLEGITIMATE PLANTS RAISED FROM A SHORT-STYLED PARENT FERTILISED WITH
POLLEN FROM THE MID-LENGTH STAMENS OF THE LONG-STYLED FORM.

In the four previous classes, plants raised from the three forms fertilised with
pollen from either the longer or shorter stamens of the same form, but generally
not from the same plant, have been described. Six other illegitimate unions are
possible, namely, between the three forms and the stamens in the other two forms
which do not correspond in height with their pistils. But I succeeded in raising
plants from only three of these six unions. From one of them, forming the
present Class 5, twelve plants were raised; these consisted of eight short-
styled, and four long-styled plants, with not one mid-styled. These twelve
plants never attained quite their full and proper height, but by no means
deserved to be called dwarfs. The anthers in some of the flowers were
contabescent. One plant was remarkable from all the longer stamens in every
flower and from many of the shorter ones having their anthers in this condition.
The pollen of four other plants, in which none of the anthers were contabescent,
was examined; in one a moderate number of grains were minute and shrivelled, but
in the other three they appeared perfectly sound. With respect to the power of
producing seed, five plants (Numbers 21 to 25) were observed: one yielded
scarcely more than half the normal number; a second was slightly infertile; but
the three others actually produced a larger average number of seeds, with a
higher maximum, than the standard. In my concluding remarks I shall recur to
this fact, which at first appears inexplicable.

[PLANT 21.

This short-styled plant, freely and legitimately fertilised during 1865 by
illegitimate plants, descended from self-fertilised long-, mid- and short-styled
parents, yielded an average from ten capsules of 43 seeds, with a maximum of 63
and a minimum of 26: hence this plant, which was the one with all its longer and
many of its shorter stamens contabescent, produced only 52 per cent of the
proper number of seeds.

PLANT 22.

This short-styled plant produced perfectly sound pollen, as viewed under the
microscope. During 1866 it was freely and legitimately fertilised by other
illegitimate plants belonging to the present and the following class, both of
which include many highly fertile plants. Under these circumstances it yielded
from eight capsules an average of 100.5 seeds, with a maximum of 123 and a
minimum of 86; so that it produced 121 per cent of seeds in comparison with the
normal standard. During 1864 it was allowed to be freely and legitimately
fertilised by legitimate and illegitimate plants, and yielded an average, from
eight capsules, of 104.2 seeds, with a maximum of 125 and a minimum of 90;
consequently it exceeded the normal standard, producing 125 per cent of seeds.
In this case, as in some previous cases, pollen from legitimate plants added in
a small degree to the fertility of the plant; and the fertility would, perhaps,
have been still greater had not the summer of 1864 been very hot and certainly
unfavourable to some of the plants of Lythrum.

PLANT 23.

This short-styled plant produced perfectly sound pollen. During 1866 it was
freely and legitimately fertilised by the other illegitimate plants specified
under the last experiment, and eight capsules yielded an average of 113.5 seeds,
with a maximum of 123 and a minimum of 93. Hence this plant exceeded the normal
standard, producing no less than 136 per cent of seeds.

PLANT 24.

This long-styled plant produced pollen which seemed under the microscope sound;
but some of the grains did not swell when placed in water. During 1864 it was
legitimately fertilised by legitimate and illegitimate plants in the same manner
as Plant 22, but yielded an average, from ten capsules, of only 55 seeds, with a
maximum of 88 and a minimum of 24, thus attaining 59 per cent of the normal
fertility. This low degree of fertility, I presume, was owing to the
unfavourable season; for during 1866, when legitimately fertilised by
illegitimate plants in the manner described under Number 22, it yielded an
average, from eight capsules, of 82 seeds, with a maximum of 120 and a minimum
of 67, thus producing 88 per cent of the normal number of seeds.

PLANT 25.

The pollen of this long-styled plant contained a moderate number of poor and
shrivelled grains; and this is a surprising circumstance, as it yielded an
extraordinary number of seeds. During 1866 it was freely and legitimately
fertilised by illegitimate plants, as described under Number 22, and yielded an
average, from eight capsules, of 122.5 seeds, with a maximum of 149 and a
minimum of 84. Hence this plant exceeded the normal standard, producing no less
than 131 per cent of seeds.]

CLASS 6. ILLEGITIMATE PLANTS RAISED FROM MID-STYLED PARENTS FERTILISED WITH
POLLEN FROM THE SHORTEST STAMENS OF THE LONG-STYLED FORM.

I raised from this union twenty-five plants, which proved to be seventeen long-
styled and eight mid-styled, but not one short-styled. None of these plants were
in the least dwarfed. I examined, during the highly favourable season of 1866,
the pollen of four plants: in one mid-styled plant, some of the anthers of the
longest stamens were contabescent, but the pollen-grains in the other anthers
were mostly sound, as they were in all the anthers of the shortest stamens; in
two other mid-styled and in one long-styled plant many of the pollen-grains were
small and shrivelled; and in the latter plant as many as a fifth or sixth part
appeared to be in this state. I counted the seeds in five plants (Numbers 26 to
30), of which two were moderately sterile and three fully fertile.

[PLANT 26.

This mid-styled plant was freely and legitimately fertilised, during the rather
unfavourable year 1864, by numerous surrounding legitimate and illegitimate
plants. It yielded an average, from ten capsules, of 83.5 seeds, with a maximum
of 110 and a minimum of 64, thus attaining 64 per cent of the normal fertility.
During the highly favourable year 1866, it was freely and legitimately
fertilised by illegitimate plants belonging to the present Class and to Class 5,
and yielded an average, from eight capsules, of 86 seeds, with a maximum of 109
and a minimum of 61, and thus attained 66 per cent of the normal fertility. This
was the plant with some of the anthers of the longest stamens contabescent as
above mentioned.

PLANT 27.

This mid-styled plant, fertilised during 1864 in the same manner as the last,
yielded an average, from ten capsules, of 99.4 seeds, with a maximum of 122 and
a minimum of 53, thus attaining to 76 per cent of the normal fertility. If the
season had been more favourable, its fertility would probably have been somewhat
greater, but, judging from the last experiment, only in a slight degree.

PLANT 28.

This mid-styled plant, when legitimately fertilised during the favourable season
of 1866, in the manner described under Number 26, yielded an average, from eight
capsules, of 89 seeds, with a maximum of 119 and a minimum of 69, thus producing
68 per cent of the full number of seeds. In the pollen of both sets of anthers,
nearly as many grains were small and shrivelled as sound.

PLANT 29.

This long-styled plant was legitimately fertilised during the unfavourable
season of 1864, in the manner described under Number 26, and yielded an average,
from ten capsules, of 84.6 seeds, with a maximum of 132 and a minimum of 47,
thus attaining to 91 per cent of the normal fertility. During the highly
favourable season of 1866, when fertilised in the manner described under Number
26, it yielded an average, from nine capsules (one poor capsule having been
excluded), of 100 seeds, with a maximum of 121 and a minimum of 77. This plant
thus exceeded the normal standard, and produced 107 per cent of seeds. In both
sets of anthers there were a good many bad and shrivelled pollen-grains, but not
so many as in the last-described plant.

Plant 30.

This long-styled plant was legitimately fertilised during 1866 in the manner
described under Number 26, and yielded an average, from eight capsules, of 94
seeds, with a maximum of 106 and a minimum of 66; so that it exceeded the normal
standard, yielding 101 per cent of seeds.

Plant 31.

Some flowers on this long-styled plant were artificially and legitimately
fertilised by one of its brother illegitimate mid-styled plants; and five
capsules yielded an average of 90.6 seeds, with a maximum of 97 and a minimum of
79. Hence, as far as can be judged from so few capsules, this plant attained,
under these favourable circumstances, 98 per cent of the normal standard.]

CLASS 7. ILLEGITIMATE PLANTS RAISED FROM MID-STYLED PARENTS FERTILISED WITH
POLLEN FROM THE LONGEST STAMENS OF THE SHORT-STYLED FORM.

It was shown in the last chapter that the union from which these illegitimate
plants were raised is far more fertile than any other illegitimate union; for
the mid-styled parent, when thus fertilised, yielded an average (all very poor
capsules being excluded) of 102.8 seeds, with a maximum of 130; and the
seedlings in the present class likewise have their fertility not at all
lessened. Forty plants were raised; and these attained their full height and
were covered with seed-capsules. Nor did I observe any contabescent anthers. It
