renders so captivating the project of attacking the rains in their
aerial stronghold with dynamite bombs.




XIII

THE ASTRONOMICAL EPHEMERIS AND THE NAUTICAL ALMANAC

[Footnote: Read before the U S Naval Institute, January 10, 1879.]


Although the Nautical Almanacs of the world, at the present time, are
of comparatively recent origin, they have grown from small beginnings,
the tracing of which is not unlike that of the origin of species by the
naturalist of the present day. Notwithstanding its familiar name, it
has always been designed rather for astronomical than for nautical
purposes. Such a publication would have been of no use to the navigator
before he had instruments with which to measure the altitudes of the
heavenly bodies. The earlier navigators seldom ventured out of sight of
land, and during the night they are said to have steered by the
"Cynosure" or constellation of the Great Bear, a practice which has
brought the name of the constellation into our language of the present
day to designate an object on which all eyes are intently fixed. This
constellation was a little nearer the pole in former ages than at the
present time; still its distance was always so great that its use as a
mark of the northern point of the horizon does not inspire us with
great respect for the accuracy with which the ancient navigators sought
to shape their course.

The Nautical Almanac of the present day had its origin in the
Astronomical Ephemerides called forth by the needs of predictions of
celestial motions both on the part of the astronomer and the citizen.
So long as astrology had a firm hold on the minds of men, the positions
of the planets were looked to with great interest. The theories of
Ptolemy, although founded on a radically false system, nevertheless
sufficed to predict the position of the sun, moon, and planets, with
all the accuracy necessary for the purposes of the daily life of the
ancients or the sentences of their astrologers. Indeed, if his tables
were carried down to the present time, the positions of the heavenly
bodies would be so few degrees in error that their recognition would be
very easy. The times of most of the eclipses would be predicted within
a few hours, and the conjunctions of the planets within a few days.
Thus it was possible for the astronomers of the Middle Ages to prepare
for their own use, and that of the people, certain rude predictions
respecting the courses of the sun and moon and the aspect of the
heavens, which served the purpose of daily life and perhaps lessened
the confusion arising from their complicated calendars. In the signs of
the zodiac and the different effects which follow from the sun and moon
passing from sign to sign, still found in our farmers' almanacs, we
have the dying traces of these ancient ephemerides.

The great Kepler was obliged to print an astrological almanac in virtue
of his position as astronomer of the court of the King of Austria. But,
notwithstanding the popular belief that astronomy had its origin in
astrology, the astronomical writings of all ages seem to show that the
astronomers proper never had any belief in astrology. To Kepler himself
the necessity for preparing this almanac was a humiliation to which he
submitted only through the pressure of poverty. Subsequent ephemerides
were prepared with more practical objects. They gave the longitudes of
the planets, the position of the sun, the time of rising and setting,
the prediction of eclipses, etc.

They have, of course, gradually increased in accuracy as the tables of
the celestial motions were improved from time to time. At first they
were not regular, annual publications, issued by governments, as at the
present time, but the works of individual astronomers who issued their
ephemerides for several years in advance, at irregular intervals. One
man might issue one, two, or half a dozen such volumes, as a private
work, for the benefit of his fellows, and each might cover as many
years as he thought proper.

The first publication of this sort, which I have in my possession, is
the Ephemerides of Manfredi, of Bonn, computed for the years 1715 to
1725, in two volumes.

Of the regular annual ephemerides the earliest, so far as I am aware,
is the Connaissance des Temps or French Nautical Almanac. The first
issue was in the year 1679, by Picard, and it has been continued
without interruption to the present time. Its early numbers were, of
course, very small, and meagre in their details. They were issued by
the astronomers of the French Academy of Sciences, under the combined
auspices of the academy and the government. They included not merely
predictions from the tables, but also astronomical observations made at
the Paris Observatory or elsewhere. When the Bureau of Longitudes was
created in 1795, the preparation of the work was intrusted to it, and
has remained in its charge until the present time. As it is the oldest,
so, in respect at least to number of pages, it is the largest ephemeris
of the present time. The astronomical portion of the volume for 1879
fills more than seven hundred pages, while the table of geographical
positions, which has always been a feature of the work, contains nearly
one hundred pages more.

The first issue of the British Nautical Almanac was that for the year
1767 and appeared in 1766. It differs from the French Almanac in owing
its origin entirely to the needs of navigation. The British nation, as
the leading maritime power of the world, was naturally interested in
the discovery of a method by which the longitude could be found at sea.
As most of my hearers are probably aware, there was, for many years, a
standing offer by the British government, of ten thousand pounds for
the discovery of a practical and sufficiently accurate method of
attaining this object. If I am rightly informed, the requirement was
that a ship should be able to determine the Greenwich time within two
minutes, after being six months at sea. When the office of Astronomer
Royal was established in 1765, the duty of the incumbent was declared
to be "to apply himself with the most exact care and diligence to the
rectifying the Tables of the Motions of the Heavens, and the places of
the Fixed Stars in order to find out the so much desired Longitude at
Sea for the perfecting the Art of Navigation."

About the middle of the last century the lunar tables were so far
improved that Dr. Maskelyne considered them available for attaining
this long-wished-for object. The method which I think was then, for the
first time, proposed was the now familiar one of lunar distances.
Several trials of the method were made by accomplished gentlemen who
considered that nothing was wanting to make it practical at sea but a
Nautical Ephemeris. The tables of the moon, necessary for the purpose,
were prepared by Tobias Mayer, of Gottingen, and the regular annual
issue of the work was commenced in 1766, as already stated. Of the
reward which had been offered, three thousand pounds were paid to the
widow of Mayer, and three thousand pounds to the celebrated
mathematician Euler for having invented the methods used by Mayer in
the construction of his tables. The issue of the Nautical Ephemeris was
intrusted to Dr. Maskelyne. Like other publications of this sort this
ephemeris has gradually increased in volume. During the first sixty or
seventy years the data were extremely meagre, including only such as
were considered necessary for the determination of positions.

In 1830 the subject of improving the Nautical Almanac was referred by
the Lord Commissioners of the Admiralty to a committee of the
Astronomical Society of London. A subcommittee, including eleven of the
most distinguished astronomers and one scientific navigator, made an
exhaustive report, recommending a radical rearrangement and improvement
of the work. The recommendations of this committee were first carried
into effect in the Nautical Almanac for the year 1834. The arrangement
of the Navigator's Ephemeris then devised has been continued in the
British Almanac to the present time.

A good deal of matter has been added to the British Almanac during the
forty years and upwards which have elapsed, but it has been worked in
rather by using smaller type and closer printing than by increasing the
number of pages. The almanac for 1834 contains five hundred and
seventeen pages and that for 1880 five hundred and nineteen pages. The
general aspect of the page is now somewhat crowded, yet, considering
the quantity of figures on each page the arrangement is marvellously
clear and legible.

The Spanish "Almanaque Nautico" has been issued since the beginning of
the century. Like its fellows it has been gradually enlarged and
improved, in recent times, and is now of about the same number of pages
with the British and American almanacs. As a rule there is less matter
on a page, so that the data actually given are not so complete as in
some other publications.

In Germany two distinct publications of this class are issued, the one
purely astronomical, the other purely nautical.

The astronomical publication has been issued for more than a century
under the title of "Berliner Astronomisches Jahrbuch." It is intended
principally for the theoretical astronomer, and in respect to matter
necessary to the determinations of positions on the earth it is rather
meagre. It is issued by the Berlin Observatory, at the expense of the
government.

The companion of this work, intended for the use of the German marine,
is the "Nautisches Jahrbuch," prepared and issued under the direction
of the minister of commerce and public works. It is copied largely from
the British Nautical Almanac, and in respect to arrangement and data is
similar to our American Nautical Almanac, prepared for the use of
navigators, giving, however, more matter, but in a less convenient
form. The right ascension and declination of the moon are given for
every three hours instead of for every hour; one page of each month is
devoted to eclipses of Jupiter's satellites, phenomena which we never
consider necessary in the nautical portion of our own almanac. At the
end of the work the apparent positions of seventy or eighty of the
brightest stars are given for every ten days, while it is considered
that our own navigators will be satisfied with the mean places for the
beginning of the year. At the end is a collection of tables which I
doubt whether any other than a German navigator would ever use. Whether
they use them or not I am not prepared to say.

The preceding are the principal astronomical and nautical ephemerides
of the world, but there are a number of minor publications, of the same
class, of which I cannot pretend to give a complete list. Among them is
the Portuguese Astronomical Ephemeris for the meridian of the
University of Coimbra, prepared for Portuguese navigators. I do not
know whether the Portuguese navigators really reckon their longitudes
from this point: if they do the practice must be attended with more or
less confusion. All the matter is given by months, as in the solar and
lunar ephemeris of our own and the British Almanac. For the sun we have
its longitude, right ascension, and declination, all expressed in arc
and not in time. The equation of time and the sidereal time of mean
noon complete the ephemeris proper. The positions of the principal
planets are given in no case oftener than for every third day. The
longitude and latitude of the moon are given for noon and midnight. One
feature not found in any other almanac is the time at which the moon
enters each of the signs of the zodiac. It may be supposed that this
information is designed rather for the benefit of the Portuguese
landsman than of the navigator. The right ascensions and declinations
of the moon and the lunar distances are also given for intervals of
twelve hours. Only the last page gives the eclipses of the satellites
of Jupiter. The Fixed Stars are wholly omitted.

An old ephemeris, and one well known in astronomy is that published by
the Observatory of Milan, Italy, which has lately entered upon the
second century of its existence. Its data are extremely meagre and of
no interest whatever to the navigator. The greater part of the volume
is taken up with observations at the Milan Observatory.

Since taking charge of the American Ephemeris I have endeavored to
ascertain what nautical almanacs are actually used by the principal
maritime nations of Europe. I have been able to obtain none except
those above mentioned. As a general rule I think the British Nautical
Almanac is used by all the northern nations, as already indicated. The
German Nautical Jahrbuch is principally a reprint from the British. The
Swedish navigators, being all well acquainted with the English
language, use the British Almanac without change. The Russian
government, however, prints an explanation of the various terms in the
language of their own people and binds it in at the end of the British
Almanac. This explanation includes translations of the principal terms
used in the heading of pages, such as the names of the months and days,
the different planets, constellations, and fixed stars, and the
phenomena of angle and time. They have even an index of their own in
which the titles of the different articles are given in Russian. This
explanation occupies, in all, seventy-five pages--more than double that
taken up by the original explanation.

One of the first considerations which strikes us in comparing these
multitudinous publications is the confusion which must arise from the
use of so many meridians. If each of these southern nations, the
Spanish and Portuguese for instance, actually use a meridian of their
own, the practice must lead to great confusion. If their navigators do
not do so but refer their longitudes to the meridian of Greenwich, then
their almanacs must be as good as useless. They would find it far
better to buy an ephemeris referred to the meridian of Greenwich than
to attempt to use their own The northern nations, I think, have all
begun to refer to the meridian of Greenwich, and the same thing is
happily true of our own marine. We may, therefore, hope that all
commercial nations will, before long, refer their longitudes to one and
the same meridian, and the resulting confusion be thus avoided.

The preparation of the American Ephemeris and Nautical Almanac was
commenced in 1849, under the superintendence of the late Rear-Admiral,
then Lieutenant, Charles Henry Davis. The first volume to be issued was
that for the year 1855. Both in the preparation of that work and in the
connected work of mapping the country, the question of the meridian to
be adopted was one of the first importance, and received great
attention from Admiral Davis, who made an able report on the subject.
Our situation was in some respects peculiar, owing to the great
distance which separated us from Europe and the uncertainty of the
exact difference of longitude between the two continents. It was hardly
practicable to refer longitudes in our own country to any European
meridian. The attempt to do so would involve continual changes as the
transatlantic longitude was from time to time corrected. On the other
hand, in order to avoid confusion in navigation, it was essential that
our navigators should continue to reckon from the meridian of
Greenwich. The trouble arising from uncertainty of the exact longitude
does not affect the navigator, because, for his purpose, astronomical
precision is not necessary.

The wisest solution was probably that embodied in the act of Congress,
approved September 28, 1850, on the recommendation of Lieutenant Davis,
if I mistake not. "The meridian of the Observatory at Washington shall
be adopted and used as the American meridian for all astronomical
purposes, and the meridian of Greenwich shall be adopted for all
nautical purposes." The execution of this law necessarily involves the
question, "What shall be considered astronomical and what nautical
purposes?" Whether it was from the difficulty of deciding this
question, or from nobody's remembering the law, the latter has been
practically a dead letter. Surely, if there is any region of the globe
which the law intended should be referred to the meridian of
Washington, it is the interior of our own country. Yet, notwithstanding
the law, all acts of Congress relating to the territories have, so far
as I know, referred everything to the meridian of Greenwich and not to
that of Washington. Even the maps issued by our various surveys are
referred to the same transatlantic meridian. The absurdity culminated
in a local map of the city of Washington and the District of Columbia,
issued by private parties, in 1861, in which we find even the meridians
passing through the city of Washington referred to a supposed Greenwich.

This practice has led to a confusion which may not be evident at first
sight, but which is so great and permanent that it may be worth
explaining. If, indeed, we could actually refer all our longitudes to
an accurate meridian of Greenwich in the first place; if, for instance,
any western region could be at once connected by telegraph with the
Greenwich Observatory, and thus exchange longitude signals night after
night, no trouble or confusion would arise from referring to the
meridian of Greenwich. But this, practically, cannot be done. All our
interior longitudes have been and are determined differentially by
comparison with some point in this country. One of the most frequent
points of reference used this way has been the Cambridge Observatory.
Suppose, then, a surveyor at Omaha makes a telegraphic longitude
determination between that point and the Cambridge Observatory. Since
he wants his longitude reduced to Greenwich, he finds some supposed
longitude of the Cambridge Observatory from Greenwich and adds that to
his own longitude. Thus, what he gives is a longitude actually
determined, plus an assumed longitude of Cambridge, and, unless the
assumed longitude of Cambridge is distinctly marked on his maps, we may
not know what it is.

After a while a second party determines the longitude of Ogden from
Cambridge. In the mean time, the longitude of Cambridge from Greenwich
has been corrected, and we have a longitude of Ogden which will be
discordant with that of Omaha, owing to the change in the longitude of
Cambridge. A third party determines the longitudes of, let us suppose,
St. Louis from Washington, he adds the assumed longitudes of Washington
from Greenwich which may not agree with either of the longitudes of
Cambridge and gets his longitude. Thus we have a series of results for
our western longitude all nominally referred to the meridian of
Greenwich, but actually referred to a confused collection of meridians,
nobody knows what. If the law had only provided that the longitude of
Washington from Greenwich should be invariably fixed at a certain
quantity, say 77 degrees 3', this confusion would not have arisen. It
is true that the longitude thus established by law might not have been
perfectly correct, but this would not cause any trouble nor confusion.
Our longitude would have been simply referred to a certain assumed
Greenwich, the small error of which would have been of no importance to
the navigator or astronomer. It would have differed from the present
system only in that the assumed Greenwich would have been invariable
instead of dancing about from time to time as it has done under the
present system. You understand that when the astronomer, in computing
an interior longitude, supposes that of Cambridge from Greenwich to be
