
Just as they had made contact, before the music stopped (and once more
their thoughts would become separate, individual, and they would lose
awareness of each other and of the hundreds of other crystals that lay
over the desert, under the clear perpetual night)--just then a strident
dissonance pierced among them.

_There_, sang Petra.

_There_, hummed Jon.

_There_, came the triad in E-flat minor. They concentrated, tuned,
turned their thoughts against the dissonance. _There...._

       *       *       *       *       *

Jon rolled over and pushed the silk from his white shoulders and
stretched. Through the blue pillars, the evening sky was yellow. Music,
very light and fast, was coming from below the balcony. Suddenly a voice
sounded beside him: "Your Majesty, your Majesty! You shouldn't be
resting now. They're waiting for you downstairs. Tltltrlte will be
furious if you're late."

"What do I care?" Jon responded. "Where's my robe?"

The serving maid hastened away and returned with a sheer, shimmering
robe, netted through with threads of royal black. The drape covered
Jon's shoulders, draped across his breasts, and fell to his thighs.

"My mirror," said Jon.

The serving maid brought the mirror and Jon looked. Long, slightly
oriental eyes sat wide-spaced in the ivory face over high cheekbones.
Full breasts pushed tautly beneath the transluscent material, and the
slender waist spread to sensual, generous hips. Jon almost whistled at
his reflection.

The maid slipped clear plastic slippers on his feet, and Jon rose and
walked toward the stairs. In the lobby, the throng hissed appreciatively
as he descended. On one column hung a bird cage in which a three-headed
cockatoo was singing to beat the band. Which was difficult to do,
because the band was composed of fourteen copper-headed drums. (Fourteen
was the royal number.)

Across the lobby wind instruments wailed, and Jon paused on the stairs.
"Don't worry," the maid said, "I'm right behind you."

Jon felt the terror rise. _Hey_, he called out mentally, _is that you,
Petra?_

_Like I said, right behind you._

_Incidentally, how did I come up with this body?_

_I don't know, dear, but you look devastating._

_Gee, thanks_, he said, projecting a mental sneer. _Where's Arkor and
Company?_

The music had stopped. There was only the sound of the three-headed
bird.

_There they are._

The winds screeched again, and at the entrance of the lobby, the people
fell away from the door. There was Tltltrlte. He was tall, and dark, in
a cloak in which there were many more black threads than in Jon's. He
unsheathed a sword, and began to come forward. "Your reign is through,
Daughter of the Sun," he announced. "It is time for a new cycle."

"Very well," said Jon.

As Tltltrlte advanced, the throng that crowded the lobby clapped their
hands in terror and moved back further. Jon stood very straight.

As Tltltrlte came forward, his shoulders narrowed. He pushed back the
hood of his cloak and a mass of ebony hair cascaded down his shoulders.
With each step, his hips broadened and his waist narrowed. A very
definite bulge of mammary glands now pushed up beneath his black silk
tunic. As Tltltrlte reached the bottom of the steps, she raised her
sword.

_Think at him_, came Arkor from the bird cage.

_Think at him_, came from Petra.

Jon saw the blade flash forward and then felt it slide into his abdomen.
_At her_, he corrected.

_At her_, they answered.

As Jon toppled down the steps, dying, he asked, _What the hell is this
anyway?_

_We're inhabiting a very advanced species of moss_, Arkor explained,
with the calmness that only a telepath can muster in certain confusing
situations. _Each individual starts off male, but eventually changes to
female at the desired time._

_Moss?_ asked Jon as he hit his head on the bottom step and died.

_There...._

       *       *       *       *       *

The wave came again and thundered on the beach. He staggered backwards,
just as the froth spumed up the sand. The sky was blue-black. He raised
his fingers to his lips (seven long tines webbed together) and whined
into the night. He lifted his transparent eyelids from his huge,
luminous eyes to see if there wasn't some faint trace of the boat. Spray
fell on them, stung the rims, and he snapped all three lids over them,
one after another. He whined again, and once more the wave grew before
him.

He opened the two opaque lids, and this time thought he saw them far off
through the greenish spray. The pentagonal sail rode above a
billow-blue, wet, and full. It dipped, rose, and he pulled back his
transparent eyelid again, this time when the wave was down, and thought
he saw figures on the fibrous hammock of the boat. On the blue sail was
the white circle of a Master Fisherman's boat. His parent was a Master
Fisherman. Yes, it was his parent coming to get him.

Another billow exploded and he crouched in the froth, digging his hind
feet deep into the pebbly beach.

The crosshatch of planking scudded onto the shore, and they swarmed off.
One wore a chain around his neck with the Master Fisherman's seal.
Another carried a seven-pronged fork. The two others were just
boat-hands and wore identifying black belts of Kelpod shells.

"My offspring," said the one with the seal. "My fins have smarted for
you. I thought we would never swim together again." He reached down and
lifted Jon into his arms. Jon put his head against his parent's chest
and watched water beading down the pentagonal scales.

"I was frightened," Jon said.

His parent laughed. "I was frightened too. Why did you swim out so far?"

"I wanted to see the island. But when I was swimming, I saw...."

"What?"

Jon closed his eyelids.

His parent smiled again. "You're sleepy. Come." Now Jon felt himself
carried to the water and into the waves. The spray fell warmly on his
face now, and unafraid, he relaxed his gill slits as water fell across
him and they climbed onto the boat.

Wind caught the sail, and the open-work of planking listed into the sea.
Long clouds swung rapidly across the twin moons like the tines of the
fishing forks the fishermen saluted the sacred phosphor fires with when
they returned from their expeditions. He dreamed of his, a little, in
the swell and drop. His parent had tied him to the boat, and so he
floated at the end of a few feet of slack. Water rolled down his
shoulders, slipped beneath his limp dorsal fin, and tickled. Then he
dreamed of something else, the thing he had seen, glowing first beneath
the water, then rising.... He whined suddenly, and shook his head.

He heard the others on the boat, their webbed feet slipping on the wet
planks. He opened his eyes and looked up. The two boat-hands were
holding onto stays and pointing off into the water. Now his parent had
come up to them, holding a fishing spear, and they were joined by the
Second Fisherman.

Jon scrambled from the water onto the plank. His parent put an arm
around him and drew him closer. (_Here he comes_, Arkor said.) His other
hand went to the seal of authority around his neck, as though it gave
him some sort of protection.

"There it is," Jon suddenly cried. "That's what I saw. That's why I was
afraid to swim back." (_There it is_, Jon said.)

A phosphorescent disk was shimmering under the surface of the water. The
Second Fisherman raised his spear higher. "What is it?" he asked. (_What
is it this time?_ Petra wanted to know.)

Indistinct, yet nearly the size of the ship, it hovered almost three
breast strokes from them, glowing beneath the surface.

(_I'll have a look_, said Petra.) The Second Fisherman suddenly dove
forward and disappeared. Still holding to the frame of the boat, Jon and
his parent went under the water where they could see better.

One of Jon's eyelids, the transparent one, was actually an envelope of
tissue which he could flood with vitreous solution when he was submerged
to form a correcting lens over his pupil.

Through the water he saw the Second Fisherman bubbling through the water
toward the immense, transluscent hemisphere that dangled ahead of them.
The Second Fisherman stopped with an underwater double-reverse and
hovered near the thing. (_It's a huge jellyfish_, Petra told them.)
"Can't figure out what it is," the Second Fisherman signaled back. Then
he extended his fork and jabbed at the membrane. The seven tines went
in, came out.

The jellyfish moved, fast.

The tentacles hanging from the bottom of the bag raveled upward like
snagged threads. The body bloated and surged sideways. Two tentacles
wrapped around the Second Fisherman as he tried to swim away. (_Eep_,
said Petra. _These things hurt._)

Jon's parent was on top of deck again, shouting orders to the
boat-hands. The ship swung toward the thing which was now heaving to the
surface.

(_Look, let's finish this thing up for good. Concentrate._ That was
Arkor. _There...._)

(From beneath the water they felt Petra reach her mind into the pulsing
mass: _There...._)

(As the tentacles encased her and she jammed the spear home again and
again through the leaking membrane, she felt Jon's mind join in:
There....)

The boat rammed into the side of the jellyfish, the planks tearing away
the membrane and the thick, stinging insides fountaining over them. Now
it nearly turned over, and tentacles flapped from the water in wet,
fleshy ropes. The Second Fisherman was caught in one of the snarls.

Their green faces were lighted from beneath by the milky glow.

(_There...._) Suddenly it tore away from the planks, going down beneath
the water. (_There...._) The Second Fisherman's head bobbed to the
surface, shook the green fin that crested his skull, and laughed.
(_There...._)

3 to 6, 3 to 6, (Jon's frequency oscillated from 3 to 6 as he drifted
through clouds of super-heated gas) 3 to 6, 3 to 6--7 to 10! (Someone
was coming.) U to 10, 7 to 10, (It was getting closer; suddenly:) 10 to
16! (Then:) 3 to 6, 7 to 10, 3 to 6, 7 to 10, (they had passed through
each other. _Hi_, Petra said. _Have you any idea where we are?_)

(_The temperature is somewhere near three quarters of a million degrees.
Any ideas?_)

9 to 27, 9 to 27, 9 to 27 (came puttering along and passed through both
Jon and Petra;) 12 to 35, 10 to 37, (and then, again) 3 to 6, 7 to 10, 9
to 27, 9 to 27, 9 to 27 (_We are halfway between the surface and the
center of a star not unlike our sun_, said Arkor. _Note all the strange
elements around._) 9 to 27, 9 to 27, 9 to 27.

7 to 10, 7 to 10, 7 to 10 (_They keep on turning into one another_,
Petra said.) 7 to 10, 7 to 10, 7 to 10.

3 to 6, 3 to 6, 3 to 6 (_At this temperature you would too if you were
atomic_, Jon told her.) 3 to 6, 3 to 6, 3 to 6.

9 to 27, 9 to 27, 9 to 27 (_Where's our friend?_ Arkor wanted to know.)

pi to e, pi to 2e, 2pi to 4e, 4pi to 8e, 8pi to 16e, 16pi to 32e.

(_Speak of the_ ... Jon started. _Hey, we've got to do something about
that. Not only is it transcendental, it's increasing so fast he'll
eventually shake this star apart._) 3 to 6, 3 to 6, 3 to 6.

(_So that's what causes novas_, said Petra.) 7 to 10, 7 to 10, 7 to 10.

(At the next oscillation, Arkor, acting as a side-coefficient, passed
through the intruder.) 32^{2}pi to 64e (Arkor got out before the second
extremity was reached. The wave cycle stuttered, having been reversed
end on end.) 642pi to 32e (It tried to right itself and couldn't because
Jon spun through the lower end divisibility) 642pi to 16/9e (then Arkor
jumped in, tail first it recovered and it resolved into:) 642pi to 4/3e,
642pi to 4/3e, 642pi to 4/3e (it quivered, its range no longer
geometric).

(_Watch this_, said Petra, _About face...._ She gave it a sort of nudge,
not passing through it, so that when it whirled to catch her, she was
gone, and it was going the other way:)

4/3pi to 642e, 4/3pi to 642e, 4/3pi to 642e,

(_I hope no one ever does that to me_, said Petra. _Look, the poor thing
is contracting._)

4/3 to 640e, 4/3pi to 622, 4/3pi to 560, 4/3pi to 499,

(Somehow the _e_ component chanced to slip through 125. Jon moved in
like a shower of anti-theta-mazons and extracted a painless cube so fast
that the intruder oscillated on it three times before it knew what had
happened to it:)

4/3pi to 5^{3}e, 4/3pi to 5^{3}e, 4/3pi to 5^{3}e under high
gravity--very high, that is, two to three million times that of earth,
such as inside a star--in such warped space there is a subtle difference
between 5^{3} and 125, though they represent the same number. It's like
the notes E-sharp and F, which are technically the same, but are
distinguished between when played by a good violinist with a fine ear.
When the root came loose, therefore, the variation threw the wave-length
all off balance:) 4/3pi to 5e, 4/3pi to 5e, 4/3pi to 5e....

(_All right, everybody, concentrate--_)

(_There, there, there...._)

For one moment, the intruding oscillation turned, ducked, tried to
escape, and couldn't. It contracted into a small ball with a volume of
4/3pi_e_^{3}, and disappeared.

_There...._

       *       *       *       *       *

Jon Koshar shook his head, staggered forward, and went down on his knees
in white sand. He blinked. He looked up. There were two shadows in front
of him. Then he saw the city.

It was Telphar, stuck on a desert, under a double sun. The transit
ribbon started across the desert, got the length of twelve pylons, and
then crumpled.

As he stood up, something caught in the corner of his eye.

His eyes moved, and he saw a woman about twenty feet away from him. Her
red hair fell straight to her shoulders in the dry heat. He blinked as
she approached. She wore a straight skirt and had a notebook under her
arm. "Petra?" he said, frowning. It was Petra, but Petra different.

"Jon," she answered. "What happened to you?"

