here. It was bare and bright and glistened with wetness. The light they
experienced took on a golden tint. All of these things were utterly
unparalleled, but the stillness was a hush instead of a menacing
silence. The golden light could not possibly be associated with fear.
The people of the forgotten planet felt, most likely, the sort of
promise in this shining tranquility which before they had known only in
dreams. But this was no dream.

They came up through the surface of a sea of mist, and they saw before
them a shore of sunshine. They saw blue and sky and sunlight for the
first time. The light smote their shins and brilliantly colored furry
garments. It glittered in changing, ever-more-colorful flashes upon
cloaks made of butterfly wings. It sparkled on the great lance carried
by Burl in the lead, and the quite preposterous weapons borne by his
followers.

The little party of twenty humans waded ashore through the last of the
thinning white stuff which was cloud. They gazed about them with
wondering, astonished eyes. The sky was blue. There was green grass. And
again there was sound. It was the sound of wind blowing among trees, and
of things living in the sunshine.

They heard insects, but they did not know what they heard. The shrill
small musical whirrings; the high-pitched small cries which made an
elfin melody everywhere,--these were totally strange. All things were
new to their eyes, and an enormous exultation filled them. From
deep-buried ancestral memories they somehow knew that what they saw was
right, was normal, was appropriate and proper, and that this was the
kind of world in which humans belonged, rather than the seething horror
of the lowlands. They breathed clean air for the first time in many
generations.

Burl shouted in his triumph, and his voice echoed among trees and
hillsides.

It was time for the plateau to ring with the shouting of a man in
triumph!




_10. MEN CLIMB UP TO SAVAGERY_


They had food for days. They had brought mushroom from the isolated
thicket not too far beneath the clouds. There were the ants that Dik and
Tet had distributed grandly, and not all of which had been used to
secure escape from the canyon of the millipede. Had they found other food
immediately, they would have settled down comfortably in the fashion
normal to creatures whose idea of bliss is a secure hiding-place and
food on hand so they do not have to leave it. Somehow they believed that
this high place of bright light and new colors was secure. But they had
no hiding-place. And though they did accept with the unreasoning faith
of children and savages that there were no enemies here, they still
wanted one.

They found a cave. It was small, so that it would be crowded with all of
them in it, but as it turned out, this was fortunate. At some time it
had been occupied by some other creature, but the dirt which floored it
had settled flat and showed no tracks. It retained faint traces of a
smell which was unfamiliar but not unpleasing,--it held no connotation
of danger. Ants stank of formic acid plus the musky odor of their
particular city. One could identify not only the kind of ant, but its
home city, by sniffing at an ant-trail. Spiders had their own
hair-raising odor. The smell of a praying-mantis was acrid, and all
beetles reeked of decay. And of course there were those bugs whose main
defense was an effluvium which tended to strangle all but the smell's
happy possessor. This faint smell in the cave was different. The humans
thought vaguely that it might possibly be another kind of man.

Actually, it was the smell of a warm-blooded animal. But Burl and his
fellows knew of no warm-blooded creature but themselves.

They had come above the clouds a bare two hours before sunset,--of which
they knew nothing. For an hour they marveled, staying close together.
They were especially astounded by the sun, since they could not bear to
look at it. But presently, being savages, they accepted it
matter-of-factly.

They could not cease to wonder at the vegetation about them. They were
accustomed only to gigantic fungi and the few straggling plants which
tried so desperately to bear seed before they were devoured. Here they
saw many plants and no fungi,--and they did not see anything they
recognized as insects. They looked only for large things.

They were astounded by the slenderness and toughness of the plants.
Grass fascinated them, and weeds. A large part of their courage came
from the absence of debris upon the ground. The hunting-grounds of
spiders were marked by grisly remnants of finished meals, and where
mantises roamed there were bits of transparent beetle-wings and sharp
spiny bits of armor not tasty enough to be consumed. Here, in the first
hour of their exploration, they saw no sign that an insect like
the lowland ones had ever been in this place at all. But they
could not believe the monsters never came. They correctly--and
pessimistically--assumed that their coming was only rare.

The cave was a great relief. Trees did not grow close enough to give
them a feeling of safety,--though they were ludicrously amazed at the
invincible hardness of tree trunks. They had never known anything but
insect-armour and stone which was as hard as the trunks of those
growing things. They found nothing to eat, but they were not yet
hungry. They did not worry about food while they still had remnants from
their climb.

When the sun sank low and crimson colorings filled the west, they were
less happy. They watched the glory of their first sunset with scared,
incredulous eyes. Yellows and reds and purples reared toward the zenith.
It became possible to look at the sun directly. They saw it descend
behind something they could not guess at. Then there was darkness.

The fact stunned them. So night came like this!

Then they saw the stars for the first time, as they came singly into
being. And the folk from the lowland crowded frantically into the cave
with its faint odor of having once been occupied by something else. They
filled the cave tightly. But Burl had some reluctance to admit his
terror. He and Saya were the last to enter.

And nothing happened. Nothing. The sounds of sunset continued. They were
strange but soothing and somehow--again ancestral memory spoke
comfortingly--they were the way night-sounds ought to be. Burl and the
others could not possibly know it, but for the first time in forty
generations on the forgotten planet, human beings were in an environment
really suited to them. It had a rightness and a goodness which was
obvious in spite of its novelty. And because of Burl's own special
experiences, he was a little bit better able to estimate novelties than
the rest. He listened to the night-noises from close by the cave's small
entrance. He heard the breathing of his tribesfolk. He felt the heat of
their bodies, keeping the crowded enclosure warm enough for all. Saya
held fast to his hand, for the reassurance of the contact. He was
wakeful, and thinking very busily and painfully, but Saya was not
thinking at all. She was simply proud of Burl.

She felt, to be sure, a tumult which was fear of the unknown and relief
from much greater fear of the familiar. She felt warm, prideful
memories of the sight of Burl leading and commanding the others. She had
absorbing fresh memories of the look and feel of sunshine, and mental
pictures of sky and grass and trees which she had never seen before.
Confusedly she remembered that Burl had killed a spider, no less, and he
had shown how to escape a praying-mantis by flinging it at an ant, and
he had grandly led the others up a mountainside it had never occurred to
anybody else to climb. And the giant millipede would have devoured them
all, but that Burl gave commands and set the example, and he had marched
magnificently up the mountainside when it seemed that all the cosmos
twisted and prepared to drop them into an inverted sky....

Saya dozed. And Burl sat awake, listening, and presently with
fast-beating heart he slipped out of the entrance to the cave and stared
about him in the night.

There was coolness such as he had never known before, but nightfall was
not long past. There were smells in the air he had never before
experienced,--green things growing, and the peculiar clean odor of wind
that has been bathed in sunshine, and the oddly satisfying smell of
resinous trees.

But Burl raised his eyes to the heavens. He saw the stars in all their
glory, and he was the first human in two thousand years and more to look
at them from this planet. There were myriads upon myriads of them,
varying in brightness from stabbing lights to infinitesimal twinklings.
They were of every possible color. They hung in the sky above him,
immobile and unthreatening. They had not descended. They were very
beautiful.

Burl stared. And then he noticed that he was breathing deeply, with a
new zest. He was filling his lungs with clean, cool, fragrant air such
as men were intended to breathe from the beginning, and of which Burl
and many others had been deprived. It was almost intoxicating to feel so
splendidly alive and unafraid.

There was a slight sound. Saya stood beside him, trembling a little. To
leave the others had required great courage, but she had come to realize
that if Burl was in danger she wished to share it.

They heard the nightwind and the orchestra of night-singers. They
wandered aside from the cave-mouth and Saya found completely primitive
and satisfying pride in the courage of Burl, who was actually not afraid
of the dark! Her own uneasiness became something which merely added
savor to her pride in him. She followed him wherever he went, to examine
this and consider that in the nighttime. It gave her enormous
satisfaction at once to think of danger and to feel so safe because of
his nearness.

Presently they heard a new sound in the night. It was very far away, and
not in the least like any sound they had ever heard before. It changed
in pitch as insect-cries do not. It was a baying, yelping sound. It
rose, and held the higher note, and abruptly dropped in pitch before it
ceased. Minutes later it came again.

Saya shivered, but Burl said thoughtfully:

"That is a good sound."

He didn't know why. Saya shivered again. She said reluctantly:

"I am cold."

It had been a rare sensation in the lowlands. It came only after one of
the infrequent thunderstorms, when wetted human bodies were exposed to
the gusty winds that otherwise never blew. But here the nights grew cold
after sundown. The heat of the ground would radiate to outer space with
no clouds to intercept it, and before dawn the temperature might drop
nearly to freezing. On a planet so close to its sun, however, there
would hardly be more than light hoar-frost at any time.

The two of them went back to the cave. It was warm there, because of the
close packing of bodies and many breaths. Burl and Saya found places to
rest and dozed off, Saya's hand again trustfully in Burl's.

He still remained awake for a long time. He thought of the stars, but
they were too strange to estimate. He thought of the trees and grass.
But most of his impressions of this upper world were so remote from
previous knowledge that he could only accept them as they were and defer
reflecting upon them until later. He did feel an enormous complacency at
having led his followers here, though.

But the last thing he actually thought about, before his eyes blinked
shut in sleep, was that distant howling noise he had heard in the night.
It was totally novel in kind, and yet there was something buried among
the items of his racial heritage that told him it was good.

He was first awake of all the tribesmen and he looked out into the cold
and pallid grayness of before-dawn. He saw trees. One side was brightly
lighted by comparison, and the other side was dark. He heard the tiny
singing noises of the inhabitants of this place. Presently he crawled
out of the cave again.

The air was biting in its chill. It was an excellent reason why the
giant insects could not live here, but it was invigorating to Burl as he
breathed it in. Presently he looked curiously for the source of the
peculiar one-sided light.

He saw the top of the sun as it peered above the eastern cloud-bank. The
sky grew lighter. He blinked and saw it rise more fully into view. He
thought to look upward, and the stars that had bewildered him were
nearly gone.

He ran to call Saya.

The rest of the tribe waked as he roused her. One by one, they followed
to watch their first sunrise. The men gaped at the sun as it filled the
east with colorings, and rose and rose above the seemingly steaming
layer of clouds, and then appeared to spring free of the horizon and
swim on upward.

The women stared with all their eyes. The children blinked, and
shivered, and crept to their mothers for warmth. The women enclosed them
in their cloaks, and they thawed and peered out once more at the glory
of sunshine and the day. Very soon, too, they realized that warmth came
from the great shining body in the sky. The children presently
discovered a game. It was the first game they had ever played. It
consisted of running into a shaded place until they shivered, and then
of running out into warm sunshine once more. Until this, dawning fear
was the motive for such playing as they did. Now they gleefully made a
game of sunshine.

In this first morning of their life above the clouds, the tribesmen ate
of the food they had brought from below. But there was not an indefinite
amount of food left. Burl ate, and considered darkly, and presently
summoned his followers' attention. They were quite contented and for the
moment felt no need of his guidance. But he felt need of admiration.

He spoke abruptly:

"We do not want to go back to the place we came from," he said sternly.
"We must look for food here, so we can stay for always. Today we find
food."

It was a seizure of the initiative. It was the linking of what the folk
most craved with obedience to Burl. It was the device by which dictators
seize power, and it was the instinctive action of a leader.

The eating men murmured agreement. There was a certain definite idea of
goodness--not virtue, but of things desirable--associated with what Burl
did and what he commanded. His tribe was gradually forming a habit of
obedience, though it was a very fragile habit up to now.

He led them exploring as soon as they had eaten. All of them, of course.
They straggled irregularly behind him. They came to a brook and regarded
it with amazement. There were no leeches. No greenish algae. No foaming
masses of scum. It was dear! Greatly daring, Burl tasted it. He drank
the first really potable water in a very long time for his race on this
planet. It was not fouled by drainage through moulds or rusts.

Dor drank after him. Jak. Cori tasted, and instantly bade her children
drink. Even old Tama drank suspiciously, and then raised her voice in
shrill complaint that Burl had not led them to this place sooner. Tet
and Dik became convinced that there were no deadly things lurking in it,
and splashed each other. Dik slipped and sat down hard on white stuff
that yielded and almost splashed. He got up and looked fearfully at what
he thought might be a deadly slime. Then he yelped shrilly.

He sat down on and crushed part of a bed of mushrooms. But they were
tiny, clean, and appetizing. They were miniatures of the edible
mushrooms the tribe fed on.

Burl smelled and finally tasted one. It was, of course, nothing more or
less than a perfectly normal edible mushroom, growing to the size that
mushrooms originally grew on Earth. It grew on a shaded place in
enormously rich soil. It had been protected from direct sunlight by
trees, but it had not had the means or the stimulus to become a monster.

Burl ate it. He carefully composed his features. Then he announced the
find to his followers. There was food here, he told them sternly, but in
this splendid world to which he had led them, food was small. There
would be no great enemies here, but the food would have to be sought in
small objects instead of great ones. They must look at this place and
seek others like it, in order to find food....

The tribesmen were doubtful. But they plucked mushrooms--whole
ones!--instead of merely breaking off parts of their tops. With deep
astonishment they recognized the miniature objects as familiar things
ensmalled. These mushrooms had the same savor, but they were not coarse
or stringy or tough like the giants. They melted in the mouth; Life in
this place to which Burl had led them was delectable! Truly the doings
of Burl were astonishing!

When the oldest of Cori's children found a beetle on a leaf, and they
recognized it, and instead of being bigger than a man and a thing to
flee from, it was less than an inch in size and helpless against them--.
They were entranced. From that moment onward they would really follow
Burl anywhere, in the happy conviction that he could only bring good to
everybody.

