to other sciences in nature, because it takes cognizance
of quantity, which is apprehended by intuition (_intuitu
intellectus_). "Moreover," he adds, "there have been found famous
men, as Robert, bishop of Lincoln, and Brother Adam Marshman (de
Marisco), and many others, who by the power of mathematics have
been able to explain the causes of things; as may be seen in the
writings of these men, for instance, concerning the Rainbow and
Comets, and the generation of heat, and climates, and the
celestial bodies."--WHEWELL, W.

                         _History of the Inductive Sciences (New
                         York, 1894), Vol. 1, p. 519. Bacon,
                         Roger: Opus Majus, Part 4, Distinctia
                         Prima, cap. 3._


=1548.= The analysis which is based upon the conception of
function discloses to the astronomer and physicist not merely the
formulae for the computation of whatever desired distances,
times, velocities, physical constants; it moreover gives him
insight into the laws of the processes of motion, teaches him to
predict future occurrences from past experiences and supplies him
with means to a scientific knowledge of nature, i.e. it enables
him to trace back whole groups of various, sometimes extremely
heterogeneous, phenomena to a minimum of simple fundamental laws.

                                                 --PRINGSHEIM, A.

                         _Jahresbericht der Deutschen
                         Mathematiker Vereinigung, Bd. 13, p.
                         366._


=1549.= "As is known, scientific physics dates its existence from
the discovery of the differential calculus. Only when it was
learned how to follow continuously the course of natural events,
attempts, to construct by means of abstract conceptions the
connection between phenomena, met with success. To do this two
things are necessary: First, simple fundamental concepts with
which to construct; second, some method by which to deduce, from
the simple fundamental laws of the construction which relate to
instants of time and points in space, laws for finite intervals
and distances, which alone are accessible to observation (can be
compared with experience)." [Riemann.]

The first of the two problems here indicated by Riemann consists
in setting up the differential equation, based upon physical
facts and hypotheses. The second is the integration of this
differential equation and its application to each separate
concrete case, this is the task of mathematics.--WEBER, HEINRICH.

                         _Die partiellen Differentialgleichungen
                         der mathematischen Physik (Braunschweig,
                         1882), Bd. 1, Vorrede._


=1550.= Mathematics is the most powerful instrument which we
possess for this purpose [to trace into their farthest results
those general laws which an inductive philosophy has supplied]:
in many sciences a profound knowledge of mathematics is
indispensable for a successful investigation. In the most
delicate researches into the theories of light, heat, and sound
it is the only instrument; they have properties which no other
language can express; and their argumentative processes are
beyond the reach of other symbols.--PRICE, B.

                         _Treatise on Infinitesimal Calculus
                         (Oxford, 1858), Vol. 3, p. 5._


=1551.= Notwithstanding the eminent difficulties of the
mathematical theory of sonorous vibrations, we owe to it such
progress as has yet been made in acoustics. The formation of the
differential equations proper to the phenomena is, independent of
their integration, a very important acquisition, on account of
the approximations which mathematical analysis allows between
questions, otherwise heterogeneous, which lead to similar
equations. This fundamental property, whose value we have so
often to recognize, applies remarkably in the present case; and
especially since the creation of mathematical thermology, whose
principal equations are strongly analogous to those of vibratory
motion.--This means of investigation is all the more valuable on
account of the difficulties in the way of direct inquiry into
the phenomena of sound. We may decide the necessity of the
atmospheric medium for the transmission of sonorous vibrations;
and we may conceive of the possibility of determining by
experiment the duration of the propagation, in the air, and then
through other media; but the general laws of the vibrations of
sonorous bodies escape immediate observation. We should know
almost nothing of the whole case if the mathematical theory did
not come in to connect the different phenomena of sound, enabling
us to substitute for direct observation an equivalent examination
of more favorable cases subjected to the same law. For instance,
when the analysis of the problem of vibrating chords has shown us
that, other things being equal, the number of oscillations is in
inverse proportion to the length of the chord, we see that the
most rapid vibrations of a very short chord may be counted, since
the law enables us to direct our attention to very slow
vibrations. The same substitution is at our command in many cases
in which it is less direct.--COMTE, A.

                         _Positive Philosophy [Martineau], Bk. 3,
                         chap. 4._


=1552.= Problems relative to the uniform propagation, or to the
varied movements of heat in the interior of solids, are reduced
... to problems of pure analysis, and the progress of this part
of physics will depend in consequence upon the advance which may
be made in the art of analysis. The differential equations ...
contain the chief results of the theory; they express, in the
most general and concise manner, the necessary relations of
numerical analysis to a very extensive class of phenomena; and
they connect forever with mathematical science one of the most
important branches of natural philosophy.--FOURIER, J.

                         _Theory of Heat [Freeman], (Cambridge,
                         1878), Chap. 3, p. 131._


=1553.= The effects of heat are subject to constant laws which
cannot be discovered without the aid of mathematical analysis.
The object of the theory is to demonstrate these laws; it reduces
all physical researches on the propagation of heat, to problems
of the integral calculus, whose elements are given by experiment.
No subject has more extensive relations with the progress of
industry and the natural sciences; for the action of heat is
always present, it influences the processes of the arts, and
occurs in all the phenomena of the universe.--FOURIER, J.

                         _Theory of Heat [Freeman], (Cambridge,
                         1878), Chap. 1, p. 12._


=1554.= Dealing with any and every amount of static electricity,
the mathematical mind has balanced and adjusted them with
wonderful advantage, and has foretold results which the
experimentalist can do no more than verify.... So in respect of
the force of gravitation, it has calculated the results of the
power in such a wonderful manner as to trace the known planets
through their courses and perturbations, and in so doing has
_discovered_ a planet before unknown.--FARADAY.

                         _Some Thoughts on the Conservation of
                         Force._


=1555.= Certain branches of natural philosophy (such as physical
astronomy and optics), ... are, in a great measure, inaccessible
to those who have not received a regular mathematical education....

                                                --STEWART, DUGALD.

                         _Philosophy of the Human Mind, Part 3,
                         chap. 1, sect. 3._


=1556.= So intimate is the union between mathematics and physics
that probably by far the larger part of the accessions to our
mathematical knowledge have been obtained by the efforts of
mathematicians to solve the problems set to them by experiment,
and to create "for each successive class of phenomena, a new
calculus or a new geometry, as the case might be, which might
prove not wholly inadequate to the subtlety of nature."
Sometimes, indeed, the mathematician has been before the
physicist, and it has happened that when some great and new
question has occurred to the experimentalist or the observer, he
has found in the armoury of the mathematician the weapons which
he has needed ready made to his hand. But, much oftener, the
questions proposed by the physicist have transcended the utmost
powers of the mathematics of the time, and a fresh mathematical
creation has been needed to supply the logical instrument
requisite to interpret the new enigma.--SMITH, H. J. S.

                         _Presidential Address British
                         Association for the Advancement of
                         Science, Section A; Nature, Vol. 8
                         (1873), p. 450._


=1557.= Of all the great subjects which belong to the province of
his section, take that which at first sight is the least within
the domain of mathematics--I mean meteorology. Yet the part which
mathematics plays in meteorology increases every year, and seems
destined to increase. Not only is the theory of the simplest
instruments essentially mathematical, but the discussions of the
observations--upon which, be it remembered, depend the hopes
which are already entertained with increasing confidence, of
reducing the most variable and complex of all known phenomena to
exact laws--is a problem which not only belongs wholly to
mathematics, but which taxes to the utmost the resources of the
mathematics which we now possess.--SMITH, H. J. S.

                         _Presidential Address British
                         Association for the Advancement of
                         Science, Section A; Nature, Vol. 8
                         (1873), p. 449._


=1558.= You know that if you make a dot on a piece of paper, and
then hold a piece of Iceland spar over it, you will see not one
dot but two. A mineralogist, by measuring the angles of a
crystal, can tell you whether or no it possesses this property
without looking through it. He requires no scientific thought to
do that. But Sir William Roman Hamilton ... knowing these facts
and also the explanation of them which Fresnel had given,
thought about the subject, and he predicted that by looking
through certain crystals in a particular direction we should see
not two dots but a continuous circle. Mr. Lloyd made the
experiment, and saw the circle, a result which had never been
even suspected. This has always been considered one of the most
signal instances of scientific thought in the domain of physics.

                                                --CLIFFORD, W. K.

                         _Lectures and Essays (New York, 1901),
                         Vol. 1, p. 144._


=1559.= The discovery of this planet [Neptune] is justly reckoned
as the greatest triumph of mathematical astronomy. Uranus failed
to move precisely in the path which the computers predicted for
it, and was misguided by some unknown influence to an extent
which a keen eye might almost see without telescopic aid....
These minute discrepancies constituted the data which were found
sufficient for calculating the position of a hitherto unknown
planet, and bringing it to light. Leverrier wrote to Galle, in
substance: "_Direct your telescope to a point on the ecliptic in
the constellation of Aquarius, in longitude 326 deg., and you will
find within a degree of that place a new planet, looking like a
star of about the ninth magnitude, and having a perceptible
disc._" The planet was found at Berlin on the night of Sept. 26,
1846, in exact accordance with this prediction, within half an
hour after the astronomers began looking for it, and only about
52' distant from the precise point that Leverrier had indicated.

                                                   --YOUNG, C. A.

                         _General Astronomy (Boston, 1891), Art.
                         653._


=1560.= I am convinced that the future progress of chemistry as
an exact science depends very much indeed upon the alliance with
mathematics.--FRANKLAND, A.

                         _American Journal of Mathematics, Vol.
                         1, p. 349._


=1561.= It is almost impossible to follow the later developments
of physical or general chemistry without a working knowledge of
higher mathematics.--MELLOR, J. W.

                         _Higher Mathematics (New York, 1902),
                         Preface._


=1562.=

        ... Mount where science guides;
        Go measure earth, weigh air, and state the tides;
        Instruct the planets in what orb to run,
        Correct old time, and regulate the sun.
                                               --THOMSON, W.

                         _On the Figure of the Earth, Title
                         page._


=1563.= Admission to its sanctuary [referring to astronomy] and
to the privileges and feelings of a votary, is only to be gained
by one means,--_sound and sufficient knowledge of mathematics,
the great instrument of all exact inquiry, without which no man
can ever make such advances in this or any other of the higher
departments of science as can entitle him to form an independent
opinion on any subject of discussion within their range._

                                                   --HERSCHEL, J.

                         _Outlines of Astronomy, Introduction,
                         sect. 7._


=1564.= The long series of connected truths which compose the
science of astronomy, have been evolved from the appearances and
observations by calculation, and a process of reasoning entirely
geometrical. It was not without reason that Plato called geometry
and arithmetic the wings of astronomy; for it is only by means of
these two sciences that we can give a rational account of any of
the appearances, or connect any fact with theory, or even render
a single observation available to the most common astronomical
purpose. It is by geometry that we are enabled to reason our
way up through the apparent motions to the real orbits of
the planets, and to assign their positions, magnitudes and
eccentricities. And it is by application of geometry--a sublime
geometry, indeed, invented for the purpose--to the general laws
of mechanics, that we demonstrate the law of gravitation, trace
it through its remotest effects on the different planets, and,
comparing these effects with what we observe, determine the
densities and weights of the minutest bodies belonging to the
system. The whole science of astronomy is in fact a tissue of
geometrical reasoning, applied to the data of observation; and it
is from this circumstance that it derives its peculiar character
of precision and certainty. To disconnect it from geometry,
therefore, and to substitute familiar illustrations and vague
description for close and logical reasoning, is to deprive it of
its principal advantages, and to reduce it to the condition of
an ordinary province of natural history.

                         _Edinburgh Review, Vol. 58 (1833-1834),
                         p. 168._


=1565.= But geometry is not only the instrument of astronomical
investigation, and the bond by which the truths are enchained
together,--it is also the instrument of explanation, affording,
by the peculiar brevity and perspicuity of its technical
processes, not only aid to the learner, but also such facilities
to the teacher as he will find it very difficult to supply,
if he voluntarily undertakes to forego its assistance. Few
undertakings, indeed, are attended with greater difficulty than
that of attempting to exhibit the connecting links of a chain of
mathematical reasoning, when we lay aside the technical symbols
and notation which relieve the memory, and speak at once to the
eyes and the understanding:....

                         _Edinburgh Review, Vol. 58 (1833-1834),
                         p. 169._


=1566.= With an ordinary acquaintance of trigonometry, and the
simplest elements of algebra, one may take up any well-written
treatise on plane astronomy, and work his way through it, from
beginning to end, with perfect ease; and he will acquire, in the
course of his progress, from the mere examples put before him, an
infinitely more correct and precise idea of astronomical methods
and theories, than he could obtain in a lifetime from the most
eloquent general descriptions that ever were written. At the same
time he will be strengthening himself for farther advances, and
accustoming his mind to habits of close comparison and rigid
demonstration, which are of infinitely more importance than the
acquisition of stores of undigested facts.

                         _Edinburgh Review, Vol. 58 (1833-1834),
                         p. 170._


=1567.= While the telescope serves as a means of penetrating
space, and of bringing its remotest regions nearer us, mathematics,
by inductive reasoning, have led us onwards to the remotest
regions of heaven, and brought a portion of them within the range
of our possibilities; nay, in our own times--so propitious to the
extension of knowledge--the application of all the elements
yielded by the present conditions of astronomy has even revealed
to the intellectual eyes a heavenly body, and assigned to it its
place, orbit, mass, before a single telescope has been directed
towards it.--HUMBOLDT, A.

                         _Cosmos [Otte], Vol. 2, part 2, sect.
                         3._


=1568.= Mighty are numbers, joined with art resistless.--EURIPIDES.

                         _Hecuba, Line 884._


=1569.= No single instrument of youthful education has such
mighty power, both as regards domestic economy and politics, and
in the arts, as the study of arithmetic. Above all, arithmetic
stirs up him who is by nature sleepy and dull, and makes him
quick to learn, retentive, shrewd, and aided by art divine he
makes progress quite beyond his natural powers.--PLATO.

                         _Laws [Jowett,] Bk. 5, p. 747._


=1570.= For all the higher arts of construction some acquaintance
with mathematics is indispensable. The village carpenter, who,
lacking rational instruction, lays out his work by empirical
rules learned in his apprenticeship, equally with the builder of
a Britannia Bridge, makes hourly reference to the laws of
quantitative relations. The surveyor on whose survey the land is
purchased; the architect in designing a mansion to be built on
it; the builder in preparing his estimates; his foreman in laying
out the foundations; the masons in cutting the stones; and the
various artisans who put up the fittings; are all guided by
geometrical truths. Railway-making is regulated from beginning to
end by mathematics: alike in the preparation of plans and
sections; in staking out the lines; in the mensuration of
cuttings and embankments; in the designing, estimating, and
building of bridges, culverts, viaducts, tunnels, stations. And
similarly with the harbors, docks, piers, and various engineering
and architectural works that fringe the coasts and overspread the
face of the country, as well as the mines that run underneath it.
Out of geometry, too, as applied to astronomy, the art of
navigation has grown; and so, by this science, has been made
possible that enormous foreign commerce which supports a large
part of our population, and supplies us with many necessaries
and most of our luxuries. And nowadays even the farmer, for the
correct laying out of his drains, has recourse to the level--that
is, to geometrical principles.--SPENCER, HERBERT.

                         _Education, chap. 1._


=1571.= [Arithmetic] is another of the great master-keys of life.
With it the astronomer opens the depths of the heavens; the
engineer, the gates of the mountains; the navigator, the pathways
of the deep. The skillful arrangement, the rapid handling of
figures, is a perfect magician's wand. The mighty commerce of the
United States, foreign and domestic, passes through the books
kept by some thousands of diligent and faithful clerks. Eight
hundred bookkeepers, in the Bank of England, strike the monetary
balance of half the civilized world. Their skill and accuracy in
applying the common rules of arithmetic are as important as the
enterprise and capital of the merchant, or the industry and
courage of the navigator. I look upon a well-kept ledger with
something of the pleasure with which I gaze on a picture or a
statue. It is a beautiful work of art.--EVERETT, EDWARD.

                         _Orations and Speeches (Boston, 1870),
                         Vol. 3, p. 47._


=1572.= [Mathematics] is the fruitful Parent of, I had almost
said all, Arts, the unshaken Foundation of Sciences, and the
plentiful Fountain of Advantage to Human Affairs. In which last
Respect, we may be said to receive from the _Mathematics_, the
principal Delights of Life, Securities of Health, Increase of
Fortune, and Conveniences of Labour: That we dwell elegantly and
commodiously, build decent Houses for ourselves, erect stately
Temples to God, and leave wonderful Monuments to Posterity: That
we are protected by those Rampires from the Incursions of the
Enemy; rightly use Arms, skillfully range an Army, and manage War
by Art, and not by the Madness of wild Beasts: That we have safe
Traffick through the deceitful Billows, pass in a direct Road
through the tractless Ways of the Sea, and come to the designed
Ports by the uncertain Impulse of the Winds: That we rightly cast
up our Accounts, do Business expeditiously, dispose, tabulate,
and calculate scattered Ranks of Numbers, and easily compute
them, though expressive of huge Heaps of Sand, nay immense Hills
of Atoms: That we make pacifick Separations of the Bounds of
Lands, examine the Moments of Weights in an equal Balance, and
distribute every one his own by a just Measure: That with a light
Touch we thrust forward vast Bodies which way we will, and stop a
huge Resistance with a very small Force: That we accurately
delineate the Face of this Earthly Orb, and subject the Oeconomy
of the Universe to our Sight: That we aptly digest the flowing
Series of Time, distinguish what is acted by due Intervals,
rightly account and discern the various Returns of the Seasons,
the stated Periods of Years and Months, the alternate Increments
of Days and Nights, the doubtful Limits of Light and Shadow, and
the exact Differences of Hours and Minutes: That we derive the
subtle Virtue of the Solar Rays to our Uses, infinitely extend
the Sphere of Sight, enlarge the near Appearances of Things,
bring to Hand Things remote, discover Things hidden, search
Nature out of her Concealments, and unfold her dark Mysteries:
That we delight our Eyes with beautiful Images, cunningly imitate
the Devices and portray the Works of Nature; imitate did I say?
nay excel, while we form to ourselves Things not in being,
exhibit Things absent, and represent Things past: That we
recreate our Minds and delight our Ears with melodious Sounds,
attemperate the inconstant Undulations of the Air to musical
Tunes, add a pleasant Voice to a sapless Log and draw a sweet
Eloquence from a rigid Metal; celebrate our Maker with an
harmonious Praise, and not unaptly imitate the blessed Choirs of
Heaven: That we approach and examine the inaccessible Seats of
the Clouds, the distant Tracts of Land, unfrequented Paths of the
Sea; lofty Tops of the Mountains, low Bottoms of the Valleys, and
deep Gulphs of the Ocean: That in Heart we advance to the Saints
themselves above, yea draw them to us, scale the etherial
Towers, freely range through the celestial Fields, measure the
Magnitudes, and determine the Interstices of the Stars, prescribe
inviolable Laws to the Heavens themselves, and confine the
wandering Circuits of the Stars within fixed Bounds: Lastly, that
we comprehend the vast Fabrick of the Universe, admire and
contemplate the wonderful Beauty of the Divine Workmanship, and
to learn the incredible Force and Sagacity of our own Minds, by
certain Experiments, and to acknowledge the Blessings of Heaven
with pious Affection.--BARROW, ISAAC.

                         _Mathematical Lectures (London, 1734),
                         pp. 27-30._


=1573.= Analytical and graphical treatment of statistics is
employed by the economist, the philanthropist, the business
expert, the actuary, and even the physician, with the most
surprisingly valuable results; while symbolic language involving
mathematical methods has become a part of wellnigh every large
business. The handling of pig-iron does not seem to offer any
opportunity for mathematical application. Yet graphical and
analytical treatment of the data from long-continued experiments
with this material at Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, resulted in the
discovery of the law that fatigue varied in proportion to a
certain relation between the load and the periods of rest.
Practical application of this law increased the amount handled by
each man from twelve and a half to forty-seven tons per day. Such
study would have been impossible without preliminary acquaintance
with the simple invariable elements of mathematics.--KARPINSKY, L.

                         _High School Education (New York, 1912),
                         chap. 6, p. 134._


=1574.= They [computation and arithmetic] belong then, it seems,
to the branches of learning which we are now investigating;--for
a military man must necessarily learn them with a view to the
marshalling of his troops, and so must a philosopher with the
view of understanding real being, after having emerged from the
unstable condition of becoming, or else he can never become an
apt reasoner.

That is the fact he replied.

But the guardian of ours happens to be both a military man and a
philosopher.

Unquestionably so.

It would be proper then, Glaucon, to lay down laws for this
branch of science and persuade those about to engage in the most
important state-matters to apply themselves to computation, and
study it, not in the common vulgar fashion, but with the view of
arriving at the contemplation of the nature of numbers by the
intellect itself,--not for the sake of buying and selling as
anxious merchants and retailers, but for war also, and that the
soul may acquire a facility in turning itself from what is in the
course of generation to truth and real being.--PLATO.

                         _Republic [Davis], Bk. 7, p. 525._


=1575.= The scientific part of Arithmetic and Geometry would be
of more use for regulating the thoughts and opinions of men than
all the great advantage which Society receives from the general
application of them: and this use cannot be spread through the
Society by the practice; for the Practitioners, however dextrous,
have no more knowledge of the Science than the very instruments
with which they work. They have taken up the Rules as they found
them delivered down to them by scientific men, without the least
inquiry after the Principles from which they are derived: and the
more accurate the Rules, the less occasion there is for inquiring
after the Principles, and consequently, the more difficult it is
to make them turn their attention to the First Principles; and,
therefore, a Nation ought to have both Scientific and Practical
Mathematicians.--WILLIAMSON, JAMES.

                         _Elements of Euclid with Dissertations
                         (Oxford, 1781)._


=1576.= _Where there is nothing to measure there is nothing to
calculate_, hence it is impossible to employ mathematics in
psychological investigations. Thus runs the syllogism compounded
of an adherence to usage and an apparent truth. As to the latter,
it is wholly untrue that we may calculate only where we have
measured. Exactly the opposite is true. Every hypothetically
assumed law of quantitative combination, even such as is
recognized as invalid, is subject to calculation; and in case of
deeply hidden but important matters it is imperative to try on
hypotheses and to subject the consequences which flow from them
to precise computation until it is found which one of the
various hypotheses coincides with experience. Thus the ancient
astronomers _tried_ eccentric circles, and Kepler _tried_ the
ellipse to account for the motion of the planets, the latter also
compared the squares of the times of revolution with the cubes of
the mean distances before he discovered their agreement. In like
manner Newton _tried_ whether a gravitation, varying inversely as
the square of the distance, sufficed to keep the moon in its
orbit about the earth; if this supposition had failed him, he
would have tried some other power of the distance, as the fourth
or fifth, and deduced the corresponding consequences to compare
them with the observations. Just this is the greatest benefit of
mathematics, that it enables us to survey the possibilities whose
range includes the actual, long before we have adequate definite
experience; this makes it possible to employ very incomplete
indications of experience to avoid at least the crudest
errors. Long before the transit of Venus was employed in the
determination of the sun's parallax, it was attempted to
determine the instant at which the sun illumines exactly one-half
of the moon's disk, in order to compute the sun's distance from
the known distance of the moon from the earth. This was not
possible, for, owing to psychological reasons, our method of
measuring time is too crude to give us the desired instant with
sufficient accuracy; yet the attempt gave us the knowledge that
the sun's distance from us is at least several hundred times as
great as that of the moon. This illustration shows clearly that
even a very imperfect estimate of a magnitude in a case where no
precise observation is possible, may become very instructive, if
we know how to exploit it. Was it necessary to know the scale of
our solar system in order to learn of its order in general? Or,
taking an illustration from another field, was it impossible to
investigate the laws of motion until it was known exactly how far
a body falls in a second at some definite place? Not at all. Such
determinations of _fundamental measures_ are in themselves
exceedingly difficult, but fortunately, such investigations form
a class of their own; our knowledge of _fundamental laws_ does
not need to wait on these. To be sure, computation invites
measurement, and every easily observed regularity of certain
magnitudes is an incentive to mathematical investigation.

                                                 --HERBART, J. F.

                         _Werke [Kehrbach], (Langensalza, 1890),
                         Bd. 5, p. 97._


=1577.= Those who pass for naturalists, have, for the most part,
been very little, or not at all, versed in mathematicks, if not
also jealous of them.--BOYLE, ROBERT.

                         _Works (London, 1772), Vol. 3, p. 426._


=1578.= However hurtful may have been the incursions of the
geometers, direct and indirect, into a domain which it is not for
them to cultivate, the physiologists are not the less wrong in
turning away from mathematics altogether. It is not only that
without mathematics they could not receive their due preliminary
training in the intervening sciences: it is further necessary for
them to have geometrical and mechanical knowledge, to understand
the structure and the play of the complex apparatus of the living,
and especially the animal organism. Animal mechanics, statical and
dynamical, must be unintelligible to those who are ignorant of
the general laws of rational mechanics. The laws of equilibrium
and motion are ... absolutely universal in their action, depending
wholly on the energy, and not at all on the nature of the forces
considered: and the only difficulty is in their numerical
application in cases of complexity. Thus, discarding all idea of a
numerical application in biology, we perceive that the general
theorems of statics and dynamics must be steadily verified in the
mechanism of living bodies, on the rational study of which they
cast an indispensable light. The highest orders of animals act in
repose and motion, like any other mechanical apparatus of a
similar complexity, with the one difference of the mover, which
has no power to alter the laws of motion and equilibrium. The
participation of rational mechanics in positive biology is thus
evident. Mechanics cannot dispense with geometry; and beside, we
see how anatomical and physiological speculations involve
considerations of form and position, and require a familiar
knowledge of the principal geometrical laws which may cast light
upon these complex relations.--COMTE, A.

                         _Positive Philosophy [Martineau], Bk. 5,
                         chap. 1._


=1579.= In mathematics we find the primitive source of
rationality; and to mathematics must the biologists resort for
means to carry on their researches.--COMTE, A.

                         _Positive Philosophy [Martineau], Bk. 5,
                         chap. 1._


=1580.= In this school [of mathematics] must they [biologists]
learn familiarly the real characters and conditions of scientific
evidence, in order to transfer it afterwards to the province of
their own theories. The study of it here, in the most simple and
perfect cases, is the only sound preparation for its recognition
in the most complex.

The study is equally necessary for the formation of intellectual
habits; for obtaining an aptitude in forming and sustaining
positive abstractions, without which the comparative method
cannot be used in either anatomy or physiology. The abstraction
which is to be the standard of comparison must be first clearly
formed, and then steadily maintained in its integrity, or the
analysis becomes abortive: and this is so completely in the
spirit of mathematical combinations, that practice in them is the
best preparation for it. A student who cannot accomplish the
process in the more simple case may be assured that he is not
qualified for the higher order of biological researches, and must
be satisfied with the humbler office of collecting materials for
the use of minds of another order. Hence arises another use of
mathematical training;--that of testing and classifying minds, as
well as preparing and guiding them. Probably as much good would
be done by excluding the students who only encumber the science
by aimless and desultory inquiries, as by fitly instituting those
who can better fulfill its conditions.--COMTE, A.

                         _Positive Philosophy [Martineau], Bk. 5,
                         chap. 1._


=1581.= There seems no sufficient reason why the use of
scientific fictions, so common in the hands of geometers, should
not be introduced into biology, if systematically employed, and
adopted with sufficient sobriety. In mathematical studies, great
advantages have arisen from imagining a series of hypothetical
cases, the consideration of which, though artificial, may aid the
clearing up of the real subject, or its fundamental elaboration.
This art is usually confounded with that of hypotheses; but it is
entirely different; inasmuch as in the latter case the solution
alone is imaginary; whereas in the former, the problem itself is
radically ideal. Its use can never be in biology comparable to
what it is in mathematics: but it seems to me that the abstract
character of the higher conceptions of comparative biology
renders them susceptible of such treatment. The process will be
to intercalate, among different known organisms, certain purely
fictitious organisms, so imagined as to facilitate their
comparison, by rendering the biological series more homogeneous
and continuous: and it might be that several might hereafter meet
with more or less of a realization among organisms hitherto
unexplored. It may be possible, in the present state of our
knowledge of living bodies, to conceive of a new organism capable
of fulfilling certain given conditions of existence. However that
may be, the collocation of real cases with well-imagined ones,
after the manner of geometers, will doubtless be practised
hereafter, to complete the general laws of comparative anatomy
and physiology, and possibly to anticipate occasionally the
direct exploration. Even now, the rational use of such an
artifice might greatly simplify and clear up the ordinary system
