written.

"Jerome!"

"Yes."

"You are no longer connected with headquarters, I presume. But--can you
get men?"

"If need be."

"You will need them!" Just then Watson noticed the uniform of General
Hume. "Jerome, can you give this officer a bodyguard?"

It was both unusual and lightning-sudden. Nevertheless, there was
something in Watson's manner that called for no challenge; something
that would have brooked no refusal. And the general, although a sceptic,
was acting solely from force of habit when he objected:

"It seems to me, Watson, that you--"

Those who were present are not likely to forget it. Some men are born,
some rise, to the occasion; but Watson was both. He was clear-cut,
dominant, inexorable. He levelled his pencil at the general.

"It SEEMS to you! General, let me ask you: If your country's safety were
at stake, would you hesitate to throw reinforcements into the breach?"

"Hardly."

"All right. It's settled. Take care of your red tape AFTERWARDS."

He wheeled to the detective. "Jerome, this is a sketch of the
compartments of Dr. Holcomb's safe. Not the large one in his house, but
the small one in his laboratory. Go straight to Dwight Way. Give this
note," indicating another paper, "to Bertha Holcomb. Tell her that her
father is safe, and that I am out of the Blind Spot. Tell her you have
come to open the laboratory safe. I've written down the combination. If
it doesn't work use explosives; there's nothing inside which force can
harm. In the compartment marked 'X' you will find a small particle about
the size of a pea, wrapped in tin-foil, and locked in a small metal box.
You will have to break the box. As for the contents, once you see the
stone you can't mistake it; it will weigh about six pounds. Get it, and
guard it with your life!"

"All right."

Jerome put Watson's instructions in his wallet, at the same time
glancing about the room.

"Where is Fenton?" he asked.

It was Watson who answered. He gave us the first news that had ever come
from the Blind Spot. He spoke with firm deliberation, as though in full
realisation of the sensation:

"Hobart Fenton has gone through the Blind Spot. Just now he is right
here in this room."

Sir Henry jumped.

"In this room! Is that what you said, Watson?"

The other ignored him.

"Jerome, you haven't a minute to lose! You and the general; bring that
stone back to this house at ANY cost! Hurry!"

In another moment Jerome and Hume were gone. And few people, that day,
suspected the purport of that body of silent men who crossed over the
Bay of San Francisco. They were grim, and trusted, and under secret
orders. They had a mission, did they but know it, as important as any
in history. But they knew only that they were to guard Jerome and the
general at all hazards. One peculiarly heavy stone, "the size of a pea"!
How are we ever to calculate its value?

As for the group remaining with Watson, not one of them ever dreamed
that any danger might come out of the Blind Spot. Its manifestations had
been local and mostly negative. No; the main incentive of their interest
had been simply curiosity.

But apparently Watson was above them all. He paid no further attention
to them for a while; he bent at Fenton's desk and worked swiftly. At
length he thrust his papers aside.

"I want to see that cellar," he announced. "That is, the point where you
found that red pebble!"

Down in the basement, Sir Henry gave the details. When he came to
mention the various liquids which Fenton had poured into the woodwork
upstairs Watson examined the pool intently.

"Quite so. They would come out here--naturally."

"Naturally!"

Sir Henry could not understand. His perplexity was reflected in the
faces of Herold, the two physicians, Dr. Malloy, Miss Clarke, and Mme.
Le Fabre--and Charlotte spoke for them all:

"Can't you explain, Mr. Watson? The woodwork had nothing whatever to do
with the cellar. There was the floor between, just as you see it now."

"Naturally," Watson repeated. "It could be no other place! It was on its
way to the other side, but it could go only half-way. Simply a matter
of focus, you know. I beg pardon; you must hold your curiosity a little
longer."

He began measuring. First he located the line across the floorjoists
overhead, where rested the partition separating the dining-room from
the parlour. Finding the middle of this line, he dropped an improvised
plumb-line to the ground; and from this spot as centre, using a string
about ten feet long, he described a circle on the earth. Then, referring
to his calculations, he proceeded to locate several points with small
stakes pressed into the soil. Then he checked them off and nodded.

"It's even better than the professor thought. His theory is all but
proven. If Jerome and Hume can deliver the other stone without accident,
we can save those now inside the Spot." Then, very solemnly: "But we
face a heavy task. It will be another Thermopylae. We must hold the gate
against an occult Xerxes, together with all his horde."

"The hosts of the dead!" exclaimed Mme. Le Fabre.

"No; the living! Just give me time, Madame, and you will see something
hitherto undreamed of. As for your theory--tomorrow you may doubt
whether you are living or dead! In other words, Dr. Holcomb has
certainly proved the occult by material means. He has done it with a
vengeance. In so doing he has left us in doubt as to ourselves; and
unless he discovers the missing factor within the next few hours we are
going to be in the anomalous position of knowing plenty about the next
world, but nothing about ourselves."

He paused. He must have known that their curiosity could not hold out
much longer. He said:

"Now, just one thing more, friends, and I can tell you everything, while
we are waiting for Jerome and the general to return. But first I must
see the one who preceded me out of the spot."

"Ariadne!" from Charlotte, in wonder.

"Ariadne!" exclaimed Watson. He was both puzzled and amazed. "Did you
call her--Ariadne?"

"She is upstairs," cut in Dr. Higgins.

"I must see her!"

A minute or two later they stood in the room where the girl lay. The
coverlet was thrown back somewhat revealing the bare left arm and
shoulder, and the delicately beautiful face upon the pillow. Her golden
hair was spread out in riotous profusion. The other hand was just
protruding from the coverlet, and displayed a faint red mark, showing
where Hobart's bracelet had been fastened at the moment he disappeared.

Charlotte stepped over and laid her hand against the girl's cheek.
"Isn't she wonderful!" she murmured.

But Dr. Higgins looked to Watson.

"Do you know her?"

The other nodded. He stooped over and listened to her breathing. His
manner was that of reverence and admiration. He touched her hand.

"I see how it must have happened. Precisely what I experienced, only--"
Then: "You call her Ariadne?"

"We had to call her something," replied Charlotte. "And the name--it
just came, I suppose."

"Perhaps. Anyhow, it was a remarkably good guess. Her true name is the
Aradna."

"THE Aradna? Who--what is she?"

"Just that: the Aradna. She is one of the factors that may save us.
And on earth we would call her queen." Then, without waiting for the
inevitable question, Watson said:

"Your professional judgment will soon come to the supreme test, Dr.
Higgins. She is simply numbed and dazed from coming through the Spot."
Charlotte had already described to him the girl's arrival. "The mystery
is that she was permitted an hour of rationality before this came upon
her. I wonder if Hobart's vitality had anything to do with it?"--half to
himself. "As for the Rhamda"--he smiled--"he is merely interested in
the Spot; that is all. He would never harm the Aradna; he had nothing
whatever to do with her condition. We were mistaken about the man.
Anyway, it is the Spot of Life that interests us now."

"The Spot of Life," repeated Sir Henry. "Is that--"

"Yes; the Blind Spot, as it is known from the other side. It overtops
all your sciences, embraces every cult, and lies at the base of all
truth. It is--it is everything."

"Explain!"

Watson turned to the head upon the pillow. He ventured to touch the
cheek, with a trace of tenderness in his action and of wistfulness near
to reverence. It was not love; it was rather as one might touch a fairy.
In both spirit and substance she was truly of another world. Watson gave
a soft sigh and looked up at the Englishman.

"Yes, I can explain. Now that I know she is well, I shall tell you all
I know from the beginning. It's certainly your turn to ask questions.
I may not be able to tell you all that you want to know; but at least I
know more than any other person this side of the Spot. Let us go down to
the library."

He glanced at a clock. "We have nearly five hours remaining. Our test
will come when we open the Spot. We must not only open it, but we must
close it at all costs."

They had reached the lower hall. At the front door Watson paused and
turned to the others.

"Just a moment. We may fail tonight. In case we do, I would like one
last look at my own world--at San Francisco."

He opened the door. The rest hung back; though they could not
understand, they could sense, vaguely, the emotion of this strange man
of brave adventure. The scene, the setting, the beauty, were all akin
to the moment. Watson, stood bareheaded, looking down at the blinking
lights of the city of the Argonauts. The moon in a starlit sky was
drifting through a ragged lace of cloud. And over it all was a momentary
hush, as though the man's emotion had called for it.

No one spoke. At last Watson closed the door. And there was just the
trace of tears in his eyes as he spoke:

"Now my friends--" And led the way into the parlour.




XXIX

THE OCCULT WORLD


"In telling what I know," began Watson, "I shall use a bit of a preface.
It's necessary, in a way, if you are to understand me; besides, it will
give you the advantage of looking into the Blind Spot with the clear
eyes of reason. I intend to tell all, to omit nothing. My purpose in
doing this is that, in case we should fail tonight, you will be able to
give my account to the world."

It was a strange introduction. His listeners exchanged thoughtful
glances. But they all affirmed, and Sir Henry hitched his chair almost
impatiently.

"All right, Mr. Watson. Please proceed."

"To begin with," said Watson, "I assume that you all know of Dr.
Holcomb's announcement concerning the Blind Spot. You remember that he
promised to solve the occult; how he foretold that he would prove it not
by immaterial but by the very material means; that he would produce the
fact and the substance.

"Now, the professor had promised to deliver something far greater than
he had thought it to be. At the same time, what he knew of the
Blind Spot was part conjecture and part fact. Like his forebears and
contemporaries, he looked upon man as the real being.

"But it's a question, now, as to which is reality and which is not.
There is not a branch of philosophy that looks upon the question in that
light. Bishop Berkeley came near and he has been followed by others; but
they all have been deceived by their own sophistry. However, except for
the grossest materialists, all thinkers take cognizance of a hereafter.

"No one dreamed of a Blind Spot and what it may lead to, what it might
contain. We are five-sensed; we interpret the universe by the measure of
five yardsticks. Yet, the Blind Spot takes even those away; the more we
know, it seems, the less certain we are of ourselves. As I said to Mme.
Le Fabre, it is a difficult question to determine, after all, just who
are the ghosts. At any rate, I KNOW"--and he paused for effect--"I know
that there are uncounted millions who look upon us and our workings as
entirely supernatural!

"Remember that what I have to tell you is just as real as your own lives
have been since babyhood.

"It was slightly over a year ago that my last night on the earth
arrived.

"I had gone out for the evening, in the forlorn hope of meeting a
friend, of having some slight taste of pleasure before the end came.

"For several days I had been labouring under a sort of premonition,
knowing that my life was slowly seeping away and that my vitality was
slipping, bit by bit, to what I thought must be death. Had I then known
what I know now, I could have saved myself. But if I had done it, if I
had saved myself, we would never have found Dr. Holcomb.

"Perhaps it was the same fate that led me to Harry, that night. I don't
know. Nevertheless, if there is any truth in what I have learned on
the other side of the Blind Spot, it would seem that there is something
higher than mere fate. I had never believed in luck; but when everything
works out to a fraction of a breath, one ceases to be sceptical on the
question of destiny and chance. _I_ say, everything that happened that
night was FORCED from the other side. In short, my giving that ring to
Harry was simply a link in the chain of circumstances. It just had to
be; the PROPHECY would not have had it otherwise."

Without stopping to explain what he meant by the word "prophecy," Watson
went on:

"That's what makes it puzzling. I have never been able to understand
how every bit has dovetailed with such exactness. We--you and I--are
certainly not supernatural; and yet, on the other side of the Spot, the
proof is overwhelmingly convincing.

"I was very weak that night. So weak that it is difficult for me to
remember. The last I recollect was my going to the back of the house;
to the kitchen, I think. I had a light in my hands. The boys were in the
front room, waiting. One of them had opened a door some yards away from
where I stood.

"Coming as it did, on the instant, it is difficult to describe. But I
knew it instinctively for what it was: the dot of blue on the ceiling,
and the string of light. Then, a sensation of falling, like dropping
into space itself. It is hard to describe the horrifying terror of
plunging head on from an immense height to a plain at a vastly lower
level.

"And that's all that I remember--from this side." [Footnote: NOTE.--In
justice to Mr. Watson, the present writers have thought it best at this
stage to transpose the story from the first to the third person. Any
narrative, unless it is negative in its material, is hard to give in
the first person; for where the narrator has played an active, positive
part, he must either curb himself or fall under the slur of braggadocio.
Yet, the world wants the details exactly as they happened; hence the
transposition. EDITORS.]

Watson opened his eyes.

The first thing was light and a sense of great pain. There was a
pressure at the back of the eyeballs, a poignant sensation not unlike
a knife-thrust; that, and a sudden fear of madness, of drivelling
helplessness.

The abrupt return of consciousness in such a condition is not easy to
imagine. After all he had gone through, this strange sequel must have
been terribly puzzling to him. He was a man of good education, well
versed in psychology; in the first rush of consciousness he tried, as
best he could, to weigh himself up in the balance of aberration. And it
was this very fact that gave him his reassurance; for it told him that
he could think, could reason, could count on a mind in full function.

But he could not see. The pain in his eyeballs was blinding. There was
nothing he could distinguish; everything was woven together, a mere
blaze of wonderful, iridescent, blazing coloration.

But if he could not see, he could feel. The pain was excruciating.
He closed his eyes and fell to thinking, curiously enough, that the
experience was similar to what he had gone through when upon learning to
swim, he had first opened his eyes under the water. It had been under
a blazing sun. The pain and the colour--it was much the same, only
intensified.

Then he knew that he was very tired. The mere effort of that one thought
had cost him vitality. He dropped back into unconsciousness, such as
was more insensibility than slumber. He had strange dreams, of people
walking, of women, and of many voices. It was blurred and indistinct,
yet somehow not unreal. Then, after an unguessable length of time--he
awoke.

He was much stronger. The lapse may have been very long; he could not
know. But the pain in his eyes was gone; and he ventured to open the
lids again in the face of the light that had been so baffling. This time
he could see; not distinctly, but still enough to assure him of reality.
By closing his eyes at intervals he was able to rest them and to
accustom them gradually to the new degree of light. And after a bit he
could see plainly.

He was on a cot, and in a room almost totally different from any that
he had ever seen before. The colour of the walls, even, was dissimilar;
likewise the ceiling. It was white, in a way, and yet unlike it; neither
did it resemble any of the various tints; to give it a name that he
afterward learned--alna--implies but little. It was utterly new to him.

Apparently he was alone. The room was not large; about the size of an
ordinary bedroom. And after the first novelty of the unplaceable colour
had worn off he began to take stock of his own person.

First, he was covered by the finest of bed clothing, thick but
exceedingly light. There was no counterpane, but two blankets and two
sheets; and none of them corresponded to any colour or material he had
ever known. He only knew that their tints were light rather than dark.

Next, he moved his hands out from under the coverings, and held them up
before his eyes. He was immensely puzzled. He naturally expected to see
the worn, emaciated hands which had been his on that dramatic night; but
the ones before him were plump, normal, of a healthy pink. The wrists
likewise were in perfect condition, also his arms. He could not account
for this sudden return to health, of the vigour he had known before he
began to wear the ring. He lay back pondering.

Presently he fell to examining his clothes. There were two garments made
of a silk-like textile, rather heavy as to weight, but exceedingly soft
as to touch. They were slightly darker than the bed clothing. In a way
they were much like pyjamas, except that both were designed to be merely
slipped into place, without buttons or draw-strings. That is, they were
tailored to fit snugly over the shoulders and waist, while loose enough
elsewhere.

Then he noticed the walls of the room. They were after a simple,
symmetrical style; coved--to use an architectural expression--or curved,
where the corner would come with a radius much larger than common,
amounting to four or five feet; so that a person of ordinary height
could not stand close to the wall without stooping. Where the coved
portion flowed into the perpendicular of the wall there was a broad
moulding, like a plate rail, which acted as a support for the hanging
pictures.

Watson counted four of these pictures. Instinctively he felt that they
might give him a valuable clue as to his whereabouts. For, while his
mind had cleared enough for him to feel sure that he had truly come
through the Spot, he knew nothing more. Where was he? What would the
pictures tell?

The first was directly before his eyes. In size perhaps two by three
feet, with its greater length horizontal, it was more of a landscape
than a portrait. And Watson's eagerness for the subject itself made him
forget to note whether the work was mechanically or manually executed.

For it revealed a girl--about ten or twelve--very slightly draped,
enjoying a wild romp with a most extraordinary creature. It was this
animal that made the picture amazing; there was no subtle significance
in the scene--there was nothing remarkable about the technique. The
whole interest, for Watson, was in the animal.

It was a deer; perfect and beautiful, but cast in a Lilliputian mould.
It stood barely a foot high, the most delicate thing he had ever looked
upon. Mature in every detail of its proportion, the dainty hoofs, the
fragile legs, smooth-coated body, and small, wide-antlered head--a
miniature eight-pointer--made such a vision as might come to the dreams
of a hunter.

Chick rose up in bed, in order to examine it more closely. Immediately
he fell back again slightly dizzy. He closed his eyes.

Shortly he began examining the other pictures. Two of these were
simple flower studies. Watson scarcely knew which puzzled him most; the
blossoms or their containers. For the vases were like large-sized loving
cups, broad as to body, and provided with a handle on either side. Their
colours were unfamiliar. As for the blossoms--in one study the blooms
were a half-dozen in number, and more like Shasta daisies than anything
else. But their colour was totally unlike, while they possessed wide,
striped stamens that gave the flowers an identity all their own. In
the other vase were several varieties, and every one absolutely
unrecognisable.

On the opposite side of the room was something fairly familiar. At
