these momentary calms that the catastrophe occurred.  Our sail hung
limp and our momentum decreased when of a sudden a particularly vicious
squall caught us.  Before I could cut the sheets the mast had snapped
at the thwart in which it was stepped.

The worst had happened; Juag and I seized paddles and kept the canoe
with the wind; but that squall was the parting shot of the gale, which
died out immediately after, leaving us free to make for the shore,
which we lost no time in attempting.  But Hooja had drawn closer in
toward shore than we, so it looked as if he might head us off before we
could land.  However, we did our best to distance him, Dian taking a
paddle with us.

We were in a fair way to succeed when there appeared, pouring from
among the trees beyond the beach, a horde of yelling, painted savages,
brandishing all sorts of devilish-looking primitive weapons.  So
menacing was their attitude that we realized at once the folly of
attempting to land among them.

Hooja was drawing closer to us.  There was no wind.  We could not hope
to outpaddle him.  And with our sail gone, no wind would help us,
though, as if in derision at our plight, a steady breeze was now
blowing.  But we had no intention of sitting idle while our fate
overtook us, so we bent to our paddles and, keeping parallel with the
coast, did our best to pull away from our pursuers.

It was a grueling experience.  We were weakened by lack of food.  We
were suffering the pangs of thirst.  Capture and death were close at
hand.  Yet I think that we gave a good account of ourselves in our
final effort to escape.  Our boat was so much smaller and lighter than
any of Hooja's that the three of us forced it ahead almost as rapidly
as his larger craft could go under their twenty paddles.

As we raced along the coast for one of those seemingly interminable
periods that may draw hours into eternities where the labor is
soul-searing and there is no way to measure time, I saw what I took for
the opening to a bay or the mouth of a great river a short distance
ahead of us.  I wished that we might make for it; but with the menace
of Hooja close behind and the screaming natives who raced along the
shore parallel to us, I dared not attempt it.

We were not far from shore in that mad flight from death.  Even as I
paddled I found opportunity to glance occasionally toward the natives.
They were white, but hideously painted.  From their gestures and
weapons I took them to be a most ferocious race.  I was rather glad
that we had not succeeded in landing among them.

Hooja's fleet had been in much more compact formation when we sighted
them this time than on the occasion following the tempest.  Now they
were moving rapidly in pursuit of us, all well within the radius of a
mile.  Five of them were leading, all abreast, and were scarce two
hundred yards from us.  When I glanced over my shoulder I could see
that the archers had already fitted arrows to their bows in readiness
to fire upon us the moment that they should draw within range.

Hope was low in my breast.  I could not see the slightest chance of
escaping them, for they were overhauling us rapidly now, since they
were able to work their paddles in relays, while we three were rapidly
wearying beneath the constant strain that had been put upon us.

It was then that Juag called my attention to the rift in the shore-line
which I had thought either a bay or the mouth of a great river.  There
I saw moving slowly out into the sea that which filled my soul with
wonder.



CHAPTER XIV

GORE AND DREAMS

It was a two-masted felucca with lateen sails! The craft was long and
low.  In it were more than fifty men, twenty or thirty of whom were at
oars with which the craft was being propelled from the lee of the land.
I was dumbfounded.

Could it be that the savage, painted natives I had seen on shore had so
perfected the art of navigation that they were masters of such advanced
building and rigging as this craft proclaimed? It seemed impossible!
And as I looked I saw another of the same type swing into view and
follow its sister through the narrow strait out into the ocean.

Nor were these all.  One after another, following closely upon one
another's heels, came fifty of the trim, graceful vessels.  They were
cutting in between Hooja's fleet and our little dugout.

When they came a bit closer my eyes fairly popped from my head at what
I saw, for in the eye of the leading felucca stood a man with a
sea-glass leveled upon us.  Who could they be? Was there a civilization
within Pellucidar of such wondrous advancement as this? Were there
far-distant lands of which none of my people had ever heard, where a
race had so greatly outstripped all other races of this inner world?

The man with the glass had lowered it and was shouting to us.  I could
not make out his words, but presently I saw that he was pointing aloft.
When I looked I saw a pennant fluttering from the peak of the forward
lateen yard--a red, white, and blue pennant, with a single great white
star in a field of blue.

Then I knew.  My eyes went even wider than they had before.  It was the
navy! It was the navy of the empire of Pellucidar which I had
instructed Perry to build in my absence.  It was MY navy!

I dropped my paddle and stood up and shouted and waved my hand.  Juag
and Dian looked at me as if I had gone suddenly mad.  When I could stop
shouting I told them, and they shared my joy and shouted with me.

But still Hooja was coming nearer, nor could the leading felucca
overhaul him before he would be along-side or at least within bow-shot.

Hooja must have been as much mystified as we were as to the identity of
the strange fleet; but when he saw me waving to them he evidently
guessed that they were friendly to us, so he urged his men to redouble
their efforts to reach us before the felucca cut him off.

He shouted word back to others of his fleet--word that was passed back
until it had reached them all--directing them to run alongside the
strangers and board them, for with his two hundred craft and his eight
or ten thousand warriors he evidently felt equal to overcoming the
fifty vessels of the enemy, which did not seem to carry over three
thousand men all told.

His own personal energies he bent to reaching Dian and me first,
leaving the rest of the work to his other boats.  I thought that there
could be little doubt that he would be successful in so far as we were
concerned, and I feared for the revenge that he might take upon us
should the battle go against his force, as I was sure it would; for I
knew that Perry and his Mezops must have brought with them all the arms
and ammunition that had been contained in the prospector.  But I was
not prepared for what happened next.

As Hooja's canoe reached a point some twenty yards from us a great puff
of smoke broke from the bow of the leading felucca, followed almost
simultaneously by a terrific explosion, and a solid shot screamed close
over the heads of the men in Hooja's craft, raising a great splash
where it clove the water just beyond them.

Perry had perfected gunpowder and built cannon!  It was marvelous!
Dian and Juag, as much surprised as Hooja, turned wondering eyes toward
me.  Again the cannon spoke.  I suppose that by comparison with the
great guns of modern naval vessels of the outer world it was a
pitifully small and inadequate thing; but here in Pellucidar, where it
was the first of its kind, it was about as awe-inspiring as anything
you might imagine.

With the report an iron cannonball about five inches in diameter struck
Hooja's dugout just above the water-line, tore a great splintering hole
in its side, turned it over, and dumped its occupants into the sea.

The four dugouts that had been abreast of Hooja had turned to intercept
the leading felucca.  Even now, in the face of what must have been a
withering catastrophe to them, they kept bravely on toward the strange
and terrible craft.

In them were fully two hundred men, while but fifty lined the gunwale
of the felucca to repel them.  The commander of the felucca, who proved
to be Ja, let them come quite close and then turned loose upon them a
volley of shots from small-arms.

The cave men and Sagoths in the dugouts seemed to wither before that
blast of death like dry grass before a prairie fire.  Those who were
not hit dropped their bows and javelins and, seizing upon paddles,
attempted to escape.  But the felucca pursued them relentlessly, her
crew firing at will.

At last I heard Ja shouting to the survivors in the dugouts--they were
all quite close to us now--offering them their lives if they would
surrender.  Perry was standing close behind Ja, and I knew that this
merciful action was prompted, perhaps commanded, by the old man; for no
Pellucidarian would have thought of showing leniency to a defeated foe.

As there was no alternative save death, the survivors surrendered and a
moment later were taken aboard the Amoz, the name that I could now see
printed in large letters upon the felucca's bow, and which no one in
that whole world could read except Perry and I.

When the prisoners were aboard, Ja brought the felucca alongside our
dugout.  Many were the willing hands that reached down to lift us to
her decks.  The bronze faces of the Mezops were broad with smiles, and
Perry was fairly beside himself with joy.

Dian went aboard first and then Juag, as I wished to help Raja and
Ranee aboard myself, well knowing that it would fare ill with any Mezop
who touched them.  We got them aboard at last, and a great commotion
they caused among the crew, who had never seen a wild beast thus
handled by man before.

Perry and Dian and I were so full of questions that we fairly burst,
but we had to contain ourselves for a while, since the battle with the
rest of Hooja's fleet had scarce commenced.  From the small forward
decks of the feluccas Perry's crude cannon were belching smoke, flame,
thunder, and death.  The air trembled to the roar of them.  Hooja's
horde, intrepid, savage fighters that they were, were closing in to
grapple in a last death-struggle with the Mezops who manned our vessels.

The handling of our fleet by the red island warriors of Ja's clan was
far from perfect.  I could see that Perry had lost no time after the
completion of the boats in setting out upon this cruise.  What little
the captains and crews had learned of handling feluccas they must have
learned principally since they embarked upon this voyage, and while
experience is an excellent teacher and had done much for them, they
still had a great deal to learn.  In maneuvering for position they were
continually fouling one another, and on two occasions shots from our
batteries came near to striking our own ships.

No sooner, however, was I aboard the flagship than I attempted to
rectify this trouble to some extent.  By passing commands by word of
mouth from one ship to another I managed to get the fifty feluccas into
some sort of line, with the flag-ship in the lead.  In this formation
we commenced slowly to circle the position of the enemy.  The dugouts
came for us right along in an attempt to board us, but by keeping on
the move in one direction and circling, we managed to avoid getting in
each other's way, and were enabled to fire our cannon and our small
arms with less danger to our own comrades.

When I had a moment to look about me, I took in the felucca on which I
was.  I am free to confess that I marveled at the excellent
construction and stanch yet speedy lines of the little craft.  That
Perry had chosen this type of vessel seemed rather remarkable, for
though I had warned him against turreted battle-ships, armor, and like
useless show, I had fully expected that when I beheld his navy I should
find considerable attempt at grim and terrible magnificence, for it was
always Perry's idea to overawe these ignorant cave men when we had to
contend with them in battle.  But I had soon learned that while one
might easily astonish them with some new engine of war, it was an utter
impossibility to frighten them into surrender.

I learned later that Ja had gone carefully over the plans of various
craft with Perry.  The old man had explained in detail all that the
text told him of them.  The two had measured out dimensions upon the
ground, that Ja might see the sizes of different boats.  Perry had
built models, and Ja had had him read carefully and explain all that
they could find relative to the handling of sailing vessels.  The
result of this was that Ja was the one who had chosen the felucca.  It
was well that Perry had had so excellent a balance wheel, for he had
been wild to build a huge frigate of the Nelsonian era--he told me so
himself.

One thing that had inclined Ja particularly to the felucca was the fact
that it included oars in its equipment.  He realized the limitations
of his people in the matter of sails, and while they had never used
oars, the implement was so similar to a paddle that he was sure they
quickly could master the art--and they did.  As soon as one hull was
completed Ja kept it on the water constantly, first with one crew and
then with another, until two thousand red warriors had learned to row.
Then they stepped their masts and a crew was told off for the first
ship.

While the others were building they learned to handle theirs.  As each
succeeding boat was launched its crew took it out and practiced with it
under the tutorage of those who had graduated from the first ship, and
so on until a full complement of men had been trained for every boat.

Well, to get back to the battle: The Hoojans kept on coming at us, and
as fast as they came we mowed them down.  It was little else than
slaughter.  Time and time again I cried to them to surrender, promising
them their lives if they would do so.  At last there were but ten
boatloads left.  These turned in flight.  They thought they could
paddle away from us--it was pitiful! I passed the word from boat to
boat to cease firing--not to kill another Hoojan unless they fired on
us.  Then we set out after them.  There was a nice little breeze
blowing and we bowled along after our quarry as gracefully and as
lightly as swans upon a park lagoon.  As we approached them I could see
not only wonder but admiration in their eyes.  I hailed the nearest
dugout.

"Throw down your arms and come aboard us," I cried, "and you shall not
be harmed.  We will feed you and return you to the mainland.  Then you
shall go free upon your promise never to bear arms against the Emperor
of Pellucidar again!"

I think it was the promise of food that interested them most.  They
could scarce believe that we would not kill them.  But when I exhibited
the prisoners we already had taken, and showed them that they were
alive and unharmed, a great Sagoth in one of the boats asked me what
guarantee I could give that I would keep my word.

"None other than my word," I replied.  "That I do not break."

The Pellucidarians themselves are rather punctilious about this same
matter, so the Sagoth could understand that I might possibly be
speaking the truth.  But he could not understand why we should not kill
them unless we meant to enslave them, which I had as much as denied
already when I had promised to set them free.  Ja couldn't exactly see
the wisdom of my plan, either.  He thought that we ought to follow up
the ten remaining dugouts and sink them all; but I insisted that we
must free as many as possible of our enemies upon the mainland.

"You see," I explained, "these men will return at once to Hooja's
Island, to the Mahar cities from which they come, or to the countries
from which they were stolen by the Mahars.  They are men of two races
and of many countries.  They will spread the story of our victory far
and wide, and while they are with us, we will let them see and hear
many other wonderful things which they may carry back to their friends
and their chiefs.  It's the finest chance for free publicity, Perry," I
added to the old man, "that you or I have seen in many a day."

Perry agreed with me.  As a matter of fact, he would have agreed to
anything that would have restrained us from killing the poor devils who
fell into our hands.  He was a great fellow to invent gunpowder and
firearms and cannon; but when it came to using these things to kill
people, he was as tender-hearted as a chicken.

The Sagoth who had spoken was talking to other Sagoths in his boat.
Evidently they were holding a council over the question of the wisdom
of surrendering.

"What will become of you if you don't surrender to us?" I asked.  "If
we do not open up our batteries on you again and kill you all, you will
simply drift about the sea helplessly until you die of thirst and
starvation.  You cannot return to the islands, for you have seen as
well as we that the natives there are very numerous and warlike.  They
would kill you the moment you landed."

The upshot of it was that the boat of which the Sagoth speaker was in
charge surrendered.  The Sagoths threw down their weapons, and we took
them aboard the ship next in line behind the Amoz.  First Ja had to
impress upon the captain and crew of the ship that the prisoners were
not to be abused or killed.  After that the remaining dugouts paddled
up and surrendered.  We distributed them among the entire fleet lest
there be too many upon any one vessel.  Thus ended the first real naval
engagement that the Pellucidarian seas had ever witnessed--though Perry
still insists that the action in which the Sari took part was a battle
of the first magnitude.

The battle over and the prisoners disposed of and fed--and do not
imagine that Dian, Juag, and I, as well as the two hounds were not fed
also--I turned my attention to the fleet.  We had the feluccas close in
about the flag-ship, and with all the ceremony of a medieval potentate
on parade I received the commanders of the forty-nine feluccas that
accompanied the flag-ship--Dian and I together--the empress and the
emperor of Pellucidar.

It was a great occasion.  The savage, bronze warriors entered into the
spirit of it, for as I learned later dear old Perry had left no
opportunity neglected for impressing upon them that David was emperor
of Pellucidar, and that all that they were accomplishing and all that
