Maybe later some of them led him still further away from Columbus.
Their man is probably on the spot at Kewaukee now, ready to get that
big contract for show biplanes."

Dave had been anxiously walking up and down the floor while Hiram
was talking.  Now he took his cap off a peg and picked up an
umbrella.

"You wait here till I come back, Hiram," he said.

"Where are you going, Dave?"

"Down to the Aegis hangar.  This telegram disturbs me very much.  I
have no idea where Mr. Timmins can be, and something must certainly
be done about this contract."

"That's so, Dave," agreed Hiram.  "It isn't exactly our business,
but it would be a big feather in your cap to help out the people who
are hiring you."

"That's what I want to do, if I can," replied Dave, as he left the
place.

The youth went straight to the Aegis hangar, where he found Grimshaw
tinkering over a broken airplane wing.  Mr. King had a desk in one
corner of what he called his office room.

Dave was free to use this at all times.  He opened it now, and for
ten minutes was busy with some railroad time tables he found there.
Then he consulted an aero guide map.

Grimshaw watched him from under his shaggy eyebrows, but said
nothing until Dave got up from the desk, buttoned his coat and
prepared to face the storm again.

"What's the trouble, Dashaway?" he asked.

"Why, Mr. Grimshaw?" inquired Dave, wishing to evade direct
questioning.

"You seem bothered about something, I see."

"Well, as a matter of fact, I am," confessed Dave.

"What is it?"

"I'm trying to find a way to get to Kewaukee," explained Dave.
"Something has come up that makes me think I ought to be there in
the interests of my employers early to-morrow morning. I am figuring
out how I can make it."

"See here, Dashaway," spoke the old airman in a grim, impressive
way,  "don't you do anything reckless."

"I won't," answered Dave.  "You know you once said I was all
business.  Well, I'll always try to do my duty without any
unnecessary risks."

Dave laughed carelessly and got away from the hangar.  A daring idea
had come into his mind.  Perhaps Grimshaw suspected it, and Dave was
afraid he might.  The lad knew that the eccentric old fellow liked
him, and would try to dissuade him from any exploit of unusual
peril.

"I'll do it, I'll have to do it or let the company lose out,"
breathed Dave, as once outside he broke into a run across the
aviation field.

Dave found Hiram winding the alarm clock as he re-entered the half
shed, half canvas house where the Baby Racer was stored.  Although
they got their meals at Mr. King's headquarters, the boys had two
light cots and slept near to the machine which Dave had been
exhibiting.

Dave glanced at the clock, and Hiram noticing the look, said:

"Eleven thirty, Dave.  I've set the alarm clock for five thirty.
You know that new hydroplane will probably come in on an early
freight.  What's the programme?"

"Well, Hiram," responded Dave, throwing off his coat and hat, "I'm
going to dress up for a ride."

"Eh?" ejaculated Hiram, staring hard at the set resolute face of his
comrade.

"Yes, I've got to get to Kewaukee."

"Oh, you mean going by train?"

"No.  Last one left an hour ago.  Next one nine o clock to-morrow
morning."

"Automobile, then?"

"On the country mud roads we've been having for the last week?"

"That's so.  Then--"

"It's the airship route or nothing, Hiram," said Dave.  "I'm going
in the biplane."

"The Baby Racer?"

"Yes."

"On such a night as this!  Why, Dave," began Hiram, almost in alarm.

"Don't say a word," interrupted Dave with a preemptory wave of his
hand.  "I've made up my mind, and that ends it."

"It usually does," said Hiram.  "If you're bound to do it, though,
Dave--"

"I certainly am."

"Ask Mr. Grimshaw's advice, first."

"Not for worlds."

"Why not?"

"I think he would try to stop me.  See here, Hiram, I've thought it
all over.  I know it's a hard, rough night, but I also know what the
Baby Racer can do."

"It's a pretty bad night to do any fooling in the air," remarked
Hiram.

"There won't be much fooling about it, Hiram. I know the chances
and, I shan't look for any fun.  It is a bad night, I know, but the
wind is right, and I can head straight into it in reaching
Kewaukee."

"How far away is Kewaukee, Dave?"

"Ninety-five miles."

Dave, while he talked, had been putting on his regular aviator's
suit.  As he finished up with a helmet, he noticed Hiram changing
his coat for a sweater.

"What are you up to, Hiram," he inquired quickly.

"Getting ready, of course."

"Getting ready for what?"

"The trip to Kewaukee."

"Oh, you think you're going?"

"If you are," retorted Hiram, "I know I am.  Now, see here, Dave,"
continued Hiram, waving a silencing finger as Dave was about to
speak, "I know I'm not an aviator like you, and never will be.  All
the same, I am some good in an airship, if it's only to act as
ballast.  The other day when I was up with you in the Racer, you.
said I shifted the elevator just in time to save a smash up.  In a
storm like the one to-night, you my need me worse than ever.
Anyhow, Dave Dashaway, I won't let you go alone."

The young airman looked at his loyal, earnest friend with pleasure
and pride.  Hiram was only a crude country boy.  He had, however,
shown diamond in the rough, and Dave appreciated the fact.

Hiram had made several ground runs in an aeroplane.  He had gone up
in the Baby Racer twice with Dave, and had proven himself a model
passenger.  As he had just hinted, too, he had been familiar enough
with the mechanism of the biplane to operate some of its auxiliary
machinery so as to avert an accident.

"You are the best company in the world, Hiram," said Dave, "but I
wouldn't feel right in letting you take the risk of a hazardous
run."

"Dave, I won't let you go alone," persisted Hiram.

Dave said nothing in reply.  He went outside, and Hiram followed
him.  They unlocked the door of the shed adjoining where the Baby
Racer was housed, and lit two lanterns.

"Get a couple of the nearest field men, Hiram," directed Dave, "and
I will have everything in order by the time you get back."

There was not much for Dave to do.  Only the noon of that day they
had got the little biplane ready for a cross country spurt.  Then
the rain came on, and they decided to defer the dash till the
weather was more propitious.  Dave was looking over the machinery,
when a gruff hail startled him.

"Hello!" challenged old Grimshaw, appearing at the open doorway of
the hangar.  "What you up to, Dashaway?"

Dave flushed guiltily.  He was dreadfully embarrassed to be "caught
in the act" as it were, by his great friend, the old airman.

"Why--you see, Mr. Grimshaw--" stammered Dave.

"Yes, of course I see," retorted the old man firmly.  "You're going
to start out a night like this."

"I've got to, Mr. Grimshaw," declared Dave desperately.

"Business, eh?"

"Of the most important kind."

"What is it?"

It was in order for Dave to explain details, and did so briefly.

"H'm," commented Grimshaw, when his pupil concluded his explanation.
"And so you thought you'd steal away without letting me know it?"

"Oh, now, Mr. Grimshaw!" Dave hastened to say--"that was not the
spirit of the thing at all."

"Go ahead, Dashaway."

"Well, then, I think so very much of you I didn't want it to worry
you."

"Roll her out," was all that Grimshaw would say, placing his one
hand on the tail of the biplane.  "Hold on for a minute.  Gasoline
supply?"

"Twenty-five gallons."

"That will do.  Lubricating oil-all right.  Now then, lad, hit that
head wind every time, and you'll make it, sure."





CHAPTER III

A WILD NIGHT RIDE


"Go!"

It was less than half an hour after the appearance of Grimshaw on
the scene that the Baby Racer was all ready for its stormy night's
flight.

The old aviator had fussed and poked about the dainty little
biplane, as if it was some valued friend he was sending out into the
world to try its fortune.  Every once in a while he had growled out
some brief advice to Dave in his characteristic way.

Then he directed and helped, while two field men started the machine
on its forward run.

"Look out for telegraph poles, and watch your fuel tank," was
Grimshaw's final injunction.

Dave knew the Baby Racer just as an engineer understands his
locomotive.  Daylight or dirk, once aloft the young aviator did not
doubt his own powers.  The moment the Racer left the ground,
however, with a switch of her flapping tail, Dave knew that he was
to have no easy fair-weather cruise.

"Slow it is," the watchful, excited Hiram heard him say, working the
wheel as cautiously as an automobilist rounding a sharp curve.

Dave saw that everything depended on getting a start and reaching a
higher level.  He kept the angle of ascent small, for the maximum
power of the engine could not be reached in a moment.  The starting
speed naturally let down with the machine ascending an inclined
plane.

"It's slow enough, that's sure," remarked Hiram.  "It's the wind,
isn't it, Dave?"

"We don't want to slide back in the air or be blown over backwards,"
replied Dave, eye, ear, and nerve on the keenest alert.

The wind resistance caused a growing speed reduction.  The
sensitiveness of the elevating rudder warned Dave that he must
maintain a perfect balance until they could strike a steady path of
flight.  Hiram's rapt gaze followed every skillful maneuver of the
master hand at that wheel.

"Good for you!" he chirped, as Dave worked the ailerons to
counteract the leaning of the machine.  A swing of the rudder had
caused the biplane to bank, but quick as a flash Dave righted it by
getting the warping control on the opposite tack, avoiding a bad
spill.

The machine was tail heavy as Dave directed a forward plunge,
coasting slightly.  He had, however, pretty good control of the
center of gravity.

It was now only a question of fighting the stiff breeze that
prevailed, and keeping an even balance.

Hiram's eyes sparkled as the Racer volplaned, caught the head wind
at just the right angle, and struck a course due northwest like a
sail boat under perfect control.

The engine was near the operator's seat, and on the post just under
the wheel were the spark and throttle levers on the fuselage beam.
The steering wheel was a solid piece of wood about eight inches in
diameter with two holes cut into it to fit the hands.

The passenger's seat now occupied by Hiram was in the center line of
the machine, so that, filled or vacant, the lateral balance was not
affected.

Hiram knew all about the monoplane dummy or the aerocycle with
treadle power for practice work which he had operated under old
Grimshaw's direction.  As to the practical running of a biplane
aloft, however, that was something for him to learn.  He was keenly
alive to every maneuver that Dave executed, and he stored in his
mind every new point he noticed as the Racer seemed fairly started
on its way.

"Keep me posted, Dave," spoke the willing Hiram.  "If anything
happens I want to know what you expect me to do."

"I don't intend to have anything happen if I can help it, Hiram,"
replied Dave.  "This is a famous start."

"It's not half as bad as I thought it would be," said Hiram.

The rain had changed into a fine mist, but the breeze continued
