had never dreamed of looking upon. But even this burst of astonishment,
as Edmund afterwards pointed out, was really a tribute to their
intelligence, since it showed that they had instantly appreciated both
the absence of all mechanical means of supporting the car and the fact
that here was something that implied a power infinitely exceeding any
that they possessed. And to have produced in a world where aerial
navigation was the common, everyday means of conveyance, such a sensation
by a performance in the _air_ was an enormous triumph for us!

No sooner had we gathered at the door of the car to step out upon the
platform than an extraordinary thing occurred. The front of the crowd
receded into the form of a semicircle, of which the point where we stood
marked the center, and in the middle of the curve, slightly in advance of
the others, stood forth the tall form of the eagle-beaked high priest
with the terrible face, flanked on one side by Ala and on the other by
the Jovelike front of the aged judge before whom our first arraignment
had taken place. Directly behind Ala stood Ingra. The contrast between
the three principal personages struck my eye even in that moment of
bewilderment--Ala stately, blonde, and beautiful as a statue of her own
Venus; the high priest ominous and terrifying in aspect, even now when we
felt that he was honoring us; and the great judge, with his snow-white
hair and piercing eyes, looking like a god from Olympus.

"Do you note the significance of that arrangement?" Edmund asked, nudging
me. "Ala, the queen, yields the place of honor to the high priest. That
indicates that our reception is essentially a religious one, and proves
that our flight sunward has had the expected effect. Now we have the head
of the religious order on our side. Human nature, if I may use such a
term, is the same in whatever world you find it. Touch the imagination
with some marvel and you awaken superstition; arouse superstition and you
can do what you like."

It would be idle for me to attempt to describe our reception because
Edmund himself could only make shrewd guesses as to the meaning of what
went on, and you would probably not be particularly interested in his
conjectures. Suffice it to say that when it was over, we felt that, for a
time at least, we were virtually masters of the situation.

Only one thing troubled my mind--what did Ingra think and what would he
do? At any rate, he, too, for the time being, seemed to have been carried
away with the general feeling of wonder, and narrowly as I watched him I
could detect in his features no sign of a wish to renew his persecution.



CHAPTER XVIII


WILD EDEN

The next day after our return from the trip above the cloud dome, and our
astonishing reception (you will, of course, understand the sense in which
I use the term "day"), Edmund sprang another surprise upon us.

"I have persuaded Ala," he said, "to make a trip in the car."

"You don't mean it!"

"Oh, yes, and I am sure she will be delighted."

"But she is not going alone?"

"Surely no; she will be accompanied by one of her women--and by Ingra."

"_Ingra_!"

"Of course. Did you suppose that he would consent to be left behind? Ala
herself would refuse to go without him."

"Then," I said, with deep disappointment, "he has resumed all his
influence over her."

"I'm not sure he ever lost it," returned Edmund. "You forget his rank,
and his position as her destined consort. Whatever we do we have got to
count him in."

Jack raged inwardly, but said nothing. For my part, I almost wished
Jack's bullet had not gone astray at that first memorable shooting.

"Now," Edmund continued, "the car, as you know, has but a limited amount
of room. I do not wish to crowd it uncomfortably, but I can take six
persons. Ala's party comprises three, so there is room for just two
besides myself. You will have to draw lots."

"Is Juba included in the drawing?"

"Yes, and I'm half inclined to take him anyway, and let you three draw
for the one place remaining."

"You can count me out," said Henry. "If there is another to stay with me
I prefer to remain."

"Very well," said Edmund, "then Peter and Jack can draw lots."

"Since we can't all go," said Jack, "and since that fellow is to be of
the party, I'll stay with Henry."

So it was settled without an appeal to chance, and I went with Edmund and
Juba. As usual Edmund immediately put his project into execution. It
showed an astonishing confidence in us that Ala should consent to make
such a trip, and that her people, and especially Ingra, should assent to
it, and I could not sufficiently wonder at the fact. But we were now at
the summit of favor and influence, and it is impossible to guess what
thoughts may have been in their minds. At any rate, it showed how
completely Edmund had established himself in Ala's esteem, and I suspect
that her woman's curiosity had played a large part in the decision. There
was another thing which astonished me yet more, and, in fact, awakened a
good deal of apprehension in my mind. I could not but wonder that Edmund,
after all the precautions that he had previously taken, should now think
of admitting these people into the car, where they could witness his
manipulations of the mechanism. I spoke to him about it. "Rest your mind
easy about that," he said. "Now that everything goes like a charm, they
will suspect nothing. It will be all a complete mystery to them. Even the
gods used natural agencies when they visited the earth without shaking
the belief of mankind in them. I employ no force of which they have the
least idea, and if they see me touch a button, or pull a knob, what can
that convey to their minds except an impression of mysterious power?"

I said no more, but I was not convinced, and the sequel proved that, for
once, Edmund had made a serious mistake, the more amazing because he had
been the first to detect the exceptional intelligence and shrewdness of
Ingra. But, no doubt, in the exultation of his recent triumph, he counted
upon the strength of the superstitious regard in which we were held.

Our departure from the tower was the signal for the assembling of great
crowds of spectators again, and we sailed away with the utmost _eclat_.
Ala at once showed all the eager excitement of a child over so novel and
enjoyable an experience. The motion of the car was entirely unlike that
of the air ships. Perfectly steady, it skimmed along at a speed which
filled her with amazement and delight. The city, with its towers, seemed
to fly away from us by magic, and the trees and fields beneath ran into
streaming lines. The windows were thrown wide open, and all stood by
them, watching the scene. Finally Ala wished to go out on the window
ledges, where one was perfectly secure if he kept a firm hold on the
supports. Edmund was most of the time with us outside, only stepping
within when he wished to change the course. I thought that he showed a
disposition to conceal his manipulations as much as possible, as if what
I had said had made an impression. But all were so much occupied with
their novel sensations that, for the time at least, there was no danger
of their taking note of anything else.

I believe that it must have been some intimation from Ala which finally
led Edmund to hold his course toward the mountains, but in a direction
different from that which led to the mines. When he had once chosen this
direction he worked up the speed to fully a hundred miles an hour, and
all were compelled to go inside on account of the wind created by our
rush through the air. We held on thus for five hours. During this time
Edmund spread a repast made up of dishes chosen from the supplies in the
car, and, of course, utterly strange to our guests. They found them to
their taste, however, and were delighted with Edmund's entertainment. We
spent a long time at our little table, and I was surprised at the variety
of delicious things which Edmund managed to extract from his stores.
There was even some champagne, and I noticed that Edmund urged it upon
Ingra, who, nothing loth, drank enough to make him decidedly tipsy, a
fact which was not surprising since we had found that the wines of Venus
were very light, and but slightly alcoholized.

At length we began to approach what proved to be the goal of our journey.
Before us spread a vast extent of forest composed of trees of the most
beautiful forms and foliage. Some towered up to a great height, spreading
their pendulous branches over the less aspiring forms, like New England
elms; others were low and bushy, and afire with scarlet blossoms, whose
perfume filled the air; a few resembled gigantic grasses or great timothy
stems, surmounted with nodding plumes of golden leaves, streaming out
like gilt gonfalons in the breeze; but there was one species, as tall and
massive as oaks, and scattered everywhere through the forest, that I
could liken to nothing but enormous rose bushes in the full bloom of
June. When we began to pass above this strange woodland, Ala made some
communication to Edmund which caused him to slow down the movement of the
car. By almost imperceptible touches he controlled the motive power, and
presently we came to rest above a delightful glade, where a small stream
ran at the foot of a gravelly slope, crowned with grass and overhung by
trees.

Here the car was allowed to settle gently upon the ground, and all
alighted. Ingra, over whom the influence of the champagne had been
growing, tottered on his legs in a way that would have filled Jack with
uncontrollable delight, but Edmund gravely helped him out of the car and
steadied him to a seat on the soft turf under the tree. I saw Ala
regarding Ingra with a puzzled look, and no wonder, for Edmund had been
careful that no one else should take enough of the wine to produce more
than the slightest exhilaration of spirits. It is possible that Edmund
had plied Ingra with the idea of rendering him less observant, and it
probably had that effect; but it resulted, as you will see presently, in
a revelation which finally put Edmund on guard against the very danger to
which he had seemed so insensible when I mentioned it to him before our
start.

The place where we now were was, beyond comparison, the most charming
that we had yet seen. A very Eden it seemed, wild, splendid, and remote
from all cultivation. The air was loaded with indescribable fragrance
shed from the thousands of strange blossoms that depended from trees and
shrubs, and starred the rich grass. I learned afterwards from Edmund, who
had it from Ala, that the spot was famous for its beauty and other
attractions, and was sometimes visited in air ships from the capital. But
for them, what took us but a few hours was a trip extending over several
days of time. One would have said that the forest was imbedded in a
garden of the most extraordinary orchids. The shapes of some of the
flowers were so fantastic that it seemed impossible that Nature could
have produced them. And their colors were no less unparalleled,
inimitable, and incredible.

The flowery bank on which we had chosen our resting place was removed a
few yards from the spot where the car rested, and the latter was hidden
from view by intervening branches and huge racemes of gorgeous flowers,
hanging like embroidered curtains about us. A peculiarity of the place
was that little zephyr-like breezes seemed to haunt it, coming one could
not tell whence, and they stirred the hanging blossoms, keeping them in
almost continual rhythmic motion. The effect was wonderfully charming,
but I observed that Ala was especially influenced by it. She sat with her
maid beside her, and fixed her eyes, with an expression of ecstasy, upon
the swinging flowers. I whispered to Edmund to regard her singular
absorption. But he had already noticed it, and seemed to be puzzling his
brain with thoughts that it suggested to him.

Thus as we sat, the leaves of a tree over our heads were lightly stirred,
and a bird, adorned with long plumes more beautiful than those of a bird
of paradise, alighted on a branch, and began to ruffle its iridescent
feathers in a peculiar way. With every movement waves of color seemed to
flow over it, merging and dissolving in the most marvelous manner. As
soon as this bird appeared, Ala gave it all her attention, and the
pleasure which she experienced in watching it was reflected upon her
countenance. She seemed positively enraptured. After a few moments the
conviction came to me that she was _listening!_ Her whole attitude
expressed it. And yet not an audible sound came from the bird. At last I
whispered to Edmund:

"Edmund, I believe that Ala hears something which we do not."

"Of course she does," was his reply. "There is music here, such music as
was never heard on earth. That bird is _singing_, but our ears are not
attuned to its strain. You know the peculiarity of this atmosphere with
regard to sound, and that all of these people have a horror of loud
noises. But their ears detect sounds which are beyond the range of the
vibrations that affect ours. If you will observe the bird closely you
will perceive that there is a slight movement of its throat. But that is
not the greatest wonder, by any means. I am satisfied that there is _a
direct relation here between sounds and colors_. The swaying of the
flowers in the breeze and the rhythmic motion of the bird's plumage
produce harmonious combinations and recombinations of colors which are
transformed into sounds as exquisite as those of the world of insects. A
cluster of blossoms, when the wind stirs them, shake out a kind of
aeolian melody, and it was that which so entranced Ala a few moments ago.
She hears it still, but now it is mastered by the more perfect harmonies
that come from the bird, partly from its throat but more from the
agitation of its delicate feathers."

You may imagine the wonder with which I listened to this. It immediately
recalled what Jack and I had observed at the shop of the bird fancier,
and when the lady carried off her seemingly mute pets in the palanquin.

"But," I said, after a moment of reflection, "how can such a thing be? To
me it seems surely impossible."

"I can only try to explain it by an analogy," said Edmund. "You know how,
by a telephone, sounds are first transmuted into electric vibrations and
afterwards reshaped into sonorous waves. You know, also, that we have
used a ray of light to send telephonic messages, through the
sensitiveness of a certain metal which changes its electric resistance in
accord with the intensity of the light that strikes it. Thus with a beam
of light we can reproduce the human voice. Well, what we have done
awkwardly and tentatively by the aid of imperfect mechanical
contrivances, Nature has here accomplished perfectly through the peculiar
composition of the air and some special adjustment of the auditory
apparatus of this people.

"Light and sound, color and music, are linked for them in a manner
entirely beyond our comprehension. It is plain to me now that the music
of color which we witnessed at the capital, was something far more
complete and wonderful than I then imagined. Together with the pleasure
which they derive from the harmonic combinations of shifting hues, they
drink in, at the same time, the delight arising from sounds which are
associated with, and, in many cases, awakened by, those very colors. It
is probable that all their senses are far more fully, though more
delicately, developed than ours. The perfume of these wonderful flowers
is probably more delightful to Ala than to us. As there are sounds which
they hear though inaudible to us, and colors visible to them which lie
beyond the range of our vision, so there may be vibrations affecting the
olfactory nerves which make no impression upon our sense of smell."

"Well, well," I exclaimed, "this seems appropriate to Venus."

"Yes," said Edmund with a smile, "it is appropriate; and yet I am not
sure that some day we may not arrive at something of the kind on the
earth."

I was about to ask him what he meant when there came an exciting
interruption. Ingra, who had fallen more and more under the influence of
the champagne, had stumbled to the other side of the little glade,
virtually unnoticed, and Juba had wandered out of sight. Suddenly there
came from the direction of the car the sound of a struggle mingled with
inarticulate cries. We sprang to our feet, and, running to the car, found
both Ingra and Juba inside it. The former had his hands on one of the
knobs controlling the mechanism, and Juba had grasped him round the waist
and was trying to drag him away. Ingra was resisting with all his
strength, and uttering strange noises, whose sense, if they had any, we,
of course, did not comprehend. Just as we reached the door, Juba
succeeded in wrenching his opponent from his hold, and immediately gave
him a fling which sent him clear out of the car, tumbling in a heap at
our feet. Juba's eyes were ablaze with a dangerous light, but the moment
he encountered Edmund's gaze he quietly walked away and sat down on the
bank. Ala was immediately by our side, and I thought that I could read
embarrassment as well as surprise in her looks. Fortunately the knob that
Ingra had grasped had been thrown out of connection; else he and Juba
might have made an involuntary voyage through space.

We picked up Ingra, found a seat for him, and Edmund, going down to the
brook, filled a pocket flask with water and flung it in the fellow's
face. This was repeated several times with the effect of finally
straightening out his muddled senses sufficiently to warrant us in
embarking for the return trip. All the way home Ingra was in a sulky
mood, like any terrestrial drunkard after a debauch, but he kept his eyes
on all Edmund's movements with an expression of cunning, which he had not
sufficient self-command to conceal, and which could leave no doubt in our
minds as to the nature of the quest which had led him into the car. As to
Juba--although his interference had been of no practical benefit, since
Ingra, especially in his present state, could surely have made no
discovery of any importance--the devotion which he had again shown to our
interests endeared him the more to us. Ala's manner showed that she was
deeply chagrined, and thus our trip, which had opened so joyously, ended
in gloom, and we were glad when the car again touched the platform, and
our guests departed.



CHAPTER XIX


THE SECRET OF THE CAR

Jack and Henry were overjoyed to see us again, for after our departure
they had fallen into a despondent mood, and began to imagine all sorts of
evil.

"Jo!" was Jack's greeting; "I never was so glad to see anybody in my
life. Edmund, don't you ever go off and leave any of us alone again."

"I'll never leave you again," responded Edmund. "You can count on that."

Then we told them the story of what we had seen, and of what had happened
in the wild Eden that we had visited. They were not so much interested in
the most wonderful thing of all--the combination of sound and color--as
they were in the conduct of Ingra. Jack laughed until he was tired over
Ingra's drunkenness, but he drew a long face when he heard of the
adventure in the car.

"Edmund," he said earnestly, "I am beginning to be of Henry's opinion;
you had better get away from here without losing a moment."

"No," said Edmund, "we'll not go yet. The time hasn't come to run away.
What difference does it make even if Ingra does suspect that the car is
moved by some mechanism instead of by pure magic? He could not understand
it if I should explain it to him."

"But you have said that he is extraordinarily intelligent."

"So he is, but his intelligence is limited by the world he lives in, and
while there are many marvelous things here, nobody has the slightest
conception of inter-atomic force. They have never heard even of
radioactivity. At the same time I don't mean that they shall go nosing
about the car. I'll take care of that."

"But," said Jack, "it grinds me to see that brute Ingra get off scot-free
after trying to murder us. And what has he got against us, anyway? But
for him we should never have had any trouble. He was against us from the
beginning."

"I don't think he was particularly _against_ us at the start," said
Edmund. "Only he was for treating us with less consideration than Ala was
disposed to show. But after the first accidental shooting, and the
drubbing that Juba gave him, naturally his prejudices were aroused, and
he could hardly be blamed for thinking us dangerous. Then, when he found
himself defeated, and his wishes disregarded, on all sides, he began to
hate us. It is easy enough to account for his feelings. Now, since our
recent astonishing triumph, being himself incredulous about our celestial
origin, he will try to undermine us by showing that our seeming miracle
is no miracle at all."

"And you gave him the chance by taking him in the car!" I could not help
exclaiming.

"Yes," said Edmund, with a smile. "I admit that I made a mistake. I
counted too much upon the influence of the sense of mystery. But it will
come out all right."

"I doubt it," I persisted. "He will never rest now until he has found out
the secret."

Nothing more was said on the subject, but Edmund was careful not to leave
the car unguarded. It was always kept afloat, though in contact with the
landing. The expenditure of energy needed to keep it thus anchored
without support was, Edmund assured us, insignificant in comparison with
the quantity stored in his mysterious batteries.

