_Preferred Habitat_--Open woodland, thickets, roadsides; moist,
sandy soil.

_Flowering Season_--June-August.

_Distribution_--Georgia and lllinois, north to New Brunswick.

Medieval herbalists usually recorded anything that "Plinie saieth" with
profoundest respect; not always so, quaint old Parkinson. Speaking of
the common _(vulgaris)_ Wild Loosestrife of Europe, a rather stout,
downy species with terminal clusters of good-sized, yellow flowers, that
was once cultivated in our Eastern states, and has sparingly escaped
from gardens, he thus refers to the reputation given it by the Roman
naturalist: "It is believed to take away strife, or debate between ye
beasts, not onely those that are yoked together, but even those that are
wild also, by making them tame and quiet ... if it be either put about
their yokes or their necks," significantly adding, "which how true, I
leave to them shall try and find it soe." Our slender, symmetrical,
common loosestrife, with its whorls of leaves and little star-shaped
blossoms on thread-like pedicels at regular intervals up the stem, is
not even distantly related to the wonderful Purple Loosestrife.

Another common, lower-growing species, the Bulb-bearing Loosestrife (_L.
terrestris_), blooms from July to September and shows a decided
preference for swamps and ditches throughout a range which extends from
Manitoba and Arkansas to the Atlantic Ocean.


Star-flower; Chickweed Wintergreen; Star Anemone

_Trientalis americana_

_Flowers_--White, solitary, or a few rising on slender, wiry footstalks
above a whorl of leaves. Calyx of 5 to 9 (usually 7) narrow sepals.
Corolla wheel-shaped, 1/2 in. across or less, deeply cut into (usually)
7 tapering, spreading, petal-like segments. _Stem:_ A long horizontal
rootstock, sending up smooth stem-like branches 3 to 9 in. high, usually
with a scale or two below. (_Trientalis_ = one third of a foot, the
usual height of a plant.) _Leaves:_ 5 to 10, in a whorl at summit; thin,
tapering at both ends, of unequal size, 1-1/2 to 4 in. long.

_Preferred Habitat_--Moist shade of woods and thickets.

_Flowering Season_--May-June.

_Distribution_--From Virginia and Illinois far north.

Is any other blossom poised quite so airily above its whorl of leaves as
the delicate, frosty-white little star-flower? It is none of the anemone
kin, of course, in spite of one of its misleading folk-names; but only
the wind-flower has a similar lightness and grace.


Scarlet Pimpernel; Poor Man's or Shepherd's Weatherglass; Red
Chickweed; Burnet Rose; Shepherd's Clock

_Anagallis arvensis_

_Flower_--Variable, scarlet, deep salmon, copper red, flesh colored, or
rarely white; usually darker in the centre; about 1/4 in. across;
wheel-shaped; 5-parted; solitary, on thread-like peduncles from the
leaf axils. _Stem:_ Delicate; 4-sided, 4 to 12 in. long, much branched,
the sprays weak and long. _Leaves:_ Oval, opposite, sessile, black
dotted beneath.

_Preferred Habitat_--Waste places, dry fields and roadsides, sandy soil.

_Flowering Season_--May-August.

_Distribution_--Newfoundland to Florida, westward to Minnesota
and Mexico.

Tiny pimpernel flowers of a reddish copper or terra cotta color have
only to be seen to be named, for no other blossoms on our continent are
of the same peculiar shade.

Before a storm, when the sun goes under a cloud, or on a dull day, each
little weather prophet closes. A score of pretty folk-names given it in
every land it adopts testifies to its sensitiveness as a barometer.
Under bright skies the flower may be said to open out flat at about nine
in the morning and to begin to close at three in the afternoon.


Shooting Star; American Cowslip; Pride of Ohio

_Dodecatheon Meadia_

_Flowers_--Purplish pink or yellowish white, the cone tipped with
yellow; few or numerous, hanging on slender, _recurved_ pedicels in an
umbel at top of a simple scape 6 in. to 2 ft. high. Calyx deeply
5-parted; corolla of 5 narrow lobes bent backward and upward; the tube
very short, thickened at throat, and marked with dark reddish purple
dots; 5 stamens united into a protruding cone; 1 pistil, protruding
beyond them. _Leaves:_ Oblong or spatulate, 3 to 12 in. long, narrowed
into petioles, all from fibrous roots. _Fruit:_ A 5-valved capsule on
_erect_ pedicels.

_Preferred Habitat_--Prairies, open woods, moist cliffs.

_Flowering Season_--April-May.

_Distribution_--Pennsylvania southward and westward, and from Texas
to Manitoba.

Ages ago Theophrastus called an entirely different plant by this same
scientific name, derived from _dodeka_ = twelve, and _theos_ = gods; and
although our plant is native of a land unknown to the ancients, the
fanciful Linnaeus imagined he saw in the flowers of its umbel a little
congress of their divinities seated around a miniature Olympus! Who has
said science kills imagination? These handsome, interesting flowers, so
familiar in the Middle West and Southwest, especially, somewhat resemble
the cyclamen in oddity of form. Indeed, these prairie wild flowers are
not unknown in florists' shops in Eastern cities.

Few bee workers are abroad at the shooting star's season. The female
bumblebees, which, by striking the protruding stigma before they jar
out any pollen, cross-fertilize it, are the flower's chief
benefactors, but one often sees the little yellow puddle butterfly
about it. Very different from the bright yellow cowslip of Europe is
our odd, misnamed blossom.




GENTIAN FAMILY _(Gentianaceae)_


Bitter-bloom; Rose Pink; Square-stemmed Sabbatia; Rosy Centaury

_Sabbatia angularis_

_Flowers_--Clear rose pink, with greenish star in centre, rarely white,
fragrant, 1-1/2 in. broad or less, usually solitary on long peduncles at
ends of branches. Calyx lobes very narrow; corolla of 5 rounded
segments; stamens 5; style 2-cleft. _Stem:_ Sharply 4-angled, 2 to 3 ft.
high, with opposite branches, leafy. _Leaves:_ Opposite, 5-nerved, oval
tapering at tip, and clasping stem by broad base.

_Preferred Habitat_--Rich soil, meadows, thickets.

_Flowering Season_--July-August.

_Distribution_--New York to Florida, westward to Ontario, Michigan, and
Indian Territory.

During the drought of midsummer the lovely Rose Pink blooms inland with
cheerful readiness to adapt itself to harder conditions than most of its
moisture-loving kin will tolerate; but it may be noticed that although
we may often-times find it growing in dry soil, it never spreads in
such luxuriant clusters as when the roots are struck beside meadow
runnels and ditches. Probably the plant would be commoner than it is
about populous Eastern districts were it not so much sought by
herb-gatherers for use as a tonic medicine.

It was the Centaurea, represented here by the blue Ragged Sailor of
gardens, and not our Centaury, a distinctly American group of plants,
which, Ovid tells us, cured a wound in the foot of the Centaur Chiron,
made by an arrow hurled by Hercules.

       *       *       *       *       *

Three exquisite members of the Sabbatia tribe keep close to the Atlantic
Coast in salt meadows and marshes, along the borders of brackish rivers,
and very rarely in the sand at the edges of fresh-water ponds a little
way inland. From Maine to Florida they range, and less frequently are
met along the shores of the Gulf of Mexico so far as Louisiana. How
bright and dainty they are! Whole meadows are radiant with their
blushing loveliness. Probably if they consented to live far away from
the sea, they would lose some of the deep, clear pink from out their
lovely petals, since all flowers show a tendency to brighten their
colors as they approach the coast. In England some of the same wild
flowers we have here are far deeper-hued, owing, no doubt, to the fact
that they live on a sea-girt, moisture-laden island, and also that the
sun never scorches and blanches at the far north as it does in the
United States.

The Sea or Marsh Pink or Rose of Plymouth (_S. stellaris_), whose
graceful alternate branching stem attains a height of two feet only
under most favorable conditions, from July to September opens a
succession of pink flowers that often fade to white. The yellow eye is
bordered with carmine. They measure about one inch across, and are
usually solitary at the ends of branches, or else sway on slender
peduncles from the axils. The upper leaves are narrow and bract-like;
those lower down gradually widen as they approach the root.


Fringed Gentian

_Gentiana crinita_

_Flowers--Deep_, bright blue, rarely white, several or many, about 2
in. high, stiffly erect, and solitary at ends of very long footstalk.
Calyx of 4 unequal, acutely pointed lobes. Corolla funnel form, its
four lobes spreading, rounded, fringed around ends, but scarcely on
sides. Four stamens inserted on corolla tube; 1 pistil with 2 stigmas.
_Stem:_ 1 to 3 ft. high, usually branched, leafy. _Leaves:_ Opposite,
upper ones acute at tip, broadening to heart-shaped base, seated on
stem. _Fruit:_ A spindle-shaped, 2-valved capsule, containing numerous
scaly, hairy seeds.

_Preferred Habitat_--Low, moist meadows and woods.

_Flowering Season_--September-November.

_Distribution_--Quebec, southward to Georgia, and westward beyond the
Mississippi.

  "Thou waitest late, and com'st alone
  When woods are bare and birds have flown,
  And frosts and shortening days portend
  The aged year is near his end.

  "Then doth thy sweet and quiet eye
  Look through its fringes to the sky,
  Blue--blue--as if that sky let fall
  A flower from its cerulean wall."

When we come upon a bed of gentians on some sparkling October day, we
can but repeat Bryant's thoughts and express them prosaically who
attempt description. In dark weather this sunshine lover remains shut,
to protect its nectar and pollen from possible showers. An elusive plant
is this gentian, which by no means always reappears in the same places
year after year, for it is an annual whose seeds alone perpetuate it.
Seating themselves on the winds when autumn gales shake them from out
the home wall, these little hairy scales ride afar, and those that are
so fortunate as to strike into soft, moist soil at the end of the
journey, germinate. Because this flower is so rarely beautiful that few
can resist the temptation of picking it, it is becoming sadly rare near
large settlements.

Fifteen species of gentian have been gathered during a half-hour walk in
Switzerland, where the pastures are spread with sheets of blue. Indeed,
one can little realize the beauty of these heavenly flowers who has not
seen them among the Alps.

A deep, intense blue is the Closed, Blind, or Bottle Gentian (_G.
Andrewsii_), more truly the color of the "male bluebird's back," to
which Thoreau likened the paler Fringed Gentian. Rarely some degenerate
plant bears white flowers. As it is a perennial, we are likely to find
it in its old haunts year after year; nevertheless its winged seeds sail
far abroad to seek pastures new. This gentian also shows a preference
for moist soil. Gray thought that it expanded slightly, and for a short
time only in sunshine, but added that, although it is proterandrous,
_i.e._, it matures and sheds its pollen before its stigma is susceptible
to any, he believed it finally fertilized itself by the lobes of the
stigma curling backward until they touched the anthers. But Gray was
doubtless mistaken. Several authorities have recently proved that the
flower is adapted to bumblebees. It offers them the last feast of the
season, for although it comes into bloom in August southward, farther
northward--and it extends from Quebec to the Northwest Territory--it
lasts through October.




DOGBANE FAMILY (_Apocynaceae_)


Spreading Dogbane; Fly-trap Dogbane; Honey-bloom; Bitter-root

_Apocynum androsaemifolium_

_Flowers_--Delicate pink, veined with a deeper shade, fragrant,
bell-shaped, about 1/3 in. across, borne in loose terminal cymes. Calyx
5-parted; corolla of 5 spreading, recurved lobes united into a tube;
within the tube 5 tiny, triangular appendages alternate with stamens;
the arrow-shaped anthers united around the stigma and slightly adhering
to it. _Stem:_ 1 to 4 ft. high, with forking, spreading, leafy branches.
_Leaves:_ Opposite, entire-edged, broadly oval, narrow at base, paler,
and more or less hairy below. _Fruit:_ Two pods about 4 in. long.

_Preferred Habitat_--Fields, thickets, beside roads, lanes, and walls.

_Flowering Season_--June-July.

_Distribution_--Northern part of British Possessions south to Georgia,
westward to Nebraska.

Everywhere at the North we come across this interesting, rather shrubby
plant, with its pretty but inconspicuous little rose-veined bells
suggesting pink lilies-of-the-valley. Now that we have learned to read
the faces of flowers, as it were, we instantly suspect by the color,
fragrance, pathfinders, and structure that these are artful wilers,
intent on gaining ends of their own through their insect admirers. What
are they up to?

Let us watch. Bees, flies, moths, and butterflies, especially the
latter, hover near. Alighting, the butterfly visitor unrolls his long
tongue and inserts it where the five pink veins tell him to, for five
nectar-bearing glands stand in a ring around the base of the pistil.
Now, as he withdraws his slender tongue through one of the V-shaped
cavities that make a circle of traps, he may count himself lucky to
escape with no heavier toll imposed than pollen cemented to it. This
granular dust he is required to rub off against the stigma of the next
flower entered. Some bees, too, have been taken with the dogbane's
pollen cemented to their tongues. But suppose a fly call upon this
innocent-looking blossom? His short tongue, as well as the butterfly's,
is guided into one of the V-shaped cavities after he has sipped; but,
getting wedged between the trap's horny teeth, the poor little victim is
held a prisoner there until he slowly dies of starvation in sight of
plenty. This is the penalty he must pay for trespassing on the
butterfly's preserves! The dogbane, which is perfectly adapted to the
butterfly, and dependent upon it for help in producing fertile seed,
ruthlessly destroys all poachers that are not big or strong enough to
jerk away from its vise-like grasp. One often sees small flies and even
moths dead and dangling by the tongue from the wicked little charmers.
If the flower assimilated their dead bodies as the pitcher plant, for
example, does those of its victims, the fly's fate would seem less
cruel. To be killed by slow torture and dangled like a scarecrow simply
for pilfering a drop of nectar is surely an execution of justice
medieval in its severity.





MILKWEED FAMILY (_Aselepiadaceae_)


Common Milkweed or Silkweed

_Asclepias syriaca (A. cornuti)_

_Flowers_--Dull, pale greenish purple pink, or brownish pink, borne on
pedicels, in many flowered, broad umbels. Calyx inferior, 5-parted;
corolla deeply 5-cleft, the segments turned backward. Above them an
erect, 5-parted crown, each part called a hood, containing a nectary,
and with a tooth on either side, and an incurved horn projecting from
within. Behind the crown the short, stout stamens, united by their
filaments in a tube, are inserted on the corolla. Broad anthers united
around a thick column of pistils terminating hi a large, sticky,
5-angled disk. The anther sacs tipped with a winged membrane; a waxy,
pear-shaped pollen-mass in each sac connected with the stigma in pairs
or fours by a dark gland, and suspended by a stalk like a pair of
saddle-bags. _Stem:_ Stout, leafy, usually unbranched, 3 to 5 ft. high,
juice milky. _Leaves:_ Opposite, oblong, entire-edged smooth above,
