
The progress for the month of November, 1867, was as follows:

  East end heading                              126.00 feet
  West shaft, east heading                       33.00  "
   "     "    west heading                        5.00  "
  West end                                       20.00  "
                                              --------
  Total for the month of November               184.00  "

Thirty feet of brick arch were completed during the month at the west
end, making a total of 516 feet of brick arch completed to date.

The progress for the last six months has been as follows:

  East end                                      711.00 feet
  West shaft, east heading                      216.00  "
   "     "    west    "                         288.00  "
  West end                                      180.00  "
                                             ---------
  Total, from June 1, to Dec. 2               1,395.00  "
    "    for the previous six months            632.00  "
                                             ---------
    "      "     year ending Dec. 2, 1867     2,027.00  "

The new shaft has been sunk, and at its foot are the pumps which,
together with those at the west shaft, are now throwing out between 900
and 1,000 gallons of water per minute.

During the last month great quantities of water were struck at both
headings of the west shaft (70 gallons per minute at the east heading in
one day), and the work was stopped in consequence, which accounts for
the small progress at this point. A new pump of 1,000 gallons per minute
capacity will be at work, in addition to the above, in a few days, and
the work can then go forward with increased rapidity.

Well No. 4 is an artesian well, which is now being carried down as a
shaft to afford two more faces to work from. Its depth will be, when
finished, 215 feet, its dimensions 8 by 8 feet.

At the rate of progress for the past year it will require but eight
years and ten months to pierce through the mountain and at the rate for
the past six months it will require but six years and five months. But
when the central shaft and well No. 4 are sunk to grade the number of
faces to work from will be doubled, and the time of completion thereby
greatly diminished. At present drilling machines are employed only at
the east end, but in a few weeks they will be used at the west shaft,
and also at the central shaft as soon as the buildings and machinery are
again in place, and this again will hasten the completion of the work.
At the west shaft buildings are already erected for the manufacture of
nitro-glycerin, and the use of this powerful explosive will be adopted
during the present month. In fine, every means that will hasten the work
will be employed, and ere the present generation passes away, and
even within from four to seven years, trains loaded with freights and
passengers will pass and repass through the great heart of the Hoosac
Mountain as an hourly occurrence.

A. BEARDSLEY, C. E., Asst. Engineer.

North Adams, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *




Horse-hair Snakes--Wonderful Transformation.


Messrs. Editors:--In No. 21, current volume, you referred H. K., of
Wis., who had described the horse-hair snake, to page 280, No. 18
current volume, for a reply, which you considered "sufficient." With
your kind permission I would like to speak a few words about the
"snakes" in question. When I resided in Pennsylvania, I, in company with
many other lads, used to tie a bundle of horse hairs into a hard knot
and then immerse them in the brook, when the water began to get warm,
and in due time we would have just as many animals, with the power of
locomotion and appearance of snakes, as there were hairs in the bundle.
I have raised them one-eighth of an inch in diameter, with perceptible
eyes and mouth on the butt end or root part of the hair. Take such a
snake and dip it in an alkaline solution, and the flesh or mucus that
formed about the hair will dissolve, and the veritable horse hair is
left. They will not generate in limestone water, only in freestone or
salt water.

Covington, Ky.

T.W.B.

       *       *       *       *       *




Man Proposes, but God Disposes.


It may not be generally known that but for one of those accidents which
seem to be almost a direct interposition of Providence, Prof. Morse,
the originator of the magnetic telegraph, might have been now an artist
instead of the inventor of the telegraph, and that agent of civilization
be either unknown or just discovered. We publish from Tuckerman's "Book
of the Artists" just from the press of G. P. Putnam & Son, the following
reminiscence of Prof. Morse:

"A striking evidence of the waywardness of destiny is afforded by the
experience of this artist, if we pass at once from this early and
hopeful moment to a more recent incident. He then aimed at renown
through devotion to the beautiful; but it would seem as if the genius of
his country, in spite of himself, led him to this object, by the less
flowery path of utility. He desired to identify his name with art, but
it has become far more widely associated with science. A series of
bitter disappointments obliged him to "coin his mind for bread", for a
long period, of exclusive attention to portrait painting, although, at
rare intervals, he accomplished something more satisfactory. More than
thirty years since, on a voyage from Europe, in a conversation with
his fellow passengers, the theme of discourse happened to be the
electromagnet; and one gentleman present related some experiments he had
lately witnessed at Paris, which proved the almost incalculable rapidity
of movement with which electricity was disseminated. The idea suggested
itself to the active mind of the artist, that this wonderful and but
partially explored agent might be rendered subservient to that system of
intercommunication which had become so important a principle of modern
civilization. He brooded over the subject as he walked the deck, or lay
wakeful in his berth, and by the time he arrived at New York, had so
far matured his invention as to have decided upon a telegraph of
signs, which is essentially that now in use. After having sufficiently
demonstrated his discovery to the scientific, a long period of toil,
anxiety, and suspense intervened before he obtained the requisite
facilities for the establishment of the magnetic telegraph. It is now
in daily operation in the United States, and its superiority over all
similar inventions abroad was confirmed by the testimony of Arago and
the appropriation made for its erection by the French Government.

"By one of those coincidences which would be thought appropriate for
romance, but which are more common, in fact, than the unobservant are
disposed to confess, these two most brilliant events in the painter's
life--his first successful work of art and the triumph of his scientific
discovery--were brought together, as it were, in a manner singularly
fitted to impress the imagination. Six copies of his "Dying Hercules"
had been made in London, and the mold was then destroyed. Four of these
were distributed by the artist to academies, one he retained, and the
last was given to Mr. Bulfinch, the architect of the Capitol--who was
engaged at the time upon that building. After the lapse of many years,
an accident ruined Morse's own copy, and a similar fate had overtaken
the others, at least in America. After vain endeavors to regain one of
these trophies of his youthful career, he at length despaired of seeing
again what could not fail to be endeared to his memory by the most
interesting associations. One day he was superintending the preparations
for the first establishment of his telegraph in the room assigned at the
Capitol. His perseverence and self-denying labor had at length met
its just reward, and he was taking the first active step to obtain a
substantial benefit from his invention. It became necessary in locating
the wires, to descend into a vault beneath the apartment, which had not
been opened for a long period. A man preceded the artist with a lamp. As
they passed along the subterranean chamber the latter's attention
was excited by something white glimmering through the darkness. In
approaching the object, what was his surprise to find himself gazing
upon his long-lost Hercules, which he had not seen for twenty years. A
little reflection explained the apparent miracle. This was undoubtedly
the copy given to his deceased friend, the architect, and temporarily
deposited in the vault for safety, and undiscovered after his death."

       *       *       *       *       *




Extraordinary Effects of an Earthquake--An American Man-of-War Carried
Over the Tops of Warehouses and Stranded.


[OFFICIAL REPORT.]

UNITED STATES STEAMSHIP "MONONGAHELA," ST. CROIX, Nov. 21, 1867.

Sir:--I have to state, with deep regret, that the United States
steamship _Monongahela_, under my command, is now lying on the beach in
front of the town of Frederickstadt, St. Croix, where she was thrown by
the most fearful earthquake ever known here. The shock occurred at 3
o'clock, P. M., of the 18th inst. Up to that moment the weather was
serene, and no indication of a change showed by the barometer, which
stood at 30 degrees 15 minutes. The first indication we had of the
earthquake was a violent trembling of the ship, resembling the blowing
off of steam. This lasted some 30 seconds, and immediately afterward the
water was observed to be receding rapidly from the beach. In a moment
the current was changed, and bore the ship toward the beach, carrying
out the entire cable and drawing the bolts from the kelson, without
the slightest effect in checking her terrific speed toward the beach.
Another anchor was ordered to be let go, but in a few seconds she was in
too shoal water for this to avail. When within a few yards of the beach,
the reflux of the water checked her speed for a moment, and a light
breeze from the land gave me a momentary hope that the jib and
foretopmost staysail might pay her head off shore, so that in the reflux
of the wave she might reach waters sufficiently deep to float her, and
then be brought up by the other anchor. These sails were immediately
set, and she payed off so as to bring her broadside to the beach. When
the sea returned, in the form of a wall of water 25 or 30 feet high, it
carried us over the warehouses into the first street of the town. This
wave in receding took her back toward the beach, and left her nearly
perpendicular on the edge of a coral reef, where she has now keeled over
to an angle of 15 degrees.

All this was the work of a few moments only, and soon after the waters
of the bay subsided into their naturally tranquil state, leaving us high
and dry upon the beach. During her progress toward the beach she struck
heavily two or three times; the first lurch carried the rifle gun on the
forecastle overboard. Had the ship been carried 10 or 15 feet further
out, she must inevitably have been forced over on her beam ends,
resulting, I fear, in her total destruction, and in the loss of many
lives. Providentially only four men were lost; these were in the boats
at the time the shock commenced. The boats that were down were all
swamped except my gig, which was crushed under the keel, killing my
coxswain, a most valuable man. During this terrific scene the officers
and men behaved with coolness and subordination. It affords me great
pleasure to state, that, after a careful examination of the position and
condition of the ship, I am enabled to report that she has sustained no
irreparable damage to her hull. The sternpost is bent, and some 20 feet
of her keel partially gone; propeller and shaft uninjured. The lower
pintle of the rudder is gone, but no other damage is sustained by it. No
damage is done to her hull more serious than the loss of several sheets
of copper, torn from her starboard bilge and from her keel.

She now lies on the edge of a coral reef, which forms a solid
foundation, on which ways may be laid. She can thus be launched in 10
feet of water at 100 feet from the beach. Gentlemen looking at the ship
from shore declare that the bottom of the bay was visible where there
was before, and is now, 40 fathoms of water.

To extricate the ship from her position I respectfully suggest that
Mr. I. Hanscom be sent down with suitable material for ways, ready for
laying down, and india-rubber camels to buoy her up. I think there is no
insuperable obstacle to her being put afloat, providing a gang of ten or
twelve good ship carpenters be sent down with the Naval Constructor, as
her boilers and engines appear to have sustained no injury. A valuable
ship may thus be saved to the navy, with all her stores and equipments.

S. B. BISSELL, Commodore Commanding. Rear-Admiral J. S. Palmer,
commanding H. A. Squadron, St. Thomas.

       *       *       *       *       *

The survey of another trans-continental railway route, which shall
follow mainly the 35th parallel of latitude, is nearly completed. Its
projectors claim this as the most feasible one across the continent,
and even if the northern and southern roads are constructed, this would
still be the favorite popular thoroughfare, and the easiest and cheapest
built.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Chilian gun now being built at Pittsburgh, is 221/4 feet in length,
being two feet longer than the famous Rodman gun at Fort Hamilton,
this harbor, but of exactly the same bore, twenty inches. Its greatest
diameter is 5 feet 4 inches, its least diameter, 2 feet 9 inches. The
gun is designed for garrison or naval service.

       *       *       *       *       *

From lack of economy, in reduction of ores, it is estimated that the
aggregate loss on the production of bullion in this country for the
present year will reach the sum of $25,000,000.

       *       *       *       *       *




Recent American and foreign Patents.


_Under this heading we shall publish weekly notes of some of the more
prominent home and foreign patents._

       *       *       *       *       *

WARDROBE.--Nathan Turner, West Lynn, Mass.--This invention consists in a
movable or swinging arrangement of the sides and top and bottom, whereby
they are folded upon each other, with grooves or strips in or upon the
sides to support shelves when used as a closet or book case, and which
shelves may be removed when used as a wardrobe.

AXLE BOX.--Henry B. Pitner, La Porte, Ind.--This invention consists of
an iron thimble or slieve provided on each end in the inside with a
screw thread into which are fitted ends of brass or composition, or
other metal softer than iron, in such a way that said metallic ends will
not turn in the box, and so that the axle bears only upon the softer
metal.

SPRING FORMER.--George S. Long, Bridgeport, Conn.--This invention
consists of a vibrating anvil or former, upon which the steel to be
worked is placed, said former vibrating under a roller, said roller
being hollow, and provided with holes or orifices through which water
received in the shaft of said roller is distributed upon the heated
steel.

DOOR-FASTENER.--Francis C. Levalley, Warrenville, N. Y.--The present
invention relates to a fastener for doors more particularly which, in
the construction and arrangement of its parts, is simple, and most
effective, and secure, when fastened.

ROOFING.--Orville Manly, Garrettsville, Ohio.--This invention consists
of tiles saturated with raw coal tar, made in the same way as ordinary
brick, having all the edges bevelled, being thicker at one end, and laid
upon the roof with the thicker end towards the eaves, and the spaces
between the tiles formed by the bevelled sides of the same filled with a
cement made of raw coal and clay.

FOLDING BEDSTEAD OR CRIB.--R. S. Titcomb, Gloversville, N. Y.--This
invention consists of the parts being attached to each other by pivots
and hinges, whereby the same may be folded in upon the bed and clothing,
and upon each other.

CAST METAL CASES FOR SPRING BALANCES.--John Chattillon, New York
city.--This invention relates to a new manner of arranging the cast
metal cases for spring balances, so that they can be made less expensive
and simpler than they are now made, and consists in fitting the iron, to
which the upper end of the spring is secured, directly through the upper
head of the case, instead of using an additional head in the case for
that purpose.

