Of Mr. Benson's second novel the 'Birmingham Post' says it is
'_well written, stimulating, unconventional, and, in a word,
characteristic_'; the 'National Observer congratulates Mr. Benson upon
'_an exceptional achievement_,' and calls the book '_a notable advance
on his previous work_.'


M.M. DOWIE. GALLIA. By MENIE MURIEL DOWIE, Author of 'A Girl in the
Carpathians.' _Second Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s._

'The style is generally admirable, the dialogue not seldom brilliant,
the situations surprising in their freshness and originality, while
the subsidiary as well as the principal characters live and move, and
the story itself is readable from title-page to colophon.'--_Saturday
Review_.

'A very notable book; a very sympathetically, at times delightfully
written book.'--_Daily Graphic_.


_MR. BARING GOULD'S NOVELS_

'To say that a book is by the author of "Mehalah" is to imply that
it contains a story cast on strong lines, containing dramatic
possibilities, vivid and sympathetic descriptions of Nature, and a
wealth of ingenious imagery.'--_Speaker_.

'That whatever Mr. Baring Gould writes is well worth reading, is a
conclusion that may be very generally accepted. His views of life
are fresh and vigorous, his language pointed and characteristic,
the incidents of which he makes use are striking and original, his
characters are life-like, and though somewhat exceptional people,
are drawn and coloured with artistic force. Add to this that his
descriptions of scenes and scenery are painted with the loving eyes
and skilled hands of a master of his art, that he is always fresh and
never dull, and under such conditions it is no wonder that readers
have gained confidence both in his power of amusing and satisfying
them, and that year by year his popularity widens.'--_Court Circular_.


BARING GOULD. URITH: A Story of Dartmoor. By S. BARING GOULD. _Third
Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s._

'The author is at his best.'--_Times_.

'He has nearly reached the high water-mark of "Mehalah."'--_National
Observer_.


BARING GOULD. IN THE ROAR OF THE SEA: A Tale of the Cornish Coast. By
S. BARING GOULD. _Fifth Edition. 6s._


BARING GOULD. MRS. CURGENVEN OF CURGENVEN. By S. BARING GOULD. _Fourth
Edition. 6s._

A story of Devon life. The 'Graphic' speaks of it as '_a novel of
vigorous humour and sustained power_'; the 'Sussex Daily News' says
that '_the swing of the narrative is splendid_'; and the 'Speaker'
mentions its '_bright imaginative power_.'


BARING GOULD. CHEAP JACK ZITA. By S. BARING GOULD. _Third Edition.
Crown 8vo. 6s._

A Romance of the Ely Fen District in 1815, which the 'Westminster
Gazette' calls '_a powerful drama of human passion_'; and the
'National Observer' '_a story worthy the author_.'


BARING GOULD. THE QUEEN OF LOVE. By S. BARING GOULD. _Third Edition.
Crown 8vo. 6s._

The 'Glasgow Herald' says that '_the scenery is admirable, and the
dramatic incidents are most striking_.' The 'Westminster Gazette'
calls the book '_strong, interesting, and clever_.' 'Punch' says that
'_you cannot put it down until you have finished it_.' 'The Sussex
Daily News' says that it '_can be heartily recommended to all who care
for cleanly, energetic, and interesting fiction_.'


BARING GOULD. KITTY ALONE. By S. BARING GOULD, Author of 'Mehalah,'
'Cheap Jack Zita,' etc. _Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s._

'A strong and original story, teeming with graphic description,
stirring incident, and, above all, with vivid and enthralling human
interest.'--_Daily Telegraph_.

'Brisk, clever, keen, healthy, humorous, and interesting.'--_National
Observer_.

'Full of quaint and delightful studies of character.'--_Bristol
Mercury_.


MRS. OLIPHANT. SIR ROBERT'S FORTUNE. By MRS. OLIPHANT. _Crown 8vo.
6s._

'Full of her own peculiar charm of style and simple, subtle
character-painting comes her new gift, the delightful story before us.
The scene mostly lies in the moors, and at the touch of the authoress
a Scotch moor becomes a living thing, strong, tender, beautiful, and
changeful. The book will take rank among the best of Mrs. Oliphant's
good stories.'--_Pall Mall Gazette_.


W.E. NORRIS. MATTHEW AUSTIN. By W.E. NORRIS, Author of 'Mademoiselle
de Mersac,' etc. _Third Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s._

'"Matthew Austin" may safely be pronounced one of the most
intellectually satisfactory and morally bracing novels of the current
year.'--_Daily Telegraph_.

'Mr. W.E. Norris is always happy in his delineation of everyday
experiences, but rarely has he been brighter or breezier than in
"Matthew Austin." The pictures are in Mr. Norris's pleasantest vein,
while running through the entire story is a felicity of style and
wholesomeness of tone which one is accustomed to find in the novels of
this favourite author.'--_Scotsman_.


W.E. NORRIS. HIS GRACE. By W.E. NORRIS, Author of 'Mademoiselle de
Mersac.' _Third Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s._

'Mr. Norris has drawn a really fine character in the Duke
of Hurstbourne, at once unconventional and very true to the
conventionalities of life, weak and strong in a breath, capable of
inane follies and heroic decisions, yet not so definitely portrayed
as to relieve a reader of the necessity of study on his own
behalf.'--_Athenaeum_.


W.E. NORRIS. THE DESPOTIC LADY AND OTHERS. By W.E. NORRIS, Author of
'Mademoiselle de Mersac.' _Crown 8vo. 6s._

'A delightfully humorous tale of a converted and rehabilitated
rope-dancer.'--_Glasgow Herald_.

'The ingenuity of the idea, the skill with which it is worked out, and
the sustained humour of its situations, make it after its own manner a
veritable little masterpiece.'--_Westminster Gazette_.

'A budget of good fiction of which no one will tire.'--_Scotsman_.

'An extremely entertaining volume--the sprightliest of holiday
companions.'--_Daily Telegraph_.


GILBERT PARKER. MRS. FALCHION. By GILBERT PARKER, Author of 'Pierre
and His People.' _Second Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s._

Mr. Parker's second book has received a warm welcome. The 'Athenaeum'
called it '_a splendid study of character_'; the 'Pall Mall Gazette'
spoke of the writing as '_but little behind anything that has been
done by any writer of our time_'; the 'St. James's' called it '_a very
striking and admirable novel_'; and the 'Westminster Gazette' applied
to it the epithet of '_distinguished_.'


GILBERT PARKER. PIERRE AND HIS PEOPLE. By GILBERT PARKER. _Second
Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s._

'Stories happily conceived and finely executed. There is strength and
genius in Mr. Parker's style.'--_Daily Telegraph_.


GILBERT PARKER. THE TRANSLATION OF A SAVAGE. By GILBERT PARKER, Author
of 'Pierre and His People,' 'Mrs. Falchion,' etc. _Crown 8vo. 6s._

'The plot is original and one difficult to work out; but Mr. Parker
has done it with great skill and delicacy. The reader who is not
interested in this original, fresh, and well-told tale must be a dull
person indeed.'--_Daily Chronicle_.

'A strong and successful piece of workmanship. The portrait of
Lali, strong, dignified, and pure, is exceptionally well
drawn.'--_Manchester Guardian_.

'A very pretty and interesting story, and Mr. Parker tells it with
much skill. The story is one to be read.'--_St. James's Gazette_.


GILBERT PARKER. THE TRAIL OF THE SWORD. By GILBERT PARKER, Author of
'Pierre and his People,' etc. _Third Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s._

'Everybody with a soul for romance will thoroughly enjoy "The Trail of
the Sword."'--_St. James's Gazette_.

'A rousing and dramatic tale. A book like this, in which swords flash,
great surprises are undertaken, and daring deeds done, in which men
and women live and love in the old straightforward passionate way,
is a joy inexpressible to the reviewer, brain-weary of the domestic
tragedies and psychological puzzles of everyday fiction; and we cannot
but believe that to the reader it will bring refreshment as welcome
and as keen.'--_Daily Chronicle_.


GILBERT PARKER. WHEN VALMOND CAME TO PONTIAC; The Story of a Lost
Napoleon. By GILBERT PARKER. _Second Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s._

'Here we find romance--real, breathing, living romance, but it runs
flush with our own times, level with our own feelings. Not here can we
complain of lack of inevitableness or homogeneity. The character of
Valmond is drawn unerringly; his career, brief as it is, is placed
before us as convincingly as history itself. The book must be read,
we may say re-read, for any one thoroughly to appreciate Mr. Parker's
delicate touch and innate sympathy with humanity.'--_Pall Mall
Gazette_.


ARTHUR MORRISON. TALES OF MEAN STREETS. By ARTHUR MORRISON. _Third
Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s._

'Told with consummate art and extraordinary detail. He tells a plain,
unvarnished tale, and the very truth of it makes for beauty. In the
true humanity of the book lies its justification, the permanence of
its interest, and its indubitable triumph.'--_Athenaeum_.

'A great book. The author's method is amazingly effective, and
produces a thrilling sense of reality. The writer lays upon us a
master hand. The book is simply appalling and irresistible in its
interest. It is humorous also; without humour it would not make the
mark it is certain to make.'--_World_.


JULIAN CORBETT. A BUSINESS IN GREAT WATERS. By JULIAN CORBETT, Author
of 'For God and Gold,' 'Kophetus XIIIth.,' etc. _Crown 8vo. 6s._

'There is plenty of incident and movement in this romance. It is
interesting as a novel framed in an historical setting, and it is
all the more worthy of attention from the lover of romance as
being absolutely free from the morbid, the frivolous, and the
ultra-sexual.'--_Athenaeum_.

'A stirring tale of naval adventure during the Great French War. The
book is full of picturesque and attractive characters.'--_Glasgow
Herald_.


ROBERT BARR. IN THE MIDST OF ALARMS. By ROBERT BARR, Author of 'From
Whose Bourne,' etc. _Second Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s._

'A book which has abundantly satisfied us by its capital
humour.'--_Daily Chronicle_.

'Mr. Barr has achieved a triumph whereof he has every reason to be
proud.'--_Pall Mall Gazette_.

'There is a quaint thought or a good joke on nearly every page.
The studies of character are carefully finished, and linger in the
memory.'--_Black and White_.

'Distinguished for kindly feeling, genuine humour, and really graphic
portraiture.'--_Sussex Daily News_.

'A delightful romance, with experiences strange and exciting. The
dialogue is always bright and witty; the scenes are depicted briefly
and effectively; and there is no incident from first to last that one
would wish to have omitted.'--_Scotsman_.


MRS. PINSENT. CHILDREN OF THIS WORLD. By ELLEN F. PINSENT, Author of
'Jenny's Case.' _Crown 8vo. 6s._

'There is much clever writing in this book. The story is told in a
workmanlike manner, and the characters conduct themselves like average
human beings.'--_Daily News_.

'Full of interest, and, with a large measure of present excellence,
gives ample promise of splendid work.'--_Birmingham Gazette_.

'Mrs. Pinsent's new novel has plenty of vigour, variety, and good
writing. There are certainty of purpose, strength of touch, and
clearness of vision.'--_Athenaeum_.


CLARK RUSSELL. MY DANISH SWEETHEART. By W. CLARK RUSSELL, Author of
'The Wreck of the Grosvenor,' etc. _Illustrated. Third Edition. Crown
8vo. 6s._


PRYCE. TIME AND THE WOMAN. By RICHARD PRYCE, Author of 'Miss Maxwell's
Affections,' 'The Quiet Mrs. Fleming,' etc. _Second Edition. Crown
8vo. 6s._

'Mr. Pryce's work recalls the style of Octave Feuillet, by its
clearness, conciseness, its literary reserve.'--_Athenaeum_.


MRS. WATSON. THIS MAN'S DOMINION. By the Author of 'A High Little
World.' _Second Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s._

'It is not a book to be read and forgotten on a railway journey, but
it is rather a study of the perplexing problems of life, to which the
reflecting mind will frequently return, even though the reader does
not accept the solutions which the author suggests. In these days,
when the output of merely amusing novels is so overpowering, this is
no slight praise. There is an underlying depth in the story which
reminds one, in a lesser degree, of the profundity of George Eliot,
and "This Man's Dominion" is by no means a novel to be thrust aside as
exhausted at one perusal.'--_Dundee Advertiser_.


MARRIOTT WATSON. DIOGENES OF LONDON and other Sketches. By H.B.
MARRIOTT WATSON, Author of 'The Web of the Spider.' _Crown 8vo.
Buckram. 6s._

'By all those who delight in the uses of words, who rate the exercise
of prose above the exercise of verse, who rejoice in all proofs of its
delicacy and its strength, who believe that English prose is chief
among the moulds of thought, by these Mr. Marriott Watson's book will
be welcomed.'--_National Observer_.


GILCHRIST. THE STONE DRAGON. By MURRAY GILCHRIST. _Crown 8vo. Buckram.
6s._

'The author's faults are atoned for by certain positive and admirable
merits. The romances have not their counterpart in modern literature,
and to read them is a unique experience.'--_National Observer_.



THREE-AND-SIXPENNY NOVELS


EDNA LYALL. DERRICK VAUGHAN, NOVELIST. By EDNA LYALL, Author of
'Donovan,' etc. _Forty-first Thousand. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d._


BARING GOULD. ARMINELL: A Social Romance. By S. BARING GOULD. _New
Edition. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d._


BARING GOULD. MARGERY OF QUETHER, and other Stories. By S. BARING
GOULD. _Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d._


BARING GOULD. JACQUETTA, and other Stories. By S. BARING GOULD. _Crown
8vo. 3s. 6d._


MISS BENSON. SUBJECT TO VANITY. By MARGARET BENSON. _With numerous
Illustrations. Second Edition. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d._

'A charming little book about household pets by a daughter of the
Archbishop of Canterbury.'--_Speaker_.

'A delightful collection of studies of animal nature. It is
very seldom that we get anything so perfect in its kind.... The
illustrations are clever, and the whole book a singularly delightful
one.'--_Guardian_.

'Humorous and sentimental by turns, Miss Benson always manages to
interest us in her pets, and all who love animals will appreciate
her book, not only for their sake, but quite as much for its
own.'--_Times_.

'All lovers of animals should read Miss Benson's book. For sympathetic
understanding, humorous criticism, and appreciative observation she
certainly has not her equal.'--_Manchester Guardian_.


GRAY. ELSA. A Novel. By E. M'QUEEN GRAY. _Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d._

'A charming novel. The characters are not only powerful sketches, but
