that it was no floe or berg, but the main field of ice, part of that
from which they had been separated.

"I don't know as we'll be much better off when we get there," said Andy.
"There are not dogs enough left to draw the sled, and if we have to walk
back to where the airship is, providing this Esquimaux can find it,
we'll freeze."

"Let us wait until we get to shore before we begin to find new trouble,"
counseled the professor.

In a little while the floating floe bumped up against the main ice
field with a grinding and crashing. No sooner had it touched than the
dogs scampered off, and were soon lost to sight. The Esquimaux did not
seem to worry much over their disappearance. He coolly righted the sled,
having first demolished the temporary tent, and proceeded, unaided, to
haul the vehicle ashore.

"Give him a hand, Washington," said the professor. "He is our friend,
and rendered us good service. We must help him."

Then, while Washington and the native dragged the sled, the others
followed afoot, and in a short time were safe on the main ice.

"Now, the question is," said the inventor, "can our guide take us to the
ship?"

But the Esquimaux guide seemed to be in no dilemma. He gave one look
about, after reaching the main shore, and then, with Washington helping
him pull the sled, started off across the ice.

It was no easy path for the adventurers to follow. There were little
hills and hollows, many rough and few smooth places. Their feet were
weary before they had gone two miles. But the native did not seem to
tire.

"I declare to goodness I'se dat kerflusteredcated dat I can't
extradition myself forward in dis line ob progression de leastest moment
longer!" exclaimed Washington at length, coming to a halt. "I'se
prognosticated in de lower extremities!"

"I suppose he means he's too tired to go any further and his legs ache,"
translated Professor Henderson. "Well, he takes a lot of words, but I
guess his condition is about like that of all of us. I'm tired too."

One after another all admitted that they felt the need of rest. At the
professor's direction they came to a halt under the shelter of an ice
hill, that kept off some of the wind. Here they made some sort of a meal
of the condensed food.

This served to render their fatigue a little less, and, after an hour's
rest, they started off again. There did not seem to be much need of
dragging along the sled, which was useless without dogs to pull it, but
the vehicles are scarce and hard to make, so, doubtless, the Esquimaux
did not want to desert his property.

Mile after mile the refugees traversed. It was hard work and walking
over the humpy ice was quite different from anything the adventurers
were used to, and their feet ached very much. But they knew their only
safety was in keeping on.

The cold was terrible. They had no instruments for telling how low the
mercury might be, but the professor ventured a guess that it was at
seventy degrees below zero. The wind, too, sprang up, and adding to the
unpleasant situation the sky was overcast with heavy clouds that
threatened a snow storm.

That would mean a calamity which might bring to an untimely end the
brave men and boys who had dared so much in the search for the north
pole. A blinding fall of the white flakes would result in the guide
losing his way, and they might all perish. So they hurried on, anxious
to get to the _Monarch_, if they were lucky enough to find her.

There was no use asking the guide any questions or trying to learn how
much farther they had to go. Professor Henderson tried to learn from him
if the journey would last much longer, but the Esquimaux only shook his
head, pointed in advance, and uttered but one word:

"Ship!"

They kept on for several hours more. Their pace was slow, for all of the
adventurers, men and boys, were foot-sore and weary. The guide, however,
did not seem to mind it. Tom and Bill took turns relieving Washington at
helping pull the sled.

At last the party came to a long hill of ice. It was the hardest kind of
going to climb to the top, but the Esquimaux inspired hope in all their
hearts by showing signs of excitement, while he exclaimed rapidly:

"Ship! Ship! Ship!"

Up the long slope they toiled, almost ready to drop at every step.
Finally they gained the top. The guide was in the lead. As he got to the
summit he pointed down and gave a joyful cry.

Andy, weary as he was, hurried to his side. He gazed long and
steadfastly in the direction the Esquimaux pointed.

"It's the _Monarch_ sure enough!" cried the old hunter. "I can make out
the yellow gas bag against the snow bank! Hurrah!"

"Hurrah! Hurrah!" yelled Jack, Mark, Bill, Washington and Tom. Even
Professor Henderson joined in, and the Esquimaux added his voice in a
queer sort of native cheer that made all of the others smile.

"Now if we could only fly to her we'd be all right," exclaimed Mark.

The guide was busy overhauling the sled. He tightened some of the
retaining thongs that had become loosened, and then, with guttural
cries, he pointed to the vehicle, to the different members of the party
and to the long slope that lay before them, and which led down almost to
the abandoned airship.

"I believe he means for us to coast down the hill on the sled!" cried
Andy. "That's a good scheme. It will beat walking all to pieces!"

Down, down, down the adventurers went, like an arrow shot from a stout
bow. The bone runners of the sled glided over the frozen surface, which
was as slippery as glass.

The speed was very swift and the wind caused by the rapid passage cut in
their faces so that all had to pull their fur hoods over their heads.
The ice, scraped up by the runners, flew in a shower on either side.

The Esquimaux skillfully steered the sled. He avoided several hollows
and gullies that would have brought disaster, and kept the vehicle on a
proper course. In less than five minutes from the start at the top of
the hill they were at the bottom, more than a mile's distance, and
within a quarter of a mile of the airship.

Joy at the discovery of the _Monarch_ lent strength to travel-weary
legs. The refugees hastened on, and soon were at the place where the
craft had settled on a bank of ice and snow.

"Back to the _Monarch_!" shouted Andy. "I hope the ship is in working
order!"

Indeed this might well be a source of worry. One glance served to show
that the airship was frozen fast in the ice, while the gas bag, which
had collapsed, and was resting on top of the deck-house, was partially
covered with snow!

As weak as they were the boys set up a cheer and the men joined in, the
sound echoing for a long distance around.




CHAPTER XXVIII

ATTACKED BY THE NATIVES


"We must clear away the snow and ice!" said Professor Henderson. "Come,
boys, we must work quickly. We have no time to lose! Remember what
Dirola said about the natives following us!"

Now that he was back at his craft the inventor seemed to have recovered
all of his energies.

"Washington and I will see to the machinery, and get the bag inflated,"
he continued. "The rest begin to dig out the ship from below."

Fortunately the professor had foreseen the need of shovels on his
northern journey and had a supply in the ship. They were quickly brought
out. The snow was soon cleared from the silk bag, it being rather light.
Then, while the professor and the negro went to the engine room to start
the various apparatus, the others began chipping away the ice that held
the main body of the Monarch in a tight grip.

Inside the airship matters were in bad shape. The intense cold had
contracted all the metal and made it very brittle. Care had to be
exercised in handling every piece of apparatus. There was no heat in the
ship, and it was almost as cold as outside.

However, the gas generating machine was set in operation by a current
from the storage battery. Some of the gas was turned into the heating
stoves, which were constructed to burn it, and this made heat which soon
enabled the professor to work on the motors and dynamos. In a little
while the gas began filling the bag, which slowly distended.

"Hurrah!" yelled Jack, seeing that the _Monarch_ was beginning to look
like herself again. He and the others were working hard at the ice,
which did not seem to want to let the ship go.

The inventor went about testing each separate piece of apparatus. He
found that, with a little tinkering, all the machinery would work well.
Meanwhile the gas continued to fill the bag, until it was tugging at the
net and cords that fastened it to the airship. But all the lifting power
that could be produced from the machine would not elevate the _Monarch_
while it was held fast in the ice.

However, the forces attacking the frozen crystals worked to good
advantage. In the midst of their labors Washington brought out some hot
coffee, which was received with cheers. It was the first white man's
food, except the patent capsules, they had tasted since leaving the
ship.

At last, after several hours' hard digging, the body of the ship was all
but free. A few more blows would sever the last connecting grapple of
ice.

Suddenly Jack, who happened to glance up, gave a loud cry. All the
others stopped their digging.

"Here come the Esquimaux!" yelled the boy. "I just saw them around that
big iceberg!"

This was alarming news. Old Andy dropped his shovel and scrambled over
the side of the ship.

"What's de matter? Am yo' skeered?" asked Washington.

"Not a bit of it!" cried Andy. "I want to get a gun and give those
fellows something to remember me by!"

"Never mind them!" shouted the professor. "Get the ship free and we need
not stay to fight them. We are almost ready to start!"

But Andy was bound to have a shot at the savages, and he grabbed up his
rifle, which was fully loaded, and came out on the deck.

The natives came on with a rush. There were about two hundred of them,
and they had arrived on several big sleds. The Esquimaux who had
piloted the adventurers back to their ship had disappeared, for he knew
he would be killed as a traitor if his tribesmen caught him.

"Come on!" cried Bill to Tom and the boys. "Let's get aboard. We'll be
killed!"

"You can go!" shouted Jack. "I'm going to stay down here and free the
ship from ice. That's the only thing to do."

"I'll stay with you!" exclaimed Mark.

Tom and Bill scrambled up the sides of the ship and disappeared into the
cabin. The boys remained on the ice, partly under the airship, chipping
and picking to free the bottom.

With loud shouts and yells the Esquimaux surrounded the _Monarch_. The
savages were armed with bows and arrows, and soon a shower of these
missiles were shot toward the craft.

Professor Henderson was in mortal terror lest one of the sharp weapons
would pierce the gas bag, but, for some reason, the natives fired at the
lower part of the ship. Andy and the two helpers were now ready to
return the fire. Their guns rattled out and the reports caused the
natives great astonishment.

The first shots the defenders had fired over the heads of the Esquimaux,
not wishing to kill them if they could help it. But though the reports
caused a momentary falling back, the attackers soon rallied again, and
shot a thicker cloud of arrows, some of which fell uncomfortably near.

"Let 'em have it right in the faces this time!" shouted Andy.

He took careful aim at the mass of natives who were advancing, and one
fell. Bill and Tom followed his example, and the onslaught was checked
for a time.

But now reinforcements to the Esquimaux arrived until there were fully
five hundred of the fur-clad savages out on the ice surrounding the
airship. To cope with such a force seemed madness. Bill received a
slight wound in the arm, and Tom had a narrow escape from being killed,
a big spear just missing his head.

"Drop down below the rail!" yelled Andy. "They can't hit us so easy
then, and we can fire just as good!"

The defenders dropped flat to the deck, outside of the cabin. A loud
yell on the part of the Esquimaux told that they thought the adventurers
had been killed, and there was a rush to capture the ship.

"Let 'em have it! As fast as you can pull the triggers!" cried the old
hunter. "We'll show 'em what we can do!"

The three guns rang out again and two of the natives fell, both badly
wounded.

"I wish we had more help!" exclaimed Andy. "We're likely to have trouble
soon! Why don't those boys come up; in a few minutes they won't have a
chance!"

Indeed it would have been risky now for Jack and Mark to venture out
from under the ship, where they were still bravely chipping at the last
remaining bit of ice that help the ship fast. So far their presence had
not been noted by the enemy.

At that instant Professor Henderson ran out of the engine room.

"Use the machine gun!" he yelled. "That is our only hope!"

The next second he fell to the deck, struck by a spear.




CHAPTER XXIX

THE ESCAPE


"He's killed!" cried Andy.

"Oh Perfessor! Perfessor!" exclaimed Washington. "I tole yo' not to go
out."

"Never mind! Start the machine gun!" yelled Andy. "We must fight off
these human fiends!"

"Call up the boys!" shouted Bill. "They'll be killed under the ship!"

"I'm afraid it's too late," said Andy. "Here, Tom, you help Washington
work the machine gun!"

The weapon had been covered by canvas, and, fortunately, the snow had
not harmed it. The canvas was yanked off, and, while Tom prepared to
feed the cartridges down the hopper, Washington worked the crank. In a
few seconds there was a fusillade that sounded like a small battery
going into action.
