Canadian's shrug of the shoulders.

"Yes," replied the Captain; "sometimes the animal turns upon its
assailants and overturns their boat.  But for Master Land this danger
is not to be feared.  His eye is prompt, his arm sure."

At this moment seven men of the crew, mute and immovable as ever,
mounted the platform.  One carried a harpoon and a line similar to
those employed in catching whales.  The pinnace was lifted from the
bridge, pulled from its socket, and let down into the sea.  Six oarsmen
took their seats, and the coxswain went to the tiller.  Ned, Conseil,
and I went to the back of the boat.

"You are not coming, Captain?"  I asked.

"No, sir; but I wish you good sport."

The boat put off, and, lifted by the six rowers, drew rapidly towards
the dugong, which floated about two miles from the Nautilus.

Arrived some cables-length from the cetacean, the speed slackened, and
the oars dipped noiselessly into the quiet waters.  Ned Land, harpoon
in hand, stood in the fore part of the boat.  The harpoon used for
striking the whale is generally attached to a very long cord which runs
out rapidly as the wounded creature draws it after him.  But here the
cord was not more than ten fathoms long, and the extremity was attached
to a small barrel which, by floating, was to show the course the dugong
took under the water.

I stood and carefully watched the Canadian's adversary.  This dugong,
which also bears the name of the halicore, closely resembles the
manatee; its oblong body terminated in a lengthened tail, and its
lateral fins in perfect fingers.  Its difference from the manatee
consisted in its upper jaw, which was armed with two long and pointed
teeth which formed on each side diverging tusks.

This dugong which Ned Land was preparing to attack was of colossal
dimensions; it was more than seven yards long.  It did not move, and
seemed to be sleeping on the waves, which circumstance made it easier
to capture.

The boat approached within six yards of the animal.  The oars rested on
the rowlocks.  I half rose.  Ned Land, his body thrown a little back,
brandished the harpoon in his experienced hand.

Suddenly a hissing noise was heard, and the dugong disappeared.  The
harpoon, although thrown with great force; had apparently only struck
the water.

"Curse it!" exclaimed the Canadian furiously; "I have missed it!"

"No," said I; "the creature is wounded--look at the blood; but your
weapon has not stuck in his body."

"My harpoon! my harpoon!" cried Ned Land.

The sailors rowed on, and the coxswain made for the floating barrel.
The harpoon regained, we followed in pursuit of the animal.

The latter came now and then to the surface to breathe.  Its wound had
not weakened it, for it shot onwards with great rapidity.

The boat, rowed by strong arms, flew on its track.  Several times it
approached within some few yards, and the Canadian was ready to strike,
but the dugong made off with a sudden plunge, and it was impossible to
reach it.

Imagine the passion which excited impatient Ned Land!  He hurled at the
unfortunate creature the most energetic expletives in the English
tongue.  For my part, I was only vexed to see the dugong escape all our
attacks.

We pursued it without relaxation for an hour, and I began to think it
would prove difficult to capture, when the animal, possessed with the
perverse idea of vengeance of which he had cause to repent, turned upon
the pinnace and assailed us in its turn.

This manoeuvre did not escape the Canadian.

"Look out!" he cried.

The coxswain said some words in his outlandish tongue, doubtless
warning the men to keep on their guard.

The dugong came within twenty feet of the boat, stopped, sniffed the
air briskly with its large nostrils (not pierced at the extremity, but
in the upper part of its muzzle). Then, taking a spring, he threw
himself upon us.

The pinnace could not avoid the shock, and half upset, shipped at least
two tons of water, which had to be emptied; but, thanks to the
coxswain, we caught it sideways, not full front, so we were not quite
overturned.  While Ned Land, clinging to the bows, belaboured the
gigantic animal with blows from his harpoon, the creature's teeth were
buried in the gunwale, and it lifted the whole thing out of the water,
as a lion does a roebuck.  We were upset over one another, and I know
not how the adventure would have ended, if the Canadian, still enraged
with the beast, had not struck it to the heart.

I heard its teeth grind on the iron plate, and the dugong disappeared,
carrying the harpoon with him.  But the barrel soon returned to the
surface, and shortly after the body of the animal, turned on its back.
The boat came up with it, took it in tow, and made straight for the
Nautilus.

It required tackle of enormous strength to hoist the dugong on to the
platform.  It weighed 10,000 lb.

The next day, 11th February, the larder of the Nautilus was enriched by
some more delicate game.  A flight of sea-swallows rested on the
Nautilus.  It was a species of the Sterna nilotica, peculiar to Egypt;
its beak is black, head grey and pointed, the eye surrounded by white
spots, the back, wings, and tail of a greyish colour, the belly and
throat white, and claws red.  They also took some dozen of Nile ducks,
a wild bird of high flavour, its throat and upper part of the head
white with black spots.

About five o'clock in the evening we sighted to the north the Cape of
Ras-Mohammed. This cape forms the extremity of Arabia Petraea,
comprised between the Gulf of Suez and the Gulf of Acabah.

The Nautilus penetrated into the Straits of Jubal, which leads to the
Gulf of Suez.  I distinctly saw a high mountain, towering between the
two gulfs of Ras-Mohammed. It was Mount Horeb, that Sinai at the top of
which Moses saw God face to face.

At six o'clock the Nautilus, sometimes floating, sometimes immersed,
passed some distance from Tor, situated at the end of the bay, the
waters of which seemed tinted with red, an observation already made by
Captain Nemo.  Then night fell in the midst of a heavy silence,
sometimes broken by the cries of the pelican and other night-birds, and
the noise of the waves breaking upon the shore, chafing against the
rocks, or the panting of some far-off steamer beating the waters of the
Gulf with its noisy paddles.

From eight to nine o'clock the Nautilus remained some fathoms under the
water.  According to my calculation we must have been very near Suez.
Through the panel of the saloon I saw the bottom of the rocks
brilliantly lit up by our electric lamp.  We seemed to be leaving the
Straits behind us more and more.

At a quarter-past nine, the vessel having returned to the surface, I
mounted the platform.  Most impatient to pass through Captain Nemo's
tunnel, I could not stay in one place, so came to breathe the fresh
night air.

Soon in the shadow I saw a pale light, half discoloured by the fog,
shining about a mile from us.

"A floating lighthouse!" said someone near me.

I turned, and saw the Captain.

"It is the floating light of Suez," he continued.  "It will not be long
before we gain the entrance of the tunnel."

"The entrance cannot be easy?"

"No, sir; for that reason I am accustomed to go into the steersman's
cage and myself direct our course.  And now, if you will go down, M.
Aronnax, the Nautilus is going under the waves, and will not return to
the surface until we have passed through the Arabian Tunnel."

Captain Nemo led me towards the central staircase; half way down he
opened a door, traversed the upper deck, and landed in the pilot's
cage, which it may be remembered rose at the extremity of the platform.
It was a cabin measuring six feet square, very much like that occupied
by the pilot on the steamboats of the Mississippi or Hudson.  In the
midst worked a wheel, placed vertically, and caught to the tiller-rope,
which ran to the back of the Nautilus.  Four light-ports with
lenticular glasses, let in a groove in the partition of the cabin,
allowed the man at the wheel to see in all directions.

This cabin was dark; but soon my eyes accustomed themselves to the
obscurity, and I perceived the pilot, a strong man, with his hands
resting on the spokes of the wheel.  Outside, the sea appeared vividly
lit up by the lantern, which shed its rays from the back of the cabin
to the other extremity of the platform.

"Now," said Captain Nemo, "let us try to make our passage."

Electric wires connected the pilot's cage with the machinery room, and
from there the Captain could communicate simultaneously to his Nautilus
the direction and the speed.  He pressed a metal knob, and at once the
speed of the screw diminished.

I looked in silence at the high straight wall we were running by at
this moment, the immovable base of a massive sandy coast.  We followed
it thus for an hour only some few yards off.

Captain Nemo did not take his eye from the knob, suspended by its two
concentric circles in the cabin.  At a simple gesture, the pilot
modified the course of the Nautilus every instant.

I had placed myself at the port-scuttle, and saw some magnificent
substructures of coral, zoophytes, seaweed, and fucus, agitating their
enormous claws, which stretched out from the fissures of the rock.

At a quarter-past ten, the Captain himself took the helm.  A large
gallery, black and deep, opened before us.  The Nautilus went boldly
into it.  A strange roaring was heard round its sides.  It was the
waters of the Red Sea, which the incline of the tunnel precipitated
violently towards the Mediterranean.  The Nautilus went with the
torrent, rapid as an arrow, in spite of the efforts of the machinery,
which, in order to offer more effective resistance, beat the waves with
reversed screw.

On the walls of the narrow passage I could see nothing but brilliant
rays, straight lines, furrows of fire, traced by the great speed, under
the brilliant electric light.  My heart beat fast.

At thirty-five minutes past ten, Captain Nemo quitted the helm, and,
turning to me, said:

"The Mediterranean!"

In less than twenty minutes, the Nautilus, carried along by the
torrent, had passed through the Isthmus of Suez.



CHAPTER VI

THE GRECIAN ARCHIPELAGO

The next day, the 12th of February, at the dawn of day, the Nautilus
rose to the surface.  I hastened on to the platform.  Three miles to
the south the dim outline of Pelusium was to be seen.  A torrent had
carried us from one sea to another.  About seven o'clock Ned and
Conseil joined me.

"Well, Sir Naturalist," said the Canadian, in a slightly jovial tone,
"and the Mediterranean?"

"We are floating on its surface, friend Ned."

"What!" said Conseil, "this very night."

"Yes, this very night; in a few minutes we have passed this impassable
isthmus."

"I do not believe it," replied the Canadian.

"Then you are wrong, Master Land," I continued; "this low coast which
rounds off to the south is the Egyptian coast.  And you who have such
good eyes, Ned, you can see the jetty of Port Said stretching into the
sea."

The Canadian looked attentively.

"Certainly you are right, sir, and your Captain is a first-rate man.
We are in the Mediterranean.  Good!  Now, if you please, let us talk of
our own little affair, but so that no one hears us."

I saw what the Canadian wanted, and, in any case, I thought it better
to let him talk, as he wished it; so we all three went and sat down
near the lantern, where we were less exposed to the spray of the blades.

"Now, Ned, we listen; what have you to tell us?"

"What I have to tell you is very simple.  We are in Europe; and before
Captain Nemo's caprices drag us once more to the bottom of the Polar
Seas, or lead us into Oceania, I ask to leave the Nautilus."

I wished in no way to shackle the liberty of my companions, but I
certainly felt no desire to leave Captain Nemo.

Thanks to him, and thanks to his apparatus, I was each day nearer the
completion of my submarine studies; and I was rewriting my book of
submarine depths in its very element.  Should I ever again have such an
opportunity of observing the wonders of the ocean?  No, certainly not!
And I could not bring myself to the idea of abandoning the Nautilus
before the cycle of investigation was accomplished.

"Friend Ned, answer me frankly, are you tired of being on board?  Are
you sorry that destiny has thrown us into Captain Nemo's hands?"

The Canadian remained some moments without answering.  Then, crossing
his arms, he said:

"Frankly, I do not regret this journey under the seas.  I shall be glad
to have made it; but, now that it is made, let us have done with it.
That is my idea."

"It will come to an end, Ned."

"Where and when?"

"Where I do not know--when I cannot say; or, rather, I suppose it will
end when these seas have nothing more to teach us."

"Then what do you hope for?" demanded the Canadian.

"That circumstances may occur as well six months hence as now by which
we may and ought to profit."

"Oh!" said Ned Land, "and where shall we be in six months, if you
please, Sir Naturalist?"

"Perhaps in China; you know the Nautilus is a rapid traveller.  It goes
through water as swallows through the air, or as an express on the
land.  It does not fear frequented seas; who can say that it may not
beat the coasts of France, England, or America, on which flight may be
attempted as advantageously as here."

"M. Aronnax," replied the Canadian, "your arguments are rotten at the
foundation.  You speak in the future, `We shall be there!  we shall be
here!'  I speak in the present, `We are here, and we must profit by
it.'"

Ned Land's logic pressed me hard, and I felt myself beaten on that
ground.  I knew not what argument would now tell in my favour.

"Sir," continued Ned, "let us suppose an impossibility: if Captain Nemo
should this day offer you your liberty; would you accept it?"

"I do not know," I answered.

"And if," he added, "the offer made you this day was never to be
renewed, would you accept it?"

"Friend Ned, this is my answer.  Your reasoning is against me.  We must
not rely on Captain Nemo's good-will. Common prudence forbids him to
set us at liberty.  On the other side, prudence bids us profit by the
first opportunity to leave the Nautilus."

"Well, M. Aronnax, that is wisely said."

"Only one observation--just one.  The occasion must be serious, and our
first attempt must succeed; if it fails, we shall never find another,
and Captain Nemo will never forgive us."

"All that is true," replied the Canadian.  "But your observation
applies equally to all attempts at flight, whether in two years' time,
or in two days'. But the question is still this: If a favourable
opportunity presents itself, it must be seized."

"Agreed!  And now, Ned, will you tell me what you mean by a favourable
opportunity?"

"It will be that which, on a dark night, will bring the Nautilus a
short distance from some European coast."

"And you will try and save yourself by swimming?"

"Yes, if we were near enough to the bank, and if the vessel was
floating at the time.  Not if the bank was far away, and the boat was
under the water."

"And in that case?"

"In that case, I should seek to make myself master of the pinnace.  I
know how it is worked.  We must get inside, and the bolts once drawn,
we shall come to the surface of the water, without even the pilot, who
is in the bows, perceiving our flight."

"Well, Ned, watch for the opportunity; but do not forget that a hitch
will ruin us."

"I will not forget, sir."

"And now, Ned, would you like to know what I think of your project?"

"Certainly, M. Aronnax."

"Well, I think--I do not say I hope--I think that this favourable
opportunity will never present itself."

"Why not?"

"Because Captain Nemo cannot hide from himself that we have not given
up all hope of regaining our liberty, and he will be on his guard,
above all, in the seas and in the sight of European coasts."

"We shall see," replied Ned Land, shaking his head determinedly.

"And now, Ned Land," I added, "let us stop here.  Not another word on
the subject.  The day that you are ready, come and let us know, and we
will follow you.  I rely entirely upon you."

Thus ended a conversation which, at no very distant time, led to such
grave results.  I must say here that facts seemed to confirm my
foresight, to the Canadian's great despair.  Did Captain Nemo distrust
us in these frequented seas? or did he only wish to hide himself from
the numerous vessels, of all nations, which ploughed the Mediterranean?
I could not tell; but we were oftener between waters and far from the
coast.  Or, if the Nautilus did emerge, nothing was to be seen but the
pilot's cage; and sometimes it went to great depths, for, between the
Grecian Archipelago and Asia Minor we could not touch the bottom by
more than a thousand fathoms.

Thus I only knew we were near the Island of Carpathos, one of the
Sporades, by Captain Nemo reciting these lines from Virgil:

    "Est Carpathio Neptuni gurgite vates,
     Caeruleus Proteus,"

as he pointed to a spot on the planisphere.

It was indeed the ancient abode of Proteus, the old shepherd of
Neptune's flocks, now the Island of Scarpanto, situated between Rhodes
and Crete.  I saw nothing but the granite base through the glass panels
of the saloon.

The next day, the 14th of February, I resolved to employ some hours in
studying the fishes of the Archipelago; but for some reason or other
the panels remained hermetically sealed.  Upon taking the course of the
Nautilus, I found that we were going towards Candia, the ancient Isle
of Crete.  At the time I embarked on the Abraham Lincoln, the whole of
this island had risen in insurrection against the despotism of the
Turks.  But how the insurgents had fared since that time I was
absolutely ignorant, and it was not Captain Nemo, deprived of all land
communications, who could tell me.

I made no allusion to this event when that night I found myself alone
with him in the saloon.  Besides, he seemed to be taciturn and
preoccupied.  Then, contrary to his custom, he ordered both panels to
be opened, and, going from one to the other, observed the mass of
