the Moon. He made another ceremony out of that.

In command of the Moonship, his manner to Joe was absolutely correct. He
followed regulations to the letter--to a degree that left Joe blankly
uncomprehending. But he wouldn't have gotten along in the Navy if he
hadn't. He'd tried to do the same thing in the Platform, and it wasn't
practical. But he ignored all differences between Joe and himself. He
made no overtures of friendship, but that was natural. Unintentionally,
Joe had defied him. He now deliberately overlooked all that, and Joe
approved of him--within limits.

But Mike and Haney and the Chief did not. They laid for him. And they
considered that they got him. When he took over the Moonship, Lieutenant
Commander Brown naturally maintained naval discipline and required
snappy, official naval salutes on all suitable occasions, even in the
Platform. And Joe's gang privately tipped off the noncommissioned
personnel of the Moonship. Thereafter, no enlisted man ever saluted
Lieutenant Brown without first gently detaching his magnet-soled shoes
from the floor. When a man was free, a really snappy salute gave a
diverting result. The man's body tilted forward to meet his rising arm,
the upward impetus was one-sided, and every man who saluted Brown
immediately made a spectacular kowtow which left him rigidly at salute
floating somewhere overhead with his back to Lieutenant Brown. With a
little practice, it was possible to add a somersault to the other
features. On one historic occasion, Brown walked clanking into a
storeroom where a dozen men were preparing supplies for transfer to the
Moonship. A voice cried, "Shun!" And instantly twelve men went floating
splendidly about the storeroom, turning leisurely somersaults, all
rigidly at salute, and all wearing regulation poker faces.

An order abolishing salutes in weightlessness followed shortly after.

It took four days to get the transfer of supplies properly started. It
took eight to finish the job. Affixing fresh rockets to the outside of
the Moonship's hull alone called for long hours in space suits. During
this time Mike floated nearby in a space wagon. One of the Navy men was
a trifle overcourageous. He affected to despise safety lines. Completing
the hook-on of a landing rocket, he straightened up too abruptly and
went floating off toward the Milky Way.

Mike brought him back. After that there was less trouble.

Even so, the Moonship and the Platform were linked together for thirteen
full days, during which the Platform seemed extraordinarily crowded. On
the fourteenth day the two ships sealed off and separated. Joe and his
crew in the space tug hauled the Moonship a good five miles from the
Platform.

The space tug returned to the Platform. A blinker signal came across the
five-mile interval. It was a very crisp, formal, Navy-like message.

Then the newly-affixed rockets on the Moonship's hull spurted their
fumes. The big ship began to move. Not outward from Earth, of course.
That was where it was going. But it had the Platform's 12,000 miles per
hour of orbital speed. If the bonds of gravitation could have been
snapped at just the proper instant, that speed alone would have carried
the Moonship all the way to its destination. But they couldn't. So the
Moonship blasted to increase its orbital speed. It would swing out and
out, and as the Earth's pull grew weaker with distance the same weight
of rockets would move the same mass farther and farther toward the Moon.
The Moonship's course would be a sort of slowly flattening curve,
receding from Earth and becoming almost a straight line where Earth's
and the Moon's gravitational fields cancelled each other.

From there, the Moonship would have only to brake its fall against a
gravity one-sixth that of Earth, and reaching out a vastly shorter
distance.

Joe and the others watched the roiling masses of rocket fumes as the
ship seemed to grow infinitely small.

"We should've been in that ship," said Haney heavily when the naked eye
could no longer pick it out. "We could've beat her to the Moon!"

Joe said nothing. He ached a little inside. But he reflected that the
men who'd guided the Platform to its orbit had been overshadowed by
himself and Haney and the Chief and Mike. A later achievement always
makes an earlier one look small. Now the four of them would be
forgotten. History would remember the commander of the Moonship.

Forgotten? Yes, perhaps. But the names of the four of them, Joe and
Haney and the Chief and Mike, would still be remembered in a language
Joe couldn't speak, in a small village he couldn't name, on those
occasions when the Mohawk tribe met in formal council.

The Chief grumbled. Mike stared out the port with bitter envy.

"It was a dirty trick," growled the Chief. "We shoulda been part of the
first gang ever to land on the Moon!"

Joe grimaced. His crew needed to be cured of feeling the same way he
did.

"I wouldn't say this outside of our gang," said Joe carefully, "but if
it hadn't been for us four that ship wouldn't be on the way at all.
Haney figured the trick that got us back to Earth the first time, or
else we'd have been killed. If we had been killed, Mike wouldn't have
figured out the metal-concrete business. But for him, that Moonship
wouldn't even be a gleam in anybody's eye. And if the Chief hadn't blown
up that manned rocket we fought in the space wagons, there wouldn't be
any Platform up here to reload and refuel the Moonship. So they left us
behind! But just among the four of us I think we can figure that if it
hadn't been for us they couldn't have made it!"

Haney grinned slowly at Joe. The Chief regarded him with irony. Mike
said, "Yeah. Haney, and me, and the Chief. We did it all."

"Uh-huh," said the Chief sardonically. "Us three. Just us three. Joe
didn't do anything. Just a bum, he is. We oughta tell Sally he's no good
and she oughta pick herself out a guy that'll amount to something some
day." He hit Joe between the shoulders. "Sure! Just a bum, Joe! That's
all! But we got a weakness for you. We'll let you hang around with us
just the same! Come on, guys! Let's get something to eat!"

The four of them marched down a steel-floored corridor, their
magnetic-soled shoes clanking on the plates. Their progress was
uncertain and ungainly and altogether undignified. Suddenly the Chief
began to bawl a completely irrelevant song to the effect that the
inhabitants of the kingdom of Siam were never known to wash their
dishes. Haney chimed in, and Mike. They were all very close together,
and they were not at all impressive. But it hit Joe very hard, this
sudden knowledge that the others didn't really care. It was the first
time it had occurred to him that Haney and Mike and the Chief would
rather be left behind with him, as a gang, than go on to individual high
achievement in a first landing on the Moon.

It felt good. It felt _real_ good.

       *       *       *       *       *

But that, and all other sources of satisfaction, was wiped out by news
that came back from the Moonship a bare six hours later.

The Moonship was in trouble. The sequence and timing of its rocket
blasts were worked out on Earth, and checked by visual and radar
observation. The computations were done by electronic brains the
Moonship could not possibly have carried. And everything worked out. The
ship was on course and its firings were on schedule.

But then the unexpected happened. It was an error which no machine could
ever have predicted, for which statistics and computations could never
have compensated. It was a _human_ error. At the signal for the final
acceleration blast, the pilot of the Moonship had fired the wrong set of
rockets.

Inexperience, stupidity, negligence, excitement--the reason didn't
matter. After years of planning and working and dreaming, one human
finger had made a mistake. And the mistake was fatal!

When the mistake was realized, they'd had sense enough to cut loose the
still-firing rockets. But the damage had been done. The ship was still
plunging on. It would reach the Moon. But it wouldn't land in
Aristarchus crater as planned. It would crash. If every rocket remaining
mounted on the hull were to be fired at the best possible instant, the
Moonship would hit near Copernicus, and it would land with a terminal
velocity of 800 feet per second--540 miles an hour.

It could even be calculated that when the Moonship landed, the explosion
ought to be visible from Earth with a fairly good telescope. It was due
to take place in thirty-two hours plus or minus a few minutes.




11


The others got the space tug into the platform's lock and did things to
it, in the way of loading, that its designers never intended, while Joe
was calling Earth for calculations. The result was infuriating. The
Moonship had taken off for the Moon on the other side of the Platform's
orbit, when it had a velocity of more than 12,000 miles an hour in the
direction it wished to go. The Platform and of course the space tug was
now on the reverse side of the Platform's orbit. And of course they now
had a velocity of more than 12,000 miles per hour away from the
direction in which it was urgently necessary for the space tug to go.
They could wait for two hours to take off, said Earth, or waste the time
and fuel they'd need to throw away to duplicate the effect of waiting.

"But we can't wait!" raged Joe. Then he snapped. "Look here! Suppose we
take off from here, dive at Earth, make a near-graze, and let its
gravity curve our course! Like a cometary path! Figure that! That's what
we've got to do!"

He kicked off his magnetic-soled shoes and went diving down to the
airlock. Over his shoulder he panted an order for the radar-duty man to
relay anything from Earth down to him there. He arrived to find Haney
and Mike in hot argument over whether it was possible to load on an
extra ton or two of mass. He stopped it. They would.

"Everything's loaded?" he demanded. "Okay! Space suits! All set? Let's
get out of this lock and start blasting!"

He drove them into the space tug. He climbed in himself. He closed the
entrance port. The plastic walls of the lock bulged out, pulled back
fast, and the steering rockets jetted. The space tug came out of the
lock. It spun about. It aimed for Earth and monstrous bursts of
rocket-trail spread out behind it. It dived.

Naturally! When a ship from the Platform wanted to reach Earth for
atmosphere-deceleration, it was more economical to head away from it.
Now that it was the most urgent of all possible necessities to get away
from Earth, in the opposite direction to the space tug's present motion,
it was logical to dive toward it. The ship would plunge toward Earth,
and Earth's gravity would help its rockets in the attainment of frenzied
speed. But the tug still possessed its orbital speed. So it would not
actually strike the Earth, but would be carried eastward past its disk,
even though aimed for Earth's mid-bulge. Yet Earth would continue to
pull. As the space tug skimmed past, its path would be curved by the
pull of gravity. At the nearest possible approach to Earth, the tug
would fire its heaviest rockets for maximum acceleration. And it would
swing around Earth's atmosphere perhaps no more than 500 miles
high--just barely beyond the measurable presence of air--and come out of
that crazy curve a good hour ahead of the Platform for a corresponding
position, and with a greater velocity than could be had in any other
way. Traced on paper, the course of the tug would be a tight parabola.

The ship dived. And it happened that it had left the Platform and
plunged deep in Earth's shadow, so that the look and feel of things was
that of an utterly suicidal plunge into oblivion. There was the seeming
of a vast sack of pure blackness before the nose of the space tug. She
started for it at four gravities acceleration, and Joe got his
headphones to his ears and lay panting while he waited for the figures
and information he had to have.

He got them. When the four-gravity rockets burned out, the tug's crew
painstakingly adjusted the ship's nose to a certain position. They flung
themselves back into the acceleration chairs and Joe fired a six-g
blast. They came out of that, and he fired another. The three blasts
gave the ship a downward speed of a mile and a half a second, and
Earth's pull added to it steadily. The Earth itself was drawing them
down most of a 4,000-mile fall, which added to the speed their rockets
built up.

Down on Earth, radar-bowls wavered dizzily, hunting for them to feed
them observations of position and data for their guidance. Back on the
Platform, members of the crew feverishly made their own computations.
When the four in the Space tug were half-way to Earth, they were
traveling faster than any humans had ever traveled before, relative to
the Earth or the Platform itself. When they were a thousand miles from
Earth, it was certain they would clear its edge. Joe proposed and
received an okay to fire a salvo of Mark Tens to speed the ship still
more. When they burned to the release-point and flashed away past the
ports, the Chief and Haney panted up from their chairs and made their
way aft.

"Going to reload the firing-frames," gasped the Chief.

They vanished. The space tug could take rockets from its cargo and set
them outside its hull for firing. No other ship could.

Haney and the Chief came back. There was dead silence in the ship, save
for a small, tinny voice in Joe's headphones.

"We'll pass Earth 600 miles high," said Joe in a flat voice. "Maybe
closer. I'm going to try to make it 450. We'll be smack over enemy
territory, but I doubt they could hit us. We'll be hitting better than
six miles a second. If we wanted to, we could spend some more rockets
and hit escape velocity. But we want to stop, later. We'll ride it out."

Silence. Stillness. Speed. Out the ports to Earthward there was purest
blackness. On the other side, a universe of stars. But the blackness
grew and grew and grew until it neatly bisected the cosmos itself, and
half of everything that was, was blackness. Half was tiny colored stars.

Then there was a sound. A faint sound. It was a moan. It was a howl. It
was a shriek.... And then it was a mere thin moan again. Then it was
not.

"We touched air," said Joe calmly, "at six and a quarter miles per
second. Pretty thin, though. At that, we may have left a meteor-trail
for the populace to admire."

Nobody said anything at all. In a little while there was light ahead.
There was brightness. Instantly, it seemed, they were out of night and
there was a streaming tumult of clouds flashing past below--but they
were 800 miles up now--and Joe's headphones rattled and he said:

"Now we can give a touch of course-correction, and maybe a trace of
speed...."

Rockets droned and boomed and roared outside the hull. The Earth fell
away and away and presently it was behind. And they were plunging on
after the Moonship which was very, very, very far on before them.

It was actually many hours before they reached it. They couldn't afford
to overtake it gradually, because they had to have time to work in after
contact. But overtaking it swiftly cost extra fuel, and they hadn't too
much. So they compromised, and came up behind the Moonship at better
than 2,000 feet per second difference in speed--they approached it as
fast as most rifle-bullets travel--and all creation was blotted out by
the fumes of the rockets they fired for deceleration.

Then the space tug came cautiously close to the Moonship. Mike climbed
out on the outside of the tug's hull, with the Chief also in space
equipment, paying out Mike's safety-line. Mike leaped across two hundred
yards of emptiness with light-years of gulf beneath him. His metal soles
clanked on the Moonship's hull.

Then the vision-screen on the tug lighted up. Lieutenant Commander Brown
looked out of it, quietly grim. Joe flicked on his own transmitter. He
nodded.

"_Mr. Kenmore_," said Brown evenly, "_I did not contact you before
because I was not certain that contact could be made. How many
passengers can you take back to the Platform?_"

Joe blinked at him.

"I haven't any idea," he said. "But I'm going to hitch on and use our
rockets to land you."

"_I do not think it practicable_," said Brown calmly. "_I believe the
only result of such a course will be the loss of both ships with all
hands. I will give you a written authorization to return on my order.
But since all my crew can't return, how many can you take? I have ten
married men aboard. Six have children. Can you take six? Or all ten?_"
Then he said without a trace of emphasis, "_Of course, none of them will
be officers._"

"If I tried to turn back now, I think my crew would mutiny," Joe said
coldly. "I'd hate to think they wouldn't, anyhow! We're going to hook on
and play this out the way it lies!"

There was a pause. Then Brown spoke again. "_Mr. Kenmore, I was
hoping you'd say that. Actually--er--not to be quoted, you
understand--actually, intelligent defiance has always been in the
traditions of the Navy. Of course, you're not in the Navy, Kenmore, but
right now it looks like the Navy is in your hands. Like a battleship in
the hands of a tug. Good luck, Kenmore._"

Joe flicked off the screen. "You know," he said, winking at Mike, "I
guess Brown isn't such a bad egg after all. Let's go!"

In minutes, the space tug had a line made fast. In half an hour, the two
space craft were bound firmly together, but far enough apart for the
rocket blasts to dissipate before they reached the Moonship. Mike
returned to the tug. A pair of the big Mark Twenty rockets burned
frenziedly in emptiness.

The Moonship was slowed by a fraction of its speed. The deceleration was
