
"And if that doesn't work," snorted Astro, "we'll stick Manning outside
and let him talk about himself. That oughta give us enough gas to get us
away from this hunk of copper."

"I believe," said Alfie emphatically, "that you're joshing me, Manning."

"Now, whatever gave you that idea?" asked Roger in a hurt tone.

"This _is_ a serious situation, isn't it?" asked Alfie, looking at
Astro.

"It sure is, Alfie," said Astro soberly, "and I'm the first one to say
I'm a little scared!"

Alfie smiled. "I'm very glad you said that, Astro," he said, "because I
feel exactly the same way!" He turned and walked back to Major Connel.

"What was the idea of telling him that?" hissed Roger at Astro. "What
are you trying to do? Get the little guy space happy, or something?"

"Look at him!" said Astro. "I'm twice his size. He figures if a big guy
like me is scared, then he's got a right to be scared too!"

Roger grunted in appreciation of the way Astro had treated Alfie's
fears and turned back to the loading of the fuel.

Major Connel walked over and watched them transfer the last of the fuel
into the tanks.

"How much have you got there, Astro?" he asked.

"I'd say enough to sustain flight for about three hours, sir.
Considering we'll have such a big load."

"Ummmmh," mused Connel. "You know we're up against big odds, don't you?"

Roger and Astro nodded.

"If Tom doesn't come back soon, we'll be so far into the pull of the
sun, even a ship the size of the _Polaris_ wouldn't be able to break
out."

"How much time have we got, sir?" asked Roger.

"Not too much, Manning," said Connel. "Of course we can blast off in the
jet boat and get up a few hundred miles, in case Tom does come back.
Then he won't have to bring the _Polaris_ down here. But if time runs
out on us up there, we'll have to come back and take our chance on
Junior being blasted out of the sun's grip."

There was a pause while Astro and Roger considered this.

"That would mean," asked Roger, "that we'd be here when the reactor
units go off, wouldn't it, sir?"

"That's right, Manning," said Connel, admitting to the danger. "Even if
Junior were blasted out of the pull of the sun, we couldn't survive the
explosions."

"Couldn't we blast off in the jet boat and then land after the
explosions, sir?" asked Astro.

"Yes," admitted Connel, "we could do that. But the radioactivity would
be so powerful we couldn't last more than a few days. We have no
antiradiation gear. Not even food or water." He paused and scanned the
sky. "No," he said in a surprisingly casual voice, "the only way we can
get out of this is for Tom to come back and get us."

Shinny and Alfie came over and joined the group around the jet boat. No
one said anything. There wasn't anything to say. Each of them felt the
heat burning through his space suit. Each felt the same fear tugging at
his throat. There was nothing to say. The _Polaris_ was not to be seen;
the sky was empty of everything except Alpha Centauri, the great burning
mass of gases that once they had all seen only as a quiet twinkling star
in the heavens, never dreaming that someday it would be pulling them
relentlessly into its molten self.


Tom Corbett had a plan.

He sat at the control board of the great rocket cruiser, apparently
watching the needles and gauges on the panel, but his mind was racing
desperately. The two-hour deadline had just passed. The great solar
clock had swung its red hand past the last second. Only a miracle could
save the five men on Junior now. But Tom was not counting on miracles.
He was counting on his plan.

"Keep this space wagon driving, Corbett!" ordered Loring from behind
him. "Keep them rockets wide open!"

"Listen, Loring," pleaded Tom. "How about giving those fellows a break?
If I don't pick them up, they'll all be killed."

"Ain't that too bad," snarled Mason.

"Look," said Tom desperately, "I'll promise you nothing will happen to
you. We'll let you go free. We'll--"

Loring cut him off. "Shut your trap and concentrate on them controls!
You and Major Connel and them other punks are the only guys between me
staying free or going back to a prison asteroid. So you don't think I'm
going to let them stay alive, do you?" He grinned crookedly.

"You dirty space crawler!" growled Tom and suddenly leaped up from the
control seat.

Loring raised the paralo-ray gun threateningly. "One more move outta you
and I'll freeze you so solid you'll think you're a chunk of ice!" he
yelled.

Mason stepped to the other side of the control deck. They had Tom
blocked on either side.

"Now get back to them controls, Corbett," snarled Loring, "or I'll give
it to you right now."

"O.K., Loring, you win," said Tom. He sat down and faced the control
panel. He tried hard not to smile. They had fallen for it. Now they were
separated. Mason remained on the opposite side of the room. Tom took a
deep breath, crossed his fingers, and put the next step of his plan into
action. He reached out and pulled the master acceleration switch all the
way back. The _Polaris_ jumped ahead as if shot out of a cannon.

"Hey," growled Mason, "what're you doing?"

"You want more speed, don't you?" demanded Tom.

"O.K.," said Mason, "but don't try any funny stuff!"

"I don't see how I can. You've got me nailed with that paralo-ray," Tom
replied.

He got up leisurely, so as not to excite the nervous trigger finger of
Loring, and turned slowly.

"What is it this time?" demanded Loring.

"I just gave you an extra burst of speed. All the _Polaris_ will take.
Now I've got to adjust the mixture of the fuel, otherwise she'll kick
out on you and we'll have to clean out the tubes."

"Yeah," sneered Loring. "Well, I happen to know you do that right on the
control board." He motioned with the paralo-ray gun. "Get back down!"

"On regular space drive, you do," agreed Tom. "But we're on hyperdrive
now. It has to be done there"--he pointed to a cluster of valves and
wheels at one side of the control deck--"one of those valve wheels."

"Stay where you are," said Mason. "I'll do it!" He moved to the corner.
"Which one is it?" he asked.

Tom gulped and struggled hard to keep the terrible nervousness out of
his voice. He had to sound as casual as possible. "The red one. Turn it
to the right, hard!" he said.

Loring sat down and Mason bent over the valve wheel. He gave the wheel a
vicious twist. Suddenly there was the sound of a motor slowing down
somewhere inside the great ship. Tom gripped the edge of the control
board and waited. Slowly at first, but surely, Tom felt himself
beginning to float off his chair.

"Hey!" yelled Mason. "I'm--I'm floating!"

"It's the gravity generators," yelled Loring. "Corbett's pulled a fast
one. We're in free fall!"

Tom lifted his feet and pushed as hard as he could against the control
panel. He shot out of the chair and across the control room just as
Loring fired his ray gun. There was a loud hiss as the gun was fired,
and then the thud of a body against the wall, as Loring was suddenly
shoved by the recoil of the charge.

Tom huddled in the upper corner of the control deck like a spider, his
legs drawn up underneath him waiting for Mason to fire. But the smaller
spaceman was tumbling head over heels in the center of the room. The
more he exerted himself, the more helpless he became. His arms and legs
splayed out in an effort to level himself, as he kept trying to fire the
ray gun.

Tom saw his chance and lunged through the air again, straight at the
floating spaceman. He passed him in mid-air. Mason made an attempt to
grab him, but Tom wrenched his body to one side and pulled the ray gun
out of the other's hand.

He flipped over and turned his attention to Loring who was more
dangerous, since he was now backed up against a bulkhead waiting for Tom
to present a steady target. Loring started to fire, but Tom saw him in
time and shot away from the wall toward the hatch. He twisted his body
completely around, and with his shoulder hunched over, fired at Loring
with his ray gun. The charge hit the target and Loring became rigid, his
body slowly floating above the deck. His back to the wall, braced for
the recoil, Tom brought his arm around slowly and aimed at Mason. He
fired, and the spaceman stiffened.

Tom smiled. Neither of the spacemen would give him any more trouble now.
He pushed slightly to the left and shot over to the valve that Mason had
unwittingly turned off. Tom turned it on and clung to an overhead pipe
until he felt the reassuring grip of the synthetic gravity pull him to
the deck. Loring and Mason, in the same positions they had been in when
Tom fired, settled slowly to the deck. Tom walked over and looked at
both of them. He knew they could hear him.

"For smart spacemen like you two," said Tom, "you sure forgot your basic
physics. Newton's laws of motion, remember? Everything in motion tends
to keep going at the same speed, unless influenced by an outside force.
Firing the ray gun was the outside force that will land you right on a
prison asteroid! And you'd better start praying that I can pull those
fellows off that satellite, because if I don't, you'll wind up frying in
the sun with us!"

He started to drag them to a locker and release them from the effects of
the ray blast, but, remembering their cold-blooded condemnation of
Connel and the others to death on the satellite, he decided to let them
remain where they were.

He turned to the control board and flipped on the microphone. He was too
far away to pick up an image on the teleceiver, but the others could
hear him on the audio, if, thought Tom, they were still alive.

"Attention! Attention! _Polaris_ to Major Connel! Major Connel, can you
hear me? Come in, Major Connel--Astro--Roger--somebody--come in!"

He turned away from the mike and fired the starboard jets full blast,
making a sweeping curve in space and heading the _Polaris_ back to
Junior.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER 20


"There's only one answer, boys," said Connel. "Loring and Mason have
escaped and taken over the ship. I can't think of any other reason Tom
would abandon us like this."

The jet boat was crowded. Alfie, the smallest, was sitting on Astro's
lap. For more than an hour they had circled above the copper satellite,
searching the surrounding skies in vain for some sign of the _Polaris_.

"Major," said Roger, who was hunched over the steering wheel of the
small space craft, "we're almost out of fuel. We'd better drop down on
the night side of Junior, the side away from the sun. At least there
we'd be out of the direct heat."

"Very well, Roger," said Connel. "In fact, we could keep shifting into
the night side every hour." Then he added quietly, thoughtfully, "But
we're out of fuel, you said?"

"Yes, sir," said Roger. "There's just enough to get down." Roger sent
the craft in a shallow dive. Suddenly the rockets cut out. The last of
the fuel was gone. Roger glided the jet boat to a smooth stop on the
night side of the planetoid.

"How much longer before the reactor units go up?" asked Shinny.

Connel turned, thinking he had heard something on the communicators,
then answered Shinny's question. "Only four hours," he said.

The crew of spacemen climbed out of the jet boat into the still
blackness of the night side of the planet. There wasn't anything left to
do.

They sat around on the hard surface of the planet, staring at the
strange stars overhead.

"You know," said Astro, "I might be able to set up something to convert
some of the U235 in the reactors to fuel the jet boat."

"Impossible, Astro," said Alfie. "You'd need a reduction gear. And not
only that, but you haven't any tools to handle the mass. If you opened
one of those boxes, you'd be fried immediately by the radiation!"

"Alfie's right," said Connel. "There's nothing to do but wait."

Major Connel turned his face up as far as he could in the huge fish-bowl
helmet to stare at the sky. His eyes wandered from star cluster to star
cluster, from glowing Regulus, to bright and powerful Sirius. He stifled
a sigh. How much he had wanted to see more--and more--and more of the
great wide, high, and deep! He remembered his early days as a youth on
his first trip to Luna City; his first sensation at touching an alien
world; his skipper, old, wise, and patient, who had given him his creed
as a spaceman: "Travel wide, deep, and high," the skipper had said to
the young Connel, "but never so far, so wide, or so deep as to forget
that you're an Earthman, or how to act like an Earthman!" Even now,
years later, the gruff voice rang in his ears. It wasn't long after that
that he had met Shinny. Connel smiled behind the protection of his
helmet, as he looked at the wizened spaceman, who was now old and
toothless, but who still had the same merry twinkle in his eye that
Connel had noticed the first time he saw him. Connel had signed on as
first officer on a deep spacer bound for Titan. Shinny had come aboard
and reported to Connel as rocketman. Shinny had promptly started roaring
through the passageways of the huge freighter in his nightshirt singing
snatches of old songs at the top of his voice. It had taken Connel four
hours to find where Shinny had hidden the bottle of rocket juice! Connel
laughed. He looked over at the old man fondly.

[Illustration]

"Say, Nick," said Connel, addressing the man by his given name for the
first time, "you remember the time it took me four hours to find that
bottle of rocket juice you hid on that old Titan freighter?"

Shinny cackled, his thin voice coming over the headphones of the others
as well as Connel's.

"I sure do, Lou!" replied Shinny, using Connel's first name. They were
just old spacemen now, reliving old times together. "Funny thing,
though, you never knew I had two more bottles hidden in the tube
chamber!"

"Why, you old space crawler!" roared Connel. "You put one over on me!"

[Illustration]

Roger and Astro and Alfie had never known Connel's first name. They
rolled the name over in their minds, fitting the name to the man.
Unknown to each other, they decided that the name fitted the man. Lou
Connel!

"Say, Lou," asked Shinny, "where in the blessed universe did you come
from? You never told me."

There was a long pause. "A place called Telfair Estates, in the deep
South on the North American continent. I was raised on a farm close by.
I used to go fishing late at night and stare up at the stars." He paused
again. "I ran away from home. I don't know if--if--anyone's still there
or not. I never went back!"

There was a long silence as each man saw a small boy fishing late at
night, barefoot, his toes dangling in the water, a worm wiggling on the
end of a string, more interested in the stars that twinkled overhead
than in any fish that might swim past and seize the hook.

"Where are you from, Nick?" asked Connel.

"Born in space," cackled Shinny, "on a passenger freighter carrying
colonists out to Titan. Never had a breath of natural fresh air until I
was almost a grown man. Nothing but synthetic stuff under the atmosphere
screens. My father was a mining engineer. I was the only kid. One night
a screen busted and nearly everybody suffocated or froze to death. My pa
and ma was among 'em. I blasted off after that. Been in the deep ever
since. And you know, by the blessed rings of Saturn, I'd be on a nice
farm near Venusport, living on a pension, if you hadn't kicked me out of
the Solar Guard!"

"Why, you broken down old piece of space junk," roared Connel, "I
oughta--" Connel never finished what he was going to say.

"Attention! Attention! Roger--Astro--Major Connel--come in, please! This
is Tom on the _Polaris_!"

As if they had been struck by a bolt of lightning, the five spacemen sat
up and then raced to the jet boat.

"Connel to Corbett!" roared the major. "Where are you? What happened?"

"I haven't got time to explain now, sir," said Tom. "Loring and Mason
escaped and forced me to take them to Tara. I managed to overcome them
and blast back here. Meet me up about fifty miles above Junior, sir. I'm
bringing the _Polaris_ in!"

"No!" yelled Connel. "It's no use, Tom. We're out of fuel. We've used up
