The two started out, but suddenly Admiral Hawarden stopped Hanlon with
his hand on the young man's arm. "About that business with the toogan.
I'm not prying if you don't want to talk, but shouldn't I warn all the
men who saw it, to keep quiet?"

"Shades of Snyder, yes! I got so interested I forgot all about others
seeing me with it. Yes, absolutely, it must never be talked about."

He again looked pleadingly at the admiral. "I ... I'm sorry, sir ... but
at that I know you're smart enough to have figured out most of it. All
right, highly confidential, I can do a bit of mind-reading, and
especially with animals and birds, whose minds are not as complex as
human's. I can even control 'em to some extent."

The admiral nodded. "I sort of figured as much, with the amazing
performance of that pigeon. Your secret is safe with me--it certainly
must not be spread around. But I don't mind saying I'm glad it's you has
that ability, not me," with a half-hearted laugh.

"It is a load," Hanlon admitted soberly, then brightened, "but it sure
saved my neck when Bohr had me prisoner and was about to torture me."

The admiral looked surprised, then shivered. "The bees! I hadn't
connected ...", his voice died away, and after another brief hesitation
he left, while Hanlon slowly made his way outside, took a ground-cab,
and was driven back to the hotel.

       *       *       *       *       *

About five the next morning Hanlon was awakened by the stealthy sound of
a key in the lock of his hotel room door. His hand slid swiftly under
his pillow, and firmly grasped the blaster there.

As he saw the door open and a figure slip inside, in one swift movement
he sat up, and switched on the bed light. "Up with those hands!" he
commanded the man who was closing the door carefully, his back still
towards the bed.

The hands went up, and the man slowly turned.

"Dad!" Hanlon yelled in relief, and climbed out of bed. "How did you get
here so soon?"

His father met him halfway, and said from their embrace, "I was on
Estrella when your call came. That's only a few lights from here, and
they sent a speedster." Then he grinned. "I'm glad to see you're
learning to keep your eyes open, even in your sleep."

Hanlon started dressing while they talked. In swift, concise sentences
he told his father all that had occurred to him since he started his
job.

"Nice work, Spence," his father applauded when he had finished, then
grinned again, "although I ought to spank you for taking such risks,
after I told you to take it easy at first. I was a bit worried when you
disappeared, until Hooper reported what you were after. But about your
job," he continued after a moment, "we had no idea you could get so
much. We merely hoped you might find a lead or two for us to work on.
But you've practically wrapped this up for us."

"Unh-uh," his son demurred. "It's far from finished. We've got to get to
Algon and grab those ships. And if any of them, or enough of them, are
in shape to fight, that may take some doing ... if we can do it at all.
Then there's the job of finding out where Bohr came from, and how much
of a menace his planet or system or whatever it is, will be."

"Sure, sure, I realize that, Son. But those are incidentals. You've
given us the 'what' and 'who' we needed to know. But I see you're
dressed, and I'm hungry. Let's go eat."

As they were breakfasting his father asked for details, and Hanlon
explained about his new mental powers, and how they had helped him. "I
can't do much with men, except to read their surface thoughts," he
explained. "But with animals I can do more. I can follow those surface
thoughts and memories back and down into their total mind, and can take
over and control them. But it won't work with people--humans seem to
have a sort of natural block or screen I can't penetrate."

Newton's face was a study as he shook his head. "To think my boy can do
things like that!"

"How do you suppose it happens I can, Dad?"

"You didn't get it from me, that's for sure," his father grimaced
ruefully. "Perhaps through your mother, from her father. He was a
peculiar duck. They used to call him psychic, for he'd get some of the
craziest hunches--for lack of a better descriptive word. He often seemed
to know a lot of things when no one could figure out how he could have
learned them. Say, now that I remember back, he used to have quite a way
with animals, too, although I doubt if he had anything like your
powers."

"You said I'd probably develop other mental abilities," Hanlon grinned
nervously, "but I certainly never imagined anything like this."

"Me neither," ungrammatically. "It's weird!"

They had nearly finished eating when their waiter brought a portable
visiphone to the table. "A call for you, Mr. Hanlon," and he plugged the
set into a wall-socket.

Hanlon flipped the switch and saw Admiral Hawarden's face smiling from
the screen. "We got the freighter just a few minutes ago," he reported.
"One of our men daringly mingled with the crew as they were boarding,
and jammed the airlock so it couldn't be closed. We arrested them all,
with only two of our men injured, and five of the enemy. They're
bringing them into Base now."

"Fine work, sir. Admiral Newton is here with me--we'll see you in your
off ... wait, sir ... Dad says you'd better come here to the hotel. Room
946."

They were barely back in Hanlon's room when Admiral Hawarden knocked. He
and Newton were old friends, and greeted each other with genuine warmth.

"That's quite a boy of yours, Newt. He's got the stuff."

"Yeah, I'm sort of proud of him, myself. He's really done a job,
especially for first assignment."

"Have either of you any orders for me concerning the mopping up?"
Hawarden asked, but looked at Hanlon.

"Ask Dad ..."

But his father interrupted. "It's your party, Son. Speak up. Right now
you're not a youngster just out of school, you are the Inter-Stellar
Corps," he added impressively.

Hanlon flushed, but there was a sureness in his voice as he answered,
that only the bitter experiences through which he had so recently
passed, and which had matured him so greatly, could have brought.

"We've got to liberate Algon and capture those new battleships as
quickly as possible, of course. But at the same time we must be trying
to find out what planet or system Bohr came from, and take steps to see
they can't harm us. That means we've got to exert every effort to get
every single person who was working with or for Bohr, and especially to
find out if he had any superiors."

"Right. The fleet should be here in another two days, and then Ferguson
will want to blast for Algon. The other matter will depend on so many
things we don't know yet."

"Has Trowbridge cracked that code yet?"

"He reported first thing this morning that he broke it late last night.
I've assigned several men to help him, and they should have it
transcribed soon."

Hanlon turned to his father. "Your men here yet?"

"They're coming in as fast as they can get here."

"Better examine those men from the freighter, and have your gang follow
up all leads. They'll have to break down Bohr's hypnosis to get any
information. Although," he paused and his face grew thoughtful, "I'm
wondering if anyone besides Bohr really knew all he was planning. I'm
beginning to believe he was a lone wolf."

Admiral Hawarden nodded in agreement. "I've been forced to the same
belief."

Something clicked in Hanlon's mind. "The emperor," he exclaimed. "Maybe
we'd better have another go at him. I'll bet his mind's a lot freer from
that compulsion now, and perhaps he can remember more of what Bohr
sealed away from his conscious memory."

Hawarden nodded. "That's a good bet. I'll arrange it."

Two hours later the emperor was free to receive them, and the four were
soon closeted in his study.

"It's a strange, weird feeling, gentlemen," he said when they had
explained what they wanted. "It's almost like trying to read some other
person's mind. I've felt that Bohr's influence was receding, and I've
been trying to see what more I could find."

He sat silent for a moment, then said slowly, almost in a sing-song
voice as though reading from a printed page, "I knew he was building
some ships on Algon, but I did not know they were warships. He told me
they were a new type with an entirely new propulsive principle that one
of our scientists had worked out."

"There's always that possibility, of course," Newton said.

"Why did he say they were building them elsewhere than on this planet?"
Hawarden asked.

The emperor frowned in concentration, then a peculiar look came over his
features. "That's strange," he marvelled. "You would think I would have
been sure to ask that, but I cannot find any memory of ever having done
so."

"Algon had most of the natural resources for the building of ships,"
Hanlon ruminated aloud. "There were the mines, the forests, and slave
labor to cut down expenses. It was mostly engineers, scientists and
special technicians who were there, overseeing."

"I cannot find in my mind the names of any others who might have been in
the conspiracy with Bohr," the emperor answered another question. "He
brought only one man to see me, with the request that I present him a
decoration. It was the scientist who devised the new drive, he said. A
Professor Panek, I believe ..."

"Panek?" Hanlon interrupted. "A heavy-set, ruddy-faced, red-headed man?"

"Yes, that about describes him."

"But Panek was only one of his gunmen," the young SS man was perplexed.
"He didn't have brains enough to invent an excuse."

"I wonder, then, what Bohr had in mind to bring such a man here like
that?" Hawarden frowned.

"Maybe a trick to help throw His Majesty off guard," Newton suggested.

"Or else just a sop to Panek's vanity, to tie him closer to Bohr,"
Hanlon said. "A thing like that would have tickled Panek."

"We'll have him rounded up, then."

"No need, Sire," Hanlon explained. "He was one of those men who were
torturing me, and was killed by the bees."

The emperor looked at the young man quizzically, and a knowing smile
erased much of the tension from his face. "I've heard about that
incident. Wasn't it rather peculiar you were not harmed by any of those
ferocious bees?"

Hanlon's face was as bland as he could make it. "Not necessarily, Sire.
I was sitting still, manacled, you remember. They were moving around and
fighting the insects."

The emperor winked, and Hanlon probed into his mind, receiving the
distinct impression of friendliness, while the surface thoughts were
saying, "I won't pry, but I'd give a lot to know what really did
happen--and how."

"The Corps thanks Your Majesty," Admiral Hawarden rose to leave, and
Newton and Hanlon did likewise. "We'll keep you closely informed of
things as they break," and the three backed from the study, bowing.




Chapter 24


Grand Fleet had been rapidly assembling in the region near Simonides,
just outside visual range, and away from the passenger and freight
lanes. Mobilization was now complete.

Admiral Newton and Senior Lieutenant Hanlon had been invited to ride the
Sirius, High Admiral Ferguson's flagship, and were glad to avail
themselves of that privilege. They wore uniforms conforming to their
rank, but were disguised so that any chance acquaintances could not
recognize them, although there were no other Terrans aboard.

Orders were given, and in strict formation the fleet blasted for Algon.
First went the great screen of scouts, fanning out in all directions
from a common center, the outer fringes at higher speed until a great
bowl-like formation was secured. Then all the scouts standardized their
speed. When they reached Algon they would completely englobe the planet
just beyond detection range.

Next came the light cruisers, in the same formation, but when they
englobed at Algon they would go inside the globe of scouts, nearer the
planet's surface. Then the heavy cruisers and battleships would descend
in three mass formations, one directly over each of the three known
shipyards.

"If any of the ships being built there are in shape to attack--if they
have weapons installed and crews to use them," High Admiral Ferguson's
orders had been very explicit, "you'll have to burn them down. Otherwise
we want those ships untouched."

George Hanlon was thrilled with the excitement of what was coming, yet
knew a touch of fear. He had never been under fire, and knew only from
hearsay just what it meant to be in a ship that might be destroyed any
instant without the least chance of anyone escaping. In space warfare,
there usually just were no survivors. You won and lived--or you lost and
were blasted out of existence.

But it wouldn't be long now--the scouts were already establishing their
globe just outside of detection range. "No signs of being discovered
yet," they reported.

Then the light cruisers began slipping through the screen of scouts to
take their positions. Suddenly, a number of great beams of energy
stabbed up toward them from below, and the screens of the cruisers
flared in brilliant confiscations of flame as those mighty rays struck
them.

"Don't you cruisers and scouts take foolish chances!" High Admiral
Ferguson's voice rasped into the mike. "If those beams are too hot, get
back fast! Heavy cruisers and battleships, down!"

Instantly Hanlon could feel the surge of acceleration as the great ship
he was riding plummeted planetward. In the plate he and his father were
scanning, he could see the dots of blue light that identified the
nearest scouts, and a moment later the greens of the light cruisers.

Then those dots fled behind his range of vision as the heavies flashed
past them.

The plate Hanlon was using was of limited vision, so he could not see
the battle as a whole, as High Admiral Ferguson could in his
wide-coverage screens. Only what was going on directly below and close
to either side was visible to Hanlon. Yet he could see several of those
great, stabbing beams reaching out toward the fleet.

A change in color at one edge of his plate caught his eye, and he saw
the ship nearest on his right begin to glow as a heavy beam from below
worked on its screens, burrowing its way in and in, trying to blast the
ship out of existence.

Great streams of radiance struck and ricocheted from its screens, which
were swiftly mounting through the spectrum as more and more power was
thrown against them by the enemy below.

The air in the Sirius began to grow hotter, and his father answered his
inquiring look, "They're attacking us, too, and that's heating us up.
Hope our screens hold," he grinned grimly.

"You said it." A shiver of fear gripped the young man, and he could feel
himself trembling. His father threw a comforting arm across his
shoulders. "First battles are always toughest," he said evenly, and
Hanlon calmed instantly.

He turned his attention to the screen again. That neighboring ship was
struggling desperately to escape, knowing she could not stand much more.

"What's the matter with that pilot?" Hanlon yelled. "Why don't he flip
her over and beat it?"

"Seems to be held by something," his father's anxious voice was tense.
"Have those others got some sort of tractor beam?"

"Tractors?" Hanlon looked up in surprise. "I've read about them, but
thought they were impossible."

"Impossible to us because we haven't got 'em yet," Newton said absently.
"They are theoretically possible."

Every beam from every Corps ship was piercing downward. Suddenly other
ships were appearing, and the young man realized that the light cruisers
were coming down to add their might to that of the battleships and
heavies.

Four of the light cruisers maneuvered swiftly below the battleship next
to the Sirius, one below the other, and in the instant of their
alignment the big ship broke free, while the others flashed away from
that restricting, holding tractor, or whatever it was.

It seemed like hours that Hanlon's eyes strained, trying to see what was
going on. They had slowed, his spaceman's sense told him, and now he
could see they were within the atmosphere, not too high above the
ground. Now he could make out huge, squat mechanisms from which those
deadly rays were pouring.

The Guddus, with their lack of knowledge of things mechanical, had not
reported these to Hanlon, else he could have warned Admiral Ferguson
about them, and the attack might possibly have been handled differently.

Suddenly a speaker blared, "Sector Two is in our hands. No total losses.
A number of the enemy scouts got away--they're far faster than anything
we've got."

A yell rose from every throat there in the control room.

Sector Two, Hanlon knew, was the spaceyard where the scouts and light
cruisers were being built. "They probably hadn't armed that field as
much as these others," he said to his father.

Newton nodded, then the two walked over to the High Admiral's station
and glanced into his larger bank of plates.

Now Hanlon could see clearly, and at first glance knew that none of the
new enemy ships below them were fighting--only those ground batteries
which encircled the shipyard. He could see that most of these were now
out of action, destroyed by the Federation ships. The others were under
terrific bombardment, not only from the ships' beams, but from their
bombs and guided missiles as well.

From the looks of the destroyed batteries, Hanlon guessed the explosive
bombs had been followed by thermite to complete their destruction.

"We lost many?" Newton asked.

"No totals," Ferguson's voice was gleeful, "except one light cruiser. We
must have caught them napping. If they can't put up any more forces,
it'll all be over in a couple of minutes."

_A couple of minutes!_ Hanlon's thought was a gasp. He glanced at his
chronom, and was amazed. He had been sure this battle had lasted for
hours--but it was less than ten minutes. It didn't seem possible ... but
he quickly remembered what he had learned in school, and knowing
something of those terrific powers unleashed there, the wonder was now
that it had lasted that long.

A speaker near them blared. "Admiral Houghton reporting. Sector Three
taken. Two of our cruisers blasted, and one battleship crippled. One
enemy battleship was fighting us, and had to be destroyed. They've
really got something, sir, that we'll want to study and get for
ourselves."

Another yell of triumph came from the Corpsmen, and Hanlon felt a thrill
of pride in the Service of which he was a part.

Then a moment later Admiral Ferguson called into his mike, "Cease fire,
but stand by on careful watch. _Orion_ and _Athenia_, send your
specialists down in gigs. I'll meet you there."

The landing successfully completed without further activity from the
enemy, Ferguson, a number of designated officer-specialists, Newton and
Hanlon, some technicians, and a company of marines in full armor,
disembarked and marched to the safest part of the ruined, still-burning
spaceyard.

Careful examination of the ships there was ordered. The
officer-technies, who swarmed aboard the enemy ships, soon began
reporting one after another, that none of these partially-built vessels
seemed damaged beyond repair.

"Thank heavens they built what few ground-batteries they had well
outside the field," Ferguson said to Newton and Hanlon. "We'll get crews
in here at once, and complete these ships."

George Hanlon, after his first quick looks about at the damage done, had
been sending his mind out and out, trying to get into telepathic
communication with any of the natives, but had not had any success. Had
they all been killed? Those here at the shipyard, probably yes, he had
