The Connie commander grunted. He was afraid, Rip realized. The Connie
suspected a trick, and he had no idea of what it might be.

Rip looked him over with interest. This was the man who had been willing
to burn his own spacemen back at the asteroid belt.

Galliene saw Rip's black uniform and hurried to shake his hand. "So this
is the young lieutenant who is responsible! Lieutenant, today the spacemen
honor the Planeteers because of you. Most days we fight each other, but
today we fight together, eh? I am glad to meet you!"

"And I'm glad to meet you, sir," Rip returned. He liked the twinkle in the
Frenchman's eye. He would have given a lot to know what scheme Galliene
and MacFife had cooked up.

The Connie had overheard Galliene's greeting. He glared at Rip. The
Frenchman saw the look and smiled happily. "Ah, you do not know each
other? Commander, I have the honor to make known Lieutenant Foster of the
Federation Special Order Squadrons. He is in command on the asteroid."

The Connie blurted, "So! I send boats to help you and you fire on them!"

So that was to be the Consops story! Rip thought quickly, then held up his
hand in a shocked gesture that would have done credit to the Frenchman.
"Oh, no, Commander! You misunderstand. We had no way of communicating by
radio, so I did the only thing we could do. I fired rockets as a warning.
We didn't want your boats to get caught in a nuclear explosion." He
shrugged. "It was very unlucky for us that the sun threw my gunner's aim
off and he hit your boats, quite by accident."

MacFife coughed to cover up a chuckle. Galliene hid a smile by stroking
his mustache.

The Connie commander growled, "And I suppose it was accident that you took
my men prisoner?"

"Prisoner?" Rip looked bewildered. "We took no prisoners. When your boats
arrived, the men asked if they might not join us. They claimed refuge,
which we had to give them under interplanetary law."

"I will take them back," the Connie stated.

"You will not," Galliene replied with equal positiveness. "The law is very
clear, my friend. Your men may return willingly, but you cannot force
them. When we reach Terra we will give them a choice. Those who wish to
return to the Consolidation will be given transportation to the nearest
border."

The Connie commander motioned to a heavily armed officer. "Take their
instruments. Check them quickly." He put his lips together in a straight
line and stared at the Federation men. They stared back with equal
coldness. Around them, Connie spacemen with wooden, expressionless faces
waited without moving.

The minutes ticked by. Rip wondered again what kind of plan MacFife and
Galliene had. When would the excitement start?

Additional minutes passed and the officer returned with the cases.
Wordlessly he handed them to Galliene and MacFife. The Connie commander
snapped, "There. Now get out of my ship."

Galliene bowed. "You have been a most courteous and gracious host," he
said. "Your conversation has been stimulating, inspiring, and informative.
Our profound thanks."

He shook hands with Rip and MacFife, bowed to the Connie commander again,
and went out the way he had come. There wasn't anything to say after the
Frenchman's sarcastic farewell speech. MacFife, Rip, and the officer with
the instruments went back through the valves into their own ship.

Once inside, MacFife called, "Come with me. Hurry." He led the way through
passages and up ladders to the very top of the ship, to the hatch where
the astrogators took their star sights. The protective shield of nuclite
had been rolled back and they could see into space through the clear
vision port.

Rip and MacFife hurried to the side where they were connected to the
Connie. Rip looked down along the length of the ship. The valve connection
was in the middle of each ship, at the point of greatest diameter. From
that point each ship grew more slender.

MacFife pointed to the Connie's nose. Projecting from it like great horns
were the ship's steering tubes. Unlike the Federation cruiser which
blasted steam through internal tubes that did not project, the Connie used
chemical fuel.

"Watch," MacFife said.

There were similar tubes on the Connie's stern, Rip knew. He wondered what
they had to do with the plan.

MacFife walked to a wall communicator. "Follow instructions."

He turned to Rip. "Remember, lad. The _Sagittarius_ is on the other side
of the Connie, about to do the same thing."

Rip waited in silence, wondering.

Then the voice horn called, "Valve closed!"

A second voice yelled, "Blast!"

A tremor jarred its way through the entire ship, making the deck throb
under Rip's feet. He saw that the ship's nose had swung away from the
Connie. What in space--

"Blast!"

The nose swung into the Connie again with a jar that sent Rip sliding into
the clear plastic of the astrodome. His nose jammed into the plastic but
he didn't even wince, because he saw the Connie's steering tubes buckle
under the _Aquila_'s sudden shove.

And suddenly the picture was clear. The two Federation cruisers hadn't
cared about getting into the Connie ship. They had only wanted an excuse
to tie up to it so they could do what had just been done.

They had sheared off the enemy's steering tubes, first at the stern, then
at the bow, leaving him helpless, able to go only forward or back in the
direction in which he happened to be pointing!

MacFife had a broad grin on his face. As Rip started to speak, he held up
his hand and pointed at a wall speaker.

The Connie commander came on the circuit. He screamed, "You planned that!
You--you--" He subsided into his own language.

Galliene's voice spoke soothingly. "But my dear commander! How can I
apologize enough? Believe me, the man responsible will be reward--I mean,
the man responsible will be disciplined. You may rest assured of it. How
unfortunate! I am overcome with shame. A terrible accident! Terrible."

MacFife picked up a microphone. "Same here, Connie. A terrible accident.
Aye, the man who did it will hear from me."

"It was no accident," the Connie screamed.

"Ah," Galliene replied, "but you cannot prove otherwise. Commander, do you
realize what this means? You are helpless. Interplanetary law says that a
helpless spaceship must be salvaged and taken in tow by the nearest
cruiser, no matter what its nationality. We will do this jointly, the
_Aquila_ and the _Sagittarius_. We will take turns towing you, my friend.
We will haul you to Terra like any other piece of space junk."

MacFife could remain quiet no longer. "Yes, mister. And that's no' the end
o' it. We will collect the salvage fee. One half the value of the salvaged
vessel. Aye! My men will like that, since we share and share alike on
salvage. Now put out a cable from your nose tube. I'll take ye in tow
first."

He cut the communicator off, and met Rip's grin.

The two spacemen had figured out the one way to repay the Connie for his
attempts on the asteroid. They couldn't fire on him, but they could fake
an "accident" that would cripple him and cost Consops millions of dollars
in salvage fees.

Nor would Consops refuse to pay. Salvage law was clear. Whoever performed
the salvage was not required to turn the ship back to its owners until the
fee had been paid, in whatever currency he cared to specify.

And there was another angle. The cruisers would tow the Connie into the
Federation spaceport in New Mexico. If past experience was any indication,
the Connie would lose about half its crew--perhaps more. They would claim
sanctuary in the Federation.

Rip shook hands solemnly with the grinning Scotchman. It would be a long
time before Consops tried space piracy again.

"We'll be back at our family fight again tomorrow," MacFife said, "but
today we celebrate together. Ah, lad, this is pure joy to me. I've had a
score to settle with yon Connies for years. Now I've done it."

He put an arm around Rip's shoulders. "While I'm in a givin' mood, which
is not the way of us Scots, is there anything ye'd like?"

Rip could think of only one thing. "A hot shower. For me and my men. And
will you take the prisoners off our hands?"

"Yes to both. Anything else?"

"We'll need some rocket fuel. Terra says we have to correct course. Also,
we'll need a nuclear charge to throw us into a braking ellipse. And we
need a new landing boat. The sun baked the equipment out of ours."

MacFife nodded. "So be it. I'll send men to the asteroid to bring back the
prisoners and your Planeteers." He smiled. "We'll let yon rock go by
itself while hot showers and a good meal are had by all. It's the least of
what ye've earned."

Rip started to thank the Scot, but his stomach suddenly turned over and
black dizziness flooded in on him. He heard MacFife's sudden exclamation,
felt hands on him.

White light blinded him. He shook his head and tried to keep his stomach
from acting up. A voice asked, "Were you shielded from those nuclear
blasts?"

"No," he said past a constricted throat. "Not from the last. We got some
prompt radiation. I don't know how much."

"When was that? The exact time?"

Rip tried to remember. He felt horrible. "It was twenty-three-oh-five."

"Bad," the voice said. "He must have taken enough roentgens of gamma and
neutrons to reach or exceed the median-lethal dose."

Rip found his voice again. "Santos," he said urgently. "On the asteroid.
He got it, too. The rest were shielded. Get him. Quick!"

MacFife snapped orders. The ball-bat would have Santos in the ship within
minutes. Being sick in a space suit was about the most unpleasant thing
that could happen to anyone.

A hypospray tingled against Rip's arm. The drug penetrated, caught a quick
lift to all parts of his body through his bloodstream. Consciousness slid
away.





CHAPTER NINETEEN - SPACEFALL


Rip was never more eloquent. He argued, he begged, and he wheedled.

The _Aquila's_ chief physician listened with polite interest, but he shook
his head. "Lieutenant, you simply are not aware of the close call you've
had. Another two hours without treatment and we might not have been able
to save you."

"I appreciate that," Rip assured him. "But I'm fine now, sir."

"You are not fine. You are anything but fine. We've loaded you with
antibiotics and blood cell regenerator, and we've given you a total
transfusion. You feel fine, but you're not."

The doctor looked at Rip's red hair. "That's a fine thatch of hair you
have. In a week or two it will be gone and you'll have no more hair than
an egg. A well person doesn't lose hair."

The ship's radiation safety officer had put both Rip's and Santos's
dosimeters into his measuring equipment. They had taken over a hundred
roentgens of hard radiation above the tolerance limit. This was the result
of being caught unshielded when the last nuclear charge went off.

"Sir," Rip pleaded, "you can load us with suppressives. It's only a few
days more before we reach Terra. You can keep us going until then. We'll
both turn in for full treatment as soon as we get to the space platform.
But we have to finish the job, can't you see that, sir?"

The doctor shook his head. "You're a fool, even for a Planeteer. Before
you get over this you'll be sicker than you've ever been. You have a month
in bed waiting for you. If I let you go back to the asteroid, I'll only be
delaying the time when you start full treatment."

"But the delay won't hurt if you inject us with suppressives, will it?"
Rip asked quickly. "Don't they keep the sickness checked?"

"Yes, for a maximum of about ten days. Then they no longer have sufficient
effect and you come down with it."

"But it won't take ten days," Rip pointed out. "It will only take a
couple, and it won't hurt us."

MacFife had arrived to hear the last exchange. He nodded sympathetically.
"Doctor, I can appreciate how the lad feels. He started something and he
wants to finish it. If y'can let him, safely, I think ye should."

The doctor shrugged. "I can let him. There's a nine to one chance it will
do him no harm. But the one chance is what I don't like."

"I'll know it if the suppressives start to wear off, won't I?" Rip asked.

"You certainly will. You'll get weaker rapidly."

"How rapidly?"

"Perhaps six hours. Perhaps more."

Rip nodded. "That's what I thought. Doctor, we're less than six hours from
Terra by ship. If the stuff wears off, we can be in the hospital within a
couple of hours. Once we go into a braking ellipse, we can reach a
hospital in less than an hour by snapper-boat."

"Let him go," MacFife said.

The doctor wasn't happy about it, but he had run out of arguments. "All
right, Commander. If you'll assume responsibility for getting him off the
asteroid and into a Terra or space platform hospital in time."

"I'll do that," MacFife assured him. "Now get your hyposprays and fill him
full of that stuff you use. The corporal, too."

"Sergeant," Rip corrected. His first action on getting back to the
asteroid would be to recommend Santos's promotion to Terra base. He
intended to recommend Kemp for corporal, too. He was sure the Planeteers
at Terra would make the promotions.

The two Federation cruisers were still holding course along with the
asteroid, the Connie cruiser between them.

Within an hour, Rip and Santos, both in false good health thanks to
medical magic, were on their way back to the asteroid in a ball-bat boat.

        [Illustration: "Let Him Go Back to the Asteroid, Doctor."]

                "Let Him Go Back to the Asteroid, Doctor."


The remaining time passed quickly. The sun receded. The Planeteers
corrected course. Rip sent in his recommendations for promotions, and
looked over the last nuclear crater to see why the blast had started the
asteroid spinning.

The reason could only be guessed. The blast probably had opened a fault in
the crystal, allowing the explosion to escape partially in the wrong
direction.

Once the course was corrected, Rip calculated the position for the final
nuclear charge. When the asteroid reached the correct position relative to
earth, the charge would not only change its course but slow its speed
somewhat. The asteroid would go around the earth in a series of
ever-tightening ellipses, using Terra's gravity, plus rocket fuel, to slow
it down to the right orbital speed.

When it reached the proper position, tubes of rocket fuel would change the
course again, putting it into an orbit around the earth close to the space
platform. It wasn't practical to take the thorium rock in for a landing.
They would lose control and the asteroid would flame to earth like the
greatest meteor ever to hit the planet.

Putting the asteroid into an orbit around earth was actually the most
delicate part of the whole trip, but Rip wasn't worried. He had the
facilities of Terra base within easy reach by communicator. He dictated
his data and let them do the mathematics on the giant electronic
computers.

He and his men rode the gray planet past the moon, so close they could
almost see the Planeteer Lunar base, circled Terra in a series of
ellipses, and finally blasted the asteroid into its final orbit within
sight of the space platform.

Landing craft and snapper-boats swarmed to meet them and within an hour
after their arrival the Planeteers were surrounded by spacemen, cadets
from the platform, and officers and men wearing Planeteer black.

A cadet approached Rip and looked at him with awe. "Sir, I don't know how
you ever did it!"

And Rip, his eyes on the great curve of earth, answered casually, "There's
one thing every space-chick has to learn if he's going to be a Planeteer.
