cit., p. 381, l. 4, for Richer.

[447] Woepcke found this in a Paris MS. of Radulph of Laon, c. 1100.
[_Propagation_, p. 246.] "Et prima quidem trium spaciorum superductio
unitatis caractere inscribitur, qui chaldeo nomine dicitur igin." See also
Alfred Nagl, "Der arithmetische Tractat des Radulph von Laon"
(_Abhandlungen zur Geschichte der Mathematik_, Vol. V, pp. 85-133), p. 97.

[448] Weissenborn, loc. cit., p. 239. When Olleris (_Oeuvres de Gerbert_,
Paris, 1867, p. cci) says, "C'est a lui et non point aux Arabes, que
l'Europe doit son systeme et ses signes de numeration," he exaggerates,
since the evidence is all against his knowing the place value. Friedlein
emphasizes this in the _Zeitschrift fuer Mathematik und Physik_, Vol. XII
(1867), _Literaturzeitung_, p. 70: "Fuer das _System_ unserer Numeration ist
die _Null_ das wesentlichste Merkmal, und diese kannte Gerbert nicht. Er
selbst schrieb alle Zahlen mit den roemischen Zahlzeichen und man kann ihm
also nicht verdanken, was er selbst nicht kannte."

[449] E.g., Chasles, Buedinger, Gerhardt, and Richer. So Martin (_Recherches
nouvelles_ etc.) believes that Gerbert received them from Boethius or his
followers. See Woepcke, _Propagation_, p. 41.

[450] Buedinger, loc. cit., p. 10. Nevertheless, in Gerbert's time one
Al-Man[s.][=u]r, governing Spain under the name of Hish[=a]m (976-1002),
called from the Orient Al-Be[.g][=a]n[=i] to teach his son, so that
scholars were recognized. [Picavet, p. 36.]

[451] Weissenborn, loc. cit., p. 235.

[452] Ibid., p. 234.

[453] These letters, of the period 983-997, were edited by Havet, loc.
cit., and, less completely, by Olleris, loc. cit. Those touching
mathematical topics were edited by Bubnov, loc. cit., pp. 98-106.

[454] He published it in the _Monumenta Germaniae historica_, "Scriptores,"
Vol. III, and at least three other editions have since appeared, viz. those
by Guadet in 1845, by Poinsignon in 1855, and by Waitz in 1877.

[455] Domino ac beatissimo Patri Gerberto, Remorum archiepiscopo, Richerus
Monchus, Gallorum congressibus in volumine regerendis, imperii tui, pater
sanctissime Gerberte, auctoritas seminarium dedit.

[456] In epistle 17 (Havet collection) he speaks of the "De multiplicatione
et divisione numerorum libellum a Joseph Ispano editum abbas Warnerius" (a
person otherwise unknown). In epistle 25 he says: "De multiplicatione et
divisione numerorum, Joseph Sapiens sententias quasdam edidit."

[457] H. Suter, "Zur Frage ueber den Josephus Sapiens," _Bibliotheca
Mathematica_, Vol. VIII (2), p. 84; Weissenborn, _Einfuehrung_, p. 14; also
his _Gerbert_; M. Steinschneider, in _Bibliotheca Mathematica_, 1893, p.
68. Wallis (_Algebra_, 1685, chap. 14) went over the list of Spanish
Josephs very carefully, but could find nothing save that "Josephus Hispanus
seu Josephus sapiens videtur aut Maurus fuisse aut alius quis in Hispania."

[458] P. Ewald, _Mittheilungen, Neues Archiv d. Gesellschaft fuer aeltere
deutsche Geschichtskunde_, Vol. VIII, 1883, pp. 354-364. One of the
manuscripts is of 976 A.D. and the other of 992 A.D. See also Franz
Steffens, _Lateinische Palaeographie_, Freiburg (Schweiz), 1903, pp.
xxxix-xl. The forms are reproduced in the plate on page 140.

[459] It is entitled _Constantino suo Gerbertus scolasticus_, because it
was addressed to Constantine, a monk of the Abbey of Fleury. The text of
the letter to Constantine, preceding the treatise on the Abacus, is given
in the _Comptes rendus_, Vol. XVI (1843), p. 295. This book seems to have
been written c. 980 A.D. [Bubnov, loc. cit., p. 6.]

[460] "Histoire de l'Arithmetique," _Comptes rendus_, Vol. XVI (1843), pp.
156, 281.

[461] Loc. cit., _Gerberti Opera_ etc.

[462] Friedlein thought it spurious. See _Zeitschrift fuer Mathematik und
Physik_, Vol. XII (1867), Hist.-lit. suppl., p. 74. It was discovered in
the library of the Benedictine monastry of St. Peter, at Salzburg, and was
published by Peter Bernhard Pez in 1721. Doubt was first cast upon it in
the Olleris edition (_Oeuvres de Gerbert_). See Weissenborn, _Gerbert_, pp.
2, 6, 168, and Picavet, p. 81. Hock, Cantor, and Th. Martin place the
composition of the work at c. 996 when Gerbert was in Germany, while
Olleris and Picavet refer it to the period when he was at Rheims.

[463] Picavet, loc. cit., p. 182.

[464] Who wrote after Gerbert became pope, for he uses, in his preface, the
words, "a domino pape Gerberto." He was quite certainly not later than the
eleventh century; we do not have exact information about the time in which
he lived.

[465] Picavet, loc. cit., p. 182. Weissenborn, _Gerbert_, p. 227. In
Olleris, _Liber Abaci_ (of Bernelinus), p. 361.

[466] Richer, in Bubnov, loc. cit., p. 381.

[467] Weissenborn, _Gerbert_, p. 241.

[468] Writers on numismatics are quite uncertain as to their use. See F.
Gnecchi, _Monete Romane_, 2d ed., Milan, 1900, cap. XXXVII. For pictures of
old Greek tesserae of Sarmatia, see S. Ambrosoli, _Monete Greche_, Milan,
1899, p. 202.

[469] Thus Tzwivel's arithmetic of 1507, fol. 2, v., speaks of the ten
figures as "characteres sive numerorum apices a diuo Seuerino Boetio."

[470] Weissenborn uses _sipos_ for 0. It is not given by Bernelinus, and
appears in Radulph of Laon, in the twelfth century. See Guenther's
_Geschichte_, p. 98, n.; Weissenborn, p. 11; Pihan, _Expose_ etc., pp.
xvi-xxii.

In Friedlein's _Boetius_, p. 396, the plate shows that all of the six
important manuscripts from which the illustrations are taken contain the
symbol, while four out of five which give the words use the word _sipos_
for 0. The names appear in a twelfth-century anonymous manuscript in the
Vatican, in a passage beginning

  Ordine primigeno sibi nomen possidet igin.
  Andras ecce locum mox uendicat ipse secundum
  Ormis post numeros incompositus sibi primus.

[Boncompagni _Buttetino_, XV, p. 132.] Turchill (twelfth century) gives the
names Igin, andras, hormis, arbas, quimas, caletis, zenis, temenias,
celentis, saying: "Has autem figuras, ut donnus [dominus] Gvillelmus Rx
testatur, a pytagoricis habemus, nomina uero ab arabibus." (Who the William
R. was is not known. Boncompagni _Bulletino_ XV, p. 136.) Radulph of Laon
(d. 1131) asserted that they were Chaldean (_Propagation_, p. 48 n.). A
discussion of the whole question is also given in E. C. Bayley, loc. cit.
Huet, writing in 1679, asserted that they were of Semitic origin, as did
Nesselmann in spite of his despair over ormis, calctis, and celentis; see
Woepcke, _Propagation_, p. 48. The names were used as late as the fifteenth
century, without the zero, but with the superscript dot for 10's, two dots
for 100's, etc., as among the early Arabs. Gerhardt mentions having seen a
fourteenth or fifteenth century manuscript in the Bibliotheca Amploniana
with the names "Ingnin, andras, armis, arbas, quinas, calctis, zencis,
zemenias, zcelentis," and the statement "Si unum punctum super ingnin
ponitur, X significat.... Si duo puncta super ... figuras superponunter,
fiet decuplim illius quod cum uno puncto significabatur," in
_Monatsberichte der K. P. Akad. d. Wiss._, Berlin, 1867, p. 40.

[471] _A chart of ten numerals in 200 tongues_, by Rev. R. Patrick, London,
1812.

[472] "Numeratio figuralis est cuiusuis numeri per notas, et figuras
numerates descriptio." [Clichtoveus, edition of c. 1507, fol. C ii, v.]
"Aristoteles enim uoces rerum [Greek: sumbola] uocat: id translatum, sonat
notas." [Noviomagus, _De Numeris Libri II_, cap. vi.] "Alphabetum decem
notarum." [Schonerus, notes to Ramus, 1586, p. 3 seq.] Richer says: "novem
numero notas omnem numerum significantes." [Bubnov, loc. cit., p. 381.]

[473] "Il y a dix Characteres, autrement Figures, Notes, ou Elements."
[Peletier, edition of 1607, p. 13.] "Numerorum notas alij figuras, alij
signa, alij characteres uocant." [Glareanus, 1545 edition, f. 9, r.] "Per
figuras (quas zyphras uocant) assignationem, quales sunt hae notulae, 1. 2.
3. 4...." [Noviomagus, _De Numeris Libri II_, cap. vi.] Gemma Frisius also
uses _elementa_ and Cardan uses _literae_. In the first arithmetic by an
American (Greenwood, 1729) the author speaks of "a few Arabian _Charecters_
or Numeral Figures, called _Digits_" (p. 1), and as late as 1790, in the
third edition of J. J. Blassiere's arithmetic (1st ed. 1769), the name
_characters_ is still in use, both for "de Latynsche en de Arabische" (p.
4), as is also the term "Cyfferletters" (p. 6, n.). _Ziffer_, the modern
German form of cipher, was commonly used to designate any of the nine
figures, as by Boeschenstein and Riese, although others, like Koebel, used
it only for the zero. So _zifre_ appears in the arithmetic by Borgo, 1550
ed. In a Munich codex of the twelfth century, attributed to Gerland, they
are called _characters_ only: "Usque ad VIIII. enim porrigitur omnis
numerus et qui supercrescit eisdem designator Karacteribus." [Boncompagni
_Bulletino_, Vol. X. p. 607.]

[474] The title of his work is _Prologus N. Ocreati in Helceph_ (Arabic
_al-qeif_, investigation or memoir) _ad Adelardum Batensem magistrum suum_.
The work was made known by C. Henry, in the _Zeitschrift fuer Mathematik und
Physik_, Vol. XXV, p. 129, and in the _Abhandlungen zur Geschichte der
Mathematik_, Vol. III; Weissenborn, _Gerbert_, p. 188.

[475] The zero is indicated by a vacant column.

[476] Leo Jordan, loc. cit., p. 170. "Chifre en augorisme" is the
expression used, while a century later "giffre en argorisme" and "cyffres
d'augorisme" are similarly used.

[477] _The Works of Geoffrey Chaucer_, edited by W. W. Skeat, Vol. IV,
Oxford, 1894, p. 92.

[478] Loc. cit., Vol. III, pp. 179 and 180.

[479] In Book II, chap, vii, of _The Testament of Love_, printed with
Chaucer's Works, loc. cit., Vol. VII, London, 1897.

[480] _Liber Abacci_, published in Olleris, _Oeuvres de Gerbert_, pp.
357-400.

[481] G. R. Kaye, "The Use of the Abacus in Ancient India," _Journal and
Proceedings of the Asiatic Society of Bengal_, 1908, pp. 293-297.

[482] _Liber Abbaci_, by Leonardo Pisano, loc. cit., p. 1.

[483] Friedlein, "Die Entwickelung des Rechnens mit Columnen," _Zeitschrift
fuer Mathematik und Physik_, Vol. X, p. 247.

[484] The divisor 6 or 16 being increased by the difference 4, to 10 or 20
respectively.

[485] E.g. Cantor, Vol. I, p. 882.

[486] Friedlein, loc. cit.; Friedlein, "Gerbert's Regeln der Division" and
"Das Rechnen mit Columnen vor dem 10. Jahrhundert," _Zeitschrift fuer
Mathematik und Physik_, Vol. IX; Bubnov, loc. cit., pp. 197-245; M.
Chasles, "Histoire de l'arithmetique. Recherches des traces du systeme de
l'abacus, apres que cette methode a pris le nom d'Algorisme.--Preuves qu'a
toutes les epoques, jusq'au XVI^e siecle, on a su que l'arithmetique
vulgaire avait pour origine cette methode ancienne," _Comptes rendus_, Vol.
XVII, pp. 143-154, also "Regles de l'abacus," _Comptes rendus_, Vol. XVI,
pp. 218-246, and "Analyse et explication du traite de Gerbert," _Comptes
rendus_, Vol. XVI, pp. 281-299.

[487] Bubnov, loc. cit., pp. 203-204, "Abbonis abacus."

[488] "Regulae de numerorum abaci rationibus," in Bubnov, loc. cit., pp.
205-225.

[489] P. Treutlein, "Intorno ad alcuni scritti inediti relativi al calcolo
dell' abaco," _Bulletino di bibliografia e di storia delle scienze
matematiche e fisiche_, Vol. X, pp. 589-647.

[490] "Intorno ad uno scritto inedito di Adelhardo di Bath intitolato
'Regulae Abaci,'" B. Boncompagni, in his _Bulletino_, Vol. XIV, pp. 1-134.

[491] Treutlein, loc. cit.; Boncompagni, "Intorno al Tractatus de Abaco di
Gerlando," _Bulletino_, Vol. X, pp. 648-656.

[492] E. Narducci, "Intorno a due trattati inediti d'abaco contenuti in due
codici Vaticani del secolo XII," Boncompagni _Bulletino_, Vol. XV, pp.
111-162.

[493] See Molinier, _Les sources de l'histoire de France_, Vol. II, Paris,
1902, pp. 2, 3.

[494] Cantor, _Geschichte_, Vol. I, p. 762. A. Nagl in the _Abhandlungen
zur Geschichte der Mathematik_, Vol. V, p. 85.

[495] 1030-1117.

[496] _Abhandlungen zur Geschichte der Mathematik_, Vol. V, pp. 85-133. The
work begins "Incipit Liber Radulfi laudunensis de abaco."

[497] _Materialien zur Geschichte der arabischen Zahlzeichen in
Frankreich_, loc. cit.

[498] Who died in 1202.

[499] Cantor, _Geschichte_, Vol. I (3), pp. 800-803; Boncompagni,
_Trattati_, Part II. M. Steinschneider ("Die Mathematik bei den Juden,"
_Bibliotheca Mathematica_, Vol. X (2), p. 79) ingeniously derives another
name by which he is called (Abendeuth) from Ibn Da[=u]d (Son of David). See
also _Abhandlungen_, Vol. III, p. 110.

[500] John is said to have died in 1157.

[501] For it says, "Incipit prologus in libro alghoarismi de practica
arismetrice. Qui editus est a magistro Johanne yspalensi." It is published
in full in the second part of Boncompagni's _Trattati d'aritmetica_.

[502] Possibly, indeed, the meaning of "libro alghoarismi" is not "to
Al-Khow[=a]razm[=i]'s book," but "to a book of algorism." John of Luna says
of it: "Hoc idem est illud etiam quod ... alcorismus dicere videtur."
[_Trattati_, p. 68.]

[503] For a resume, see Cantor, Vol. I (3), pp. 800-803. As to the author,
see Enestroem in the _Bibliotheca Mathematica_, Vol. VI (3), p. 114, and
Vol. IX (3), p. 2.

[504] Born at Cremona (although some have asserted at Carmona, in
Andalusia) in 1114; died at Toledo in 1187. Cantor, loc. cit.; Boncompagni,
_Atti d. R. Accad. d. n. Lincei_, 1851.

[505] See _Abhandlungen zur Geschichte der Mathematik_, Vol. XIV, p. 149;
_Bibliotheca Mathematica_, Vol. IV (3), p. 206. Boncompagni had a
fourteenth-century manuscript of his work, _Gerardi Cremonensis artis
metrice practice_. See also T. L. Heath, _The Thirteen Books of Euclid's
Elements_, 3 vols., Cambridge, 1908, Vol. I, pp. 92-94 ; A. A. Bjoernbo,
"Gerhard von Cremonas Uebersetzung von Alkwarizmis Algebra und von Euklids
Elementen," _Bibliotheca Mathematica_, Vol. VI (3), pp. 239-248.

[506] Wallis, _Algebra_, 1685, p. 12 seq.

[507] Cantor, _Geschichte_, Vol. I (3), p. 906; A. A. Bjoernbo,
"Al-Chw[=a]rizm[=i]'s trigonometriske Tavler," _Festskrift til H. G.
Zeuthen_, Copenhagen, 1909, pp. 1-17.

[508] Heath, loc. cit., pp. 93-96.

[509] M. Steinschneider, _Zeitschrift der deutschen morgenlaendischen
Gesellschaft_, Vol. XXV, 1871, p. 104, and _Zeitschrift fuer Mathematik und
Physik_, Vol. XVI, 1871, pp. 392-393; M. Curtze, _Centralblatt fuer
Bibliothekswesen_, 1899, p. 289; E. Wappler, _Zur Geschichte der deutschen
Algebra im 15. Jahrhundert_, Programm, Zwickau, 1887; L. C. Karpinski,
"Robert of Chester's Translation of the Algebra of Al-Khow[=a]razm[=i],"
_Bibliotheca Mathematica_, Vol. XI (3), p. 125. He is also known as
Robertus Retinensis, or Robert of Reading.

[510] Nagl, A., "Ueber eine Algorismus-Schrift des XII. Jahrhunderts und
ueber die Verbreitung der indisch-arabischen Rechenkunst und Zahlzeichen im
christl. Abendlande," in the _Zeitschrift fuer Mathematik und Physik,
Hist.-lit. Abth._, Vol. XXXIV, p. 129. Curtze, _Abhandlungen zur Geschichte
der Mathematik_, Vol. VIII, pp. 1-27.

[511] See line _a_ in the plate on p. 143.

[512] _Sefer ha-Mispar, Das Buch der Zahl, ein hebraeisch-arithmetisches
Werk des R. Abraham ibn Esra_, Moritz Silberberg, Frankfurt a. M., 1895.

[513] Browning's "Rabbi ben Ezra."

[514] "Darum haben auch die Weisen Indiens all ihre Zahlen durch neun
bezeichnet und Formen fuer die 9 Ziffern gebildet." [_Sefer ha-Mispar_, loc.
cit., p. 2.]

[515] F. Bonaini, "Memoria unica sincrona di Leonardo Fibonacci," Pisa,
1858, republished in 1867, and appearing in the _Giornale Arcadico_, Vol.
CXCVII (N.S. LII); Gaetano Milanesi, _Documento inedito e sconosciuto a
Lionardo Fibonacci_, Roma, 1867; Guglielmini, _Elogio di Lionardo Pisano_,
Bologna, 1812, p. 35; Libri, _Histoire des sciences mathematiques_, Vol.
II, p. 25; D. Martines, _Origine e progressi dell' aritmetica_, Messina,
1865, p. 47; Lucas, in Boncompagni _Bulletino_, Vol. X, pp. 129, 239;
Besagne, ibid., Vol. IX, p. 583; Boncompagni, three works as cited in Chap.
I; G. Enestroem, "Ueber zwei angebliche mathematische Schulen im
christlichen Mittelalter," _Bibliotheca Mathematica_, Vol. VIII (3), pp.
252-262; Boncompagni, "Della vita e delle opere di Leonardo Pisano," loc.
cit.

[516] The date is purely conjectural. See the _Bibliotheca Mathematica_,
Vol. IV (3), p. 215.

[517] An old chronicle relates that in 1063 Pisa fought a great battle with
the Saracens at Palermo, capturing six ships, one being "full of wondrous
treasure," and this was devoted to building the cathedral.

[518] Heyd, loc. cit., Vol. I, p. 149.

[519] Ibid., p. 211.

[520] J. A. Symonds, _Renaissance in Italy. The Age of Despots._ New York,
1883, p. 62.

[521] Symonds, loc. cit., p. 79.

[522] J. A. Froude, _The Science of History_, London, 1864. "Un brevet
d'apothicaire n'empecha pas Dante d'etre le plus grand poete de l'Italie,
et ce fut un petit marchand de Pise qui donna l'algebre aux Chretiens."
[Libri, _Histoire_, Vol. I, p. xvi.]

[523] A document of 1226, found and published in 1858, reads: "Leonardo
bigollo quondam Guilielmi."
