
"The more ignorant the human mind, the more abject was its slavery to
religion. As history progresses toward a more diffuse education of the
masses, the forms, ceremonies and beliefs in religion are continually
changing to suit the advancement of intelligence; and when intelligence
becomes universal, they will be renounced altogether. What is true of
the history of one people will be true of the history of another.
Religions are not necessary to human progress. They are really clogs. My
ancestors had more trouble to extirpate these superstitious ideas from
the mind than they had in getting rid of disease and crime. There were
several reasons for this difficulty. Disease and crime were self-evident
evils, that the narrowest intelligence could perceive; but beliefs in
creeds and superstitions were perversions of judgment, resulting from a
lack of thorough mental training. As soon, however, as education of a
high order became universal, it began to disappear. No mind of
philosophical culture can adhere to such superstitions.

"Many ages the people made idols, and, decking them with rich ornaments,
placed them in magnificent temples specially built for them and the
rites by which they worshipped them. There have existed many variations
of this kind of idolatry that are marked by the progressive stages of
civilization. Some nations of remote antiquity were highly cultured in
art and literature, yet worshipped gods of their own manufacture, or
imaginary gods, for everything. Light and darkness, the seasons, earth,
air, water, all had a separate deity to preside over and control their
special services. They offered sacrifices to these deities as they
desired their co-operation or favor in some enterprise to be undertaken.

"In remote antiquity, we read of a great General about to set out upon
the sea to attack the army of another nation. In order to propitiate the
god of the ocean, he had a fine chariot built to which were harnessed
two beautiful white horses. In the presence of a vast concourse of
people collected to witness the ceremony, he drove them into the sea.
When they sank out of sight it was supposed that the god had accepted
the present, and would show his gratitude for it by favoring winds and
peaceful weather.

"A thousand years afterward history speaks of the occurrence derisively,
as an absurd superstition, and at the same time they believed in and
lauded a more absurd and cruel religion. They worshipped an imaginary
being who had created and possessed absolute control of everything. Some
of the human family it had pleased him to make eminently good, while
others he made eminently bad. For those whom he had created with evil
desires, he prepared a lake of molten fire into which they were to be
cast after death to suffer endless torture for doing what they had been
expressly created to do. Those who had been created good were to be
rewarded for following out their natural inclinations, by occupying a
place near the Deity, where they were to spend eternity in singing
praises to him.

"He could, however, be persuaded by prayer from following his original
intentions. Very earnest prayer had caused him to change his mind, and
send rain when he had previously concluded to visit the country with
drouth.

"Two nations at war with each other, and believing in the same Deity,
would pray for a pestilence to visit their enemy. Death was universally
regarded as a visitation of Providence for some offense committed
against him instead of against the laws of nature.

"Some believed that prayer and donations to the church or priest, could
induce the Deity to take their relatives from the lake of torment and
place them in his own presence. The Deity was prayed to on every
occasion, and for every trivial object. The poor and indolent prayed for
him to send them food and clothes. The sick prayed for health, the
foolish for wisdom, and the revengeful besought the Deity to consign all
their enemies to the burning lake.

"The intelligent and humane began to doubt the necessity of such
dreadful and needless torment for every conceivable misdemeanor, and it
was modified, and eventually dropped altogether. Education finally
rooted out every phase of superstition from the minds of the people, and
now we look back and smile at the massive and magnificent structures
erected to the worship of a Deity who could be coaxed to change his mind
by prayer."

I did not tell the Preceptress that she had been giving me a history of
my own ancestry; but I remarked the resemblance with the joyous hope
that in the future of my own unhappy country lay the possibility of a
civilization so glorious, the ideal heaven of which every sorrowing
heart had dreamed. But always with the desire to believe it had a
spiritual eternity.




CHAPTER IX.


I have described the peculiar ceremony attending the burial of youth in
Mizora. Old age, in some respects, had a similar ceremony, but the
funeral of an aged person differed greatly from what I had witnessed at
the grave of youth. Wauna and I attended the funeral of a very aged
lady. Death in Mizora was the gradual failing of mental and physical
vigor. It came slowly, and unaccompanied with pain. It was received
without regret, and witnessed without tears.

The daughters performed the last labor that the mother required. They
arrayed her body for burial and bore it to the grave. If in that season
of the year, autumn leaves hid the bier, and formed the covering and
pillow of her narrow bed. If not in the fall, full-blown roses and
matured flowers were substituted.

The ceremony was conducted by the eldest daughter, assisted by the
others. No tears were shed; no mourning worn; no sorrowful chanting. A
solemn dirge was sung indicative of decay. A dignified solemnity
befitting the farewell to a useful life was manifest in all the
proceedings; but no demonstrations of sorrow were visible. The mourners
were unveiled, and performed the last services for their mother with
calmness. I was so astonished at the absence of mourning that I asked an
explanation of Wauna.

"Why should we mourn," was the surprising answer, "for what is
inevitable? Death must come, and, in this instance, it came in its
natural way. There is nothing to be regretted or mourned over, as there
was in the drowning of my young friend. Her life was suddenly arrested
while yet in the promise of its fruitfulness. There was cause for grief,
and the expressions and emblems of mourning were proper and appropriate.
But here, mourning would be out of place, for life has fulfilled its
promises. Its work is done, and nature has given the worn-out body rest.
That is all."

That sympathy and regret which the city had expressed for the young
dead was manifested only in decorum and respectful attendance at the
funeral. No one appeared to feel that it was an occasion for mourning.
How strange it all seemed to me, and yet there was a philosophy about it
that I could not help but admire. Only I wished that they believed as I
did, that all of those tender associations would be resumed beyond the
grave. If only they could be convinced. I again broached the subject to
Wauna. I could not relinquish the hope of converting her to my belief.
She was so beautiful, so pure, and I loved her so dearly. I could not
give up my hope of an eternal reunion. I appealed to her sympathy.

"What hope," I asked, "can you offer those whose lives have been only
successive phases of unhappiness? Why should beings be created only to
live a life of suffering, and then die, as many, very many, of my people
do? If they had no hope of a spiritual life, where pain and sorrow are
to be unknown, the burdens of this life could not be borne."

"You have the same consolation," replied Wauna, "as the Preceptress had
in losing her daughter. That daring spirit that cost her her life, was
the pride of her mother. She possessed a promising intellect, yet her
mother accepts her death as one of the sorrowful phases of life, and
bravely tries to subdue its pain. Long ages behind us, as my mother has
told you, the history of all human life was but a succession of woes.
Our own happy state has been evolved by slow degrees out of that
sorrowful past. Human progress is marked by blood and tears, and the
heart's bitterest anguish. We, as a people, have progressed almost
beyond the reach of sorrow, but you are in the midst of it. You must
work for the future, though you cannot be of it."

"I cannot," I declared, "reconcile myself to your belief. I am separated
from my child. To think I am never to see it in this world, nor through
endless ages, would drive me insane with despair. What consolation can
your belief offer _me_?"

"In this life, you may yearn for your child, but after this life you
sleep," answered Wauna, sententiously. "And how sweet that sleep! No
dreams; no waking to work and trial; no striving after perfection; no
planning for the morrow. It is oblivion than which there can be no
happier heaven."

"Would not meeting with those you have loved be happier?" I asked, in
amazement.

"There would be happiness; and there would be work, too."

"But my religion does not believe in work in heaven," I answered.

"Then it has not taken the immutable laws of Nature into consideration,"
said Wauna. "If Nature has prepared a conscious existence for us after
this body decays, she has prepared work for us, you may rest assured. It
might be a grander, nobler work; but it would be work, nevertheless.
Then, how restful, in contrast, is our religion. It is eternal,
undisturbable rest for both body and brain. Besides, as you say
yourself, you cannot be sure of meeting those whom you desire to meet in
that other country. They may be the ones condemned to eternal suffering
for their sins. Think you I could enjoy myself in any surroundings, when
I knew that those who were dear to me in this life, were enduring
torment that could have no end. Give me oblivion rather than such a
heaven.

"Our punishment comes in this world; but it is not so much through sin
as ignorance. The savages lived lives of misery, occasioned by their
lack of intelligence. Humanity must always suffer for the mistakes it
makes. Misery belongs to the ignorant; happiness to the wise. That is
our doctrine of reward and punishment."

"And you believe that my people will one day reject all religions?"

"When they are advanced enough," she answered. "You say you have
scholars among you already, who preach their inconsistencies. What do
you call them?"

"Philosophers," was my reply.

"They are your prophets," said Wauna. "When they break the shackles that
bind you to creeds and dogmas, they will have done much to advance you.
To rely on one's own _will_ power to do right is the only safe road to
morality, and your only heaven."

I left Wauna and sought a secluded spot by the river. I was shocked
beyond measure at her confession. It had the earnestness, and, to me,
the cruelty of conviction. To live without a spiritual future in
anticipation was akin to depravity, to crime and its penalty of prison
life forever. Yet here was a people, noble, exalted beyond my
conceiving, living in the present, and obeying only a duty to posterity.
I recalled a painting I had once seen that always possessed for me a
horrible fascination. In a cave, with his foot upon the corpse of a
youth, sat the crowned and sceptered majesty of Death. The waters of
oblivion encompassed the throne and corpse, which lay with its head and
feet bathed in its waters--for out of the Unknown had life come, and to
the Unknown had it departed. Before me, in vision, swept the mighty
stream of human life from which I had been swept to these strange
shores. All its sufferings, its delusions; its baffled struggles; its
wrongs, came upon me with a sense of spiritual agony in them that
religion--my religion, which was their only consolation--must vanish in
the crucible of Science. And that Science was the magician that was to
purify and exalt the world. To live in the Present; to die in it and
become as the dust; a mere speck, a flash of activity in the far,
limitless expanse of Nature, of Force, of Matter in which a spiritual
ideal had no part. It was horrible to think of. The prejudices of
inherited religious faith, the contracted forces of thought in which I
had been born and reared could not be uprooted or expanded without pain.




CHAPTER X.


I had begun to feel an intense longing to return to my own country, but
it was accompanied by a desire, equally as strong, to carry back to that
woe-burdened land some of the noble lessons and doctrines I had learned
in this. I saw no means of doing it that seemed so available as a
companion,--a being, born and bred in an atmosphere of honor and grandly
humane ideas and actions.

My heart and my judgment turned to Wauna. She was endeared to me by long
and gentle association. She was self-reliant and courageous, and
possessed a strong will. Who, of all my Mizora acquaintances, was so
well adapted to the service I required.

When I broached the subject to her, Wauna expressed herself as really
pleased with the idea; but when we went to the Preceptress, she
acknowledged a strong reluctance to the proposition. She said:

"Wauna can form no conception of the conditions of society in your
country. They are far, very far, behind our own. They will, I fear,
chafe her own nature more than she can improve theirs. Still, if I
thought she could lead your people into a broader intelligence, and
start them on the way upward to enlightenment and real happiness, I
would let her go. The moment, however, that she desires to return she
must be aided to do so."

I pledged myself to abide by any request the Preceptress might make of
me. Wauna's own inclinations greatly influenced her mother, and finally
we obtained her consent. Our preparations were carefully made. The
advanced knowledge of chemistry in Mizora placed many advantages in our
way. Our boat was an ingenious contrivance with a thin glass top that
could be removed and folded away until needed to protect us from the
rigors of the Arctic climate.

I had given an accurate description of the rapids that would oppose us,
and our boat was furnished with a motive power sufficient to drive us
through them at a higher rate of speed than what they moved at. It was
built so as to be easily converted into a sled, and runners were made
that could be readily adjusted. We were provided with food and clothing
prepared expressly for the severe change to and rigors of the Arctic
climate through which we must pass.

I was constantly dreading the terrors of that long ice-bound journey,
but the Preceptress appeared to be little concerned about it. When I
spoke of its severities, she said for us to observe her directions, and
we should not suffer. She asked me if I had ever felt uncomfortable in
any of the air-ship voyages I had taken, and said that the cold of the
upper regions through which I had passed in their country was quite as
intense as any I could meet within a lower atmosphere of my own.

The newspapers had a great deal to say about the departure of the
Preceptress' daughter on so uncertain a mission, and to that strange
land of barbarians which I represented. When the day arrived for our
departure, immense throngs of people from all parts of the country lined
the shore, or looked down upon us from their anchored air-ships.

The last words of farewell had been spoken to my many friends and
benefactors. Wauna had bidden a multitude of associates good-bye, and
clasped her mother's hand, which she held until the boat parted from the
shore. Years have passed since that memorable parting, but the look of
yearning love in that Mizora mother's eyes haunts me still. Long and
vainly has she watched for a boat's prow to cleave that amber mist and
bear to her arms that vision of beauty and tender love I took away from
her. My heart saddens at the thought of her grief and long, long waiting
that only death will end.

We pointed the boat's prow toward the wide mysterious circle of amber
mists, and then turned our eyes for a last look at Mizora. Wauna stood
silent and calm, earnestly gazing into the eyes of her mother, until the
shore and the multitude of fair faces faded like a vision of heaven from
our views.

"O beautiful Mizora!" cried the voice of my heart. "Shall I ever again
see a land so fair, where natures so noble and aims so lofty have their
abiding place? Memory will return to you though my feet may never again
tread your delightful shores. Farewell, sweet ideal land of my Soul, of
Humanity, farewell!"

My thoughts turned to that other world from which I had journeyed so
long. Would the time ever come when it, too, would be a land of
