faster unless Stanton was at the controls, than the Nipe. But the Nipe
would be able to tell that the thing was a robot, and he would simply
destroy it with one of his weapons. A remote-control robot could never
get close enough to the Nipe to do any good.

"We do not know positively," Dr. Yoritomo had said, "whether he would
recognize it as a robot or not, but his instruments would show the metal
easily enough, and his eyes would be able to tell him that the machine
was not covered with human skin. The rats are small enough so that they
can be made mostly of plastic, and they are covered with real rat hides.
In addition, our friend, the Nipe, is used to seeing them around. But a
human-sized robot? Ah, no. Never."

So Stanton had to go in person, walking southward along the tracks,
through the miles of blackness that led to the nest of the Nipe.

Overhead was Government City.

He had looked out upon those streets only the night before, and he knew
that only a short distance away there was an entirely different world.

Somewhere up there, his brother was waiting, after having run the gamut
of publicity. He was a celebrity. "Stanley Martin, the greatest
detective in the Solar System," they'd called him. Fine stuff, that.
Stanton wondered what the asteroids were like. What would it be like to
live out in space, where a man still had plenty of space to move around
in and could fashion his life to suit himself? Maybe there would be a
place in the asteroids for a hopped-up superman.

Or maybe there would only be a place here, beneath the streets of
Government City, for a dead superman.

_Not if I can help it_, Stanton thought with a grim smile.

The walking seemed to take forever in one way, but, in another way,
Stanton didn't mind it. He had a lot to think over. Seeing his brother's
image on the TV had been unnerving yesterday, but today he felt as
though everything had been all right all along.

His memory was still a long way from being complete, and it probably
always would be, he thought. He could still scarcely recall any real
memories of a boy named Martin Stanton, but--and he smiled a little at
the thought--he knew more about him than his brother did, even so.

It made very little difference now. That Martin Stanton was gone. In
effect, he had been demolished--what little there had been of him--and a
new structure had been built on the old foundation.

And yet, it was highly probable that the new structure was very like
that that would have developed naturally if the accident so early in
Martin Stanton's life had never occurred.

Stanton kept walking. There was a timeless feeling about his march
through the depths of the ground, as though every step through the
blackness was exactly like every other step, and it was only the same
step over and over again.

He skirted a pile of rubble on his right. There had been a station here,
once; the street above had caved in and filled it with brick, concrete,
cobblestones, and steel scrap, and then it had been sealed over when
Government City was built.

A part of one wall was still unbroken, though. A sign built of tile said
125TH STREET, he knew, although it was hard to make it out in the dim
glow. He kept on walking, ignoring the rats that scampered over the
rubble.

A mile or so farther on, he whispered: "Barbell to Barhop. How's
everything going?"

"Barhop to Barbell," came the answer. "No sign of any activity from
Target. So far, none of the alarms have been triggered."

"What's he doing?" Stanton whispered. It seemed only right to keep his
voice low, although he was fairly certain that his voice would not carry
to the Nipe, even through these echoing tunnels. He was still miles
away.

"He's still sitting motionless," said Captain Greer. "Thinking, I
suppose. Or sleeping. It's hard to tell."

"All right. Let me know if he starts moving, will you?"

"Will do."

_Poor unsuspecting beastie_, Stanton thought. _Ten long years of hard
work, of feeling secure in his little nest, and within a very short time
he's going to get the shock of his life._

Or maybe not. There was no way of knowing what kind of shocks the Nipe
had taken in the course of his life, Stanton thought. There was no way
of knowing whether the Nipe was even capable of feeling anything like
shock, as a matter of fact.

It was odd, he thought, that he should feel a strong kinship toward both
the Nipe and his brother in such similar ways. He had never met the
Nipe, and his brother was only a dim picture in his old memories, but
they were both very well known to him. Certainly they were better known
to him than he was to them.

And yet, seeing his brother's face on the TV screen, hearing his voice,
watching the way he moved about, watching the changing expressions on
his face, had been a tremendously moving experience. Not until that
moment, he thought, had he really known himself.

Meeting him face to face would be much easier now, but it would still be
a scene highly charged with emotional tension.

His foot kicked something that rattled and rolled away from him. He
stopped, freezing in his tracks, looking downward, trying to pierce the
dully glowing gloom. The thing he had kicked was a human skull.

He relaxed and began walking again.

There were plenty of human bones down here. Mannheim had told him that
the tunnels had been used as air-raid shelters when the sun bomb had hit
the island during the Holocaust. Men, women, and children by the
thousands had crowded underground after the warning had come--and they
had died by the thousands when the bright, hot, deadly gases had roared
down the ventilators and stairwells.

There were even caches of canned goods down here, some of them still
perfectly sealed after all this time. The hordes of rats, wiser than
they knew, had chewed at them, exposing the steel beneath the thin tin
plate. And, after a while, oxidation would weaken the can to the point
where some lucky rat could gnaw through the rusty spot and find himself
a meal. Then he would move the empty can aside and begin gnawing at the
next in line. He couldn't get through the steel, but he would scratch
the tin off, and the cycle would begin again. Later, another rat would
find that can weak enough to bite through. It kept the rats fed almost
as well as an automatic machine might have.

The tunnel before him was an endless monochromatic world that was both
artificial and natural. Here was a neatly squared-off mosaic of ceramic
tile that was obviously man-made; over there, on a little hillock of
earth, squatted a colony of fat mushrooms. In several places he had to
skirt little pools of dark, stagnant water; twice he had to climb over
long heaps of crumbling rust that had once been trains of subway cars.

He kept moving--one man, alone, walking through the dark toward a
superhuman monster that had terrorized Earth for a decade.

A drug that would knock out the Nipe would have been very useful, but to
synthesize such a drug would have required a greater knowledge of the
biochemical processes of the Nipe than any human scientist had. The same
applied to anesthetic gases, or electric shock, or supersonics. There
was no way of determining how much would be required to knock him out or
how much would be required to kill. There were no easy answers.

The only answer was a man called Stanton.

    _Boots! Boots! Boots! Boots! Marchin' up and down again!
      And there's no discharge in the war!_

Stanton hummed the song in his mind. It seemed that he had been walking
forever through the Kingdom of Hades, while around him twittered the
ghosts of the dead.

_Poor shades_, he thought, entertaining the fancy for a brief moment,
_will I be one of you in a short while?_

There was no answer, though the squeaking continued. The sound of his
feet and the snarling chirping of the rats were the only sounds in the
world.

"Barhop to Barbell," said a voice suddenly, sounding very loud in his
ear, "this is where you have to make your change to the other tunnel."

"Barbell to Barhop. I know. I've been watching the markers."

"Just precaution, Barbell," Captain Greer said. "How do you feel?"

"I'd like to rest for a few minutes, frankly," Stanton said.

"Feeling tired?" There was just the barest tinge of alarm in the
captain's voice.

"No," Stanton said. "I just want to sit down and rest my feet for a few
minutes."

There was a pause. Then the captain's voice came again. "Okay, go ahead
and relax, Barbell. Take ten. But be ready to move fast if I yell. These
alarm systems are tricky things to hold. And don't start moving again
without letting me know."

"Right."

Stanton lifted himself out of the trench in which the tunnel ran and sat
on the edge of the boarding platform. It wasn't far now. There was only
one more of the old entranceways between himself and the Nipe. This
particular one was a transfer point, where two different parts of the
tunnel network met and it was possible to transfer from one to another.
It required going up a couple of flights of stairs to the next higher
level, and changing to another tunnel going southward.

There were other ways. This tunnel, the one he had been following for so
long, branched a little farther south. If he took one branch, he would
end up to the east of the Nipe; the other would bring him to a point on
the west. From either, he would have to travel laterally through
another set of tunnels, but neither route offered anything that this
one didn't have, and the most direct route would be best.

"Barbell to Barhop," he whispered, "I'm ready to go."

"It's only been five minutes."

"I know. But I rest pretty fast, too. Let's move out."

There were a few seconds of silence, then Captain Greer said: "All set,
Barbell. Move out."

Stanton got to his feet and walked toward the stairway that led up to
the next level. Minutes later, he was in another tunnel exactly similar
to the first one, walking southward again.

But now he was more careful. He watched the ground carefully, making
sure that he didn't step on anything that would snap or rattle. The Nipe
was still quite a distance away--three-quarters of a mile, or so--but
taking the chance that the beast couldn't hear him might be deadly
dangerous. The robot rat that he was following led him along a path that
had been unobtrusively cleared of rubble by the robot rats over a period
of months, but the robots weren't the only rats in the place. He kept
his eyes on the path.

A while later, the voice in his ear said: "A hundred yards to go,
Barbell."

"I know," Stanton whispered. "He hasn't moved?"

"No. I'll yell if he does. You don't need to talk any more. His ears
might pick up even that whisper."

_He hasn't moved_, Stanton thought. _Not for all this time. Not since I
came down into his private domain. All this time, he has been sitting
motionless--waiting. Wouldn't it be funny if he were dead? If his heart
had stopped, or something. Wouldn't that be absolutely hilarious?
Wouldn't that be a big joke on everybody? Especially me._

Ahead was the large area that had been one of the major junction points
of the tunnel network. This was the area that the Nipe had taken over to
build his home-away-from-home. Here were his workshops, his
laboratories, his storerooms.

And somewhere here was the Nipe.

He came out of the tunnel into another passenger-loading area. Just to
his left was another short stairway that led up to a slightly higher
level. He moved slowly and quietly. He didn't want to fight down here on
the tracks, and he didn't want to be caught just yet.

Cautiously he lifted himself to the platform where long-gone passengers
had once waited for long-gone trains.

The quality of the illumination at the head of the stairs was different
from that which he had been used to for the past three hours. He lifted
off the infra-red goggles. Enough light spilled over from the Nipe's
lair to give him illumination to see by. Silently, he put the goggles on
the floor of the platform. He wouldn't need them again.

Then, step by step, he walked up the concrete stairway.

At the head of the stairs, he paused to get his bearings.

The illumination was not bright, but it was enough to--

"Barbell! He's heard you! Watch it!"

But Stanton had already heard the movement of the Nipe. He jerked off
the communicator and threw it down the stairs behind him. He wanted no
encumbrances now!

He ran quickly out into the center of the big underground room, away
from the open stairwell.

And then, as fast as any express train that had ever moved through these
subterranean ways, the Nipe came around a corner thirty feet away, his
four violet eyes gleaming, his limbs rippling beneath his centipede-like
body.

From fifteen feet away, he launched himself through the air, his
outstretched hands ready to kill.

But Stanton's marvelous neuromuscular system was already in action.

At this stage of the game, it would be utter suicide to let the Nipe
get in close. Stanton couldn't fend off eight grasping hands with his
own two. He leaped to one side, and the Nipe got his first surprise in
ten years when Stanton's fist slammed against the side of his snouted
head, knocking him in the direction opposite that in which Stanton had
moved.

The Nipe landed, turned, and charged back toward the man. This time he
reared up, using his two rearmost pairs of limbs for locomotion, while
the two forward pairs were held out, ready to kill.

He got surprise number two when Stanton's fist landed on the tip of his
rather sensitive snout, rocking his head back. His own hands met nothing
but air, and by the time he had recovered from the blow, Stanton was
well back, out of the way.

_He's so small!_ Stanton thought wonderingly. Even when he reared up,
the Nipe's head was only three feet above the concrete floor.

The Nipe came in again--more cautiously this time.

Stanton punched again with a straight right. The Nipe moved his head
aside, and Stanton's knuckles merely grazed the side of the alien's
head, just below the lower right eye.

At the same time, one of the Nipe's hands swung in in a chopping right
hook that took Stanton just below the ribs. Stanton leaped back with a
gasp of pain.

The Nipe didn't use fists. He used his open hand, fingers together, like
a judo fighter.

The Nipe came forward, and, as Stanton danced back, the Nipe made a grab
for his ankle, almost catching it. There were too many hands to watch!

Stanton had two advantages: weight and reach. His arms were almost half
again as long as the Nipe's.

Against that, the Nipe had all those hands; and with his low center of
gravity and four-footed stance, it would be hard to knock him down. On
the other hand, if Stanton lost his footing, the fight would be over
fast.

Stanton lunged suddenly forward and planted a left in the Nipe's right
upper eye, then followed it with a right uppercut to the Nipe's jaw as
his head snapped back. The Nipe's four hands cut inward from the sides
like sword blades, but they found no target.

Backing away, Stanton realized he had another advantage. The Nipe
couldn't throw a straight jab! His shoulders--if that's what they should
be called--were narrow and the upper arm bones weren't articulated
properly for such a blow. The alien could throw a mean hook, but he had
to get in close to deliver it.

On the other side of the coin was the fact that the Nipe knew plenty
about human anatomy--from the bones out. Stanton's knowledge of Nipe
anatomy was almost totally superficial.

He wished he knew if and where the Nipe had a solar plexus. He would
like to punch something soft for a change.

Instead, he tried for another eye. He danced in, jabbed, and danced out.
The Nipe had ducked again, taking the blow on the side of his head.

Then the Nipe came in low, at an angle, trying for the groin. For his
troubles, he got a knee in the jaw that staggered him badly. One
grasping hand clutched at Stanton's right thigh and grabbed hard.
