relieve. When gouty patients become much debilitated by the progress of the
disease, they are liable to dropsy of the chest, which they suppose a fit
of the gout would relieve. But in all these cases the attempt to procure a
paroxysm of gout by wine, or aromatics, or volatiles, or blisters, or
mineral waters, seldom succeeds; and the patients are obliged to apply to
other methods of relief adapted to their particular cases. In the two
former situations small repeated doses of calomel, or mercurial unction on
the region of the liver may succeed, by giving new activity to the vessels
of the liver, either to secrete or to absorb their adapted fluids, and thus
to remove the cause of the gout, rather than to promote a fit of it. In the
last case the tincture of digitalis, and afterwards the class of sorbentia,
must be applied to.

M. M. In young strong patients the gout should be cured by venesection and
cathartics and diluents, with poultices externally. But it has a natural
crisis by producing calcareous matter on the inflamed membrane, and
therefore in old enfeebled people it is safest to wait for this crisis,
attending to the natural evacuations and the degree of fever; and in young
ones, where it is not attended with much fever, it is customary and popular
not to bleed, but only to keep the body open with aloes, to use gentle
sudorifics, as neutral salts, and to give the bark at the decline of the
fit; which is particularly useful where the patient is much debilitated.
See Arthritis ventriculi, Class I. 2. 4. 6. and Sect. XXV. 17.

When there is not much fever, and the patient is debilitated with age, or
the continuance of the disease, a moderate opiate, as twenty drops of
tincture of opium, or one grain of solid opium, may be taken every night
with advantage. Externally a paste made with double the quantity of yeast
is a good poultice; and booterkins made with oiled silk, as they confine
the perspirable matter, keep the part moist and supple, and thence relieve
the pain like poultices.

The only safe way of moderating the disease is by an uniform and equal
diminution, or a total abstinence from fermented liquors, with the cautions
directed in Sect. XII. 7. 8. The continued use of strong bitters, as of
Portland's powder, or bark, has been frequently injurious, as spoken of in
the Materia Medica, Art. IV. 2. 11.

One of my acquaintance, who was much afflicted with the gout, abstained for
about half a year from beer and wine; and not having resolution to persist,
returned to his former habits of potation in less quantity; and observed
that he was then for one winter stronger and freer from the gout than
usual. This however did not long continue, as the disease afterwards
returned with its usual or increased violence. This I think is a
circumstance not unlikely to occur, as opium has a greater effect after its
use has been a while intermitted; and the debility or torpor, which is the
cause of gout, is thus for a few months prevented by the greater
irritability of the system, acquired during the lessened use of fermented
liquor.

For the same reason an ounce of spirituous tincture of guaiacum, or of
bark, is said to have for some time prevented returns of the gout; which
has afterwards, like all other great stimuli when long continued, been
succeeded by greater debility, and destroyed the patient. This seems to
have been exemplified in the case of the ingenious Dr. Bown, see Preface to
his Elementa Medicinae; he found temporary relief from the stimulus of
wine, regardless of its future effects.

16. _Rheumatismus._ Acute rheumatism. There is reason to suspect, that
rheumatic inflammations, like the gouty ones, are not a primary disease;
but that they are the consequence of a translation of morbid action from
one part of the system to another. This idea is countenanced by the
frequent change of place of rheumatic-like gouty inflammations, and from
their attacking two similar parts at the same time, as both ankles and both
wrists, and these attacks being in succession to each other. Whereas it is
not probable that both feet or both hands should at the same time be
equally exposed to any external cause of the disease, as to cold or
moisture; and less so that these should occur in succession. Lastly, from
the inflammatory diathesis in this disease being more difficult to subdue,
and more dangerous in event, than other common inflammations, especially to
pregnant women, and in weak constitutions.

From this idea of the rheumatism being not a primary disease, like the
gout, but a transferred morbid action owing to the previous torpor of some
other part of the system, we perceive why it attacks weak people with
greater pertinacity than strong ones; resisting or recurring again and
again after frequent evacuations, in a manner very different from primary
inflammations; because the cause is not removed, which is at a distance
from the seat of the inflammation.

This also accounts for rheumatic inflammations so very rarely terminating
in suppuration, because like the gout the original cause is not in the
inflamed part, and therefore does not continue to act after the
inflammation commences. Instead of suppuration in this disease, as well as
in the gout, a quantity of mucus or coagulable lymph is formed on the
inflamed membrane; which in the gout changes into chalkstones, and in the
rheumatism is either reabsorbed, or lies on the membrane, producing pains
on motion long after the termination of the inflammation, which pains are
called chronic rheumatism. The membranes, which have thus been once or
repeatedly inflamed, become less mobile, or less liable to be affected by
sympathy, as appears by the gout affecting new parts, when the joints of
the foot have been frequently inflamed by it; hence as the cause of the
inflammation does not exist in the inflamed part, and as this part becomes
less liable to future attacks, it seldom suppurates.

Secondly, when rheumatism affects the muscles of the chest, it produces
symptoms similar to pleurisy, but are distinguished from that by the
patient having previously suffered rheumatic affections in other parts, and
by the pertinacity or continuance of the inflammatory state of the patient,
this should be termed pleurodyne rheumatica.

Thirdly, when rheumatic inflammation affects the bowels, it produces a
disease very different from enteritis, or common inflammation of the
bowels, and should be termed enteralgia rheumatica. The pain is less than
in enteritis, and the disease of longer continuance, with harder pulse, and
the blood equally sizy. It is attended with frequent dejections, with much
mucus, and previous griping pains, but without vomiting; and differs
perhaps from dysentery from its not being attended with bloody stools, and
not being infectious.

Fourthly, there is another kind of rheumatism attended with debility, which
suppurates, and should be termed rheumatismus suppurans. It is generally
believed to be the gout, till suppuration takes place on the swelled joint;
and, as the patient sinks, there are sloughs formed over the whole mouth;
and he seems to be destroyed by inflammation or gangrene of the mucous
membranes. I have twice seen this disease in patients about sixty. Some
other diseases are erroneously called rheumatic, as hemicrania, and
odontalgia. See Sect. XXVI. 3.

M.M. In the three former kinds venesection repeatedly. Cathartics.
Antimonials. Diluents. Neutral salts. Oil. Warm bath. Afterwards the bark.
Opium with or without ipecacuanha; but not till the patient is considerably
weakened. Sweats forced early in the disease do injury. Opium given early
in the disease prolongs it. In the last kind, gentle stimulants, as wine
and water, mucilage, sorbentia.

The following is a case of suppurative rheumatism. Mr. F----, about sixty,
was supposed to have the gout in his hand, which however suppurated, and it
was then called the suppurative rheumatism. He had lived rather
intemperately in respect to wine, and was now afflicted with a tendency to
inflammation of the mucous membranes. As he lay on the bed half resupine,
propped up with pillows, and also slept in that posture, his lower jaw
dropped by its own weight, when the voluntary power of the muscles was
suspended. The mucus of his mouth and throat became quite dry, and at
length was succeeded with sloughs; this was a most distressing circumstance
to him, and was in vain endeavoured to be relieved by supporting his jaw by
slender steel springs fixed to his night-cap, and by springs of elastic
gum. The sloughs spread and seemed to accelerate his death. See Class I. 1.
3. 2.

17. _Erysipelas._ The erysipelas differs from the zona ignea, and other
species of herpes, in its being attended with fever, which is sometimes of
the sensitive irritated or inflammatory kind, with strong and full pulse;
and at other times with weak pulse and great inirritability, as when it
precedes or attends mortifications. See Class II. 1. 3. 2.

Like the zona ignea above described, it seems to be a secondary disease,
having for its primary part the torpor or inflammation of some internal or
distant membrane, as appears from its so frequently attending wounds;
sometimes spreading from issues over the whole limb, or back, by sympathy
with a tendon or membrane, which is stimulated by the pease in them. In its
more violent degree I suppose that it sympathizes with some extensive
internal membranes, as of the liver, stomach, or brain. Another reason,
which countenances this idea, is, that the inflammation gradually changes
its situation, one part healing as another inflames; as happens in respect
to more distant parts in gout and rheumatism; and which seems to shew, that
the cause of the disease is not in the same place with the inflammation.
And thirdly, because the erysipelas of the face and head is liable to
affect the membranes of the brain; which were probably in these cases the
original or primary seat of the disease; and lastly, because the fits of
erysipelas, like those of the gout, are liable to return at certain annual
or monthly periods, as further treated of in Class II. 1. 3. 2.

Many cases of erysipelas from wounds or bruises are related in Default's
Surgical Journal, Vol. II. in which poultices are said to do great injury,
as well as oily or fatty applications. Saturnine solutions were sometimes
used with advantage. A grain of emetic tartar given to clear the stomach
and bowels, is said to be of great service.

18. _Testium tumor in gonorrhoea._ Mr. Hunter in his Treatise on the
Venereal Disease observes, that the tumor of the testes in gonorrhoea
arises from their sympathy with the inflammation of the urethra; and that
they are not similar to the actions arising from the application of
venereal matter, whether by absorption or otherwise; as they seldom or
never suppurate; and when suppuration happens, the matter produced is not
venereal. Treatise on Venereal Disease, p. 53.

19. _Testium tumor in parotidite._ The sympathy between some parts about
the throat and the genitals has been treated of in Class IV. 1. 2. 7. The
swelling of the testes, when that of the parotis subsides, seems to arise
from the association of successive action; as the tension of the penis in
hydrophobia appears to arise from the previous synchronous associations of
the sensitive motions of these parts; but the manner of the production of
both these associations is yet very obscure. In women a swelling of the
breasts often succeeds the decline of the mumps by another wonderful
sympathy. See Class IV. 1. 2. 7. and I. 1. 2. 15. In many persons a
delirium succeeds the swelling of the parotis, or the subsequent ones of
the testes or breasts; which is sometimes fatal, and seems to arise from a
sympathy of successive action, and not of synchronous action, of the
membranes of the brain with those of the parotide glands. Sometimes a
stupor comes on instead of this delirium, which is relieved by fomenting
the shaved head for an hour or two. See Class II. 1. 3. 4.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORDO I.

_Increased Associate Motions._

GENUS III.

_Catenated with Voluntary Motions_

SPECIES.

1. _Deglutitio invita._ When any one is told not to swallow his saliva, and
that especially if his throat be a little sore, he finds a necessity of
immediately swallowing it; and this the more certainly, the more he
voluntarily endeavours not to do so.

In this case the voluntary power exerted by our attention to the pharinx
renders it more sensible to irritation, and therefore occasions it to be
more frequently induced to swallow the saliva. Here the irritation induces
a volition to swallow it, which is more powerful than the desire not to
swallow it. See XXIV. 1. 7. So in reverie, when the voluntary power was
exerted on any of the senses, as of sight or taste, the objects of those
senses became perceived; but not otherwise. Sect. XIX. 6. This is a
troublesome symptom in some sore throats.

M. M. Mucilage, as sugar and gum arabic. Warm water held in the mouth
frequently, as a fomentation to the inflamed throat.

2. _Nictitatio invita._ Involuntary winking with the eye-lids, and
twitchings of the face, are originally induced by an endeavour to relieve
some disagreeable sensations about inflamed eyes, as the dazzling of light;
and afterwards these motions become catenated with other motions or
sensations, so as not to be governed by the will. Here the irritation first
produces a volition to wink, which by habit becomes stronger than the
anti-volition not to wink.

This subject is rendered difficult from the common acceptation of the word,
volition, including previous deliberation, as well as the voluntary
exertion, which succeeds it. In the volitions here spoken of there is no
time for deliberation or choice of objects, but the voluntary act
immediately succeeds the sensation which excites it.

M. M. Cover the affected parts with a sticking plaster or a blister. Pass a
fine needle and thread through a part of the skin over the muscle, which
moves, and attach the other end of the thread by a sticking plaster to a
distant part. An issue behind the ear. To practise daily by a looking-glass
to stop the motions with the hand. See the cure of a case of the leaping of
a muscle of the arm, Sect. XVII. 1. 8. See Convulsio debilis, Class III. 1.
1. 5.

3. _Risus invitus._ Involuntary laughter. When the pleasure arising from
new combinations of words and ideas, as in puns; or of other circumstances,
which are so trivial, as to induce no voluntary exertion to compare or
consider their present importance or their future consequence; the pleasure
is liable to rise into pain; that is, the ideas or sensual motions become
exerted too violently for want of some antithetistic ideas; in the same
manner as those muscles, which have weak antagonists, as those of the calf
of the leg, are liable to fall into cramp or painful contraction. In this
situation a scream is begun to relieve this pain of ideas too violently
exerted, which is stopped again soon, as explained in Sect. XXXIV. 1. 4.
and Class III. 1. 1. 4. and IV. 2. 3. 3.

The pain, into which this pleasure rises, which would excite the scream of
laughter, has been felt forcibly by every one; when they have been under
such circumstances, as have induced them to restrain it by a
counter-volition; till at length the increased associate motions produce so
much pain as to overcome the counter-volition, and the patient bursts out
into indecent laughter, contrary to his will in the common acceptation of
that word.

4. _Lusus digitorum invitus._ An awkward playing with the fingers in
speaking in public. These habits are began through bashfulness, and seem
rather at first designed to engage the attention in part, and thus prevent
the disagreeable ideas of mauvaise hont; as timorous boys whistle, when
they are obliged to walk in the dark; and as it is sometimes necessary to
employ raw soldiers in perpetual manoeuvres, as they advance to the first
charge.

5. _Unguium morsiuncula invita._ Biting the nails is a depraved habit
arising from similar causes as those of the last article.

M. M. Dip the fingers in solution of aloes.

6. _Vigilia invita._ Watchfulness, where the person wishes, and endeavours
to fall asleep, properly belongs to this place, as the wish or volition to
sleep prevents the desired effect; because sleep consists in an abolition
of volition. See Class III. 1. 2. 3.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORDO I.

_Increased Associate Motions._

GENUS IV.

_Catenated with External Influences._

SPECIES.

1. _Vita ovi._ Life of an egg. The eggs of fowls were shewn by Mr. J.
Hunter to resist the freezing process in their living state more
powerfully, than when they were killed by having the yolk and white shook
together. Philos. Trans. It may be asked, does the heat during the
incubation of eggs act as a stimulus exciting the living principle into
activity? Or does it act simply as a causa sine qua non, as an influence,
which penetrating the mass, removes the particles of it to a greater
distance from each other, so as to allow their movement over each other, in
the same manner as heat is conceived to produce the fluidity of water; not
by stimulus, but by its penetrating influence? Or may elementary heat in
its uncombined state be supposed to act only as an influence necessary to
life in its natural quantity; whence torpor and death follows the eduction
of it from the body; but in its increased state above what is natural, or
usual, that it acts as a stimulus; which we have a sense to perceive; and
which excites many parts of the system into unnatural action? See Class IV.
1. 1. C.

2. _Vita hiemi-dormientium._ The torpor of insects, and birds, and
quadrupeds, during the cold season, has been called sleep; but I suppose it
must differ very much from that state of animal life, since not only all
voluntary power is suspended, but sensation and vascular motion has ceased,
and can only be restored by the influence of heat. There have been related
instances of snails, which have recovered life and motion on being put into
water after having experienced many years of torpidity, or apparent death,
in the cabinets of the curious. Here the water as well as the heat are
required not only as a stimulus, but as a causa sine qua non of fluidity
and motion, and consequent life.

3. _Pullulatio arborum._ The annual revivescence of the buds of trees seems
not only to be owing to the influence of the returning warmth of the
spring, but also to be catenated with solar gravitation; because seeds and
roots and buds, which are analogous to the eggs of animals, put forth their
shoots by a less quantity of heat in spring, than they had undergone in the
latter part of autumn, which may however be ascribed to their previous
torpid state, and consequent accumulation of sensorial power, or
irritability; as explained in Botanic Garden, Part II. Cant. I. l. 322.
note. Other circumstances, which countenance the idea, that vegetation is
affected by solar gravitation, as well as by heat, may be observed in the
ripening of the seeds of plants both in those countries where the summers
are short, and in those where they are long. And by some flowers closing
their bells at noon, or soon after; and hence seem to sleep rather at solar
diurnal periods, than from the influence of cold, or the deficiency of
light.

4. _Orgasmatis venerei periodus._ The venereal orgasm of birds and
quadrupeds commences or returns about the vernal or autumnal equinoxes, and
thence seems in respect to their great periods to be governed by solar
influence. But if this orgasm be disappointed of its object, it is said to
recur at about monthly periods, as observed in mares and bitches in this
respect resembling the female catamenia. See Sect. XXXVI. 2. 3. and Sect.
XVI. 13.

5. _Brachii concussio electrica._ The movement of the arm, even of a
paralytic patient, when an electric shock is passed through it, is owing to
the stimulus of the excess of electricity. When a piece of zinc and silver,
each about the size of a crown-piece, are placed one under the upper lip,
and the other on the tongue, so as the outer edges may be brought into
contact, there is an appearance of light in the eyes, as often as the outer
edges of these metals are brought into contact or separated; which is
another instance of the stimulus of the passage of electric shocks through
the fibres of the organs of sense, as well as through the muscular fibres.
See Sect. XII. 1. 1. and first addit. note to Vol. I. of this work. But in
its natural state electricity seems only to act as an influence on animal
and vegetable bodies; of the salutary or injurious effects of which we have
yet no precise knowledge.

Yet if regular journals were kept of the variations of atmospheric
electricity, it is probable some discoveries of its influence on our system
might in time be discovered. For this purpose a machine on the principle of
Mr. Bennet's electric doubler might be applied to the pendulum of a clock,
so as to manifest, and even to record the daily or hourly variations of
aerial electricity. Which has already been executed, and applied to the
pendulum of a Dutch wooden clock, by Mr. Bennet, curate of Wirksworth in
Derbyshire.

Besides the variations of the degree or kind of atmospheric electricity,
some animals, and some men, seem to possess a greater power of accumulating
this fluid in themselves than others. Of which a famous history of a
Russian prince was lately published; who, during the clear and severe
frosts of that country, could not move himself in bed without luminous
corruscations. Such may have been the case of those people, who have been
related to have taken fire spontaneously, and to have been reduced to
ashes. The electric concussion from the gymnotus electricus, and torpedo,
are other instances of the power of the animal system to accumulate
electricity, as in these it is used as a weapon of defence, or for the
purpose of taking their prey.

Some have believed that the accumulation or passage of the magnetic fluid
might affect the animal system, and have asserted that the application of a
large magnet to an aching tooth has quickly effected a cure. If this
experiment is again tried in odontalgia, or hemicrania, the painful
membrane of the tooth or head should be included between the south and
north poles of a horse-shoe magnet, or between the contrary poles of two
different magnets, that the magnetism may be accumulated on the torpid
part.

6. _Oxygenatio sanguinis._ The variation of the quantity of oxygen gas
existing in the atmosphere must affect all breathing animals; in its excess
this too must be esteemed a stimulus; but in its natural quantity would
seem to act as an influence, or cause, without which, animal life cannot
exist even a minute. It is hoped that Dr. Beddoes's plan for a pneumatic
infirmary, for the purpose of putting this and various other airs to the
test of experiment, will meet with public encouragement, and render
consumption, asthma, cancer, and many diseases conquerable, which at
present prey with unremitted devastation on all orders and ages of mankind.

7. _Humectatio corporis._ Water, and probably the vapour of water dissolved
or diffused in the atmosphere, unites by mechanical attraction with the
unorganized cuticle, and softens and enlarges it; as may be seen in the
loose and wrinkled skin of the hands of washerwomen; the same probably
occurs to the mucous membrane of the lungs in moist weather; and by
thickening it increases the difficulty of respiration of some people, who
are said to be asthmatical. So far water may be said to act as an influx or
influence, but when it is taken up by the mouths of the absorbent system,
it must excite those mouths into action, and then acts as a stimulus.

There appears from hence to be four methods by which animal bodies are
penetrated by external things. 1. By their stimulus, which induces the
absorbent vessels to imbibe them. 2. By mechanical attraction, as when
water softens the cuticle. 3. By chemical attraction, as when oxygen passes
through the membranes of the air-vessels of the lungs, and combines with
the blood. And lastly, by influx without mechanical attraction, chemical
combination, or animal absorption, as the universal fluids of heat,
gravitation, electricity, magnetism, and perhaps of other ethereal fluids
yet unknown.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORDO II.

_Decreased Associate Motions._

GENUS I.

_Catenated with Irritative Motions._

As irritative muscular motions are attended with pain, when they are
exerted too weakly, as well as when they are exerted too strongly; so
irritative ideas become attended with sensation, when they are exerted too
weakly, as well as when they are exerted too strongly. Which accounts for
these ideas being attended with sensation in the various kinds of vertigo
described below.

There is great difficulty in tracing the immediate cause of the deficiences
of action of some links of the associations of irritative motions; first,
because the trains and tribes of motions, which compose these links, are so
widely extended as to embrace almost the whole animal system; and secondly,
because when the first link of an associated train of actions is exerted
with too great energy, the second link by reverse sympathy may be affected
with torpor. And then this second link may transmit, as it were, this
torpor to a third link, and at the same time regain its own energy of
action; and it is possible this third link may in like manner transmit its
torpor to a fourth, and thus regain its own natural quantity of motion.

I shall endeavour to explain this by an example taken from sensitive
associated motions, as the origin of their disturbed actions is more easily
detected. This morning I saw an elderly person, who had gradually lost all
the teeth in his upper jaw, and all of the under except three of the
molares; the last of these was now loose, and occasionally painful; the
fangs of which were almost naked, the gums being much wasted both within
and without the jaw. He is a man of attentive observation, and assured me,
that he had again and again noticed, that, when a pain commenced in the
membranes of the alveolar process of the upper jaw opposite to the loose
tooth in the under one (which had frequently occurred for several days
past), the pain of the loose tooth ceased. And that, when the pain
afterwards extended to the ear and temple on that side, the pain in the
membranes of the upper jaw ceased. In this case the membranes of the
alveolar process of the upper jaw became torpid, and consequently painful,
by their reverse sympathy with the too violent actions of the inflamed
membranes of the loose tooth; and then by a secondary sympathy the
membranes about the ear and temple became torpid, and painful; and those of
the alveolar process of the upper jaw regained their natural quantity of
action, and ceased to be painful. A great many more nice and attentive
observations are wanted to elucidate these curious circumstances of
association, which will be found to be of the greatest importance in the
cure of many diseases, and lead us to the knowledge of fever.

SPECIES.

1. _Cutis frigida pransorum._ Chillness after dinner frequently attends
weak people, or those who have been exhausted by exercise; it arises from
the great expenditure of the sensorial power on the organs of digestion,
which are stimulated into violent action by the aliment; and the vessels of
the skin, which are associated with them, become in some measure torpid by
reverse sympathy; and a consequent chillness succeeds with less absorption
of atmospheric moisture. See the subsequent article.

2. _Pallor urinae pransorum._ The paleness of urine after a full meal is an
instance of reverse association; where the secondary part of a train of
associate motions acts with less energy in consequence of the greater
exertions of the primary part. After dinner the absorbent vessels of the
stomach and intestines are stimulated into greater action, and drink up the
newly taken aliment; while those, which are spread in great number on the
neck of the bladder, absorb less of the aqueous part of the urine than
usual, which is therefore discharged in a more dilute state; and has been
termed crude by some medical writers, but it only indicates, that so great
a proportion of the sensorial power is expended on digestion and absorption
of the aliment, that other parts of the system act for a time with less
energy. See Class IV. I. 1. 6.

3. _Pallor urinae a frigore cutaneo._ There is a temporary discharge of
pale water, and a diarrhoea, induced by exposing the skin to the cold air;
as is experienced by boys, who strip themselves before bathing. In this
case the mouths of the cutaneous lymphatics become torpid by the subduction
of their accustomed degree of heat, and those of the bladder and intestines
become torpid by direct sympathy; whence less of the thinner part of the
urinary secretion, and of the mucus of the intestines, is reabsorbed. See
Sect. XXIX. 4. 6. This effect of suddenly cooling the skin by the aspersion
of cold water has been used with success in costiveness, and has produced
evacuations, when other means have failed. When young infants are afflicted
with griping joined with costiveness, I have sometimes directed them to be
taken out of a warm bed, and carried about for a few minutes in a cool
room, with almost instant relief.

4. _Pallor ex aegritudine._ When sickness of stomach first occurs, a
paleness of the skin attends it; which is owing to the association or
catenation between the capillaries of the stomach and the cutaneous ones;
which at first act by direct sympathy. But in a short time there commences
an accumulation of the sensorial power of association in the cutaneous
capillaries during their state of inactivity, and then the skin begins to
glow, and sweats break out, from the increased action of the cutaneous
glands or capillaries, which is now in reverse sympathy with those of the
stomach. So in continued fevers, when the stomach is totally torpid, which
is known by the total aversion to solid food, the cutaneous capillaries are
by reverse sympathy in a perpetual state of increased activity, as appears
from the heat of the skin.

5. _Dyspnoea a balneo frigido._ The difficulty of breathing on going up to
the middle in cold water is owing to the irritative association or
catenation of the action of the extreme vessels of the lungs with those of
the skin. So that when the latter are rendered torpid or inactive by the
application of sudden cold, the former become inactive at the same time,
and retard the circulation of the blood through the lungs, for this
difficulty of breathing cannot be owing to the pressure of the water
impeding the circulation downwards, as it happens equally by a cold
shower-bath, and is soon conquered by habitual immersions. The capillaries
of the skin are rendered torpid by the subduction of the stimulus of heat,
and by the consequent diminution of the sensorial power of irritation. The
capillaries of the lungs are rendered torpid by the diminution of the
sensorial power of association, which is now excited in less quantity by
the lessened actions of the capillaries of the skin, with which they are
catenated. So that at this time both the cutaneous and pulmonary
capillaries are principally actuated, as far as they have any action, by
the stimulus of the blood. But in a short time the sensorial powers of
irritation, and of association, become accumulated, and very energetic
action of both these membranes succeed. Which thus resemble the cold and
hot fit of an intermittent fever.

6. _Dyspepsia a pedibus frigidis._ When the feet are long cold, as in
riding in cold and wet weather, some people are very liable to indigestion
and consequent heart-burn. The irritative motions of the stomach become
torpid, and do their office of digestion imperfectly, in consequence of
their association with the torpid motions of the vessels of the
extremities. Fear, as it produces paleness and torpidity of the skin,
frequently occasions temporary indigestion in consequence of this
association of the vessels of the skin with those of the stomach; as riding
in very bad roads will give flatulency and indigestion to timorous people.

A short exposure to cold air increases digestion, which is then owing to
the reverse sympathy between the capillary vessels of the skin, and of the
stomach. Hence when the body is exposed to cold air, within certain limits
of time and quantity of cold, a reverse sympathy of the stomach and the
skin first occurs, and afterwards a direct sympathy. In the former case the
expenditure of sensorial power by the skin being lessened, but not its
production in the brain; the second link of the association, viz. the
stomach, acquires a greater share of it. In the latter case, by the
continuation of the deficient stimulus of heat, the torpor becomes extended
to the brain itself, or to the trunks of the nerves; and universal
inactivity follows.

7. _Tussis a pedibus frigidis._ On standing with the feet in thawing snow,
many people are liable to incessant coughing. From the torpidity of the
absorbent vessels of the lungs, in consequence of their irritative
associations with those of the skin, they cease to absorb the saline part
of the secreted mucus; and a cough is thus induced by the irritation of
this saline secretion; which is similar to that from the nostrils in frosty
weather, but differs in respect to its immediate cause; the former being
from association with a distant part, and the latter from defect of the
stimulus of heat on the nostrils themselves. See Catarrhus frigidus, Class
I. 2. 3. 3.

8. _Tussis hepatica._ The cough of inebriates, which attends the
enlargement of the liver, or a chronical inflammation of its upper
membrane, is supposed to be produced by the inconvenience the diaphragm
suffers from the compression or heat of the liver. It differs however
essentially from that attending hepatitis, from its not being accompanied
with fever. And is perhaps rather owing to irritative association, or
reverse sympathy, between the lungs and the liver. As occurs in sheep,
which are liable to a perpetual dry cough, when the fleuk-worm is preying
on the substance of their livers. See Class II. 1. 1. 5.

M. M. From half a grain to a grain of opium twice a day. A drachm of
mercurial ointment rubbed on the region of the liver every night for eight
or ten times.

9. _Tussis arthritica._ Gout-cough. I have seen a cough, which twice
recurred at a few years distance in the same person, during his fits of the
gout, with such pertinacity and violence as to resist venesection, opiates,
bark, blisters, mucilages, and all the usual methods employed in coughs. It
was for a time supposed to be the hooping-cough, from the violence of the
action of coughing; it continued two or three weeks, the patient never
being able to sleep more than a few minutes at once during the whole time,
and being propped up in bed with pillows night and day.

As no fever attended this violent cough, and but little expectoration, and
that of a thin and frothy kind, I suspected the membrane of the lungs to be
rather torpid than inflamed, and that the saline part of the mucus not
being absorbed stimulated them into perpetual exertion. And lastly, that
though the lungs are not sensible to cold and heat, and probably therefore
less mobile; yet, as they are nevertheless liable to consent with the
torpor of cold feet, as described in Species 6 of this Genus, I suspected
this torpor of the lungs to succeed the gout in the feet, or to act a
vicarious part for them.

10. _Vertigo rotatoria._ In the vertigo from circumgyration the irritative
motions of vision are increased; which is evinced from the pleasure that
children receive on being rocked in a cradle, or by swinging on a rope. For
whenever sensation arises from the production of irritative motion with
less energy than natural, it is of the disagreeable kind, as from cold or
hunger; but when it arises from their production with greater energy than
natural, if it be confined within certain limits, it is of the pleasurable
kind, as by warmth or wine. With these increased irritative motions of
vision, I suppose those of the stomach are performed with greater energy by
direct sympathy; but when the rotatory motions, which produce this
agreeable vertigo, are continued too long, or are too violent, sickness of
the stomach follows; which is owing to the decreased action of that organ
from its reverse sympathy with the increased actions of the organ of
vision. For the expenditure of sensorial power by the organ of vision is
always very great, as appears by the size of the optic nerves; and is now
so much increased as to deprive the next link of association of its due
share. As mentioned in Article 6 of this Genus.

In the same manner the undulations of water, or the motions of a ship, at
first give pleasure by increasing the irritative motions belonging to the
sense of vision; but produce sickness at length by expending on one part of
the associated train of irritative actions too much of that sensorial
power, which usually served the whole of it; whence some other parts of the
train acquire too little of it, and perform their actions in consequence
too feebly, and thence become attended with disagreeable sensation.

It must also be observed, that when the irritative motions are stimulated
into unusual action, as in inebriation, they become succeeded by sensation,
either of the pleasurable or painful kind; and thus a new link is
introduced between the irritative motions thus excited, and those which
used to succeed them; whence the association is either dissevered or much
weakened, and thus the vomiting in sea-sickness occurs from the defect of
the power of association, rather than from the general deficiency of
sensorial power.

When a blind man turns round, or when one, who is not blind, revolves in
the dark, a vertigo is produced belonging to the sense of touch. A blind
man balances himself by the sense of touch, which being a less perfect
means of determining small quantities of deviation from the perpendicular,
occasions him to walk more carefully upright than those, who balance
themselves by vision. When he revolves, the irritative associations of the
muscular motions, which were used to preserve his perpendicularity, become
disordered by their new modes of successive exertion; and he begins to
fall. For his feet now touch the floor in manners or directions different
from those they have been accustomed to; and in consequence he judges less
perfectly of the situation of the parts of the floor in respect to that of
his own body, and thus loses his perpendicular attitude. This may be
illustrated by the curious experiment of crossing one finger over the next
to it, and feeling of a nut or bullet with the ends of them. When, if the
eyes be closed, the nut or bullet appears to be two, from the deception of
the sense of touch.

In this vertigo from gyration, both of the sense of sight, and of the sense
of touch, the primary link of the associated irritative motions is
increased in energy, and the secondary ones are increased at first by
direct sympathy; but after a time they become decreased by reverse sympathy
with the primary link, owing to the exhaustion of sensorial power in
general, or to the power of association in particular; because in the last
case, either pleasurable or painful sensation has been introduced between
the links of a train of irritative motions, and has dissevered, or much
enfeebled them.

Dr. Smyth, in his Essay on Swinging in Pulmonary Consumption, has observed,
that swinging makes the pulse slower. Dr. Ewart of Bath confirmed this
observation both on himself and on Col. Cathcart, who was then hectic, and
that even on shipboard, where some degree of vertigo might be supposed
previously to exist. Dr. Currie of Liverpool not only confirmed this
observation frequently on himself, when he was also phthisical, but found
that equitation had a similar effect on him, uniformly retarding his pulse.
This curious circumstance cannot arise from the general effect of exercise,
or fatigue, as in those cases the pulse becomes weaker and quicker; it must
therefore be ascribed to a degree of vertigo, which attends all those modes
of motion, which we are not perpetually accustomed to.

Dr. Currie has further observed, that "in cases of great debility the
voluntary muscular exertion requisite in a swing produces weariness, that
is, increases debility; and that in such instances he had frequently
noticed, that the diminution of the frequency of the pulse did not take
place, but the contrary." These circumstances may thus be accounted for.

The links of association, which are effected in the vertigo occasioned by
unusual motion, are the irritative motions of the sense of vision, those of
the stomach, and those of the heart and arteries. When the irritative ideas
of vision are exerted with greater energy at the beginning of vertigo, a
degree of sensation is excited, which is of the pleasurable kind, as above
mentioned; whence the associated trains of irritative motions of the
stomach, and heart, and arteries, act at first with greater energy, both by
direct sympathy; and by the additional sensorial power of sensation. Whence
the pulse of a consumptive patient becomes stronger and consequently
slower.

But if this vertigo becomes much greater in degree or duration, the first
link of this train of associated irritative motions expends too much of the
sensorial power, which was usually employed on the whole train; and the
motions of the stomach become in consequence exerted with less energy. This
appears, because in this degree of vertigo sickness supervenes, as in
sea-sickness, which has been shewn to be owing to less energetic action of
the stomach. And the motions of the heart and arteries then become weaker,
and in consequence more frequent, by their direct sympathy with the
lessened actions of the stomach. See Supplement, I. 12. and Class II. 1. 6.
7. The general weakness from fatigue is owing to a similar cause, that is,
to the too great expenditure of sensorial power in the increased actions of
one part of the system, and the consequent deficiency of it in other parts,
or in the whole.

The abatement of the heat of the skin in hectic fever by swinging, is not
only owing to the increased ventilation of cool air, but to the reverse
sympathy of the motions of the cutaneous capillaries with those of the
heart and arteries; which occurs in all fevers with arterial debility, and
a hot or dry skin. Hence during moderate swinging the action of the heart
and arteries becomes stronger and slower, and the action of the
capillaries, which was before too great, as appeared by the heat of the
skin, now is lessened by their reverse sympathy with that of the heart and
arteries. See Supplement, I. 8.

11. _Vertigo visualis._ Visual vertigo. The vertigo rotatoria described
above, was induced by the rotation or undulation of external objects, and
was attended with increased action of the primary link of the associated
motions belonging to vision, and with consequent pleasure. The vertigo
visualis is owing to less perfect vision, and is not accompanied with
pleasurable sensation. This frequently occurs in strokes of the palsy, and
is then succeeded by vomiting; it sometimes precedes epileptic fits, and
often attends those, whose sight begins to be impaired by age.

In this vertigo the irritative ideas of the apparent motions of objects are
less distinct, and on that account are not succeeded by their usual
irritative associations of motion; but excite our attention. Whence the
objects appear to librate or circulate according to the motions of our
heads, which is called dizziness; and we lose the means of balancing
ourselves, or preserving our perpendicularity, by vision. So that in this
vertigo the motions of the associated organs are decreased by direct
sympathy with their primary link of irritation; as in the preceding case of
sea-sickness they are decreased by reverse sympathy.

When vertigo affects people about fifty years of age, their sight has
generally been suddenly impaired; and from their less accurate vision they
do not soon enough perceive the apparent motions of objects; like a person
in a room, the walls of which are stained with the uniform figures of
lozenges, explained in Sect. XX. 1. This is generally ascribed to
indigestion; but it ceases spontaneously, as the patient acquires the habit
of balancing himself by less distinct objects.

A gentleman about 50 was seized with an uncommon degree of vertigo, so as
to fall on the ground, and not to be able to turn his head, as he sat up
either in his chair or in his bed, and this continued eight or ten weeks.
As he had many decayed teeth in his mouth, and the vertigo was preceded and
sometimes accompanied by pains on one side of his head, the disease of a
tooth was suspected to be the cause. And as his timidity was too great to
admit the extraction of those which were decayed; after the trial of
cupping repeatedly, fomentations on his head, repeated blisters, with
valerian, Peruvian bark, musk, opium, and variety of other medicines;
mercurials were used, both externally and internally, with design to
inflame the membranes of the teeth, and by that means to prevent the torpor
of the action of the membranes about the temple, and parietal bone; which
are catenated with the membranes of the teeth by irritative association,
but not by sensitive association. The event was, that as soon as the gums
became sore with a slight ptyalism, the pains about the head and vertigo
gradually diminished, and during the soreness of his gums entirely ceased;
but I believe recurred afterwards, though in less degree.

The idea of inflaming the membranes of the teeth to produce increased
sensation in them, and thus to prevent their irritative connection with
those of the cranium, was taken from the treatment of trismus, or locked
jaw, by endeavouring to inflame the injured tendon; which is said to
prevent or to remove the spasm of the muscles of the jaw. See Class III. 1.
1. 13. and 15.

M. M. Emetics. Blisters. Issues about the head. Extraction of decayed
teeth. Slight salivation. Sorbentia. Incitantia.

12. _Vertigo ebriosa._ Vertigo from intoxication is owing to the
association of the irritative ideas of vision with the irritative motions
of the stomach. Whence when these latter become much increased by the
immoderate stimulus of wine, the irritative motions of the retina are
produced with less energy by reverse sympathy, and become at the same time
succeeded by sensation in consequence of their decreased action. See Sect.
XXI. 3. and XXXV. 1. 2. So conversely when the irritative motions of vision
are increased by turning round, or by our unaccustomed agitation at sea,
those of the stomach become inverted by reverse sympathy, and are attended
in consequence with disagreeable sensation. Which decreased action of the
stomach is in consequence of the increased expenditure of the sensorial
power on the irritative ideas of vision, as explained in Vertigo rotatoria.

Whence though a certain quantity of vinous spirit stimulates the whole
system into increased action, and perhaps even increases the secretion of
sensorial power in the brain; yet as soon as any degree of vertigo is
produced, it is a proof, that by the too great expenditure of sensorial
power by the stomach, and its nearest associated motions, the more distant
ones, as those of vision, become imperfectly exerted. From hence may be
deduced the necessity of exhibiting wine in fevers with weak pulse in only
appropriated quantity; because if the least intoxication be induced, some
part of the system must act more feebly from the unnecessary expenditure of
sensorial power.

13. _Vertigo febriculosa._ Vertigo in fevers either proceeds from the
general deficiency of sensorial power belonging to the irritative
associations, or to a greater expenditure of it on some links of the trains
and tribes of associated irritative motions. There is however a slighter
vertigo attending all people, who have been long confined in bed, on their
first rising; owing to their having been so long unused to the apparent
motions of objects in their erect posture, or as they pass by them, that
they have lost in part the habit of balancing themselves by them.

14. _Vertigo cerebrosa._ Vertigo from injuries of the brain, either from
external violence, or which attend paralytic attacks, are owing to the
general deficiency of sensorial power. In these distressful situations the
vital motions, or those immediately necessary to life, claim their share of
sensorial power in the first place, otherwise the patient must die; and
those motions, which are less necessary, feel a deficiency of it, as these
of the organs of sense and muscles; which constitute vertigo; and lastly
the voluntary motions, which are still less immediately necessary to life,
are frequently partially destroyed, as in palsy; or totally, as in
apoplexy.

15. _Murmur aurium vertiginosum._ The vertiginous murmur in the ears, or
noise in the head, is compared to the undulations of the sound of bells, or
to the humming of bees. It frequently attends people about 60 years of age;
and like the visual vertigo described above is owing to our hearing less
perfectly from the gradual inirritability of the organ on the approach of
age; and the disagreeable sensation of noise attending it is owing to the
less energetic action of these irritative motions; which not being
sufficiently distinct to excite their usual associations become succeeded
by our attention, like the indistinct view of the apparent motions of
objects mentioned in vertigo visualis. This may be better understood from
considering the use, which blind men make of these irritative sounds, which
they have taught themselves to attend to, but which escape the notice of
others. The late blind Justice Fielding walked for the first time into my
room, when he once visited me, and after speaking a few words said, "this
room is about 22 feet long, 18 wide, and 12 high;" all which he guessed by
the ear with great accuracy. Now if these irritative sounds from the
partial loss of hearing do not correspond with the size or usual echoes of
the places, where we are; their catenation with other irritative ideas, as
those of vision, becomes dissevered or disturbed; and we attend to them in
consequence, which I think unravels this intricate circumstance of noises
being always heard in the head, when the sense of hearing begins to be
impaired, from whatever cause it occurs.

This ringing in the ears also attends the vertigo from intoxication; for
the irritative ideas of sound are then more weakly excited in consequence
of the deficiency of the sensorial power of association. As is known by
this also being attended with disagreeable sensation, and by its
