outside the useless superstitions that sent man to groveling in the dust
at each small breath that blew, and also one who would not quit because
he had no weather vane to test the direction of that breath.

And they would know when that mind came.

The first man came. Take away his tools and wait. He did not fall to
earth in awe nor freeze in fear. His mind searched curiously. Enough.
The man was here. Shield off the planet from the rest that he be
undisturbed in his thought.

Could he go farther? Conceive the purpose of this lack of tools, that it
was by design? And still not grovel in the dust? They'd made their move.
Could he respond?

He drew a circle in the sand!

Joy! Ecstasy!

This time there might be surcease to the loneliness, and two
intelligences so unlike commune. The very unlikeness of each bringing to
the other thought not yet considered, and together going on to find ...
to find ...

Now let him see the fallacy of such strict measurement. Now let him
think, to realize that measuring the balance of the status quo of things
in only one relationship of an infinity of possibilities, to realize
that he can change his measurements to balance an equation designed to
express the status quo, or with equal truth, at his desire, he can
change the status quo, the shape of things, to fit the equation he
desires.

Let him wander, puzzled, worrying on this. Let him work it out himself,
for experience from long ago had taught them that if man was not ready
to accept an alien thought he could not, would not, accept but in his
own interpreting.

Now, at last, at his readiness to make things fit the equation he
conceives, instead of making the equation fit the things as they are,
bring him closer in the range of the amplifier, the crystal tool, that
communication might be direct.

He holds the key.

He knows the lock.

He finds the door.

Show him the one small step remaining--the diagram, the design, the
movement of the forces of his mind.

To turn the key.

Unlock the lock.

Throw wide the door.




26


As one awakened from a deep sleep, a hypnotic trance, Cal opened his
eyes.

Man's ancient thought filled his being, the subject of man's dreams, of
yearnings, of philosophies. In ancient eidetic memory, the unbroken
thread persisted: If I could only grasp this elusive thing, always just
barely beyond my reach, I would not need the ox, the wagon, the train,
the plane, the spaceship to transport me from here to there.

And now, at last, the thought was in Cal's grasp. Express the things and
forces balanced in equation to describe them as they are; or, equally,
to alter the things and forces instead to fit the equation balance one
had in mind; purely a matter of choice. Each was the use of natural law.
No chaos here, no magic, one as much true science as the other.

How long had he slept, and dreamed? A few minutes? An hour? Or by chance
was he another Rip Van Winkle, doomed to find the colonists aged or
dead?

But why wonder?

A short distance first, just outside the amphitheater, just a small
test. He first rearranged the relative position of himself to the
amphitheater, to be outside instead of in it. He diagrammed the forces
in his mind that would alter the relationship, connected them.

He was standing outside the entrance arch.

With a hoarse cry, Louie, who had been watching all the while through
the open arch, shrank back away from Cal, wavered in uncertainty, then
fell to his knees, then groveled in the dust.

"Forgive me!" he cried. "In my blind, senseless vanity, I did not know
you were a Holy One. I was going to kill you, I confess. Woe! Woe! I saw
you lying there in Their temple, defaming it in blasphemy by your sleep.
But when I tried to enter, I could not. Their will prevented me. Some
shielding force protected you. And then I knew you were a Holy One.
Forgive me. Let me live to expiate my sin."

"Louie, Louie," Cal said sadly.

As if in tangled ball, the thought stream of Louie, twisted and warped
by the false reasonings and interpretations fed to him in childhood,
seemed clearly revealed to Cal. Again a change in concept of
relationship to reality, the schematic of forces visualized, the
untangling, straightening of thought.

Louie scrambled to his feet, a rueful grin on his face.

"Sorry, Cal," he said. "I must have gone nuts there for a while, shock
and all. I'm all right now. Don't worry anymore about me. I'll get on
back to the rest."

"Sure, Louie. See you there," Cal agreed.

A rearrangement of relationships, and Cal walked out from behind a bush
to approach Jed and Tom.

"You must not have gone all the way to the top," Jed said when he looked
up and caught sight of Cal. "It's just barely past noon, I reckon.
Didn't expect to see you back until nightfall."

"I took a short cut," Cal said with a grin. "Little past noon," he
continued, as if musing with a thought. "About the same time of day that
everything happened a couple of weeks ago."

"Yeah, about the same time of day," Jed said, and looked at him
curiously.

Tom had arisen to his feet and was staring at Cal curiously, sensing a
difference in the E. Now Jed felt it too, and looked at Cal with
puzzlement on his face.

"There's something important about it being around this time of day,
Cal?" he asked.

"Not really," Cal said, "but I thought it might be helpful. I could
restore the village, the fields, the escape ship, everything just as it
was; make it feel like a continuation of the same day to the people. It
being the same time of day would help the illusion that no time had
passed, nothing had happened."

Tom's eyes narrowed in speculation.

"You can do that, Cal?" he asked. "You've solved the problem?"

"Yes," Cal said simply. "I'll tell you about it sometime. There's quite
a few loose ends to catch up right now." He turned to Jed. "How about
it, Jed?" he asked. "Think it'll be too much of a shock to put things
back as they were?"

In spite of himself, Jed was trembling. He drew a deep breath, firmed
his jaw. Seemed to set himself as one does in the dentist's chair at the
approach of the drill.

It was a bigger equation, a more complex one, but not different in kind.

The village of Appletree sprang suddenly into being, the hangar with the
metallic gleam of the ship inside, the fields, the pasture fences with
the calves separated from the cows. A few people, clothed, were walking
on the dirt street between the houses. They looked at one another. They
looked up at the sky, at the fields around them, the forests beyond.
They looked back at one another. They shook their heads, and blinked
their eyes, as if suddenly wakened from a sleep, a dream, the craziest
dream.

Later they would compare the dream, and with Jed's help piece together,
and feel the shock, and wonder.

Upon the hill, away from the village, where Jed lay, clothed, in the
hammock swung between two trees, Martha came out of the house, clothed.

"I must have sat down in a chair for a minute and fallen asleep or
something, Jed," she said as she came to stand beside him. "And I had
the funniest dream. You can't imagine. You know how sometimes we'll
dream about being out in front of folks, all naked ..."

"That wasn't any dream, Martha," he answered with a grin. "All the
people in the village are going to start realizing it pretty soon.
They'll need some help. We'd better walk down there. Them people across
the ridge, too. Bet they'll be hightailing it back over here first thing
you know. And something else, there's an E ship here, come to find out
why we didn't communicate."

"Well whatever on Earth are you talkin' about, Jed?" she asked
curiously. "It won't be time to communicate for a couple of days yet.
You ought to know that. Have you been dreaming, too? Or you and the boys
fermenting something? Here, let me smell your breath!"

"Aw, now Martha," he said with a huge grin. He clambered out of the
hammock and stood up, took her in his arms, hugged her tightly.

"Jed!" she scolded. "Right out here in the front yard in front of
everybody." But she didn't struggle away from him.

"Won't matter a bit," he said. "Not after what's been goin' on in front
of everybody right along."

"Whatever has been goin' on can't be half as bad as what I've been
dreamin'," she said.

"Better start gettin' used to the idea that it wasn't a dream, Martha,"
he cautioned.

"Jed!" she scolded again, her face aflame with embarrassment.




27


The communications operator looked up as the supervisor came down the
aisle toward him.

"Communication from the E.H.Q. ship at Eden coming in just fine," he
said enthusiastically. He'd thought it over and decided he'd better
repair some fences. Good job here, no use letting his irritation with
the supervisor's old-maid fussiness make him cut off his nose to spite
his face.

"See that it does," the supervisor answered sharply. He recognized the
overture for what it was, felt relieved that he wouldn't have any more
insubordination, was willing to let bygones be bygones--after a suitable
period of punishment. "What's been happening?" he asked with a curiosity
that got the better of his desire to discipline.

"E Gray has come back out of that quartz outcropping where we lost him.
He's standing there talking to the astronavigator who followed him up
the mountain."

"More of the same, I guess," the supervisor said. "Nothing's happened
for ten days. Nothing likely to happen," he said. He turned and started
back down the aisle toward his own office.

"Wait a minute," the operator called. "Here's something."

Other operator heads raised up all down the aisle.

"Now, now; now, now!" the supervisor quarreled at them. "Get on with
your work, nothing to concern you here, none of your business."

But of course it was everybody's business. Anything different was
everybody's business. All over the world everybody was wondering about
the enigma of Eden, everybody speculating, everybody with a different
answer. Some were gleeful that science had finally got its comeuppance,
and felt no more than a pleasure that the bigdomes had proved they
weren't any smarter than anybody else. Others took an equal pleasure in
crying woe, woe, at this proof there were mysteries beyond man's
knowing, woe, woe, now that man would be punished for trying to know
what he was not meant to know.

The operator took time out, in spite of the supervisor's admonishments,
to listen frankly.

"They've lost sight of the E," the operator exclaimed. "No, wait a
minute. There he is, down in the valley, coming out from behind a bush
to talk to the pilot and the head man of the colony."

"Can't have happened like that," the supervisor grumbled. "Ten or twelve
miles from that mountain top to the valley. The ship has garbled their
reporting. Probably got behind in reporting and then just decided to
skip the journey back, and pick up to make it current. There's going to
be complaints about this."

"Well, you were right here," the operator said. "You were listening. I
didn't skip anything. It wasn't my fault."

"All right, all right."

"Wait a minute," the operator said. "Here, listen in."

The supervisor's eyes grew round.

"Can't be," he exclaimed.

"All the buildings, everything's just like it was before," the operator
said loudly to the room at large. "All of a sudden, the way they report
it."

"They're faking the reports," the supervisor grumbled irritably. "Have
to be."

"Now, no matter how much they fake, you can't rebuild all those
buildings in a couple hours," the operator argued.

"None of our business," the supervisor cautioned. "We just take the
reports. Can't criticize us for whatever the E.H.Q. ship out there's
doing."

"And everybody's got their clothes back on," the operator said loudly.

There was a sigh of regret up and down the aisle.

"Now the E's disappeared again," the operator said, "They're scanning
all over, trying to find him."

The supervisor put down his headset with resolution.

"I'm going to my office to make a report on the sloppy way this
reporting has been done. There's going to be fur flying over these skips
and jumps, and I don't want it to be our fur. Best thing is to make the
complaint first," he said to the room at large. "Now you call me if
there's any more of this bollix," he said to the operator as he left.

An hour passed while the supervisor sat in his office. He wrote
furiously, scratched out, wrote some more, tore up papers and threw them
in the vague direction of the wastebasket, started afresh to write some
more. How to report without stepping on anybody's toes?

His buzzer sounded softly to give him respite, and he looked up from a
virtually blank piece of paper to the board. The Eden operator again.

"Oh, no," he groaned. But he left his desk at once and half trotted up
the aisle.

"Now the captain of the ship says he wants Sector Chief Hayes at once,"
the operator called out. "Something very important."

"Very well," the supervisor said. "Ring him."

But Hayes didn't wait for the ring. He had been listening, red-eyed,
tired, gaunt for lack of sleep.

"Give me connection," he said to the operator as soon as the line
opened.

"Bill Hayes here, Captain," he said, as soon as he received the signal.
"What now?"

"Mrs. Gray, the Junior E's wife, has disappeared from aboard ship," the
Captain said without any preliminaries.

"What do you mean 'disappeared'?" Hayes asked. "How could she disappear
in deep space? Have you looked everywhere? Checked the lifeboats? Maybe
she took one and tried to get down to her husband by herself."

"We've looked everywhere. No lifeboats missing. No port has opened. You
ought to know we wouldn't bother you until we'd checked everything out
first."

"She can't have disappeared into thin air, thin space," Hayes quarreled
back. "She must be on your ship somewhere. When was she last seen?"

"That's--ah--that's mainly why I'm calling you, Bill," the captain said.
