
"What are you going to tell them?" asked Linane.

"God only knows," said Muller.

"Let me handle them," said Jenks, looking up confidently.

       *       *       *       *       *

The newspapermen had rushed the office. They came in like a wild wave.
Questions flew like feathers at a cock-fight.

Muller held up his hand and there was something in his grief-stricken
eyes that held the gentlemen of the press in silence. They had time to
look around. They saw the handsome, dark-haired, brown-eyed Jenks poring
over the plans. Dust from the carpet smudged his knees, and he had
rubbed some of it over a sweating forehead, but he still looked the
picture of self-confident efficiency.

"Gentlemen," said Muller slowly, "I can answer all your questions at
once. Our firm is one of the oldest and staunchest in the trade. Our
buildings stand as monuments to our integrity--"

"All but one," said a young Irishman.

"You are right. All but one," confessed Muller. "But that one, believe
me, has been visited by an act of God. Some form of earthquake or some
unlooked for, uncontrolled, almost unbelievable catastrophe has
happened. The Muller company stands back of its work to its last dollar.
Gentlemen, you know as much as we do. Mr. Jenks there, whose reputation
as an engineer is quite sturdy, I assure you, was the last to inspect
the building. He passed upon it when it was finished. He is at your
service."

Jenks arose, brushed some dust from his knees.

"You look like you'd been praying," bandied the Irishman.

"Maybe I have. Now let me talk. Don't broadside me with questions. I
know what you want to know. Let me talk."

The newspapermen were silent.

"There has been talk of probing this disaster, naturally," began Jenks.
"You all know, gentlemen, that we will aid any inquiry to our utmost.
You want to know what we have to say about it--who is responsible. In a
reasonable time I will have a statement to make that will be startling
in the extreme. I am not sure of my ground now."

"How about the ground under the Colossus?" said the Irishman.

"Don't let's kid each other," pleaded Jenks. "Look at Mr. Muller: it is
as if he had lost his whole family. We are good people. I am doing all I
can. Mr. Linane, who had charge of the construction, is doing all he
can. We believe we are blameless. If it is proven otherwise we will
acknowledge our fault, assume financial responsibility, and take our
medicine. Believe me, that building was perfection plus, like all our
buildings. That covers the entire situation."

Hundreds of questions were parried and answered by the three engineers,
and the reporters left convinced that if the Muller Construction Company
was responsible, it was not through any fault of its own.

       *       *       *       *       *

The fact that Jenks and Linane were not strong for each other, except to
recognize each other's ability as engineers, was due to an incident of
the past. This incident had caused a ripple of mirth in engineering
circles when it happened, and the laugh was on the older man, Linane.

It was when radio was new. Linane, a structural engineer, had paid
little attention to radio. Jenks was the kind of an engineer who dabbled
in all sciences. He knew his radio.

When Jenks first came to work with a technical sheepskin and a few tons
of brass, Linane accorded him only passing notice. Jenks craved the
plaudits of the older man and his palship. Linane treated him as a son,
but did not warm to his social advances.

"I'm as good an engineer as he is," mused Jenks, "and if he is going to
high-hat me, I'll just put a swift one over on him and compel his
notice."

The next day Jenks approached Linane in conference and said:

"I've got a curious bet on, Mr. Linane. I am betting sound can travel a
mile quicker than it travels a quarter of a mile."

"What?" said Linane.

"I'm betting fifty that sound can travel a mile quicker than it can
travel a quarter of a mile."

"Oh no--it can't," insisted Linane.

"Oh yes--it can!" decided Jenks.

"I'll take some of that fool money myself," said Linane.

"How much?" asked Jenks.

"As much as you want."

"All right--five hundred dollars."

"How you going to prove your contention?"

"By stop watches, and your men can hold the watches. We'll bet that a
pistol shot can be heard two miles away quicker than it can be heard a
quarter of a mile away."

"Sound travels about a fifth of a mile a second. The rate varies
slightly according to temperature," explained Linane. "At the freezing
point the rate is 1,090 feet per second and increases a little over one
foot for every degree Fahrenheit."

"Hot or cold," breezed Jenks, "I am betting you five hundred dollars
that sound can travel two miles quicker than a quarter-mile."

"You're on, you damned idiot!" shouted the completely exasperated
Linane.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jenks let Linane's friends hold the watches and his friend held the
money. Jenks was to fire the shot.

Jenks fired the shot in front of a microphone on a football field. One
of Linane's friends picked the sound up instantaneously on a three-tube
radio set two miles away. The other watch holder was standing in the
open a quarter of a mile away and his watch showed a second and a
fraction.

All hands agreed that Jenks had won the bet fairly. Linane never exactly
liked Jenks after that.

Then Jenks rather aggravated matters by a habit. Whenever Linane would
make a very positive statement Jenks would look owl-eyed and say: "Mr.
Linane, I'll have to sound you out about that." The heavy accent on the
word "sound" nettled Linane somewhat.

Linane never completely forgave Jenks for putting over this "fast one."
Socially they were always more or less at loggerheads, but neither let
this feeling interfere with their work. They worked together faithfully
enough and each recognized the ability of the other.

And so it was that Linane and Jenks, their heads together, worked all
night in an attempt to find some cause that would tie responsibility
for the disaster on mother nature.

They failed to find it and, sleepy-eyed, they were forced to admit
failure, so far.

The newspapers, to whom Muller had said that he would not shirk any
responsibility, began a hue and cry for the arrest of all parties in any
way concerned with the direction of the building of the Colossus.

When the death list from the crash and subway wreck reached 97, the
press waxed nasty and demanded the arrest of Muller, Linane and Jenks in
no uncertain tones.

Half dead from lack of sleep, the three men were taken by the police to
the district attorney's offices and, after a strenuous grilling, were
formally placed under arrest on charges of criminal negligence. They put
up a $50,000 bond in each case and were permitted to go and seek further
to find the cause of what the newspapers now began calling the "Colossal
Failure."

Several days were spent by Linane and Jenks in examining the wreckage
which was being removed from Times Square, truckload after truckload, to
a point outside the city. Here it was again sorted and examined and
piled for future disposal.

So far as could be found every brick, stone and ounce of material used
in the building was perfect. Attorneys, however, assured Linane, Jenks
and Muller that they would have to find the real cause of the disaster
if they were to escape possible long prison sentences.

Night after night Jenks courted sleep, but it would not come. He began
to grow wan and haggard.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jenks took to walking the streets at night, mile after mile, thinking,
always thinking, and searching his mind for a solution of the mystery.

It was evening. He had walked past the scene of the Colossus crash
several times. He found himself on a side street. He looked up and saw
in electric lights:

  TOWN HALL

  _Munsterbergen, the Mad Musician_
  Concert Here To-night.

He took five dollars from his pocket and bought a ticket. He entered
with the crowd and was ushered to a seat. He looked neither to the right
or left. His eyes were sunken, his face lined with worry.

Something within Jenks caused him to turn slightly. He was curiously
aware of a beautiful girl who sat beside him. She had a mass of golden
hair which seemed to defy control. It was wild, positively tempestuous.
Her eyes were deep blue and her skin as white as fleecy clouds in
spring. He was dimly conscious that those glorious eyes were troubled.

She glanced at him. She was aware that he was suffering. A great surge
of sympathy welled in her heart. She could not explain the feeling.

A great red plush curtain parted in the center and drew in graceful
folds to the edges of the proscenium. A small stage was revealed.

A tousle-headed man with glaring, beady black eyes, dressed in black
evening clothes stepped forward and bowed. Under his arm was a violin.
He brought the violin forward. His nose, like the beak of some great
bird, bobbed up and down in acknowledgment of the plaudits which greeted
him. His long nervous fingers began to caress the instrument and his
lips began to move.

Jenks was aware that he was saying something, but was not at all
interested. What he said was this:

"Maybe, yes, I couldn't talk so good English, but you could understood
it, yes? Und now I tell you dot I never play the compositions of any
man. I axtemporize exgloosively. I chust blay und blay, und maybe you
should listen, yes? If I bleeze you I am chust happy."

Jenks' attention was drawn to him. He noted his wild appearance.

"He sure looks mad enough," mused Jenks.

       *       *       *       *       *

The violinist flipped the fiddle up under his chin. He drew the bow over
the strings and began a gentle melody that reminded one of rain drops
falling on calm waters.

Jenks forgot his troubles. He forgot everything. He slumped in his seat
and his eyes closed. The rain continued falling from the strings of the
violin.

Suddenly the melody changed to a glad little lilting measure, as sweet
as love itself. The sun was coming out again and the birds began to
sing. There was the trill of a canary with the sun on its cage. There
was the song of the thrush, the mocking-bird and the meadow lark. These
blended finally into a melodious burst of chirping melody which seemed a
chorus of the wild birds of the forest and glen. Then the lilting love
measure again. It tore at the heart strings, and brought tears to one's
eyes.

Unconsciously the girl next to Jenks leaned towards him. Involuntarily
he leaned to meet her. Their shoulders touched. The cloud of her golden
hair came to rest against his dark locks. Their hands found each other
with gentle pressure. Both were lost to the world.

Abruptly the music changed. There was a succession of broken treble
notes that sounded like the crackling of flames. Moans deep and
melancholy followed. These grew more strident and prolonged, giving
place to abject howls, suggesting the lamentations of the damned.

The hands of the boy and girl gripped tensely. They could not help
shuddering.

The violin began to produce notes of a leering, jeering character,
growing more horrible with each measure until they burst in a loud
guffaw of maniacal laughter.

The whole performance was as if someone had taken a heaven and plunged
it into a hell.

The musician bowed jerkily, and was gone.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was no applause, only wild exclamations. Half the house was on its
feet. The other half sat as if glued to chairs.

The boy and the girl were standing, their hands still gripping tensely.

"Come, let's get out of here," said Jenks. The girl took her wrap and
Jenks helped her into it. Hand in hand they fled the place.

In the lobby their eyes met, and for the first time they realized they
were strangers. Yet deep in their hearts was a feeling that their fates
had been sealed.

"My goodness!" burst from the girl.

"It can't be helped now," said Jenks decisively.

"What can't be helped?" asked the girl, although she knew in her heart.

"Nothing can be helped," said Jenks. Then he added: "We should know each
other by this time. We have been holding hands for an hour."

The girl's eyes flared. "You have no right to presume on that
situation," she said.

Jenks could have kicked himself. "Forgive me," he said. "It was only
that I just wanted so to know you. Won't you let me see you home?"

"You may," said the girl simply, and she led the way to her own car.

They drove north.

Their bodies seemed like magnets. They were again shoulder to shoulder,
holding hands.

"Will you tell me your name?" pleaded Jenks.

"Surely," replied the girl. "I am Elaine Linane."

"What?" exploded Jenks. "Why, I work with a Linane, an engineer with the
Muller Construction Company."

"He is my father," she said.

"Why, we are great friends," said the boy. "I am Jenks, his
assistant--at least we work together."

"Yes, I have heard of you," said the girl. "It is strange, the way we
met. My father admires your work, but I am afraid you are not great
friends." The girl had forgotten her troubles. She chuckled. She had
heard the way Jenks had "sounded" her father out.

Jenks was speechless. The girl continued:

"I don't know whether to like you or to hate you. My father is an old
dear. You were cruel to him."

Jenks was abject. "I did not mean to be," he said. "He rather belittled
me without realizing it. I had to make my stand. The difference in our
years made him take me rather too lightly. I had to compel his notice,
if I was to advance."

"Oh!" said the girl.

"I am sorry--so sorry."

"You might not have been altogether at fault," said the girl. "Father
forgets at times that I have grown up. I resent being treated like a
child, but he is the soul of goodness and fatherly care."

"I know that," said Jenks.

       *       *       *       *       *

Every engineer knows his mathematics. It was this fact, coupled with
what the world calls a "lucky break," that solved the Colossus mystery.
Nobody can get around the fact that two and two make four.

Jenks had happened on accomplishment to advance in the engineering
profession, and it was well for him that he had reached a crisis. He had
never believed in luck or in hunches, so it was good for him to be
brought face to face with the fact that sometimes the footsteps of man
are guided. It made him begin to look into the engineering of the
universe, to think more deeply, and to acknowledge a Higher Power.

With Linane he had butted into a stone wall. They were coming to know
what real trouble meant. The fact that they were innocent did not make
the steel bars of a cage any more attractive. Their troubles began to
wrap about them with the clammy intimacy of a shroud. Then came the
lucky break.

Next to his troubles, Jenks' favorite topic was the Mad Musician. He
tried to learn all he could about this uncanny character at whose
concert he had met the girl of his life. He learned two facts that made
him perk up and think.

One was that the Mad Musician had had offices and a studio in the
Colossus and was one of the first to move in. The other was that the Mad
Musician took great delight in shattering glassware with notes of or
vibrations from a violin. Nearly everyone knows that a glass tumbler can
be shattered by the proper note sounded on a violin. The Mad Musician
took delight in this trick. Jenks courted his acquaintance, and saw him
shatter a row of glasses of different sizes by sounding different notes
on his fiddle. The glasses crashed one after another like gelatine balls
hit by the bullets of an expert rifleman.

Then Jenks, the engineer who knew his mathematics, put two and two
together. It made four, of course.

"Listen, Linane," he said to his co-worker: "this fiddler is crazier
than a flock of cuckoos. If he can crack crockery with violin sound
vibrations, is it not possible, by carrying the vibrations to a much
higher power, that he could crack a pile of stone, steel, brick and
cement, like the Colossus?"

"Possible, but hardly probable. Still," Linane mused, "when you think
about it, and put two and two together.... Let's go after him and see
what he is doing now."

Both jumped for their coats and hats. As they fared forth, Jenks cinched
his argument:

"If a madman takes delight in breaking glassware with a vibratory wave
or vibration, how much more of a thrill would he get by crashing a
mountain?"

"Wild, but unanswerable," said Linane.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jenks had been calling on the Mad Musician at his country place. "He had
a studio in the Colossus," he reminded Linane. "He must have re-opened
somewhere else in town. I wonder where."

"Musicians are great union men," said Linane. "Phone the union."

Teddy Jenks did, but the union gave the last known town address as the
Colossus.

"He would remain in the same district around Times Square," reasoned
Jenks. "Let's page out the big buildings and see if he is not preparing
to crash another one."

"Fair enough," said Linane, who was too busy with the problem at hand to
choose his words.

Together the engineers started a canvass of the big buildings in the
theatrical district. After four or five had been searched without result
they entered the 30-story Acme Theater building.

Here they learned that the Mad Musician had leased a four-room suite
just a few days before. This suite was on the fifteenth floor, just half
way up in the big structure.

They went to the manager of the building and frankly stated their
suspicions. "We want to enter that suite when the tenant is not there,"
they explained, "and we want him forestalled from entering while we are
examining the premises."
