Samas, the sun-god, and I[vs]tar, in this connection possibly the planet
Venus. It has therefore been suggested by Prof. Schiaparelli that
_Mazz[=a]l[=o]th_ is the planet Venus; and, since the word is plural in
form, Venus in her double capacity;--sometimes an evening, sometimes a
morning star. The sun and the moon and _Mazz[=a]l[=o]th_ would then set
forth the three brightest luminaries, whilst the general congress of
stars would be represented by the "host of heaven." But though Venus is
sometimes the brightest of the planets, she is essentially of the same
order as Jupiter or Mars, and is not of the same order as the sun and
moon, with whom, on this supposition, she is singled out to be ranked.
Moreover, if I[vs]tar or Ashtoreth were intended in this passage, it
does not appear why she should not be expressly named as such;
especially as Baal, so often coupled with her, is named. The "triad of
stars," too, had originally quite a different meaning, as will be seen
later.

Moreover, the parallelism between Job ix. and Job xxxviii. is destroyed
by this rendering, since the planet Venus could not be described as "the
chambers of the south." These are therefore referred by Professor
Schiaparelli to the glorious mass of stars in the far south, shining in
the constellations that set forth the Deluge story,--the Ship, and the
Centaur, much the most brilliant region of the whole sky.

Another interpretation of _Mazzaroth_ is given by Dr. Cheyne, on grounds
that refute Professor Schiaparelli's suggestion, but it is itself open
to objection from an astronomical point of view. He writes--

     "_Mazzaroth_ is probably not to be identified with _Mazzaloth_
     (2 Kings xxiii. 5) in spite of the authority of the Sept. and
     the Targum. . . . _Mazzaroth_ = Ass. _Mazarati_; _Mazzaloth_
     (i.e. the zodiacal signs) seems to be the plural of
     _Mazz[=a]la_ = Ass. _Manzaltu_, station."[254:1]

Dr. Cheyne therefore renders the passage thus--

     "Dost thou bring forth the moon's watches at their season,
      And the Bear and her offspring--dost thou guide them?
      Knowest thou the laws of heaven?
      Dost thou determine its influence upon the earth?"

_Mazzaloth_ are therefore "the zodiacal signs," but _Mazzaroth_ "the
watches or stations of the moon, which marked the progress of the
month;"[254:2] or, in other words, the lunar zodiac.

But the lunar and the solar zodiac are only different ways of dividing
the same belt of stars. Consequently when, as in the passage before us,
reference is made to the actual belt of stars as a whole, there is no
difference between the two. So that we are obliged, as before, to
consider _Mazzaroth_ and _Mazzaloth_ as identical, and both as setting
forth the stars of the zodiac.

So far as the two zodiacs differ, it is the solar and not the lunar
zodiac that is intended. This is evident when we consider the different
natures of the apparent motions of the sun and the moon. The sun passes
through a twelfth part of the zodiac each month, and month by month the
successive constellations of the zodiac are brought out, each in its own
season; each having a period during which it rises at sunset, is visible
the whole night, and sets at sunrise. The solar _Mazzaroth_ are
therefore emphatically brought out, each "in its season." Not so the
lunar _Mazzaroth_.

The expression, "the watches or stations of the moon which marked the
progress of the month," is unsuitable when astronomically considered.
"Watches" refer strictly to divisions of the day and night; the
"stations" of the moon refer to the twenty-seven or twenty-eight
divisions of the lunar zodiac; the "progress of the month" refers to the
complete sequence of the lunar phases. These are three entirely
different matters, and Dr. Cheyne has confused them. The progress of the
moon through its complete series of stations is accomplished in a
siderial month--that is, twenty-seven days eight hours, but from the
nature of the case it cannot be said that these "stations" are brought
out each in his season, in that time, as a month makes but a small
change in the aspect of the sky. The moon passes through the complete
succession of its phases in the course of a synodical month, which is in
the mean twenty-nine days, thirteen hours--that is to say from new to
new, or full to full--but no particular star, or constellation, or
"station" has any fixed relation to any one given phase of the moon. In
the course of some four or five years the moon will have been both new
and full in every one of the "lunar stations."

     "Knowest thou the ordinances of heaven?
      Canst thou set the dominion thereof in the earth?"

He, who has lived out under the stars, in contact with the actual
workings of nature, knows what it is to watch "Mazzaroth" brought "out
in his season;" the silent return to the skies of the constellations,
month by month, simultaneous with the changes on the face of the earth.
Overhead, the glorious procession, so regular and unfaltering, of the
silent, unapproachable stars: below, in unfailing answer, the succession
of spring and summer, autumn and winter, seedtime and harvest, cold and
heat, rain and drought. If there be but eyes to see, this majestic
Order, so smooth in working, so magnificent in scale, will impress the
most stolid as the immediate acting of God; and the beholder will feel
at the same a reverent awe, and an uplifting of the spirit as he sees
the action of "the ordinances of heaven," and the evidence of "the
dominion thereof in the earth."

Dr. Cheyne, however, only sees in these beautiful and appropriate lines
the influence upon the sacred writer of "the physical theology of
Babylonia";[256:1] in other words, its idolatrous astrology, "the
influence of the sky upon the earth."

But what would Job understand by the question, "Canst thou bring forth
Mazz[=a]r[=o]th in his season?" Just this: "Canst thou so move the
great celestial sphere that the varied constellations of the zodiac
shall come into view, each in their turn, and with them the earth pass
through its proper successive seasons?" The question therefore embraced
and was an extension of the two that preceded it. "Canst thou bind the
sweet influences of the Pleiades? Canst thou prevent the revival of all
the forces of nature in the springtime?" and "Canst thou loose the bands
of Orion; canst thou free the ground from the numbing frosts of winter?"

The question to us would not greatly differ in its meaning, except that
we should better understand the mechanism underlying the phenomena. The
question would mean, "Canst thou move this vast globe of the earth,
weighing six thousand million times a million million tons, continually
in its orbit, more than 580 millions of miles in circuit, with a speed
of nearly nineteen miles in every second of time, thus bringing into
view different constellations at different times of the year, and
presenting the various zones of the earth in different aspects to the
sun's light and heat?" To us, as to Job, the question would come as:

     "Knowest thou the ordinances of heaven?
      Canst thou set the dominion thereof in the earth?"

It is going beyond astronomy, yet it may be permitted to an astronomer,
to refer for comparison to a parallel thought, not couched in the form
of a question, but in the form of a prayer:

          "Thy will be done,
     As in heaven, so in earth."


FOOTNOTES:

[254:1] Rev. T. K. Cheyne, M.A., _Job and Solomon_, p. 290.

[254:2] _Ibid._, p. 52.

[256:1] Rev. T. K. Cheyne, M.A., _Job and Solomon_, p. 52.




CHAPTER IX

ARCTURUS


In two passages of the Book of Job a word, _`Ash_ or _`Ayish_, is used,
by context evidently one of the constellations of the sky, but the
identification of which is doubtful. In our Authorized Version the first
passage is rendered thus:--

     (God) "Which maketh Arcturus (_`Ash_), Orion, and Pleiades,
     and the chambers of the south";

and the second:--

     "Canst thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades,
      Or loose the bands of Orion?
      Canst thou bring forth Mazzaroth in his season?
      Or canst thou guide Arcturus (_`Ayish_) with his sons?
      Knowest thou the ordinances of heaven?
      Canst thou set the dominion thereof in the earth?"

The words (or word, for possibly _`Ayish_ is no more than a variant of
_`Ash_) here translated "Arcturus" were rendered by the "Seventy" as
"Arktouros" in the first passage; as "Hesperos" in the second passage;
and their rendering was followed by the Vulgate. The rendering Hesper or
Vesper is absurd, as "the sons" of Hesper has no meaning. "Arktouros"
is not improbably a misrendering of "Arktos," "the north," which would
give a free but not a literal translation of the meaning of the passage.
In another passage from Job (xxxvii. 9) where the south wind is
contrasted with the cold from another quarter of the sky, the
"Seventy"--again followed by the Vulgate--rendered it as "cold from
Arcturus." Now cold came to the Jews, as it does to us, from the north,
and the star which we know as Arcturus could not be described as
typifying that direction either now or when the Septuagint or Vulgate
versions were made. The Peschitta, the Syriac version of the Bible, made
about the second century after Christ, gives as the Syriac equivalent
for `Ash, or `Ayish, the word _`iy[=u]th[=a]_, but it also renders
_K[)e]s[=i]l_ by the same word in Amos v. 8, so that the translators
were evidently quite at sea as to the identity of these constellations.
We are also in doubt as to what star or constellation the Syrians meant
by _`Iy[=u]th[=a]_, and apparently they were in some doubt themselves,
for in the Talmud we are told that there was a disputation, held in the
presence of the great teacher Rabbi Jehuda, about 150 years after
Christ, whether _`Iy[=u]th[=a]_ was situated in the head of the Bull, or
in the tail of the Ram. Oriental scholars now assign it either to
Aldebaran in the head of the Bull, the "sons" being in this case the
other members of the Hyades group of which Aldebaran is the brightest
star; or else identifying it with the Arabic _el-`aiy[=u]q_, the name of
the star which the Greeks call _Aix_, and we call Capella, the "sons" on
this inference being the three small stars near, called by the Greeks
and by ourselves the "Kids." The word _`Ash_ is used several times in
Scripture, but without any astronomical signification, and is there
rendered "moth," as in Isaiah, where it says--

     "Lo, they all shall wax old as a garment; the moth (_`Ash_)
     shall eat them up."

This literal significance of the word does not help, as we know of no
constellation figured as a "moth" or bearing any resemblance to one.

But the word _`ash_, or _`ayish_ does not differ importantly from the
word _na`sh_, in Hebrew "assembly," in Arabic "bier," which has been the
word used by the Arabs from remote antiquity to denote the four bright
stars in the hind-quarters of the Great Bear; those which form the body
of the Plough. Moreover, the three stars which form the "tail" of the
Great Bear, or the "handle" of the Plough have been called by the Arabs
_ben[=a]t na`sh_, "the daughters of na`sh." The Bear is the great
northern constellation, which swings constantly round the pole, always
visible throughout the changing seasons of the year. There should be no
hesitation then in accepting the opinion of the Rabbi, Aben Ezra, who
saw in _`Ash_, or _`Ayish_ the quadrilateral of the great Bear, whose
four points are marked by the bright stars, Alpha, Beta, Gamma and
Delta, and in the "sons" of _`Ayish_, the three stars, Epsilon, Zeta,
and Eta. Our Revised Version therefore renders the word as "Bear."

In both passages of Job, then, we get the four quarters of the sky
marked out as being under the dominion of the Lord. In the ninth chapter
they are given in the order--

     The Bear, which is in the North;

     Orion, in its acronical rising, with the sun setting in the
     West;

     The Pleiades, in their heliacal rising, with the sun rising in
     the East;

     And the Chambers of the South.

In the later passage they are given with fuller illustration, and in the
order--

     The Pleiades, whose "sweet influences" are given by their
     heliacal rising in spring time, with the sun rising in the
     East;

     Orion, whose "bands" are those of winter, heralded by his
     acronical rising with the sun setting in the West;

     Mazzaroth, the constellations of the zodiac corresponding to
     the Chambers of the South, which the sun occupies each in its
     "season."

     The Bear with its "sons," who, always visible, are unceasingly
     guided round the pole in the North.

The parallelism in the two passages in Job gives us the right to argue
that _`Ash_ and _`Ayish_ refer to the same constellation, and are
variants of the same name; possibly their vocalization was the same, and
they are but two divergent ways of writing the word. We must therefore
reject Prof. Schiaparelli's suggestion made on the authority of the
Peschitta version of the Scriptures and of Rabbi Jehuda, who lived in
the second century A.D., that _`Ash_ is _`Iy[=u]th[=a]_ which is
Aldebaran, but that _`Ayish_ and his "sons" may be Capella and her
"Kids."

Equally we must reject Prof. Stern's argument that _K[=i]mah_ is Sirius,
_K[)e]s[=i]l_ is Orion, _Mazz[=a]r[=o]th_ is the Hyades and _`Ayish_ is
the Pleiades. He bases his argument on the order in which these names
are given in the second passage of Job, and on the contention of
Otfried Mueller that there are only four out of the remarkable groups of
stars placed in the middle and southern regions of the sky which have
given rise to important legends in the primitive mythology of the
Greeks. These groups follow one after the other in a belt in the sky in
the order just given, and their risings and settings were important
factors in the old Greek meteorological and agricultural calendars.
Prof. Stern assumes that _k[)e]s[=i]l_ means Orion, and from this
identification deduces the others, neglecting all etymological or
traditional evidences to the contrary. He takes no notice of the
employment of the same names in passages of Scripture other than that in
the thirty-eighth chapter of Job. Here he would interpret the "chain,"
or "sweet influences" of _K[=i]mah_ = "Sirius the dog," by assuming that
the Jews considered that the dog was mad, and hence was kept chained up.
More important still, he fails to recognize that the Jews had a
continental climate in a different latitude from the insular climate of
Greece, and that both their agricultural and their weather conditions
were different, and would be associated with different astronomical
indications.

In the 9th verse of the 37th chapter of Job we get an antithesis which
has already been referred to--

     "Out of the south cometh the whirlwind: and cold out of the
     north."

The Hebrew word here translated "north" is _mezar[=i]m_, a plural word
which is taken literally to mean "the scatterings." For its
interpretation Prof. Schiaparelli makes a very plausible suggestion. He
says, "We may first observe that the five Hebrew letters with which this
name was written in the original unpointed text could equally well be
read, with a somewhat different pointing, as _mizrim_, or also as
_mizrayim_, of which the one is the plural, the other the dual, of
_mizreh_. Now _mizreh_ means a winnowing-fan, the instrument with which
grain is scattered in the air to sift it; and it has its root, like
_mezarim_, in the word _zarah_, . . . which, besides the sense
_dispersit_, bears also the sense _expandit_, _ventilavit_."[263:1]

[Illustration: STARS OF THE PLOUGH, AS THE WINNOWING FAN.]

If Prof. Schiaparelli is correct in his supposition, then the word
translated "north" in our versions is literally the "two winnowing
fans," names which from the form suggested by the stars we may suppose
that the Jews gave to the two Bears in the sky, just as the Chinese
called them the "Ladles," and the Americans call them the "Big Dipper"
and the "Little Dipper." The sense is still that of the north, but we
may recognize in the word employed another Jewish name of the
constellation, alternative with _`Ash_ or _`Ayish_, or perhaps used in
order to include in the region the Lesser as well as the Greater Bear.
We should not be surprised at finding an alternative name for this great
northern constellation, for we ourselves call it by several different
appellations, using them indiscriminately, perhaps even in the course of
a single paragraph.

What to Job did the question mean which the Lord addressed to him:
"Canst thou guide the Bear and his sons?" To Job it meant, "Canst thou
guide this great constellation of stars in the north, in their unceasing
round, as a charioteer guides his horses in a wide circle, each keeping
to his proper ring, none entangling himself with another, nor falling
out of his place?"

What would the same question mean to us, if addressed to us to-day? In
the first place we might put it shortly as "Canst thou turn the earth on
its axis regularly and continuously, so as to produce this motion of the
stars round the pole, and to make day and night?" But modern astronomy
can ask the question in a deeper and a wider sense.

It was an ancient idea that the stars were fixed in a crystal sphere,
and that they could not alter their relative positions; and indeed until
the last century or two, instruments were not delicate enough to measure
the small relative shift that stars make. It is within the last seventy
years that we have been able to measure the "annual parallax" of certain
stars,--that is, the difference in the position of a star when viewed by
the earth from the opposite ends of a diameter of the earth's orbit
round the sun. Besides their yearly shift due to "annual parallax," most
stars have a "proper" or "peculiar motion" of their own, which is in
most cases a very small amount indeed, but can be determined more easily
than "annual parallax" because its effect accumulates year after year.
If, therefore, we are able to observe a star over a period of fifty, or
a hundred or more years, it may seem to have moved quite an appreciable
amount when examined by the powerful and delicate instruments that we
have now at our disposal. Observations of the exact positions of stars
have been made ever since the founding of Greenwich Observatory, so that
now we have catalogues giving the "proper motions" of several hundreds
of stars. When these are examined it is seen that some groups of stars
move in fellowship together through space, having the same direction,
and moving at the same rate, and of these companies the most striking
are the stars of the Plough, that is _`Ayish_ and his sons. Not all the
stars move together; out of the seven, the first and the last have a
different direction, but the other five show a striking similarity in
their paths. And not only are their directions of movement, and the
amounts of it, the same for the five stars, but spectroscopic
observations of their motion in the line of sight show that they are all
approaching us with a speed of about eighteen miles a second, that is to
say with much the same speed as the earth moves in her orbit round the
sun. Another indication of their "family likeness" is that all their
spectra are similar. A German astronomer, Dr. Hoeffler, has found for
this system a distance from us so great that it would take light 192
years to travel from them to us. Yet so vast is this company of five
stars that it would take light seventy years, travelling at the rate of
186,000 miles in every second of time to go from the leading star,
_Merak_--Beta of the Bear--to _Mizar_--Zeta of the Bear--the final
brilliant of the five. So bright and great are these suns that they
shine to us as gems of the second magnitude, and yet if our sun were
placed amongst them at their distance from us he would be invisible to
the keenest sight.

Dr. Hoeffler's estimate may be an exaggerated one, but it still remains
true that whilst the cluster of the Pleiades forms a great and wonderful
family group, it is dwarfed into insignificance by the vast distances
between these five stars of the Great Bear. Yet these also form one
family, though they are united by no nebulous bands, and are at
distances so great from each other that the bonds of gravitation must
cease to show their influence; yet all are alike, all are marshalled
together in their march under some mysterious law. We cannot answer the
question, "By what means are _`Ayish_ and his sons guided?" much more
are we speechless when we are asked, "Canst thou guide them?"


FOOTNOTES:

[263:1] _Astronomy in the Old Testament_, p. 69.


[Illustration: "BLOW UP THE TRUMPET IN THE NEW MOON."]




BOOK III

TIMES AND SEASONS




CHAPTER I

THE DAY AND ITS DIVISIONS


There is a difference of opinion at the present day amongst astronomers
as to the time in which the planet Venus rotates upon her axis. This
difference arises through the difficulty of perceiving or identifying
any markings on her brilliantly lighted surface. She is probably
continually cloud-covered, and the movements of the very faint shadings
that are sometimes seen upon her have been differently interpreted. The
