Following the dictates of his Venerian knowledge, he crossed to one of
the walls, and drew therefrom a flat, glass vessel, somewhat like a
petri dish. This contained bacteria that were harmless in themselves,
and were hostile to those of the Gray Plague. These germs, brought
from Venus, were the only cure for the terrible disease.[1]

[Footnote 1: The work of the English bacteriologist Twort, in 1915,
and the Frenchman, d'Herelle, in 1917, brought to the attention of the
scientific world the fact that many bacteria are subject to attack and
destruction by some unknown active agent with which they are
associated in infected material. This agent, whatever its character,
changed growing germ cultures to a dead, glassy substance.

Twort advanced the thought that the agent might be a living, filtered
virus, although he favored the theory that it was an enzyme derived
from the bacteria themselves.

D'Herelle, on the contrary, believed that this phenomenon was due to a
living, multiplying, ultra-microscopic microbe that destroyed certain
bacteria.

Evidence favoring both theories has come to light, with the result
that, at present, controversy is rife. Up to date, the contention of
neither side has been proved.]

Parkinson's adventure was almost at an end. He had not emerged
unscathed, but he had won!

The details of his further actions need not be recorded. Suffice it to
say that he entered the sphere, carrying his precious, curative germs,
arose to the top of the tower, and passed through a round opening in
its side. His borrowed knowledge revealed that the car possessed
abilities that he had not suspected; with amazing speed he caused it
to flash across the Atlantic Ocean to the United States.

There he saw the frightful carnage that the Plague had caused, saw the
deserted cities--and was filled with self-reproach because he had not
acted sooner.

Across the miles and miles of deserted country he sped, following the
fleeing hordes, finally passing over the stragglers and landing in
the heart of the congested areas. After making a few inquiries, he
returned to the sphere, and continued on toward the West. He landed,
finally, outside the city of San Francisco.

A short time later, twisted, deformed, yet triumphant, he was ushered
into the presence of the United States government as--the man who had
saved the human race.


CHAPTER IV

The terrible days of the Gray Plague ended in mystery. Much that had
puzzled the world, Parkinson, with his Venerian knowledge, explained;
but there was one thing, the final, enigmatical act in the strange
drama, that was as much of a mystery to him as it was to the rest of
the world.

Enigma! Of what significance, of what portent--who could tell?

When the great vessel from the United States, equipped to destroy the
meteor of the Venetians, neared the great thoque sphere, they came
upon a scene quite different from what they had expected. Parkinson,
who was on the ship, was more surprised than the rest, for he had
definite knowledge of what, in the natural course of events, they
should see. For the others there was nothing so very strange in what
they saw; Parkinson had lied, that was all.

When the bacteriologist had left the meteor, there had been a high,
bronze-colored tower, a burnished lighthouse, covering its entire top.
It had been there--but now it was gone! Only the jagged, arched
surface of the meteor remained.

They lowered boats and rowed to the strange island. There they saw
something that filled them--Parkinson especially--with a very definite
uneasiness. The entire top of the meteor was a twisted, fire-blasted
mass of bronze-like metal. Where the tower had been, where the shaft
had led into the remarkable interplanetary vehicle, there was now a
broken expanse of thoque that flashed fire under the rays of the sun.

Something seemed to have melted, to have fused the tower, until it had
crumpled, and had run, filling the entrance of the meteor. There was
irrefutable evidence to that effect; no one thought otherwise.

But what agency had done this strange thing?

Someone suggested that it might have been the work of some prearranged
mechanism. Parkinson shook his head. Had such been the case, his
Venerian knowledge would have told him so.

Obviously, nothing of Earth had done it, nothing of Earth--then
something of Venus! Inconclusive conjecture, perhaps, but no other
explanation offered itself. Something had sealed the contents of the
meteor from the sight of man, something with a purpose. From Venus?
The thought was logical, to say the least.

Not for long did they remain there beside the Venerian vehicle; there
was naught for them to do, so they turned about and headed toward the
United States. They bore tidings that were vaguely disturbing, tidings
that none were glad to hear. For, according to all indications,
something alien to Earth was still within her confines.

       *       *       *       *       *

Behind it all--the meteors, the Plague, the sealing of the Venerian
vehicle--is one fact of great significance. No longer is man alone in
the universe; no longer is he in isolation! Out of space came a
menace, an intelligence striving to wrest from him his right to rule
over Earth. No longer can man in his smug complacency think of himself
as being secure in his strength. He has been shown the utter folly of
such thinking.

The menace--the invaders from Venus--came, and were destroyed, their
purposes defeated. Yet--in the vast reaches of space, in worlds of
other dimensions, in the cosmic crucible of life that embodies all
creation, there may be other forms of life, other menaces, hovering
clouds of death, preparing to sweep down upon Earth to snuff out her
life. Who can tell?

And who may say that man is free from the Venerian danger? The strange
sealing of the meteor implies that the menace is still present. Who
knows but what those inhuman Venerian brutes may even now be planning
some new invasion, may be preparing to renew their attack upon Earth?

Time alone will tell.


ROBOT PILOTS FOR AIRCRAFT

Perfection of an automatic mechanical piloting mechanism for airplanes
has been achieved after several years of experiment at the royal
aircraft establishment of Farnborough.

The apparatus has been successfully tried out on various types of
planes--two-seater day bombers, large twin-engine night bombers and
big flying boats. Its use as a second or relief pilot on long distance
flights by Royal Air Force machines is now being considered.

In every test the robot pilot has steered an accurate course for hours
at a time and over distances up to 400 miles while human members of
the crew have been concerned with other duties.

The basis of the mechanical pilot is a gyroscope that controls pistons
connected with the rudder and elevators of the plane. These pistons
are actuated by compressed air.

Once a course is set the robot pilot keeps the machine on that route
and errors of even a fraction of a degree are instantly and
automatically detected and corrected. All the human pilot has to do in
a plane so equipped is to take off and land the machine.

The Pilot's Assister is the official name of the new English device.
It weighs about 120 pounds.

Flights have been made with the mechanical pilot in all sorts of
weather. In dense fog and clouds, when a human pilot would have found
it almost impossible to maintain straight or level flight because of
the absence of any visible horizon by which to steer, the mechanical
pilot flew the plane with absolute accuracy. On one test flight the
automatic pilot steered a dead true course from Farnborough in South
England, to Newcastle, 270 miles farther north. The human pilot did
not touch the controls until it was necessary to land the plane at the
destination.




Jetta of the Lowlands

Conclusion

_By Ray Cummings_

[Sidenote: Black-garbed figures move in ghastly greenness as the
invisible flyer speeds on its business of ransom.]

[Illustration: _Hans and I hauled out the heavy casket._]


CHAPTER XV

_In the Bandit Camp_

The dark cave, with its small spots of tube-light mounted upon movable
tripods, was eery with grotesque swaying shadows. The bandit camp.
Hidden down here in the depths of the Mid-Atlantic Lowlands. An
inaccessible retreat, this cave in what once was the ocean floor. Only
a few years ago water had been here, water black and cold and
soundless. Tremendous pressure, with three thousand or more fathoms of
the ocean above it. Fishes had roamed these passages, no doubt.
Strange monsters of the deeps: sightless, or with eyes like
phosphorescent torches.

But the water was gone now. Blue ooze was caked upon the cave floor.
Eroded walls; niches and tiny gullies; crevices and an arching dome
high overhead. A fantastic cave--no one, seeing it as I saw it that
morning at dawn, could have believed it was upon this earth. From
where De Boer had put me--on the flat top of a small, butte-like dome
near the upper end of the sloping cave floor--all the area of this
strange bandit camp was visible to me.

A little tent of parchment was set upon the dome-top.

"Yours," said De Boer, with a grin. "Make yourself comfortable.
Gutierrez will be your willing servant, until we see about this
ransom. It will have to be one very large, for you are a damn trouble
to me, Grant. And a risk. Food will come shortly. Then you can sleep:
I think you will want it."

He leaped from the little butte, leaving the taciturn ever-watchful
Gutierrez sitting cross-legged on the ledge near me, with his
projector across his knees.

       *       *       *       *       *

The cave was irregularly circular, with perhaps, a hundred-feet
diameter and a ceiling fifty feet high. A drift of the fetid, Lowland
air went through it--into a rift at this upper end, and out through
the lower passage entrance which sloped downward thirty feet and
debouched upon a rippled ramp of ooze outside. It was daylight out
there now. From my perch I could see the sullen heavy walls of a
ridge. Mist hung against them, but the early morning sunlight came
down in shafts penetrating the mist and striking the oily surface of a
spread of water left here in the depths of a cauldron.

De Boer's flyer was outside. We had landed by the shore of the sea,
and the bandits had pushed the vehicle into an arching recess which
seemed as though made to hide it. All this camp was hidden. Arching
crags of the ridge-wall jutted out over the cave entrance. From above,
any passing flyer--even though well below the zero-height--would see
nothing but this black breathing sea, lapping against its eroded,
fantastic shore-line.

Within the cave, there was only a vague filtering daylight from the
lower entrance, a thin shaft from the rift overhead, and the blue
tube-light, throwing great shadows of the tents and the men against
the black rock walls.

There seemed perhaps a hundred of the bandits here. A semi-permanent
camp, by its aspect. Grey parchment tents were set up about the floor,
some small, others more elaborate. It seemed as though it were a
huddled little group of buildings in the open air, instead of in a
cave. One tent, just at the foot of my dome, seemed De Boer's personal
room. He went into it after leaving me, and came out to join the main
group of his fellows near the center of the cave where a large
electron stove, and piped water from a nearby subterranean freshet,
and a long table set with glassware and silver, stood these men for
kitchen and eating place.

       *       *       *       *       *

The treasure had not yet been brought in from the flyer. But, from
what I overheard, it seemed that the radiumized ingots of the
ill-fated Spawn and Perona were to be stored for a year at least, here
in this cave. I could see the strong-room cubby. It was hewn from the
rock of the cave wall, its sealed-grid door-oval set with metal bars.

I saw also what seemed a small but well-equipped machine shop, in a
recess room at one side of the cave. Men were working in there under
the light of tubes. And there was a niche hollowed out in the wall to
make a room for De Boer's instruments--ether-wave receivers and
transmitters, the aerial receiving wires of which stretched in banks
along the low ceiling.

There was no activity in there now, except for one man who was
operating what I imagined might be an aerial insulator, guarding the
place from any prying search-vibrations.

The main cave was a bustle of activity. The arriving bandits were
greeting their fellows and exchanging news. The men who had been left
here were jubilant at the success of the Chief's latest enterprise.
Bottles were unsealed and they began to prepare the morning meal.

My presence caused considerable comment. I was a complication at which
most of the men were ill pleased, especially when the arriving bandits
told who I was, and that the patrols of the United States were
doubtless even now trying to find me.

But De Boer silenced the grumbling with rough words.

"My business, not yours. But you will take your share of his ransom,
won't you? Have done!"

And Jetta, she had caused comment also. But when the bottles were well
distributed the grumbling turned to ribald banter which made me
shudder that it should fall upon Jetta's ears. De Boer had kept his
men away from her, shoving them aside when they crowded to see her.
She was in a little tent now, not far from the base of my ledge.

My meal presently was brought from where most of the bandits now were
roistering at the long table in the center of the cave.

"Eat," said Gutierrez. "I eat with you, Americano. _Madre Mia_, when
you are ransomed away from here it will please me! De Boer is fool,
with taking such a chance."

       *       *       *       *       *

With the meal ended, another guard came to take Gutierrez' place and I
was ordered into my tent. The routine of the camp, it seemed, was to
use the daylight hours for the time of sleep. There were lookouts and
guards at the entrance, and a little arsenal of ready weapons stocked
in the passage. The men at the table were still at their meal. It
would end, I did not doubt, by most of them falling into heavy
alcoholic slumber.

I was tired, poisoned by the need of sleep. I lay on fabric cushions
piled in one corner of my tent. But sleep would not come; my thoughts
ran like a tumbling mountain torrent, and as aimlessly. I hoped that
Jetta was sleeping. De Boer was now at the center table with his men.
Hans was guarding Jetta. He was a phlegmatic, heavy Dutchman, and
seemed decent enough.

I wondered what Hanley might be doing to rescue me. But as I thought
about it, I could only hope that his patrols would not find us out
here. An attack and most certainly De Boer and his men in their anger
would kill me out of hand. And possibly Jetta also.

I had not had a word alone with Jetta since that scene in the control
room. When we disembarked, she had stayed close by De Boer. But I knew
that Jetta had fathomed my purpose, that she was working to the same
end. We must find a way of arranging the ransom which would give us an
opportunity to escape.

I pondered it. And at last an idea came to me, vague in all its
details, as yet. But it seemed feasible, and I thought it would sound
plausible to De Boer. I would watch my chance and explain it to him.
Then I realized how much aid Jetta would be. She would agree with my
plan, and help me convince him. And when the crucial time came, though
I would be a captive, watched by Gutierrez, bound and gagged,
perhaps--Jetta would be at liberty. De Boer and Gutierrez would not be
on their guard with her.

I drifted off to sleep, working out the details of my plan.


CHAPTER XVI

_Planning The Ransom_

I was awakened by the sound of low voices outside my tent. Jetta's
voice, and De Boer's, and, mingled with them, the babble of the still
