dome-top, and crashed silently on the central runway near the
stern-tip. Anita and I ran to it.

The two helmeted figures seized us, shoved us prone on the metal
platform. It was barely four feet wide: a low railing, handles with
which to cling, and a tiny hooded cubby in front, with banks of
controls.

"Gregg!"

"Snap!"

It was Snap and Venza. She seized Anita, held her crouching in place.
Snap flung himself face down at the controls.

The brigands in the lock were out on the dome now. I took a last shot
as we lifted. My bullet punctured one of them; he fell, slid
scrambling off the rounded dome and dropped out of sight.

Light-rays and silent flashes seemed to envelop us. Venza held the
side-shields higher.

We tilted, swayed crazily, and then steadied.

The ship's dome dropped away beneath us. The rocks of the open ledge
were under us. Then the abyss, with the moving climbing specks of
Miko's lights far down.

I saw, over the side-shield, the already distant brigand ship resting
on the ledge with the massive Archimedes' wall behind it. A confusion
back there of futile flashing rays.

It all faded into a remote glow as we sailed smoothly up into the
starlight and away, heading for the Grantline camp.


CHAPTER XXXIII

_Besieged!_

"Wake up, Gregg! They're coming!"

I forced myself to consciousness. "Coming--"

"Yes. Wake up!"

I leaped from my bunk, followed Snap with a rush into the corridor. We
had returned safely to the Grantline Camp. Anita and I found ourselves
exhausted from lack of sleep, our arduous climb of Archimedes and that
tense time on the brigand ship. On the flight back Snap had explained
how the landing of the ship on Archimedes was observed through the
Grantline telescope, using but little of its power for this local
range. They had read with amazement my signals to the brigands. Snap
had rushed to completion the first of our contemplated flying
platforms. Then he had seen Miko's signals from the crater-base, seen
the lights of the fight to capture Anita and me in the cubby, and had
come to rescue us.

Back at the camp we were given food, and Grantline forced me to try
and sleep.

"They'll be on us in a few hours, Gregg. Miko will have joined them by
now. He'll lead them to us. You must rest, for we need everyone at his
best."

And surprisingly, in the midst of the camp's turmoil of last minute
activities, I slept soundly, until Snap called me that the ship was
coming.

The corridor echoed with the tramp of Grantline's busy crew. But there
was no confusion now; a grim calmness had settled upon everyone.

Anita and Venza rushed up to join us. "It's in sight!"

       *       *       *       *       *

There was no need of going to the instrument room. From the windows
fronting the brink of the cliff the brigand ship was plainly visible.
It came sailing from Archimedes, a dark shape blurring the stars. All
its lights were extinguished save a single white search-beam in the
bow-peak, slanting diagonally down.

The beam presently caught our little group of buildings; its glare
shone in the windows as it clung for a moment. I could envisage the
triumphant curiosity, of Potan and his fellows up there, gazing along
the beam.

Then it swung away. The ship was at an altitude of no more than three
thousand feet when I first saw it, coming upon a level keel. Would it
circle over us, firing at us? Or sail past, after inspecting us? Or
land, perhaps, boldly crowded upon our little ledge?

We were ready--as ready as we could be with our meager equipment. The
camp was in a state of siege. The cliff-lights were extinguished: the
interior lights were dim, save in the workshops of the main building,
where the final assembling of Snap's other flying platforms and their
insulated protective shields was still in progress.

We had dimmed the lights to conserve our power, and to enable the
Erentz motors to run at full capacity. Our buildings would have to
withstand the brigand rays which soon would be upon us.

Outside on our dim, Earthlit cliff, the tiny lights showed where our
few guards were lurking. As I stood at the window watching the
oncoming ship, Grantline's voice sounded:

"Call in those men! Ring the call-lights, Franck!"

The siren buzzed over the camp's interior; the warning call-lights on
the roof brought in the outer guards. They came running to the
admission portes, which had been repaired after Miko disabled them.

       *       *       *       *       *

The guards came in. We dimmed our lights further. The treasure sheds
were black against the cliff behind us. No need for guards there--the
bulk of the ore was such that we reasoned the brigands would not
attempt to move it until our buildings were captured. But, if they
should try it, we were prepared to sally out with our hand-weapons and
defend it.

In the dim lights we crouched. A silence was upon us, save for the
clanging in the workshop down the corridor. Most of us wore our Erentz
suits, with helmets ready, though I am sure there was not a man of us
but who prayed he might not have to go out. At many of the
windows--our weakest points to withstand the rays--insulated fabric
shields were hung like curtains.

The brigand ship slowly advanced. It was soon over the opposite rim of
our little crater. Its search-beam swung about the rim and down into
the valley.

My thoughts ran like a turgid stream as I stood tensely watching.

Four hours ago I had sent that flash-signal to Earth. If it were
received, a patrol-ship could come to our rescue and arrive here in
another eight hours--or perhaps even less.

Ah, that "if!" _If_ the signal were received! _If_ the patrol-ship
were immediately available! _If_ it started at once....

Eight hours at the very least. I tried to assure myself that we could
hold out that long....

The brigand ship crossed the opposite crater-rim. It dropped lower. It
seemed poised over the crater-valley, almost at our own level and less
than two miles from us. Its search-beam vanished. For a moment it
hung, a sleek, cylindrical silver shape, gleaming in the Earthlight.

Snap looked at me and murmured, "It's descending."

It slowly settled, cautiously picked its landing-place amid the crags
and pits of the tumbled scarred valley floor. It came to rest, a vague
silver menacing shape lurking in the lower shadows, close at the foot
of the inner opposite crater-wall.

A few moments of tense waiting passed. Soon tiny lights were moving
down there, some out on the rocks near the ship, others up under its
deck-dome.

A stab of searchlight shot across the valley, swung along our ledge
and clung with its glaring ten-foot circle to the front of our main
building. Then a ray flashed.

The assault had begun!

(_To be concluded_)

[Advertisement:]




The Jovian Jest

_By Lilith Lorraine_

[Illustration: _The object shot forth another tentacle._]

[Sidenote: There came to our pigmy planet a radiant wanderer with a
message--and a jest--from the vasty universe.]


Consternation reigned in Elsnore village when the Nameless Thing was
discovered in Farmer Burns' corn-patch. When the rumor began to gain
credence that it was some sort of meteor from inter-stellar space,
reporters, scientists and college professors flocked to the scene,
desirous of prying off particles for analysis. But they soon
discovered that the Thing was no ordinary meteor, for it glowed at
night with a peculiar luminescence. They also observed that it was
practically weightless, since it had embedded itself in the soft sand
scarcely more than a few inches.

By the time the first group of newspapermen and scientists had reached
the farm, another phenomenon was plainly observable. The Thing was
growing!

Farmer Burns, with an eye to profit, had already built a picket fence
around his starry visitor and was charging admission. He also flatly
refused to permit the chipping off of specimens or even the touching
of the object. His attitude was severely criticized, but he stubbornly
clung to the theory that possession is nine points in law.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was Professor Ralston of Princewell who, on the third day after the
fall of the meteor, remarked upon its growth. His colleagues crowded
around him as he pointed out this peculiarity, and soon they
discovered another factor--pulsation!

Larger than a small balloon, and gradually, almost imperceptibly
expanding, with its viscid transparency shot through with opalescent
lights, the Thing lay there in the deepening twilight and palpably
shivered. As darkness descended, a sort of hellish radiance began to
ooze from it. I say hellish, because there is no other word to
describe that spectral, sulphurous emanation.

As the hangers-on around the pickets shudderingly shrank away from the
weird light that was streaming out to them and tinting their faces
with a ghastly, greenish pallor, Farmer Burns' small boy, moved by
some imp of perversity, did a characteristically childish thing. He
picked up a good-sized stone and flung it straight at the nameless
mass!

       *       *       *       *       *

Instead of veering off and falling to the ground as from an impact
with metal, the stone sank right through the surface of the Thing as
into a pool of protoplastic slime. When it reached the central core of
the object, a more abundant life suddenly leaped and pulsed from
center to circumference. Visible waves of sentient color circled round
the solid stone. Stabbing swords of light leaped forth from them,
piercing the stone, crumbling it, absorbing it. When it was gone, only
a red spot, like a bloodshot eye, throbbed eerily where it had been.

Before the now thoroughly mystified crowd had time to remark upon this
inexplicable disintegration, a more horrible manifestation occurred.
The Thing, as though thoroughly awakened and vitalized by its unusual
fare, was putting forth a tentacle. Right from the top of the
shivering globe it pushed, sluggishly weaving and prescient of doom.
Wavering, it hung for a moment, turning, twisting, groping. Finally it
shot straight outward swift as a rattler's strike!

Before the closely packed crowd could give room for escape, it had
circled the neck of the nearest bystander, Bill Jones, a cattleman,
and jerked him, writhing and screaming, into the reddish core.
Stupefied with soul-chilling terror, with their mass-consciousness
practically annihilated before a deed with which their minds could
make no association, the crowd could only gasp in sobbing unison and
await the outcome.

       *       *       *       *       *

The absorption of the stone had taught them what to expect, and for a
moment it seemed that their worst anticipations were to be realised. The
sluggish currents circled through the Thing, swirling the victim's body to
the center. The giant tentacle drew back into the globe and became itself
a current. The concentric circles merged--tightened--became one gleaming
cord that encircled the helpless prey. From the inner circumference of
this cord shot forth, not the swords of light that had powdered the stone
to atoms, but myriads of radiant tentacles that gripped and cupped the
body in a thousand places.

Suddenly the tentacles withdrew themselves, all save the ones that
grasped the head. These seemed to tighten their pressure--to swell and
pulse with a grayish substance that was flowing from the cups into the
cord and from the cord into the body of the mass. Yes, it was a
grayish something, a smokelike Essence that was being drawn from the
cranial cavity. Bill Jones was no longer screaming and gibbering, but
was stiff with the rigidity of stone. Notwithstanding, there was no
visible mark upon his body; his flesh seemed unharmed.

Swiftly came the awful climax. The waving tentacles withdrew
themselves, the body of Bill Jones lost its rigidity, a heaving motion
from the center of the Thing propelled its cargo to the surface--and
Bill Jones stepped out!

Yes, he stepped out and stood for a moment staring straight ahead,
staring at nothing, glassily. Every person in the shivering, paralysed
group knew instinctively that something unthinkable had happened to
him. Something had transpired, something hitherto possible only in the
abysmal spaces of the Other Side of Things. Finally he turned and
faced the nameless object, raising his arm stiffly, automatically, as
in a military salute. Then he turned and walked jerkily, mindlessly,
round and round the globe like a wooden soldier marching. Meanwhile
the Thing lay quiescent--gorged!

       *       *       *       *       *

Professor Ralston was the first to find his voice. In fact, Professor
Ralston was always finding his voice in the most unexpected places.
But this time it had caught a chill. It was trembling.

"Gentlemen," he began, looking down academically upon the motley crowd
as though doubting the aptitude of his salutation. "Fellow-citizens,"
he corrected, "the phenomenon we have just witnessed is, to the lay
mind, inexplicable. To me--and to my honorable colleagues (added as an
afterthought) it is quite clear. Quite clear, indeed. We have before
us a specimen, a perfect specimen, I might say, of a--of a--"

He stammered in the presence of the unnamable. His hesitancy caused
the rapt attention of the throng that was waiting breathlessly for an
explanation, to flicker back to the inexplicable. In the fraction of a
second that their gaze had been diverted from the Thing to the
professor, the object had shot forth another tentacle, gripping him
round the neck and choking off his sentence with a horrid rasp that
sounded like a death rattle.

Needless to say, the revolting process that had turned Bill Jones
from a human being into a mindless automaton was repeated with
Professor Ralston. It happened as before, too rapidly for
intervention, too suddenly for the minds of the onlookers to shake off
the paralysis of an unprecedented nightmare. But when the victim was
thrown to the surface, when he stepped out, drained of the grayish
smokelike essence, a tentacle still gripped his neck and another
rested directly on top of his head. This latter tentacle, instead of
absorbing _from_ him, visibly poured into him what resembled a
threadlike stream of violet light.

       *       *       *       *       *

Facing the cowering audience with eyes staring glassily, still in the
grip of the unknowable, Professor Ralston did an unbelievable thing.
He resumed his lecture at the exact point of interruption! But he
spoke with the tonelessness of a machine, a machine that pulsed to the
will of a dictator, inhuman and inexorable!

"What you see before you," the Voice continued--the Voice that no
longer echoed the thoughts of the professor--"is what you would call
an amoeba, a giant amoeba. It is I--this amoeba, who am addressing
you--children of an alien universe. It is I, who through this captured
instrument of expression, whose queer language you can understand, am
explaining my presence on your planet. I pour my thoughts into this
specialised brain-box which I have previously drained of its meager
thought-content." (Here the "honorable colleagues" nudged each other
gleefully.) "I have so drained it for the purpose of analysis and that
the flow of my own ideas may pass from my mind to yours unimpeded by
any distortion that might otherwise be caused by their conflict with
the thoughts of this individual.

"First I absorbed the brain-content of this being whom you call Bill
Jones, but I found his mental instrument unavailable. It was
technically untrained in the use of your words that would best convey
my meaning. He possesses more of what you would call 'innate
intelligence,' but he has not perfected the mechanical brain through
whose operation this innate intelligence can be transmitted to others
and, applied for practical advantage.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Now this creature that I am using is, as you might say, full of sound
without meaning. His brain is a lumber-room in which he has hoarded a
conglomeration of clever and appropriate word-forms with which to
disguise the paucity of his ideas, with which to express nothing! Yet
the very abundance of the material in his storeroom furnishes a
discriminating mind with excellent tools for the transportation of its
ideas into other minds.

"Know, then, that I am not here by accident. I am a Space Wanderer, an
explorer from a super-universe whose evolution has proceeded without
variation along the line of your amoeba. Your evolution, as I perceive
from an analysis of the brain-content of your professor, _began_ its
unfoldment in somewhat the same manner as our own. But in your smaller
system, less perfectly adjusted than our own to the cosmic mechanism,
