
Hastily and without a backward glance, he gathered the girl into his
arms and dashed into the room where he had first found her. Ascertaining
that she had but swooned he placed her gently on the bed. In some
perplexity as to his next move he stared at the beautiful face now so
wan and white. Queer that he hadn't noticed the fact before--she was
beautiful. He even took a second look, then noting a continued absence
of all sound from the laboratory decided to investigate.

Gingerly he pushed open the door, sniffing the air cautiously as he
advanced. To his nostrils gradually came a slight scent, which though
almost imperceptible made his senses reel. As he approached the hall
door he found the atmosphere heavy with the soporific vapors from the
broken vial, and he staggered drunkenly.

He gave a start of surprise. On the floor, lying in a grotesque huddle
which suggested a most unpleasant possibility, was the inert body of
Professor Kell.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jimmie bent over the body and put an experienced ear to the heart. Yes,
there as a faint beat--very faint. Even as he listened he perceived a
slight increase in the respiration. Now the breath began coming in
great, choking gasps, only to die suddenly to next to nothing. At last
with a rueful sigh Jimmie reached to his hip and produced the private
O'Hara flagon. He stooped over the Professor's form once more and by
dint of much prying at clenched jaws managed to force a sizeable charge
of fiery liquid down the old man's throat. Jimmie had just begun to
entertain a strong hope that this latter effort would bring the
Professor to life, when his keen ear detected signs of a commotion
below.

He sprang from his position over the slowly reviving Kell and leaped to
a vantage point beside the door. A blackjack miraculously appeared from
some hidden part of his anatomy and the ever-dependable Colt also became
in evidence. Now came the banging of a door, muffled voices, a crash as
of a chair overturned in the dark. Up rolled a horrible oath, and the
same was rendered in a voice to Jimmie sweetly familiar. Came the sound
of footsteps on the stairway and several persons coming along the hall.

"Where in hell is Jimmie?" roared a wicked voice. "If he's met with any
monkey business in this hell-hole I'll see that the damned place burns
to the ground before I leave it!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Delightedly Jimmie jerked open the door.

"Still alive, Chief," he chirped as the Old Man strode into the
laboratory. Bland was followed by Perry, who seemed to be in a sort of
daze. Bringing up the rear were a pair of plainclothesmen whom Jimmie
knew very well--almost too well. One of these gentlemen bore a lantern
which reminded Jimmie strongly of some he had seen that night guarding
an open ditch in the public highway.

The Professor had fully regained consciousness and was struggling to his
feet. As for Norma Manion, she had suddenly appeared, leaning weakly
against the door casing, and was surveying the group in great alarm.

After being assured by O'Hara that they were her friends she smiled
wanly. To Bland and the others she was, of course, an unexpected factor
in the weird night's doings, and for several moments they regarded her
curiously.

At length Jimmie, sensing the question in the Old Man's eyes, elected to
offer a few words of explanation.

"Miss Manion has just been through a terrible experience," he said.
"She and her father have been for some time at the mercy of this
monster"--indicating Kell--"and her nerves are completely shattered.
We'd better get her out of this as quickly as we can."

"Mike!" Hard Boiled Bland glared at one of the officers. "Don't stand
there with your teeth in your gums like that. Take this girl out to my
car and let her lie down. She needs a stimulant, too. If you search my
car and find any red liquor in the left back door pocket, I don't know a
thing about it. And stay with her so she won't be afraid to go to
sleep."

She smiled in silent gratitude and allowed the plainclothesman to lead
her away from that chamber of horror.

       *       *       *       *       *

The reporter lost no time in telling Bland of his failure to find Skip
Handlon. He went on to acquaint his Chief with the facts of all that had
occured while he had been at the Professor's house.

The fiery old fellow listened grimly. When Jimmie came to the story of
the corpse and the cask the editor breathed one word, "Manion!"

Jimmie nodded sadly. All eyes turned to the dejected huddle on the floor
that was Professor Kell. Finally Bland could wait no longer, but fixed a
terrible eye on the murderer and demanded harshly, "Where's Handlon?"

Now the Professor burst into a fit of insane laughter, laughter that
curdled the blood of the listeners.

"You ask me that! It's almost too good. Hee-hee! You sent your two
precious reporters out to my house to pry into my secrets, and thought
to display my name all over your yellow sheet; but you forgot that you
were dealing with Professor Anton Kell, didn't you?" The last he fairly
shrieked. "A lot of people have tried to intrude upon me before, but
none ever escaped me!"

"We know that," cut in Jimmie, for he was getting impatient and the old
man's boastings seemed out of place. "You are slated for the rope
anyway, after what I discovered down cellar." He jerked his eyes in the
direction of the door significantly. "Now we propose to find Handlon,
and the better it will be for you if you tell us what you have done with
him. Otherwise...."

"You can go to hell!" screamed the maniac. "If you are so clever, find
out for yourselves. He isn't so far away that you couldn't touch him by
reaching out your hand. In fact, he's been with you quite a while.
Hee-hee-hee! Well, if you must know--there he is!" With an insane
chuckle he pointed at Horace Perry. And Perry did a strange thing.

"Yes, you fiend, here I am!" Whose voice was that? Was it Perry
speaking, or was it Skip Handlon? Most assuredly Perry stood before
them, but the voice, in a subtle manner, reminded the group strongly of
poor old Skip.

       *       *       *       *       *

As he spoke Perry had launched himself at the Professor's throat and had
to be restrained by the others. Savagely he fought them but slowly and
surely they overcame his struggles and placed him, writhing, in a
chair.

Of a sudden Bland leaned forward and scrutinized Perry's face sharply.
Had the reporter gone insane too? The pupils of the eyes had taken on a
sort of queer contraction, a fixed quality that was almost ludicrous. He
looked like a man under hypnosis. He had gone limp in their grasp, but
now suddenly he stiffened. The eyes underwent another startling change,
this time glowing undoubtedly with the look of reason. Bland was
mystified and waited for Perry to explain his queer conduct. The latter
seemed finally to come to. Simultaneously he realized that his peculiar
lapse from consciousness had been observed by the others.

"Guess I may as well admit it," he said with a wry smile. "Ever since I
came back from my assignment with Kell I have had a hell of a time. Half
the time I have been in a daze and have not had the least idea what I
was doing. Funny part of it is that I have seemed to keep right on doing
things even while I was out of my head." He told briefly of the visions
he had had in which he had seemed to contend with his brother reporter,
the horrid sensations as he felt himself overcome, the black oblivion in
which he then found himself, and the mysterious manner in which he had
left Keegan on that ill-fated assignment.

"What have you done to Handlon?" Jimmie's voice cut in. He was standing
over the form of the maniac, rigid and menacing. "You have exactly two
minutes to go."

"Find out for yourself!" snarled the bruised and battered fiend.

"I will," was the answer, and on the instant a horrible shriek rent the
air. Jimmie had quickly grasped both of the Professor's arms at the
wrists and was slowly twisting them in a grip of iron. Kell's face went
white, the lips writhed back over toothless gums, the eyes closed in the
supreme effort to withstand the excruciating pain. Then--

"Enough, enough!" he screamed.

       *       *       *       *       *

O'Hara eased the pressure slightly but retained his hold upon the
clawlike hands. "Talk fast," he ordered.

The old man struggled futilely in the grasp of the powerful reporter,
finally glancing in the direction of the others. Would they show signs
of pity? Surely not Hard Boiled Bland. The Chief was watching the
struggles of the victim through a cloud of tobacco smoke which he was
slowly exhaling through his nose. The plainclothesman displayed no sign
of interest at all. The game was up!

"Very well," he said sullenly. "Handlon and Perry are both occupying the
same body."

"Wh-a-a-t?" roared Bland. "Jimmie, I guess you'll have to put the screws
to him some more. He's trying to make fools of us at the last minute!"

"No, no!" screamed the Professor. "What I say is true. I have been
working for years on my system of de-astralization. This last year I at
length perfected my electric de-astralizer, which amplifies and exerts
the fifth influence of de-cohesion."

The whole party began to look uneasy and gazed apprehensively at the
huge Crookes tube which still stood in its supporting frame on the
table.

"I have been forced to experiment on animals for the most part," the
Professor continued. "I succeeded in de-astralizing a dog and a bull and
caused them to exchange bodies. The bodies continued to function. I was
enthusiastic. Other experiments took place of which I will not tell you.
Finally I began to long for a human subject on which to try my fifth
influence."

"Just get down to cases, if you don't mind, Kell." The Chief wanted
action. "Suppose you tell us just what you did to Handlon and where we
can find him. I may as well mention that your life depends upon it. If
we find that you have done for him, something worse than death may
happen to you." The tone was menacing. Although Handlon was a
comparatively late acquisition to the old Chief's staff, still he had
been loyal to the paper.

"When your two damned reporters entered my driveway," Kell resumed. "I
saw them coming through a powerful glass which I always have on hand. I
had no desire to see them, but they forced themselves upon me. At last I
determined that they should furnish material for my experiments.

       *       *       *       *       *

"If your men had looked into the grove behind the barn they would have
found the automobile which furnished two more subjects I was keeping on
hand in a room upstairs. Old Manion and his daughter gave me quite a bit
of trouble, but I kept them drugged most of the time. He broke out of
the room to-night though, and I had to kill him. It was self defense,"
he added slyly.

"Anyway, I found it was possible to make two astrals exchange bodies.
But I also wanted to see if it were possible to cause two astrals to
occupy the same body at the same time, and if so what the result would
be. I found out. It was rare sport to watch your star reporter leave my
house. He was damned glad to leave, I believe...." Again came the insane
cackle.

"Guess we have to believe him whether we want to or not." The detective
came to life. "How about making him release Handlon's--what d'ye call
it?--astral--from Perry's body?"

"Just a moment." The voice now was unmistakably Handlon's, though it was
issuing from the throat of Perry. "In the minute I have in consciousness
let me suggest that before you do any more de-astralizing you _locate my
body_. Until then, if I am released from this one I am a dead man."

The words struck the group dumb. Where _was_ Handlon's body? Could the
Professor produce it?

That worthy looked rather haunted at that moment, and they began to see
the fear of death coming upon him.

"Mercy, mercy!" he begged as the four men started to advance upon him.
"As soon as I had de-astralized Handlon I destroyed his body in my
pickling barrel down cellar. But there is another way...." He paused,
uncertain as to how his next words would be received. "Go out and get
the Manion girl. She can be de-astralized and friend Handlon can have
her body."

       *       *       *       *       *

At this suggestion, advanced so naively, the four men recoiled in
horror. It was entirely too much even for Hard Boiled Bland, and he
could hardly restrain himself from applying the editorial fist to the
leering face before him. Undoubtedly Professor Kell was hopelessly
insane, and for that reason he held himself in leash.

"Kell, you are slated to pull off one more stunt," Jimmie addressed the
cringing heap. "You know what it is. Get busy. And just remember that I
am standing over here"--he indicated a corner well separated from the
rest--"with this cannon aimed in your direction. If things aren't just
according to Hoyle, you get plugged. Get me?"

"What about it, men?" Bland spoke up. "Is it going to be treating
Handlon right to de-astralize him now? It will be his last chance to
have a body on this earth."

"Unfortunately that body never belonged to Handlon," said O'Hara. "Hence
I fail to see why Perry should be discommoded for the balance of his
life with a companion astral. Perry is clearly entitled to his own body,
free and unhampered. Friend Skip is out of luck, unless--Well, I don't
mind telling you, Kell, that you just gave me an idea. Snap into it
now!"

The Professor dragged himself to his feet and under the menace of the
automatic fumbled under the table until he had located the intricate
apparatus before mentioned.

"Now if Mr. Perry--or Handlon--will kindly recline at full length on
this table," he said with an obscene leer, "the experiment will begin."

"Just remember, Kell, this is no experiment," advised Bland, fixing the
Professor with an ugly eye. "You do as you're told."

The other made no reply, but threw a hidden switch. Perry, lying flat on
his back on the ancient table, suddenly found himself being bathed by
what seemed to be a ray of light, and yet was not a ray of light. What
was it? It was surely not visible, yet it was tangible. A terrific force
was emanating from that devilish globe above him, drawing him out of
himself--or--no--was he expanding? Again his ears became filled with
confused, horrible sounds, the outlines of the room faded from sight,
he felt a strange sense of inflation ... of lightness.... Oblivion!

       *       *       *       *       *

From where the others sat a gasp of wonder went up. At the first contact
of the switch there had been a momentary flash of greenish light within
the bulb, and then a swift transition to a beautiful orange. It had then
faded altogether, leaving the glass apparently inert and inactive.

But it was not so! The form lying beneath the bulb was evidently being
racked with untold tortures. The face became a thing of horror. Now it
had twisted into a grotesque semblance of Handlon's--now it again
resembled Perry's. The Professor quietly increased the pressure of the
current. From the bulb emanated a steel gray exhalation of what must be
termed light, and yet so real it was seemingly material. Assuredly it
was not a ray of light as we understand light. It came in great beating
throbs, in which the actual vibrations were entirely visible. Under each
impact the body of Perry seemed to change, slowly at first, then with
increasing speed. The body was now swelled to enormous size. Bland
reached forward to touch it.

"This de-cohering influence," the Professor was murmuring, almost
raptly, "causes the atoms that go to make a living body repel one
another. When the body is sufficiently nebulized, the soul--Back! Back,
you fool!" he suddenly shrieked, grasping Bland by the arm. "Do you want
to kill him?"

Bland hurriedly retreated, convinced perforce that Kell's alarm was
genuine. The editorial fingers had penetrated the subject's garments
without resistance and sank into the body as easily as if it were so
much soft soap!

       *       *       *       *       *

The body continued to expand until at length even the hard-headed
plainclothesman realized that it had been reduced to a mere vapor.
Within this horrid vaporized body, which nearly filled the room and
which had now lost all semblance to a man, could be discerned two faint
shapes. Swiftly the Professor extinguished the lantern. The shapes,
vague though they were, could be recognized as those of Horace Perry and
Skip Handlon. And they were at strife!

All eyes were now focused on Professor Kell, who was evidently waiting
for something to happen. The two apparitions within the body-cloud were
at death grips. One had been overcome and was temporarily helpless. It
was that of Handlon. And then again the astral of Perry forcibly ousted
that of Handlon from the cloud-cyst. And at that instant Professor Kell
