buy thees machine inside, and we put him together. But he could no
make him work--it take too long. We watch, hear old man go down
to-night, and--"

       *       *       *       *       *

The greaser stopped. "And so he sent you to get me, while he kidnapped
the old man and his daughter and forced them under the ground in their
own borer," Holmes supplied, and the other nodded.

"But I only mean to tie you!" he blurted, gesturing weakly. "I no mean
shoot! No, no--"

"All right--forget it," Phil interrupted. "And now tell me what Quade
expects to do down there."

"I not know, Senor," came the hesitant reply, "but...."

"But what?" the young man jerked.

Reluctantly the wounded Mexican continued. "Senor Quade--he--I think
he don' like thees old man. I think he leave heem an' the girl down
below. Then he come up an' say they keeled going down."

Phil nodded grimly. "I see," he said, voicing his thoughts. "Then he
would say that he and Professor Guinness are still partners--and the
radium ore will belong to him. Very nice. Very nice...."

He snapped back to action, and without another word hoisted the
Mexican onto his back and carried him into the shack. There he
cleansed the wound, rigged up a tight bandage for it, and tied the man
to one of the cots. He tied him in such a fashion that he could reach
some food and water he put by the cot.

"You leave me like thees?" the Mexican asked.

"Yes," Phil said, and started for the door.

"But what you going to do?"

Phil smiled grimly as he flung an answer back over his shoulder.

"Me?--I'm going to fix the wiring on those disintegrators in your
friend Quade's borer. Then I'm starting down after him." He stopped
and turned before he closed the door. "And if I don't get back--well,
it's just too bad for you!"

       *       *       *       *       *

And so, a little later, once more the hushed desert night was cleft by
a furious bellow of sound. It came, this time, from a narrow canyon.
The steep sides threw the roar back and back again, and the echoes
swelled to an earth-shaking blast of sound. The oblong hut from which
it came rocked and almost fell; then, as the noise began to lessen,
teetered on its foundations and half-slipped into the ragged hole that
had been bored inside.

The descent was a nightmare that Holmes would never forget. Quade's
machine was much cruder and less efficient than the sphere David
Guinness had designed. Its protecting insulation proved quite
inadequate, and the heat rapidly grew terrific as the borer dug down.
Phil became faint, stifled, and his body oozed streams of sweat. And
the descent was also bumpy and uneven; often he was forced to leave
the controls and work on the mechanism of the disintegrators when they
faltered and threatened to stop. But in spite of everything the needle
on the depth gauge gradually swung over to three thousand, and four,
and five....

After the first mile Holmes improvised a way to change the air more
rapidly, and it grew a little cooler. He watched the story the depth
gauge told with narrowed eyes, and, as it reached three miles,
inspected his rifle. At three and a half miles he stopped the borer,
thinking to try to hear the noise made by the other, but so paralyzed
were his ear-drums from the terrific thunder beneath, it seemed hardly
any quieter when it ceased.

His plans were vague; they would have to be made according to the
conditions he found. There was a coil of rope in the tube-like
interior of the borer, and he hoped to find a cavern or cleft in the
earth for lateral exploring. He would stop at a depth of four
miles--where he should be very near the path of the professor's
sphere.

But Phil never saw the needle on the gauge rise to four miles. At
three and three quarters came sudden catastrophe.

He knew only that there was an awful moment of utter helplessness,
when the borer swooped wildly downwards, and the floor was snatched
sickeningly from under him. He was thrown violently against the
instrument panel; then up toward the pointed top; and at the same
instant came a rending crash that drove his senses from him....


CHAPTER III

"_You Haven't the Guts_"

"Just as I thought," said James Quade in the silence that fell when
the last echoes had died away, and the splinters of steel and rock had
settled. "You see, Professor, this earth-borer belongs to me. Yes, I
built one too. But I couldn't, unfortunately, get it working
properly--that is, in time to get down here first. After all, I'm not
a scientist, and remembered little enough of your borer's plans....
It's probably young Holmes who's dropped in on us. Shall we see?"

David Guinness and his daughter were speechless with dread. Quade had
trained the searchlight on the borer, and by turning their heads they
could see it plainly. It was all too clear that the machine was a
total wreck. It had pitched over onto one side, its shell cracked and
mangled irreparably. Grotesque pieces of crumpled metal lay all around
it. Its slanting course had tumbled it within fifteen yards of the
sphere.

In silence the old man and the girl watched Quade walk deliberately
over to it, his automatic steady in his right hand. He wrenched at the
long, narrow door, but it was so badly bent that for a while he could
not get it open. At last it swung out, however, and Quade peered
inside.

After a moment he reached in and drew out a rifle. He took it over to
a nearby rock, smashed the gun's breech, then flung it, useless,
aside. Returning to the borer, he again peered in.

Sue was about to scream from the torturous suspense when he at last
straightened up and looked around at the white-faced girl and her
father.

"Mr. Holmes is tougher than I'd thought possible," he said, with a
thin smile; "he's still alive." And, as Sue gasped with relief, he
added: "Would you like to see him?"

       *       *       *       *       *

He dragged the young man's unconscious body roughly out on the floor.
There were several bad bruises on his face and head, but otherwise he
was apparently uninjured. As Quade stood over him, playing idly with
the automatic, he stirred, and blinked, and at last, with an effort,
got up on one elbow and looked straight at the thin lips and narrowed
eyes of the man standing above. He shook his head, trying to
comprehend, then muttered hazily:

"You--you're--Quade?"

Quade did not have time to answer, for Sue Guinness cried out:

"Phil! Are you all right?"

Phil stared stupidly around, caught sight of the two who lay bound on
the floor, and staggered to his feet. "Sue!" he cried, relief and
understanding flooding his voice. He started towards her.

"Stand where you are!" Quade snapped harshly, and the automatic in his
hand came up. Holmes peered at it and stopped, but his blood-streaked
face settled into tight lines, and his body tensed.

"You'd better," continued Quade. "Now tell me what happened to Juan."

Phil forced himself to be calm. "Your pal, the greaser?" he said
cuttingly. "He's lying on a bunk in your shack. He shot himself,
playing with a gun."

Quade chose not to notice the way Phil said this, but a little of the
suave self-confidence was gone from his face as he said: "Well, in
that case I'll have to hurry back to the surface to attend to him. But
don't be alarmed," he added, more brightly. "I'll be back for you all
in an hour or so."

At this, David Guinness struggled frantically with his bonds and
yelled:

"Don't believe him, Phil! He's going to leave us here, to starve and
die! He told us so just before you came down!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Quade's face twitched perceptibly. His eyes were nervous.

"Is that true, Quade?" Holmes asked. There was a steely note in his
voice.

"Why--no, of course not," the other said hastily, uncertain whether to
lie or not. "Of course I didn't!"

Phil Holmes looked square into his eyes. He bluffed.

"You couldn't desert us, Quade. You haven't the guts. You haven't the
guts."

His face and eyes burned with the contempt that was in his words. It
cut Quade to the raw. But he could not avoid Phil's eyes. He stared at
them for a full moment, trembling slightly. Slowly, by inches, he
started to back toward the sphere; then suddenly he ran for it with
all his might, Holmes after him. Quade got to it first, and inside, as
he yanked in the searchlight and slammed and locked the door, he
yelled:

"You'll see, you damned pup! You'll see!" And there was the smothered
sound of half-maniacal laughter....

Phil threw all his weight against the metal door, but it was hopeless
and he knew it. He had gathered himself for another rush when he heard
Guinness yell:

"Back, Phil--back! He'll turn on the side disintegrators!"

Mad with rage as the young man was, he at once saw the danger and
leaped away--only to almost fall over the professor's prone body. With
hurrying, trembling fingers he untied the pair's bonds, and they
struggled to their feet, cramped and stiff. Then it was Phil who
warned them.

"Back as far as you can! Hurry!" He grabbed Sue's hand and plunged
toward the uncertain protection of a huge rock far in the rear. At
once he made them lie flat on the ground.

       *       *       *       *       *

As yet the sphere had not stirred nor emitted a whisper of sound,
though they knew the man inside was conning the controls in a fever of
haste to leave the cavern. But they hadn't long to wait. There came a
sputter, a starting cough from the rocket tubes beneath the sphere.
Quickly they warmed into life, and the dully glimmering ball rocked in
the hole it lay in. Then a cataract of noise unleashed itself; a
devastating thunder roared through the echoing cavern as the rockets
burst into full force. A wave of brilliant orange-red splashed out
from under the sphere, licked back up its sides, and seemed literally
to shove the great ball up towards the hole in the ceiling.

Its ascent was very slow. As it gained height it looked--save for its
speed--like a fantastic meteor flaming through the night, for the
orange plumage that streamed from beneath lit the ball with dazzling
color. A glowing sphere, it staggered midway between floor and
ceiling, creeping jerkily upwards.

"He's not going to hit the hole!" shouted Guinness.

The borer had not risen in a perfectly straight line; it jarred
against the rim of the hole, and wavered uncertainly. Every second the
roar of its rockets, swollen by echoes, rose in a savage crescendo;
the faces of the three who watched were painted orange in the glow.

The sphere was blind. The man inside could judge his course only by
the feel. As the three who were deserted watched, hoping ardently that
Quade would not be able to find the opening, the left side-rockets
spouted lances of fire, and they knew he had discovered the way to
maneuver the borer laterally. The new flames welded with the exhaust
of the main tubes into a great fan-shaped tail, so brilliant and shot
through with other colors that their eyes could not stand the sight,
except in winks. The borer jerked to the right, but still it could not
find the hole. Then the flames lessened for a moment, and the borer
sank down, to rise again a moment later. Its ascent was so labored
that Phil shouted to Professor Guinness:

"Why so slow?"

And the inventor told him that which he had not seen for the
intolerable light.

"Only half his rockets are on!"

       *       *       *       *       *

This time the sphere was correctly aimed, however, and it roared
straight into the hole. Immediately the fierce sound of the exhaust
was muffled, and in a few seconds only the fiery plumage, shooting
down from the ceiling, showed where the machine was. Then this
disappeared, and the noise alone was left.

Phil leaped forward, intending to stare up, but Guinness's yell halted
him.

"Not yet! He might still use the disintegrators!"

For many minutes they waited, till the muffled exhaust had died to a
drone. There was a puzzled expression on the professor's face as the
three at last walked over and dared peer up into the hole. Far above,
the splash of orange lit the walls of the tunnel.

"That's funny!" the old man muttered. "He's only using half the
rockets--about ten. I thought he'd turn them all on when he got into
the hole, but he didn't. Either they were damaged in the fall, or
Quade doesn't see fit to use them."

"Half of them are enough," said Phil bitterly, and put his arm around
the quiet girl standing next to him. Together, a silent little group,
they watched the spot of orange die to a pin-point; watched it waver,
twinkle, ever growing smaller.... And then it was gone.

Gone! Back to the surface of the earth, to the normal world of
reality. Only four miles above them--a small enough distance on the
surface itself--and yet it might have been a million miles, so utterly
were they barred from it....

       *       *       *       *       *

The same thought was in their minds, though none of them dared express
it. They were thinking of the serene desert, and the cool wind, and
the buttes and the high hills, placid in the moonlight. Of the hushed
rise of the dawn, the first flush of the sun that was so achingly
lovely on the desert. The sun they would never see again, buried in a
lifeless world of gloom four miles within.... And buried alive--and
not alive for long....

But that way lay madness. Phil Holmes drove the horrible thoughts from
his brain and forced a smile to his face.

"Well, that's that!" he said in a voice meant to be cheerful.

The dim cavern echoed his words mockingly. With the earth-borer
gone--the man-made machine that had dared break a solitude undisturbed
since the earth first cooled--the great cavern seemed to return to its
awful original mood. The three dwarfed humans became wholly conscious
of it. They felt it almost a living thing, stretching vastly around
them, tightening its unheard spell on them. Its smell, of mouldy earth
and rocks down which water slowly dripped, filled their nostrils and
somehow added to their fear.

As they looked about, their eyes became accustomed to the dim, eery,
phosphorescent illumination. They saw little worm-like creatures now
and again appear from tiny holes between stalagmites in the jagged
floor; and, as Phil wondered in his mind how long it would be before
they would be reduced to using them for food, a strange mole-sized
animal scraped from the darkness and pecked at one of them. As it
slithered away, a writhing shape in its mouth, Holmes muttered
bitterly: "A competitor!" Vague, flitting forms haunted the gloom
among the stalactites of the distorted ceiling--hints of the things
that lived in the terrible silence of this nether world. Here Time had
paused, and life had halted in primate form.

A little moan came from Sue Guinness's pale lips. She plucked at her
arm; a sickly white worm, only an inch long, had fallen on it from the
ceiling. "Oh!" she gasped. "Oh!"

Phil drew her closer to him, and walked with her over to Quade's
wrecked borer. "Let's see what we've got here," he suggested
cheerfully.

The machine was over on its side, the metal mangled and crushed beyond
repair. Nevertheless, he squeezed into it. "Stand back!" he warned.
"I'm going to try its rockets!" There was a click of broken machinery,
and that was all. "Rockets gone," Phil muttered.

He pulled another lever over. There was a sputter from within the
borer, then a furious roar that sent great echoes beating through the
cavern. A cloud of dust reared up before the bottom of the machine,
whipped madly for a moment, and sank as the bellow of sound died down.
Sue saw that a rocky rise in the floor directly in front of the
disintegrators had been planed off levelly.

Phil scrambled out. "The disintegrators work," he said, "but a lot of
good they do us. The borer's hopelessly cracked." He shrugged his
shoulders, and with a discouraged gesture cast to the ground a coil of
rope he had found inside.

Then suddenly he swung around. "Professor!" he called to the old
figure standing bowed beneath the hole in the ceiling. "There's a
draft blowing from somewhere! Do you feel it?"

Guinness felt with his hands a moment and nodded slowly. "Yes," he
said.

