battering without, showed signs of giving in. With herculean efforts
they dragged a heavy divan over and wedged it tightly against it; then
added other furniture in a tight supporting pile. But the door, of
some light metal, was not built to stand such a siege, and was
buckling further inward with each blow being dealt it. More and more
plainly the two men could hear the triumphant snarls and howls of the
animal-men.

Frantically they ransacked the rooms looking for what they thought
might be weapons, but found none. They looked at each other with
dismay. It was only a question of time--minutes--before the slaves
would break in. What could they do?

       *       *       *       *       *

In that tense moment of indecision a low, weak voice reached their
ears--a woman's voice, and one they remembered well.

"Vivian!" cried Clee, and ran to the alcove, from whence it had seemed
to come. The girl's next words brought them understanding.

"Clee--Jim--it's Xantra! He's willing the slaves to break in! He's
lying bound on the floor, but he's conscious!"

Clee ran to where he had left the invisible man, cursing himself under
his breath for being an utter ass for not having guessed this. His
groping fingers quickly found the squirming Xantra's neck; and he had
begun to throttle him into unconsciousness when Vivian called out:

"No! Don't! That won't stop the slaves: they've already been given the
order! We've got to make Xantra stop them! Here--drag him to the
work-table! I've got something--"

Wondering what the girl was about, Clee relaxed his grip on the
invisible man's neck and complied. But he suddenly understood--and
Jim, too--when he saw coming through the air the pair of
thought-sending helmets. He had a way of communicating with Xantra, of
course! He saw the larger helmet lower to rest over the head he was
still holding; then soft hands placed the other over his own.

As it settled down a great crash sounded in the other room: the door
had given in. It was still held almost in place by the tightly-wedged
furniture, but that would not hold the animal-men long.

"Hurry!" cried Jim. "I'll stand by the door!" And he was already on
his way to it.

Clee saw the small panel on the table above; saw the knob on it turn.
He caught Vivian's excited voice. "Tell him to order them to stop,"
she said; "or else--or else--"

"He dies!" finished Clee, viciously thumbing into the air where the
invisible Xantra's neck was.

       *       *       *       *       *

With all the intensity he could muster, Clee concentrated on one
simple, strong thought. He hardly heard the triumphant cries of the
slaves as they felt the blocking furniture give before their efforts;
all his energy was being expended in the will to get his thought
across.

"Tell those slaves to stop breaking in or you die!" he commanded.

The noises at the door continued. Either Xantra had not understood, or
else he was stubborn. He repeated his command and threat, and still
the crashing sounds came to his ears.

Desperate, he played his last card; and unconsciously his lips formed
the words of his next mental command, so that it was understood by the
breathlessly watching Vivian.

"_Tell them to stop!_" he willed. "_No more air till you do!_" And
with the words his fingers closed tightly over the other's throat.

The sounds at the door continued; for a moment the invisible form
between Clee's knees writhed violently--and then suddenly, almost
magically, a silence fell over the whole room. Clee had forced his
will on Xantra! He had made him stop the slaves!

And just in time.

Clee's fingers relaxed a little on the throat of the man beneath him.
He turned and said: "Quick, Vivian--find that anaesthetic!" A moment
later it was pressed in his hands. "Say when," he told the girl, and
held it beneath the nose of the helpless man. Xantra's head at once
fell back, and he heard Vivian telling him to stop. He pulled away the
bottle, corked it and stood up.

"Well, that's that," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

For a moment he was silent. Only the noises made by Jim in
strengthening the barricade at the door could be heard in the room.
Then he said, earnestly:

"I wish I could see you, Vivian--right now; but that'll have to wait.
I guess...."

A low laugh came from the place where the girl was standing. A hand
touched his arm, and he found himself being conducted into the alcove.
Vivian laughed again; said, teasingly, "What a stupid expression on
your face!" then commanded him to shut his eyes, and keep them shut.
He felt something being attached to his wrists; heard a coarse hum
that quickly rose in pitch until it passed the range of hearing. He
was caught up in a surprising exhilaration; he heard the hum again,
sliding down and down in pitch, while every atom in his body felt a
sickening vibration that grew ever coarser. Then suddenly he felt
normal; the things on his wrists were removed and Vivian told him he
could open his eyes.

He did so. He had guessed what she had done, but he was surprised,
nevertheless, to see the straight, slender, attractive girl who stood
before him.

"You see, Xantra used this on me twice--the latter time to restore me,
so I would be able to see him. I watched him carefully," the girl
explained.

Clee gazed at Vivian in greatest confusion. Why--she was beautiful! He
grew conscious of a growing need to say something, and eventually the
asinine thing that left his lips was:

"Yes--you--you aren't bad looking at all."

The girl turned away, blushing; and it was Jim who relieved Clee from
his awkward situation. He came swinging happily through the alcove
portal to suddenly stop in blank surprise. Clee had disappeared!

       *       *       *       *       *

It did not take long to restore Jim to his normal self, and Vivian and
Clee laughed at the great sigh of relief he unconsciously gave when he
found himself able to see the girl who before had been only a
disembodied Voice to him. Clee explained to Vivian what had happened
to them down below, and she in turn told them how she and Xantra had
come to be unconscious when they reached the control alcove.

"I found the anaesthetic by its smell soon after I went to Xantra,"
she explained. "I tried to conceal it in my dress, but Xantra saw me
and tried to take it away; and in the struggle that followed I guess
we both got anaesthetized. When I came to I saw you and Jim trying to
hold back the slaves; and I could see Xantra on the floor,
conscious--which you couldn't--and knew he was ordering the slaves on.
So I told you, and--here we are!

"Do you want to see Xantra now?" she added.

Clee would never forget the sight of the bound figure that met his
eyes on the floor on the large room. The clothes were odd; the figure
was much that of a normal man, though the shoulders were more sloped
and the head much larger; but it was the face, its expression, that
held him.

Unhealthy, leprous-white was the skin, and there was not one hair,
eyelash or eyebrow on the whole head. The closed eyes lay in deep
caverns surrounded by a thousand fine wrinkles, which crisscrossed all
over his face in every direction. The face and head were
freakish--monstrous; and yet, somehow, over it rested an expression of
infinite wisdom and calm. He lay bound and still and unconscious, at
the mercy of men far below him intellectually, this man from another
planet. Clee could not help but compare him to a stoical man staked
out on an anthill to die....

"We'll have to keep him unconscious with the anaesthetic," he said at
length; "he's too dangerous to monkey with. And that means we've got
to find out how to run this ship--take it back ourselves."

"Leave that to me!" said Jim, feeling quite chipper. "Never saw
anything yet I couldn't drive. Where is it--Cape Cod, you want to be
let off, Miss Gray?... O. K. This is my joy-ride, and I'll see that
you're delivered at your front door."

       *       *       *       *       *

More than two days later, again at night, the few look-outs on the
lonely fishing craft off Cape Cod might have seen a pinpoint of
cherry-red appear off the eastern horizon and make a wide arc up the
heavens.

Its course was erratic, and it made sudden angles as it drew near the
zenith. It glowed more and more brightly as it approached--until it
disappeared from sight overhead.

For some minutes it was invisible; and then, suddenly, only a few
hundred yards overhead, it emerged into view again, a great sphere of
faintly glowing, cherry-red crystal. Rapidly--with dangerous speed--it
descended, straight for the shore-line of Massachusetts Bay. And as it
neared, its erratic side-to-side dashes increased, rather than
diminished.

Down at a wide angle it came for the beach; then, when it was a
hundred feet away, it sheared suddenly out to sea. There, only a few
feet above the water, it darted to the side once more--and fell, and
skipped along the water at dizzying speed.

But it did not go far. With its first contact with the water a great
crack split the night air; and a little further, the ship split into
hundreds of small pieces, all of which slid along the surface of the
water until, their momentum lost, they came to a stop and slowly sank
from view. A dozen figures were left threshing on the surface; but one
by one they disappeared, till there were only four left. Then one of
the four sank from sight....

Slowly but steadily the remaining three drew near to the welcoming
shore, and at last stood dripping and tired on the sandy beach. For
some time they stood there in silence, reviewing all the incredible
adventure they had been through, as they gazed off across the water to
the place where the slave ship had gone down.

But one of them--Jim--had something to say, and at last it came out.

"Well, I _told_ you I'd drive you safely back!"

Clee, his arm around the waist of the exhausted Vivian, smiled and
answered:

"But I don't see Vivian's front door."

"We're close enough!" Jim snorted. "After all, I _did_ hit the Earth!"


[Illustration: Advertisement]




The Revolt of the Machines

_By Nat Schachner and Arthur L. Zagat_

[Illustration: "Look!" he gasped. Out on the floor was a shambles.]

[Sidenote: Something in the many-faceted mind of the master machine
spurs it to diabolical revolt against the authority of its human
masters.]


PROLOGUE

_For five thousand years, since that nigh legendary figure Einstein
wrote and thought in the far-off mists of time, the scientists
endeavored to reduce life and the universe to terms of a mathematical
formula. And they thought they had succeeded. Throughout the world,
machines did the work of man, and the aristos, owners of the machines,
played in soft idleness in their crystal and gold pleasure cities.
Even the prolat hordes, relieved of all but an hour or two per day of
toil, were content in their warrens--content with the crumbs of their
masters._

_Then the ice began to move, down from the north and up from the
south. Slowly, inexorably, the jaws of the great vise closed, till all
that was left of the wide empire of man was a narrow belt about the
equator. Everywhere else was a vast tumbled waste of cold and glaring
whiteness, a frozen desert. In the narrow habitable belt were
compacted the teeming millions of earth's peoples._

_In spite of the best efforts of the scientists among them, the
crowding together of the myriads of earth's inhabitants brought in its
train the inevitable plagues of famine and disease. Even with the most
intensive methods of cultivation, even with the synthetic food
factories running day and night, there could not be produced enough to
sustain life in the hordes of prolats. And with the lowering of
resistance and the lack of sufficient sanitary arrangements, disease
began to spread with ever increasing rapidity and virulence._

       *       *       *       *       *

_The aristos trembled, for they were few, and the prolats many.
Already were arising loud and disheveled orators, inciting the
millions to arise against their masters. The aristos were few, but
they were not helpless. In the blackness of a moonless, clouded night
there was a whispering of many wings, and from dark shapes that loomed
against the dark sky, great beams swept over the tented fields where
the prolats lay huddled and sleeping. And when the red sun circled the
ice-chained earth he found in his path heaps of dust where on his last
journey he had warmed the swarming millions._

_The slaves thus ruthlessly destroyed could well be spared, for the
machines did the work of the world, even to the personal care of the
aristos' pampered bodies. Only for direction, and starting and
stopping, was the brain and the hand of man required. Now that the
inhabited portion of the terrestrial globe was so straitly
circumscribed, radio power waves, television and radio-phone, rendered
feasible the control of all the machines from one central station,
built at the edge of the Northern Glacier. Here were brought the scant
few of the prolats that had been spared, a pitiful four hundred men
and women, and they were set to endless, thankless tasks._

_I was one of those few; and Keston, my friend, who was set at the
head of the force. I was second in command. For a decade we labored,
whipped our fellows to their tasks, that the aristos might loll
careless in the perfume and silks of their pleasure palaces, or riot
in wild revel, to sink at last in sodden stupor. Sprawled thus they
would lie, until the dressing machines we guided would lift them
gently from their damasked couches, bathe them with warm and fragrant
waters, clothe their soft carcasses in diaphanous, iridescent webs,
and start them on a new day of debauchery._

_But the slow vengeance of an inscrutable Omnipotence they mockingly
denied overtook them at last, and I saw the rendering and payment of
the long past due account._

       *       *       *       *       *

As I entered the vast domed hall wherein all my waking hours were
spent, the shrill whistle of an alarm signal told me that something
had been wrong. Instinctively I looked toward the post of Abud. Three
times in the past week had Keston or I been called upon for swift
action to right some error of that dull witted prolat. On the oval
visor-screen above the banked buttons of his station I saw the
impending catastrophe. Two great freight planes, one bearing the
glowing red star that told of its cargo of highly explosive terminite,
were approaching head-on with lightning rapidity. The fool had them on
the same level.

Abud was gaping now at the screen in paralyzed fright, with no idea of
how to avoid the cataclysm. Just below I glimpsed the soaring towers
of Antarcha. In a moment that gold and crystal pleasure city would be
blasted to extinction, with all its sleeping thousands. Swift would be
the vengeance of the aristos. Already I could see Abud and Keston and
a hundred others melting in the fierce rays of the Death Bath!

But, even as my face blanched with the swift and terrible vision, the
little controller's car ground to a smoking stop at Abud's back. With
one motion Keston's lithe form leaped from his seat and thrust aside
the gaping prolat. His long white fingers darted deftly over the
gleaming buttons. The red starred plane banked in a sudden swerve; the
other dipped beneath. Distinct from the speaker beneath the screen
came the whoosh of the riven air as the fliers flashed past, safe by a
margin of scant feet. Another rippling play of the prolat chief's
fingers and the planes were back on their proper courses. The whistle
ceased its piercing alarm, left a throbbing stillness.

       *       *       *       *       *

Chief Keston turned to the brute faced culprit. Cold contempt tautened
the thin, ascetic features of his face. Somehow I was at his side: I
must have been running across the wide floor of the Control Station
while the crisis had flared and passed. In measured tones, each word a
cutting whip-lash, came his well merited rebuke:

"Don't try me too far, Abud. Long before this I should have relieved
you of your post, and ordered you to the Death Bath. I am derelict in
my duty that I do not do so. By my weak leniency I imperil the lives
of your comrades, and my own. It is your good fortune that a Council
delegate has not been present at one of your exhibitions. But I dare
not risk more. Let the warning whistle come from your station just
once again and I shall report you as an incompetent. You know the
