dark cloud the sun. It seemed to suck the light out of the disk; paler
and paler it became and bigger and bigger swelled the body of the
octopus until it had swallowed the sun.

Now snakes came creeping from all sides up to the swollen octopus. All
of a sudden the primeval struggle turned into the classic image of the
Laokoon group: a giant central figure of a man wrestling with pythons
which crushed him in their coils. Then there was only the head of the
giant, majestic like the Moses hewn by Leonardo's hands but torn in pain
with the noose of a python's muscle around his neck. Gasping, the giant
opened his mouth and long tongues of flames shot out of it....

Behind his ears he heard the voices whisper:

"By God, Scriven was right."

"You bet he was; maniacal obsession, a classic, most beautiful case."

"What more do we need?"

"Nothing I guess; he's through. Start pushing back the rheostats."

The pounding, maddening crescendo of the vibrations receded gradually.
The rim of the vortexial funnel widened beyond Lee's head; in its center
it left a sort of vacuum. There was one thing he couldn't understand:
those tactile rays, why didn't they kill him when they had his heart
within their grip? Now that The Brain knew everything he had been
waiting for the sudden vise-grip of the rays upon his heart which would
have meant the end. But then, this was the end in any case....

The lights went on and he blinked into the faces of the medics bending
over him, watching him as he wiped the sweat of death fear from his
face.

"Dr. Lee," Mellish began, "This is a serious matter we've got to discuss
with you. You have seen those images yourself?--Fine. We needn't go into
any great detail since you are probably familiar with the ancient
symbolisms which the subconscious employs in expressing itself. You are
suffering from a very strong neurosis, Dr. Lee; I might almost say a
maniacal obsession. Existence of some old neurosis, partially submerged,
was established already in your first analysis. Now the barriers which
you had built against this war neurosis have broken down. Quite a
natural breakdown considering the very great stress under which you have
been living of late. No, I don't say that you are actually demented, but
there is a very real danger that you might lose complete control over
your mind. As it stands, your scientific work already is impaired by the
fixed ideas you have formed about The Brain. We are here to help you, so
please be calm and cooperate with us; we have got to decide upon some
course of action."

"You must get away from it all. Lee," Bondy chimed in; "Take a
sabbatical year. The Braintrust operates a really first-class sanitarium
out on the West Coast. Your insurance plan covers every expense. All you
have to do is to sign these papers and we'll get us a plane and I'll
personally bring you there. That's the safe, the sane course for you to
take. Here, take my pen."

Lee had raised his gaunt frame from the table. For a moment he sat with
his face buried in his hands trying to control his swimming head. A hand
patted his shoulders: "Don't take it so hard, old man; come on, be
sensible and let's get out of here."

He stood up; vertigo made him sway and he felt the supporting, the
restraining grip of the two medic's hands upon his arms. And then, in a
flash, he saw red. "I had it coming to me," he thought, "I would have
gone like a lamb. If only they had been shooting straight; if they
hadn't tried to frame me with their dirty trickery. It's all over now
but I might as well go down fighting." He didn't know which he loathed
more of the two; it just happened that Bondy was standing to his right
and took it on the chin and nose as Lee's fist shot up.

"Mellish, quick, the straight jacket," he screamed, toppling over.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mellish, stark horror in his eyes, started towards the alarm button by
the door. Old and forgotten combat technique reacted automatically to
the move: one foot shot out, it tripped the lunging man and sent him
sprawling down before he reached the button. But then it was as if a
hand had pressed that button anyway: The loudspeaker built into the
panel over the door broke into shrill sharp peals: Fire alarm. It froze
the violent commotion of the three. From their prostrate position on the
floor Mellish and Bondy stared up to the red-flashing disk, their mouths
agape in dumb amazement. A fire in the most protected, the most guarded
apparatus in the world, a fire in The Brain!

Cautiously Bondy raised his bleeding nose to Lee and quickly put it down
again: the dangerous maniac was a horrifying sight; with his greying
mane standing wildly all around his death head he stood and _laughed_.

He alone understood what had happened: the timebomb he had planted had
ticked its allotted span, the millions of devouring mandibles had done
their work, the living were eating away along the Apperception Centers.
And now the bomb went off; the short-circuit-fires were racing through
The Brain and not even carbon-dioxide could reach them inside the nerve
paths!

But now the alarm stopped and a calm commanding voice came over the
intercom: "Attention, please! A five-alarm fire has broken out in the
Parietal region. There is no immediate danger. I repeat: _There is no
immediate danger._ I order all occupants of Apperception Centers to
collect important papers and documents and then to proceed down to Grand
Central for evacuation. All elevators will be kept in operation. There
is no fire in the Dura Mater. Keep calm! Keep calm and proceed as
ordered."

The voice broke off; the alarm bells started shrieking again.

Bondy and Mellish had scrambled to their feet; wide-eyed they stared at
Lee. Lee made wild gestures now and they heard him call: "Get out....
Get out!"

With their backs to the wall they exchanged a rapid glance which said:

"This is our chance; Together then and quick."

As one man they bolted to the door and down the corridor into the
elevator, slamming the door behind.

"That was a close shave!" Mellish exclaimed as the cage streaked down.

"He caught me by surprise," Bondy moaned. "Never expected it from him,
he almost killed me!"

"He can't get away though, the guards will get him the moment he comes
down. But what about the girl? We quite forgot to warn Vivian that she
has a paranoiac on her hands."

"Bah!" Bondy scoffed, "Vivian is an intelligent girl. It was our _duty_
to evacuate, wasn't it? Besides, we can warn her over the phone."

With the unbearable tension gone from him as sudden as the air from a
blown tire, Lee really acted like a madman now. Stretching to his full
length he reached out to the alarm over the door and put it at rest.
What was alarm to others, to him was a signal to rest. The noise didn't
befit the wonderful calm and serenity he felt. His job was done, his
mission completed. Time for him had ceased to exist. Danger--he had no
consciousness of it. Slowly he stepped out in the corridor. It felt like
walking on air. There, it was Vivian Leahy who brought him down to
earth. She came rushing out of the archive laden with precious records
up to her chin. Under the provoking red of her hair the face looked pale
and pinched: "Where are the doctors?" she panted.

"I don't know," Lee said. "They left me a moment ago--rather suddenly."

"The rats! Leaving me to get their chestnuts out of the fire for them.
How d'you like that?"

Her flippant manner was nothing but a brave front she put up to hide the
panic in her heart. Lee sensed it. There was an unexpected
responsibility thrust into his hands. His mission was not yet completed;
he had to get this girl to safety.

She followed the direction of his glance.

"No go," she said. "They took the elevator. It will be some time before
another one comes up. If it does come. What are we two going to do now,
Dr. Lee?"

He smiled down to her as he would have to a child lost in the woods.

"Never you fear, Vivian. We still have that other exit. We can use the
glideway through The Brain."

"Through the fire?"

"Yes. I think we can make it if you're a brave girl. Know where the gas
masks are and asbestos suits? There ought to be some in every
Apperception Center."

"How about these records? Your own amongst the lot!"

"Leave them; they aren't worth risking your life for. You can believe
that."

She dropped them instantly: "I like you, Dr. Lee, you're a real
old-school cavalier. My doctors here, they'd rather see me burn to a
crisp than any of those records. Come on, I'll show you the gas masks
and the other stuff."

       *       *       *       *       *

He helped her to put on the outfit. "Ready to go?" he asked.

"With you? To the end of the world at any day." Proudly she marched him
off toward the rear exit.

The glideways were operating. At an accelerated pace, they rushed
through the maze of The Brain with the swish and the swoosh of surf
racing across a coral reef. They had to grab for dear life at the rails.

"Hold tight," Lee cried as he saw the girl go down upon the platform,
but then his own legs were jerked from under him as the momentum of the
journey flung him forward.

They saw what no human eye had seen before! The Brain illuminated by its
own nerve cables turned radiant as neon lights. It was like seeing
Berlin from the air after a big firebomb attack. It was like racing in a
car through forest fires. It was like lava pouring in a thousand winding
streams down a volcano cone. It was all this and more, but transferred
into some other dimension where all things are transparent or light has
an x-ray quality.

Through the plastic walls of lobes and convolutions they saw the
liana-networks of the nerve cables like bloodstreams radiant with purple
light. Shrouded in columns of whirling smoke they seemed alive. Like
tropical rains from a jungle roof, lignin dripped from the vaults, and
in falling, burst into flames. Cable connections were molten at the
branching points and then the luminous nets writhed, and severed ends
bent down spilling their fiery blood over the mushroom formations of
nerve cell groups.

The scenes raced much too fast; the glideway's continuous curvings,
steep ascents and power dives were like stunt flying through an ack-ack
barrage. No human eye could catch more than a fraction of the inferno's
majesty. Yet there were brief visions so breathtaking as to obliterate
all sense of danger and to become indelibly implanted upon the retina. A
main nerve stem burst asunder and the lignin poured from its cracked
plastic walls like crude oil from a burning gusher, rushing over acres
of electronic tubes, branding against banks of radioactive pyramidal
cells, swamping them as a wave. And at one point the glideways circled a
convolution which was a fiery lake dotted with thousands of
fractional-horsepower motors, still running, but showering sparks as
their insulation was consumed.

The air conditioning was working full blast; that probably saved their
lives because heat blasts alternated with spouts and currents of cold
air. Even so there were stretches where the glideway's rubber flooring
smouldered as it shot over nerve-bridges and through narrow tunnels
lined with nerve cables on all sides. From thousands of jets the carbon
dioxide of the automatic fire-fighting system hissed against the flames,
but it was drowned in the hollow roar of the conflagration shooting
through nerve paths where no gas could reach.

Endless it seemed, this mad wild flight through hell, but actually it
took only minutes before they reached the median section and went into
the steep descent between the hemispheres. The whirling reddish glow
receded overhead and white smoke cleared. Lee could crawl forward a
little to bend over the prostrate body of the girl. He unloosened her
gas mask and shouted into her ear.

"Are you okay? The worst is over now; there are the fire brigades coming
up."

She nodded. Her face was a white blot in the semidarkness of the black
lights and Lee felt the weak, but reassuring pressure of her hand upon
his arms. Then, as from one racing train to another, they watched the
firefighters coming up, ghostly in their asbestos suits, with the snouts
of gas masks for faces, crouching under the foamite tanks on their backs
and clutching the funnel-shaped nozzles in their hands. Maintenance
engineers followed, laden with tools; and where the glideways branched
off one could already see them at work; fast but calm: disconnecting
nerve cables, closing circuits, setting up firescreens with a discipline
as magnificent as that of their invisible enemies, _ant-termes_, long
since consumed by the flames, but still sending the chain-reactions of
their destruction through The Brain.

       *       *       *       *       *

A few minutes later glideway T shot into the 'lateral ventricle', huge
cavern of the Mid-Brain separated from the blast by the thick walls of
the pallium. It looked like the inside of a giant wind tunnel
brilliantly lit now with powerful searchlights. It was swarming with
personnel; white electricians, blue air-conditioners, weird, sponge
rubber-padded shapes of ray-proofed men, uniformed guards, even soldiers
in uniform rushed to the spot from outlying garrisons of The
Brains-preserve. It all seemed to rush up as the earth rushes up in a
low-altitude parachute jump; it looked like headquarters of an army on
the eve of a big drive, and then--

Lee and the girl felt themselves being violently derailed. Catchers had
been thrown across all incoming glide ways from The Brain. Irresistibly
they were propelled right into the arms of stretcher bearers in
Red-Cross uniforms.

"Are you hurt?" somebody yelled. "By God, those fellows must have come
through the flames. Look, they're all black with the smoke. Get a couple
of respirators, Jack."

Lee waved the helping hands away; he was already on his feet. Anxiously
he bent over Vivian. She had her head embedded in a stretcher-bearer's
lap; her eyes rolled around in their smoke-blackened sockets in great
surprise and her tongue licked parched lips, spreading rouge generously
all around mixing it with soot. She looked so funny; almost as a
minstrel singer at a county fair, but there was deep tenderness in Lee's
voice:

"You're quite safe now, Vivian. How do you feel, brave girl?"

Her bosom heaved a big sigh:

"O simply wonderful, absolutely wonderful. Only, I'm afraid I'm going to
be sick. It's the gas I swallowed. It's terrible; something always
happens to me just when romance begins."

The stretcher bearer grinned up to Lee, "She sure gets it out of her
system like a good little girl. Don't you worry; she'll be all right."

Lee nodded; he knew she would.

As the big drive went on and column after column went over the top up to
the hemispheres, nobody wasted time on Lee. He cautiously surveyed the
tumultuous scene. With his asbestos suit and with his blackened face
everybody would take him for a fireman. He might be able to complete his
mission, to ascertain that The Brain had stopped to function in all its
parts, to make sure that it actually was dead. And if down at "Grand
Central" the turmoil was as great as ever here; with all those strangers
rushing in and bound to be rushed out again....

"Why, I have a chance," Lee thought. Freedom; he had abandoned any hope
for it. Now the reborn idea surged through his blood, a powerful motor
as chance pressed the starter button for it.

The thing to do first was to get past the searchlight beams. From the
nearest pile of equipment he took an axe and a pair of long-handled
metal shears. Then he marched off, straight into the glaring eyes of the
searchlights till he got out of their cones, and the deep shadows of the
"thalamus" labyrinth swallowed him up.

Now he was on familiar ground and even in a familiar atmosphere. This
was like a night patrol through jungle. The black lights of The Brain
were the fireflies, the sirens' hollow wailings were the shriek owls and
the cries of the lemurs. There was the same sense of loneliness, too,
and of danger. The winding passages skirted the glandular organs, some
of them looming huge like dirigibles, others small like fuselages of
airplanes stored in a giant hangar underground. Strings of tiny green
bulbs guided the path toward the pineal gland, the citadel of The Brain.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was dark, as Lee had expected it would be. The danger zone was at
least a mile away, and the attack against the fire was launched from the
main sulci in the median section of The Brain.

