
But farther; by the 24th Observation it appears, that there is a
constant relation between Colours and Refrangibility; the most
refrangible Rays being violet, the least refrangible red, and those of
intermediate Colours having proportionably intermediate degrees of
Refrangibility. And by the 13th, 14th, and 15th Observations, compared
with the 4th or 18th there appears to be the same constant relation
between Colour and Reflexibility; the violet being in like circumstances
reflected at least thicknesses of any thin Plate or Bubble, the red at
greatest thicknesses, and the intermediate Colours at intermediate
thicknesses. Whence it follows, that the colorifick Dispositions of
Rays are also connate with them, and immutable; and by consequence, that
all the Productions and Appearances of Colours in the World are derived,
not from any physical Change caused in Light by Refraction or Reflexion,
but only from the various Mixtures or Separations of Rays, by virtue of
their different Refrangibility or Reflexibility. And in this respect the
Science of Colours becomes a Speculation as truly mathematical as any
other part of Opticks. I mean, so far as they depend on the Nature of
Light, and are not produced or alter'd by the Power of Imagination, or
by striking or pressing the Eye.




THE

SECOND BOOK

OF

OPTICKS


_PART III._

_Of the permanent Colours of natural Bodies, and the Analogy between
them and the Colours of thin transparent Plates._

I am now come to another part of this Design, which is to consider how
the Phaenomena of thin transparent Plates stand related to those of all
other natural Bodies. Of these Bodies I have already told you that they
appear of divers Colours, accordingly as they are disposed to reflect
most copiously the Rays originally endued with those Colours. But their
Constitutions, whereby they reflect some Rays more copiously than
others, remain to be discover'd; and these I shall endeavour to manifest
in the following Propositions.


PROP. I.

_Those Superficies of transparent Bodies reflect the greatest quantity
of Light, which have the greatest refracting Power; that is, which
intercede Mediums that differ most in their refractive Densities. And in
the Confines of equally refracting Mediums there is no Reflexion._

The Analogy between Reflexion and Refraction will appear by considering,
that when Light passeth obliquely out of one Medium into another which
refracts from the perpendicular, the greater is the difference of their
refractive Density, the less Obliquity of Incidence is requisite to
cause a total Reflexion. For as the Sines are which measure the
Refraction, so is the Sine of Incidence at which the total Reflexion
begins, to the Radius of the Circle; and consequently that Angle of
Incidence is least where there is the greatest difference of the Sines.
Thus in the passing of Light out of Water into Air, where the Refraction
is measured by the Ratio of the Sines 3 to 4, the total Reflexion begins
when the Angle of Incidence is about 48 Degrees 35 Minutes. In passing
out of Glass into Air, where the Refraction is measured by the Ratio of
the Sines 20 to 31, the total Reflexion begins when the Angle of
Incidence is 40 Degrees 10 Minutes; and so in passing out of Crystal, or
more strongly refracting Mediums into Air, there is still a less
obliquity requisite to cause a total reflexion. Superficies therefore
which refract most do soonest reflect all the Light which is incident on
them, and so must be allowed most strongly reflexive.

But the truth of this Proposition will farther appear by observing, that
in the Superficies interceding two transparent Mediums, (such as are
Air, Water, Oil, common Glass, Crystal, metalline Glasses, Island
Glasses, white transparent Arsenick, Diamonds, &c.) the Reflexion is
stronger or weaker accordingly, as the Superficies hath a greater or
less refracting Power. For in the Confine of Air and Sal-gem 'tis
stronger than in the Confine of Air and Water, and still stronger in the
Confine of Air and common Glass or Crystal, and stronger in the Confine
of Air and a Diamond. If any of these, and such like transparent Solids,
be immerged in Water, its Reflexion becomes, much weaker than before;
and still weaker if they be immerged in the more strongly refracting
Liquors of well rectified Oil of Vitriol or Spirit of Turpentine. If
Water be distinguish'd into two parts by any imaginary Surface, the
Reflexion in the Confine of those two parts is none at all. In the
Confine of Water and Ice 'tis very little; in that of Water and Oil 'tis
something greater; in that of Water and Sal-gem still greater; and in
that of Water and Glass, or Crystal or other denser Substances still
greater, accordingly as those Mediums differ more or less in their
refracting Powers. Hence in the Confine of common Glass and Crystal,
there ought to be a weak Reflexion, and a stronger Reflexion in the
Confine of common and metalline Glass; though I have not yet tried
this. But in the Confine of two Glasses of equal density, there is not
any sensible Reflexion; as was shewn in the first Observation. And the
same may be understood of the Superficies interceding two Crystals, or
two Liquors, or any other Substances in which no Refraction is caused.
So then the reason why uniform pellucid Mediums (such as Water, Glass,
or Crystal,) have no sensible Reflexion but in their external
Superficies, where they are adjacent to other Mediums of a different
density, is because all their contiguous parts have one and the same
degree of density.


PROP. II.

_The least parts of almost all natural Bodies are in some measure
transparent: And the Opacity of those Bodies ariseth from the multitude
of Reflexions caused in their internal Parts._

That this is so has been observed by others, and will easily be granted
by them that have been conversant with Microscopes. And it may be also
tried by applying any substance to a hole through which some Light is
immitted into a dark Room. For how opake soever that Substance may seem
in the open Air, it will by that means appear very manifestly
transparent, if it be of a sufficient thinness. Only white metalline
Bodies must be excepted, which by reason of their excessive density seem
to reflect almost all the Light incident on their first Superficies;
unless by solution in Menstruums they be reduced into very small
Particles, and then they become transparent.


PROP. III.

_Between the parts of opake and colour'd Bodies are many Spaces, either
empty, or replenish'd with Mediums of other Densities; as Water between
the tinging Corpuscles wherewith any Liquor is impregnated, Air between
the aqueous Globules that constitute Clouds or Mists; and for the most
part Spaces void of both Air and Water, but yet perhaps not wholly void
of all Substance, between the parts of hard Bodies._

The truth of this is evinced by the two precedent Propositions: For by
the second Proposition there are many Reflexions made by the internal
parts of Bodies, which, by the first Proposition, would not happen if
the parts of those Bodies were continued without any such Interstices
between them; because Reflexions are caused only in Superficies, which
intercede Mediums of a differing density, by _Prop._ 1.

But farther, that this discontinuity of parts is the principal Cause of
the opacity of Bodies, will appear by considering, that opake Substances
become transparent by filling their Pores with any Substance of equal or
almost equal density with their parts. Thus Paper dipped in Water or
Oil, the _Oculus Mundi_ Stone steep'd in Water, Linnen Cloth oiled or
varnish'd, and many other Substances soaked in such Liquors as will
intimately pervade their little Pores, become by that means more
transparent than otherwise; so, on the contrary, the most transparent
Substances, may, by evacuating their Pores, or separating their parts,
be render'd sufficiently opake; as Salts or wet Paper, or the _Oculus
Mundi_ Stone by being dried, Horn by being scraped, Glass by being
reduced to Powder, or otherwise flawed; Turpentine by being stirred
about with Water till they mix imperfectly, and Water by being form'd
into many small Bubbles, either alone in the form of Froth, or by
shaking it together with Oil of Turpentine, or Oil Olive, or with some
other convenient Liquor, with which it will not perfectly incorporate.
And to the increase of the opacity of these Bodies, it conduces
something, that by the 23d Observation the Reflexions of very thin
transparent Substances are considerably stronger than those made by the
same Substances of a greater thickness.


PROP. IV.

_The Parts of Bodies and their Interstices must not be less than of some
definite bigness, to render them opake and colour'd._

For the opakest Bodies, if their parts be subtilly divided, (as Metals,
by being dissolved in acid Menstruums, &c.) become perfectly
transparent. And you may also remember, that in the eighth Observation
there was no sensible reflexion at the Superficies of the
Object-glasses, where they were very near one another, though they did
not absolutely touch. And in the 17th Observation the Reflexion of the
Water-bubble where it became thinnest was almost insensible, so as to
cause very black Spots to appear on the top of the Bubble, by the want
of reflected Light.

On these grounds I perceive it is that Water, Salt, Glass, Stones, and
such like Substances, are transparent. For, upon divers Considerations,
they seem to be as full of Pores or Interstices between their parts as
other Bodies are, but yet their Parts and Interstices to be too small to
cause Reflexions in their common Surfaces.


PROP. V.

_The transparent parts of Bodies, according to their several sizes,
reflect Rays of one Colour, and transmit those of another, on the same
grounds that thin Plates or Bubbles do reflect or transmit those Rays.
And this I take to be the ground of all their Colours._

For if a thinn'd or plated Body, which being of an even thickness,
appears all over of one uniform Colour, should be slit into Threads, or
broken into Fragments, of the same thickness with the Plate; I see no
reason why every Thread or Fragment should not keep its Colour, and by
consequence why a heap of those Threads or Fragments should not
constitute a Mass or Powder of the same Colour, which the Plate
exhibited before it was broken. And the parts of all natural Bodies
being like so many Fragments of a Plate, must on the same grounds
exhibit the same Colours.

Now, that they do so will appear by the affinity of their Properties.
The finely colour'd Feathers of some Birds, and particularly those of
Peacocks Tails, do, in the very same part of the Feather, appear of
several Colours in several Positions of the Eye, after the very same
manner that thin Plates were found to do in the 7th and 19th
Observations, and therefore their Colours arise from the thinness of the
transparent parts of the Feathers; that is, from the slenderness of the
very fine Hairs, or _Capillamenta_, which grow out of the sides of the
grosser lateral Branches or Fibres of those Feathers. And to the same
purpose it is, that the Webs of some Spiders, by being spun very fine,
have appeared colour'd, as some have observ'd, and that the colour'd
Fibres of some Silks, by varying the Position of the Eye, do vary their
Colour. Also the Colours of Silks, Cloths, and other Substances, which
Water or Oil can intimately penetrate, become more faint and obscure by
being immerged in those Liquors, and recover their Vigor again by being
dried; much after the manner declared of thin Bodies in the 10th and
21st Observations. Leaf-Gold, some sorts of painted Glass, the Infusion
of _Lignum Nephriticum_, and some other Substances, reflect one Colour,
and transmit another; like thin Bodies in the 9th and 20th Observations.
And some of those colour'd Powders which Painters use, may have their
Colours a little changed, by being very elaborately and finely ground.
Where I see not what can be justly pretended for those changes, besides
the breaking of their parts into less parts by that contrition, after
the same manner that the Colour of a thin Plate is changed by varying
its thickness. For which reason also it is that the colour'd Flowers of
Plants and Vegetables, by being bruised, usually become more transparent
than before, or at least in some degree or other change their Colours.
Nor is it much less to my purpose, that, by mixing divers Liquors, very
odd and remarkable Productions and Changes of Colours may be effected,
of which no cause can be more obvious and rational than that the saline
Corpuscles of one Liquor do variously act upon or unite with the tinging
Corpuscles of another, so as to make them swell, or shrink, (whereby not
only their bulk but their density also may be changed,) or to divide
them into smaller Corpuscles, (whereby a colour'd Liquor may become
transparent,) or to make many of them associate into one cluster,
whereby two transparent Liquors may compose a colour'd one. For we see
how apt those saline Menstruums are to penetrate and dissolve Substances
to which they are applied, and some of them to precipitate what others
dissolve. In like manner, if we consider the various Phaenomena of the
Atmosphere, we may observe, that when Vapours are first raised, they
hinder not the transparency of the Air, being divided into parts too
small to cause any Reflexion in their Superficies. But when in order to
compose drops of Rain they begin to coalesce and constitute Globules of
all intermediate sizes, those Globules, when they become of convenient
size to reflect some Colours and transmit others, may constitute Clouds
of various Colours according to their sizes. And I see not what can be
rationally conceived in so transparent a Substance as Water for the
production of these Colours, besides the various sizes of its fluid and
globular Parcels.


PROP. VI.

_The parts of Bodies on which their Colours depend, are denser than the
Medium which pervades their Interstices._

This will appear by considering, that the Colour of a Body depends not
only on the Rays which are incident perpendicularly on its parts, but on
those also which are incident at all other Angles. And that according to
the 7th Observation, a very little variation of obliquity will change
the reflected Colour, where the thin Body or small Particles is rarer
than the ambient Medium, insomuch that such a small Particle will at
diversly oblique Incidences reflect all sorts of Colours, in so great a
variety that the Colour resulting from them all, confusedly reflected
from a heap of such Particles, must rather be a white or grey than any
other Colour, or at best it must be but a very imperfect and dirty
Colour. Whereas if the thin Body or small Particle be much denser than
the ambient Medium, the Colours, according to the 19th Observation, are
so little changed by the variation of obliquity, that the Rays which
are reflected least obliquely may predominate over the rest, so much as
to cause a heap of such Particles to appear very intensely of their
Colour.

It conduces also something to the confirmation of this Proposition,
that, according to the 22d Observation, the Colours exhibited by the
denser thin Body within the rarer, are more brisk than those exhibited
by the rarer within the denser.


PROP. VII.

_The bigness of the component parts of natural Bodies may be conjectured
by their Colours._

For since the parts of these Bodies, by _Prop._ 5. do most probably
exhibit the same Colours with a Plate of equal thickness, provided they
have the same refractive density; and since their parts seem for the
most part to have much the same density with Water or Glass, as by many
circumstances is obvious to collect; to determine the sizes of those
parts, you need only have recourse to the precedent Tables, in which the
thickness of Water or Glass exhibiting any Colour is expressed. Thus if
it be desired to know the diameter of a Corpuscle, which being of equal
density with Glass shall reflect green of the third Order; the Number
16-1/4 shews it to be (16-1/4)/10000 parts of an Inch.

The greatest difficulty is here to know of what Order the Colour of any
Body is. And for this end we must have recourse to the 4th and 18th
Observations; from whence may be collected these particulars.

_Scarlets_, and other _reds_, _oranges_, and _yellows_, if they be pure
and intense, are most probably of the second order. Those of the first
and third order also may be pretty good; only the yellow of the first
order is faint, and the orange and red of the third Order have a great
Mixture of violet and blue.

There may be good _Greens_ of the fourth Order, but the purest are of
the third. And of this Order the green of all Vegetables seems to be,
partly by reason of the Intenseness of their Colours, and partly because
when they wither some of them turn to a greenish yellow, and others to a
more perfect yellow or orange, or perhaps to red, passing first through
all the aforesaid intermediate Colours. Which Changes seem to be
effected by the exhaling of the Moisture which may leave the tinging
Corpuscles more dense, and something augmented by the Accretion of the
oily and earthy Part of that Moisture. Now the green, without doubt, is
of the same Order with those Colours into which it changeth, because the
Changes are gradual, and those Colours, though usually not very full,
yet are often too full and lively to be of the fourth Order.

_Blues_ and _Purples_ may be either of the second or third Order, but
the best are of the third. Thus the Colour of Violets seems to be of
that Order, because their Syrup by acid Liquors turns red, and by
