been touched upon in Chapter IV, and for Uranus we need only note that
it was found by accident in the year 1781 by William Herschel, who for
some time after the discovery considered it to be only a comet. It was
the first planet ever discovered, all of its predecessors having been
known from prehistoric times.

[Illustration: WILLIAM HERSCHEL (1738-1822).]

Uranus has four satellites, all of them very faint, which present only
one feature of special importance. Instead of moving in orbits which are
approximately parallel to the plane of the ecliptic, as do the
satellites of the inner planets, their orbit planes are tipped up nearly
perpendicular to the planes of the orbits of both Uranus and the earth.
The one satellite which Neptune possesses has the same peculiarity in
even greater degree, for its motion around the planet takes place in the
direction opposite to that in which all the planets move around the sun,
much as if the orbit of the satellite had been tipped over through an
angle of 150°. Turn a watch face down and note how the hands go round in
the direction opposite to that in which they moved before the face was
turned through 180°.

Both Uranus and Neptune are too distant to allow much detail to be seen
upon their surfaces, but the presence of broad absorption bands in their
spectra shows that they must possess dense atmospheres quite different
in constitution from the atmosphere of the earth. In respect of density
and the force of gravity at their surfaces, they are not very unlike
Saturn, although their density is greater and gravity less than his,
leading to the supposition that they are for the most part gaseous
bodies, but cooler and probably more nearly solid than either Jupiter or
Saturn.

Under favorable circumstances Uranus may be seen with the naked eye by
one who knows just where to look for it. Neptune is never visible save
in a telescope.

147. THE INNER PLANETS.--In sharp contrast with the giant planets which
we have been considering stands the group of four inner planets, or five
if we count the moon as an independent body, which resemble each other
in being all small, dense, and solid bodies, which by comparison with
the great distances separating the outer planets may fairly be described
as huddled together close to the sun. Their relative sizes are shown in
Fig. 84, together with the numerical data concerning size, mass,
density, etc., which we have already found important for the
understanding of a planet's physical condition.


VENUS

[Illustration: FIG. 94.--The phases of Venus.--ANTONIADI.]

148. APPEARANCE.--Omitting the earth, Venus is by far the most
conspicuous member of this group, and when at its brightest is, with
exception of the sun and moon, the most brilliant object in the sky, and
may be seen with the naked eye in broad daylight if the observer knows
just where to look for it. But its brilliancy is subject to considerable
variations on account of its changing distance from the earth, and the
apparent size of its disk varies for the same reason, as may be seen
from Fig. 94. These drawings bring out well the phases of the planet,
and the student should determine from Fig. 17 what are the relative
positions in their orbits of the earth and Venus at which the planet
would present each of these phases. As a guide to this, observe that the
dark part of Venus's earthward side is always proportional in area to
the angle at Venus between the earth and sun. In the first picture of
Fig. 94 about two thirds of the surface corresponding to the full
hemisphere of the planet is dark, and the angle at Venus between earth
and sun is therefore two thirds of 180°--i. e., 120°. In Fig. 17 find a
place on the orbit of Venus from which if lines be drawn to the sun and
earth, as there shown, the angle between them will be 120°. Make a
similar construction for the fourth picture in Fig. 94. Which of these
two positions is farther from the earth? How do the distances compare
with the apparent size of Venus in the two pictures? What is the phase
of Venus to-day?

The irregularities in the shading of the illuminated parts of the disk
are too conspicuous in Fig. 94, on account of difficulties of
reproduction; these shadings are at the best hard to see in the
telescope, and distinct permanent markings upon the planet are wholly
lacking. This absence of markings makes almost impossible a
determination of the planet's time of rotation about its axis, and
astronomers are divided in this respect into two parties, one of which
maintains that Venus, like the earth, turns upon its axis in some period
not very different from 24 hours, while the other contends that, like
the moon, it turns always the same face toward the center of its orbit,
making a rotation upon its axis in the same period in which it makes a
revolution about the sun. The reason why no permanent markings are to be
seen on this planet is easily found. Like Jupiter and Saturn, its
atmosphere is at all times heavily cloud-laden, so that we seldom, if
ever, see down to the level of its solid parts. There is, however, no
reason here to suppose the interior parts hot and gaseous. It is much
more probable that Venus, like the earth, possesses a solid crust whose
temperature we should expect to be considerably higher than that of the
earth, because Venus is nearer the sun. But the cloud layer in its
atmosphere must modify the temperature in some degree, and we have
practically no knowledge of the real temperature conditions at the
surface of the planet.

It is the clouds of Venus which in great measure are responsible for its
marked brilliancy, since they are an excellent medium for reflecting the
sunlight, and give to its surface an albedo greater than that of any
other planet, although Saturn is nearly equal to it.

Of course, the presence of such cloud formations indicates that Venus is
surrounded by a dense atmosphere, and we have independent evidence of
this in the shape of its disk when the planet is very nearly between the
earth and sun. The illuminated part, from tip to tip of the horns, then
stretches more than halfway around the planet's circumference, and shows
that a certain amount of light must have been refracted through its
atmosphere, thus making the horns of the crescent appear unduly
prolonged. This atmosphere is shown by the spectroscope to be not unlike
that of the earth, although, possibly, more dense.


MERCURY

149. CHIEF CHARACTERISTICS.--Mercury, on account of its nearness to the
sun, is at all times a difficult object to observe, and Copernicus, who
spent most of his life in Poland, is said, despite all his efforts, to
have gone to his grave without ever seeing it. In our more southern
latitude it can usually be seen for about a fortnight at the time of
each elongation--i. e., when at its greatest angular distance from the
sun--and the student should find from Fig. 16 the time at which the next
elongation occurs and look for the planet, shining like a star of the
first magnitude, low down in the sky just after sunset or before
sunrise, according as the elongation is to the east or west of the sun.
When seen in the morning sky the planet grows brighter day after day
until it disappears in the sun's rays, while in the evening sky its
brilliancy as steadily diminishes until the planet is lost. It should
therefore be looked for in the evening as soon as possible after it
emerges from the sun's rays.

Mercury, as the smallest of the planets, is best compared with the
moon, which it does not greatly surpass in size and which it strongly
resembles in other respects. Careful comparisons of the amount of light
reflected by the planet in different parts of its orbit show not only
that its albedo agrees very closely with that of the moon, but also that
its light changes with the varying phase of the planet in almost exactly
the same way as the amount of moonlight changes. We may therefore infer
that its surface is like that of the moon, a rough and solid one, with
few or no clouds hanging over it, and most probably covered with very
little or no atmosphere. Like Venus, its rotation period is uncertain,
with the balance of probability favoring the view that it rotates upon
its axis once in 88 days, and therefore always turns the same face
toward the sun.

If such is the case, its climate must be very peculiar: one side roasted
in a perpetual day, where the direct heating power of the sun's rays,
when the planet is at perihelion, is ten times as great as on the moon,
and which six weeks later, when the planet is at its farthest from the
sun, has fallen off to less than half of this. On the opposite side of
the planet there must reign perpetual night and perpetual cold,
mitigated by some slight access of warmth from the day side, and perhaps
feebly imitating the rapid change of season which takes place on the day
side of the planet. This view, however, takes no account of a possible
deviation of the planet's axis from being perpendicular to the plane of
its orbit, or of the librations which must be produced by the great
eccentricity of the orbit, either of which would complicate without
entirely destroying the ideal conditions outlined above.


MARS

150. APPEARANCE.--The one remaining member of the inner group, Mars, has
in recent years received more attention than any other planet, and the
newspapers and magazines have announced marvelous things concerning it:
that it is inhabited by a race of beings superior in intelligence to
men; that the work of their hands may be seen upon the face of the
planet; that we should endeavor to communicate with them, if indeed they
are not already sending messages to us, etc.--all of which is certainly
important, if true, but it rests upon a very slender foundation of
evidence, a part of which we shall have to consider.

Beginning with facts of which there is no doubt, this ruddy-colored
planet, which usually shines about as brightly as a star of the first
magnitude, sometimes displays more than tenfold this brilliancy,
surpassing every other planet save Venus and presenting at these times
especially favorable opportunities for the study of its surface. The
explanation of this increase of brilliancy is, of course, that the
planet approaches unusually near to the earth, and we have already seen
from a consideration of Fig. 17 that this can only happen in the months
of August and September. The last favorable epoch of this kind was in
1894. From Fig. 17 the student should determine when the next one will
come.

[Illustration: FIG. 95.--Mars.--SCHAEBERLE.]

Fig. 95 presents nine drawings of the planet made at one of the epochs
of close approach to the earth, and shows that its face bears certain
faint markings which, though inconspicuous, are fixed and permanent
features of the planet. The dark triangular projection in the lower
half of the second drawing was seen and sketched by Huyghens, 1659
A. D. In Fig. 96 some of these markings are shown much more plainly, but
Fig. 95 gives a better idea of their usual appearance in the telescope.

[Illustration: FIG. 96.--Four views of Mars differing 90° in
longitude.--BARNARD.]

151. ROTATION.--It may be seen readily enough, from a comparison of the
first two sketches of Fig. 95, that the planet rotates about an axis,
and from a more extensive study it is found to be very like the earth in
this respect, turning once in 24h. 37m. around an axis tipped from being
perpendicular to the plane of its orbit about a degree and a half more
than is the earth's axis. Since it is this inclination of the axis which
is the cause of changing seasons upon the earth, there must be similar
changes, winter and summer, as well as day and night, upon Mars, only
each season is longer there than here in the same proportion that its
year is longer than ours--i. e., nearly two to one. It is summer in the
northern hemisphere of Mars whenever the sun, as seen from Mars, stands
in that constellation which is nearest the point of the sky toward which
the planet's axis points. But this axis points toward the constellation
Cygnus, and Alpha Cygni is the bright star nearest the north pole of
Mars. As Pisces is the zodiacal constellation nearest to Cygnus, it must
be summer in the northern hemisphere of Mars when the sun is in Pisces,
or, turning the proposition about, it must be summer in the _southern_
hemisphere of Mars when the planet, as seen from the sun, lies in the
direction of Pisces.

152. THE POLAR CAPS.--One effect of the changing seasons upon Mars is
shown in Fig. 97, where we have a series of drawings of the region about
its south pole made in 1894, on dates between May 21st and December
10th. Show from Fig. 17 that during this time it was summer in the
region here shown. Mars crossed the prime radius in 1894 on September
5th. The striking thing in these pictures is the white spot surrounding
the pole, which shrinks in size from the beginning to near the end of
the series, and then disappears altogether. The spot came back again a
year later, and like a similar spot at the north pole of the planet it
waxes in the winter and wanes during the summer of Mars in endless
succession.

[Illustration: FIG. 97.--The south polar cap of Mars in 1894.--BARNARD.]

Sir W. Herschel, who studied these appearances a century ago, compared
them with the snow fields which every winter spread out from the region
around the terrestrial pole, and in the summer melt and shrink, although
with us they do not entirely disappear. This explanation of the polar
caps of Mars has been generally accepted among astronomers, and from it
we may draw one interesting conclusion: the temperature upon Mars
between summer and winter oscillates above and below the freezing point
of water, as it does in the temperate zones of the earth. But this
conclusion plunges us into a serious difficulty. The temperature of the
earth is made by the sun, and at the distance of Mars from the sun the
heating effect of the latter is reduced to less than half what it is at
the earth, so that, if Mars is to be kept at the same temperature as the
earth, there must be some peculiar means for storing the solar heat and
using it more economically than is done here. Possibly there is some
such mechanism, although no one has yet found it, and some astronomers
are very confident that it does not exist, and assert that the
comparison of the polar caps with snow fields is misleading, and that
the temperature upon Mars must be at least 100°, and perhaps 200° or
more, below zero.

153. ATMOSPHERE AND CLIMATE.--In this connection one feature of Mars is
of importance. The markings upon its surface are always visible when
turned toward the earth, thus showing that the atmosphere contains no
such amount of cloud as does our own, but on the whole is decidedly
clear and sunny, and presumably much less dense than ours. We have seen
in comparing the earth and the moon how important is the service which
the earth's atmosphere renders in storing the sun's heat and checking
those great vicissitudes of temperature to which the moon is subject;
and with this in mind we must regard the smaller density and cloudless
character of the atmosphere of Mars as unfavorable to the maintenance
there of a temperature like that of the earth. Indeed, this
cloudlessness must mean one of two things: either the temperature is so
low that vapors can not exist in any considerable quantity, or the
surface of Mars is so dry that there is little water or other liquid to
be evaporated. The latter alternative is adopted by those astronomers
who look upon the polar caps as true snow fields, which serve as the
chief reservoir of the planet's water supply, and who find in Fig. 98
evidence that as the snow melts and the water flows away over the flat,
dry surface of the planet, vegetation springs up, as shown by the dark
markings on the disk, and gradually dies out with the advancing season.
Note that in the first of these pictures the season upon Mars
corresponds to the end of May with us, and in the last picture to the
beginning of August, a period during which in much of our western
country the luxuriant vegetation of spring is burned out by the
scorching sun. From this point of view the permanent dark spots are the
low-lying parts of the planet's surface, in which at all times there is
a sufficient accumulation of water to support vegetable life.

[Illustration: FIG. 98.--The same face of Mars at three different
seasons.--LOWELL.]

154. THE CANALS.--In Fig. 98 the lower part of the disk of Mars shows
certain faint dark lines which are generally called canals, and in Plate
III there is given a map of Mars showing many of these canals running in
narrow, dusky streaks across the face of the planet according to a
pattern almost as geometrical as that of a spider's web. This must not
be taken for a picture of the planet's appearance in a telescope. No man
ever saw Mars look like this, but the map is useful as a plain
representation of things dimly seen. Some of the regions of this map are
marked Mare (sea), in accordance with the older view which regarded the
darker parts of the planet--and of the moon--as bodies of water, but
this is now known to be an error in both cases. The curved surface of a
planet can not be accurately reproduced upon the flat surface of paper,
but is always more or less distorted by the various methods of
"projecting" it which are in use. Compare the map of Mars in Plate III
with Fig. 99, in which the projection represents very well the
equatorial parts of the planet, but enormously exaggerates the region
around the poles.

It is a remarkable feature of the canals that they all begin and end in
one of these dark parts of the planet's surface; they show no loose ends
lying on the bright parts of the planet. Another even more remarkable
feature is that while the larger canals are permanent features of the
planet's surface, they at times appear "doubled"--i. e., in place of one
canal two parallel ones side by side, lasting for a time and then giving
place again to a single canal.

It is exceedingly difficult to frame any reasonable explanation of these
canals and the varied appearances which they present. The source of the
wild speculations about Mars, to which reference is made above, is to be
found in the suggestion frequently made, half in jest and half in
earnest, that the canals are artificial water courses constructed upon a
scale vastly exceeding any public works upon the earth, and testifying
to the presence in Mars of an advanced civilization. The distinguished
Italian astronomer, Schiaparelli, who has studied these formations
longer than any one else, seems inclined to regard them as water courses
lined on either side by vegetation, which flourishes as far back from
the central channel as water can be supplied from it--a plausible enough
explanation if the fundamental difficulty about temperature can be
overcome.

[Illustration: FIG. 99.--A chart of Mars, 1898-'99.--CERULLI.]

[Illustration: PLATE III. MAP OF MARS (AFTER SCHIAPARELLI)]

155. SATELLITES.--In 1877, one of the times of near approach, Professor
Hall, of Washington, discovered two tiny satellites revolving about Mars
in orbits so small that the nearer one, Phobos, presents the remarkable
anomaly of completing the circuit of its orbit in less time than the
planet takes for a rotation about its axis. This satellite, in fact,
makes three revolutions in its orbit while the planet turns once upon
its axis, and it therefore rises in the west and sets in the east, as
seen from Mars, going from one horizon to the other in a little less
than 6 hours. The other satellite, Deimos, takes a few hours more than a
day to make the circuit of its orbit, but the difference is so small
that it remains continuously above the horizon of any given place upon
Mars for more than 60 hours at a time, and during this period runs twice
through its complete set of phases--new, first quarter, full, etc. In
ordinary telescopes these satellites can be seen only under especially
favorable circumstances, and are far too small to permit of any direct
measurement of their size. The amount of light which they reflect has
been compared with that of Mars and found to be as much inferior to it
as is Polaris to two full moons, and, judging from this comparison,
their diameters can not much exceed a half dozen miles, unless their
albedo is far less than that of Mars, which does not seem probable.


THE ASTEROIDS

156. MINOR PLANETS.--These may be dismissed with few words. There are
about 500 of them known, all discovered since the beginning of the
nineteenth century, and new ones are still found every year. No one
pretends to remember the names which have been assigned them, and they
are commonly represented by a number inclosed in a circle, showing the
order in which they were discovered--e. g., [circle 1] = Ceres,
[circle 433] = Eros, etc. For the most part they are little more than
chips, world fragments, adrift in space, and naturally it was the larger
and brighter of them that were first discovered. The size of the first
four of them--Ceres, Pallas, Juno, and Vesta--compared with the size of
the moon, according to Professor Barnard, is shown in Fig. 100. The
great majority of them must be much smaller than the smallest of these,
perhaps not more than a score of miles in diameter.

A few of the asteroids present problems of special interest, such as
Eros, on account of its close approach to the earth; Polyhymnia, whose
very eccentric orbit makes it a valuable means for determining the mass
of Jupiter, etc.; but these are special cases and the average asteroid
now receives scant attention, although half a century ago, when only a
few of them were known, they were regarded with much interest, and the
discovery of a new one was an event of some consequence.

It was then a favorite speculation that they were in fact fragments of
an ill-fated planet which once filled the gap between the orbits of Mars
and Jupiter, but which, by some mischance, had been blown into pieces.
This is now known to be well-nigh impossible, for every fragment which
after the explosion moved in an elliptical orbit, as all the asteroids
do move, would be brought back once in every revolution to the place of
the explosion, and all the asteroid orbits must therefore intersect at
this place. But there is no such common point of intersection.

[Illustration: FIG. 100.--The size of the first four
asteroids.--BARNARD.]

157. LIFE ON THE PLANETS.--There is a belief firmly grounded in the
popular mind, and not without its advocates among professional
astronomers, that the planets are inhabited by living and intelligent
beings, and it seems proper at the close of this chapter to inquire
briefly how far the facts and principles here developed are consistent
with this belief, and what support, if any, they lend to it.

At the outset we must observe that the word life is an elastic term,
hard to define in any satisfactory way, and yet standing for something
which we know here upon the earth. It is this idea, our familiar though
crude knowledge of life, which lies at the root of the matter. Life, if
it exists in another planet, must be in its essential character like
life upon the earth, and must at least possess those features which are
common to all forms of terrestrial life. It is an abuse of language to
