set himself to do this duty which he dreaded so, and do it he would were
all the armies of the world camped within Battel.

Directly he heard a low challenge from one of his sentries, who
presently appeared escorting a lackey.

"A messenger from Lady Bertrade de Montfort," said the soldier.

"Bring him hither," commanded the outlaw.

The lackey approached and handed Norman of Torn a dainty parchment
sealed with scented wax wafers.

"Did My Lady say you were to wait for an answer?" asked the outlaw.

"I am to wait, My Lord," replied the awestruck fellow, to whom the
service had been much the same had his mistress ordered him to Hell to
bear a message to the Devil.

Norman of Torn turned to a flickering torch and, breaking the seals,
read the message from the woman he loved. It was short and simple.

To Norman of Torn, from his friend always, Bertrade de Montfort.

Come with Giles. He has my instructions to lead thee secretly to where I
be.

Bertrade de Montfort.

Norman of Torn turned to where one of his captains squatted upon the
ground beside an object covered with a cloth.

"Come, Flory," he said, and then, turning to the waiting Giles, "lead
on."

They fell in single file: first the lackey, Giles, then Norman of Torn
and last the fellow whom he had addressed as Flory bearing the object
covered with a cloth. But it was not Flory who brought up the rear.
Flory lay dead in the shadow of a great oak within the camp; a thin
wound below his left shoulder blade marked the spot where a keen dagger
had found its way to his heart, and in his place walked the little grim,
gray, old man, bearing the object covered with a cloth. But none might
know the difference, for the little man wore the armor of Flory, and his
visor was drawn.

And so they came to a small gate which let into the castle wall where
the shadow of a great tower made the blackness of a black night doubly
black. Through many dim corridors, the lackey led them, and up winding
stairways until presently he stopped before a low door.

"Here," he said, "My Lord," and turning left them.

Norman of Torn touched the panel with the mailed knuckles of his right
hand, and a low voice from within whispered, "Enter."

Silently, he strode into the apartment, a small antechamber off a
large hall. At one end was an open hearth upon which logs were burning
brightly, while a single lamp aided in diffusing a soft glow about the
austere chamber. In the center of the room was a table, and at the sides
several benches.

Before the fire stood Bertrade de Montfort, and she was alone.

"Place your burden upon this table, Flory," said Norman of Torn. And
when it had been done: "You may go. Return to camp."

He did not address Bertrade de Montfort until the door had closed behind
the little grim, gray man who wore the armor of the dead Flory and
then Norman of Torn advanced to the table and stood with his left hand
ungauntleted, resting upon the table's edge.

"My Lady Bertrade," he said at last, "I have come to fulfill a promise."

He spoke in French, and she started slightly at his voice. Before,
Norman of Torn had always spoken in English. Where had she heard that
voice! There were tones in it that haunted her.

"What promise did Norman of Torn e'er make to Bertrade de Montfort?" she
asked. "I do not understand you, my friend."

"Look," he said. And as she approached the table he withdrew the cloth
which covered the object that the man had placed there.

The girl started back with a little cry of terror, for there upon a
golden platter was a man's head; horrid with the grin of death baring
yellow fangs.

"Dost recognize the thing?" asked the outlaw. And then she did; but
still she could not comprehend. At last, slowly, there came back to her
the idle, jesting promise of Roger de Conde to fetch the head of her
enemy to the feet of his princess, upon a golden dish.

But what had the Outlaw of Torn to do with that! It was all a sore
puzzle to her, and then she saw the bared left hand of the grim, visored
figure of the Devil of Torn, where it rested upon the table beside the
grisly head of Peter of Colfax; and upon the third finger was the great
ring she had tossed to Roger de Conde on that day, two years before.

What strange freak was her brain playing her! It could not be, no it was
impossible; then her glance fell again upon the head grinning there upon
the platter of gold, and upon the forehead of it she saw, in letters of
dried blood, that awful symbol of sudden death--NT!

Slowly her eyes returned to the ring upon the outlaw's hand, and then
up to his visored helm. A step she took toward him, one hand upon her
breast, the other stretched pointing toward his face, and she swayed
slightly as might one who has just arisen from a great illness.

"Your visor," she whispered, "raise your visor." And then, as though to
herself: "It cannot be; it cannot be."

Norman of Torn, though it tore the heart from him, did as she bid, and
there before her she saw the brave strong face of Roger de Conde.

"Mon Dieu!" she cried, "Tell me it is but a cruel joke."

"It be the cruel truth, My Lady Bertrade," said Norman of Torn sadly.
And, then, as she turned away from him, burying her face in her raised
arms, he came to her side, and, laying his hand upon her shoulder, said
sadly:

"And now you see, My Lady, why I did not follow you to France. My heart
went there with you, but I knew that naught but sorrow and humiliation
could come to one whom the Devil of Torn loved, if that love was
returned; and so I waited until you might forget the words you had
spoken to Roger de Conde before I came to fulfill the promise that you
should know him in his true colors.

"It is because I love you, Bertrade, that I have come this night. God
knows that it be no pleasant thing to see the loathing in your very
attitude, and to read the hate and revulsion that surges through your
heart, or to guess the hard, cold thoughts which fill your mind against
me because I allowed you to speak the words you once spoke, and to the
Devil of Torn.

"I make no excuse for my weakness. I ask no forgiveness for what I know
you never can forgive. That, when you think of me, it will always be
with loathing and contempt is the best that I can hope.

"I only know that I love you, Bertrade; I only know that I love you, and
with a love that surpasseth even my own understanding.

"Here is the ring that you gave in token of friendship. Take it. The
hand that wore it has done no wrong by the light that has been given it
as guide.

"The blood that has pulsed through the finger that it circled came from
a heart that beat for Bertrade de Montfort; a heart that shall continue
to beat for her alone until a merciful providence sees fit to gather in
a wasted and useless life.

"Farewell, Bertrade." Kneeling he raised the hem of her garment to his
lips.

A thousand conflicting emotions surged through the heart of this proud
daughter of the new conqueror of England. The anger of an outraged
confidence, gratitude for the chivalry which twice had saved her honor,
hatred for the murderer of a hundred friends and kinsmen, respect and
honor for the marvellous courage of the man, loathing and contempt for
the base born, the memory of that exalted moment when those handsome
lips had clung to hers, pride in the fearlessness of a champion who
dared come alone among twenty thousand enemies for the sake of a promise
made her; but stronger than all the rest, two stood out before her
mind's eye like living things--the degradation of his low birth, and
the memory of the great love she had cherished all these long and dreary
months.

And these two fought out their battle in the girl's breast. In those few
brief moments of bewilderment and indecision, it seemed to Bertrade de
Montfort that ten years passed above her head, and when she reached her
final resolution she was no longer a young girl but a grown woman who,
with the weight of a mature deliberation, had chosen the path which she
would travel to the end--to the final goal, however sweet or however
bitter.

Slowly she turned toward him who knelt with bowed head at her feet, and,
taking the hand that held the ring outstretched toward her, raised him
to his feet. In silence she replaced the golden band upon his finger,
and then she lifted her eyes to his.

"Keep the ring, Norman of Torn," she said. "The friendship of Bertrade
de Montfort is not lightly given nor lightly taken away," she hesitated,
"nor is her love."

"What do you mean?" he whispered. For in her eyes was that wondrous
light he had seen there on that other day in the far castle of
Leicester.

"I mean," she answered, "that, Roger de Conde or Norman of Torn,
gentleman or highwayman, it be all the same to Bertrade de Montfort--it
be thee I love; thee!"

Had she reviled him, spat upon him, he would not have been surprised,
for he had expected the worst; but that she should love him! Oh God, had
his overwrought nerves turned his poor head? Was he dreaming this thing,
only to awaken to the cold and awful truth!

But these warm arms about his neck, the sweet perfume of the breath that
fanned his cheek; these were no dream!

"Think thee what thou art saying, Bertrade?" he cried. "Dost forget that
I be a low-born knave, knowing not my own mother and questioning even
the identity of my father? Could a De Montfort face the world with such
a man for husband?"

"I know what I say, perfectly," she answered. "Were thou born out of
wedlock, the son of a hostler and a scullery maid, still would I love
thee, and honor thee, and cleave to thee. Where thou be, Norman of Torn,
there shall be happiness for me. Thy friends shall be my friends; thy
joys shall be my joys; thy sorrows, my sorrows; and thy enemies, even
mine own father, shall be my enemies.

"Why it is, my Norman, I know not. Only do I know that I didst often
question my own self if in truth I did really love Roger de Conde, but
thee--oh Norman, why is it that there be no shred of doubt now, that
this heart, this soul, this body be all and always for the Outlaw of
Torn?"

"I do not know," he said simply and gravely. "So wonderful a thing be
beyond my poor brain; but I think my heart knows, for in very joy, it
is sending the hot blood racing and surging through my being till I were
like to be consumed for the very heat of my happiness."

"Sh!" she whispered, suddenly, "methinks I hear footsteps. They must not
find thee here, Norman of Torn, for the King has only this night wrung
a promise from my father to take thee in the morning and hang thee. What
shall we do, Norman? Where shall we meet again?"

"We shall not be separated, Bertrade; only so long as it may take thee
to gather a few trinkets, and fetch thy riding cloak. Thou ridest north
tonight with Norman of Torn, and by the third day, Father Claude shall
make us one."

"I am glad thee wish it," she replied. "I feared that, for some reason,
thee might not think it best for me to go with thee now. Wait here, I
will be gone but a moment. If the footsteps I hear approach this door,"
and she indicated the door by which he had entered the little room,
"thou canst step through this other doorway into the adjoining
apartment, and conceal thyself there until the danger passes."

Norman of Torn made a wry face, for he had no stomach for hiding himself
away from danger.

"For my sake," she pleaded. So he promised to do as she bid, and she ran
swiftly from the room to fetch her belongings.




CHAPTER XIX

When the little, grim, gray man had set the object covered with a cloth
upon the table in the center of the room and left the apartment, he did
not return to camp as Norman of Torn had ordered.

Instead, he halted immediately without the little door, which he left a
trifle ajar, and there he waited, listening to all that passed between
Bertrade de Montfort and Norman of Torn.

As he heard the proud daughter of Simon de Montfort declare her love for
the Devil of Torn, a cruel smile curled his lip.

"It will be better than I had hoped," he muttered, "and easier. 'S blood!
How much easier now that Leicester, too, may have his whole proud heart
in the hanging of Norman of Torn. Ah, what a sublime revenge! I have
waited long, thou cur of a King, to return the blow thou struck
that day, but the return shall be an hundred-fold increased by long
accumulated interest."

Quickly, the wiry figure hastened through the passageways and corridors,
until he came to the great hall where sat De Montfort and the King, with
Philip of France and many others, gentlemen and nobles.

Before the guard at the door could halt him, he had broken into the room
and, addressing the King, cried:

"Wouldst take the Devil of Torn, My Lord King? He be now alone where a
few men may seize him."

"What now! What now!" ejaculated Henry. "What madman be this?"

"I be no madman, Your Majesty. Never did brain work more clearly or to
more certain ends," replied the man.

"It may doubtless be some ruse of the cut-throat himself," cried De
Montfort.

"Where be the knave?" asked Henry.

"He stands now within this palace and in his arms be Bertrade, daughter
of My Lord Earl of Leicester. Even now she did but tell him that she
loved him."

"Hold," cried De Montfort. "Hold fast thy foul tongue. What meanest thou
by uttering such lies, and to my very face?"

"They be no lies, Simon de Montfort. An I tell thee that Roger de Conde
and Norman of Torn be one and the same, thou wilt know that I speak no
lie."

De Montfort paled.

"Where be the craven wretch?" he demanded.

"Come," said the little, old man. And turning, he led from the hall,
closely followed by De Montfort, the King, Prince Philip and the others.

"Thou hadst better bring twenty fighting men--thou'lt need them all to
take Norman of Torn," he advised De Montfort. And so as they passed the
guard room, the party was increased by twenty men-at-arms.

Scarcely had Bertrade de Montfort left him ere Norman of Torn heard the
tramping of many feet. They seemed approaching up the dim corridor that
led to the little door of the apartment where he stood.

Quickly, he moved to the opposite door and, standing with his hand upon
the latch, waited. Yes, they were coming that way, many of them and
quickly and, as he heard them pause without, he drew aside the arras and
pushed open the door behind him; backing into the other apartment just
as Simon de Montfort, Earl of Leicester, burst into the room from the
opposite side.

At the same instant, a scream rang out behind Norman of Torn, and,
turning, he faced a brightly lighted room in which sat Eleanor, Queen
of England and another Eleanor, wife of Simon de Montfort, with their
ladies.

There was no hiding now, and no escape; for run he would not, even had
there been where to run. Slowly, he backed away from the door toward a
corner where, with his back against a wall and a table at his right,
he might die as he had lived, fighting; for Norman of Torn knew that he
could hope for no quarter from the men who had him cornered there like a
great bear in a trap.

With an army at their call, it were an easy thing to take a lone man,
even though that man were the Devil of Torn.

The King and De Montfort had now crossed the smaller apartment and were
within the room where the outlaw stood at bay.

At the far side, the group of royal and noble women stood huddled
together, while behind De Montfort and the King pushed twenty gentlemen
and as many men-at-arms.

"What dost thou here, Norman of Torn?" cried De Montfort, angrily.
"Where be my daughter, Bertrade?"

"I be here, My Lord Earl, to attend to mine own affairs," replied Norman
of Torn, "which be the affair of no other man. As to your daughter: I
know nothing of her whereabouts. What should she have to do with the
Devil of Torn, My Lord?"

De Montfort turned toward the little gray man.

"He lies," shouted he. "Her kisses be yet wet upon his lips."

Norman of Torn looked at the speaker and, beneath the visor that was now
partly raised, he saw the features of the man whom, for twenty years, he
had called father.

He had never expected love from this hard old man, but treachery and
harm from him? No, he could not believe it. One of them must have gone
mad. But why Flory's armor and where was the faithful Flory?

"Father!" he ejaculated, "leadest thou the hated English King against
thine own son?"

"Thou be no son of mine, Norman of Torn," retorted the old man. "Thy
days of usefulness to me be past. Tonight thou serve me best swinging
from a wooden gibbet. Take him, My Lord Earl; they say there be a good
strong gibbet in the courtyard below."

"Wilt surrender, Norman of Torn?" cried De Montfort.

"Yes," was the reply, "when this floor be ankle deep in English blood
and my heart has ceased to beat, then will I surrender."

"Come, come," cried the King. "Let your men take the dog, De Montfort!"

"Have at him, then," ordered the Earl, turning toward the waiting
men-at-arms, none of whom seemed overly anxious to advance upon the
doomed outlaw.

But an officer of the guard set them the example, and so they pushed
forward in a body toward Norman of Torn; twenty blades bared against
one.

