deserves, also, particular notice that these plants, differently from what
occurred in any of the previous classes, consisted of all three forms, namely,
eighteen short-styled, fourteen long-styled, and eight mid-styled plants. As
these plants were so fertile, I counted the seeds only in the two following
cases.

[PLANT 32.

This mid-styled plant was freely and legitimately fertilised during the
unfavourable year of 1864, by numerous surrounding legitimate and illegitimate
plants. Eight capsules yielded an average of 127.2 seeds, with a maximum of 144
and a minimum of 96; so that this plant attained 98 per cent of the normal
standard.

PLANT 33.

This short-styled plant was fertilised in the same manner and at the same time
with the last; and ten capsules yielded an average of 113.9, with a maximum of
137 and a minimum of 90. Hence this plant produced no less than 137 per cent of
seeds in comparison with the normal standard.]

CONCLUDING REMARKS ON THE ILLEGITIMATE OFFSPRING OF THE THREE FORMS OF Lythrum
salicaria.

From the three forms occurring in approximately equal numbers in a state of
nature, and from the results of sowing seed naturally produced, there is reason
to believe that each form, when legitimately fertilised, reproduces all three
forms in about equal numbers. Now, we have seen (and the fact is a very singular
one) that the fifty-six plants produced from the long-styled form,
illegitimately fertilised with pollen from the same form (Class 1 and 2), were
all long-styled. The short-styled form, when self-fertilised (Class 3), produced
eight short-styled and one long-styled plant; and the mid-styled form, similarly
treated (Class 4), produced three mid-styled and one long-styled offspring; so
that these two forms, when illegitimately fertilised with pollen from the same
form, evince a strong, but not exclusive, tendency to reproduce the parent-form.
When the short-styled form was illegitimately fertilised by the long-styled form
(Class 5), and again when the mid-styled was illegitimately fertilised by the
long-styled (Class 6), in each case the two parent-forms alone were reproduced.
As thirty-seven plants were raised from these two unions, we may, with much
confidence, believe that it is the rule that plants thus derived usually consist
of both parent-forms, but not of the third form. When, however, the mid-styled
form was illegitimately fertilised by the longest stamens of the short-styled
(Class 7), the same rule did not hold good; for the seedlings consisted of all
three forms. The illegitimate union from which these latter seedlings were
raised is, as previously stated, singularly fertile, and the seedlings
themselves exhibited no signs of sterility and grew to their full height. From
the consideration of these several facts, and from analogous ones to be given
under Oxalis, it seems probable that in a state of nature the pistil of each
form usually receives, through the agency of insects, pollen from the stamens of
corresponding height from both the other forms. But the case last given shows
that the application of two kinds of pollen is not indispensable for the
production of all three forms. Hildebrand has suggested that the cause of all
three forms being regularly and naturally reproduced, may be that some of the
flowers are fertilised with one kind of pollen, and others on the same plant
with the other kind of pollen. Finally, of the three forms, the long-styled
evinces somewhat the strongest tendency to reappear amongst the offspring,
whether both, or one, or neither of the parents are long-styled.

[TABLE 5.30. Tabulated results of the fertility of the foregoing illegitimate
plants, when legitimately fertilised, generally by illegitimate plants, as
described under each experiment. Plants 11, 12 and 13 are excluded, as they were
illegitimately fertilised.

NORMAL STANDARD OF FERTILITY OF THE THREE FORMS, WHEN LEGITIMATELY AND NATURALLY
FERTILISED.

Column 1: Form.
Column 2: Average number of seeds per capsule.
Column 3: Maximum number in any one capsule.
Column 4: Minimum number in any one capsule.

Long-styled  :  93  : 159 : No record was kept as all very poor capsules were
rejected.
Mid-styled   : 130  : 151 : No record was kept as all very poor capsules were
rejected.
Short-styled : 83.5 : 112 : No record was kept as all very poor capsules were
rejected.

TABLE 5.30. Continued.

CLASS 1 AND CLASS 2.--ILLEGITIMATE PLANTS RAISED FROM LONG-STYLED PARENTS
FERTILISED WITH POLLEN FROM OWN-FORM MID-LENGTH OR SHORTEST STAMENS.

Column 1: Number (name) of plant.
Column 2: Form.
Column 3: Average number of seeds per capsule.
Column 4: Maximum number of seeds in any one capsule.
Column 5: Minimum number of seeds in any one capsule.
Column 6: Average number of seeds, expressed as the percentage of the normal
standard.

 1 : Long-styled :  0      :  0 :  0 : 0.
 2 : Long-styled :  4.5    :  ? :  0 : 5.
 3 : Long-styled :  4.5    :  ? :  0 : 5.
 4 : Long-styled :  4.5    :  ? :  0 : 5.
 5 : Long-styled :  0 or 1 :  2 :  0 : 0 or 1.
 6 : Long-styled :  0      :  0 :  0 : 0.
 7 : Long-styled : 36.1    : 47 : 22 : 39.
 8 : Long-styled : 41.1    : 73 : 11 : 44.
 9 : Long-styled : 57.1    : 86 : 23 : 61.
10 : Long-styled : 44.2    : 69 : 25 : 47.

CLASS 3. ILLEGITIMATE PLANTS RAISED FROM SHORT-STYLED PARENTS FERTILISED WITH
POLLEN FROM OWN-FORM SHORTEST STAMENS.

14 : Short-styled : 28.3 : 51 : 11 : 33.
15 : Short-styled : 32.6 : 49 : 20 : 38.
16 : Short-styled : 77.8 : 97 : 60 : 94.
17 : Long-styled  : 76.3 : 88 : 57 : 82.

CLASS 4. ILLEGITIMATE PLANTS RAISED FROM MID-STYLED PARENTS FERTILISED WITH
POLLEN FROM OWN-FORM LONGEST STAMENS.

18 : Mid-styled  : 102.6 : 131 : 63 : 80.
19 : Mid-styled  :  73.4 :  87 : 64 : 56.
20 : Long-styled :  69.6 :  83 : 52 : 75.

CLASS 5. ILLEGITIMATE PLANTS RAISED FROM SHORT-STYLED PARENTS FERTILISED WITH
POLLEN FROM THE MID-LENGTH STAMENS OF THE LONG-STYLED FORM.

21 : Short-styled :  43.0 :  63 : 26 :  52.
22 : Short-styled : 100.5 : 123 : 86 : 121.
23 : Short-styled : 113.5 : 123 : 93 : 136.
24 : Long-styled  :  82.0 : 120 : 67 :  88.
25 : Long-styled  : 122.5 : 149 : 84 : 131.

CLASS 6. ILLEGITIMATE PLANTS RAISED FROM MID-STYLED PARENTS FERTILISED WITH
POLLEN FROM THE SHORTEST STAMENS OF THE LONG-STYLED FORM.

26 : Mid-styled  :  86.0 : 109 : 61 :  66.
27 : Mid-styled  :  99.4 : 122 : 53 :  76.
28 : Mid-styled  :  89.0 : 119 : 69 :  68.
29 : Long-styled : 100.0 : 121 : 77 : 107.
30 : Long-styled :  94.0 : 106 : 66 : 101.
31 : Long-styled :  90.6 :  97 : 79 :  98.

CLASS 7. ILLEGITIMATE PLANTS RAISED FROM MID-STYLED PARENTS FERTILISED WITH
POLLEN FROM THE LONGEST STAMENS OF THE SHORT-STYLED FORM.

32 : Mid-styled   : 127.2 : 144 : 96 :  98.
33 : Short-styled : 113.9 : 137 : 90 : 137.

The lessened fertility of most of these illegitimate plants is in many respects
a highly remarkable phenomenon. Thirty-three plants in the seven classes were
subjected to various trials, and the seeds carefully counted. Some of them were
artificially fertilised, but the far greater number were freely fertilised (and
this is the better and natural plan) through the agency of insects, by other
illegitimate plants. In the right hand, or percentage column, in Table 5.30, a
wide difference in fertility between the plants in the first four and the last
three classes may be perceived. In the first four classes the plants are
descended from the three forms illegitimately fertilised with pollen taken from
the same form, but only rarely from the same plant. It is necessary to observe
this latter circumstance; for, as I have elsewhere shown, most plants, when
fertilised with their own pollen, or that from the same plant, are in some
degree sterile, and the seedlings raised from such unions are likewise in some
degree sterile, dwarfed, and feeble. (5/3. 'The Effects of Cross and Self-
fertilisation in the Vegetable Kingdom' 1876.) None of the nineteen illegitimate
plants in the first four classes were completely fertile; one, however, was
nearly so, yielding 96 per cent of the proper number of seeds. From this high
degree of fertility we have many descending gradations, till we reach an
absolute zero, when the plants, though bearing many flowers, did not produce,
during successive years, a single seed or even seed-capsule. Some of the most
sterile plants did not even yield a single seed when legitimately fertilised
with pollen from legitimate plants. There is good reason to believe that the
first seven plants in Class 1 and 2 were the offspring of a long-styled plant
fertilised with pollen from its own-form shortest stamens, and these plants were
the most sterile of all. The remaining plants in Class 1 and 2 were almost
certainly the product of pollen from the mid-length stamens, and although very
sterile, they were less so than the first set. None of the plants in the first
four classes attained their full and proper stature; the first seven, which were
the most sterile of all (as already stated), were by far the most dwarfed,
several of them never reaching to half their proper height. These same plants
did not flower at so early an age, or at so early a period in the season, as
they ought to have done. The anthers in many of their flowers, and in the
flowers of some other plants in the first six classes, were either contabescent
or included numerous small and shrivelled pollen-grains. As the suspicion at one
time occurred to me that the lessened fertility of the illegitimate plants might
be due to the pollen alone having been affected, I may remark that this
certainly was not the case; for several of them, when fertilised by sound pollen
from legitimate plants, did not yield the full complement of seeds; hence it is
certain that both the female and male reproductive organs were affected. In each
of the seven classes, the plants, though descended from the same parents, sown
at the same time and in the same soil, differed much in their average degree of
fertility.

Turning now to the fifth, sixth, and seventh classes, and looking to the right
hand column of Table 5.30, we find nearly as many plants with a percentage of
seeds above the normal standard as beneath it. As with most plants the number of
seeds produced varies much, it might be thought that the present case was one
merely of variability. But this view must be rejected, as far as the less
fertile plants in these three classes are concerned: first, because none of the
plants in Class 5 attained their proper height, which shows that they were in
some manner affected; and, secondly, because many of the plants in Classes 5 and
6 produced anthers which were either contabescent or included small and
shrivelled pollen-grains. And as in these cases the male organs were manifestly
deteriorated, it is by far the most probable conclusion that the female organs
were in some cases likewise affected, and that this was the cause of the reduced
number of seeds.

With respect to the six plants in these three classes which yielded a very high
percentage of seeds, the thought naturally arises that the normal standard of
fertility for the long-styled and short-styled forms (with which alone we are
here concerned) may have been fixed too low, and that the six legitimate plants
are merely fully fertile. The standard for the long-styled form was deduced by
counting the seeds in twenty-three capsules, and for the short-styled form from
twenty-five capsules. I do not pretend that this is a sufficient number of
capsules for absolute accuracy; but my experience has led me to believe that a
very fair result may thus be gained. As, however, the maximum number observed in
the twenty-five capsules of the short-styled form was low, the standard in this
case may possibly be not quite high enough. But it should be observed, in the
case of the illegitimate plants, that in order to avoid over-estimating their
infertility, ten very fine capsules were always selected; and the years 1865 and
1866, during which the plants in the three latter classes were experimented on,
were highly favourable for seed-production. Now, if this plan of selecting very
fine capsules during favourable seasons had been followed for obtaining the
normal standards, instead of taking, during various seasons, the first capsules
which came to hand, the standards would undoubtedly have been considerably
higher; and thus the fact of the six foregoing plants appearing to yield an
unnaturally high percentage of seeds may, perhaps, be explained. On this view,
these plants are, in fact, merely fully fertile, and not fertile to an abnormal
degree. Nevertheless, as characters of all kinds are liable to variation,
especially with organisms unnaturally treated, and as in the four first and more
sterile classes, the plants derived from the same parents and treated in the
same manner, certainly did vary much in sterility, it is possible that certain
plants in the latter and more fertile classes may have varied so as to have
acquired an abnormal degree of fertility. But it should be noticed that, if my
standards err in being too low, the sterility of all the many sterile plants in
the several classes will have to be estimated by so much the higher. Finally, we
see that the illegitimate plants in the four first classes are all more or less
sterile, some being absolutely barren, with one alone almost completely fertile;
in the three latter classes, some of the plants are moderately sterile, whilst
others are fully fertile, or possibly fertile in excess.

The last point which need here be noticed is that, as far as the means of
comparison serve, some degree of relationship generally exists between the
infertility of the illegitimate union of the several parent-forms and that of
their illegitimate offspring. Thus the two illegitimate unions, from which the
plants in Classes 6 and 7 were derived, yielded a fair amount of seed, and only
a few of these plants are in any degree sterile. On the other hand, the
illegitimate unions between plants of the same form always yield very few seeds,
and their seedlings are very sterile. Long-styled parent-plants when fertilised
with pollen from their own-form shortest stamens, appear to be rather more
sterile than when fertilised with their own-form mid-length stamens; and the
seedlings from the former union were much more sterile than those from the
latter union. In opposition to this relationship, short-styled plants
illegitimately fertilised with pollen from the mid-length stamens of the long-
styled form (Class 5) are very sterile; whereas some of the offspring raised
from this union were far from being highly sterile. It may be added that there
is a tolerably close parallelism in all the classes between the degree of
sterility of the plants and their dwarfed stature. As previously stated, an
illegitimate plant fertilised with pollen from a legitimate plant has its
fertility slightly increased. The importance of the several foregoing
conclusions will be apparent at the close of this chapter, when the illegitimate
unions between the forms of the same species and their illegitimate offspring,
are compared with the hybrid unions of distinct species and their hybrid
offspring.

OXALIS.

No one has compared the legitimate and illegitimate offspring of any trimorphic
species in this genus. Hildebrand sowed illegitimately fertilised seeds of
Oxalis Valdiviana, but they did not germinate (5/4. 'Botanische Zeitung' 1871
page 433 footnote.); and this fact, as he remarks, supports my view that an
illegitimate union resembles a hybrid one between two distinct species, for the
seeds in this latter case are often incapable of germination.

[The following observations relate to the nature of the forms which appear among
the legitimate seedlings of Oxalis Valdiviana. Hildebrand raised, as described
in the paper just referred to, 211 seedlings from all six legitimate unions, and
the three forms appeared among the offspring from each union. For instance,
long-styled plants were legitimately fertilised with pollen from the longest
stamens of the mid-styled form, and the seedlings consisted of 15 long-styled,
18 mid-styled, and 6 short-styled. We here see that a few short-styled plants
were produced, though neither parent was short-styled; and so it was with the
other legitimate unions. Out of the above 211 seedlings, 173 belonged to the
same two forms as their parents, and only 38 belonged to the third form distinct
from either parent. In the case of O. Regnelli, the result, as observed by
Hildebrand, was nearly the same, but more striking: all the offspring from four
of the legitimate unions consisted of the two parent-forms, whilst amongst the
seedlings from the other two legitimate unions the third form appeared. Thus, of
the 43 seedlings from the six legitimate unions, 35 belonged to the same two
forms as their parents, and only 8 to the third form. Fritz Muller also raised
in Brazil seedlings from long-styled plants of O. Regnelli legitimately
fertilised with pollen from the longest stamens of the mid-styled form, and all
these belonged to the two parent-forms. (5/5. 'Jenaische Zeitschrift' etc. Band
6 1871 page 75.) Lastly, seedlings were raised by me from long-styled plants of
O. speciosa legitimately fertilised by the short-styled form, and from the
latter reciprocally fertilised by the long-styled; and these consisted of 33
long-styled and 26 short-styled plants, with not one mid-styled form. There can,
therefore, be no doubt that the legitimate offspring from any two forms of
Oxalis tend to belong to the same two forms as their parents; but that a few
seedlings belonging to the third form occasionally make their appearance; and
this latter fact, as Hildebrand remarks, may be attributed to atavism, as some
of their progenitors will almost certainly have belonged to the third form.

When, however, any one form of Oxalis is fertilised illegitimately with pollen
from the same form, the seedlings appear to belong invariably to this form. Thus
Hildebrand states that long-styled plants of O. rosea growing by themselves have
been propagated in Germany year after year by seed, and have always produced
long-styled plants. (5/6. 'Ueber den Trimorphismus in der Gattung Oxalis:
Monatsberichte der Akad. der Wissen. zu Berlin' 21 June 1866 page 373 and
'Botanische Zeitung' 1871 page 435.) Again, 17 seedlings were raised from mid-
styled plants of O. hedysaroides growing by themselves, and these were all mid-
styled. So that the forms of Oxalis, when illegitimately fertilised with their
own pollen, behave like the long-styled form of Lythrum salicaria, which when
thus fertilised always produced with me long-styled offspring.]

PRIMULA.

Primula Sinensis.

I raised during February 1862, from some long-styled plants illegitimately
fertilised with pollen from the same form, twenty-seven seedlings. These were
all long-styled. They proved fully fertile or even fertile in excess; for ten
flowers, fertilised with pollen from other plants of the same lot, yielded nine
capsules, containing on an average 39.75 seeds, with a maximum in one capsule of
66 seeds. Four other flowers legitimately crossed with pollen from a legitimate
plant, and four flowers on the latter crossed with pollen from the illegitimate
seedlings, yielded seven capsules with an average of 53 seeds, with a maximum of
72. I must here state that I have found some difficulty in estimating the normal
standard of fertility for the several unions of this species, as the results
differ much during successive years, and the seeds vary so greatly in size that
it is hard to decide which ought to be considered good. In order to avoid over-
estimating the infertility of the several illegitimate unions, I have taken the
normal standard as low as possible.

From the foregoing twenty-seven illegitimate plants, fertilised with their own-
form pollen, twenty-five seedling grandchildren were raised; and these were all
long-styled; so that from the two illegitimate generations fifty-two plants were
raised, and all without exception proved long-styled. These grandchildren grew
vigorously, and soon exceeded in height two other lots of illegitimate seedlings
of different parentage and one lot of equal-styled seedlings presently to be
described. Hence I expected that they would have turned out highly ornamental
plants; but when they flowered, they seemed, as my gardener remarked, to have
gone back to the wild state; for the petals were pale-coloured, narrow,
sometimes not touching each other, flat, generally deeply notched in the middle,
but not flexuous on the margin, and with the yellow eye or centre conspicuous.
Altogether these flowers were strikingly different from those of their
progenitors; and this I think, can only be accounted for on the principle of
reversion. Most of the anthers on one plant were contabescent. Seventeen flowers
on the grandchildren were illegitimately fertilised with pollen taken from other
seedlings of the same lot, and produced fourteen capsules, containing on an
average 29.2 seeds; but they ought to have contained about 35 seeds. Fifteen
flowers legitimately fertilised with pollen from an illegitimate short-styled
plant (belonging to the lot next to be described) produced fourteen capsules,
containing an average of 46 seeds; they ought to have contained at least 50
seeds. Hence these grandchildren of illegitimate descent appear to have lost,
though only in a very slight degree, their full fertility.

We will now turn to the short-styled form: from a plant of this kind, fertilised
with its own-form pollen, I raised, during February 1862, eight seedlings, seven
of which were short-styled and one long-styled. They grew slowly, and never
attained to the full stature of ordinary plants; some of them flowered
precociously, and others late in the season. Four flowers on these short-styled
seedlings and four on the one long-styled seedling were illegitimately
fertilised with their own-form pollen and produced only three capsules,
containing on an average 23.6 seeds, with a maximum of 29; but we cannot judge
of their fertility from so few capsules; and I have greater doubts about the
normal standard for this union than about any other; but I believe that rather
above 25 seeds would be a fair estimate. Eight flowers on these same short-
styled plants, and the one long-styled illegitimate plant were reciprocally and
legitimately crossed; they produced five capsules, which contained an average of
28.6 seeds, with a maximum of 36. A reciprocal cross between legitimate plants
of the two forms would have yielded an average of at least 57 seeds, with a
possible maximum of 74 seeds; so that these illegitimate plants were sterile
when legitimately crossed.

I succeeded in raising from the above seven short-styled illegitimate plants,
fertilised with their own-form pollen, only six plants--grandchildren of the
first union. These, like their parents, were of low stature, and had so poor a
constitution that four died before flowering. With ordinary plants it has been a
rare event with me to have more than a single plant die out of a large lot. The
two grandchildren which lived and flowered were short-styled; and twelve of
their flowers were fertilised with their own-form pollen and produced twelve
capsules containing an average of 28.2 seeds; so that these two plants, though
belonging to so weakly a set, were rather more fertile than their parents, and
perhaps not in any degree sterile. Four flowers on the same two grandchildren
were legitimately fertilised by a long-styled illegitimate plant, and produced
four capsules, containing only 32.2 seeds instead of about 64 seeds, which is
the normal average for legitimate short-styled plants legitimately crossed.

By looking back, it will be seen that I raised at first from a short-styled
plant fertilised with its own-form pollen one long-styled and seven short-styled
