a certain definite amount, say 4h 44m 30s, what he actually does is to
count from a meridian just that far east of Cambridge. When he changes
the assumed longitude of Cambridge he counts from a meridian farther
east or farther west of his former one: in other words, he always
counts from an assumed Greenwich, which changes its position from time
to time, relative to our own country.

Having two meridians to look after, the form of the American Ephemeris,
to be best adapted to the wants both of navigators and astronomers was
necessarily peculiar. Had our navigators referred their longitudes to
any meridian of our own country the arrangement of the work need not
have differed materially from that of foreign ones. But being referred
to a meridian far outside our limits and at the same time designed for
use within those limits, it was necessary to make a division of the
matter. Accordingly, the American Ephemeris has always been divided
into two parts: the first for the use of navigators, referred to the
meridian of Greenwich, the second for that of astronomers, referred to
the meridian of Washington. The division of the matter without serious
duplication is more easy than might at first be imagined. In explaining
it, I will take the ephemeris as it now is, with the small changes
which have been made from time to time.

One of the purposes of any ephemeris, and especially of that of the
navigators, is to give the position of the heavenly bodies at
equidistant intervals of time, usually one day. Since it is noon at
some point of the earth all the time, it follows that such an ephemeris
will always be referred to noon at some meridian. What meridian this
shall be is purely a practical question, to be determined by
convenience and custom. Greenwich noon, being that necessarily used by
the navigator, is adopted as the standard, but we must not conclude
that the ephemeris for Greenwich noon is referred to the meridian of
Greenwich in the sense that we refer a longitude to that meridian.
Greenwich noon is 18h 51m 48s, Washington mean time; so the ephemeris
which gives data for every Greenwich noon may be considered as referred
to the meridian of Washington giving the data for 17h 51m 48s,
Washington time, every day. The rule adopted, therefore, is to have all
the ephemerides which refer to absolute time, without any reference to
a meridian, given for Greenwich noon, unless there may be some special
reason to the contrary. For the needs of the navigator and the
theoretical astronomer these are the most convenient epochs.

Another part of the ephemeris gives the position of the heavenly
bodies, not at equidistant intervals, but at transit over some
meridian. For this purpose the meridian of Washington is chosen for
obvious reasons. The astronomical part of our ephemeris, therefore,
gives the positions of the principal fixed stars, the sun, moon, and
all the larger planets at the moment of transit over our own meridian.

The third class of data in the ephemeris comprises phenomena to be
predicted and observed. Such are eclipses of the sun and moon,
occultations of fixed stars by the moon, and eclipses of Jupiter's
satellites. These phenomena are all given in Washington mean time as
being most convenient for observers in our own country. There is a
partial exception, however, in the case of eclipses of the sun and
moon. The former are rather for the world in general than for our own
country, and it was found difficult to arrange them to be referred to
the meridian of Washington without having the maps referred to the same
meridian. Since, however, the meridian of Greenwich is most convenient
outside of our own territory, and since but a small portion of the
eclipses are visible within it, it is much the best to have the
eclipses referred entirely to the meridian of Greenwich. I am the more
ready to adopt this change because when the eclipses are to be computed
for our own country the change of meridians will be very readily
understood by those who make the computation.

It may be interesting to say something of the tables and theories from
which the astronomical ephemerides are computed. To understand them
completely it is necessary to trace them to their origin. The problem
of calculating the motions of the heavenly bodies and the changes in
the aspect of the celestial sphere was one of the first with which the
students of astronomy were occupied. Indeed, in ancient times, the only
astronomical problems which could be attacked were of this class, for
the simple reason that without the telescope and other instruments of
research it was impossible to form any idea of the physical
constitution of the heavenly bodies. To the ancients the stars and
planets were simply points or surfaces in motion. They might have
guessed that they were globes like that on which we live, but they were
unable to form any theory of the nature of these globes. Thus, in The
Almagest of Ptolemy, the most complete treatise on the ancient
astronomy which we possess, we find the motions of all the heavenly
bodies carefully investigated and tables given for the convenient
computation of their positions. Crude and imperfect though these tables
may be, they were the beginnings from which those now in use have
arisen.

No radical change was made in the general principles on which these
theories and tables were constructed until the true system of the world
was propounded by Copernicus. On this system the apparent motion of
each planet in the epicycle was represented by a motion of the earth
around the sun, and the problem of correcting the position of the
planet on account of the epicycle was reduced to finding its geocentric
from its heliocentric position. This was the greatest step ever taken
in theoretical astronomy, yet it was but a single step. So far as the
materials were concerned and the mode of representing the planetary
motions, no other radical advance was made by Copernicus. Indeed, it is
remarkable that he introduced an epicycle which was not considered
necessary by Ptolemy in order to represent the inequalities in the
motions of the planets around the sun.

The next great advance made in the theory of the planetary motion was
the discovery by Kepler of the celebrated laws which bear his name.
When it was established that each planet moved in an ellipse having the
sun in one focus it became possible to form tables of the motions of
the heavenly bodies much more accurate than had before been known. Such
tables were published by Kepler in 1632, under the name of Rudolphine
Tables, in memory of his patron, the Emperor Rudolph. But the laws of
Kepler took no account of the action of the planets on one another. It
is well known that if each planet moved only under the influence of the
gravitating force of the sun its motion would accord rigorously with
the laws of Kepler, and the problems of theoretical astronomy would be
greatly simplified. When, therefore, the results of Kepler's laws were
compared with ancient and modern observations it was found that they
were not exactly represented by the theory. It was evident that the
elliptic orbits of the planets were subject to change, but it was
entirely beyond the power of investigation, at that time, to assign any
cause for such changes. Notwithstanding the simplicity of the causes
which we now know to produce them, they are in form extremely complex.
Without the knowledge of the theory of gravitation it would be entirely
out of the question to form any tables of the planetary motions which
would at all satisfy our modern astronomers.

When the theory of universal gravitation was propounded by Newton he
showed that a planet subjected only to the gravitation of a central
body, like the sun, would move in exact accordance with Kepler's laws.
But by his theory the planets must attract one another and these
attractions must cause the motions of each to deviate slightly from the
laws in question. Since such deviations were actually observed it was
very natural to conclude that they were due to this cause, but how
shall we prove it? To do this with all the rigor required in a
mathematical investigation it is necessary to calculate the effect of
the mutual action of the planets in changing their orbits. This
calculation must be made with such precision that there shall be no
doubt respecting the results of the theory. Then its results must be
compared with the best observations. If the slightest outstanding
difference is established there is something wrong and the requirements
of astronomical science are not satisfied. The complete solution of
this problem was entirely beyond the power of Newton. When his methods
of research were used he was indeed able to show that the mutual action
of the planets would produce deviations in their motions of the same
general nature with those observed, but he was not able to calculate
these deviations with numerical exactness. His most successful attempt
in this direction was perhaps made in the case of the moon. He showed
that the sun's disturbing force on this body would produce several
inequalities the existence of which had been established by
observation, and he was also able to give a rough estimate of their
amount, but this was as far as his method could go. A great improvement
had to be made, and this was effected not by English, but by
continental mathematicians.

The latter saw, clearly, that it was impossible to effect the required
solution by the geometrical mode of reasoning employed by Newton. The
problem, as it presented itself to their minds, was to find algebraic
expressions for the positions of the planets at any time. The latitude,
longitude, and radius-vector of each planet are constantly varying, but
they each have a determined value at each moment of time. They may
therefore be regarded as functions of the time, and the problem was to
express these functions by algebraic formulae. These algebraic
expressions would contain, besides the time, the elements of the
planetary orbits to be derived from observation. The time which we may
suppose to be represented algebraically by the symbol t, would remain
as an unknown quantity to the end. What the mathematician sought to do
was to present the astronomer with a series of algebraic expressions
containing t as an indeterminate quantity, and so, by simply
substituting for t any year and fraction of a year whatever--1600,
1700, 1800, for example, the result would give the latitude, longitude,
or radius-vector of a planet.

The problem as thus presented was one of the most difficult we can
perceive of, but the difficulty was only an incentive to attacking it
with all the greater energy. So long as the motion was supposed purely
elliptical, so long as the action of the planets was neglected, the
problem was a simple one, requiring for its solution only the analytic
geometry of the ellipse. The real difficulties commenced when the
mutual action of the planets was taken into account. It is, of course,
out of the question to give any technical description or analysis of
the processes which have been invented for solving the problem; but a
brief historical sketch may not be out of place. A complete and
rigorous solution of the problem is out of the question--that is, it is
impossible by any known method to form an algebraic expression for the
co-ordinates of a planet which shall be absolutely exact in a
mathematical sense. In whatever way we go to work the expression comes
out in the form of an infinite series of terms, each term being, on the
whole, a little smaller as we increase the number. So, by increasing
the number of these various terms, we can approach nearer and nearer to
a mathematical exactness, but can never reach it. The mathematician and
astronomer have to be satisfied when they have carried the solution so
far that the neglected quantities are entirely beyond the powers of
observation.

Mathematicians have worked upon the problem in its various phases for
nearly two centuries, and many improvements in detail have, from time
to time, been made, but no general method, applicable to all cases, has
been devised. One plan is to be used in treating the motion of the
moon, another for the interior planets, another for Jupiter and Saturn,
another for the minor planets, and so on. Under these circumstances it
will not surprise you to learn that our tables of the celestial motions
do not, in general, correspond in accuracy to the present state of
practical astronomy. There is no authority and no office in the world
whose duty it is to look after the preparations of the formulae I have
described. The work of computing them has been almost entirely left to
individual mathematicians whose taste lay in that direction, and who
have sometimes devoted the greater part of their lives to calculations
on a single part of the work. As a striking instance of this, the last
great work on the Motion of the Moon, that of Delaunay, of Paris,
involved some fifteen years of continuous hard labor.

Hansen, of Germany, who died five years ago, devoted almost his whole
life to investigations of this class and to the development of new
methods of computation. His tables of the moon are those now used for
predicting the places of the moon in all the ephemerides of the world.

The only successful attempt to prepare systematic tables for all the
large planets is that completed by Le Verrier just before his death;
but he used only a small fraction of the material at his disposal, and
did not employ the modern methods, confining himself wholly to those
invented by his countrymen about the beginning of the present century.
For him Jacobi and Hansen had lived in vain.

The great difficulty which besets the subject arises from the fact that
mathematical processes alone will not give us the position of a planet,
there being seven unknown quantities for each planet which must be
determined by observations. A planet, for instance, may move in any
ellipse whatever, having the sun in one focus, and it is impossible to
tell what ellipse it is, except from observation. The mean motion of a
planet, or its period of revolution, can only be determined by a long
series of observations, greater accuracy being obtained the longer the
observations are continued. Before the time of Bradley, who commenced
work at the Greenwich Observatory about 1750, the observations were so
far from accurate that they are now of no use whatever, unless in
exceptional cases. Even Bradley's observations are in many cases far
less accurate than those made now. In consequence, we have not
heretofore had a sufficiently extended series of observations to form
an entirely satisfactory theory of the celestial motions.

As a consequence of the several difficulties and drawbacks, when the
computation of our ephemeris was started, in the year 1849, there were
no tables which could be regarded as really satisfactory in use. In the
British Nautical Almanac the places of the moon were derived from the
tables of Burckhardt published in the year 1812. You will understand,
in a case like this, no observations subsequent to the issue of the
tables are made use of; the place of the moon of any day, hour, and
minute of Greenwich time, mean time, was precisely what Burckhardt
would have computed nearly a half a century before. Of the tables of
the larger planets the latest were those of Bouvard, published in 1812,
while the places of Venus were from tables published by Lindenau in
1810. Of course such tables did not possess astronomical accuracy. At
that time, in the case of the moon, completely new tables were
constructed from the results reached by Professor Airy in his reduction
of the Greenwich observations of the moon from 1750 to 1830. These were
constructed under the direction of Professor Pierce and represented the
places of the moon with far greater accuracy than the older tables of
Burckhardt. For the larger planets corrections were applied to the
older tables to make them more nearly represent observations before new
ones were constructed. These corrections, however, have not proved
satisfactory, not being founded on sufficiently thorough
investigations. Indeed, the operation of correcting tables by
observation, as we would correct the dead-reckoning of a ship, is a
makeshift, the result of which must always be somewhat uncertain, and
it tends to destroy that unity which is an essential element of the
astronomical ephemeris designed for permanent future use. The result of
introducing them, while no doubt an improvement on the old tables, has
not been all that should be desired. The general lack of unity in the
tables hitherto employed is such that I can only state what has been
done by mentioning each planet in detail.

For Mercury, new tables were constructed by Professor Winlock, from
formulae published by Le Verrier in 1846. These tables have, however,
been deviating from the true motion of the planet, owing to the motion
of the perihelion of Mercury, subsequently discovered by Le Verrier
himself. They are now much less accurate than the newer tables
published by Le Verrier ten years later.

Of Venus new tables were constructed by Mr. Hill in 1872. They are more
accurate than any others, being founded on later data than those of Le
Verrier, and are therefore satisfactory so far as accuracy of
prediction is concerned.

The place of Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn are still computed from the old
tables, with certain necessary corrections to make them better
represent observations.

The places of Uranus and Neptune are derived from new tables which will
probably be sufficiently accurate for some time to come.

For the moon, Pierce's tables have been employed up to the year 1882
inclusive. Commencing with the ephemeris for the year 1883, Hansen's
tables are introduced with corrections to the mean longitude founded on
two centuries of observation.

With so great a lack of uniformity, and in the absence of any existing
tables which have any other element of unity than that of being the
work of the same authors, it is extremely desirable that we should be
able to compute astronomical ephemerides from a single uniform and
consistent set of astronomical data. I hope, in the course of years, to
render this possible.

When our ephemeris was first commenced, the corrections applied to
existing tables rendered it more accurate than any other. Since that
time, the introduction into foreign ephemerides of the improved tables
of Le Verrier have rendered them, on the whole, rather more accurate
than our own. In one direction, however, our ephemeris will hereafter
be far ahead of all others. I mean in its positions of the fixed stars.
This portion of it is of particular importance to us, owing to the
extent to which our government is engaged in the determination of
positions on this continent, and especially in our western territories.
Although the places of the stars are determined far more easily than
those of the planets, the discussion of star positions has been in
almost as backward a state as planetary positions. The errors of old
observers have crept in and been continued through two generations of
astronomers. A systematic attempt has been made to correct the places
of the stars for all systematic errors of this kind, and the work of
preparing a catalogue of stars which shall be completely adapted to the
determination of time and longitude, both in the fixed observatory and
in the field, is now approaching completion. The catalogue cannot be
sufficiently complete to give places of the stars for determining the
latitude by the zenith telescope, because for such a purpose a much
greater number of stars is necessary than can be incorporated in the
ephemeris.

From what I have said, it will be seen that the astronomical tables, in
general, do not satisfy the scientific condition of completely
representing observations to the last degree of accuracy. Few, I think,
have an idea how unsystematically work of this kind has hitherto been
