
Iimmi put his hand on his head. "They want us to go with them...." And
suddenly they were going forward, slipping into the familiar state of
half-consciousness which had come when they had crossed the river, to
the City of New Hope, or when they had first fallen into the sea.

Wet hands fell on their bodies as they were guided through the swamp.
They were being carried through deeper water. Now they were walking over
dry land where the vegetation was thicker, and slimy boulders caught
shards of sunset on their wet flanks, blood leaking on the gray, the wet
gray, and the green.

Through a rip in the arras of vegetation, they saw the moon push through
the clouds, staining them silver. A rock rose in silhouette against the
moon. On the rock a naked man stood, staring at the white disk. White
highlighted one side of his body. As they passed, he howled (or anyway,
opened his mouth and threw his head back. But their ears were full of
night and could not hear.) and dropped to all fours. A breeze blew
momentarily in the sudden plume of his tail, in the scraggly hair of the
under-belly, and light lay white on the points of his ears, his
lengthened muzzle, his thinned hind legs. The animal turned its head
once, and then scampered down the rock and into the darkness as a
curtain of trees swung across the opened sky.

Eyes of flame whipped ahead of them as water swirled their knees once
more. Then the water went down and sand washed back under the soles of
their feet on the dark beach. The beating of the sea, the rush of the
river, and the odor of the wet leaves that fingered their cheeks,
prodded their shins, and slapped against their bellies as they moved
forward, all this fell away. Red eyes wavered into flaming tongues, and
the tongues showed themselves housed in the mouths of a dozen caves.

Light flickered on the wet rocks and they entered the largest one. Their
eyes suddenly focused once more. Foam washed back and forth over the
sand floor, and black chains of weeds, caught in crevices on the rock,
lengthened over the sand with the inrush of water. Webbed hands
released them.

Brown rocks rose around in the firelight. They raised their eyes to
where the Old One sat. The long spines were strung with shrunken
membrane. His eyes, gray and indistinct, were close to the surface of
his broad nostriled face. A film of water trickled over the rock where
he sat. Others stood about him, on various levels of the rock.

The tugging left them, and they glanced at one another now. Outside the
cave it was raining hard. Geo saw that Argo's hair had wet to dark
auburn and hugged her head now, making little streaks down her neck.

Suddenly a voice boomed at them, like an echo, more than the
reverberation that the cave would give. "Carriers of the jewels," it
began, and suddenly Geo realized that it was the same hollowness that
accompanied Snake's soundless messages. "We have brought you here to
give a warning. We are the oldest forms of intelligence on this planet,"
continued the Old One from the throne. "We have watched from the delta
of the Nile the rise of the pyramids; we have seen the murder of Caesar
from the banks of the Tiber. We watched the Spanish Armada destroyed by
English, and we followed Man's great metal fish through the ocean before
the Great Fire. We have never aligned ourselves with either Argo or
Hama, but rise in the sexless swell of the ocean. We can warn you, as we
have warned man before. As before, some will listen, some will not. Your
minds are your own, now. That I pledge you. Now, I warn you; cast the
jewels into the sea.

"Nothing is ever lost in the sea, and when the evil has been washed from
them with time and brine, they will be returned to man. For then time
and brine will have washed away his imperfections also.

"No living intelligence is free from their infection, nothing with the
double impulse of life. But we are old, and can hold them for a million
years before we will be so infected as you are. Your young race is too
condensed in its living to tolerate such power at its fingers now. Again
I say: cast these into the sea.

"The knowledge which man needs to alleviate hunger and pain from the
world of men is contained in two monasteries on this island. Both have
the science to put the jewels to use, to the good use which is possible
with them. Both have been infected. In Leptar, however, where you carry
these jewels, there is no way at all to utilize them for anything but
evil. There will only be the temptation to destroy."

"What about me?" Argo suddenly piped up. "I can teach them all sorts of
things in Leptar." She took one of Snake's hands. "We used one for our
motor."

"You will find something else to make your motor turn," came the voice.
"You still have to see something that you have not yet seen?"

"At the beach?" demanded Iimmi.

"Yes," nodded the Old One, with something like a sigh, "at the beach. We
have a science that allows us to do things which to you seem
impossibilities, as when we carried you in the sea for weeks without
your body decaying. We can enter your mind as Snake does. And we can do
much else. We have a wisdom which far surpasses even Argo's and Hama's
on Aptor. Will you then cast the jewels into the sea and trust them with
us?"

Here Urson interrupted. "How can we give you the jewels?" he said. "How
can we be sure you're not going to use them against Argo and Hama once
you get them. You say nobody is impervious to them. And we've only got
your say so on how long it would take you to fall victim. You can
already influence minds. That's how you got us here. And according to
Hama, that's what corrupts. And you've already done it."

"Besides," Geo said. "There's something else. We've nearly messed this
thing up a dozen times trying to figure out motives and counter motives.
And it always comes back to the same thing: we've got a job to do, and
we ought to do it. We're suppose to return Argo and the jewels to the
ship, and that's what we're doing."

"He's right," said Iimmi. "It's the general rule again. Act on the
simplest theory that holds all the information."

The Old One sighed again. "Once, fifteen hundred years ago, a man who
was to maneuver one of the metal birds walked and pondered by the sea.
He had been given a job to do. We tried to warn him, as we tried to warn
you. But he jammed his hands into the pockets of his khaki uniform, and
uttered to the waves the words you just uttered, and the warning was
shut out of his mind. He scrambled up over the dunes on the beach, never
taking his hands out of his pockets. The next morning, at five o'clock,
when the sun slanted red across the air field, he climbed into his metal
bird, took off, flew for some time over the sea, looking down on the
water like crinkled foil under the heightening sun, until he reached
land again. Then he did his job: he pressed a button which released two
shards of fire metal in a housing of cobalt. The land flamed. The sea
boiled in the harbors. And two weeks later he was also dead. That which
burned your arm away, poet, burned away his whole face, boiled his lungs
in his chest and his brain in his skull."

There was a pause. And then, "Yes, we can control minds. We could have
relieved the tiredness, immobilized the fear, the terror, immobilized
all his unconscious reasons for doing what he did, just as man can now
do with the jewels. But had we, we would have also immobilized the--the
honor which he clung to. Yes, we can control minds, but we do not." Now
the voice swelled. "But never, since that day on the shore before the
Great Fire, has the temptation to do so been as great as now." Again the
voice returned to normal. "Perhaps," and there was almost humor in it
now, "the temptation is too great, even for us. Perhaps we have reached
the place where the jewels would push us just across the line where we
have never before gone, make us do those things that we have never done.
You have heard our warning now. The choice, I swear to you, is yours."

They stood silent in the high cave, the fire on their faces weaving
brightness and shadow. Geo turned to look at the rain-blurred darkness
outside the cave's entrance.

"Out there is the sea," said the voice again. "Your decision quickly.
The tide is coming in...."

It was snatched from their minds before they could articulate it. Two
children saw a bright motor turning in the shadow. Geo and Iimmi saw the
temples of Argo in Leptar. Then there was something darker. And for a
moment, they all saw all the pictures at once.

A wave splashed across the floor, like twisted glass before the rock on
which the fire stood. Then it flopped wetly across the burning driftwood
which hissed into darkness. Charred sticks turned, glowing in the water,
and were extinguished.

Rain was buffeting them; hands held them once more, pulling them into
the warm sea, the darkness, and then nothing....

Snake was thinking again, and this time through the captain's eyes.

_The cabin door burst open in the rain. Wind whipped her wet veils about
her in the door as lightning made them transparent, blackening her
body's outline. Jordde rose from his seat. She closed the door on
thunder._

_"I have received the signal from the sea," she said. "Tomorrow you
pilot the ship into the estuary."_

_The captain's voice: "But Priestess Argo, I cannot take the ship into
Aptor. We already have lost ten men; I cannot sacrifice ..."_

_"And the storm," smiled Jordde. "If it is like this tomorrow, how can I
take her through the rocks?"_

_Her nostrils flared as her lips compressed to a chalky line. She was
regarding Jordde._

_The captain's thoughts: What is between them, this confused tension. It
upsets me deeply, and I am tired._

_"You will pilot the boat to shore tomorrow," Argo nearly hissed. "They
have returned, with the jewels!"_

_The captain's thoughts: They speak to each other in a code I don't
understand. I am so tired, now. I have to protect my ship, my men, that
is my job, my responsibility._

_But Argo turned to the captain. "I hired you to obey me. I order you to
pilot this ship to Aptor's shore tomorrow morning."_

_The captain's thoughts; Yes, yes. The fatigue and the unknowing. But I
must fulfill, must complete. "Jordde," he began._

_"Yes, captain," answered the mate, anticipating. "If the weather is
permitting, sir, I will take the ship as close as I can get." He smiled
now, a thin curve over his face, and turned toward Argo._




CHAPTER XII


Roughness of sand beneath one of his sides, and the flare of the sun on
the other. His eyes were hot and his lids were orange over them. He
turned over, and reached out to dig his fingers into the sand. Only one
hand closed; then he remembered. Opening his eyes, he rolled to his
knees. The sand grated under his knee caps. Looking out toward the
water, he saw that the sun hung only seeming inches above the horizon.
Then he saw the ship.

From its course, he gathered it was heading toward the estuary of the
river down the beach. He began to run toward where the rocks and
vegetation cut off the end of the beach. The sand under his feet was
cool.

A moment later he saw Iimmi's dark figure come from the jungle. He was
heading for the same place. Geo hailed him, and panting, they joined
each other. Then, together they continued toward the rocks.

As they broke through the first sheet of foliage, they bumped into the
red-haired girl who stood, knuckling her eyes in the shadow of the broad
palm fronds. When she recognized them, she joined them silently. Finally
they reached the outcropping of rock a few hundred feet up the river
bank.

The rain had swelled the river's mouth to tremendous violence. It
vomited surges of brown water into the ocean, frothed against rocks, and
boiled opaquely below them. It was nearly half again as wide as Geo
remembered it.

Although the sky was clear, beyond the brown bile of the river, the sea
snarled viciously and bared white teeth in the sun. It took another
fifteen minutes for the boat to maneuver through the granite spikes
toward the rocky embankment a hundred yards away.

Glancing down into the turbulence, Argo breathed, "Gee." But that was
the only human sound against the water's roaring.

The boat's prow doffed in the swell, and then at last her plank swung
out and bumped unsteadily on the rocky bank. Figures were gathering on
deck.

"Hey," Argo said, pointing toward one. "That's Sis!"

"Where the hell are Snake and Urson?" Iimmi asked.

"That's Snake down there," Geo said. "Look!" He pointed with his nub.

They could see Snake crouched near the gangplank itself. He was behind a
ledge of rock, invisible to the people on the ship, apparently, but
plain to Geo and his companions.

"Watch it," Geo said. "I'm going down there. You stay here." He ducked
off through the vines, keeping in sight of the rocks' edge and the
boiling foam. The ship grew before him, and at last he reached a
sheltered rise, just ten feet above the nest of rock in which the
four-armed boy was crouching.

Geo looked out at the boat. Jordde stood at the head of the gangplank.
The eighteen feet of board was unsteady with the roll of the ship.
Jordde held something like a black whip in his hand, only the end went
to a box-like contraption strapped to his back. With the lash raised, he
stepped onto the shifting plank.

Geo wondered what the whip contrivance was. The answer came with the
hollow sound of Snake's thoughts. _That ... is ... machine ... he ...
use ... to ... cut ... tongue ... with ... only ... on ... whip ...
now ... not ... wire ..._ So Snake knew he was just behind him. As he
was trying to figure exactly the implications of what Snake had said,
suddenly, with the speed of a bird's shadow, Snake leaped from his
hiding place and landed on the shore end of the plank. He recovered from
his crouch, and rushed down the plank toward Jordde, apparently
intending to knock him from the board.

Jordde raised the lash and it fell across the boy's shoulder. It didn't
land hard; it just dropped. But Snake suddenly reeled, and went down on
one knee, grabbing the sides of the plank. Geo was close enough to hear
the boy scream.

"I cut your tongue out once with this thing," Jordde said, matter of
factly. "Now I'm going to cut the rest of you to pieces." He adjusted a
control at his belt and raised the lash again.

Geo leapt for the plank. He faced Jordde over the crouching boy, he
wondered how wise it had been. Then he had to stop wondering and try to
duck the falling lash. He couldn't.

It landed with only the weight of gravity, brushing his cheek, then
dropping across his shoulder and down his back. He screamed; the whole
side of his face seemed seared away, and an inch crevice burned into his
shoulder and back the length it touched him. He bit into white fire,
trying not to leap aside into the foaming chasm between rocks and boat.
As the lash rasped over his shoulder, sweat flooded his eyes. His good
arm, which held the edge of the plank, was shaking like a plucked string
on a loose guitar. Snake lunged back against him, almost knocking him
over. When Geo blinked the tears out of his eyes, he saw two bright
welts over Snake's shoulder. He also saw that Jordde had stepped out
upon the plank and was smiling.

When the line fell again, he wasn't sure just what happened. He leaned
in one direction, and suddenly Snake was a dive of legs in the other.
Now Snake was just four sets of fingers on the edge of the plank. Geo
screamed again and shook.

Two sets of fingers disappeared from one side of the board and
reappeared on the other. As Jordde raised the lash a fourth time to rid
the plank of this last one-armed nuisance, the fingers worked rapidly
forward toward Jordde's feet, until suddenly an arm raised from beneath
the plank, grabbed Jordde's foot, and tugged. The lash fell far from Geo
who was still trembling, trying to move backwards off the unsteady
plank, and keep from vomiting at the same time.

Jordde tripped, but turned in time to grab the edge of the ship's gate
and steady himself. At the same time, one leg, and then another, came up
the other side of the plank, and then Snake rolled to a crouching
position on the board's top.

Geo got his feet under him now, and stumbled backwards, off the plank,
and then sat down hard a few feet back on the rocks. He clutched his
good arm across his stomach, and without lowering his eyes, leaned
forward to cool his back.

Jordde, half-seated on the board now, lashed the whip sideways. Snake
leaped a foot from the plank as the line swung beneath his feet. All
four arms went spidering out to regain equilibrium. The whip struck the
side of the boat, left a burn along the hull, and came swinging back
again. Snake leapt once more and made it.

Suddenly there was a shadow over him, and Geo saw Urson stride up to the
end of the plank. His back to Geo, he crouched bear-like at the plank's
head. "All right, now try someone a little bigger than you. Come on,
kid, get off there. I want my turn." Urson's sword was drawn.

Snake turned, grabbed at something on Urson, but the big man knocked him
away as he leapt diagonally onto the shore. Urson laughed over his
shoulder. "You don't want the ones around my neck," he called back.
"Here, keep these for me." He tossed the leather purse from his belt
back to the shore. Snake landed just as Jordde flung the lash out again.
Urson must have caught the line across his chest, because they saw his
back suddenly stiffen. Then he leapt forward and came down with his
sword so hard that had Jordde still been there, his leg would have come
off. Jordde leapt back onto the edge of the ship, and the sword sliced
three inches into the plank. As Urson tried to pull the blade out once
more, Jordde sent his whip singing again. It wrapped Urson's mid-section
like a black serpent, and it didn't come loose.

Urson howled. He flung his sword forward, which probably only by
accident thwunked seventeen inches through Jordde's abdomen. He bent
forward, grabbed the line with both hands, and tugged backwards,
