The opinion could have drawbacks, and it need not be always even true,
but Burl did nothing to discourage it.

And then, near midday, they made a discovery even greater than that of
familiar food in unfamiliar sizes. They were struggling, at the time,
through a vast patch of bushes with thorns on them--they were not used
to thorns--which they deeply distrusted. Eventually they would find out
that the glistening dark fruit were blackberries, and would rejoice in
them, but at this first encounter they were uneasy. In the midst of such
an untouched berry-patch they heard noises in the distance.

The sound was made up of cries of varying pitch, some of which were loud
and abrupt, and others longer and less loud. The people did not
understand them in the least. They could have been cries of human
beings, perhaps, but they were not cries of pain. Also they were not
language. They seemed to express a tremendous, zestful excitement. They
had no overtone of horror. And Burl and his folk had known of no
excitement among insects except frenzy. They could not imagine what sort
of tumult this could be.

But to Burl these sounds had something of the timbre of the yelping
noises of the night before. He had felt drawn to that sound. He liked
it. He liked this.

He led the way boldly toward the agitated noises. Presently--after a
mile or so--he and his people came out of breast-high weeds. Saya was
immediately behind him. The others trailed,--Tama complaining bitterly
that there was no need to track down sounds which could only mean
danger. They emerged in a space of bare stone above a small and grassy
amphitheatre. The tumult came from its center.

A pack of dogs was joyously attacking something that Burl could not see
clearly. They were dogs. They barked zestfully, and they yelped and
snarled and yapped in a dozen different voices, and they were having a
thoroughly good time,--though it might not be so good for the thing they
attacked.

One of them sighted the humans. He stopped stock-still and barked. The
others whirled and saw the humans as they came out into view. The tumult
ceased abruptly.

There was silence. The tribesmen saw creatures with four legs only. They
had never before seen any living thing with fewer than six,--except men.
Spiders had eight. The dogs did not have mandibles. They did not have
wing-cases. They did not act like insects. It was stupifying!

And the dogs saw men, whom they had never seen before. Much more
important, they smelled men. And the difference between man-smell and
insect-smell was so vast--because through hundreds of generations the
dogs had not smelled anything with warm blood save their own kind--the
difference in smell was so great in kind that the dogs did not react
with suspicion, but with a fascinated curiosity. This was an
unparalleled smell. It was, even in its novelty, an overwhelmingly
satisfying smell.

The dogs regarded the men with their heads on one side, sniffing in the
deepest possible amazement,--amazement so intense that they could not
possibly feel hostility. One of them whined a little because he did not
understand.




_11. WARM BLOOD IS A BOND_


Peculiarly enough, it was a matter of topography. The plateau which
reached above the clouds rose with a steep slope from the valley from
which a hunting-spider's brood had driven the men. This was on the
eastern edge of the plateau. On the west, however, the highland was
subject to an indentation which almost severed it. No more than twenty
miles from where Burl's group had climbed to sunshine, there was a much
more gradual slope downward. There, mushroom-forests grew almost to the
cloud-layer. From there, giant insects strayed up and onto the plateau
itself.

They could not live above the clouds, of course. There was not food
enough for their insatiable hunger. Especially at night, it was too cold
to allow them to stay active. But they did stray from their normal
environment, and some of them did reach the sunshine, and perhaps some
of them blundered back down to their mushroom-forests again. But those
which did not stumble back were chilled to torpor during their first
night underneath the stars. They were only partly active on the second
day,--if, indeed, they were active at all. Few or none recovered from
their second nights' coldness. None at all kept their full ferocity and
deadliness.

And this was how the dogs survived. They were certainly descended from
dogs on the wrecked space-ship--the _Icarus_--whose crew had landed on
this planet some forty-odd human generations since. The humans of today
had no memories of the ship, and the dogs surely had no traditions. But
just because those early dogs had less intelligence, they had more
useful instincts. Perhaps the first generations of castaways bred dogs
in their first few desperate centuries, hoping that dogs could help them
survive. But no human civilization could survive in the lowlands. The
humans went back to the primitive state of their race and lived as
furtive vermin among monsters. Dogs could not survive there, though
humans did linger on, so somehow the dogs took to the heights. Perhaps
dogs survived their masters. Perhaps some were abandoned or driven away.
But dogs had reached the highlands. And they did survive because giant
insects blundered up after them,--and could not survive in a proper
environment for dogs and men.

There was even reason for the dogs remaining limited in number, and
keenly intelligent. The food-supply was limited. When there were too
many dogs, their attacks on stumbling insect giants were more desperate
and made earlier, before the monsters' ferocity was lessened. So more
dogs died. Then there was an adjustment of the number of dogs to the
food-supply. There was also a selection of those too intelligent to
attack rashly. Yet those who had insufficient courage would not eat.

In short, the dogs who now regarded men with bright, interested eyes
were very sound dogs. They had the intelligence needed for survival.
They did not attack anything imprudently, but they also knew that it was
not necessary to be more than reasonably wary of insects in
general,--not even spiders unless they were very newly arrived from the
steaming lowlands. So the dogs regarded men with very much the same
astonished interest with which the men regarded the dogs.

Burl saw immediately that the dogs did not act with the blind ferocity
of insects, but with an interested, estimative intelligence strikingly
like that of men. Insects never examined anything. They fled or they
fought. Those who were not carnivorous had no interest in anything but
food, and those who were meat-eaters lumbered insanely into battle at
the bare sight of possible prey. The dogs did neither. They sniffed and
they considered.

Burl said sharply to his followers:

"Stay here!"

He walked slowly down into the amphitheatre. Saya followed him
instantly. Dogs moved warily aside. But they raised their noses and
sniffed. They were long, luxurious sniffs. The smell of human kind was a
good smell. Dogs had lived hundreds of their generations without having
it in their nostrils, but before that there were thousands of
generations to whom that smell was a necessity.

Burl reached the object the dogs had been attacking. It lay on the
grass, throbbing painfully. It was the larva of an azure-blue moth which
spread ten-foot wings at nightfall. The time for its metamorphosis was
near, and it had traveled blindly in search of a place where it could
spin its cocoon safely and change to its winged form. It had come to
another world,--the world above the clouds. It could find no proper
place. Its stores of fat had protected it somewhat from the chill. But
the dogs had found it as it crawled blindly--.

Burl considered. It was the custom of wasps to sting creatures like this
at a certain special spot,--apparently marked for them by a tuft of dark
fur.

Burl thrust home with his lance. The point pierced that particular spot.
The creature died quickly and without agony. The thought to kill was an
inspiration. Then instinct followed. Burl cut off meat for his
tribesmen. The dogs offered no objection. They were well-fed enough.
Burl and Saya, together, carried the meat back to the other tribesfolk.
On the way Burl passed within two yards of a dog which regarded him with
extreme intentness and almost a wistful expression. Burl's smell did not
mean game. It meant--something the dog struggled helplessly to remember.
But it was good.

"I have killed the thing," said Burl to the dog, in the tone of one
addressing an equal. "You can go and eat it now. I took only part of
it."

Burl and his people ate of what he had brought back. Many of the
dogs--most of them--went to the feast Burl had left. Presently they were
back. They had no reason to be hostile. They were fed. The humans
offered them no injury, and the humans smelled of something that
appealed to the deepest well-springs of canine nature.

Presently the dogs were close about the humans. They were fascinated.
And the humans were fascinated in return. Each of the people had a
little of the feeling that Burl had experienced as the tribal leader. In
the intent, absorbed and wholly unhostile regard of the dogs, even
children felt flattered and friendly. And surely in a place where
everything else was so novel and so satisfactory, it was possible to
imagine friendliness with creatures which were not human, since
assuredly they were not insects.

A similar state of mind existed among the dogs.

Saya had more meat than she desired. She glanced among the members of
the tribe. All were supplied. She tossed it to a dog. He jerked away
alertly, and then sniffed at it where it had dropped. A dog can always
eat. He ate it.

"I wish you would talk to us," said Saya hopefully.

The dog wagged his tail.

"You do not look like us," said Saya interestedly, "but you act like we
do. Not like the--Monsters."

The dog looked significantly at meat in Burl's hand. Burl tossed it. The
dog caught it with a quick snap, swallowed it, wagged his tail briefly
and came closer. It was a completely incredible action, but dogs and men
were blood-kin on this planet. Besides, there was racial-memory
rightness in friendship between men and dogs. It was not hindered by any
past experience of either. They were the only warm-blooded creatures on
this world. It was a kinship felt by both.

Presently Burl stood up and spoke politely to the dog. He addressed him
with the same respect he would have given to another man. In all his
life he had never felt equal to an insect, but he felt no arrogance
toward this dog. He felt superior only to other men.

"We are going back to our cave," he said politely. "Maybe we will meet
again."

He led his tribe back to the cave in which they had spent the previous
night. The dogs followed, ranging on either side. They were well-fed,
with no memory of hostility to any creature which smelled of warm blood.
They had an instinct without experience to dull it. The latter part of
the journey back to the tribal cave was--if anybody had been qualified
to notice it--remarkably like a group of dogs taking a walk with a group
of people. It was companionable. It felt right.

That night Burl left the cave, as before, to look at the stars. This
time Saya went with him matter-of-factly. But as they came out of the
cave-entrance there was a stirring. A dog rose and stretched himself
elaborately, yawning the while. When Burl and Saya moved away, he
trotted amiably with them.

They talked to it, and the dog seemed pleased. It wagged its tail.

When morning came, the dogs were still waiting hopefully for the humans
to come out. They appeared to expect the people to take another nice
long walk, on which they would accompany them. It was a brand-new
satisfaction they did not want to miss. After all, from a dog's
standpoint, humans are made to take long walks with, among other things.
The dogs greeted the people with tail-waggings and cordiality.

The dogs made a great difference in the adjustment of the tribe to life
upon the plateau. Their friendship assured the new status of human life.
Burl and his fellows had ceased to be fugitive game for any insect
murderer. They had hoped to become unpursued foragers,--because they
could hardly imagine anything else. But when the dogs joined them, they
were immediately raised to the estate of hunters. The men did not
domesticate the dogs. They made friends with them. The dogs did not
subjugate themselves to the men. They joined them,--at first
tentatively, and then with worshipful enthusiasm. And the partnership
was so inevitably a right one that within a month it was as if it had
always been.

Actually, save for a mere two thousand years, it had been.

At the end of a month the tribe had a permanent encampment. There were
caves at a suitable distance from the slope up which most wanderers from
the lowlands came. Cori's oldest child found the chrysalis of a giant
butterfly, whose caterpillar form had so offensive an odor that the dogs
had not attacked it. But when it emerged from the chrysalis, men and
dogs together assailed it before it could take flight. They ended the
enterprise with warm mutual approval. The humans had acquired great
wings with which to make warm cloaks,--very useful against the evening
chill. Dogs and men, alike, had feasted.

Then, one dawning, the dogs made a vast outcry which awoke the
tribesmen. Burl led the rush to the spot. They did battle with a monster
nocturnal beetle, less chilled than most such invaders. In the gray
dawnlight Burl realized that the darting, yapping dogs kept the
creature's full attention. He crippled, and then killed it with his
spear. The feat appeared to earn him warm admiration from the dogs. Burl
wore a moth's feathery antenna again, bound to his forehead like a
knight's plumes. He looked very splendid.

The entire pattern of human life changed swiftly, as if an entire
revelation had been granted to men. The ground was often thorny. One man
pierced his foot. Old Tama, scolding him for his carelessness, bound a
strip of wing-fabric about it so he could walk. The injured foot was
more comfortable than the one still unhurt. Within a week the women
were busily contriving diverse forms of footgear to achieve greater
comfort for everybody. One day Saya admired glistening red berries and
tried to pluck one, and they stained her fingers. She licked her fingers
to clean them,--and berries were added to the tribe's menu. A veritable
orgy of experiment began, which is a state of things which is extremely
rare in human affairs. A race with an established culture and tradition
does not abandon old ways of doing things without profound reason. But
men who have abandoned their old ways can discover astonishingly useful
new ones.

Already the dogs were established as sentries and watchmen, and as
friends to every member of the tribe. By now mothers did not feel
alarmed if a child wandered out of sight. There would be dogs along. No
danger could approach a child without vociferous warning from the dogs.
Men went hunting, now, with zestful tail-wagging dogs as companions in
the chase. Dor killed a torpid minotaur-beetle alone, save for assisting
dogs, and Burl felt a twinge of jealousy. But then Burl, himself,
battled a black male spider in a lone duel,--with dogs to help. By the
time a stray monster from the lowlands reached this area, it was dazed
and half-numbed by one night of continuous chill. Even the black spider
could not find the energy to leap. It fought like a fiend, yet
sluggishly. Burl killed this one while the dogs kept it busy,--and the
dogs were reproachful because he carried it back to the tribal
headquarters before dividing it among his assistants. Afterward, he
realized that though he could have avoided the fight he would have been
ashamed to do so, while the dogs barked and snapped at its furry legs.

It was while things were in this state that the way of life for human
beings on the forgotten planet was settled for all time. Burl and Saya
went out early one morning with the dogs, to hunt for meat for the
village. Hunting was easiest in the early hours, while creatures that
strayed up the night before were still sluggish with cold. Often,
hunting was merely butchery of an enfeebled monster to whom any effort
at all was terribly difficult.

This morning they strode away briskly. The dogs roved exuberantly
through the brush before them. They were some five miles from the
village when the dogs bayed game. And Burl and Saya ran to the spot with
ready spears,--which was something of a change from their former actions
on notice of a carnivore abroad. They found the dogs dancing and barking
around one of the most ferocious of the meat-eating beetles. It was not
unduly large, to be sure. Its body might have been four feet long, or
thereabouts. But its horrible gaping mandibles added a good three feet
more.

Those scythelike weapons gaped wide--opening sidewise as insects' jaws
do--as the beetle snapped hideously at its attackers, swinging about as
the dogs dashed at it. Its legs were spurred and spiked and armed with
dagger-like spines. Burl plunged into the fight.

The great mandibles clicked and clashed. They were capable of
disemboweling a man or snapping a dog's body in half without effort.
There were whistling noises as the beetle breathed through its abdominal
