of biological instruction. But it is only the highest order of
investigators who can be trusted with it. Whenever it is adopted,
it will constitute another ground of relation between biology and
mathematics.--COMTE, A.

                         _Positive Philosophy [Martineau], Bk. 5,
                         chap. 1._


=1582.= I think it may safely enough be affirmed, that he, that
is not so much as indifferently skilled in mathematicks, can
hardly be more than indifferently skilled in the fundamental
principles of physiology.--BOYLE, ROBERT.

                         _Works (London, 1772), Vol. 3, p. 430._


=1583.= It is not only possible but necessary that mathematics be
applied to psychology; the reason for this necessity lies briefly
in this: that by no other means can be reached that which is the
ultimate aim of all speculation, namely conviction.--HERBART, J. F.

                         _Werke [Kehrbach], (Langensalza, 1890),
                         Bd. 5, p. 104._


=1584.= All more definite knowledge must start with computation;
and this is of most important consequences not only for the
theory of memory, of imagination, of understanding, but as well
for the doctrine of sensations, of desires, and affections.

                                                 --HERBART, J. F.

                         _Werke [Kehrbach], (Langensalza, 1890),
                         Bd. 5, p. 103._


=1585.= In the near future mathematics will play an important
part in medicine: already there are increasing indications that
physiology, descriptive anatomy, pathology and therapeutics
cannot escape mathematical legitimation.--DESSOIR, MAX.

                         _Westermann's Monatsberichte, Bd. 77, p.
                         380; Ahrens: Scherz und Ernst in der
                         Mathematik (Leipzig, 1904), p. 395._


=1586.= The social sciences mathematically developed are to be
the controlling factors in civilization.--WHITE, W. F.

                         _A Scrap-book of Elementary Mathematics
                         (Chicago, 1908), p. 208._


=1587.= It is clear that this education [referring to education
preparatory to the science of sociology] must rest on a basis of
mathematical philosophy, even apart from the necessity of
mathematics to the study of inorganic philosophy. It is only in
the region of mathematics that sociologists, or anybody else, can
obtain a true sense of scientific evidence, and form the habit of
rational and decisive argumentation; can, in short, learn to
fulfill the logical conditions of all positive speculation, by
studying universal positivism at its source. This training,
obtained and employed with the more care on account of the
eminent difficulty of social science, is what sociologists have
to seek in mathematics.--COMTE, A.

                         _Positive Philosophy [Martineau], Bk. 6,
                         chap. 4._


=1588.= It is clear that the individual as a social unit and the
state as a social aggregate require a certain modicum of
mathematics, some arithmetic and algebra, to conduct their
affairs. Under this head would fall the theory of interest,
simple and compound, matters of discount and amortization, and,
if lotteries hold a prominent place in raising moneys, as in some
states, questions of probability must be added. As the state
becomes more highly organized and more interested in the
scientific analysis of its life, there appears an urgent
necessity for various statistical information, and this can be
properly obtained, reduced, correlated, and interpreted only when
the guiding spirit in the work have the necessary mathematical
training in the theory of statistics. (Figures may not lie, but
statistics compiled unscientifically and analyzed incompetently
are almost sure to be misleading, and when this condition is
unnecessarily chronic the so-called statisticians may well be
called liars.) The dependence of insurance of various kinds on
statistical information and the very great place which insurance
occupies in the modern state, albeit often controlled by private
corporations instead of by the government, makes the theories of
paramount importance to our social life.--WILSON, E. B.

                         _Bulletin American Mathematical Society,
                         Vol. 18 (1912), p. 463._


=1589.= The theory of probabilities and the theory of errors now
constitute a formidable body of knowledge of great mathematical
interest and of great practical importance. Though developed
largely through the applications to the more precise sciences of
astronomy, geodesy, and physics, their range of applicability
extends to all the sciences; and they are plainly destined to
play an increasingly important role in the development and in the
applications of the sciences of the future. Hence their study is
not only a commendable element in a liberal education, but some
knowledge of them is essential to a correct understanding of
daily events.--WOODWARD, R. S.

                         _Probability and Theory of Errors (New
                         York, 1906), Preface._


=1590.= It was not to be anticipated that a new science [the
science of probabilities] which took its rise in games of chance,
and which had long to encounter an obloquy, hardly yet extinct,
due to the prevailing idea that its only end was to facilitate
and encourage the calculations of gamblers, could ever have
attained its present status--that its aid should be called for in
every department of natural science, both to assist in discovery,
which it has repeatedly done (even in pure mathematics), to
minimize the unavoidable errors of observation, and to detect the
presence of causes as revealed by observed events. Nor are
commercial and other practical interests of life less indebted to
it: wherever the future has to be forecasted, risk to be provided
against, or the true lessons to be deduced from statistics, it
corrects for us the rough conjectures of common sense, and
decides which course is really, according to the lights of which
we are in possession, the wisest for us to pursue.--CROFTON, M. W.

                         _Encyclopedia Britannica, 9th Edition;
                         Article "Probability."_


=1591.= The calculus of probabilities, when confined within just
limits, ought to interest, in an equal degree, the mathematician,
the experimentalist, and the statesman. From the time when Pascal
and Fermat established its first principles, it has rendered, and
continues daily to render, services of the most eminent kind. It
is the calculus of probabilities, which, after having suggested
the best arrangements of the tables of population and mortality,
teaches us to deduce from those numbers, in general so erroneously
interpreted, conclusions of a precise and useful character; it is
the calculus of probabilities which alone can regulate justly the
premiums to be paid for assurances; the reserve funds for the
disbursements of pensions, annuities, discounts, etc. It is under
its influence that lotteries and other shameful snares cunningly
laid for avarice and ignorance have definitely disappeared.--ARAGO.

                         _Eulogy on Laplace [Baden-Powell],
                         Smithsonian Report, 1874, p. 164._


=1592.= Men were surprised to hear that not only births, deaths,
and marriages, but the decisions of tribunals, the results of
popular elections, the influence of punishments in checking
crime, the comparative values of medical remedies, the probable
limits of error in numerical results in every department of
physical inquiry, the detection of causes, physical, social, and
moral, nay, even the weight of evidence and the validity of
logical argument, might come to be surveyed with the lynx-eyed
scrutiny of a dispassionate analysis.--HERSCHEL, J.

                         _Quoted in Encyclopedia Britannica, 9th
                         Edition; Article "Probability."_


=1593.= If economists expect of the application of the
mathematical method any extensive concrete numerical results, and
it is to be feared that like other non-mathematicians all too
many of them think of mathematics as merely an arithmetical
science, they are bound to be disappointed and to find a paucity
of results in the works of the few of their colleagues who use
that method. But they should rather learn, as the mathematicians
among them know full well, that mathematics is much broader, that
it has an abstract quantitative (or even qualitative) side, that
it deals with relations as well as numbers, ....--WILSON, E. B.

                         _Bulletin American Mathematical Society,
                         Vol. 18 (1912), p. 464._


=1594.= The effort of the economist is to _see_, to picture the
inter-play of economic elements. The more clearly cut these
elements appear in his vision, the better; the more elements he
can grasp and hold in his mind at once, the better. The economic
world is a misty region. The first explorers used unaided vision.
Mathematics is the lantern by which what before was dimly visible
now looms up in firm, bold outlines. The old phantasmagoria
disappear. We see better. We also see further.--FISHER, IRVING.

                         _Transactions of Connecticut Academy,
                         Vol. 9 (1892), p. 119._


=1595.= In the great inquiries of the moral and social sciences
... mathematics (I always mean Applied Mathematics) affords the
only sufficient type of deductive art. Up to this time, I may
venture to say that no one ever knew what deduction is, as a
means of investigating the laws of nature, who had not learned it
from mathematics, nor can any one hope to understand it
thoroughly, who has not, at some time in his life, known enough
of mathematics to be familiar with the instrument at work.

                                                    --MILL, J. S.

                         _An Examination of Sir William
                         Hamilton's Philosophy (London, 1878), p.
                         622._


=1596.= Let me pass on to say a word or two about the teaching of
mathematics as an academic training for general professional
life. It has immense capabilities in that respect. If you
consider how much of the effectiveness of an administrator
depends upon the capacity for co-ordinating appropriately a
number of different ideas, precise accuracy of definition,
rigidity of proof, and sustained reasoning, strict in every step,
and when you consider what substitutes for these things nine men
out of every ten without special training have to put up with, it
is clear that a man with a mathematical training has incalculable
advantages.--SHAW, W. H.

                         _Perry's Teaching of Mathematics
                         (London, 1902), p. 73._


=1597.= Before you enter on the study of law a sufficient ground
work must be laid.... Mathematics and natural philosophy are so
useful in the most familiar occurrences of life and are so
peculiarly engaging and delightful as would induce everyone to
wish an acquaintance with them. Besides this, the faculties of
the mind, like the members of a body, are strengthened and
improved by exercise. Mathematical reasoning and deductions are,
therefore, a fine preparation for investigating the abstruse
speculations of the law.--JEFFERSON, THOMAS.

                         _Quoted in Cajori's Teaching and History
                         of Mathematics in the U. S. (Washington,
                         1890), p. 35._


=1598.= It has been observed in England of the study of
law,--though the acquisition of the most difficult parts of its
learning, the interpretation of laws, the comparison of
authorities, and the construction of instruments, would seem to
require philological and critical training; though the weighing
of evidence and the investigation of probable truth belong to the
province of the moral sciences, and the peculiar duties of the
advocate require rhetorical skill,--yet that a large proportion
of the most distinguished members of the profession has proceeded
from the university (that of Cambridge) most celebrated for the
cultivation of mathematical studies.--EVERETT, EDWARD.

                         _Orations and Speeches (Boston, 1870),
                         Vol. 2, p. 511._


=1599.= All historic science tends to become mathematical.
Mathematical power is classifying power.--NOVALIS.

                         _Schriften (Berlin, 1901), Teil 2, p.
                         192._


=1599a.= History has never regarded itself as a science of
statistics. It was the Science of Vital Energy in relation with
time; and of late this radiating centre of its life has been
steadily tending,--together with every form of physical and
mechanical energy,--toward mathematical expression.--ADAM, HENRY.

                         _A Letter to American Teachers of
                         History (Washington, 1910), p. 115._


=1599b.= Mathematics can be shown to sustain a certain relation
to rhetoric and may aid in determining its laws.--SHERMAN L. A.

                         _University [of Nebraska] Studies, Vol.
                         1, p. 130._




  CHAPTER XVI

  ARITHMETIC


=1601.= There is no problem in all mathematics that cannot be
solved by direct counting. But with the present implements of
mathematics many operations can be performed in a few minutes
which without mathematical methods would take a lifetime.

                                                   --MACH, ERNST.

                         _Popular Scientific Lectures [McCormack]
                         (Chicago, 1898), p. 197._


=1602.= There is no inquiry which is not finally reducible to a
question of Numbers; for there is none which may not be conceived
of as consisting in the determination of quantities by each
other, according to certain relations.--COMTE, A.

                         _Positive Philosophy [Martineau], Bk. 1,
                         chap. 1._


=1603.= Pythagoras says that number is the origin of all things,
and certainly the law of number is the key that unlocks the
secrets of the universe. But the law of number possesses an
immanent order, which is at first sight mystifying, but on a more
intimate acquaintance we easily understand it to be intrinsically
necessary; and this law of number explains the wondrous
consistency of the laws of nature.--CARUS, PAUL.

                         _Reflections on Magic Squares; Monist,
                         Vol. 16 (1906), p. 139._


=1604.= An ancient writer said that arithmetic and geometry are
the _wings of mathematics_; I believe one can say without
speaking metaphorically that these two sciences are the
foundation and essence of all the sciences which deal with
quantity. Not only are they the foundation, they are also, as it
were, the capstones; for, whenever a result has been arrived at,
in order to use that result, it is necessary to translate it into
numbers or into lines; to translate it into numbers requires the
aid of arithmetic, to translate it into lines necessitates the
use of geometry.--LAGRANGE.

                         _Lecons Elementaires sur les
                         Mathematiques, Lecon seconde._


=1605.= It is number which regulates everything and it is measure
which establishes universal order.... A quiet peace, an
inviolable order, an inflexible security amidst all change and
turmoil characterize the world which mathematics discloses and
whose depths it unlocks.--DILLMANN, E.

                         _Die Mathematik die Fackeltraegerin einer
                         neuen Zeit (Stuttgart, 1889), p. 12._


=1606.=

        Number, the inducer of philosophies,
        The synthesis of letters, ....
                                                --AESCHYLUS.

                         _Quoted in, Thomson, J. A., Introduction
                         to Science, chap. 1 (London)._


=1607.= Amongst all the ideas we have, as there is none suggested
to the mind by more ways, so there is none more simple, than that
of _unity_, or one: it has no shadow of variety or composition in
it; every object our senses are employed about; every idea in our
understanding; every thought of our minds, brings this idea along
with it. And therefore it is the most intimate to our thoughts,
as well as it is, in its agreement to all other things, _the most
universal idea we have_.--LOCKE, JOHN.

                         _An Essay concerning Human
                         Understanding, Bk. 2, chap. 16, sect.
                         1._


=1608.= The _simple modes_ of _number_ are of all other the most
distinct; every the least variation, which is an unit, making
each combination as clearly different from that which approacheth
nearest to it, as the most remote; two being as distinct from
one, as two hundred; and the idea of two as distinct from the
idea of three, as the magnitude of the whole earth is from that
of a mite.--LOCKE, JOHN.

                         _An Essay concerning Human
                         Understanding, Bk. 2, chap. 16, sect.
                         3._


=1609.= The number of a class is the class of all classes similar
to the given class.--RUSSELL, BERTRAND.

                         _Principles of Mathematics (Cambridge,
                         1903), p. 115._


=1610.= Number is that property of a group of distinct things
which remains unchanged during any change to which the group may
be subjected which does not destroy the distinctness of the
individual things.--FINE, H. B.

                         _Number-system of Algebra (Boston and
                         New York, 1890), p. 3._


=1611.= The science of arithmetic may be called the science of
exact limitation of matter and things in space, force, and time.

                                                  --PARKER, F. W.

                         _Talks on Pedagogics (New York, 1894),
                         p. 64._


=1612.=

        Arithmetic is the science of the Evaluation
            of Functions,
        Algebra is the science of the Transformation
            of Functions.
                                            --HOWISON, G. H.

                         _Journal of Speculative Philosophy, Vol.
                         5, p. 175._


=1613.= That _arithmetic_ rests on pure intuition of _time_ is
not so obvious as that geometry is based on pure intuition of
space, but it may be readily proved as follows. All counting
consists in the repeated positing of unity; only in order to know
how often it has been posited, we mark it each time with a
different word: these are the numerals. Now repetition is
possible only through succession: but succession rests on the
immediate intuition of _time_, it is intelligible only by means
of this latter concept: hence counting is possible only by means
of time.--This dependence of counting on _time_ is evidenced by
the fact that in all languages multiplication is expressed by
"times" [mal], that is, by a concept of time; sexies, [Greek:
hexakis], six fois, six times.--SCHOPENHAUER, A.

                         _Die Welt als Vorstellung und Wille;
                         Werke (Frauenstaedt) (Leipzig, 1877),
                         Bd. 3, p. 39._


=1614.= The miraculous powers of modern calculation are due to
three inventions: the Arabic Notation, Decimal Fractions and
Logarithms.--CAJORI, F.

                         _History of Mathematics (New York,
                         1897), p. 161._


=1615.= The grandest achievement of the Hindoos and the one
which, of all mathematical investigations, has contributed most
to the general progress of intelligence, is the invention of the
principle of position in writing numbers.--CAJORI, F.

                         _History of Mathematics (New York,
                         1897), p. 87._


=1616.= The invention of logarithms and the calculation of the
earlier tables form a very striking episode in the history of
exact science, and, with the exception of the _Principia_ of
Newton, there is no mathematical work published in the country
which has produced such important consequences, or to which so
much interest attaches as to Napier's Descriptio.

                                             --GLAISHER, J. W. L.

                         _Encyclopedia Britannica, 9th Edition;
                         Article "Logarithms."_


=1617.= All minds are equally capable of attaining the science of
numbers: yet we find a prodigious difference in the powers of
different men, in that respect, after they have grown up, because
their minds have been more or less exercised in it.

                                               --JOHNSON, SAMUEL.

                         _Boswell's Life of Johnson, Harper's
                         Edition (1871), Vol. 2, p. 33._


=1618.= The method of arithmetical teaching is perhaps the best
understood of any of the methods concerned with elementary
studies.--BAIN, ALEXANDER.

                         _Education as a Science (New York,
                         1898), p. 288._


=1619.= What a benefite that onely thyng is, to haue the witte
whetted and sharpened, I neade not trauell to declare, sith all
men confesse it to be as greate as maie be. Excepte any witlesse
persone thinke he maie bee to wise. But he that most feareth
that, is leaste in daunger of it. Wherefore to conclude, I see
moare menne to acknowledge the benefite of nomber, than I can
espie willying to studie, to attaine the benefites of it. Many
praise it, but fewe dooe greatly practise it: onlesse it bee for
the vulgare practice, concernying Merchaundes trade. Wherein the
desire and hope of gain, maketh many willying to sustaine some
trauell. For aide of whom, I did sette forth the first parte of
_Arithmetike_. But if thei knewe how faree this seconde parte,
doeeth excell the firste parte, thei would not accoumpte any
tyme loste, that were emploied in it. Yea thei would not thinke
any tyme well bestowed till thei had gotten soche habilitie by
it, that it might be their aide in al other studies.

                                               --RECORDE, ROBERT.

                         _Whetstone of Witte (London, 1557)._


=1620.= You see then, my friend, I observed, that our real need
of this branch of science [arithmetic] is probably because it
seems to compel the soul to use our intelligence in the search
after pure truth.

Aye, remarked he, it does this to a remarkable extent.

Have you ever noticed that those who have a turn for arithmetic
are, with scarcely an exception, naturally quick in all sciences;
and that men of slow intellect, if they be trained and exercised
in this study ... become invariably quicker than they were
before?

Exactly so, he replied.

And, moreover, I think you will not easily find that many things
give the learner and student more trouble than this.

Of course not.

On all these accounts, then, we must not omit this branch of
science, but those with the best of talents should be instructed
therein.--PLATO.

                         _Republic [Davis], Bk. 7, chap. 8._


=1621.= Arithmetic has a very great and elevating effect,
compelling the soul to reason about abstract number, and if
visible or tangible objects are obtruding upon the argument,
refusing to be satisfied.--PLATO.

                         _Republic [Jowett], Bk. 7, p. 525._


=1622.= Good arithmetic contributes powerfully to purposive
effort, to concentration, to tenacity of purpose, to generalship,
to faith in right, and to the joy of achievement, which are the
elements that make up efficient citizenship.... Good arithmetic
exalts thinking, furnishes intellectual pleasure, adds appreciably
to love of right, and subordinates pure memory.--MYERS, GEORGE.

                         _Monograph on Arithmetic in Public
                         Education (Chicago), p. 21._


=1623.= On the one side we may say that the purpose of number
work is to put a child in possession of the machinery of
calculation; on the other side it is to give him a better mastery
of the world through a clear (mathematical) insight into the
varied physical objects and activities. The whole world, from one
point of view, can be definitely interpreted and appreciated by
mathematical measurements and estimates. Arithmetic in the common
school should give a child this point of view, the ability to see
and estimate things with a mathematical eye.--MCMURRAY, C. A.

                         _Special Method in Arithmetic_ (_New
                         York, 1906_), _p. 18._


=1624.= We are so accustomed to hear arithmetic spoken of as
one of the three fundamental ingredients in all schemes of
instruction, that it seems like inquiring too curiously to ask
why this should be. Reading, Writing, and Arithmetic--these
three are assumed to be of co-ordinate rank. Are they indeed
co-ordinate, and if so on what grounds?

In this modern "trivium" the art of reading is put first. Well,
there is no doubt as to its right to the foremost place. For
reading is the instrument of all our acquisition. It is
indispensable. There is not an hour in our lives in which it does
not make a great difference to us whether we can read or not.
And the art of Writing, too; that is the instrument of all
communication, and it becomes, in one form or other, useful to us
every day. But Counting--doing sums,--how often in life does this
accomplishment come into exercise? Beyond the simplest additions,
and the power to check the items of a bill, the arithmetical
knowledge required of any well-informed person in private life is
very limited. For all practical purposes, whatever I may have
learned at school of fractions, or proportion, or decimals, is,
unless I happen to be in business, far less available to me in
life than a knowledge, say, of history of my own country, or the
elementary truths of physics. The truth is, that regarded as
practical _arts_, reading, writing, and arithmetic have no right
to be classed together as co-ordinate elements of education; for
the last of these is considerably less useful to the average man
or woman not only than the other two, but than many others that
might be named. But reading, writing, and such mathematical or
logical exercise as may be gained in connection with the
manifestation of numbers, _have_ a right to constitute the
primary elements of instruction. And I believe that arithmetic,
if it deserves the high place that it conventionally holds in our
educational system, deserves it mainly on the ground that it is
to be treated as a logical exercise. It is the only branch of
mathematics which has found its way into primary and early
education; other departments of pure science being reserved for
what is called higher or university instruction. But all the
arguments in favor of teaching algebra and trigonometry to
advanced students, apply equally to the teaching of the
principles or theory of arithmetic to schoolboys. It is
calculated to do for them exactly the same kind of service, to
educate one side of their minds, to bring into play one set of
faculties which cannot be so severely or properly exercised in
any other department of learning. In short, relatively to the
needs of a beginner, Arithmetic, as a science, is just as
valuable--it is certainly quite as intelligible--as the higher
mathematics to a university student.--FITCH, J. G.

                         _Lectures on Teaching (New York, 1906),
                         pp. 267-268._


=1625.= What mathematics, therefore are expected to do for the
advanced student at the university, Arithmetic, if taught
demonstratively, is capable of doing for the children even of the
humblest school. It furnishes training in reasoning, and
particularly in deductive reasoning. It is a discipline in
closeness and continuity of thought. It reveals the nature of
fallacies, and refuses to avail itself of unverified assumptions.
It is the one department of school-study in which the sceptical
and inquisitive spirit has the most legitimate scope; in which
authority goes for nothing. In other departments of instruction
you have a right to ask for the scholar's confidence, and to
expect many things to be received on your testimony with
the understanding that they will be explained and verified
afterwards. But here you are justified in saying to your pupil
"Believe nothing which you cannot understand. Take nothing for
granted." In short, the proper office of arithmetic is to serve
as elementary training in logic. All through your work as
teachers you will bear in mind the fundamental difference between
knowing and thinking; and will feel how much more important
relatively to the health of the intellectual life the habit of
thinking is than the power of knowing, or even facility of
achieving visible results. But here this principle has special
significance. It is by Arithmetic more than by any other subject
in the school course that the art of thinking--consecutively,
closely, logically--can be effectually taught.--FITCH, J. G.

                         _Lectures on Teaching (New York, 1906),
                         pp. 292-293._


=1626.= Arithmetic and geometry, those wings on which the
astronomer soars as high as heaven.--BOYLE, ROBERT.

                         _Usefulness of Mathematics to Natural
                         Philosophy; Works (London, 1772), Vol.
                         3, p. 429._


=1627.= Arithmetical symbols are written diagrams and geometrical
figures are graphic formulas.--HILBERT, D.

                         _Mathematical Problems; Bulletin
                         American Mathematical Society, Vol. 8
                         (1902), p. 443._


=1628.= Arithmetic and geometry are much more certain than the
other sciences, because the objects of them are in themselves so
simple and so clear that they need not suppose anything which
experience can call in question, and both proceed by a chain of
consequences which reason deduces one from another. They are also
the easiest and clearest of all the sciences, and their object is
such as we desire; for, except for want of attention, it is
hardly supposable that a man should go astray in them. We must
not be surprised, however, that many minds apply themselves by
preference to other studies, or to philosophy. Indeed everyone
allows himself more freely the right to make his guess if the
matter be dark than if it be clear, and it is much easier to have
on any question some vague ideas than to arrive at the truth
itself on the simplest of all.--DESCARTES.

                         _Rules for the Direction of the Mind;
                         Torrey's Philosophy of Descartes (New
                         York, 1892), p. 63._


=1629.=

        Why are _wise_ few, _fools_ numerous in the
            excesse?
        'Cause, wanting _number_, they are
            _numberlesse_.
                                                 --LOVELACE.

                         _Noah Bridges: Vulgar Arithmetike
                         (London, 1659), p. 127._


=1630.= The clearness and distinctness of each mode of number
from all others, even those that approach nearest, makes me apt
to think that demonstrations in numbers, if they are not more
evident and exact than in extension, yet they are more general in
their use, and more determinate in their application. Because the
ideas of numbers are more precise and distinguishable than in
extension; where every equality and excess are not so easy to be
observed or measured; because our thoughts cannot in space arrive
at any determined smallness beyond which it cannot go, as an
unit; and therefore the quantity or proportion of any the least
excess cannot be discovered.--LOCKE, JOHN.

                         _An Essay concerning Human
                         Understanding, Bk. 2, chap. 16, sect.
                         4._

