and if the leaflet had bent to one side, its upper surface could have come
into contact only with the apex of either lateral leaflet; and this,
perhaps, is the meaning of the loss of the lateral movement.

The cotyledons do not sleep at night. the first leaf consists of a single
orbicular leaflet, which twists at night so that the blade stands
vertically. It is a remarkable fact that with M. Taurica, and in a somewhat
less degree with M. macrorrhiza and petitpierreana, all the many small and
young leaves produced during
[page 348]
the early spring from shoots on some cut-down plants in the greenhouse,
slept in a totally different manner from the normal one; for the three
leaflets, instead of twisting on their own axes so as to present their
lateral edges to the zenith, turned upwards and stood vertically with their
apices pointing to the zenith. They thus assumed nearly the same position
as in the allied genus Trifolium; and on the same principle that
embryological characters reveal the lines of descent in the animal kingdom,
so the movements of the small leaves in the above three species of
Melilotus, perhaps indicate that this genus is descended from a form which
was closely allied to and slept like a Trifolium. Moreover, there is one
species, M. messanensis, the leaves of which, on full-grown plants between
2 and 3 feet in height, sleep like the foregoing small leaves and like
those of a Trifolium. We were so much surprised at this latter case that,
until the flowers and fruit were examined, we thought that the seeds of
some Trifolium had been sown by mistake instead of those of a Melilotus. It
appears therefore probable that M. messanensis has either retained or
recovered a primordial habit.

The circumnutation of a leaf of M. officinalis was traced, the stem being
left free; and the apex of the terminal leaflet described three laterally
extended ellipses, between 8 A.M. and 4 P.M.; after the latter hour the
nocturnal twisting movement commenced. It was afterwards ascertained that
the above movement was compounded of the circumnutation of the stem on a
small scale, of the main petiole which moved most, and of the sub-petiole
of the terminal leaflet. The main petiole of a leaf having been secured to
a stick, close to the base of the sub-petiole of the terminal leaflet, the
latter described two small ellipses between 10.30 A.M., and 2 P.M. At 7.15
P.M., after this same leaflet (as well as another) had twisted themselves
into their vertical nocturnal position, they began to rise slowly, and
continued to do so until 10.35 P.M., after which hour they were no longer
observed.

As M. messanensis sleeps in an anomalous manner, unlike that of any other
species in the genus, the circumnutation of a terminal leaflet, with the
stem secured, was traced during two days. On each morning the leaflet fell,
until about noon, and then began to rise very slowly; but on the first day
the rising movement was interrupted between 1 and 3 P.M. by the formation
of a laterally extended ellipse, and on the second day, at the same time,
by two smaller ellipses. The rising movement then
[page 349]
recommenced, and became rapid late in the evening, when the leaflet was
beginning to go to sleep. The awaking or sinking movement had already
commenced by 6.45 A.M. on both mornings.

Trifolium (Tribe 3).--The nyctitropic movements of 11 species were
observed, and were found to be closely similar. If we select a leaf of T.
repens having an upright petiole, and with the three leaflets expanded
horizontally, the two lateral leaflets will be seen in the evening to twist
and approach each other, until their upper surfaces come into contact. At
the same time they bend downwards in a plane at right angles to that of
their former position, until their midribs form an angle of about 45o with
the upper part of the petiole. This peculiar change of position requires a
considerable amount of torsion in the pulvinus. The terminal leaflet merely
rises up without any twist-

Fig. 141. Trifolium repens: A, leaf during the day; B, leaf asleep at
night.

ing and bends over until it rests on and forms a roof over the edges of the
now vertical and united lateral leaflets. Thus the terminal leaflet always
passes through an angle of at least 90o, generally of 130o or 140o, and not
rarely--as was often observed with T. subterraneum--of 180o. In this latter
case the terminal leaflet stands at night horizontally (as in Fig. 141),
with its lower surface fully exposed to the zenith. Besides the difference
in the angles, at which the terminal leaflets stand at night in the
individuals of the same species, the degree to which the lateral leaflets
approach each other often likewise differs.

We have seen that the cotyledons of some species and not of others rise up
vertically at night. The first true leaf is generally unifoliate and
orbicular; it always rises, and either stands vertically at night or more
commonly bends a little over so as to expose the lower surface obliquely to
the zenith, in the same manner as does the terminal leaflet of the mature
leaf. But it does not twist itself like the corresponding first simple leaf
of Melilotus.
[page 350]
With T. Pannonicum the first true leaf was generally unifoliate, but
sometimes trifoliate, or again partially lobed and in an intermediate
condition.

Circumnutation.--Sachs described in 1863* the spontaneous up and down
movements of the leaflets of T. incarnatum, when kept in darkness. Pfeffer
made many observations on the similar movements in T. pratense.** He states
that the terminal leaflet of this species, observed at different times,
passed through angles of from 30o to 120o in the course of from 1 ½ to 4 h.
We observed the movements of T. subterraneum, resupinatum, and repens.

Trifolium subterraneum.--A petiole was secured close to the base of the
three leaflets, and the movement of the terminal leaflet was traced during
26 ½ h., as shown in the figure on the next page.

Between 6.45 A.M. and 6 P.M. the apex moved 3 times up and 3 times down,
completing 3 ellipses in 11 h. 15 m. The ascending and descending lines
stand nearer to one another than is usual with most plants, yet there was
some lateral motion. At 6 P.M. the great nocturnal rise commenced, and on
the next morning the sinking of the leaflet was continued until 8.30 A.M.,
after which hour it circumnutated in the manner just described. In the
figure the great nocturnal rise and the morning fall are greatly
abbreviated, from the want of space, and are merely represented by a short
curved line. The leaflet stood horizontally when at a point a little
beneath the middle of the diagram; so that during the daytime it oscillated
almost equally above and beneath a horizontal position. At 8.30 A.M. it
stood 48o beneath the horizon, and by 11.30 A.M. it had risen 50o above the
horizon; so that it passed through 98o in 3 h. By the aid of the tracing we
ascertained that the distance travelled in the 3 h. by the apex of this
leaflet was 1.03 inch. If we look at the figure, and prolong upwards in our
mind's eye the short curved broken line, which represents the nocturnal
course, we see that the latter movement is merely an exaggeration or
prolongation of one of the diurnal ellipses. The same leaflet had been
observed on the previous day, and the course then pursued was almost
identically the same as that here described.

* 'Flora,' 1863, p. 497.

** 'Die Period. Bewegungen,' 1875, pp. 35, 52.
[page 351]

Fig. 142. Trifolium subterraneum: circumnutation and nyctitropic movement
of terminal leaflet (.68 inch in length), traced from 6.45 A.M. July 4th to
9.15 A.M. 5th. Apex of leaf 3 7/8 inches from the vertical glass, and
movement, as here shown, magnified 5 1/4 times, reduced to one-half of
original scale. Plant illuminated from above; temp. 16o - 17o C.

Trifolium resupinatum.--A plant left entirely free was placed before a
north-east window, in such a position that a terminal leaflet projected at
right angles to the source of the light, the sky being uniformly clouded
all day. The movements of this leaflet were traced during two days, and on
both were closely similar. Those executed on the second day are shown in
Fig. 143. The obliquity of the several lines is due partly to the manner in
which the leaflet was viewed, and partly to its having moved a little
towards the light. From 7.50 A.M. to 8.40 A.M. the leaflet fell, that is,
the awakening movement was continued. It then rose and moved a little
laterally towards the light. At 12.30 it retrograded, and at 2.30 resumed
its original course, having thus completed a small ellipse during the
middle of the day. In the evening it rose rapidly, and by 8 A.M. on the
following morning had returned to exactly the same spot as on the previous
morning. The line representing the nocturnal course ought to be extended
much higher up, and is here abbreviated into a short,
[page 352]
curved, broken line. The terminal leaflet, therefore, of this species
described during the daytime only a single additional ellipse, instead of
two additional ones, as in the case of T. subterraneum. But we should
remember that it was shown in the fourth chapter that the stem
circumnutates, as no doubt does the main petiole and the sub-petioles; so
that the movement represented in Fig. 143 is a compounded one. We tried to
observe the movements of a leaf kept during the day in darkness, but it
began to go to sleep after 2 h. 15 m., and this was well pronounced after 4
h. 30 m.

Fig 143. Trifolium resupinatum: circumnutation and nyctitropic movements of
the terminal leaflet during 24 hours.

Trifolium repens.--A stem was secured close to the base of a moderately old
leaf, and the movement of the terminal leaflet was observed during two
days. This case is interesting solely from the simplicity of the movements,
in contrast with those of the two preceding species. On the first day the
leaflet fell between 8 A.M. and 3 P.M., and on the second between 7 A.M.
and 1 P.M. On both days the descending course was somewhat zigzag, and this
evidently represents the circumnutating movement of the two previous
species during the middle of the day. After 1 P.M., Oct. 1st (Fig. 144),
the leaflet began to rise, but the movement was slow on both days, both
before and after this hour, until 4 P.M. The rapid evening and nocturnal
rise then commenced. Thus in this species the course during 24 h. consists
of a single great ellipse; in T. resupinatum of two ellipses, one of which
includes the nocturnal movement and is much elongated; and in T.
subterraneum of three ellipses, of which the nocturnal one is likewise of
great length.

Securigera coronilla (Tribe 4).--The leaflets, which stand opposite one
another and are numerous, rise up at night, come into close contact, and
bend backwards at a moderate angle towards the base of the petiole.
[page 353]

Fig. 144. Trifolium repens: circumnutation and nyctitropic movements of a
nearly full-grown terminal leaflet, traced on a vertical glass from 7 A.M.
Sept. 30th to 8 A.M. Oct. 1st. Nocturnal course, represented by curved
broken line, much abbreviated.

Lotus (Tribe 4).--The nyctitropic movements of 10 species in this genus
were observed, and found to be the same. The main petiole rises a little at
night, and the three leaflets rise till they become vertical, and at the
same time approach each other. This was conspicuous with L. Jacoboeus, in
which the leaflets are almost linear. In most of the species the leaflets
rise so much as to press against the stem, and not rarely they become
inclined a little inwards with their lower surfaces exposed obliquely to
the zenith. This was clearly the case with L. major, as its petioles are
unusually long, and the leaflets are thus enabled to bend further inwards.
The young leaves on the summits of the stems close up at night so much, as
often to resemble large buds. The stipule-like leaflets, which are often of
large size, rise up like the other leaflets, and press against the stem
(Fig. 145). All the leaflets of L. Gebelii, and probably of the other
species, are provided at their bases with distinct pulvini, of a yellowish
colour, and formed of very small cells. The circumnutation of a terminal
leaflet of L. peregrinus (with the stem secured) was traced during two
days, but the movement was so simple that it is not worth while to give the
diagram. The leaflet fell slowly from the early morning till about 1 P.M.
It then rose gradually at first, but rapidly late in the evening. It
occasionally stood still for about 20 m. during the day, and sometimes
zigzagged a little. The movement of one of the basal, stipule-like leaflets
was likewise traced in the same manner and at the same time, and its course
was closely similar to that of the terminal leaflet.

In Tribe 5 of Bentham and Hooker, the sleep-movements of species in 12
genera have been observed by ourselves and
[page 354]
others, but only in Robinia with any care. Psoralea acaulis raises its
three leaflets at night; whilst Amorpha fruticosa,* Dalea alopecuroides,
and Indigofera tinctoria depress them. Ducharte** states that Tephrosia
caribaea is the sole example of "folioles couchées le long du pétiole et
vers la base;" but a

Fig. 145. Lotus Creticus: A, stem with leaves awake during the day; B, with
leaves asleep at night. SS, stipule-like leaflets.

similar movement occurs, as we have already seen, and shall again see in
other cases. Wistaria Sinensis, according to Royer,*** "abaisse les
folioles qui par une disposition bizarre sont inclinées dans la même
feuille, les supérieures vers le

* Ducharte, 'Eléments de Botanique', 1867, p. 349.

** Ibid., p. 347.

*** 'Ann. des Sciences Nats. Bot.' (5th series), ix. 1868.
[page 355]

sommet, les inférieures vers la base du petiole commun;" but the leaflets
on a young plant observed by us in the greenhouse merely sank vertically
downwards at night. The leaflets are raised in Sphaerophysa salsola,
Colutea arborea, and Astragalus uliginosus, but are depressed, according to
Linnaeus, in Glycyrrhiza. The leaflets of Robinia pseudo-acacia likewise
sink vertically down at night, but the petioles rise a little, viz., in one
case 3o, and in another 4o. The circumnutating movements of a terminal
leaflet on a rather old leaf were traced during two days, and were simple.
The leaflet fell slowly, in a slightly zigzag line, from 8 A.M. to 5 P.M.,
and then more rapidly; by 7 A.M. on the following morning it had risen to
its diurnal position. There was only one peculiarity in the movement,
namely, that on both days there was a distinct though small oscillation up
and down between 8.30 and 10 A.M., and this would probably have been more
strongly pronounced if the leaf had been younger.

Coronilla rosea (Tribe 6).--the leaves bear 9 or 10 pairs of opposite
leaflets, which during the day stand horizontally, with

Fig. 146. Coronilla rosea: leaf asleep.

their midribs at right angles to the petiole. At night they rise up so that
the opposite leaflets come nearly into contact, and those on the younger
leaves into close contact. At the same time they bend back towards the base
of the petiole, until their midribs form with it angles of from 40o to 50o
in a vertical plane, as here figured (Fig. 146). The leaflets, however,
sometimes bend so much back that their midribs become parallel to and lie
on the petiole. They thus occupy a reversed position to what they do in
several Leguminosae, for instance, in Mimosa
[page 356]
pudica; but, from standing further apart, they do not overlap one another
nearly so much as in this latter plant. The main petiole is curved slightly
downwards during the day, but straightens itself at night. In three cases
it rose from 3o above the horizon at noon, to 9o at 10 P.M.; from 11o to
33o; and from 5o to 33o--the amount of angular movement in this latter case
amounting to 28o. In several other species of Coronilla the leaflets showed
only feeble movements of a similar kind.

Hedysarum coronarium (Tribe 6).--The small lateral leaflets on plants
growing out of doors rose up vertically at night, but the large terminal
one became only moderately inclined. The petioles apparently did not rise
at all.

Smithia Pfundii (Tribe 6).--The leaflets rise up vertically, and the main
petiole also rises considerably.

Arachis hypogoea (Tribe 6).--The shape of a leaf, with its two pairs of
leaflets, is shown at A (Fig. 147); and a leaf asleep,

Fig. 147. Arachis hypogoea: A, leaf during the day, seen from vertically
above; B, leaf asleep, seen laterally, copied from a photograph. Figures
much reduced.

traced from a photograph (made by the aid of aluminium light), is given at
B. The two terminal leaflets twist round at night until their blades stand
vertically, and approach each other until they meet, at the same time
moving a little upwards and backwards. The two lateral leaflets meet each
other in this same manner, but move to a greater extent forwards, that is,
in a contrary direction to the two terminal leaflets, which they partially
embrace. Thus all four leaflets form together a single packet, with their
edges directed to the zenith, and with their lower surfaces turned
outwards. On a plant which was not growing vigorously the closed leaflets
seemed too heavy for the
[page 357]
petioles to support them in a vertical position, so that each night the
main petiole became twisted, and all the packets were extended
horizontally, with the lower surfaces of the leaflets on one side directed
to the zenith in a most anomalous manner. This fact is mentioned solely as
a caution, as it surprised us greatly, until we discovered that it was an
anomaly. The petioles are inclined upwards during the day, but sink at
night, so as to stand at about right angles with the stem. The amount of
sinking was measured only on one occasion, and found to be 39o. A petiole
was secured to a stick at the base of the two terminal leaflets, and the
circumnutating movement of one of these leaflets was traced from 6.40 A.M.
to 10.40 P.M., the plant being illuminated from above. The temperature was
17o - 17 1/2o C., and therefore rather too low. During the 16 h. the
leaflet moved thrice up and thrice down, and as the ascending and
descending lines did not coincide, three ellipses were formed.

Fig. 148. Desmodium gyrans: leaf seen from above, reduced to one-half
natural size. The minute stipules unusually large.

Desmodium gyrans (Tribe 6).--A large and full-grown leaf of this plant, so
famous for the spontaneous movements of the two little lateral leaflets, is
here represented (Fig. 148). The large terminal leaflet sleeps by sinking
vertically down, whilst the petiole rises up. The cotyledons do not sleep,
but the first-formed leaf sleeps equally well as the older ones. The
appearance presented by a sleeping branch and one in the day-time, copied
from two photographs, are shown at A and B (Fig. 149), and we see how at
night the leaves are crowded together, as if for mutual protection, by the
rising of the petioles. The petioles of the younger leaves near the summits
of the shoots rise up at night, so as to stand vertical and parallel to the
stem; whilst those on the sides were found in four cases to have risen
respectively 46 1/2o, 36o, 20o, and 19.5o above the inclined positions which
they had occupied during the day. For instance, in the first of these four
cases the petiole stood in the day at 23o, and at night at 69 1/2o above
the horizon. In the evening the rising of the petioles is almost completed
before the leaflets sink perpendicularly downwards.
[page 358]

Circumnutation.--The circumnutating movements of four young shoots were
observed during 5 h. 15 m.; and in this time each completed an oval figure
of small size. The main petiole also circumnutates rapidly, for in the
course of 31 m. (temp. 91o F.) it changed its course by as much as a
rectangle six times, describing a figure which apparently represented two
ellipses.

Fig. 149. Desmodium gyrans: A, stem during the day; B, stem with leaves
asleep. Figures reduced.

The movement of the terminal leaflet by means of its sub-petiole or
pulvinus is quite as rapid, or even more so, than that of the main petiole,
and has much greater amplitude. Pfeffer has seen* these leaflets move
through an angle of 8o in the course of from 10 to 30 seconds.

A fine, nearly full-grown leaf on a young plant, 8 inches in height, with
the stem secured to a stick at the base of the leaf, was observed from 8.30
A.M. June 22nd to 8 A.M. June 24th.

* 'Die Period. Beweg.,' p. 35.
[page 359]

In the diagram given on the next page (Fig. 150), the two curved broken
lines at the base, which represent the nocturnal courses, ought to be
prolonged far downwards. On the first day the leaflet moved thrice down and
thrice up, and to a considerable distance laterally; the course was also
remarkably crooked. The dots were generally made every hour; if they had
been made every few minutes all the lines would have been zigzag to an
extraordinary degree, with here and there a loop formed. We may infer that
this would have been the case, because five dots were made in the course of
31 m. (between 12.34 and 1.5 P.M.), and we see in the upper part of the
diagram how crooked the course here is; if only the first and last dots had
been joined we should have had a straight line. Exactly the same fact may
be seen in the lines representing the course between 2.24 P.M. and 3 P.M.,
when six intermediate dots were made; and again at 4.46 and 4.50. But the
result was widely different after 6 P.M.,--that is, after the great
nocturnal descent had commenced; for though nine dots were then made in the
course of 32 m., when these were joined (see Figure) the line thus formed
was almost straight. The leaflets, therefore, begin to descend in the
afternoon by zigzag lines, but as soon as the descent becomes rapid their
whole energy is expended in thus moving, and their course becomes
rectilinear. After the leaflets are completely asleep they move very little
or not at all.

Had the above plant been subjected to a higher temperature than 67o - 70o
F., the movements of the terminal leaflet would probably have been even
more rapid and wider in extent than those shown in the diagram; for a plant
was kept for some time in the hot-house at from 92o - 93o F., and in the
course of 35 m. the apex of a leaflet twice descended and once ascended,
travelling over a space of 1.2 inch in a vertical direction and of .82 inch
in a horizontal direction. Whilst thus moving the leaflet also rotated on
its own axis (and this was a point to which no attention had been before
paid), for the plane of the blade differed by 41o after an interval of only
a few minutes. Occasionally the leaflet stood still for a short time. There
was no jerking movement, which is so characteristic of the little lateral
leaflets. A sudden and considerable fall of temperature causes the terminal
leaflet to sink downwards; thus a cut-off leaf was immersed in water at 95o
F., which was slowly raised to 103o F., and afterwards allowed to sink to
70o F., and the sub-petiole of the terminal leaflet then curved downwards.
The water was afterwards
[page 360]

Fig. 150. Desmodium gyrans: circumnutation and nyctitropic movement of leaf
(3 3/4 inches in length, petiole included) during 48 h. Filament affixed to
midrib of terminal leaflet; its apex 6 inches from the vertical glass.
Diagram reduced to one-third of original scale. Plant illuminated from
above. Temp. 19o - 20o C.
[page 361]

raised to 120o F., and the sub-petiole straightened itself. Similar
experiments with leaves in water were twice repeated, with nearly the same
result. It should be added, that water raised to even 122o F. does not soon
kill a leaf. A plant was placed in darkness at 8.37 A.M., and at 2 P.M.
(i.e. after 5 h. 23 m.), though the leaflets had sunk considerably, they
had by no means acquired their nocturnal vertically dependent position.
Pfeffer, on the other hand, says* that this occurred with him in from 3/4
h. to 2 h.; perhaps the difference in our results may be due to the plant
on which we experimented being a very young and vigorous seedling.

The Movements of the little Lateral Leaflets .--These have been so often
described, that we will endeavour to be as brief as possible in giving a
few new facts and conclusions. The leaflets sometimes quickly change their
position by as much as nearly 180o; and their sub-petioles can then be seen
to become greatly curved. They rotate on their own axes, so that their
upper surfaces are directed to all points of the compass. The figure
described by the apex is an irregular oval or ellipse. They sometimes
remain stationary for a period. In these several respects there is no
difference, except in rapidity and extent, between their movements and the
lesser ones performed by the large terminal leaflet whilst making its great
oscillations. The movements of the little leaflets are much influenced, as
is well known, by temperature. This was clearly shown by immersing leaves
with motionless leaflets in cold water, which was slowly raised to 103o F.,
and the leaflets then moved quickly, describing about a dozen little
irregular circles in 40 m. By this time the water had become much cooler,
and the movements became slower or almost ceased; it was then raised to
100o F., and the leaflets again began to move quickly. On another occasion
a tuft of fine leaves was immersed in water at 53o F., and the leaflets
were of course motionless. The water was raised to 99o, and the leaflets
soon began to move; it was raised to 105o, and the movements became much
more rapid; each little circle or oval being completed in from 1 m. 30 s.
to 1 m. 45 s. There was, however, no jerking, and this fact may perhaps be
attributed to the resistance of the water.

Sachs states that the leaflets do not move until the surrounding air is as
high as 71o - 72o F., and this agrees with our

* 'Die Period. Beweg.,' p. 39.
[page 362]

experience on full-grown, or nearly full-grown, plants. But the leaflets of
young seedlings exhibit a jerking movement at much lower temperatures. A
seedling was kept (April 16th) in a room for half the day where the
temperature was steady at 64o F., and the one leaflet which it bore was
continually jerking, but not so rapidly as in the hot-house. The pot was
taken in the evening into a bed-room where the temperature remained at 62o
during nearly the whole night; at 10 and 11 P.M. and at 1 A.M. the leaflet
was still jerking rapidly; at 3.30 A.M. it was not seen to jerk, but was
observed during only a short time. It was, however, now inclined at a much
lower angle than that occupied at 1 A.M. At 6.30 A.M. (temp. 61o F.) its
inclination was still less than before, and again less at 6.45 A.M.; by
7.40 A.M. it had risen, and at 8.30 A.M. was again seen to jerk. This
leaflet, therefore, was moving during the whole night, and the movement was
by jerks up to 1 A.M. (and possibly later) and again at 8.30 A.M., though
the temperature was only 61o to 62o F. We must therefore conclude that the
lateral leaflets produced by young plants differ somewhat in constitution
from those on older plants.

In the large genus Desmodium by far the greater number of the species are
trifoliate; but some are unifoliate, and even the same plant may bear uni-
and trifoliate leaves. In most of the species the lateral leaflets are only
a little smaller than the terminal one. Therefore the lateral leaflets of
D. gyrans (see Fig. 148) must be considered as almost rudimentary. They are
also rudimentary in function, if this expression may be used; for they
certainly do not sleep like the full-sized terminal leaflets. It is,
however, possible that the sinking down of the leaflets between 1 A.M. and
6.45 A.M., as above described, may represent sleep. It is well known that
the leaflets go on jerking during the early part of the night; but my
gardener observed (Oct. 13th) a plant in the hot-house between 5 and 5.30
A.M., the temperature having been kept up to 82o F., and found that all the
leaflets were inclined, but he saw no jerking movement until 6.55 A.M., by
which time the terminal leaflet had risen and was awake. Two days
afterwards (Oct. 15th) the same plant was observed by him at 4.47 A.M.
(temp. 77o F.), and he found that the large terminal leaflets were awake,
though not quite horizontal; and the only cause which we could assign for
this anomalous wakefulness was that the plant had been kept for
experimental purposes during
[page 363]
the previous day at an unusually high temperature; the little lateral
leaflets were also jerking at this hour, but whether there was any
connection between this latter fact and the sub-horizontal position of the
terminal leaflets we do not know. Anyhow, it is certain that the lateral
leaflets do not sleep like the terminal leaflets; and in so far they may be
said to be in a functionally rudimentary condition. They are in a similar
condition in relation to irritability; for if a plant be shaken or
syringed, the terminal leaflets sink down to about 45o beneath the horizon;
but we could never detect any effect thus produced on the lateral leaflets;
yet we are not prepared to assert positively that rubbing or pricking the
pulvinus produces no effect.

As in the case of most rudimentary organs, the leaflets are variable in
size; they often depart from their normal position and do not stand
opposite one another; and one of the two is frequently absent. This absence
appeared in some, but not in all the cases, to be due to the leaflet having
become completely confluent with the main petiole, as might be inferred
from the presence of a slight ridge along its upper margin, and from the
course of the vessels. In one instance there was a vestige of the leaflet,
in the shape of a minute point, at the further end of the ridge. The
frequent, sudden and complete disappearance of one or both of the
rudimentary leaflets is a rather singular fact; but it is a much more
surprising one that the leaves which are first developed on seedling plants
are not provided with them. Thus, on one seedling the seventh leaf above
the cotyledons was the first which bore any lateral leaflets, and then only
a single one. On another seedling, the eleventh leaf first bore a leaflet;
of the nine succeeding leaves five bore a single lateral leaflet, and four
bore none at all; at last a leaf, the twenty-first above the cotyledons,
was provided with two rudimentary lateral leaflets. From a widespread
analogy in the animal kingdom, it might have been expected that these
rudimentary leaflets would have been better developed and more regularly
present on very young than on older plants. But bearing in mind, firstly,
that long-lost characters sometimes reappear late in life, and secondly,
that the species of Desmodium are generally trifoliate, but that some are
unifoliate, the suspicion arises that D. gyrans is descended from a
unifoliate species, and that this was descended from a trifoliate one; for
in this case both the absence of the little lateral leaflets on very young
seedlings, and their sub-
[page 364]
sequent appearance, may be attributed to reversion to more or less distant
progenitors.*

No one supposes that the rapid movements of the lateral leaflets of 'D.
gyrans' are of any use to the plant; and why they should behave in this
manner is quite unknown. We imagined that their power of movement might
stand in some relation with their rudimentary condition, and therefore
observed the almost rudimentary leaflets of Mimosa albida vel sensitiva (of
which a drawing will hereafter be given, Fig. 159); but they exhibited no
extraordinary movements, and at night they went to sleep like the
full-sized leaflets. There is, however, this remarkable difference in the
two cases; in Desmodium the pulvinus of the rudimentary leaflets has not
been reduced in length, in correspondence with the reduction of the blade,
to the same extent as has occurred in the Mimosa; and it is on the length
and degree of curvature of the pulvinus that the amount of movement of the
blade depends. Thus the average length of the pulvinus in the large
terminal leaflets of Desmodium is 3 mm., whilst that of the rudimentary
leaflets is 2.86 mm.; so that they differ only a little in length. But in
diameter they differ much, that of the pulvinus of the little leaflets
being only 0.3 mm. to 0.4 mm.; whilst that of the terminal leaflets is 1.33
mm. If we now turn to the Mimosa, we find that the average length of the
pulvinus of the almost rudimentary leaflets is only 0.466 mm., or rather
more than a quarter of the length of the pulvinus of the full-sized
leaflets, namely, 1.66 mm. In this small reduction in length of the
pulvinus of the rudimentary leaflets of Desmodium, we apparently have the
proximate cause of their great and rapid circumnutating movement, in
contrast with that of the almost rudimentary leaflets of the Mimosa. The
small size and weight of the blade, and the little resistance opposed by
the air to its movement, no doubt also come into play; for we have seen
that these leaflets if immersed in water, when the resistance would be much
greater, were prevented from jerking forwards. Why, during the reduction of
the lateral leaflets of Desmodium, or during their reappearance--if they
owe their origin to reversion--the pulvinus should have been so much less
affected than the blade, whilst with the

* Desmodium vespertilionis is closely allied to D. gyrans, and it seems
only occasionally to bear rudimentary lateral leaflets. Duchartre,
'Eléments de Botanique,' 1867, p. 353.
[page 365]

Mimosa the pulvinus has been greatly reduced, we do not know. Nevertheless,
it deserves notice that the reduction of the leaflets in these two genera
has apparently been effected by a different process and for a different
end; for with the Mimosa the reduction of the inner and basal leaflets was
necessary from the want of space; but no such necessity exists with
Desmodium, and the reduction of its lateral leaflets seems to have been due
to the principle of compensation, in consequence of the great size of the
terminal leaflet.
Uraria (Tribe 6) and Centrosema (Tribe 8).--The leaflets of Uraria lagopus
and the leaves of a Centrosema from Brazil both sink vertically down at
night. In the latter plant the petiole at the same time rose 16 1/2o.

Amphicarpoea monoica (Tribe 8).--The leaflets sink down vertically at
night, and the petioles likewise fall considerably.

Fig. 151. Amphicarpoea monoica: circumnutation and nyctitropic movement of
leaf during 48 h.; its apex 9 inches from the vertical glass. Figure
reduced to one-third of original scale. Plant illuminated from above; temp
17 1/2o - 18 1/2o C.

A petiole, which was carefully observed, stood during the day 25o above the
horizon and at night 32o below it; it therefore fell 57o. A filament was
fixed transversely across the terminal leaflet of a fine young leaf (2 1/4
inches in length including the
[page 366]
petiole), and the movement of the whole leaf was traced on a vertical
glass. This was a bad plan in some respects, because the rotation of the
leaflet, independently of its rising or falling, raised and depressed the
filament; but it was the best plan for our special purpose of observing
whether the leaf moved much after it had gone to sleep. The plant had
twined closely round a thin stick, so that the circumnutation of the stem
was prevented. The movement of the leaf was traced during 48 h., from 9
A.M. July 10th to 9 A.M. July 12th.  In the figure given (Fig. 151) we see
how complicated its course was on both days: during the second day it
changed its course greatly 13 times. The leaflets began to go to sleep a
little after 6 P.M., and by 7.15 P.M. hung vertically down and were
completely asleep; but on both nights they continued to move from 7.15 P.M.
to 10.40 and 10.50 P.M., quite as much as during the day; and this was the
point which we wished to ascertain. We see in the figure that the great
sinking movement late in the evening does not differ essentially from the
circumnutation during the day.

Glycine hispida (Tribe 8).--The three leaflets sink vertically down at
night.

Erythrina (Tribe 8).--Five species were observed, and the leaflets of all
sank vertically down at night; with E. caffra and with a second unnamed
species, the petioles at the same time rose slightly. The movements of the
terminal leaflet of E. crista-galli (with the main petiole secured to a
stick) were traced from 6.40 A.M. June 8th, to 8 A.M. on the 10th. In order
to observe the nyctitropic movements of this plant, it is necessary that it
should have grown in a warm greenhouse, for out of doors in our climate it
does not sleep. We see in the tracing (Fig. 152) that the leaflet
oscillated twice up and down between early morning and noon; it then fell
greatly, afterwards rising till 3 P.M. At this latter hour the great
nocturnal fall commenced. On the second day (of which the tracing is not
given) there was exactly the same double oscillation before noon, but only
a very small one in the afternoon. On the third morning the leaflet moved
laterally, which was due to its beginning to assume an oblique position, as
seems invariably to occur with the leaflets of this species as they grow
old. On both nights after the leaflets were asleep and hung vertically
down, they continued to move a little both up and down, and from side to
side.

Erythrina caffra.--A filament was fixed transversely across
[page 367]

a terminal leaflet, as we wished to observe its movements when asleep. The
plant was placed in the morning of June 10th under a skylight, where the
light was not bright; and we do not know whether it was owing to this cause
or to the plant having been disturbed, but the leaflet hung vertically down
all day; nevertheless it circumnutated in this position, describing a
figure which represented two irregular ellipses. On the next day it
circumnutated in a greater degree, describing four irregular ellipses, and
by 3 P.M. had risen into a horizontal position. By 7.15 P.M. it was asleep
and vertically dependent, but continued to circumnutate as long as
observed, until 11 P.M.

Fig. 152. Erythrina crista-galli: circumnutation and nyctitropic movement
of terminal leaflet, 3 3/4 inches in length, traced during 25 h.; apex of
leaf 3 ½ inches from the vertical glass. Figure reduced to one-half of
original scale. Plant illuminated from above; temp. 17 1/2o - 18 1/2o C.

Erythrina corallodendron.--The movements of a terminal leaflet were traced.
During the second day it oscillated four times up and four times down
between 8 A.M. and 4 P.M., after which hour the great nocturnal fall
commenced. On the third day the movement was equally great in amplitude,
but was remarkably simple, for the leaflet rose in an almost perfectly
straight line from 6.50 A.M. to 3 P.M., and then sank down in an equally
straight line until vertically dependent and asleep.
[page 368]

Apios tuberosa (Tribe 8).--The leaflets sink vertically down at night.

Phaseolus vulgaris (Tribe 8).--The leaflets likewise sink vertically down
at night. In the greenhouse the petiole of a young leaf rose 16o, and that
of an older leaf 10o at night. With plants growing out of doors the
