"Can't say whether they were aircraft or autos, of course," he
added, "but those things were certainly machines." Later, Rolla paid
more attention to them, and the doctor positively identified them as
former motor-cars.

The sun had gone down. It was still quite light, of course; darkness
would not come for a couple of hours. Rolla munched on what food she
had, and pressed on through the ruins. She saw skeletons and rusted
engines everywhere, and once passed a rounded heap of rust which
looked like nothing so much as a large cannon shell. Had the place
been the scene of a battle?

Just when she had got rather accustomed to the place and was feeling
more or less at her ease, she stopped short. At the same time the
doctor himself fairly jumped in his chair. Somewhere, right near at
hand, on one of the larger structures, a bell began to ring!

It clanged loudly and confidently, giving out perhaps thirty strokes
before it stopped. The stillness which followed was pretty painful.
In a moment, however, it was broken as effectively as any silence
can be broken.

A man's voice sounded within the building.

Immediately it was replied to, more faintly, by several others. Then
came the clatter of some sort of utensils, and sundry other noises
which spoke loudly of humans. Rolla froze in her tracks, and her
teeth began to chatter.

Next moment she got a grip on herself. "What difference doth it
make, whether they be friend or enemy?" she argued severely, for the
benefit of her shaking nerves. "They will give thee food, anyhow.
And perchance they know where liveth the magic stone!"

In the end Rolla's high purpose prevailed over her weak knees, and
she began to look for the entrance to the place. It was partly in
ruins-that is, the upper stories-but the two lower floors seemed, so
far as their interior could be seen through the high, unglazed
windows, to be in good condition. There were no doors on that
street.

Going around the corner, however, Rolla saw a high archway at the
far corner of the structure. Approaching near enough to peek in, she
saw that this arch provided an opening into a long corridor, such as
might once have served as a wagon or auto entrance. After a little
hesitation she went in.

She passed a door, a massive thing of solid brassy metal, such as
interested the doctor immensely but only served to confuse the
explorer. A little farther on, and the corridor became pretty dark.
She passed another brass door, and approached the end of the
pavement. There was one more door there; and she noted with
excitement that it was open.

She came closer and peered in. The room was fairly well lighted, and
what she saw was clear-cut and unmistakable. In the middle of the
room was a long table, and seated about it, in perfect silence, sat
an even dozen men.






XIII

THE TWELVE






For a minute or two Rolla was not observed. She simply stood and
stared, being neither confident enough to go forward nor scared
enough to retreat. Childlike, she scrutinized the group with great
thoroughness.

Their comparatively white faces and hands puzzled her most. Also,
she could not understand the heavy black robes in which all were
dressed. Falling to the floor and reaching far above their necks,
such garments would have been intolerable to the free-limbed
Sanusians. To the watchers on the earth, however, the robes made the
group look marvelously like a company of monks.

Not that there was anything particularly religious about the place
or in their behavior. All twelve seemed to be silent only because
they were voraciously hungry. A meal was spread on the table. Except
for the garments, the twelve might have been so many harvest hands,
gathered for the evening meal in the cook-house. From the
white-bearded man who sat at the head of the table and passed out
large helpings of something from a big pot, to the fair-haired young
fellow at the foot, who could scarcely wait for his share, there was
only one thing about them which might have been labeled pious; and
that was their attitude, which could have been interpreted: "Give us
this day our daily bread--and hurry up about it!"

Apparently Rolla was convinced that these men were thoroughly human,
and as such fairly safe to approach. For she allowed her curiosity
to govern her caution, and proceeded to sidle through the doorway.
Half-way through she caught a whiff of the food, and her sidling
changed to something faster.

At that instant she was seen. A tall, dark-haired chap on the far
side of the table glanced up and gave a sharp, startled exclamation.
Instantly the whole dozen whirled around and with one accord shot to
their feet.

Rolla stopped short.

There was a second's silence; then the white-bearded man, who seemed
to be the leader of the group, said something peremptory in a deep,
compelling voice. Rolla did not understand.

He repeated it, this time a little less commandingly; and Rolla,
after swallowing desperately, inclined her head in the diffident way
she had, and said:

"Are ye friends or enemies?"

Eleven of the twelve looked puzzled. The dark-haired man, who had
been the first to see her, however, gave a muttered exclamation;
then he cogitated a moment, wet his lips and said something that
sounded like: "What did you say? Say it again!"

Rolla repeated.

The dark-haired man listened intently. Immediately he fell to
nodding with great vigor, and thought deeply again before making
another try: "We are your friends. Whence came ye, and what seek
ye?"

Rolla had to listen closely to what he said. The language was
substantially the same as hers; but the verbs were misplaced in the
sentences, the accenting was different, and certain of the vowels
were flatted. After a little, however, the man caught her way of
talking and was able to approximate it quite well, so that she
understood him readily.

"I seek," Rolla replied, "food and rest. I have traveled far and am
weary."

"Ye look it," commented the man. His name, Rolla found out later,
was Somat. "Ye shall have both food and rest. However, whence came
ye?"

"From the other side of the world," answered Rolla calmly.

Instantly she noted that the twelve became greatly excited when
Somat translated her statement. She decided to add to the scene.

"I have been away from my people for many days," and she held up one
hand with the five fingers spread out, opening and closing them four
times, to indicate twenty.

"Ye came over the edge of the world!" marveled Somat. "It were a
dangerous thing to do, stranger!"

"Aye," agreed Rolla, "but less dangerous than that from which I
fled. However," impatiently, "give me the food ye promised; I can
talk after my stomach be filled."

"Of a surety," replied Somat apologetically. "I were too interested
to remember thy hunger." He spoke a word or two, and one of his
companions brought another stool, also dishes and table utensils.

Whereupon the watchers on the earth got a first-class surprise. Here
they had been looking upon twelve men, living in almost barbaric
fashion amid the ruins of a great city; but the men had been eating
from hand-painted china of the finest quality, and using silverware
that was simply elegant, nothing less! Luxury in the midst of
desolation!

Rolla, however, paid little attention to these details. She was
scarcely curious as to the food, which consisted of some sort of
vegetable and meat stew, together with butterless bread, a kind of
small-grained corn on the cob, a yellowish root-vegetable not unlike
turnips, and large quantities of berries. She was too hungry to be
particular, and ate heartily of all that was offered, whether cooked
or uncooked. The twelve almost forgot their own hunger in their
interest in the stranger.

It was now pretty dark in the big room. The white-bearded man said
something to the young fellow at the foot of the table, whereupon
the chap got up and stepped to the nearest wall, where he pressed
something with the tip of his finger. Instantly the room was flooded
with white light--from two incandescent bulbs!

Rolla leaped to her feet in amazement, bunking painfully in the
unaccustomed glare.

"What is this?" she demanded, all the more furiously to hide her
fear. "Ye would not trick me with magic; ye, who call yourselves
friends!"

Somat interpreted this to the others. Some laughed; others looked
pityingly at her. Somat explained:

"It is nothing, stranger. Be not afraid. We forgot that ye might
know nothing of this 'magic.'" He considered deeply, apparently
trying to put himself in her place. "Know ye not fire?" Of course,
she did not know what he meant. "Then," with an inspiration,
"perchance ye have see the flower, the red flower, ye might call--"

"Aye!" eagerly. "Doth it grow here?"

Somat smiled with satisfaction, and beckoned for her to follow him.
He led the way through a small door into another room, evidently
used as a kitchen. There he pointed to a large range, remarkably
like the up-to-date article known on the earth.

"The flower 'groweth' here," said he, and lifted a lid from the
stove. Up shot the flame.

"Great Mownoth!" shouted Holla, forgetting all about her hunger. "I
have found it--the precious flower itself!"

Somat humored her childlike view-point. "We have the seed of the
flower, too," said he. He secured a box of matches from a shelf, and
showed her the "little sticks."

"Exactly what the angel showed me!" jubilated Holla. "I have come to
the right place!"

Back she went to her food, her face radiant, and all her lurking
suspicion of the twelve completely gone. From that time on she had
absolute and unquestioning confidence in all that was told her. In
her eyes, the twelve were simply angels or gods who had seen fit to
clothe themselves queerly and act human.

Supper over, she felt immensely tired. All the strain of the past
three weeks had to have its reaction. Like a very tired, sleepy
child, she was led to a room in another part of the building, where
she was shown an ordinary sleeping-cot. She promptly pulled the
mattress onto the floor, where she considered it belonged, and fell
fast asleep.

Meanwhile, back on the earth, Van Emmon and Smith had lost no time
in making use of the doctor's description of the twelve. Within a
few minutes they had new agents; Van Emmon used Somat's eyes and
ears, while Smith got in touch with the elderly bearded man at the
head of the table. His name was Deltos.

"A very striking confirmation of the old legends," he was saying
through a big yawn, as Smith made connection. He used a colloquial
type of language, quite different from the lofty, dignified speech
of the Sanusians. "That is, of course, if the woman is telling the
truth."

"And I think she is," declared the young fellow at the foot of the
table. "It makes me feel pretty small, to think that none of us ever
had the nerve to make the trip; while she, ignorant as she is, dared
it all and succeeded!"

"You forget, Sorplee," reminded Somat, "that such people are far
hardier than we. The feat is one that requires apelike ability. The
only thing that puzzled me is--why did she do it at all?"

"It will have to remain a puzzle until she awakens," said Deltos,
rising from the table. "Lucky for us, Somat, that you saw fit to
study the root tongues. Otherwise we'd have to converse by signs."

Neither Smith nor Van Emmon learned anything further that night. The
twelve were all very tired, apparently, and went right to bed; a
procedure which was straightway seconded by the four watchers on the
earth. Which brings us in the most ordinary manner to the events of
the next day.

After breakfast all but Somat left the place and disappeared in
various directions; and Rolla noted that the robes were, evidently,
worn only at meal time. Most of the men were now dressed in rough
working garments, similar to what one sees in modern factories.
Whimsical sort of gods, Rolla told herself, but gods just the same.

"Tell me," began Somat, as the woman sat on the floor before him--he
could not get her to use a chair--"tell me, what caused thee to
leave thy side of the world? Did ye arouse the wrath of thy fellow
creatures?"

"Nay," answered Rolla, and proceeded to explain, in the wrong order,
as a child might, by relating first the crossing of the ridge, the
flight from the bees, the "masters'" cruel method of dealing with
Corrus and Dulnop, and finally the matter of the fire itself, the
real cause of the whole affair. Somat was intelligent enough to fill
in such details as Rolla omitted.

"Ye did right, and acted like the brave girl ye are!" he exclaimed,
when Rolla had finished. However, he did not fully appreciate what
she had meant by "the winged masters," and not until she pointed out
some bees and asked if, on this part of the planet, such were the
rulers of the humans, that the man grasped the bitter irony of it
all.

"What! Those tiny insects rule thy lives!" It took him some time to
comprehend the deadly nature of their stings, and the irresistible
power of concerted effort; but in the end he commented: "'Tis not so
strange, now that I think on it. Mayhap life is only a matter of
chance, anyway."

Presently he felt that he understood the Sanusian situation. He fell
silent; and Rolla, after waiting as long as her patience would
allow, finally put the question temporarily uppermost in her mind:

"It is true that I have crossed the edge of the world. And yet, I
understand it not at all. Can ye explain the nature of this strange
world we live upon, Somat?" There was infinite respect in the way
Rolla used his name; had she known a word to indicate human
infallibility, such as "your majesty," she would have used it.
"There is a saying among our people that the world be round. How can
this be so?"

"Yet it is true," answered Somat, "although ye must know that it be
not round like a fruit or a pebble. No more is it flat, like this,"
indicating the lid of the stove, near which they sat. "Instead, 'tis
shaped thus"--and he took from his finger a plain gold band, like an
ordinary wedding ring--"the world is shaped like that!"

Rolla examined the ring with vast curiosity. She had never seen the
like before, and was quite as much interested in the metal as in the
thing it illustrated. Fortunately the band was so worn that both
edges were nearly sharp, thus corresponding with the knifelike ridge
over which she had crawled.

"Now," Somat went on, "ye and your people live on the inner face of
the world," indicating the surface next his skin, "while I and my
kind live on the outer face. Were it not for the difficulties of
making the trip, we should have found you out ere this."

Rolla sat for a long time with the ring in her hand, pondering the
great fact she had just learned. And meanwhile, back on the earth,
four excited citizens were discussing this latest discovery.

"An annular world!" exclaimed the doctor, his eyes sparkling
delightedly. "It confirms the nebular hypothesis!"

"How so?" Smith wanted to know.

"Because it proves that the process of condensation and
concentration, which produces planets out of the original gases can
take place at uneven speeds! Instead of concentrating to the
globular form, Sanus cooled too quickly; she concentrated while she
was still a ring!"

Smith was struck with another phase of the matter. "Must have a
queer sort of gravitation," he pointed out. "Seems to be the same,
inside the ring or outside. Surely, doc it can't be as powerful as
it is here on the earth?"

"No; not likely."

"Then, why hasn't it made a difference in the inhabitants? Seems to
me the humans would have different structure."

"Not necessarily. Look at it the other way around; consider what an
enormous variety of animal forms we have here, all developed under
the same conditions. The humming-bird and the python, for instance.
Gravitation needn't have anything to do with it."

Billie was thinking mainly of the question of day and night. "The
ring must be inclined at an angle with the sun's rays," she
observed. "That being the case, Sanus has two periods each year when
there is continuous darkness on the inner face; might last a week or
two. Do you suppose the people all hibernate during those seasons?"
But no one had an answer to that.

Van Emmon said he would give all he was worth to explore the
Sanusian mountains long enough to learn their geology. He said that
the rocks ought to produce some new mineral forms, due to the
peculiar condition of strain they would be subjected to.

"I'm not sure," said he thoughtfully, "but I shouldn't be surprised
if there's an enormous amount of carbon there. Maybe diamonds are as
plentiful as coal is here."

At the word "diamonds" Smith glanced covertly at Billie's left hand.
But she had hidden it in the folds of her skirt. Next moment the
doctor warned them to be quiet; Somat and Rolla were talking again.

He was telling her about his world. She learned that his people, who
had never concerned themselves with her side of the planet, had
progressed enormously beyond the Sanusians. Rolla did not understand
all that he told her; but the people on the earth gathered, in one
way or another, that civilization had proceeded about as far as that
of the year 1915 in Europe. All this, while fellow humans only a few
thousand miles away, not only failed to make any progress at all,
but lived on, century after century, the absolute slave of a race of
bees!

But it was a fact. The ancient city in which Rolla found herself had
been, only a generation before, a flourishing metropolis, the
capital of a powerful nation. There had been two such nations on
that side of the planet, and the most violent rivalry had existed
between them.

"However," Somat told Rolla, "'twas not this rivalry which wrought
their downfall, except indirectly. The last great war between them
was terrible, but not disastrous. Either could have survived that.

"But know you that the ruler of one of the nations, in order to
carry on this war--which was a war of commerce (never mind what that
means)--in order to carry it on was obliged to make great
concessions to his people. In the other nation, the ruler oppressed
the workers, instead, and drove them mad with his cruelty. So that,
not long after the end of the war, there was a great rebellion among
the people who had been so long oppressed, and their government was
overthrown."

Back on the earth the four investigators reflected on this in
amazement. The case was wonderfully like that of Russia after the
great war. Perhaps--

"Immediately the other nation forced its soldiers to fight the
victorious rebels. But at home the workers had tasted of power. Many
refused to work at all; and one day, behold, there were two
rebellions instead of one! And within a very short time the whole
world was governed by--the working class!"

So this was what the Venusians had meant when they wrote that Sanus
was ruled by the workers!

"What became of these rebellions?" Rolla asked, little understanding
what it meant, but curious anyhow.

"Devastation!" stated Somat solemnly. He waved a hand, to include
all that lay within the ruined city. "Not altogether because of the
workers, although they were scarcely fit for ruling but because the
former rulers and others of that kind, who liked to oppose their
wills upon others, saw fit to start a fresh rebellion. Conflict
followed conflict; sometimes workers were in power, and sometimes
aristocrats. But the fighting ended not until"--he drew a deep
breath--"until there were none left to fight!"

"Ye mean," demanded Rolla incredulously, "that your people killed
themselves off in this fashion?"

"Aye," sorrowfully. "There were a few of us--they called us 'the
middle class'--who urged equality. We wanted a government in which
all classes were represented fairly; what we called a democracy.
Once the experiment was started, but it failed.

"Saw ye the skeletons in the streets?" he went on. "'Twas a dreadful
sight, those last few days. I were but a lad, yet I remember it all
too well." He paused, then broke out fiercely: "I tell ye that I saw
brother slay brother, father slay son, son slay mother, in those
last days!
