reviving the past and summoning up the forms and faces that were about
me in my former life. It was in vain. There was no longer any life in
them. For nearly one hundred years the stars had been looking down on
Edith Bartlett's grave, and the graves of all my generation.

The past was dead, crushed beneath a century's weight, and from the
present I was shut out. There was no place for me anywhere. I was
neither dead nor properly alive.

"Forgive me for following you."

I looked up. Edith stood in the door of the subterranean room,
regarding me smilingly, but with eyes full of sympathetic distress.

"Send me away if I am intruding on you," she said; "but we saw that you
were out of spirits, and you know you promised to let me know if that
were so. You have not kept your word."

I rose and came to the door, trying to smile, but making, I fancy,
rather sorry work of it, for the sight of her loveliness brought home
to me the more poignantly the cause of my wretchedness.

"I was feeling a little lonely, that is all," I said. "Has it never
occurred to you that my position is so much more utterly alone than any
human being's ever was before that a new word is really needed to
describe it?"

"Oh, you must not talk that way--you must not let yourself feel that
way--you must not!" she exclaimed, with moistened eyes. "Are we not
your friends? It is your own fault if you will not let us be. You need
not be lonely."

"You are good to me beyond my power of understanding," I said, "but
don't you suppose that I know it is pity merely, sweet pity, but pity
only. I should be a fool not to know that I cannot seem to you as other
men of your own generation do, but as some strange uncanny being, a
stranded creature of an unknown sea, whose forlornness touches your
compassion despite its grotesqueness. I have been so foolish, you were
so kind, as to almost forget that this must needs be so, and to fancy I
might in time become naturalized, as we used to say, in this age, so as
to feel like one of you and to seem to you like the other men about
you. But Mr. Barton's sermon taught me how vain such a fancy is, how
great the gulf between us must seem to you."

"Oh that miserable sermon!" she exclaimed, fairly crying now in her
sympathy, "I wanted you not to hear it. What does he know of you? He
has read in old musty books about your times, that is all. What do you
care about him, to let yourself be vexed by anything he said? Isn't it
anything to you, that we who know you feel differently? Don't you care
more about what we think of you than what he does who never saw you?
Oh, Mr. West! you don't know, you can't think, how it makes me feel to
see you so forlorn. I can't have it so. What can I say to you? How can
I convince you how different our feeling for you is from what you
think?"

As before, in that other crisis of my fate when she had come to me, she
extended her hands toward me in a gesture of helpfulness, and, as then,
I caught and held them in my own; her bosom heaved with strong emotion,
and little tremors in the fingers which I clasped emphasized the depth
of her feeling. In her face, pity contended in a sort of divine spite
against the obstacles which reduced it to impotence. Womanly compassion
surely never wore a guise more lovely.

Such beauty and such goodness quite melted me, and it seemed that the
only fitting response I could make was to tell her just the truth. Of
course I had not a spark of hope, but on the other hand I had no fear
that she would be angry. She was too pitiful for that. So I said
presently, "It is very ungrateful in me not to be satisfied with such
kindness as you have shown me, and are showing me now. But are you so
blind as not to see why they are not enough to make me happy? Don't you
see that it is because I have been mad enough to love you?"

At my last words she blushed deeply and her eyes fell before mine, but
she made no effort to withdraw her hands from my clasp. For some
moments she stood so, panting a little. Then blushing deeper than ever,
but with a dazzling smile, she looked up.

"Are you sure it is not you who are blind?" she said.

That was all, but it was enough, for it told me that, unaccountable,
incredible as it was, this radiant daughter of a golden age had
bestowed upon me not alone her pity, but her love. Still, I half
believed I must be under some blissful hallucination even as I clasped
her in my arms. "If I am beside myself," I cried, "let me remain so."

"It is I whom you must think beside myself," she panted, escaping from
my arms when I had barely tasted the sweetness of her lips. "Oh! oh!
what must you think of me almost to throw myself in the arms of one I
have known but a week? I did not mean that you should find it out so
soon, but I was so sorry for you I forgot what I was saying. No, no;
you must not touch me again till you know who I am. After that, sir,
you shall apologize to me very humbly for thinking, as I know you do,
that I have been over quick to fall in love with you. After you know
who I am, you will be bound to confess that it was nothing less than my
duty to fall in love with you at first sight, and that no girl of
proper feeling in my place could do otherwise."

As may be supposed, I would have been quite content to waive
explanations, but Edith was resolute that there should be no more
kisses until she had been vindicated from all suspicion of precipitancy
in the bestowal of her affections, and I was fain to follow the lovely
enigma into the house. Having come where her mother was, she blushingly
whispered something in her ear and ran away, leaving us together.

It then appeared that, strange as my experience had been, I was now
first to know what was perhaps its strangest feature. From Mrs. Leete I
learned that Edith was the great-granddaughter of no other than my lost
love, Edith Bartlett. After mourning me for fourteen years, she had
made a marriage of esteem, and left a son who had been Mrs. Leete's
father. Mrs. Leete had never seen her grandmother, but had heard much
of her, and, when her daughter was born, gave her the name of Edith.
This fact might have tended to increase the interest which the girl
took, as she grew up, in all that concerned her ancestress, and
especially the tragic story of the supposed death of the lover, whose
wife she expected to be, in the conflagration of his house. It was a
tale well calculated to touch the sympathy of a romantic girl, and the
fact that the blood of the unfortunate heroine was in her own veins
naturally heightened Edith's interest in it. A portrait of Edith
Bartlett and some of her papers, including a packet of my own letters,
were among the family heirlooms. The picture represented a very
beautiful young woman about whom it was easy to imagine all manner of
tender and romantic things. My letters gave Edith some material for
forming a distinct idea of my personality, and both together sufficed
to make the sad old story very real to her. She used to tell her
parents, half jestingly, that she would never marry till she found a
lover like Julian West, and there were none such nowadays.

Now all this, of course, was merely the daydreaming of a girl whose
mind had never been taken up by a love affair of her own, and would
have had no serious consequence but for the discovery that morning of
the buried vault in her father's garden and the revelation of the
identity of its inmate. For when the apparently lifeless form had been
borne into the house, the face in the locket found upon the breast was
instantly recognized as that of Edith Bartlett, and by that fact, taken
in connection with the other circumstances, they knew that I was no
other than Julian West. Even had there been no thought, as at first
there was not, of my resuscitation, Mrs. Leete said she believed that
this event would have affected her daughter in a critical and life-long
manner. The presumption of some subtle ordering of destiny, involving
her fate with mine, would under all circumstances have possessed an
irresistible fascination for almost any woman.

Whether when I came back to life a few hours afterward, and from the
first seemed to turn to her with a peculiar dependence and to find a
special solace in her company, she had been too quick in giving her
love at the first sign of mine, I could now, her mother said, judge for
myself. If I thought so, I must remember that this, after all, was the
twentieth and not the nineteenth century, and love was, no doubt, now
quicker in growth, as well as franker in utterance than then.

From Mrs. Leete I went to Edith. When I found her, it was first of all
to take her by both hands and stand a long time in rapt contemplation
of her face. As I gazed, the memory of that other Edith, which had been
affected as with a benumbing shock by the tremendous experience that
had parted us, revived, and my heart was dissolved with tender and
pitiful emotions, but also very blissful ones. For she who brought to
me so poignantly the sense of my loss was to make that loss good. It
was as if from her eyes Edith Bartlett looked into mine, and smiled
consolation to me. My fate was not alone the strangest, but the most
fortunate that ever befell a man. A double miracle had been wrought for
me. I had not been stranded upon the shore of this strange world to
find myself alone and companionless. My love, whom I had dreamed lost,
had been reembodied for my consolation. When at last, in an ecstasy of
gratitude and tenderness, I folded the lovely girl in my arms, the two
Ediths were blended in my thought, nor have they ever since been
clearly distinguished. I was not long in finding that on Edith's part
there was a corresponding confusion of identities. Never, surely, was
there between freshly united lovers a stranger talk than ours that
afternoon. She seemed more anxious to have me speak of Edith Bartlett
than of herself, of how I had loved her than how I loved herself,
rewarding my fond words concerning another woman with tears and tender
smiles and pressures of the hand.

"You must not love me too much for myself," she said. "I shall be very
jealous for her. I shall not let you forget her. I am going to tell you
something which you may think strange. Do you not believe that spirits
sometimes come back to the world to fulfill some work that lay near
their hearts? What if I were to tell you that I have sometimes thought
that her spirit lives in me--that Edith Bartlett, not Edith Leete, is
my real name. I cannot know it; of course none of us can know who we
really are; but I can feel it. Can you wonder that I have such a
feeling, seeing how my life was affected by her and by you, even before
you came. So you see you need not trouble to love me at all, if only
you are true to her. I shall not be likely to be jealous."

Dr. Leete had gone out that afternoon, and I did not have an interview
with him till later. He was not, apparently, wholly unprepared for the
intelligence I conveyed, and shook my hand heartily.

"Under any ordinary circumstances, Mr. West, I should say that this
step had been taken on rather short acquaintance; but these are
decidedly not ordinary circumstances. In fairness, perhaps I ought to
tell you," he added smilingly, "that while I cheerfully consent to the
proposed arrangement, you must not feel too much indebted to me, as I
judge my consent is a mere formality. From the moment the secret of the
locket was out, it had to be, I fancy. Why, bless me, if Edith had not
been there to redeem her great-grandmother's pledge, I really apprehend
that Mrs. Leete's loyalty to me would have suffered a severe strain."

That evening the garden was bathed in moonlight, and till midnight
Edith and I wandered to and fro there, trying to grow accustomed to our
happiness.

"What should I have done if you had not cared for me?" she exclaimed.
"I was afraid you were not going to. What should I have done then, when
I felt I was consecrated to you! As soon as you came back to life, I
was as sure as if she had told me that I was to be to you what she
could not be, but that could only be if you would let me. Oh, how I
wanted to tell you that morning, when you felt so terribly strange
among us, who I was, but dared not open my lips about that, or let
father or mother----"

"That must have been what you would not let your father tell me!" I
exclaimed, referring to the conversation I had overheard as I came out
of my trance.

"Of course it was," Edith laughed. "Did you only just guess that?
Father being only a man, thought that it would make you feel among
friends to tell you who we were. He did not think of me at all. But
mother knew what I meant, and so I had my way. I could never have
looked you in the face if you had known who I was. It would have been
forcing myself on you quite too boldly. I am afraid you think I did
that to-day, as it was. I am sure I did not mean to, for I know girls
were expected to hide their feelings in your day, and I was dreadfully
afraid of shocking you. Ah me, how hard it must have been for them to
have always had to conceal their love like a fault. Why did they think
it such a shame to love any one till they had been given permission? It
is so odd to think of waiting for permission to fall in love. Was it
because men in those days were angry when girls loved them? That is not
the way women would feel, I am sure, or men either, I think, now. I
don't understand it at all. That will be one of the curious things
about the women of those days that you will have to explain to me. I
don't believe Edith Bartlett was so foolish as the others."

After sundry ineffectual attempts at parting, she finally insisted that
we must say good night. I was about to imprint upon her lips the
positively last kiss, when she said, with an indescribable archness:

"One thing troubles me. Are you sure that you quite forgive Edith
Bartlett for marrying any one else? The books that have come down to us
make out lovers of your time more jealous than fond, and that is what
makes me ask. It would be a great relief to me if I could feel sure
that you were not in the least jealous of my great-grandfather for
marrying your sweetheart. May I tell my great-grandmother's picture
when I go to my room that you quite forgive her for proving false to
you?"

Will the reader believe it, this coquettish quip, whether the speaker
herself had any idea of it or not, actually touched and with the
touching cured a preposterous ache of something like jealousy which I
had been vaguely conscious of ever since Mrs. Leete had told me of
Edith Bartlett's marriage. Even while I had been holding Edith
Bartlett's great-granddaughter in my arms, I had not, till this moment,
so illogical are some of our feelings, distinctly realized that but for
that marriage I could not have done so. The absurdity of this frame of
mind could only be equalled by the abruptness with which it dissolved
as Edith's roguish query cleared the fog from my perceptions. I laughed
as I kissed her.

"You may assure her of my entire forgiveness," I said, "although if it
had been any man but your great-grandfather whom she married, it would
have been a very different matter."

On reaching my chamber that night I did not open the musical telephone
that I might be lulled to sleep with soothing tunes, as had become my
habit. For once my thoughts made better music than even twentieth
century orchestras discourse, and it held me enchanted till well toward
morning, when I fell asleep.



Chapter 28

"It's a little after the time you told me to wake you, sir. You did not
come out of it as quick as common, sir."

The voice was the voice of my man Sawyer. I started bolt upright in bed
and stared around. I was in my underground chamber. The mellow light of
the lamp which always burned in the room when I occupied it illumined
the familiar walls and furnishings. By my bedside, with the glass of
sherry in his hand which Dr. Pillsbury prescribed on first rousing from
a mesmeric sleep, by way of awakening the torpid physical functions,
stood Sawyer.

"Better take this right off, sir," he said, as I stared blankly at him.
"You look kind of flushed like, sir, and you need it."

I tossed off the liquor and began to realize what had happened to me.
It was, of course, very plain. All that about the twentieth century had
been a dream. I had but dreamed of that enlightened and care-free race
of men and their ingeniously simple institutions, of the glorious new
Boston with its domes and pinnacles, its gardens and fountains, and its
universal reign of comfort. The amiable family which I had learned to
know so well, my genial host and Mentor, Dr. Leete, his wife, and their
daughter, the second and more beauteous Edith, my betrothed--these,
too, had been but figments of a vision.

For a considerable time I remained in the attitude in which this
conviction had come over me, sitting up in bed gazing at vacancy,
absorbed in recalling the scenes and incidents of my fantastic
experience. Sawyer, alarmed at my looks, was meanwhile anxiously
inquiring what was the matter with me. Roused at length by his
importunities to a recognition of my surroundings, I pulled myself
together with an effort and assured the faithful fellow that I was all
right. "I have had an extraordinary dream, that's all, Sawyer," I said,
"a most-ex-traor-dinary dream."

I dressed in a mechanical way, feeling light-headed and oddly uncertain
of myself, and sat down to the coffee and rolls which Sawyer was in the
habit of providing for my refreshment before I left the house. The
morning newspaper lay by the plate. I took it up, and my eye fell on
the date, May 31, 1887. I had known, of course, from the moment I
opened my eyes that my long and detailed experience in another century
had been a dream, and yet it was startling to have it so conclusively
demonstrated that the world was but a few hours older than when I had
lain down to sleep.

Glancing at the table of contents at the head of the paper, which
reviewed the news of the morning, I read the following summary:


FOREIGN AFFAIRS.--The impending war between France and Germany. The
French Chambers asked for new military credits to meet Germany's
increase of her army. Probability that all Europe will be involved in
case of war.--Great suffering among the unemployed in London. They
demand work. Monster demonstration to be made. The authorities
uneasy.--Great strikes in Belgium. The government preparing to repress
outbreaks. Shocking facts in regard to the employment of girls in
Belgium coal mines.--Wholesale evictions in Ireland.

"HOME AFFAIRS.--The epidemic of fraud unchecked. Embezzlement of half a
million in New York.--Misappropriation of a trust fund by executors.
Orphans left penniless.--Clever system of thefts by a bank teller;
$50,000 gone.--The coal barons decide to advance the price of coal and
reduce production.--Speculators engineering a great wheat corner at
Chicago.--A clique forcing up the price of coffee.--Enormous land-grabs
of Western syndicates.--Revelations of shocking corruption among
Chicago officials. Systematic bribery.--The trials of the Boodle
aldermen to go on at New York.--Large failures of business houses.
Fears of a business crisis.--A large grist of burglaries and
larcenies.--A woman murdered in cold blood for her money at New
Haven.--A householder shot by a burglar in this city last night.--A man
shoots himself in Worcester because he could not get work. A large
family left destitute.--An aged couple in New Jersey commit suicide
rather than go to the poor-house.--Pitiable destitution among the women
wage-workers in the great cities.--Startling growth of illiteracy in
Massachusetts.--More insane asylums wanted.--Decoration Day addresses.
Professor Brown's oration on the moral grandeur of nineteenth century
civilization."

It was indeed the nineteenth century to which I had awaked; there could
be no kind of doubt about that. Its complete microcosm this summary of
the day's news had presented, even to that last unmistakable touch of
fatuous self-complacency. Coming after such a damning indictment of the
age as that one day's chronicle of world-wide bloodshed, greed, and
tyranny, was a bit of cynicism worthy of Mephistopheles, and yet of all
whose eyes it had met this morning I was, perhaps, the only one who
perceived the cynicism, and but yesterday I should have perceived it no
more than the others. That strange dream it was which had made all the
difference. For I know not how long, I forgot my surroundings after
this, and was again in fancy moving in that vivid dream-world, in that
glorious city, with its homes of simple comfort and its gorgeous public
palaces. Around me were again faces unmarred by arrogance or servility,
by envy or greed, by anxious care or feverish ambition, and stately
forms of men and women who had never known fear of a fellow man or
depended on his favor, but always, in the words of that sermon which
still rang in my ears, had "stood up straight before God."

With a profound sigh and a sense of irreparable loss, not the less
poignant that it was a loss of what had never really been, I roused at
last from my reverie, and soon after left the house.

A dozen times between my door and Washington Street I had to stop and
pull myself together, such power had been in that vision of the Boston
of the future to make the real Boston strange. The squalor and
malodorousness of the town struck me, from the moment I stood upon the
street, as facts I had never before observed. But yesterday, moreover,
it had seemed quite a matter of course that some of my fellow-citizens
should wear silks, and others rags, that some should look well fed, and
others hungry. Now on the contrary the glaring disparities in the dress
and condition of the men and women who brushed each other on the
sidewalks shocked me at every step, and yet more the entire
indifference which the prosperous showed to the plight of the
unfortunate. Were these human beings, who could behold the wretchedness
of their fellows without so much as a change of countenance? And yet,
all the while, I knew well that it was I who had changed, and not my
contemporaries. I had dreamed of a city whose people fared all alike as
children of one family and were one another's keepers in all things.

Another feature of the real Boston, which assumed the extraordinary
effect of strangeness that marks familiar things seen in a new light,
was the prevalence of advertising. There had been no personal
advertising in the Boston of the twentieth century, because there was
no need of any, but here the walls of the buildings, the windows, the
broadsides of the newspapers in every hand, the very pavements,
everything in fact in sight, save the sky, were covered with the
appeals of individuals who sought, under innumerable pretexts, to
attract the contributions of others to their support. However the
wording might vary, the tenor of all these appeals was the same:

"Help John Jones. Never mind the rest. They are frauds. I, John Jones,
am the right one. Buy of me. Employ me. Visit me. Hear me, John Jones.
Look at me. Make no mistake, John Jones is the man and nobody else. Let
the rest starve, but for God's sake remember John Jones!"

Whether the pathos or the moral repulsiveness of the spectacle most
impressed me, so suddenly become a stranger in my own city, I know not.
