TWEERS.--John B. Himberg, Frederick City, Md.--This invention relates to
a new tweers, which is so arranged that the center part or ring can be
easily taken out, whenever desired, but not accidentally, by a hook or
stirrer, and that it can be easily cleaned and taken apart whenever
desired, and that it may conduct a strong blast of air to the fire.

PUNCH.--C. D. Flesche, New York city.--This invention consists in
arranging a punch in such a manner that it consists of two parts, which
are firmly connected together for cutting the metal, while for bending
the same, an inner sliding punch will be moved out of the stationary
cutting punch, thus making both operations by one instrument, and
avoiding the removal of the article from the cutting to the bonding
punch, which was heretofore necessary.

RAILROAD CHAIR.--Leander Pollock, Matteawan, N.Y.--This invention
consists in making the chair of two pieces, each piece consisting of one
cheek and of a portion of the case. When the two pieces are connected,
the base of one rests upon the base of the other, the line of division
between the two bases being inclined so that as the rail presses upon
the upper base, it, will tend to force the same downward on the incline,
whereby the two cheeks will be brought together.

FIRE LADDER.--Johan Blomgren, Galesburg, Ill.--The main feature in this
invention is a telescopic tube, expanded or closed by a coil fitting
within it, and worked by a toothed wheel.

HARVESTER.--Francis C. Coppage, Terre Haute, Ind.--The object of my
invention is to render more simple and effective the machinery for
operating and adjusting the cutter bar and the reel of harvesters.

BOAT-DETACHING APPARATUS.--David L. Cohen, Pensacola, Fla.--The object
of this invention is to furnish a device by which a ship's boat can
be readily shipped or launched at sea, without danger of capsizing or
fouling.

DEVICE FOR HITHING HORSES.--Samuel Galbraith, New Orleans, La.--This
invention is a neat, cheap, and durable device, designed to be attached
to halters used in hitching horses, mules, etc., to prevent their being
thrown, hung, or injured.

HYDROSTATIC MACHINE.--Dr. J. R. Cole, Kenton Station, Tenn.--The object
of this invention is to construct a machine which, by the application of
but little power, will raise a stream of water to any desired hight, to
furnish motive power for machinery or for other purposes.

FENCE POST.--Robert Ramsay, New Wilmington, Pa.--In this invention the
bottom of the post is supported between two parallel sills a short
distance from the ground, the post being dovetailed and held by keys
passing across the sills, and being adjusted high or low, or at any
inclination, by making the keys larger or smaller, or of different
sizes.

SELF-LOADING EXCAVATOR.--Benj. Slusser, Sidney, Ohio.--In this invention
a pinion, attached to the forward axle is made to elevate the plow, when
desired, and at the same instant to ungear and stop the endless apron
carrier that conveys the dirt from the plow to the cart. A new method of
instantly unloading the cart, and setting it again to receive another
load, is shown.

WASHING MACHINE.--J. Q. Leffingwell, Nevada, Iowa.--This invention
relates to an improvement in washing machines, and consists of a
vibrating semi-cylindrical box operated by a means of a lever handle and
gearing.

SCAFFOLD FOR BUILDERS, ETC.--John E. Bliss, Oxford, Ind.--This invention
has for its object to furnish an improved scaffold for the use
of carpenters, masons, painters, etc., which shall be simple in
construction, strong, durable and easily adjusted to any desired hight.

PLOW.--Harvey Briggs, Smithland, Ky.--This invention has for its object
to furnish an improved plow for breaking up sod or prairie land, which
shall be strong and durable in construction and effective m operation.

CORN PLOW.--John Snyder, Williamsfield, Ohio.--This invention has for
its object to furnish an improved plow for plowing and hoeing corn,
which shall be simple and strong in construction and will do its work
well.

SELF-RAKING ATTACHMENT FOR REAPERS.--James H. Glass and Albert J Glass,
McGregor, Iowa.--This invention has for its object to furnish an
improved attachment for reapers of that class in which the rakes act as
beaters, in the place of a reel, and are made to descend occasionally to
sweep the bundle from the platform, so that the third, fourth, sixth, or
any other desired rake may sweep the platform and deliver the bundle.

SKY ROCKET.--John W. Hadfield, Newtown, N. Y.--This invention relates to
a modification of an improvement in sky rockets for which letters patent
were granted to this inventor bearing date Nov. 28, 1865. The original
improvement consisted in a novel application of wings to the body or
"carcass" of the rocket, whereby the use of the ordinary guide stick was
rendered unnecessary and the rockets rendered capable of being packed
for transportation much more compactly than when provided with sticks.
The present invention also consists in a novel manner of attaching the
wings to the body or "carcass" of the rocket, whereby the same advantage
is obtained as hitherto, at a less cost of manufacture.

TAIL PIECE FOR VIOLINS.--James Thoms, South Boston, Mass.--This
invention relates to a new and improved manner of attaching the E-string
to the tail piece of a violin, whereby a comparatively small portion of
said string is wasted in case of breakage.

HAME TUG.--James E. Covert, Townsendville, N. Y.--This hame tug,
according to the present invention, is made of a strip of malleable iron
or other suitable material, perforated or provided with V-Shaped holes
or slots having a center tongue piece, for the reception of a V-Shaped
block fixed at one end of the trace, by means of which block the trace
is engaged with the hame tug, where through a suitably arranged spring
slot that strikes against the end of the tongue to the said V-slots, the
block is held firmly in place, and consequently the trace fastened to
the hame tug.

CENTER BOARD.--F. J. McFarland, San Francisco, Cal.--This invention
relates to the location of the center boards of boats and sailing craft
of all kinds, but is designed more particularly for freight carrying
vessels. It consists simply in employing two center boards and locating
the same at the extreme ends of the hull.

MUSICAL INSTRUMENT.--George W. Van Dusen, Williamsburgh, N.Y.--This
invention consists in a novel connection and arrangement of levers
and valves between the plane of movement of the perforated surface or
surfaces, and an airchest or chests, and the keys or levers for opening
the valves to the reeds or for operating any other mechanism suitable
for producing tones, whereby through such perforated surface or surfaces
the mechanism forming the connection between it and the sounding
mechanism will be operated through the perforations to produce the sound
or note or notes desired, of whatever length such notes or sounds are to
be.

COMBINED SEAT AND DESK.--Rev Allen H. Burn, May's Landing, N. J.--The
present invention relates to the combination of a desk or lid with a
seat or bench, such lid or desk being hinged to the back of the seat in
such a manner as to be raised or lowered at pleasure, and when raised,
supported in position by means of supporting bars properly applied
thereto.

MACHINE FOR REFITTING CONICAL VALVES.--Charles F. Hall, Brooklyn. N.
Y.--This invention relates to a device by which the conical stop valves
of gas, steam, and water works may be refitted or repaired when from any
cause they are rendered leaky and unfit for use.

GRAIN-BAND CUTTER AND FORK.--E. G. Bullis, Manchester, Iowa.--This
invention has for its object to furnish an improved instrument by means
of which the bands of the grain bundles may be cut at the same time that
the bundles are pitched to the person who feeds them to the threshing
machine, and by the same operation.

PROPELLING VESSELS, ETC.--Robert R. Spedden and Daniel F. Stafford,
Astoria, Oregon.--This invention has for its object to furnish an
improved means by which the motion of the waves may be used for
propelling vessels or working pumps or other machinery.

MAILBAG FASTENER.--S. Denison, Portlandville, N.Y.--This invention has
for its object to furnish an improved mailbag fastening by the use of
which the mouth of the bag will be closed securely, and which may be
operated, in closing and opening the bag, in less time and with less
labor, than the fastenings now in use.

KNIFE AND FORK CLEANER.--John Merritt, New York city.--This invention
has for its object to furnish an improved machine by means of which
knives and forks may be quickly and thoroughly cleaned.

CHURN.--Thomas Bisbing, Buckstown, Penn.--This invention has for its
object to furnish an improved churn conveniently and easily operated,
and which will do its work quickly and thoroughly.

SAW BUCK.--Henry J. Dill, Cummington, Mass.--This invention relates to
the manner in which a stick of fire wood, or cord wood, is held fast
or secured in the saw buck for the purpose of sawing it into suitable
lengths, and it consists in arranging adjustable toothed clamps for
holding the stick, which clamps are brought in contact with it by
bearing upon a treddle with the foot.

PLATFORM SCALES.--D. Hazzard, Milton, Del.--This invention relates to a
new and improved method of constructing scales of the platform kind, and
it consists in attaching a spiral spring to a spindle, to the top end of
which spindle the platform is secured, and to the bottom end of which a
rod and index finger is attached so that when an article, to be weighed,
is placed on the platform, the weight of the article will act upon the
spring and be indicated by the finger.

WASHING MACHINE.--S. W. Curtiss, Sugar Grove, Pa.--This invention
relates to a new and improved method of constructing washing machines,
and consists in the arrangement of three fluted revolving rollers in a
suitable washing box or vessel.

COMBINED TRY SQUARE AND BEVEL.--Samuel N. Batchelder, Prairie du Chien,
Wis.--This invention consists in attaching the blade of a try square
to the stock in such a manner that it can be set and fastened at any
desired angle by operating a hook slide and set screws.

STEAM ENGINE.--J. F. Troxel, Bloomsville, Ohio.--This invention relates
to a new and improved method of constructing steam engines, whereby the
same are greatly increased in power and effectiveness, and consists in
operating a number of pistons in one cylinder.

STOVE.--T. W. Wisner, Howell, Mich.--This invention relates to a new and
improved method of constructing those stoves which are used for drying
purposes or for heating water, or steaming vegetables and for all other
purposes of a similar nature, and the invention consists in rendering
the stove portable by providing for supporting the same on truck wheels
which allows of its being transported from place to place, as may be
required.

FURNACE HOT AIR BLAST.--Richard Long, Chillicothe, Ohio.--This invention
relates to a new and improved method of constructing and arranging
the air pipes for heating the air blast for furnaces for smelting
and reducing the ores in the manufacture of iron, having particular
reference to the materials of which the air pipe is formed, the
method of its construction, and also to the materials and method of
construction of the supporting walls.

PRINTING POINTERS.--R. W. Macgowan, New York city.--This invention
relates to a new and improved application of pointers to printing
presses for registering the sheets of paper as they are fed to the
press. Hitherto these pointers have been operated automatically, from
the running parts of the press allowed to remain in an elevated or
nearly upright position, and through the sheet until the fingers or
nippers of the cylinder arrive in proper position to grasp the sheet, at
which time the pointers are drawn down and the sheet released, so that
it may be connected with the cylinder, and related with the same in
order to receive the impression. This improvement consists in applying a
spring or an equivalent weight to the pointers, the latter being pivoted
at their lower ends, or attached to axes and all constructed and
arranged in such a manner that the pointers will hold the sheets
properly in position on the feed board, and the nippers of the cylinder
allowed to draw the sheet off from the points on account of the latter
yielding or being allowed to be drawn down under the slight pull of the
sheet, the springs or weights throwing the points back to their original
position as soon as the sheet is withdrawn.

CLEANER FOR LAMP CHIMNEYS, ETC.--R. B. Musson, Champaign, Ill.--This
invention relates to an improved cleaner for lamp chimneys, bottles, and
other hollow ware.

SAWYER'S RULE.--Thomas Carter, Louisville, Ky.--This invention relates
to an improved sawyer's rule, and consists of a rule on which is a scale
showing at a glance the number of boards or planks, of any desired
thickness, which can be sawn from a log of any given diameter.

WINDOW SCREEN.--A. W. Griffith, Roxbury, Mass.--This invention relates
to an improvement in window screens, and consists in a screen wound
round a spring roller at foot of a window, and attached to the bottom of
the lower sash so that on opening the window the screen opens with it,
admitting the air but excluding insects, and on closing the sash the
screen winds up itself.

SHOVEL PLOW, CULTIVATOR, ETC.--P. Atkinson Ross, Harveys, Pa.--This
invention has for its object to improve the construction of single and
double-shovel plows, cultivators, etc., to enable them to be readily
adjusted for use upon sidehills or level ground, so that the handles may
be secured in nearly a level position, while the plow is held in the
best position for doing the work properly.

SKY ROCKETS.--John W. Hadfield, East Williamsburgh, N. Y.--This
invention consists in dispensing with the long stick or guide which is
now attached to sky rockets in order to insure a straight upward flight
of the same in the air, and using instead a plurality of short guides,
whereby several important advantages are obtained, to wit: the packing
of the rockets in a small space, so as to economise in transportation,
the forming of a stand or support for the rocket, so that no fixture of
any kind will be required when they are to be fired or "set off," and
lastly, the obtaining of an efficient guide to insure the straight
flight of the rockets upward in the air.

CATCHING THE OXYDE OF ZINC.--G. C. Hall, Brooklyn, N. Y.--This invention
relates to an improved means for catching the oxyde of zinc, as it
escapes with the fumes and gases from roasting zinc, or zinc ore.
Hitherto the oxyde of zinc has been caught and retained by forcing the
fumes and gases from the roasting ore into a large bag or receptacle
composed of cotton cloth or other porous material, which will admit
of the gases and air passing it, but not the oxyde, the latter being
retained within the bag, and, by its superior gravity, falling to the
bottom thereof and settling in teats or pendent receptacles at the
bottom of the bag, from which it is removed from time to time. This
invention has for its object the dispensing with the large bag, which
is very expensive--the gases from the ore affecting the same so that it
rots in a very short time, and soon becomes ruptured under the blows
which are given it to cause the oxyde which adheres to the sides of
the bag to drop into the teats or receptacles made to receive it. The
invention consists in having the fumes and gases from the roasting zinc
or zinc ore forced into a close building, provided with openings or
apertures, over which screens are placed, constructed in such a manner
and of such materials as to admit of the air and gases passing through
them, but not the oxyde.

FERRULE.--Archibald Shaw, Philadelphia, Pa.--This invention relates to a
new and improved ferrule for the handles of tools and other implements,
and it consists in providing the interior of the ferrule with oblique
spurs or projections, disposed or arranged in such a manner as to admit
of the ferrule being driven on the handle and at the same time prevent
it from casually slipping off therefrom. The object of the invention is
to obviate the necessity of tacks or screws being used to secure the
ferrule on the handle, as well as the pinching of the same externally to
form a burr to sink into the handle to effect the same end.

SUCTION OF VACUUM PUMP AND BLOWER.--John Doyle and Timothy A. Martin,
New York City.--This invention consists in arranging valves and air
passages with a hollow cylinder or drum having an oscillating movement,
and provided with a chamber or chambers to receive water, mercury or
other fluid, whereby an exceedingly simple and compact pump or blower is
obtained, one not liable to get out of repair or become deranged by use.

MACHINE FOR REGSTERING NUMBERS FOR ODOMETERS.--Henry F. Hart, New York
city.--This invention relates to an improved machine or apparatus
for registering numbers applicable to odometers or measurements of
quantities of all kinds, such as the numbers of barrels of flour,
bushels of grain or any other commodity that requires a tally or record
of the quantity packed, stored, weighed, or handled in any manner.

DITCHING MACHINE.--A. H. and P. S. Whitacre, Morrow, Ohio.--This
invention relates to an improvement in the construction of a machine for
cutting ditches suitable for laying tile for draining lands, or pipe of
any kind, and consists in a sled worked by tackle and supporting a frame
carrying the machinery, in such manner that the frame can be raised and
lowered to cut the ditch to any required depth.

WINDOW SHADE RACK AND PULLEY FASTENING.--Wm. H. Woods, Philadelphia,
Pa.--This invention relates to an improvement in constructing a
fastening for window shades and consists in a metal rack to be attached
vertically as usual to the side of the window frame for holding the
cord connected with the shade by means of a lever dog that works in a
