has for its object to improve the construction of that class of washing
boilers in which the clothes are washed by the water as it boils being
projected down upon the clothes to percolate through them, and thus
remove the dirt. And it consists in the construction and combination of
the various parts.

TOY VELOCIPEDE.--H.C. Alexander, New York city.--This invention has for
its object to furnish an improved toy velocipede.

BRICK MACHINE.--Thomas Smurfit, Davisville, Mich.--This invention has
for its object to furnish an improved brick machine, which shall be
strong, durable, simple in construction, and effective in operation,
making the bricks rapidly and well.

TRUNKS, ETC.--Thomas B. Peddie, Newark, N.J.--This invention has for its
object to improve the construction of trunks, valises, portmanteaus,
pellesiers, traveling bags, etc., so as to adapt them to receive and
carry a portfolio in such a way that while carrying it safely, it may be
conveniently removed when required for use.

SEED PLANTER.--David C. Woods, Waxahatchie, Texas.--This invention has
for its object the construction of a seed planter, which will deposit
the seeds in the requisite quantities and the proper distances apart,
and which will cover and mark the hills, so that a plowman will not be
at a loss where to start at the commencement of a new row, and after
having passed around tree stumps or other obstructions, as he can always
see the marks on the preceding rows.

WASHING MACHINE.--Joseph Balsley, Bedford, Ind.--This invention has
for its object to improve the construction of the machine known as the
"Egyptian Washing Machine," so as to make it more convenient in use and
more effective in operation.

DENTAL IMPRESSION CUP FOR LOWER JAW.--Robert V. Jenks, Paterson,
N.J.--This invention has for its object to furnish an improved
impression cup for use in taking a cast of the lower jaw, to form a
model of said jaw to fit the plate upon, which shall be so constructed
as to enable the dentist to take a more perfect cast than is possible
with impression cups constructed in the ordinary manner.

SHOW CARD SUSPENSION RING.--H.S. Griffiths, New York city.--This
invention has for its object to furnish an improved suspension ring for
suspending show cards, which shall be simple in construction and easily
attached to the cards, and which shall, at the same time, be so formed
as to take a firm hold upon the card, and not be liable to tear out.

REFRIGERATOR.--Samuel Ayres, Danville, Ky.--This invention relates to
improvements in refrigerators, and consists in certain improvements in
the construction and arrangement for excluding the external atmosphere,
distributing the cold by means of the ice, and also the water resulting
therefrom; for economizing space, and for providing convenient access to
all the different parts.

CINDER AND DUST ARRESTER FOR CAR WINDOWS.--Edwin Norton, Brooklyn,
N.Y.--This invention relates to improvements in apparatus for preventing
the cinders and dust from being blown into the cars, when in motion,
through the open windows, and consists in the application to the cars
at the sides of the windows, on the exterior, by hinging thereto or
by other equivalent connection, small guard plates of wood or other
substance to project outwardly in a right or other suitable or preferred
angle, at the side of the window, to arrest the cinder and dust moving
rearward alongside of the car, and conduct it below the windows, the
said guard plates being arranged so that those on the side of the
windows in the direction of the movement of the train may be adjusted to
the operating position while the others are folded back against the side
of the car.

HOSE COUPLING.--William J. Osbourne, New York city.--This invention
relates to a new and useful improvement in couplings for hose pipe,
whereby the parts of a hose are united in a more perfect manner than by
the ordinary hose coupling.

SAW GUIDE.--John Trunick, Muscatine, Iowa.--This invention relates to
a new and useful improvement in means for guiding circular saws and
keeping them to the true saw line.

SQUARE, GAGE, AND LEVEL.--Josiah Potts, Milwaukee, Wis.--This invention
relates to a new and useful improvement in a tool for mechanics' use and
consists in combining with a try square, a spirit level and a surface
gage.

EXTENSION MUFF BLOCK.--C.F. Butterworth, Troy, N.Y.--This invention
relates to a new and useful improvement in blocks for forming and
stretching muffs in the process of manufacturing that article.

HAY AND GRAIN ELEVATOR.--John Dennis, Oswego, N.Y.--This invention has
for its object to furnish an improved device, to be used in connection
with the improved hay and grain elevator, patented by the same inventor,
September 21, 1869, and numbered 95,006, for the purpose of moving the
whole load of hay or grain when elevated to any desired part of the barn
before unloading it.

MILLER TRAP FOR BEEHIVES.--T.L. Gray, Thomasville, Tenn.--This invention
relates to a device for catching millers, or other insects, in their
attempts to gain entrance into beehives.

VALVE GEAR.--Thomas E. Evans, William R. Thomas, and Joshua Hunt,
Catasauqua, Pa.--This invention relates to a new and useful improvement
in the mode of operating valves of steam engines, more especially
designed for pumping engines, but applicable to other purposes or to
valves of steam and water engines generally.

WATER WHEEL.--Henry W. McAuley, De Soto, Wis.--This invention consists
in certain improvements in the form and arrangements of the buckets and
in chutes for delivering the water thereto.

SELF-LOADING HAY WAGON.--James Capen, Charlton, Mass.--This invention
relates to improvements in hay loaders, and consists in the application
to the rear end of a hay wagon of an endless elevator case and rake, the
latter having spring teeth, and arranged for adjustment by means of
a hand lever at the front and suitable connecting devices; and the
elevator is connected with one or both of the hind wheels of the wagon
by machine chains or belts for operation.

ELEVATOR.--Francis Stein and Henry Haering, New York city.--This
invention consists in the application to a pair of vertical ports or
ways with toothed racks, of a carriage or platform having a shaft
provided with a gear wheel at or near each end, and gearing into the
toothed rack; also, having in suitable cases sliding on the posts a set
of hoisting gears, gearing with the toothed racks and operated by hand
cranks, and provided with ratchet wheels, holding pawls, and friction
apparatus, arranged in a peculiar way for elevating the platform,
holding it in any desired position or governing its descent.

FOLDING AND EXTENSION TABLE.--C. Mayer, Sullivan, Ill.--This invention
relates to improvements in tables, and consists in arranging the side
rails of the top of the frame, which are enlarged at the center and
hinged to the posts for folding against the cross rails, when the top,
which is detachably connected, is removed, for economy of space and
convenience, in packing for transportation or storage; also in arranging
the legs for folding up against the under edge of the cross rails; also
in an improved arrangement of the side rails for extension.

MANUFACTURE OF SCOOPS.--S. Geo. Knapp, Woodhaven, N.Y.--This invention
relates to an improved mode of manufacturing sheet-metal flour, grain,
and other scoops, and consists in forming the bowls in one piece of
metal, without seams or joints, by stamping up sheets of metal into the
form of a trough, with a flange around the top, and cutting the same
transversely in the center, with blanks for the bowls of two scoops, to
be finished by trimming or shaping the cut ends, turning down the flange
at the top, for stiffening either over wire or not and attaching the
handle; the object being to produce scoops with bowls formed in one
piece, and shaped at the base or in the part where the handles are
connected, and to smoothly effect an economy of labor by stamping two
blanks at one blow of the drop press, and also to control the metal
under the action of the drop better in shaping the deep curved part of
the base so as to upset and stiffen the blanks thereat.

BORING MACHINE.--E.C. Barton, Bloomsburg, Pa.--This invention relates to
improvements in wood-boring machines, whereby it is designed to provide
a simple and efficient arrangement of frame operating devices and
feeding table for boring light articles to be presented to the machine
by hand.

HASP LOCK.--E.R. Culver, New London, Conn.--This invention relates
to improvements in that class of locks where the locking devices are
incased within a hasp, and a hook is used in connection with the hasp
for locking, or independently for fastening the door without locking.

WATER WHEELS.--W.J. Thompson, Springfield, Mo.--This invention relates
to improvements in that class of horizontally running wheels, which
receive the water from above or below on curved buckets taking the water
at one side and discharging it at the other, and it consists of an
improved arrangement of vertically oscillating gates, which, when open,
form chutes for the water; it also consists of an improved means for
working the gates.

PIPE COUPLING.--J.D. Ware, Savannah, Ga.--This invention relates to
improvements in pipe couplings, and consists in forming a dovetailed
groove across the end of one part, with an annular recess in the bottom
around the bore for a packing ring, and fitting on the other part a
dovetailed projection for engaging in the groove, and in arranging on
one of the parts an eccentric ring to work against the head of the
projection and force it tightly into the groove.

FIRE GRATES.--G.W. Everhart, Louisville, Ky.--This invention relates to
improvements in that class of fire grates used for heating rooms, and
consists in so arranging them as to provide a clear air space between
the basket and the walls of the fire-place, both at the back and ends,
for the admission of air more directly at these parts, for the better
combustion of the coal and the gases arising therefrom; it also consists
in providing a recess in the hearth or bottom of the fire-place under
the grate, for the reception of ash pans of greater capacity than can be
contained on the top of the hearth, whereby a much larger quantity of
cinders and ashes may be received and retained, so that less frequent
removals of the same will be required.

APPARATUS FOR SEWING SADDLERY AND OTHER LEATHER, OR STRONG
MATERIALS.--Auguste Jacques Hurtu and Victor Joseph Hautin, Paris
France.--This invention relates to apparatus more especially applicable
for sewing leather, saddlery, harness, and other similar work with waxed
thread, and consists first, in the improved apparatus of this invention,
two needles are employed, the one sewing as an awl, and the other
carrying the thread; the two needles have at the same time a vertical
movement and also an adjustable horizontal movement. The needles are
operated alternately, so that the needle may pass the thread through the
hole made just previously by the awl, before the leather has been
moved forward. By this means the sewing may be carried on with great
regularity, and the material be turned in any direction in order to
execute small designs. Secondly, the invention relates to improvements
in the arrangement of the shuttle, whereby it is caused to pass through
the loops formed by the waxed thread without touching it.

PACKING AND ATOMIZING CAN.--F.L. Palmer, Sr., New York city.--This
invention relates to improvements in cans for packing insect powder
and other like finely powdered substances which, in use, require to be
delivered in atomic jets for penetrating crevices where insects secrete
themselves, and it consists in providing such cans with stoppers having
nozzles, through which stoppers or nozzles the passages are temporarily
closed in a way to be readily opened for use; also, in providing the
cans with nozzles at or near the bottom temporarily plugged in which
tubes may be connected so that the powder may, when required for use,
be readily blown out in atomic jets, whereby the said cans are made to
subserve the uses of packing cans and discharging atomizing cans, with
but trifling additional expense, whereas, at the present time, users of
such powders are compelled to buy expensive atomizing cans, to which
the powder must be transferred from the packing cans, before it can be
properly used, or in the absence of such cans the powder is scattered in
an ineffectual and wasteful way in or about the resorts of the insects.

REMEDY TOR RHEUMATISM.--H.H. Munroe, Louisville, Ky.--This invention
relates to a new and useful improvement in a remedy for rheumatism.

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW BOOKS AND PUBLICATIONS.



ELOCUTION AND ORATORY. Giving a Thorough Treatise on the Art of Speaking
and Reading. With numerous Selections of Didactic, Humorous, and
Dramatic Styles.

The author of this valuable treatise is Prof. Charles A. Wiley, of Fort
Plain, N.Y. The instructions are valuable and the selections admirable;
and we can very cordially recommend it to all who would improve either
in speaking or reading. Such a book is worthy a place in every family.


SPECIMENS OF FANCY TURNING EXECUTED ON THE HAND OR FOOT LATHE. With
Geometric, Oval, and Eccentric Chucks, and Elliptical Cutting Frame. By
an Amateur. Illustrated by Thirty exquisite Photographs. Philadelphia:
Henry Carey Baird, Industrial Publisher, 406 Walnut Street.

The beauty of these photographs is indescribable; they must be seen to
be appreciated. The designs from which they were taken were executed by
a gentleman well known to us, and who is undoubtedly one of the most
expert turners on this continent. The price of the work by mail, free of
postage, is $3.00.


THE NATIONAL WAGES TABLES, Showing at a glance the Amount of Wages, from
Half an Hour to Sixty Hours at $1 to $37 per Week, also from One Quarter
of a Day to Four Weeks, at $1 to $37 per Week. By Nelson Row, Publisher,
No 149 Fulton street, New York.

This little work, which our readers will find advertised in another
column, must prove an almost indispensable help in the counting rooms of
establishments employing large numbers of workmen at varying rates of
wages. It is one of the best things of the kind we have ever seen, and
we give it earnest commendation.


DIRECTIONS FOR COOKING. By Miss Leslie. Price, by mail, $1.50.

Henry Carey Baird, of Philadelphia, has just published a new edition of
Miss Leslie's "Old Standard and Renowned Cookery," being the sixtieth
edition of a book which has stood the test of time and practice, and is
a valuable aid in every household.


BENNY.

S.R. Wells, of this city, has published in pretty form "Benny," a
Christmas ballad, by Annie Chambers Ketchum, a poem which has already
appeared in the _Phrenological Journal_.


The prospectus of EVERY SATURDAY, for 1870, by Fields, Osgood & Co. of
Boston, promises to give us that excellent journal in a new and enlarged
form, with the additional attraction of illustrations, engraved from
designs by leading European artists. This publication will therefore
hereafter present weekly, not only the cream of European literature, but
the cream of European art. The high character of the publishers of this
journal is an ample guarantee that this promise will be fulfilled in the
most satisfactory manner.


LIPPINCOTT'S MAGAZINE, for January, also presents a varied and select
bill of fare, containing among other things, Part XIII. of Robert
Dale Owen's novel "Beyond the Breakers," "The Fairy and the Ghost,"
a Christmas tale, with six amusing illustrations; a curious and
interesting article on "Literary Lunatics," by Wirt Sikes, "Our
Capital," by William R. Hooper, and very much more excellent matter in
the way of stories poems, and essays.


The "Mobile Weekly Register," the oldest Democratic paper in the South,
is said to have reached a larger circulation than was ever attained by
any journal South of Mason and Dixon's line. It is full of interesting
varied matter, having an able agricultural department, presided over by
the veteran editor and successful agriculturist, Hon. C.C. Langdon. Its
general literature, poetry, stories, etc., make it highly acceptable
to the ladies. The year will open with a new continued story, of deep
interest, by one of the most distinguished writers of the day. The price
was recently reduced to $3.00 per year, which, for so large a paper (12
pages), is extremely cheap.


We have received the January number of "Demorest's Mirror of Fashions,"
a work that interests the ladies. Also "Demorest's Young America," a
fine magazine for boys and girls. Both these serials are well published
by Mr. and Madame Demorest of this city.

       *       *       *       *       *




