
When at last night closed down upon them the girl was, at heart, terror
stricken, but she hid her true state from the man, because she knew
that their plight was no fault of his.  The strange and uncanny noises
of the jungle night filled her with the most dreadful forebodings, and
when a cold, drizzling rain set in upon them her cup of misery was full.

Bulan rigged a rude shelter for her, making her lie down beneath it,
and then he removed his Dyak war-coat and threw it over her, but it was
hours before her exhausted body overpowered her nervous fright and won
a fitful and restless slumber.  Several times Virginia became obsessed
with the idea that Bulan had left her alone there in the jungle, but
when she called his name he answered from close beside her shelter.

She thought that he had reared another for himself nearby, but even the
thought that he might sleep filled her with dread, yet she would not
call to him again, since she knew that he needed his rest even more
than she.  And all the night Bulan stood close beside the woman he had
learned to love--stood almost naked in the chill night air and the cold
rain, lest some savage man or beast creep out of the darkness after her
while he slept.

The next day with its night, and the next, and the next were but
repetitions of the first.  It had become an agony of suffering for the
man to fight off sleep longer.  The girl read part of the truth in his
heavy eyes and worn face, and tried to force him to take needed rest,
but she did not guess that he had not slept for four days and nights.

At last abused Nature succumbed to the terrific strain that had been
put upon her, and the giant constitution of the man went down before
the cold and the wet, weakened and impoverished by loss of sleep and
insufficient food; for through the last two days he had been able to
find but little, and that little he had given to the girl, telling her
that he had eaten his fill while he gathered hers.

It was on the fifth morning, when Virginia awoke, that she found Bulan
rolling and tossing upon the wet ground before her shelter, delirious
with fever.  At the sight of the mighty figure reduced to pitiable
inefficiency and weakness, despite the knowledge that her protector
could no longer protect, the fear of the jungle faded from the heart of
the young girl--she was no more a weak and trembling daughter of an
effete civilization.  Instead she was a lioness, watching over and
protecting her sick mate.  The analogy did not occur to her, but
something else did as she saw the flushed face and fever wracked body
of the man whose appeal to her she would have thought purely physical
had she given the subject any analytic consideration; and as a
realization of his utter helplessness came to her she bent over him and
kissed first his forehead and then his lips.

"What a noble and unselfish love yours has been," she murmured.  "You
have even tried to hide it that my position might be the easier to
bear, and now that it may be too late I learn that I love you--that I
have always loved you.  Oh, Bulan, my Bulan, what a cruel fate that
permitted us to find one another only to die together!"



16

SING SPEAKS


For a week Professor Maxon with von Horn and Sing sought for Virginia.
They could get no help from the natives of the long-house, who feared
the vengeance of Muda Saffir should he learn that they had aided the
white men upon his trail.

And always as the three hunted through the jungle and up and down the
river there lurked ever near a handful of the men of the tribe of the
two whom von Horn had murdered, waiting for the chance that would give
them revenge and the heads of the three they followed.  They feared the
guns of the white men too much to venture an open attack, and at night
the quarry never abated their watchfulness, so that days dragged on,
and still the three continued their hopeless quest unconscious of the
relentless foe that dogged their footsteps.

Von Horn was always searching for an opportunity to enlist the aid of
the friendly natives in an effort to regain the chest, but so far he
had found none who would agree to accompany him even in consideration
of a large share of the booty.  It was the treasure alone which kept
him to the search for Virginia Maxon, and he made it a point to direct
the hunt always in the vicinity of the spot where it was buried, for a
great fear consumed him that Ninaka might return and claim it before he
had a chance to make away with it.

Three times during the week they returned and slept at the long-house,
hoping each time to learn that the natives had received some news of
her they sought, through the wonderful channels of communication that
seemed always open across the trackless jungle and up and down the
savage, lonely rivers.

For two days Bulan lay raving in the delirium of fever, while the
delicate girl, unused to hardship and exposure, watched over him and
nursed him with the loving tenderness and care of a young mother with
her first born.

For the most part the young giant's ravings were inarticulate, but now
and then Virginia heard her name linked with words of reverence and
worship.  The man fought again the recent battles he had passed
through, and again suffered the long night watches beside the sleeping
girl who filled his heart.  Then it was that she learned the truth of
his self-sacrificing devotion.  The thing that puzzled her most was the
repetition of a number and a name which ran through all his
delirium--"Nine ninety nine Priscilla."

She could make neither head nor tail of it, nor was there another word
to give a clue to its meaning, so at last from constant repetition it
became a commonplace and she gave it no further thought.

The girl had given up hope that Bulan ever could recover, so weak and
emaciated had he become, and when the fever finally left him quite
suddenly she was positive that it was the beginning of the end.  It was
on the morning of the seventh day since they had commenced their
wandering in search of the long-house that, as she sat watching him,
she saw his eyes resting upon her face with a look of recognition.

Gently she took his hand, and at the act he smiled at her very weakly.

"You are better, Bulan," she said.  "You have been very sick, but now
you shall soon be well again."

She did not believe her own words, yet the mere saying of them gave her
renewed hope.

"Yes," replied the man.  "I shall soon be well again.  How long have I
been like this?"

"For two days," she replied.

"And you have watched over me alone in the jungle for two days?" he
asked incredulously.

"Had it been for life," she said in a low voice, "it would scarce have
repaid the debt I owe you."

For a long time he lay looking up into her eyes--longingly, wistfully.

"I wish that it had been for life," he said.

At first she did not quite realize what he meant, but presently the
tired and hopeless expression of his eyes brought to her a sudden
knowledge of his meaning.

"Oh, Bulan," she cried, "you must not say that.  Why should you wish to
die?"

"Because I love you, Virginia," he replied.  "And because, when you
know what I am, you will hate and loathe me."

On the girl's lips was an avowal of her own love, but as she bent
closer to whisper the words in his ear there came the sound of men
crashing through the jungle, and as she turned to face the peril that
she thought approaching, von Horn sprang into view, while directly
behind him came her father and Sing Lee.

Bulan saw them at the same instant, and as Virginia ran forward to
greet her father he staggered weakly to his feet.  Von Horn was the
first to see the young giant, and with an oath sprang toward him,
drawing his revolver as he came.

"You beast," he cried.  "We have caught you at last."

At the words Virginia turned back toward Bulan with a little scream of
warning and of horror.  Professor Maxon was behind her.

"Shoot the monster, von Horn," he ordered.  "Do not let him escape."

Bulan drew himself to his full height, and though he wavered from
weakness, yet he towered mighty and magnificent above the evil faced
man who menaced him.

"Shoot!" he said calmly.  "Death cannot come too soon now."

At the same instant von Horn pulled the trigger.  The giant's head fell
back, he staggered, whirled about, and crumpled to the earth just as
Virginia Maxon's arms closed about him.

Von Horn rushed close and pushing the girl aside pressed the muzzle of
his gun to Bulan's temple, but an avalanche of wrinkled, yellow skin
was upon him before he could pull the trigger a second time, and Sing
had hurled him back a dozen feet and snatched his weapon.

Moaning and sobbing Virginia threw herself upon the body of the man she
loved, while Professor Maxon hurried to her side to drag her away from
the soulless thing for whom he had once intended her.

Like a tigress the girl turned upon the two white men.

"You are murderers," she cried.  "Cowardly murderers.  Weak and
exhausted by fever he could not combat you, and so you have robbed the
world of one of the noblest men that God ever created."

"Hush!" cried Professor Maxon.  "Hush, child, you do not know what you
say.  The thing was a monster--a soulless monster."

At the words the girl looked up quickly at her father, a faint
realization of his meaning striking her like a blow in the face.

"What do you mean?" she whispered.  "Who was he?"

It was von Horn who answered.

"No god created that," he said, with a contemptuous glance at the still
body of the man at their feet.  "He was one of the creatures of your
father's mad experiments--the soulless thing for whose arms his insane
obsession doomed you.  The thing at your feet, Virginia, was Number
Thirteen."

With a piteous little moan the girl turned back toward the body of the
young giant.  A faltering step she took toward it, and then to the
horror of her father she sank upon her knees beside it and lifting the
man's head in her arms covered the face with kisses.

"Virginia!" cried the professor.  "Are you mad, child?"

"I am not mad," she moaned, "not yet.  I love him.  Man or monster, it
would have been all the same to me, for I loved him."

Her father turned away, burying his face in his hands.

"God!" he muttered.  "What an awful punishment you have visited upon me
for the sin of the thing I did."

The silence which followed was broken by Sing who had kneeled opposite
Virginia upon the other side of Bulan, where he was feeling the giant's
wrists and pressing his ear close above his heart.

"Do'n cly, Linee," said the kindly old Chinaman.  "Him no dlead."
Then, as he poured a pinch of brownish powder into the man's mouth from
a tiny sack he had brought forth from the depths of one of his sleeves:
"Him no mlonster either, Linee.  Him white man, alsame Mlaxon.  Sing
know."

The girl looked up at him in gratitude.

"He is not dead, Sing?  He will live?" she cried.  "I don't care about
anything else, Sing, if you will only make him live."

"Him live.  Gettem lilee flesh wounds.  Las all."

"What do you mean by saying that he is not a monster?" demanded von
Horn.

"You waitee, you dam flool," cried Sing.  "I tellee lot more I know.
You waitee I flixee him, and then, by God, I flixee you."

Von Horn took a menacing step toward the Chinaman, his face black with
wrath, but Professor Maxon interposed.

"This has gone quite far enough, Doctor von Horn," he said.  "It may be
that we acted hastily.  I do not know, of course, what Sing means, but
I intend to find out.  He has been very faithful to us, and deserves
every consideration."

Von Horn stepped back, still scowling.  Sing poured a little water
between Bulan's lips, and then asked Professor Maxon for his brandy
flask.  With the first few drops of the fiery liquid the giant's
eyelids moved, and a moment later he raised them and looked about him.

The first face he saw was Virginia's.  It was full of love and
compassion.

"They have not told you yet?" he asked.

"Yes," she replied.  "They have told me, but it makes no difference.
You have given me the right to say it, Bulan, and I do say it now
again, before them all--I love you, and that is all there is that makes
any difference."

A look of happiness lighted his face momentarily, only to fade as
quickly as it had come.

"No, Virginia," he said, sadly, "it would not be right.  It would be
wicked.  I am not a human being.  I am only a soulless monster.  You
cannot mate with such as I.  You must go away with your father.  Soon
you will forget me."

"Never, Bulan!" cried the girl, determinedly.

The man was about to attempt to dissuade her, when Sing interrupted.

"You keepee still, Bulan," he said.  "You wait till Sing tellee.  You
no mlonster.  Mlaxon he no makee you.  Sing he find you in low bloat
jus' outsidee cove.  You dummy.  No know nothing.  No know namee.  No
know where comee from.  No talkee.

"Sing he jes' hearee Mlaxon tellee Hornee 'bout Nlumber Thlirteen.  How
he makee him for Linee.  Makee Linee mally him.  Sing he know what
kindee fleaks Mlaxon makee.  Linee always good to old Sing.  Sing he
been peeking thlu clack in wallee.  See blig vlat where Thlirteen
growing.

"Sing he takee you to Sing's shackee that night.  Hide you till
evlybody sleep.  Then he sneak you in workee shop.  Kickee over vlat.
Leaves you.  Nex' mlorning Mlaxon makee blig hulabaloo.  Dance up and
downee. Whoop!  Thlirteen clome too soonee, but allight; him finee,
perfec' man.  Whoop!

"Anyway, you heap better for Linee than one Mlaxon's fleaks," he
concluded, turning toward Bulan.

"You are lying, you yellow devil," cried von Horn.

The Chinaman turned his shrewd, slant eyes malevolently upon the doctor.

"Sing lies?" he hissed.  "Mabbeso Sing lies when he ask what for you
glet Bludleen steal tleasure.  But Lajah Saffir he come and spoil it
all while you tly glet Linee to the ship--Sing knows.

"Then you tellee Mlaxon Thlirteen steal Linee.  You lie then and you
knew you lie.  You lie again when Thlirteen savee Linee flom Oulang
Outang--you say you savee Linee.

"Then you make bad talkee with Lajah Saffir at long-house.  Sing hear
you all timee.  You tly getee tleasure away from Dlyaks for your self.
Then--"

"Stop!" roared von Horn.  "Stop!  You lying yellow sneak, before I put
a bullet in you."

"Both of you may stop now," said Professor Maxon authoritatively.
"There have been charges made here that cannot go unnoticed.  Can you
prove these things Sing?" he asked turning to the Chinaman.

"I plove much by Bludleen's lascar.  Bludleen tell him all 'bout
Hornee.  I plove some more by Dyak chief at long-house.  He knows lots.
Lajah Saffir tell him.  It all tlue, Mlaxon."

"And it is true about this man--the thing that you have told us is
true?  He is not one of those created in the laboratory?"

"No, Mlaxon.  You no makee fine young man like Blulan--you know lat,
Mlaxon.  You makee One, Two, Thlee--all up to Twelve.  All fleaks.  You
ought to know, Mlaxon, lat you no can makee a Blulan."
