
"If I had not anticipated its being original, I would not have come
here," said Maskull. "Still, explain--why can't harsh tones have simple
symmetry of form? And why must they necessarily cause more profound
emotions in us who listen?"

"Pleasures may harmonise. Pains must clash; and in the order of their
clashing lies the symmetry. The emotions follow the music, which is
rough and earnest."

"You may call it music," remarked Maskull thoughtfully, "but to me it
bears a closer resemblance to actual life."

"If Shaping's plans had gone straight, life would have been like that
other sort of music. He who seeks can find traces of that intention in
the world of nature. But as it has turned out, real life resembles my
music and mine is the true music."

"Shall we see living shapes?"

"I don't know what my mood will be," returned Earthrid. "But when I have
finished, you shall adventure your tune, and produce whatever shapes you
please--unless, indeed, the tune is out of your own big body."

"The shocks you are preparing may kill us," said Gleameil, in a low,
taut voice, "but we shall die, seeing beauty."

Earthrid looked at her with a dignified expression.

"Neither you, nor any other person, can endure the thoughts which I put
into my music. Still, you must have it your own way. It needed a woman
to call it 'beauty.' But if this is beauty, what is ugliness?"

"That I can tell you, Master," replied Gleameil, smiling at him.
"Ugliness is old, stale life, while yours every night issues fresh from
the womb of nature."

Earthrid stared at her, without response. "Teargeld is rising," he said
at last. "And now you shall see--though not for long."

As the words left his mouth, the full moon peeped over the hills in the
dark eastern sky. They watched it in silence, and soon it was wholly
up. It was larger than the moon of Earth, and seemed nearer. Its shadowy
parts stood out in just as strong relief, but somehow it did not give
Maskull the impression of being a dead world. Branchspell shone on
the whole of it, but Alppain only on a part. The broad crescent that
reflected Branchspell's rays alone was white and brilliant; but the part
that was illuminated by both suns shone with a greenish radiance that
had almost solar power, and yet was cold and cheerless. On gazing at
that combined light, he felt the same sense of disintegration that the
afterglow of Alppain had always caused in him; but now the feeling was
not physical, but merely aesthetic. The moon did not appear romantic to
him, but disturbing and mystical.

Earthrid rose, and stood quietly for a minute. In the bright moonlight,
his face seemed to have undergone a change. It lost its loose, weak,
disagreeable look, and acquired a sort of crafty grandeur. He clapped
his hands together meditatively two or three times, and walked up and
down. The others stood together, watching him.

Then he sat down by the side of the lake, and, leaning on his side,
placed his right hand, open palm downward, on the ground, at the same
time stretching out his right leg, so that the foot was in contact with
the water.

While Maskull was in the act of staring at him and at the lake, he felt
a stabbing sensation right through his heart, as though he had been
pierced by a rapier. He barely recovered himself from falling, and as
he did so he saw that a spout had formed on the water, and was now
subsiding again. The next moment he was knocked down by a violent blow
in the mouth, delivered by an invisible hand. He picked himself up; and
observed that a second spout had formed. No sooner was he on his legs,
than a hideous pain hammered away inside his brain, as if caused by a
malignant tumour. In his agony, he stumbled and fell again; this time on
the arm Krag had wounded. All his other mishaps were forgotten in this
one, which half stunned him. It lasted only a moment, and then sudden
relief came, and he found that Earthrid's rough music had lost its power
over him.

He saw him still stretched in the same position. Spouts were coming
thick and fast on the lake, which was full of lively motion. But
Gleameil was not on her legs. She was lying on the ground, in a heap,
without moving. Her attitude was ugly, and he guessed she was dead. When
he reached her, he discovered that she was dead. In what state of mind
she had died, he did not know, for her face wore the vulgar Crystalman
grin. The whole tragedy had not lasted five minutes.

He went over to Earthrid and dragged him forcibly away from his playing.

"You have been as good as your word, musician," he said. "Gleameil is
dead."

Earthrid tried to collect his scattered senses.

"I warned her," he replied, sitting up. "Did I not beg her to go away?
But she died very easily. She did not wait for the beauty she spoke
about. She heard nothing of the passion, nor even of the rhythm. Neither
have you."

Maskull looked down at him in indignation, but said nothing.

"You should not have interrupted me," went on Earthrid. "When I am
playing, nothing else is of importance. I might have lost the thread of
my ideas. Fortunately, I never forget. I shall start over again."

"If music is to continue, in the presence of the dead, I play next."

The man glanced up quickly.

"That can't be."

"It must be," said Maskull decisively. "I prefer playing to listening.
Another reason is that you will have every night, but I have only
tonight."

Earthrid clenched and unclenched his fist, and began to turn pale. "With
your recklessness, you are likely to kill us both. Irontick belongs to
me, and until you have learned how to play, you would only break the
instrument."

"Well, then, I will break it; but I am going to try."

The musician jumped to his feet and confronted him. "Do you intend to
take it from me by violence?"

"Keep calm! You will have the same choice that you offered us. I shall
give you time to go away somewhere."

"How will that serve me, if you spoil my lake? You don't understand what
you are doing."

"Go, or stay!" responded Maskull. "I give you till the water gets smooth
again. After that, I begin playing."

Earthrid kept swallowing. He glanced at the lake and back to Maskull.

"Do you swear it?"

"How long that will take, you know better than I; but till then you are
safe."

Earthrid cast him a look of malice, hesitated for an instant, and then
moved away, and started to climb the nearest hill. Halfway up he glanced
over his shoulder apprehensively, as if to see what was happening. In
another minute or so, he had disappeared over the crest, travelling in
the direction of the shore that faced Matterplay.

Later, when the water was once more tranquil. Maskull sat down by its
edge, in imitation of Earthrid's attitude. He knew neither how to set
about producing his music, nor what would come of it. But audacious
projects entered his brain and he willed to create physical shapes--and,
above all, one shape, that of Surtur.

Before putting his foot to the water, he turned things over a little in
his mind.

He said, "What themes are in common music, shapes are in this music. The
composer does not find his theme by picking out single notes; but the
whole theme flashes into his mind by inspiration. So it must be with
shapes. When I start playing, if I am worth anything, the undivided
ideas will pass from my unconscious mind to this lake, and then,
reflected back in the dimensions of reality, I shall be for the first
time made acquainted with them. So it must be."

The instant his foot touched the water, he felt his thoughts flowing
from him. He did not know what they were, but the mere act of flowing
created a sensation of joyful mastery. With this was curiosity to learn
what they would prove to be. Spouts formed on the lake in increasing
numbers, but he experienced no pain. His thoughts, which he knew to
be music, did not issue from him in a steady, unbroken stream, but in
great, rough gushes, succeeding intervals of quiescence. When these
gushes came, the whole lake broke out in an eruption of spouts.

He realised that the ideas passing from him did not arise in his
intellect, but had their source in the fathomless depths of his will.
He could not decide what character they should have, but he was able to
force them out, or retard them, by the exercise of his volition.

At first nothing changed around him. Then the moon grew dimmer, and a
strange, new radiance began to illuminate the landscape. It increased
so imperceptibly that it was some time before he recognised it as the
Muspel-light which he had seen in the Wombflash Forest. He could not
give it a colour, or a name, but it filled him with a sort of stern and
sacred awe. He called up the resources of his powerful will. The
spouts thickened like a forest, and many of them were twenty feet high.
Teargeld looked faint and pale; the radiance became intense; but it cast
no shadows. The wind got up, but where Maskull was sitting, it was calm.
Shortly afterward it began to shriek and whistle, like a full gale. He
saw no shapes, and redoubled his efforts.

His ideas were now rushing out onto the lake so furiously that his whole
soul was possessed by exhilaration and defiance. But still he did not
know their nature. A huge spout shot up and at the same moment the hills
began to crack and break. Great masses of loose soil were erupted from
their bowels, and in the next period of quietness, he saw that the
landscape had altered. Still the mysterious light intensified. The moon
disappeared entirely. The noise of the unseen tempest was terrifying,
but Maskull played heroically on, trying to urge out ideas which would
take shape. The hillsides were cleft with chasms. The water escaping
from the tops of the spouts, swamped the land; but where he was, it was
dry.

The radiance grew terrible. It was everywhere, but Maskull fancied that
it was far brighter in one particular quarter. He thought that it was
becoming localised, preparatory to contracting into a solid form. He
strained and strained....

Immediately afterward the bottom of the lake subsided. Its waters fell
through, and his instrument was broken.

The Muspel-light vanished. The moon shone out again, but Maskull could
not see it. After that unearthly shining, he seemed to himself to be in
total blackness. The screaming wind ceased; there was a dead silence.
His thoughts finished flowing toward the lake, and his foot no longer
touched water, but hung in space.

He was too stunned by the suddenness of the change to either think or
feel. While he was still lying dazed, a vast explosion occurred in the
newly opened depths beneath the lakebed. The water in its descent had
met fire. Maskull was lifted bodily in the air, many yards high, and
came down heavily. He lost consciousness....



When he came to his senses again, he saw everything. Teargeld was
gleaming brilliantly. He was lying by the side of the old lake, but it
was now a crater, to the bottom of which his eyes could not penetrate.
The hills encircling it were torn, as if by heavy gunfire. A few
thunderclouds were floating in the air at no great height, from which
branched lightning descended to the earth incessantly, accompanied by
alarming and singular crashes.

He got on his legs, and tested his actions. Finding that he was
uninjured, he first of all viewed the crater at closer quarters, and
then started to walk painfully toward the northern shore.

When he had attained the crest above the lake, the landscape sloped
gently down for two miles to the sea. Everywhere he passed through
traces of his rough work. The country was carved into scarps, grooves,
channels, and craters. He arrived at the line of low cliffs overlooking
the beach, and found that these also were partly broken down by
landslips. He got down onto the sand and stood looking over the moonlit,
agitated sea, wondering how he could contrive to escape from this island
of failure.

Then he saw Earthrid's body, lying quite close to him. It was on its
back. Both legs had been violently torn off and he could not see
them anywhere. Earthrid's teeth were buried in the flesh of his right
forearm, indicating that the man had died in unreasoning physical agony.
The skin gleamed green in the moonlight, but it was stained by darker
discolourations, which were wounds. The sand about him was dyed by the
pool of blood which had long since filtered through.

Maskull left the corpse in dismay, and walked a long way along the
sweet-smelling shore. Sitting down on a rock, he waited for daybreak.



Chapter 16. LEEHALLFAE

At midnight, when Teargeld was in the south, throwing his shadow
straight toward the sea and making everything nearly as bright as day,
he saw a great tree floating in the water, not far out. It was thirty
feet out of the water, upright, and alive, and its roots must have been
enormously deep and wide. It was drifting along the coast, through
the heavy seas. Maskull eyed it incuriously for a few minutes. Then it
dawned on him that it might be a good thing to investigate its nature.
Without stopping to weigh the danger, he immediately swam out, caught
hold of the lowest branch, and swung himself up.

He looked aloft and saw that the main stem was thick to the very top,
terminating in a knob that somewhat resembled a human head. He made
his way toward this knob, through the multitude of boughs, which were
covered with tough, slippery, marine leaves, like seaweed. Arriving at
the crown, he found that it actually was a sort of head, for there were
membranes like rudimentary eyes all the way around it, denoting some
form of low intelligence.

At that moment the tree touched bottom, though some way from the shore,
and began to bump heavily. To steady himself, Maskull put his hand out,
and, in doing so, accidentally covered some of the membranes. The tree
sheered off the land, as if by an act of will. When it was steady again,
Maskull removed his hand; they at once drifted back to shore. He thought
a bit, and then started experimenting with the eyelike membranes. It was
as he had guessed--these eyes were stimulated by the light of the moon,
and whichever way the light came from, the tree would travel.

A rather defiant smile crossed Maskull's face as it struck him that
it might be possible to navigate this huge plant-animal as far as
Matterplay. He lost no time in putting the conception into execution.
Tearing off some of the long, tough leaves, he bound up all the
membranes except the ones that faced the north. The tree instantly left
the island, and definitely put out to sea. It travelled due north. It
was not moving at more than a mile an hour, however, while Matterplay
was possibly forty miles distant.

The great spout waves fell against the trunk with mighty thuds; the
breaking seas hissed through the lower branches--Maskull rested high and
dry, but was more than a little apprehensive about their slow rate
of progress. Presently he sighted a current racing along toward the
north-west, and that put another idea into his head. He began to juggle
with the membranes again, and before long had succeeded in piloting his
tree into the fast-running stream. As soon as they were fairly in its
rapids, he blinded the crown entirely, and thenceforward the current
acted in the double capacity of road and steed.

Maskull made himself secure among the branches and slept for the
remainder of the night.

When his eyes opened again, the island was out of sight. Teargeld was
setting in the western sea. The sky in the east was bright with the
colours of the approaching day. The air was cool and fresh; the light
over the sea was beautiful, gleaming, and mysterious. Land--probably
Matterplay--lay ahead, a long, dark line of low cliffs, perhaps a mile
away. The current no longer ran toward the shore, but began to skirt the
coast without drawing any closer to it. As soon as Maskull realised the
fact, he manoeuvred the tree out of its channel and started drifting it
inshore. The eastern sky blazed up suddenly with violent dyes, and
the outer rim of Branchspell lifted itself above the sea. The moon had
already sunk.

The shore loomed nearer and nearer. In physical character it was like
Swaylone's Island--the same wide sands, small cliffs, and rounded,
insignificant hills inland, without vegetation. In the early-morning
sunlight, however, it looked romantic. Maskull, hollow-eyed and morose,
cared nothing for all that, but the moment the tree grounded, clambered
swiftly down through the branches and dropped into the sea. By the
time he had swam ashore, the white, stupendous sun was high above the
horizon.

He walked along the sands toward the east for a considerable distance,
without having any special intention in his mind. He thought he would go
on until he came to some creek or valley, and then turn up it. The sun's
rays were cheering, and began to relieve him of his oppressive night
weight. After strolling along the beach for about a mile, he was stopped
by a broad stream that flowed into the sea out of a kind of natural
gateway in the line of cliffs. Its water was of a beautiful, limpid
green, all filled with bubbles. So ice-cold, aerated, and enticing did
it look that he flung himself face downward on the ground and took
a prolonged draught. When he got up again his eyes started to play
pranks--they became alternately blurted and clear.... It may have been
pure imagination, but he fancied that Digrung was moving inside him.

He followed the bank of the stream through the gap in the cliffs, and
then for the first time saw the real Matterplay. A valley appeared,
like a jewel enveloped by naked rock. All the hill country was bare
and lifeless, but this valley lying in the heart of it was extremely
fertile; he had never seen such fertility. It wound up among the hills,
and all that he was looking at was its broad lower end. The floor of the
valley was about half a mile wide; the stream that ran down its middle
was nearly a hundred feet across, but was exceedingly shallow--in most
places not more than a few inches deep. The sides of the valley were
about seventy feet high, but very sloping; they were clothed from top
to bottom with little, bright-leaved trees--not of varied tints of one
colour, like Earth trees, but of widely diverse colours, most of which
were brilliant and positive.

The floor itself was like a magician's garden. Densely interwoven trees,
shrubs, and parasitical climbers fought everywhere for possession of it.
The forms were strange and grotesque, and each one seemed different;
the colours of leaf, flower, sexual organs, and stem were equally
peculiar--all the different combinations of the five primary colours
of Tormance seemed to be represented, and the result, for Maskull was
a sort of eye chaos. So rank was the vegetation that he could not fight
his way through it; he was obliged to take to the riverbed. The contact
of the water created an odd tingling sensation throughout his body,
like a mild electric shock. There were no birds, but a few
extraordinary-looking winged reptiles of small size kept crossing the
valley from hill to hill. Swarms of flying insects clustered around him,
threatening mischief, but in the end it turned out that his blood was
disagreeable to them, for he was not bitten once. Repulsive crawling
creatures resembling centipedes, scorpions, snakes, and so forth were in
myriads on the banks of the stream, but they also made no attempt to use
their weapons on his bare legs and feet, as he passed through them into
the water.... Presently however, he was confronted in midstream by a
hideous monster, of the size of a pony, but resembling in shape--if it
resembled anything--a sea crustacean; and then he came to a halt. They
stared at one another, the beast with wicked eyes, Maskull with cool and
wary ones. While he was staring, a singular thing happened to him.

His eyes blurred again. But when in a minute or two this blurring passed
away and he saw clearly once more, his vision had changed in character.
He was looking right through the animal's body and could distinguish all
its interior parts. The outer crust, however, and all the hard tissues
were misty and semi-transparent; through them a luminous network of
blood-red veins and arteries stood out in startling distinctness. The
hard parts faded away to nothingness, and the blood system alone was
left. Not even the fleshy ducts remained. The naked blood alone was
visible, flowing this way and that like a fiery, liquid skeleton, in the
shape of the monster. Then this blood began to change too. Instead of
a continuous liquid stream, Maskull perceived that it was composed of a
million individual points. The red colour had been an illusion caused by
the rapid motion of the points; he now saw clearly that they resembled
minute suns in their scintillating brightness. They seemed like a double
drift of stars, streaming through space. One drift was travelling toward
a fixed point in the centre, while the other was moving away from it.
He recognised the former as the veins of the beast, the latter as the
arteries, and the fixed point as the heart.

While he was still looking, lost in amazement, the starry network went
out suddenly like an extinguished flame. Where the crustacean had stood,
there was nothing. Yet through this "nothing" he could not see the
landscape. Something was standing there that intercepted the light,
though it possessed neither shape, colour, nor substance. And now the
object, which could no longer be perceived by vision, began to be felt
by emotion. A delightful, springlike sense of rising sap, of quickening
pulses of love, adventure, mystery, beauty, femininity--took possession
of his being, and, strangely enough, he identified it with the monster.
Why that invisible brute should cause him to feel young, sexual, and
audacious, he did not ask himself, for he was fully occupied with the
effect. But it was as if flesh, bones, and blood had been discarded, and
he were face to face with naked Life itself, which slowly passed into
his own body.

The sensations died away. There was a brief interval, and then the
streaming, starlike skeleton rose up again out of space. It changed to
the red-blood system. The hard parts of the body reappeared, with more
and more distinctness, and at the same time the network of blood grew
fainter. Presently the interior parts were entirely concealed by
