were about to pull Bush from Astro's back.

Vidac swung the ray gun around toward Astro. "See that, big boy?" He
laughed. "Well, you're going to get the same thing if you make one funny
move. Now pile those two stiffs into the back of my car! Get moving!"

Seething with frustration and rage, Astro turned to Roger and Tom,
standing like solid slabs of stone. He picked up Roger and carried him
gently to the car, placing him in the back. Then he turned and walked
toward Tom. He made a slight movement toward Vidac and Bush, but they
leveled their guns quickly.

"None of that," warned Vidac. Astro's shoulders drooped. He was almost
in tears as he walked toward Tom. The curly-haired cadet stood
immovable, staring at his friend. The Venusian leaned over and picked up
Tom gently.

"Take it easy, Astro," whispered Tom, not moving his lips. "I'm not
frozen. He missed me!"

Astro nearly jumped at the sound of Tom's voice. He recovered quickly,
fighting back a grin of triumph. He threw a quick glance at Vidac and
Bush, then carefully picked Tom up and carried him to the car. As he was
about to turn around again, he felt the sudden jolt of the paralo ray,
and in the split-second before the ray took effect, Astro nearly
laughed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Under the effects of a paralo-ray charge the body is paralyzed and there
is no feeling. Tom, however, lying beside Roger but beneath Astro in
the back seat of the car, began to suffer painful muscular cramps. He
gritted his teeth, trying to lie rigidly still, but his arms and legs
began to jerk spasmodically and he had to move.

Slowly he eased one arm from beneath Astro's heavy body and shifted his
legs into a more comfortable position. Though the Venusian's weight
still pressed him down in the seat, the muscular cramps were relieved.
He began to pay attention to what Vidac and Bush were saying in the
front seat of the car.

"We'll blast off as soon as we reach the spaceport," said Vidac, "and get
up to the asteroid."

"Why so fast?" asked Bush.

"I want to get rid of those nosy space rats as quickly as possible. Then
I'll go after Strong."

Bush shook his head. "That won't be easy. Strong's not a Space Cadet.
He's Solar Guard. And good Solar Guard at that!"

Tom smiled in wholehearted agreement with the lieutenant governor's
henchman.

Vidac sneered. "Don't make me laugh! Didn't you see the way I convinced
those dumb colonists that the cadets were responsible for the
professor's murder? If they'd stopped to think about it, they would have
realized I was putting one over on them. All you have to do is keep
talking, fast and loud. Keep them off balance, and don't let them
think."

"There's the spaceport road," said Bush. "And there's the _Polaris_. I
hope we don't have any trouble with the grease monkeys when they see us
hauling the cadets out."

"If they start anything," said Vidac with a sneer, "you know what to
do."

"Sure," said Bush, patting his paralo-ray gun.

The car roared through the gates of the spaceport and sped across the
hard surface of the field. A moment later it came to a shuddering stop
at the base of the giant rocket cruiser.

"All right," said Vidac. "Get them aboard the ship. Hardy will blow a
gasket if we don't get this over with in a hurry."

Hardy! The name hit Tom like a trip hammer. So Hardy was mixed up in it!
Hardy, the respected Governor of Roald, the man responsible for the
welfare of the colony and the lives of the colonists, was really a
swindler and a thief. Now if Jeff only had Professor Sykes's journal
they could tie everything together, providing he could stop Vidac from
sending them off to a prison rock! Tom's thoughts were suddenly
interrupted by the movement of Astro's heavy body on top of him. The
young cadet broke out into a cold sweat. When he had been supposedly hit
by the paralo ray his arms had been outstretched! He had been so busy
thinking about Hardy's connection with Vidac that he had forgotten to
resume his original position.

Astro was hauled out of the car and Bush reached in the car to get Tom.
The boy braced himself and waited as the spaceman grabbed him by the
feet. He was pulled roughly out of the door and stood on his feet. Out
of the corner of his eye he could see that Astro had been stood up
beside the car like a tree. Vidac turned away from the giant cadet and
started to give Bush a hand. Suddenly he stopped and pulled out his
paralo-ray gun.

"Boss, what're you doing?" cried Bush, jumping away from Tom and leaving
the cadet rocking on his feet, trying to pretend he was still paralyzed.
He toppled forward, and before he realized what he had done, threw out
his hands to break his fall.

Vidac laughed. "I have to hand it to you, Corbett. That was the best bit
of acting I've ever seen in my life."

Tom picked himself up from the ground and glared at Vidac. Bush stood to
one side, too startled to realize what had happened.

"You mean, he--he--" Bush stammered, his eyes wide with alarm.

"That's right," said Vidac. "The wonder boy of the space lanes acted as
if he was frozen. What were you going to do, Corbett? Take over, maybe?"

"You'll never get away with it, Vidac," said Tom through clenched teeth.
"You're through and you know it!"

"Not yet, my friend," said Vidac. "You've had your fun. Now get your
friend out of the car and carry him aboard the _Polaris_. We're all
going for a little ride!"

Tom turned reluctantly and began pulling Roger out of the back of the
car. He realized that he could take no more chances with the paralo ray.
As long as he was awake, there was a chance for him to do something. He
lifted Roger gently to his shoulder, turned, and staggered toward the
cruiser. Just as he was about to step inside the hatch, he heard the
faint roar of jets in the distance. He stumbled and fell purposely to
stall for time. He and Roger sprawled full length on the deck. As Tom
sat up and rubbed his knee, Bush rushed over, leaving Vidac to struggle
with the immense bulk of Astro.

"Get up!" snarled Bush. He poked the gun within an inch of Tom's face.
The cadet knew that if Bush fired at such a close range, his brains
would be burned to a crisp. He fell away from the gun.

"I wrenched my knee," he whined. "I can't get up!"

"If you don't get up by the time I count three," growled Bush, "I'll
blast you! One, two--"

The roar of the jets was closer now and Tom's heart began to race.
Feigning pain in his leg, he started to pull himself to his feet. He
glanced toward the spaceport entrance and saw a stream of jet cars
pouring into the field, heading for the _Polaris_. Suddenly Tom leaped
for Bush from the crouching position. He lashed out with his right fist,
while grabbing for the ray gun with his left.

Bush was not to be tricked so easily. He fired just as the cadet jumped.
But in trying to evade Tom's crashing right hand, he missed his shot and
was grazed by Tom's fist. He fell back out of the spaceship, his gun
falling inside the air-lock portal.

Tom lay on the deck, wincing in pain. The wild shot had caught him in
the right leg and he was unable to move it. He crawled across the deck,
reaching for the gun as Bush came charging up the ramp.

Meanwhile, Vidac, seeing the commotion in the hatch of the spaceship,
pulled his gun and leveled it at Tom. But Bush charged through the hatch
just as Vidac fired and he caught the full blast of Vidac's shot. He
landed on the deck beside Tom, stiff as a board.

Tom reached for the gun, preparing to fight it out with Vidac. But the
odds were against him. His leg was completely paralyzed and Vidac was
climbing into the ship. He knew he couldn't reach the gun in time.

Suddenly Vidac became aware of the jet cars streaming into the
spaceport. He stopped and turned to look at them. Then, sensing
something was wrong, he turned back to dash into the _Polaris_. The
second his back was turned was sufficient time for Tom to grab the gun
and fire. Vidac was stopped cold, his bright eyes burning with hate,
unable to move.

"You can drop that now," said a voice in back of Tom.

The curly-haired cadet whirled around to face Governor Hardy, holding a
paralo-ray rifle up to his shoulder, aimed and ready to fire.

"You're a good spaceman, Corbett," said Hardy in a cold, harsh voice,
"but this is the last time you'll ever get into my hair!"

Tom's leg prevented him from moving and he had turned in an awkward
sitting position to face Hardy. All he could do was bring his gun up
quickly and fire over his left shoulder. Hardy fired at the same
instant. At such close range neither could miss.

When Captain Strong and the colonists dashed into the ship they found
two perfect statues.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER 21


"And you kept giving Hardy wrong information?" asked Strong with a
laugh.

"Yes!" snorted Professor Sykes with a wry grin. "You see, I knew right
away Vidac was doing something funny way back--" He paused to sip his
tea. "Way back before we landed on Roald." He grinned broadly at the
people seated around the table in the dining room of the Logan house,
Roger, Astro, Jeff, Tom, Jane, Billy, Hyram, and Strong.

After Strong had released the Space Cadets from the effects of the
paralo rays, they had searched the _Polaris_ and found the professor
locked in one of the cabins. Placing Vidac and Hardy under arrest and
confining them in the brig of the ship with Winters and Bush, they had
returned to the Logan farm to clear a few of the mysteries surrounding
the nightmare of violence since their landing on Roald.

"When Vidac and Hardy refused to let me go down and make an inspection
of the satellite after the instruments conked out, I knew there was
something fishy," Sykes continued. "Any fool could have seen that
radioactivity would be the only thing to cause an instrument
disturbance like that!"

"Then Vidac and Hardy knew about the uranium?" asked Strong. "We only
discovered it at Space Academy ourselves a little while ago."

"They knew about it all right," asserted Sykes. "Hardy told me so
himself. He got the information from an old prospector who had made
application to come to Roald as a colonist. The space rat had been here
before, as a sailor on a deep spacer that had wandered off course. The
ship was running low on water so the skipper sent him down to the
satellite to see if he could find any. He found the water and the
uranium too. But he clammed up about that, hoping to keep it a secret
until he could go back and claim it. His only chance was to become a
colonist, and when he washed out in the screening, he told Hardy, hoping
to bribe his way. Of course Hardy double-crossed him to get the uranium
himself. That was why you were pulled off the project and sent to Pluto,
Strong. Then he got Vidac to be his aide and everything looked rosy."

"It's still hard to believe that Hardy was behind the whole operation,"
said Astro, shaking his head. "Imagine--the governor of the colony
ratting on his own people."

"It's happened before, unfortunately," commented Strong. "Better men
than Hardy have succumbed to the lure of riches and power."

"You're right, Strong," snapped Sykes. "That's just what happened to
Hardy. While I was his prisoner on the _Polaris_, he kept boasting about
how rich he was going to be--how powerful. When I reminded him of his
past achievements and of his responsibility to the colony, he just
laughed. He said getting the uranium meant more to him than anything in
the world." The little professor sighed. "If it hadn't been for the
cadets, he would have gotten away with it."

"But wait a minute," said Roger. "If you suspected Vidac, why did you
give him the information on the uranium to send back to the Solar
Guard?"

"I just told him about a puny little deposit near the Logan farm,"
replied Sykes. "The big strike is on the other side of the satellite. I
figured that if Vidac was honest it wouldn't hurt to delay sending
information back about the big strike until later." He paused and added,
"But then, of course, I had to tell him about the big strike."

"You had to tell him!" exclaimed Jeff. "But why?"

"To stay alive, you idiot!" barked Sykes. "As long as I had something
they wanted, they'd keep me alive until they found out about it. They
gave me truth serum, but I'm immune to drugs. All Solar Guard scientists
are. They didn't know that. So I told them to look here, then there,
acted as though I had lost my memory. It worked, and here I am."

"What about the way they antagonized us?" asked Tom. "Refusing to let us
contact Space Academy and sending us out on a stripped-down rocket scout
to investigate the asteroid cluster. It seems to me they should have
acted a little more friendly to throw us off the track. All they did was
arouse suspicion and get us sore."

"But they hoped that you would get angry enough to do something
rebellious, so that they could send you back," said Sykes.

"Well, that makes sense," said Strong. "But what about their treatment
of the colonists?"

"Humph. A clear case of attempting to get the colonists to rebel which
would give them the right to absolute control of the entire satellite
and the people. Cadet Tom Corbett here is to be congratulated for not
allowing Mr. Logan to go around like a vigilante and get us all in a
space hurricane!"

Hyram Logan blushed and cleared his throat noisily.

The door suddenly opened and a uniformed messenger thrust a dispatch
into Strong's hands.

"What's this?" asked Strong, tearing the Solar Guard seal.

"Message from spaceport control, sir," said the messenger. "They report
a fleet of ships approaching Roald, under full thrust."

"A fleet!" gasped Strong. "But how? Why?"

Sykes laughed, winked at Jane, and slapped his thigh. "The Solar Guard
coming to the rescue!"

"Solar Guard!" chorused the others at the table.

"Yes! Solar Guard. I sent for them. I figured if the cadets could build
a communicator, I could too. I did it on the _Polaris_ when Hardy went
searching for the uranium. I told the whole story to Commander Walters
back at Space Academy."

"Well," sighed Roger, "with the confession Jeff got from Winters on the
audioscriber, I guess we can consider the first civil disorder of the
star satellite of Roald finished. Peace and harmony will reign. And
speaking of harmony, Jane, would you like to take a walk in the
starlight?"

"I'm sorry, Roger," answered Jane, blushing prettily, "but I've already
been invited."

Roger's face fell. "You've already been invited?"

Jane nodded. "Ready, Astro?"

"Sure!" replied the giant Venusian. He rose, offered Jane his arm
ceremoniously, and the two walked out of the house. Roger's face turned
a deep scarlet. The others around the table burst into laughter.

"Ah, go blow your jets," growled Roger.

Billy's eyes were shining. He turned to Strong. "Captain Strong, how old
do you have to be to get into Space Academy?"

Strong's eyes twinkled. "Since Roger doesn't seem to be too busy, why
don't you ask him for all the Academy dope?"

"Would you help me, Roger?" pleaded Billy. "I can recite the whole book
of Academy 'regs' by heart!"

Roger glanced around the table with a sheepish grin. "There isn't but
one regulation that's really important, Billy."

"Oh? What's that?"

"I'll answer that, Billy," said Tom. "Roger means the one that goes like
this ... 'no cadet will be allowed to entertain any work, project, or
ideas that will not lend themselves directly to his immediate or future
obligation as a spaceman.'" Tom stopped and smiled broadly. "And that
means girls!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Calling all boys and girls to Mercury, Venus, Jupiter and all
points in outer space--

You, too, can be a part of the group of daring adventurers from the
Space Academy who travel to mysterious lands in outer space on dangerous
and exciting missions. It's as simple as opening a book ... if the book
is

TOM CORBETT, SPACE CADET

You'll discover the Earth of the future, where you can hurtle through
space at breath-taking speed, and a trip to Mars will be as simple as
taking a walk around the block.

Don't miss these thrill-packed books:

1. STAND BY FOR MARS!
2. DANGER IN DEEP SPACE
3. ON THE TRAIL OF THE SPACE PIRATES
4. THE SPACE PIONEERS
5. THE REVOLT ON VENUS
6. TREACHERY IN OUTER SPACE
7. SABOTAGE IN SPACE
8. THE ROBOT ROCKET

GROSSET & DUNLAP, Inc., _Publishers_

New York 10, N. Y.
