
But not how he died. Ross was prepared to grant the Baldies super-Terran
abilities, but he did not see how they could know what had happened
here. They could only suspect danger, not know the form it had taken.
And sooner or later one of them must come to adjust the switch. This
could be a duel of patience.

Ross squatted at the edge of the well, trying to make his ears supply
him with hints of what might be happening below. Had there been an
alteration in the volume of vibration? He set his palm flat to the deck,
tried to deduce the truth. But he could not be sure. That there had been
some slight change he was certain.

They could not wait much longer without making an attempt to reopen the
air-supply regulator, or could they? Again Ross was hampered by lack of
information. Perhaps the Baldies did not need the same amount of oxygen
his own kind depended upon. And if that were true, Ross could be the
first to suffer in playing a waiting game. Well, air was not the only
thing he could cut off from here, though it had been the first and most
important to his mind. Ross hesitated. Two-edged weapons cut in both
directions. But he had to force a countermove from them. He pulled
another switch. The control cabin, the whole of the ship, was plunged
into darkness.

No sound from below this time. Ross pictured the interior layout of the
ships he had known. Two levels down to reach the engine room. Could he
descend undetected? There was only one way to test that--try it.

He pulled the Foanna cloak about him, was several rungs down on the
ladder when the glow in the walls came on. An emergency switch? With a
forward scramble, Ross swung into one of the radiating side corridors.
The sliding-door panels along it were all closed; he could detect no
sounds behind them. But the vibration in the ship's walls had returned
to its steady beat.

Now the Terran realized the folly of his move. He was more securely
trapped here than he had been in the control cabin. There was only one
way out, up or down the ladder, and the enemy could have that under
observation from below. All they would need to do was to use a flamer or
a paralyzing ray such as the one he had turned over to Ashe several days
ago.

Ross inched along to the stairwell. A faint pad of movement, a shadow of
sound from the ladder. Someone on the way up. Could they mentally detect
him, know him for an alien intruder by the broadcast of his thoughts?
The Baldies had a certain respect for the Foanna and might desire to
take one alive. He drew the robe about him, used it to muffle his figure
completely as the true wearers did.

But the figure pulling painfully up from rung to rung was no Baldy. The
lean Hawaikan arms, the thin Hawaikan face, drawn of feature, painfully
blank of expression--Loketh--under the same dread spell as had held the
warriors in the citadel courtyard. Could the aliens be using this
Hawaikan captive as a defense shield, moving up behind him?

Loketh's head turned, those blank eyes regarded Ross. And their depths
were troubled, recognition of a sort returning. The Hawaikan threw up
one hand in a beseeching gesture and then went to his knees in the
corridor.

"Great One! Great One!" The words came from his lips in a breathy hiss
as he groveled. Then his body went flaccid, and he sprawled face down,
his twisted leg drawn up as if he would run but could not.

"Foanna!" The one word came out of the walls themselves, or so it
seemed.

"Foanna--the wise learn what lies before them when they walk alone in
the dark." The Hawaikan speech was stilted, accented, but
understandable.

Ross stood motionless. Had they somehow seen him through Loketh's eyes?
Or had they been alerted merely by the Hawaikan's call? They believed he
was one of the Foanna. Well, he would play that role.

"Foanna!" Sharper this time, demanding. "You lie in our hand. Let us
clasp the fingers tightly and you shall be naught."

Out of somewhere the words Karara had chanted in the Foanna temple came
to Ross--not in her Polynesian tongue but in the English she had
repeated. And softening his voice to his best approximation of the
Foanna singsong Ross sang:

    "Ye forty thousand gods,
    Ye gods of sea, of sky--of stars," he improvised.
    "Ye elders of the gods that are,
    Ye gods that once were,
    Ye that whisper, yet that watch by night,
    Ye that show your gleaming eyes."

"Foanna!" The summons was on the ragged edge of patience. "Your tricks
will not move our mountains!"

"Ye gods of mountains," Ross returned, "of valleys, of Shades and not
the Shadow," he wove in the beliefs of this world, too. "Walk now this
world, between the stars!" His confidence was growing. And there was no
use in remaining pent in this corridor. He would have to chance that
they were not prepared to kill summarily one of the Foanna.

Ross went to the well, went down the ladder slowly, keeping his robe
about him. Here at the next level there was a wider space about the
opening, and three door panels. Behind one must be those he sought. He
was buoyed up by a curious belief in himself, almost as if wearing this
robe did give him in part the power attributed to the Foanna.

He laid his hand on the door to his right and sent it snapping back into
its frame, stepped inside as if he entered here by right.

There were three Baldies. To his Terran eyes they were all superficially
alike, but the one seated on a control stool had a cold arrogance in his
expression, a pitiless half smile which made Ross face him squarely. The
Terran longed for one of the Foanna staffs and the ability to use it. To
spray that energy about this cabin might reduce the Baldy defenses to
nothing. But now two of the paralyzing tubes were trained on him.

"You have come to us, Foanna, what have you to offer?" demanded the
commander, if that was his rank.

"Offer?" For the first time Ross spoke. "There is no reason for the
Foanna to make any offer, slayer of women and children. You have come
from the stars to take, but that does not mean we choose to give."

He felt it now, that inner pulling, twisting in his mind, the willing
which was their more subtle weapon. Once they had almost bent him with
that willing because then he had worn their livery, a spacesuit taken
from the wrecked freighter. Now he did not have that chink in his
defense. And all that stubborn independence and determination to be
himself alone resisted the influence with a fierce inner fire.

"We offer life to you, Foanna, freedom of the stars. These other dirt
creepers are nothing to you, why take you weapons in their cause? You
are not of the same race."

"Nor are you!" Ross's hands moved under the envelope of the robe,
unloosing the two hidden clasps which held it. That bank of controls
before which the commander sat--to silence that would cause trouble. And
he depended upon Ynlan. The Rovers should now be massed at either end of
the canyon waiting for the force field to fail and let them in.

Ross steadied himself, poised for action. "We have something for you,
star men--" he tried to hold their attention with words, "have you not
heard of the power of the Foanna--that they can command wind and wave?
That they can be where they were not in a single movement of the eyelid?
And this is so--behold!"

It was the oldest trick in the world, perhaps on any planet. But because
it was so old maybe it had been forgotten by the aliens. For, as Ross
pointed, those heads did turn for an instant.

He was in the air, the robe gathered in his arms wide spread as bat
wings. And then they crashed in a tangle which bore them all back
against the controls. Ross strove to enmesh them in the robe, using the
pressure of his body to slam them all on the buttons and levers of the
board. Whether that battering would accomplish his purpose, he could not
tell. But that he had only these few seconds torn out of time to try, he
knew, and determined to use them as best he could.

One of the Baldies had slithered down to the floor and another was
aiming strangely ineffectual blows at him. But the third had wriggled
free to bring up a paralyzer. Ross slewed around, dragging the alien he
held across his body just as the other fired. But though the fighter
went limp and heavy in Ross's hold, the Terran's own right arm fell to
his side, his upper chest was numb, and his head felt as if one of the
Rover's boarding axes had clipped it. Ross reeled back and fell, his
left hand raking down the controls as he went. Then he lay on the cabin
floor and saw the convulsed face of the commander above him, a paralyzer
aiming at his middle.

To breathe was an effort Ross found torture to endure. The red haze in
his head filled all the world. Pain--he strove to flee the pain but was
held captive in it. And always the pressure on him kept that agony
steady.

"Let ... be...." He wanted to scream that. Perhaps he had, but the
pressure continued. Then he forced his eyes open. Ashe--Ashe and one of
the Foanna bending over him, Ashe's hands on his chest, pressing,
relaxing, pressing again.

"It is good--" He knew Ynvalda's voice. Her hand rested lightly on his
forehead and from that touch Ross drew again the quickening of body and
spirit he had felt on the dancing floor.

"How--?" He began and then changed to--"Where--?" For this was not the
engine room of the spacer. He lay in the open, with sweet, rain-wet wind
filling his starved lungs now without Ashe's force aid.

"It is over," Ashe told him, "all over--for now."

But not until the sun reached the canyon hours later and they sat in
council, did Ross learn all the tale. Just as he had made his own plan
for reaching the spacer, so had Ashe, Karara, and the dolphins worked on
a similar attempt. The river running deep in those mountain gorges had
provided a road for the dolphins and they found beneath its surface an
entrance past the force barrier.

"The Baldies were so sure of their superiority on this primitive world
they set no guards save that field," Ashe explained. "We slipped through
five swimmers to reach the ship. And then the field went down, thanks to
you."

"So I did help--that much." Ross grinned wryly. What had he proven by
his sortie? Nothing much. But he was not sorry he had made it. For the
very fact he had done it on his own had eased in part that small ache
which was in him now when he looked at Ashe and remembered how it had
once been. Ashe might be--always would be--his friend, but the old
tight-locking comradeship of the Project was behind them, vanished like
the time gate.

"And what will you do with them?" Ross nodded toward the captives, the
three from the ship, two more taken from the small scouting globe which
had homed to find their enemies ready for them.

"We wait," Ynvalda said, "for those on the Rover ship to be brought
hither. By our laws they deserve death."

The Rovers at that council nodded vigorously, all save Torgul and Jazia.
The Rover woman spoke first.

"They bear the Curse of Phutka heavy on them. To live under such a curse
is worse than a clean, quick dying. Listen, it has come upon me that
better this curse not only eat them up but be carried by them to rot
those who sent them--"

Together the Foanna nodded. "There has been enough of killing," said
Ynlan. "No, warriors, we do not say this because we shrink from rightful
deaths. But Jazia speaks the truth in this matter. Let these depart.
Perhaps they will bear that with them which will convince their leaders
that this is not a world they may squeeze in their hands as one crushes
a ripe quaya to eat its seeds. You believe in your cursing, Rovers, then
let the fruit of it be made plain beyond the stars!"

Was this the time to speak of the switched tapes, Ross wondered. No, he
did not really believe that the Rover curse or their treatment of the
captives would, either one, influence the star leaders. But, if the
invaders did not return to their base, their vanishing might also work
to keep another expedition from invading Hawaikan skies. Leave it to
chance, a curse, and time....

So it was decided.

"Have we won?" Ross asked Ashe later.

"Do you mean, have we changed the future? Who can answer that? They may
return in force, this may have been a step which was taken before. Those
pylons may still stand in the future above a deserted sea and island. We
shall probably never know."

That was also their own truth. For them also there had been a
substitution of journey tapes by Fate, and this was now their Hawaika.
Ross Murdock, Gordon Ashe, Karara Trehern, Tino-rau, Taua--five Terrans
forever lost in time--in the past with a dubious future. Would this be
the barren, lotus world, or another now? Yes, no--either. They had found
their key to the mystery out of time, but they could not turn it, and
there was no key to the gate which had ceased to exist. Grasp tight the
present. Ross looked about him. Yes, the present, which might be very
satisfying after all....


       *       *       *       *       *



SCIENCE FICTION by ANDRE NORTON


THE DEFIANT ANGENTS

Operation Cochise: a carefully planned Western move to colonize a planet
ahead of the Reds. Travis Fox had been an eager volunteer, but the
morning he dragged himself half-conscious from the wrecked spaceship on
the planet Topaz, he sensed the terror which would threaten the project.
Travis never learned why the ship had crashed, nor why he and the other
Apache agents had been shot into space without warning and under Redax
control, a machine which had returned them to ancestral mentality.

But the dangers on Topaz demanded free minds, for Travis soon realized
that if the Reds already encamped beyond the mountains--a horde of
barbaric Mongols completely dominated by their masters--discovered the
secret of the eerie underground chamber in the towers hidden in a valley
of mists, not only Topaz but Terra itself would be destroyed.

Andre Norton's ability to grip the reader and transport him to other
worlds in space and time is well known. In this fast-paced adventure in
which the struggle for domination of men's minds ranges from control of
their prehistoric memories to the risk of unleashing a horror never
meant for the hands of men, the author again proves to be "a superb
storyteller whose skill draws the reader completely into a fantastic
other-world," (_Chicago Tribune_). A companion book to _Galactic
Derelict_.


STORM OVER WARLOCK

"Fleeing from Throg invaders, Shann Lantee and Ragnar Thorvald enter the
world of beautiful women. Immensely powerful as they are lovely, these
witches control men by thought domination. Shann's victory over the
beetle-like Throg and his civilized alliance with the women is told
here with that sweep of imagination and brilliance of detail which
render Andre Norton a primary talent among writers of science
fiction."--_Virginia Kirkus_ (starred).


GALACTIC DERELICT

"Andre Norton has no peer in his chosen field of science fiction for
teen-agers. This time his story involves an expedition in both time and
space, as some young scientists ... set forth on a journey to repossess
a lost spaceship."--_Virginia Kirkus_ (starred).


THE TIME TRADERS

"Effectively utilizing the concept of time travel, the author ... has
written another imaginative, action-filled science fiction story for
teenage boys. Young Ross Murdock ... is sent back into the Bronze Age,
discovers a derelict galactic ship, and finds himself fighting ... to
gain control of the secrets of space flight."--ALA _Booklist_.


STAR BORN

Young Dalgard Nordis of the planet Astra and his merman companion Sssuri
join forces with a space man from Terra to outwit resurgent nonhuman
Aliens. A sequel to _The Stars Are Ours!_


THE STARS ARE OURS!

To escape the tyranny on Terra in the year 2500, a group of scientists
make a last-minute getaway under fire and take off for another planet in
another solar system. Their adventures make top-flight entertainment for
all science-fiction fans.


SPACE PIONEERS

_Edited With an Introduction and Notes by Andre Norton_

Outstanding stories by some of the finest writers in the science-fiction
genre that present a startling glimpse into the future of space travel,
artificial satellites, and colonization.


REBEL SPURS


THE DEFIANT AGENTS


RIDE PROUD, REBEL!


THE TIME TRADERS


YANKEE PRIVATEER


SPACE SERVICE _Edited by Andre Norton_
