possible."

"Very well, sir," replied the lieutenant.

"I'll go back to the other position with Cadet Astro. Start your attack
as soon as you see Major Connel and his men go in."

"Got it, sir," said the lieutenant.

Strong and Astro made their way back to Connel's position quickly, and
after a brief but hearty handclasp, the two officers began plotting the
last assault against the Nationalists' stronghold. While other Marine
columns were wiping up small groups of rebels fighting from disabled
spaceships, repair shops, and other buildings, Strong's column had been
driving straight for the heart of the base. The administration building
was the last barrier between them and complete victory over the rebels.

Strong and Connel spoke briefly of Tom and Roger, neither wanting to
voice his inner fears in front of Astro. The Nationalists previously had
shown little regard for human life. Now, with their backs to the wall,
Connel and Strong knew that if Tom and Roger were captured, they might
be used as hostages to ensure safe passage for some of the rebels.

"Let's go," said Connel finally. "Tom and Roger will be expecting us."
He forced himself to grin at Astro, but the giant cadet turned and faced
the building grimly. Connel lifted his hand, took a last look up and
down the line of waiting Marines, then brought his hand down quickly.
"Over the top. Spaceman's luck!" he shouted.

The Marines vaulted over the top of their defense position and charged
madly toward the building, all guns blazing. The Nationalists returned
the fire, and for the first few seconds it seemed that the world had
suddenly gone mad. Strong found himself shouting, running, and firing in
a red haze. Astro was roaring at the top of his lungs, and Connel just
charged ahead blindly. Marines began to drop on all sides, cut down by
the withering fire. Then, when it appeared that they would have to fall
back, the main column, led by the Solar Guard lieutenant, broke through
the last barricade and swarmed into the building.

Five minutes later the battle was over. The last remnants of the
Nationalists had been defeated and the green-clad troopers were herded
into the streets like cattle. Strong and Connel, followed by Astro,
charged through the building like wild bulls searching for Tom and
Roger.

"No sign of them," said Strong finally. "They must have slipped out
somehow."

"No!" roared Connel. "They've been taken out of here as hostages. I'll
bet my life on that. There must be a secret way out of here!"

"Come on," said Strong. "Let's find it." Suddenly he stopped. "Look!
Those three troopers outside that door! They're frozen! Let's have a
look there first!"

They rushed over to the closet where the three Nationalists had been
frozen by Sinclair.

Strong stopped and gasped. "By the craters of Luna, it's Sharkey!"

"Sharkey? Who's that?" asked Astro.

"Supposed to be the leader of the Nationalists," said Connel.

Strong quickly released Sharkey from the paralo-ray effects and the man
shuddered so violently from the reaction that Astro had to grab him to
keep him from falling down.

"Where are Corbett and Manning?" demanded Connel.

"Lactu ... he took them both in there ... through a secret passageway."
Sharkey pointed to the closet with a trembling finger.

Strong jumped for the closet door and jerked it open. He saw the open
wall and the stairs leading down. "Come on! This way!"

Connel ran wildly into the closet, followed by Astro. Suddenly the big
cadet stopped, turned, and fired point-blank at the figurehead of the
Nationalist rebellion. Sharkey once again grew rigid.

The two Solar Guard officers raced down the stairs into the tunnel and
ran headlong through the darkness. Time was precious now. The lives of
Tom and Roger might be lost by a wasted second.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER 20


"What's that noise, Tom?"

The two cadets were walking through the tunnel when they heard the
strange booming roar. Behind them, Sinclair overheard Roger's whispered
question and laughed. "That is the sound of the slaves being fed their
lunch. They do not know yet that there has been a battle and soon
they'll be free!"

"Slaves!" gasped Roger. "What kind of slaves?"

"You shall see. Keep going!" Sinclair prodded the cadets with his ray
gun. The tunnel had grown larger and the downward slant of the floor
lessened as they pressed forward. The noise ahead of them grew louder
and stronger and now they could distinguish occasional words above the
din.

"We must pass through the big vault where the slaves are working," said
Sinclair. "I would advise you to keep your mouths shut and do as I say!"

Neither Tom nor Roger answered, keeping their eyes straight ahead.

The tunnel suddenly cut sharply to the right and they could see a blaze
of light in front of them. The two boys stopped involuntarily, and then
were nudged forward by Sinclair's guns. Before them was a huge cavern
nearly a thousand yards high and three thousand yards across,
illuminated by hundreds of torches. Along one side of the cave a line of
men were waiting to have battered tin plates filled from a huge pot at
the head of the line. The men were in rags, and every one of them was
hardly more than skin and bones. At strategic places around the cavern,
Nationalist guards kept their guns trained and ready to fire. They
brought up their guns quickly as Tom and Roger entered, and then lowered
them again as Sinclair appeared. Every eye turned to the Nationalist
leader as he marched across the floor of the cave, Tom and Roger walking
before him.

"You see," said Sinclair, "these wretched fools thought my organization
was a utopia until they learned that I was no better for them than the
Solar Guard. Unfortunately they learned too late and were sent here to
dig underground pits for my spaceships and storage dumps."

The small column of three marched across the floor of the cave toward
another small tunnel on the opposite side. The slaves were absolutely
still, and the guards smiled a greeting at their leader when he passed
them.

Sinclair ignored them all. "Beyond that tunnel," he continued, pointing
to the small opening ahead of them, "there is a spaceship. We will board
that ship and blast off. The three of us. Where we will go, I haven't
decided yet. Perhaps a long trip into deep space until the Solar Guard
has forgotten about you and me and the Nationalists. Then we will
return, as I said before, to Mars, or perhaps Ganymede, and I will start
all over again."

"You're mad!" said Tom through clenched teeth. "Crazy as a space bug!"

"We shall see, Corbett. We shall see!"

Suddenly Roger broke away and raced toward the mass of slaves. He
shouted wildly, "Get the guards! The Nationalists are beaten! The base
in the canyon has been destroyed! Hurry! Rebel!"

The emaciated men milled around the cadet, all asking questions at once.

Sinclair signaled to the guards. "Shoot him down!" Four guards took
careful aim.

"Roger! Look out!" warned Tom.

Roger whirled around in time to see the guards about to fire. He dived
for a mound of dirt and hid behind it. The energy shock waves licked at
the sand where he had stood a second before. Roger got up and ran for
better cover, the guards continuing to fire at him. Then, around the
cadet, the slave workers began to come alive. Some hurled stones at the
guards, others began climbing up the sides to the ledges where the
guards stood. Taking in the situation at a glance, Sinclair shoved the
ray gun in Tom's back and snarled, "Get going!"

The young cadet had no alternative. He turned and marched hurriedly
across the floor toward the small tunnel ahead of him. Several slave
workers tried to attack Sinclair, but in their weakened condition, they
were no match for the alert Nationalist leader who froze them instantly
with his paralo-ray gun.

Roger saw Tom heading for the tunnel and made a sudden dash for
Sinclair. But the rebel leader heard the pounding of footsteps and
turned to fire at Roger as the cadet sailed through the air in a flying
tackle. The jolting ray hit him squarely and he landed on the ground
with a thud a few feet from Sinclair, completely immobilized again.

Tom tried to seize the momentary advantage, but once again Sinclair was
quicker and forced Tom back into the small opening of the tunnel.

Around them, the slave workers were being whipped into a frenzy after
months of stored-up hatred for their guards. Hundreds of them were
climbing up toward the guards' posts, unmindful of the deadly fire
pouring down on them.

"Get in there quick!" demanded Sinclair. He shoved Tom through the small
opening, and after a quick glance over his shoulder at the surging
slaves, followed the cadet.

Sinclair flashed a light ahead of them and Tom saw the reflection of a
bright surface. In the distance he recognized the outlines of a
spaceship.

"Keep moving!" ordered Sinclair. "You're my protection in getting out of
here, and if I have to freeze you and carry you aboard, that's just what
I'll do! Now get moving!"

Tom walked to the air lock of the ship, Sinclair right in back of him.
The rebel leader pressed an outside button in the ship's stabilizer fin
and the port swung open slowly. "Get in!" growled Sinclair.

Tom stepped into the ship and waited. Sinclair climbed in in back of him
and closed the air lock.

"Through that hatch," said Sinclair, motioning toward the iron ladder,
"and keep your hands in the air."

"How do you think you're going to get through the Solar Guard fleet
that's standing off above the canyon?" asked Tom casually. "As soon as
they see this ship blast off, you'll have a hundred atomic war heads
blasting after you!"

"Not as long as I have you!" sneered Sinclair. "You're my protection!"

"You're wrong," said Tom. "They'll open fire, anyway."

"That's the chance I've got to take," said Sinclair. "Now climb up to
the control deck and get on the audioceiver. You're going to tell them
you're aboard!"

Tom walked ahead of the rebel leader toward the control deck, his mind
racing. He knew that Sinclair was going through with his plan and he
also knew that the Solar Guard would not pay any attention to anything
he had to say. If, after three warnings, Sinclair didn't brake jets and
bring his ship to a stop, he would be blasted out of space. He had to do
something.

"Where's the communicator?" asked Tom.

"Over by the radar scanner." Sinclair eyed him suspiciously. "Remember,
Corbett, your life depends on this as much as mine. If you don't
convince them you're worth saving by letting me get away, you're a dead
pigeon!"

"You don't have to tell me," said Tom. "I know when I'm licked."

Sinclair took his position in the pilot's chair, facing the control
panel. For a brief moment his back was to Tom as he bent over to turn on
the generators. Tom took a deep breath and lurched across the deck. But
Sinclair turned and saw him coming, and jerked up the ray gun. He wasn't
able to get clear in time. Tom's fingers circled the barrel of the gun
as Sinclair fired. The barrel grew hot as Sinclair fired repeatedly.
Tom's fingers were beginning to blister under the intense heat, but he
held on. With his other hand he reached up for the rebel's throat.
Sinclair grabbed his wrist and, locked together, they rolled around on
the deck.

[Illustration: _Sinclair wasn't able to get clear in time_]

Sinclair continued to fire the ray gun and Tom's fingers were burning
with pain from the heat. Suddenly the cadet let go the gun, spun around,
and jerked Sinclair off balance. He swung his free hand as hard as he
could into the rebel's stomach. Sinclair doubled over and staggered
back, dropping the gun. Tom was on top of him like a shot, pounding
straight, jolting rights and lefts to the man's head and stomach. But
Sinclair was tough. He twisted around, and quick as a cat, jumped to his
feet. Then, stepping in, he rapped a solid right to Tom's jaw. The cadet
reeled back, nearly falling to the deck. Sinclair was in on top of him
in a flash, pounding his head and body with vicious smashing blows.

Tom fell to the floor under the savagery of the rebel leader's attack.
Sinclair lifted his foot to kick the cadet as Tom's fingers tightened
around the barrel of the discarded ray gun. He brought it up sharply
against the planter's shin and he staggered back in pain. Tom took
careful aim. He fired the gun. Nothing happened. The gun was empty.

Sinclair rushed the cadet again, but Tom stepped aside and swung the
heavy gun with all his might. The metal smashed against Sinclair's head
and he sank to the deck, out cold.

The last rebel of Venus had been defeated.

       *       *       *       *       *

"We found Roger trying to keep the slaves away from the guards," said
Strong. "They were ready to tear them apart!"

"Can't say that I blame them," snorted Connel. "Some of those poor
devils had been working in the caves for three years!"

Tom, Roger, and Astro sat sprawled in chairs in one of the offices of
the Nationalist headquarters listening to Strong and Major Connel sum up
the day's battle. The entire army of Nationalist guards, Division
Chiefs, and workers had been rounded up and put aboard the troop
carriers to be taken to a prison asteroid. Each individual rebel would
be dealt with under special court proceedings to be established by Solar
Alliance decree later.

"There are still some things I don't understand," said Astro. "How did
they know you were going to investigate them in the first place?"

"After our meeting with Commander Walters," said Connel, "we sent a
special coded message to the Solar Alliance Delegate here on Venus. His
secretary intercepted the message, used stolen priorities for himself
and two assistants to get to Earth and back on an express space liner
without being missed."

"The secretary!" shouted Tom. "That's the same fellow I saw in Atom City
when we were bumped out of our seats on the _Venus Lark_!"

Roger looked up at Tom with a scowl. "A fine time to remember!"

Strong grinned. "We discovered him, Tom, when that attempt was made to
kidnap you by the cab driver. We also picked up the owner of the
pawnshop."

"The most amazing thing about this space joker, Sinclair," commented
Connel, "was the way he had everyone fooled. I couldn't figure out how
he was able to get around so quickly until I learned about those
buildings."

"What buildings?" asked Tom, suddenly remembering how the rebel leader
had disappeared so quickly and quietly when he was being held captive
with Mr. and Mrs. Hill in the Sinclair home.

"Every one of the important members of the organization, the Division
Chiefs, they called themselves, had a small shack on his property near
the edge of the jungle. It was nothing more than a covering for a shaft
that led to a tunnel, which, in turn, led to other tunnels under the
jungle and eventually connected with one leading right into the base."

"You mean," said Astro, "they have underground tunnels all through the
jungle?"

"That's right," asserted Connel. "If they had been prepared for our
attack, they could have beaten the pants off us. Not only in space, but
on the ground. They could have run circles around us in those tunnels. I
got suspicious when I found a hut at the Sharkey place with no windows
in it."

"Say, remember the time Sinclair barked at me for going near that shack
on his place when we first arrived?" said Roger.

Connel grinned. "I'll bet you a plugged credit that if you had opened
that door you'd have been frozen stiffer than a snowman on Pluto."

"Well, anyhow," said Tom happily, "we got what we came after."

"What was that?" asked Strong.

"A tyrannosaurus!" replied the curly-haired cadet.

"And that's another thing," said Connel. "That tyrannosaurus we killed
was a pet of the Nationalists. I don't mean a household pet, but it
fitted into their plans nicely. The tyranno's lair was near the top of
that canyon. Any time a stray hunter came along, the tyrannosaurus would
scare him away. So when you three came along and said you were
deliberately hunting for a tyrannosaurus, they got worried."

"Worried?" asked Roger. "Why?"

"They thought you were actually hunting or investigating them, and when
I started nosing around, they were sure. That's why Sinclair ordered his
boys to burn down his plantation--to try to throw us off the track. So
you see," Connel concluded, "your summer leave really started the ball
rolling against them."

"Summer leave!" shouted Roger. "What day is it?"

"The twenty-ninth of August," replied Strong.

"Oh, no!" moaned the blond-haired cadet. "We start back to class in
three days!"

"Three days!" roared Astro. "But--but it'll take three days to write up
our reports of everything that's happened! We won't have any time for
fun!"

