"Hurrah for home!" cried Mark.

Three days later they landed at a small Florida town. The sight of the
_Porpoise_ attracted throngs of people to the dock where she tied up.
Among them was a newsboy.

"Get me all the papers for the past month," said Jack. "I want to see
what the news is."

"Same here," put in Mark, and the papers were soon brought.

"Hurrah!" exclaimed Jack, as soon as he had looked at several of the
sheets.

"What is it?" asked Mark, who was unfolding a paper.

"Anarchists Confess," read Jack. "Two Englishmen Admit They Blew Up
Hotel Where Lord Peckham Was Stopping. No Suspicion Attaches to Two
Youths Who So Mysteriously Disappeared!"

"Hurrah!" joined in Mark.

"Those are only the head lines," went on Jack. "There's a long story,
and I guess it lets us out."

The two boys were completely cleared of the slightest shade of suspicion
of the outrage, and there was even an interview with the English
detective in which he admitted that he was wrong.

A week later the _Porpoise_ tied up at her own dock, whence she was
launched.

"Back again," remarked the professor as he stepped ashore. "I've been to
the south pole, and to the north pole. I wonder where I shall go next?"

"To the big hole and underground," suggested Jack.

"We shall see," said Mr. Henderson with a twinkle in his eyes.


THE END




The Dave Dashaway Series

By ROY ROCKWOOD


Author of the "Speedwell Boys Series" and the "Great Marvel Series."

=12mo. Illustrated. Price per volume, 60 cents, postpaid.=

=Never was there a more clever young aviator than Dave Dashaway. All
up-to-date lads will surely wish to read about him.=


[Illustration: DAVE DASHAWAY THE YOUNG AVIATOR]

          DAVE DASHAWAY THE YOUNG AVIATOR
          _or In the Clouds for Fame and Fortune_

          This initial volume tells how the hero ran away
          from his miserly guardian, fell in with a
          successful airman, and became a young aviator of
          note.


          DAVE DASHAWAY AND HIS
          HYDROPLANE
          _or Daring Adventures Over the Great Lakes_

          Showing how Dave continued his career as a birdman
          and had many adventures over the Great Lakes, and
          how he foiled the plans of some Canadian
          smugglers.


          DAVE DASHAWAY AND HIS GIANT AIRSHIP
          _or A Marvellous Trip Across the Atlantic_

          How the giant airship was constructed and how the
          daring young aviator and his friends made the
          hazardous journey through the clouds from the new
          world to the old, is told in a way to hold the
          reader spellbound.


          DAVE DASHAWAY AROUND THE WORLD
          _or A Young Yankee Aviator Among Many Nations_

          An absorbing tale of a great air flight around the
          world, of adventures in Alaska, Siberia and
          elsewhere. A true to life picture of what may be
          accomplished in the near future.


          DAVE DASHAWAY: AIR CHAMPION
          _or Wizard Work in the Clouds_

          Dave makes several daring trips, and then enters a
          contest for a big prize. An aviation tale
          thrilling in the extreme.

       *       *       *       *       *

CUPPLES & LEON CO., Publishers, NEW YORK




THE FRED FENTON ATHLETIC SERIES

By ALLEN CHAPMAN

Author of "The Tom Fairfield Series," "The Boys of Pluck Series" and
"The Darewell Chums Series."

=12mo. Illustrated. Price per volume, 60 cents, postpaid.=

       *       *       *       *       *

A line of tales embracing school athletics. Fred is a true type of the
American schoolboy of to-day.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: FRED FENTON THE PITCHER]

          FRED FENTON THE PITCHER
          _or The Rivals of Riverport School_

          When Fred came to Riverport none of the school
          lads knew him, but he speedily proved his worth in
          the baseball box. A true picture of school
          baseball.


          FRED FENTON IN THE LINE
          _or The Football Boys of Riverport School_

          When Fall came in the thoughts of the boys turned
          to football. Fred went in the line, and again
          proved his worth, making a run that helped to win
          a great game.


          FRED FENTON ON THE CREW
          _or The Young Oarsmen of Riverport School_

          In this volume the scene is shifted to the river,
          and Fred and his chums show how they can handle
          the oars. There are many other adventures, all
          dear to the hearts of boys.


          FRED FENTON ON THE TRACK
          _or The Athletes of Riverport School_

          Track athletics form a subject of vast interest to
          many boys, and here is a tale telling of great
          running races, high jumping, and the like. Fred
          again proves himself a hero in the best sense of
          that term.


          FRED FENTON: MARATHON RUNNER
          _or The Great Race at Riverport School_

          Fred is taking a post-graduate course at the
          school when the subject of Marathon running came
          up. A race is arranged, and Fred shows both his
          friends and his enemies what he can do. An
          athletic story of special merit.

       *       *       *       *       *

CUPPLES & LEON CO., Publishers, NEW YORK




_Everybody will love the story of_

NOBODY'S BOY

       *       *       *       *       *

By HECTOR MALOT

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: NOBODY'S BOY]

The dearest character in all the literature of child life is little Remi
in Hector Malot's famous masterpiece _Sans Famille_ ("Nobody's Boy").

All love, pathos, loyalty, and noble boy character are exemplified in
this homeless little lad, who has made the world better for his being in
it. The boy or girl who knows Remi has an ideal never to be forgotten.
But it is a story for grownups, too.

"Nobody's Boy" is one of the supreme heart-interest stories of all time,
which will _make you happier and better_.

          _4 Colored Illustrations. $1.25 net._
          =_At All Booksellers_=

       *       *       *       *       *

=CUPPLES & LEON CO. Publishers New York=




THE BOYS' OUTING LIBRARY

_12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Jacket in full color._

_Price, per volume, 60 cents, postpaid._

[Illustration: THE SADDLE BOYS OF THE ROCKIES]

=THE SADDLE BOYS SERIES=

       *       *       *       *       *

BY CAPT. JAMES CARSON

       *       *       *       *       *

          The Saddle Boys of the Rockies
          The Saddle Boys in the Grand Canyon
          The Saddle Boys on the Plains
          The Saddle Boys at Circle Ranch
          The Saddle Boys on Mexican Trails


=THE DAVE DASHAWAY SERIES=

       *       *       *       *       *

BY ROY ROCKWOOD

       *       *       *       *       *

          Dave Dashaway the Young Aviator
          Dave Dashaway and His Hydroplane
          Dave Dashaway and His Giant Airship
          Dave Dashaway Around the World
          Dave Dashaway: Air Champion


=THE SPEEDWELL BOYS SERIES=

       *       *       *       *       *

BY ROY ROCKWOOD

       *       *       *       *       *

          The Speedwell Boys on Motorcycles
          The Speedwell Boys and Their Racing Auto
          The Speedwell Boys and Their Power Launch
          The Speedwell Boys in a Submarine
          The Speedwell Boys and Their Ice Racer


=THE TOM FAIRFIELD SERIES=

       *       *       *       *       *

BY ALLEN CHAPMAN

       *       *       *       *       *

          Tom Fairfield's School Days
          Tom Fairfield at Sea
          Tom Fairfield in Camp
          Tom Fairfield's Pluck and Luck
          Tom Fairfield's Hunting Trip


=THE FRED FENTON ATHLETIC SERIES=

       *       *       *       *       *

BY ALLEN CHAPMAN

       *       *       *       *       *

          Fred Fenton the Pitcher
          Fred Fenton in the Line
          Fred Fenton on the Crew
          Fred Fenton on the Track
          Fred Fenton: Marathon Runner

_Send For Our Free Illustrated Catalogue._

       *       *       *       *       *

=CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY, Publishers New York=

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Page 3, "Main" changed to "Maine". (coast of Maine)

Page 7, "stearsman" changed to "steersman". (for the steersman)

Page 16, "stearing" changed to "steering". (or steering tower)

Page 16, "beeksteak" changed to "beefsteak". (fry a beefsteak)

Page 19, "speciments" changed to "specimens". (pretty nice specimens)

Page 20, "steared" changed to "steered". (professor steered her)

Page 24, word "be" added to the text. (it'll be all)

Page 32, "lauched" changed to "launched". (she had been launched)

Page 36, "reined" changed to "reigned". (pandemonium reigned)

Page 56, "stear" changed to "steer". (to steer properly)

Page 57, "stear" changed to "steer". (ship will steer)

Page 63, "helmet" changed to "helmets". (their helmets were)

Page 67, "stearing" changed to "steering". (professor was steering)

Page 72, "assasinate" changed to "assassinate". (to assassinate Lord)

Page 76, "want's" changed to "wants". (cabin wants to)

Page 82, "innner" changed to "inner". (inner door was)

Page 87, "stearing" changed to "steering". (Washington was steering)

Page 89, "propellors" changed to "propellers". (about the propellers)

Page 90, "propellor" changed to "propeller". (big propeller in)

Page 140, "begining" changed to "beginning". (run was beginning)

Page 158, "wierd" changed to "weird". (weird white object)

Page 162, "subterreanean" changed to "subterranean". (of subterranean
disturbances)

Page 182, "Britanic" changed to "Britannic". (His Britannic Majesty's)

Page 182, word "was" removed from text. (show something that) Original
read "show was something that".

Page 187, "beeing" changed to "being". (was being steered)

Page 187, "firghtened" changed to "frightened". (gave one frightened)

Page 192, "folowed" changed to "followed". (silence followed his)

Page 193, "oscilation" changed to "oscillation". (oscillation of the
big)

Page 195, "preparel" changed to "prepared". (prepared water-proof)

