
The beam had about a hundred foot diameter at its base on the rocks;
it passed upward through the circle of Wandl vessels and its spread
bathed all of Grantline's ships at once. An attractive beam, so
powerful that the ships were helpless; against all their efforts they
were pinned and drawn downward. A slight velocity at first, but with a
tremendous acceleration.

Within an hour they were hurtling, coming together as they speeded
down the narrowing cone of the beam. The ten thousand miles, their
distance above the Moon, was cut to five thousand. The Wandl ships
drew aside, keeping well out of range to let them pass; in another
thirty minutes they would crash against the rocks.

I gazed in horror from the _Star-Streak's_ turret. We were sidewise to
the angle of the beam. Grantline's ships were pulled together now into
almost a fifty-mile group. They hung all askew, helplessly pinned,
some broadside, some upended. The movement of their fall was so rapid
that even with the naked eye it was apparent.

"Got them now," Molo chuckled. "This is the end for them, Gregg
Haljan."

There were only three of us in the turret: Molo and I, and my
watchful, silent guard who sat cross-legged, with a ray-gun pointed at
me.

Meka and the two girls were below during all the engagement.

It was over now.

During this lull Molo had sent the men from the deck gun ports to
their hull quarters. Our decks were empty now; the bridges and
catwalks up here had momentarily no occupants. The _Star-Streak_ had
little velocity, only a slow drift downward toward the Moon's surface,
which now was only a few hundred miles beneath us.

The lunar disc was a great dark spread of desolation, with only the
sunlight topping the distant horizon limb. And from under us, to the
side, was the source of the giant gravity-beam. Over us were the
watch-Wandl vessels, and, still higher, the helpless knot of
Grantline's ships hurtling down.

"Got them now," Molo repeated. "In another...."

He never finished. From the open doorway of the turret a figure rose
up. Snap! His aspect, even more than his appearance, transfixed me.
Snap, with his clothes torn; grimy and spattered with blood; his face
pale and gaunt, with hollow, blazing eyes. And above it, the shock of
rumpled red hair. In one hand he clutched a ray-gun, and in the other
a blood-stained knife!

My guard squatting on the floor, half-turned. Snap's bolt met him
before he could raise his weapon. He tumbled dead almost at my feet.
And mingled with the hiss of the bolt was Snap's shout at the unarmed
Molo.

"Into the corner, you! Back up, you damned traitor, else I'll kill you
as I've killed everyone else on this ship!"




19


I had leaped and seized the gun which was still in the hand of the
dead guard. "Snap, the girls!"

"Down below. Free. They've got Meka bound and gagged, locked and
sealed in a bunk-room. You bring them up! I'll hold this accursed
traitor. No need to kill him. By the gods, I've killed enough!"

He saw for the first time the vast silent drama in the firmament
outside the dome windows. "Gregg, for the love of...."

"No time now, Snap! I'll get the girls."

"Watch out. I might have missed somebody down below."

He had. Three men appeared on the forward deck near the foot of our
turret ladder. My bolt spat down upon them; two of them fell. The
other ran aft, toward where I saw Venza and Anita appearing from the
lounge doorway of the cabin superstructure. I fired again, and the
running man tumbled forward on his face. He was the last of the pirate
crew.

Molo was crouching, half-bending forward over his instrument table,
with Snap's gun upon him. The girls burst upon us. We armed them. Meka
was safely fastened down below. We backed Molo to the floor in the
corner, with Venza and Anita watching him.

Snap and I were in control of the ship. For temporary periods the
automatics would handle the gravity-shifters. I could operate them
here from the turret. We had a downward velocity toward the Moon. Five
hundred miles below us, no more, was the base of that diabolical
gravity-ray which was so swiftly pulling the twenty-five Grantline
ships to their destruction.

I gripped Snap and told him what we must do. "The forward gun on the
starboard side is almost identical with our Earth guns, the Francine
projectors. With a short range you can handle it and I'll give you a
close mark!"

He dashed for the deck. I set the levers. Gravity-plates with full bow
attraction. Stern repulsion to the Earth and the stern rocket-streams
at highest power.

The _Star-Streak_ responded smoothly; with acceleration such as only
Molo's famous terror of the starways could attain, we dove for the
Moon.

Breathless minutes! Those Wandl ships up in the firmament behind our
stern would probably do nothing; they would not understand this sudden
move of their friendly ship. The brain masters, the insect-like
Wandlites down on the Moon rocks operating the mechanism of the
gravity-ray, would not suspect until too late what the _Star-Streak_
was doing.

Uprushing rocks, the Apennines to one side; the dark yawning maw of
Archimedes on the other. We were diving parallel with the gravity-ray
now, hardly a mile from it, diving for the mechanisms of its source.
Twenty thousand feet of altitude. I bent our rocket-streams up for the
start of our turning. Bow-hull gravity-plates next. Ten thousand feet.
Five thousand.

How close we went I never knew. It was seconds now, not minutes. I
shifted all the controls. Our bow lifted as we straightened. The whole
spreading lunar surface tilted and dipped. Snap fired. I saw the bolt
flash at the tilting landscape and a puff of light down there on the
rocks. And an instant later there were vacant rocks where the little
cluster of men and mechanisms had been. And the upflung gravity-beam
was gone!

The giant towering cliffs of the mountain of Archimedes seemed to rush
at our upturning bow. The great dark crater-mouth slid under our hull.
But we cleared it; the maw of blackness slid down and away; the whole
lunar world tilted down and dwindled as we mounted again into the
starlight.

Minutes passed while we mounted. Above our upstanding bow was a new
drama. The suddenly-released Grantline ships, almost level with the
ten Wandl vessels when the ray vanished, turned sidewise. The poised
Wandl craft, devoid of velocity, could not pick up the ray to
escape now. Grantline, for those minutes, ignored the frantically
flung discs; it was a desperate encounter, all at close quarters. We
saw the spitting, puffing lights and the silent turmoil, hidden
presently by the spreading clouds of luminous fog.

Then out of it came drifting the wreckage. We plunged through an end
of the glowing fog, encountered nothing but two triumphant Venus
vessels. With them we mounted into the upper starlight.

This was the end of the battle. The victorious Grantline ships one by
one came lunging up: only twelve of them now. No Wandl vessels were
left.

The great spreading cloud drifted down like a shroud to hide the
wreckage, drifted and settled to the lunar surface, a great, radiant
area of fog, gleaming in the Earthlight.




20


There is very little more, pertinent to this narrative, that I need
add of the events on Earth, Venus, and Mars during this momentous
summer. The main facts are history now: the wild storms, the damage
done by outraged nature and the panic among the people--all of it has
been detailed as public news. The strange light-beams planted by Wandl
in Greater New York, Grebhar, and Ferrok-Shahn have not yet burned
themselves away. But they are lessening and scientists say that they
will soon be gone.

The changed calendars call this the New Era. The axis of each of the
three worlds was not appreciably altered; the climates are at last
restoring to normal. But the axial rotations of all three planets were
slowed by that attacking Wandl beam before we wrecked the gravity
station. The Earth day has been lengthened, resulting in the new
calendar, the New Era. Our year, formerly of approximately 365-1/4
days, now contains, but 358.7 days.

Molo and Meka have been returned to Ferrok-Shahn. They were tried
there for piracy and treason and are imprisoned.

And Wandl? With her gravity-controls wrecked, Wandl became subject to
the balancing celestial forces. During those succeeding months of the
summer and autumn no other spaceships appeared from her: nor did our
world investigate. Her presence here, even a little world one-sixth
the size of the Moon, was causing disturbance enough!

Wandl moved with slow velocity, like a dallying, strangely sluggish
comet about to round our Sun. What would her final orbit be? By
fortunate chance she headed in, far from the Earth and Venus; missed
Mercury by a wide margin; went close around the Sun: came out again.

But the pull of the Sun, and Mercury dragged her back. Her velocity
was not great enough.

I recall that late autumn afternoon when, with Anita, Snap, and Venza,
I sat in the observatory near Washington, gazing at Wandl through the
dark glass of the solar-scope. Doomed invader! She showed now as a
tiny dark dot over the Sun's giant, blazing surface. This was her
final plunge. The dot was presently swallowed and gone. It seemed,
amid those giant, licking streamers of blazing gas, that there was an
extra puff of light.

And some claim now that for a brief time our sunlight was a trifle
warmer, a little pyre to mark the end of Wandl, the Invader.

       *       *       *       *       *




A CLASSIC NOVEL OF INTERPLANETARY WARFARE

There were nine major planets in the Solar System and it was within
their boundaries that man first set up interplanetary commerce and
began trading with the ancient Martian civilization. And then they
discovered a tenth planet--a maverick!

This tenth world, if it had an orbit, had a strange one, for it was
heading inwards from interstellar space, heading close to the
Earth-Mars spaceways, upsetting astronautic calculations and raising
turmoil on the two inhabited worlds.

But even so none suspected then just how much trouble this new world
would make. For it was WANDL THE INVADER and it was no barren
planetoid. It was a manned world, manned by minds and monsters and
traveling into our system with a purpose beyond that of astronomical
accident!

It's a terrific novel from the classic days of great science-fiction
adventure--now first published in book form. When RAY CUMMINGS took
leave of this planet early in 1957, the world of modern
science-fiction lost one of its genuine founding fathers. For the
imagination of this talented writer supplied a great many of the most
basic themes upon which the present superstructure of science-fiction
is based. Following the lead of Jules Verne and H. G. Wells, Cummings
successfully bridged the gap between the early dawning of
science-fiction in the last decades of the Nineteenth Century and the
full flowering of the field in these middle decades of the Twentieth.

       *       *       *       *       *

Born in 1887, Cummings acquired insight into the vast possibilities of
future science by a personal association with Thomas Alva Edison.
During the 1920's and 1930's, he thrilled millions of readers with his
vivid tales of space and time. The infinite and the infinitesimal were
all parts of his canvas, and past, present, and future, the
interplanetary and the extra-dimensional, all made their initial
impact on the reading public through his many stories and novels.

       *       *       *       *       *




Here's a quick checklist of recent releases of

ACE SCIENCE-FICTION BOOKS

D-449  THE GENETIC GENERAL by Gordon R. Dickson
       and TIME TO TELEPORT by Gordon R. Dickson

D-453  THE GAMES OF NEITH by Margaret St. Clair
       and THE EARTH GODS ARE COMING
       by Kenneth Bulmer

D-455  THE BEST FROM FANTASY AND SCIENCE-FICTION
       Fourth Series, edited by Anthony Boucher.

D-457  VULCAN'S HAMMER by Philip K. Dick
       and THE SKYNAPPERS by John Brunner

D-461  THE TIME TRADERS by Andre Norton

D-465  THE MARTIAN MISSILE by David Grinnell
       and THE ATLANTIC ABOMINATION
       by John Brunner

D-468  SENTINELS OF SPACE by Eric Frank Russell

D-471  SANCTUARY IN THE SKY by John Brunner
       and THE SECRET MARTIANS by Jack Sharkey

D-473  THE GREATEST ADVENTURE by John Taine

D-479  TO THE TOMBAUGH STATION by Wilson Tucker
       and EARTHMAN GO HOME by Poul Anderson

D-482  THE WEAPON SHOPS OF ISHER
       by A. E. Van Vogt

35c

If you are missing any of these, they can be obtained directly from
the publisher by sending 35c per book (plus 5c handling fee) to Ace
Books, Inc. (Sales Dept.), 23 W. 47th St., New York 36, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *





End of Project Gutenberg's Wandl the Invader, by Raymond King Cummings

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WANDL THE INVADER ***

***** This file should be named 20859.txt or 20859.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/8/5/20859/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Sankar Viswanathan, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
