
"It's pretty difficult to tell. Sometimes I wonder what my own real
feelings are."

"I wasn't completely briefed on how it ended," Entman said delicately.

"I think the phony specifications got through."

"If they did--if things are really as they appear--"

Taber smiled in the darkness. "Are _you_ beginning to doubt, Doctor?"

"Oh, be quiet," Entman said with friendly petulance. "I was going to say
that I was rather proud of those details. If our hostiles out there
follow my specifications, they'll create androids with much smaller
lungs and non-porous skin that will give them no end of trouble when
they start chasing frightened householders down the streets of the
world."

Taber chuckled. "I remember a story about the Japanese Navy. They were
supposed to have built some ships to specifications stolen in England.
When launched, they slid out into the bay and tipped over."

Entman sighed. "I wish I could get some of the data those creatures
used in the construction of the androids."

"You'd like to make one of your own?"

"It would solve the servant problem. Terrible here in Washington."

"Labor unions would holler bloody murder."

"You can't stop progress."

Suddenly Entman got to his feet. He walked to the edge of the patio and
looked upward. Taber saw his face in the light streaming from the living
room--he seemed frightened.

"Brent! It's such a helpless feeling. What do we do?"

Brent Taber got up and went over and stood beside Entman. He, too,
looked up into the velvet night; the beautiful, quiet, impersonal night.

The sinister night.

"We watch the stars," Brent said. "And we wait."

THE END

       *       *       *       *       *

  OTHER SIGNIFICANT MONARCH BOOKS

  MS8 THE COLD WAR by Deane and David Heller
                          (A Monarch Select Book) 50c

  MS7 FORGET ABOUT CALORIES by Leland H. O'Brian
                          (A Monarch Select Book) 35c

  MS6 THE NAKED RISE OF COMMUNISM by Frank L. Kluckhohn
                          (A Monarch Select Book) 75c

  MS5 PLANNED PARENTHOOD by Henry De Forrest, M.D.
                          (A Monarch Select Book) 50c
      A study of safe and practical approaches to birth control.

  MS4 THE RISE AND FALL OF THE JAPANESE EMPIRE
                                   by Gary Gordon 50c

  MS3A AMERICA: LISTEN! by Frank L. Kluckhohn (Revised Ed.) 75c

  MS2 THE BERLIN CRISIS by Deane and David Heller 50c

  K67 DORIS DAY by Tedd Thomey 35c

  K66 ROBERT F. KENNEDY: ASSISTANT PRESIDENT by Gary Gordon
                          (A Monarch Select Book) 35c

  K65 S O S: THE WORLD'S GREAT SEA DISASTERS by Keith Jameson 50c

  K64 EISENHOWER by George Johnson (A Monarch Select Book) 35c

  K61 ELEANOR ROOSEVELT by George Johnson 35c

  K60 PRINCESS GRACE KELLY by Robert Newman 35c

  K59 POPE JOHN XXIII: PASTORAL PRINCE by Randall Garrett 50c

  K57 RICHARD NIXON by George Johnson 35c

  K56 SIR WINSTON CHURCHILL by Edgar Black 50c

  K54 JACQUELINE KENNEDY by Deane and David Heller 35c
      The fascinating story of America's glamorous First Lady.

  MB528 MEDICAL PROBLEMS OF WOMEN by Martin James, M.D.
                          (A Monarch Select Book) 50c

  MB512 FOLK AND MODERN MEDICINE by Don James 50c

  MB509 THE BOOK OF MIRACLES by Zsolt Aradi 50c

  MA328 ADMIRAL "BULL" HALSEY by Jack Pearl
                          (A Monarch Select Book) 35c

  MA321 TARAWA by Tom Bailey 50c

  MA319 U. S. MARINES IN ACTION by T. R. Fehrenbach 50c

  MA312 THE KENNEDY CABINET by Deane and David Heller 35c

Available at all newsstands and bookstores

If you are unable to secure these books at your local dealer, you may
obtain copies by sending the retail price plus 5c for handling each
title to Monarch Books, Inc., Mail Order Department, Capital Building,
Division Street, Derby, Connecticut.

       *       *       *       *       *

_A Terrifying Tale Of Horror In The Skies_

THE FLYING EYES

By J. Hunter Holly

Author of ENCOUNTER and THE GREEN PLANET

Linc Hosler was sitting in a packed football stadium when the Flying
Eyes appeared and cast their hypnotic power over half the crowd.
Thousands of people suddenly began marching zombie-like into the woods
where they vanished into a black pit.

Linc used every resource of the Space Research Lab and the National
Guard to destroy the Eyes. But nothing could stop them, for they proved
immune to bullets and bombs.

In desperation, Linc captured an Eye and found a way to communicate with
it through his mind. He learned that radiation was fuel for the
creatures' lives. And then they issued their terrible ultimatum: Explode
a series of atom bombs to supply them with radiation or they would turn
the world's population into mindless robots.

It gave the world two harrowing choices--self-destruction via fallout
from the bombs or annihilation via the sinister Flying Eyes....

A MONARCH SCIENCE-FICTION CLASSIC Available at all newsstands and
bookstores 35c

If you are unable to secure this book at your local dealer, you may
obtain a copy by sending 35c plus 5c for handling to Monarch Books,
Inc., Mail Order Department, Capital Building, Derby, Connecticut.

_A Destroyer From Another Planet--Bent On Mastery Of The World_

       *       *       *       *       *

ENCOUNTER

By J. Hunter Holly Author of THE GREEN PLANET

It came plummeting out of the sky--a soundless, streaking, purple glow,
moving faster and faster until it ripped at the trees, crashed through
them and struck sickeningly against a hill. Momentarily it flared
brightly, then went out.

It was not long after that the murders began--strange, inexplicable
deaths, all the victims found with their heads crushed as if their
skulls had exploded outward.

The trail of victims lead from Arkansas to Tennessee, to Kentucky,
Illinois and Michigan--sixteen unrelated people who had only one thing
in common: All of their brains were withered, as if sucked dry of their
contents ...

And somewhere wandered an evil stranger from another planet, his
personality expanding, his brain power increasing, preparing for the
inevitable encounter that could make him master of the world!

A Science Fiction Thriller From

MONARCH BOOKS, INC.

Available at all newsstands and bookstores 35c

If you are unable to secure this book at your local dealer, you may
obtain a copy by sending 35c plus 5c for handling to Monarch Books,
Inc., Mail Order Division, Capital Building, Derby, Connecticut.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE POWER OF EVIL

"You might call it a fight," Elizabeth said, "but they never actually
laid a hand on each other."

Dr. Carew stared at her in puzzlement as she went on. "They threw every
hard thing in the room at each other, without ever touching anything. It
was like some ghastly, murderous game. A clock flew through the air like
a cannonball, straight at Joseph's head, and some unseen force seemed to
stop it. For a second it hung there and trembled in the air--_with
nothing under it_; then it turned and flew like lightning at Quincy; he
barely dodged it.

"Finally a vase did find its mark and Quincy fell to the floor. Joseph
stepped over him and came toward me. I ran, slamming the door in his
face, locking him in. He laughed evilly and called after me, 'Why waste
time running away, Elizabeth? I'll come to get you, and you won't be
able to resist me now!'"

This is one of the unforgettable scenes from MONARCH BOOKS' new fiction
thriller--

       *       *       *       *       *

WITCH HOUSE

By Evangeline Walton

A spine-tingling tale of a group of tormented men and women forced to
live in a house saturated with evil.

On sale at all newsstands and bookstores 35c

If you are unable to secure this book at your local dealer, you may
obtain a copy by sending 35c plus 5c for handling to Monarch Books,
Inc., Mail Order Department, Capital Building, Derby, Connecticut.

       *       *       *       *       *

REVENGE IN AN ALIEN WORLD

When Gail Loring chose Bill Drake to be her husband--in name only--for
the duration of the flight to Mars, she didn't know that she had just
signed his death warrant.

Jealous Dr. Spartan, leader of the expedition, swore to get revenge and
force Gail to share his maniacal plan for power.

Bound together in space, five men and a woman strained against the
powerful tug of twisted emotions and secret ambitions.

But all plans were forgotten when they landed on the Red Planet and
encountered the Martians--half animal, half vegetable, with acid for
blood and radar for sight.

When the Martians launched an assault against the space ship, linking
their electrical energy in an awesome display of power, Spartan realized
that this was the perfect moment for personal revenge--and touched off
his own diabolical plan of destruction against his fellow crewmen ...

This is the exciting plot of the new MONARCH BOOKS science-fiction
thriller--

       *       *       *       *       *

THE RED PLANET

By Russ Winterbotham

A tense novel of violence and intrigue--a million miles in space.

On sale at all newsstands and bookstores 35c

If you are unable to secure this book at your local dealer, you may
obtain a copy by sending 35c plus 5c for handling to Monarch Books,
Inc., Mail Order Department, Capital Building, Derby, Connecticut.

_It Spread A New Electrical Virus That Turned Men Into Ruthless
Monsters_

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SPACE EGG

By Russ Winterbotham

Flying forty-two miles above Kansas, something phenomenal had happened
to Test Pilot Fayburn. A space egg had smashed through the cockpit
Plexi-glass and then pierced his pressurized suit.

Blood on the pilot's seat indicated that he had been injured, but there
was no wound. The loss of pressure in the cockpit and in his suit should
have killed him instantly--yet here he was, alive and unharmed, but
definitely a changed man.

Always a mild, considerate person he had, in a matter of minutes, become
a madman. What had brought about the change? Was he still human or was
he now OUT OF THIS WORLD?

Only time would tell as he daringly laid siege to an important air base
and began using his frightening power to force men and women to serve
his evil purpose.

A MONARCH SCIENCE-FICTION CLASSIC

Available at all newsstands and bookstores 35c

If you are unable to secure this book at your local dealer, you may
obtain a copy by sending 35c plus 5c for handling to Monarch Books,
Inc., Mail Order Department, Capital Building, Derby, Connecticut.

       *       *       *       *       *

TEN FROM INFINITY

Ten men walked Earth--ten men in different cities in the United States.
Each one was the exact replica of the other--from the tips of his
fingers down to the beating of his twin hearts.

Where they came from, they were called androids--synthetic men,
conditioned by their masters to complete their deadly purpose on Earth
as advance agents for an invasion from space.

The only man who knew of their existence was Brent Taber, secret agent,
specially commissioned to find out their plans and avert the world's
destruction.

The big problem was to figure out a way to appeal to the mindless,
soulless creatures who knew no emotion--pleasure or pain. But every move
he had made so far had ended in failure and time was running out--for
him and everyone on the face of the Earth ...

Published By MONARCH BOOKS, INC.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Ten From Infinity, by Paul W. Fairman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TEN FROM INFINITY ***

***** This file should be named 20856.txt or 20856.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/8/5/20856/
