with scarcely a perceptible pause in her work.

        *           *           *

A tour of the ship followed; and as it progressed, the more confused and
dismayed the two Nargodian commanders became.

"But no crew at _all_?" Holson demanded incredulously. "How can a thing
like this _possibly_ work?"

"It's fully Gunthered," Lola explained. "It works itself. That is,
almost all the time. Whenever we land on any planet for the first time,
one of us has to control it. Or for any other special job not in its
memory banks. When you're ready for us to land I'll show you--it's my
turn to work."

"Miss Flurnoy, have they cleared the air over Pylon Six?"

"Yes, sir. Clearance came through five minutes ago. They are holding it
clear for us."

"Thank you. Miss Montandon, you may land at your convenience."

"Thank you, sir." Lola took the pilot's chair. "This is the scanner. I
pull it over my face and head, so. Since I am always in tune with the
field...."

"What does _that_ mean?" Entlore asked, dark foreboding in his mind.

"I was afraid of that. You can't feel an Operator Field. I'm sorry, sir,
but that means you can't handle these forces and never will be able to.
Certain Gunther areas of your brain are inoperative. On our scale you
are a Gunther First...."

"On ours, I'm an Esper Ten, the highest rating in the world--except for
a few theoretical crackpots who.... Excuse me, please, I shouldn't have
said that, in view of what I see happening here."

"No offense taken, sir. Those who developed the Gunther Drive were
crackpots until they got the first starship out into space. But with
this scanner on, I think of where I want to look and I can see it. I
then think the ship a few miles sidewise--so--and we are now directly
over your Pylon Six. I'm starting down, but I won't go into free fall."

Apparent weight grew less and less, until: "This is about enough for
you, Miss Flurnoy?"

"Just," the ComOff agreed, with a gulp. "One pound less and I'm afraid
I'll upchuck that lovely lunch I just ate."

"We're going fast enough now. Everyone sitting down? Brace yourselves,
please. You'll be about fifty percent overweight for a while."

        *           *           *

As bodies settled deeper into cushions Entlore sent Garlock a
thought. "We three weigh about five hundred pounds. You lifted
us--instantaneously or nearly so, but I'll pass the question of
acceleration for the moment--eleven hundred miles straight up. How did
you repeal the Law of Conservation?"

"We didn't. We have fusion engines of twenty million horsepower. Our
Operator Field, which has a radius of fifteen thousand miles and is
charged to an electrogravitic potential of one hundred thousand gunts,
stores energy. Its action is not exactly like that of an electrical
condenser or of a storage battery, but is more or less analogous to
both. Thus, the energy required to lift you three came from the field,
but the amount was so small that it did not lower the potential of the
field by any measurable amount. Setting this ship down--call it sixty
thousand tons for a thousand miles at one gravity--will increase the
field's potential by approximately one-tenth of one gunt. Have you
studied paraphysics?"

"No."

"It wasn't practical, eh?" Garlock smiled. "Then I can't make even a
stab at explaining instantaneous translation to you. I'll just say that
there is no acceleration involved, no time lapse. There is no violation
of the Law of Conservation since departure and arrival points are
equi-Guntherial. But what I am really interested in is that small group
of high espers you mentioned."

"Yes, I inferred that from Miss Montandon's comments." Entlore fell
silent and Garlock watched his somber thoughts picture Margon Base and
his nation's capital being attacked and destroyed by a fleet of
invincible and invulnerable starships like this _Pleiades_.

"You are wrong, sir," Garlock put in, quietly. "The Galactic Service has
not had, does not and will not have, anything to do with intra-planetary
affairs. We have no connection with, and no responsibility to, any world
or any group of worlds. We are an arm of the United Galaxian Societies
of the Galaxy. Our function is to control space. To forbid, to prevent,
to rectify any interplanetary or interstellar aggression. Above all, to
prevent, by means of procedures up to and including total destruction of
planets if necessary, any attempt whatever to form any multi-world
empire."

The three Nargodians gasped as one, as much at the scope of the thing as
at the calmly cold certainty of ability carried by the thought.

"You are transmitting this precisely, Miss Flurnoy?" Entlore asked.

"Precisely, sir; including background, fringes, connotations, and
implications; just as he is giving it to us."

"Let us assume that your Nargodian government decides to conquer all the
other nations of your planet Margonia. Assume farther that it succeeds.
We will not object; in fact, we will, as a usual thing, not even be
informed of it. If then, however, your government decides that one world
is not enough for it to rule and prepares to conquer, or take aggressive
action against, any other world, we will be informed and we will step
in. First, warning will be given. Second, any and all vessels dispatched
on such a mission will be annihilated. Third, if the offense is
continued or repeated, trial will be held before the Galactic Council
and any sentence imposed will be carried out."

In spite of Garlock's manner and message, both marshals were highly
relieved. "You're in plenty of time, with us, sir," Entlore said. "We
have just sent our first rocket to our nearer moon ... that is, unless
that group of--of espers gets their ship off the ground."

"How far along are they?"

"The ship itself is built, but they are having trouble with their drive.
The hull is spherical, and much smaller than this one. It has atomic
engines, but no blasts or ion-plates ... but neither has this one!"

"Exactly; they may be pretty well along. I'd like to get in touch with
them as soon as possible. May I borrow a 'talker' like Miss Flurnoy for
a few days? You have others, I suppose?"

"Yes, but I'll let you have her; it is of the essence that you have the
best one available. Miss Flurnoy?"

"Yes, sir?" Besides reporting, she had been conversing busily with James
and Belle.

"Would you like to be assigned to Mr. Garlock for the duration of his
stay on Margonia?"

"Oh, _yes_, sir!" she replied, excitedly.

"You are so assigned. Take orders from him or from any designate as
though I myself were issuing them."

"Thank you, sir ... but what limits? And do I transmit to and/or record
for you, sir?"

"No limit. These four Galaxians are hereby granted nation-wide top
clearance. Transmit as usual whatever is permitted."

"Full reporting is not only permitted, but urged," Garlock said. "There
is nothing secret about our mission."

        *           *           *

As the _Pleiades_ landed: "If you will give us your focus spot, Mr.
Entlore, we can all 'port to your office and save calling staff cars."

"And cause a revolution?" Entlore laughed. "Apparently you haven't been
checking outside."

"Afraid I haven't. I've been thinking."

"Take a look. I got orders from the Cabinet to put guards wherever
people absolutely must not go, and open everything else to the public. I
_hope_ there are enough guards to keep a lane open for us, but I
wouldn't bet on it." Garlock was very glad that the military men's stiff
formality had disappeared. "You Galaxians took this whole planet by
storm while you were still above the stratosphere."

        *           *           *

There is no need to go into detail concerning the reception and
celebration. On Earth, one inauguration of a president and one
coronation of a monarch were each almost as well covered by
broadcasters, if not as turbulently and enthusiastically prolonged. From
the _Pleiades_ they went to the Administration Building, where an
informal reception was held. Thence to the Capitol, where the reception
was very formal indeed. Thence to the Grand Ballroom of the city's
largest hotel, where a tremendous--and long-winded--banquet was served.

At Garlock's request, all sixteen members of the "crackpot" group--the
most active members of the Deep Space Club--had been invited to the
banquet. And, even though Garlock was a very busy man, his talker tuned
in to each one of the sixteen, tuned them all to the Galactic Admiral,
and in odd moments a great deal of business was done.

After being told most of the story--in tight-beamed thoughts that ComOff
Flurnoy could not receive--the whole group was wildly enthusiastic. They
would change the name of their club forthwith to The Galaxian Society Of
Margonia. They laid plans for a world-wide organization which would have
tremendous prestige and tremendous income. They already had a
field--Garlock knew about their ship--they wanted the _Pleiades_ to move
over to it as soon as possible--Yes, Garlock thought he could do it the
following day--if not, as soon as he could....

        *           *           *

The _Pleiades_ had landed at ten o'clock in the forenoon, local time;
the banquet did not come to an end until long after midnight. Throughout
all this time the four Galaxians carried on, without a slip, the act
that all this was, to them, old stuff.

It was just a little before daylight when they returned, exhausted, to
the ship. ComOff Flurnoy went with them. She was still agog at the
wonder of it all as Belle and Brownie showed her to her quarters.




CHAPTER 7


Since everyone, including the ebullient ComOff, slept late the following
morning, they all had brunch instead of breakfast and lunch. All during
the meal Garlock was preoccupied and stern.

"Hold everything for a while, Jim," he said, when everyone had eaten.
"Before we move, Belle and I have got to have a conference."

"Not a Fatso Ferber nine-o'clock type, I hope." James frowned in mock
reproach and ComOff Flurnoy cocked an eyebrow in surprise.
"Monkey-business on company time is only for Big Shots like him; not for
small fry such as you."

"Well, it won't be exclusively monkey-business, anyway. While we're gone
you might clear with the control tower and take us up into take-off
position. Come on, Belle." He took her by one elbow and led her away.

"Why, _Doctor Garlock_." Mincing along beside him, pretending high
reluctance, she looked up at him wide-eyed. "I'm _surprised_, I really
am. I'm _shocked_, too. I'm _not_ that kind of a _girl_, and if I wasn't
_afraid_ of losing my _job_ I would _scream_. I _never_ even _suspected_
that _you_ would use your _position_ as my _boss_ to _force_ your
_unwelcome attentions_ on a _poor_ and _young_ and _innocent_ and
_suffering_...."

    [Illustration:

    In an unparalleled blast of Gunther power the primes of
    many worlds head toward the meeting on Tellus.]

Inside his room Garlock, who had been grinning, sobered down and checked
every Gunther block--a most unusual proceeding.

        *           *           *

Belle stopped joking in the middle of the sentence.

"Yeah, _how_ you suffer," he said. "I was just checking to be sure we're
prime-proof. I'm not ready for Deggi Delcamp yet. That guy, Belle, as
you probably noticed, has got one God-awful load of stuff."

"Not as much as you have, Clee. Nor as much push behind what he has got.
And his shield wouldn't make patches for yours."

"Huh? How sure are you of that?"

"I'm positive. I'm the one who is going to get bumped, I'm afraid. That
Fao Talaho is a hard-hitting, hard-boiled hellcat on wheels."

"I'll be damned. You're wrong. I checked her from stem to gudgeon and
you lay over her like a circus tent. What's the answer?"

"Oh? Do I? I'm mighty glad ... funny, both of us being wrong ... it must
be, Clee, that it's sex-based differences. We're used to each other, but
neither of us has ever felt a Prime of the same sex before, and there
must be more difference between Ops and Primes than we realized.
Suppose?"

"Could be--I hope. But that doesn't change the fact that we aren't
ready. We haven't got enough data. If we start out with this grandiose
Galactic Service thing and find only two or three planets Gunthered, we
make jackasses of ourselves. On the other hand, if we start out with a
small organization or none, and find a lot of planets, it'll be one
continuous cat-fight. On the third hand...."

"Three hands, Clee? What are you, an octopussy or an Arpalone?"

"Keep your beautiful trap shut a minute. On the third hand, we've _got_
to start somewhere. Any ideas?"

"I never thought of it that way.... Hm-m-m-m ... I see." She thought for
a minute, then went on, "We'll have to start without starting, then ...
quite a trick.... But how about this? Suppose we take a fast tour, with
you and I taking quick peeks, without the peekees ever knowing we've
been peeking?"

"That's using the brain, Belle. Let's go." Then, out in the Main, "Jim,
we want to hit a few high spots, as far out as you can reach without
losing orientation. Beta Centauri here is pretty bright, Rigel and
Canopus are real lanterns. With those three as a grid, you could reach
fifteen hundred or two thousand light-years, couldn't you?"

"More than that. That many parsecs, at least."

"Good. Belle and I want to make a fast, random-sampling check of Primes
and Ops around here. We'll need five minutes at each planet--quite a
ways out. So set up as big a globe as you can and still be dead sure of
your locations; then sample it."

"Not enough data. How many samples do you want?"

"As many as we can get in the rest of today. Six or seven hours,
say--eight hours max."

"Call it seven.... Brownie on the guns, me on Compy.... Five minutes for
you.... I should be able to lock down the next shot in five ... one
minute extra, say, for safety factor ... that'd be ten an hour. Seventy
planets enough?"

