Suddenly the _Ancient Mariner_ was visible again. Simultaneously, three
rays leaped down and bathed the formation in their pale radiance. The
front ranks vanished, and the line broke, attacking the ship that hung
above them now. Four magnetic beams hit the _Ancient Mariner_ at once!
Arcot couldn't pull away from all four, and his gunners couldn't tell
which ships were holding them.

All at once, the men felt a violent electrical shock! The air about them
was filled with the blue haze of the electric weapon they had seen!

Instantly, the magnetic beams left them, and they saw behind them a
single Satorian ship heading toward them, surrounded by that same bluish
halo of light. A suicide ship!

Arcot accelerated away from it as Fuller hit it with a molecular beam.
The ship reeled and stopped, and the _Ancient Mariner_ pulled away from
it rapidly. Then, the frost-covered ship of the dead came on, still
heading for them!

Arcot turned and went off to the right, but like a pursuing Nemesis, the
strange ship came after them in the shortest, most direct route!

The molecular beams were useless now; there was no molecular energy left
in the frozen hulk that accelerated toward them. Suddenly, the two
envelopes of blue light touched and coalesced! A great, blinding arc
leaped between the two ships as the speeding Satorian hull smashed
violently against the side of the _Ancient Mariner_! The men ducked
automatically, and were hurled against their seat-straps with tremendous
force. There was a rending, crashing roar, a sea of flame--and darkness.

They could only have been unconscious a few seconds, for when the fog
went away, they could see the glowing mass of the enemy ship still
falling far beneath them. The lux wall where it had hit was still
glowing red.

"Morey!" Arcot called. "You all right? Wade? Fuller?"

"Okay!" Morey answered.

So were Wade and Fuller.

"It was the lux hull that saved us," Arcot said. "It wouldn't break, and
the temperature of the arc didn't bother it. And since it wouldn't carry
a current, we didn't get the full electrical effect.

"I'm going to convince those birds that this ship is made of something
they can't touch! We'll give them a real show!"

He dived downward, back into the battle.

It was a show, all right! It was impossible to fight the Earth ship. The
enemy had to concentrate four magnetic rays on it to use their electric
weapon, and they could only do that by sheer luck!

And even that was of little use, for they simply lost one of their own
ships without harming the _Ancient Mariner_ in the least.

Ship after ship crumpled in on itself like crushed tinfoil or hurled
itself violently to the ground as the molecular beams touched them. The
Satorian fleet was a fleet no longer; it was a small collection of
disorganized ships whose commanders had only one thought--to flee!

The few ships that were left spearheaded out into space, using every bit
of acceleration that the tough bodies of the Satorians could stand. With
a good head start, they were rapidly escaping.

"We can't equal that acceleration," said Wade. "We'll lose them!"

"Nope!" Arcot said grimly. "I want a couple of those ships, and I'm
going to get them!"

At four gravities of acceleration, the _Ancient Mariner_ drove after the
fleeing ships of Sator, but the enemy ships soon dropped rapidly from
sight.

Twenty five thousand miles out in space, Arcot cut the acceleration.
"We'll catch them now, I think," he said softly. He pushed the little
red switch for an instant, then opened it. A moment before, the planet
Nansal had been a huge disc behind them. Now it was a tiny thing, a full
million miles away.

It took the Satorian fleet over an hour to reach them. They appeared as
dim lights in the telectroscope. They rapidly became larger. Arcot had
extinguished the lights, and since they were on the sunward side of the
approaching ships, the _Ancient Mariner_ was effectively invisible.

"They're going to pass us at a pretty good clip," Morey said quietly.
"They've been accelerating all this time."

Arcot nodded in agreement. "We'll have to hit them as they come toward
us. We'd never get one in passing."

As the ships grew rapidly in the plate, Arcot gave the order to fire!

The molecular rays slashed out toward the onrushing ships, picking them
off as fast as the beams could be directed. The rays were invisible in
space, so they managed to get several before the Satorians realized what
was happening.

Then, in panic, they scattered all over space, fleeing madly from the
impossible ship that was firing on them. They knew they had left it
behind, yet here it was, waiting for them!

"Let them go," Arcot said. "We've got our specimens, and the rest can
carry the word back to Sator that the war is over for them."

It was several hours later that the _Ancient Mariner_ approached Nansal
again, bringing with it two Satorian ships. By careful use of the heat
beam and the molecular beam, the Earthmen had managed to jockey the two
battle cruisers back to Nansal.

It was nighttime when they landed. The whole area around the city was
illuminated by giant searchlights. Men were working recovering the
bodies of the dead, aiding those who had survived, and examining the
wreckage.

Arcot settled the two Satorian ships to the ground, and landed the
_Ancient Mariner_.

Torlos sprinted over the ground toward them as he saw the great silver
ship land. He had been helping in the examination of the wrecked enemy
ships.

"Have they attacked anywhere else on the planet?" Arcot asked as he
opened the airlock.

Torlos nodded. "They hit five other cities, but they didn't use as big a
fleet as they did here. The plan of battle seems to have been for the
ships with the new weapons to hit here first and then hit each of the
other cities in turn. They didn't have enough to make a full-scale
attack; evidently, your presence here made them desperate.

"At any rate, the other cities were able to beat off the magnetic beam
ships with the projectors of molecular beams."

"Good," Arcot thought. "Then the Nansal-Sator war is practically over!"




XXIII


Richard Arcot stepped into the open airlock of the _Ancient Mariner_ and
walked down the corridor to the library. There, he found Fuller and Wade
battling silently over a game of chess and Morey relaxed in a chair with
a book in his hands.

"What a bunch of loafers," Arcot said acidly. "Don't you ever _do_
anything?"

"Sure," said Fuller. "The three of us have entered into a lifelong pact
with each other to refrain from using a certain weapon which would make
this war impossible for all time."

"What war?" Arcot wondered. "And what weapon?"

"This war," Wade grinned, pointing at the chess board. "We have agreed
absolutely never to read each other's minds while playing chess."

Morey lowered his book and looked at Arcot. "And just what have you been
so busy about?"

"I've been investigating the weapon on board the Satorian ships we
captured," Arcot told them. "Quite an interesting effect. The Nansalian
scientists and I have been analyzing the equipment for the past three
days.

"The Satorians found a way to cut off and direct an electrostatic field.
The energy required was tremendous, but they evidently separated the
charges on Sator and carried them along on the ships.

"You can see what would happen if a ship were charged negatively and the
ship next to it were charged positively! The magnitude of electrostatic
forces is terrific! If you put two ounces of iron ions, with a positive
charge, on the north pole, and an equivalent amount of chlorine ions,
negatively charged, on the south pole, the attraction, even across that
distance, would be three hundred and sixty tons!

"They located the negative charges on one ship and the positive charges
on the one next to it. Their mutual attraction pulled them toward each
other. As they got closer, the charges arced across, heating and fusing
the two ships. But they still had enough motion toward each other to
crash.

"They were wrecked by less than a tenth of an ounce of ions which were
projected to the ship and held there by an automatic field until the
ships got close enough to arc through it.

"We still haven't been able to analyze that trick field, though."

"Well, now that we've gotten things straightened out," Fuller said,
"let's go home! I'm anxious to leave! We're all ready to go, aren't we?"

Arcot nodded. "All except for one thing. The Supreme Three want to see
us. We've got a meeting with them in an hour, so put on your best Sunday
pants."

In the Council of Three, Arcot was officially invited to remain with
them. The fleet of molecular motion ships was nearing completion--the
first one was to roll off the assembly line the next day--but they
wanted Arcot, Wade, Morey, and Fuller to remain on Nansal.

"We have a large world here," the Scientist thought at them. "Thanks to
you people, we can at last call it our own. We offer you, in the name of
the people, your choice of any spot in this world. And we give
you--this!" The Scientist came forward. He had a disc-shaped plaque,
perhaps three inches in diameter, made of a deep ruby-red metal. In the
exact center was a green stone which seemed to shine of its own accord,
with a pale, clear, green light; it was transparent and highly
refractive. Around it, at the three points of a triangle, were three
similar, but smaller stones. Engraved lines ran from each of the stones
to the center, and other lines connected the outer three in a triangle.
The effect was as though one were looking down at the apex of a regular
tetrahedron.

There were characters in Nansalese at each point of the tetrahedron, and
other characters engraved in a circle around it.

Arcot turned it in his hand. On the back was a representation of the
Nansalian planetary system. The center was a pale yellow, highly-faceted
stone which represented the sun. Around this were the orbits of planets,
and each of the eleven planets was marked by a different colored stone.

The Scientist was holding in the palm of his hand another such disc,
slightly smaller. On it, there were three green stones, one slightly
larger than the others.

"This is my badge of office as Scientist of the Three. The stone marked
Science is here larger. Your plaque is new. Henceforth, it shall be the
Three and a Coordinator!

"Your vote shall outweigh all but a unanimous vote of the Three. To you,
this world is answerable, for you have saved our civilization. And when
you return, as you have promised, you shall be Coordinator of this
system!"

Arcot stood silent for a moment. This was a thing he had never thought
of. He was a scientist, and he knew that his ability was limited to that
field.

At last, he smiled and replied: "It is a great honor, and it is a great
work. But I can not spend my time here always; I must return to my own
planet. I can not be fairly in contact with you.

"Therefore, I will make my first move in office now, and suggest that
this plaque signify, not the Coordinator, and first power of your
country, but Counselor and first friend in all things in which I can
serve you.

"The tetrahedron you have chosen; so let it be. The apex is out of the
plane of the other points, and I am out of this galaxy. But there is a
relationship between the apex and the points of the base, and these
lines will exist forever.

"We have been too busy to think of anything else as yet, but our worlds
are large, and your worlds are large. Commerce can develop across the
ten million light years of space as readily as it now exists across the
little space of our own system. It is a journey of but five days, and
later machines will make it in less! Commerce will come, and with it
will come close communication.

"I will accept this plaque with the understanding that I am but your
friend and advisor. Too much power in the hands of one man is bad. Even
though you trust me completely, there might be an unscrupulous
successor.

"And I must return to my world.

"Your first ship will be ready tomorrow, and when it is completed, my
friends and I will leave your planet.

"We will return, though. We are ten million light years apart, but the
universe is not to be measured in space anymore, but in time. We are
five days apart. I will be nearer to you at all times than is Sator!

"If you wish, others of my race shall come, too. But if you do not want
them to come, they will not. I alone have Tharlano's photographs of the
route, and I can lose them."

For a moment, the Three spoke together, then the Scientist was again
thinking at Arcot.

"Perhaps you are right. It is obvious your people know more than we.
They have the molecular ray, and they know no wars; they do not destroy
each other. They must be a good race, and we have seen excellent
examples in you.

"We can realize your desire to return home, but we ask you to come
again. We will remember that you are not ten million light years, but
five days, from our planet."

When the conference was ended, Arcot and his friends returned to their
ship. Torlos was waiting for them outside the airlock.

"Abaout haow saon you laive?" he asked in English.

"Why--tomorrow," Arcot said, in surprise. "Have you been practicing our
language?"

Torlos reverted to telepathy. "Yes, but that is not what I came to talk
to you about. Arcot--can a man of Nansal visit Earth?" Anxiously,
hopefully, and hesitatingly, he asked. "I could come back on one of your
commercial vessels, or come back when you return. And--and I'm sure I
could earn my living on your world! I'm not hard to feed, you know!" He
half smiled, but he was too much in earnest to make a perfect success.

Arcot was amazed that he should ask. It was an idea he would very much
like to see fulfilled. The idea of metal-boned men with tremendous
strength and strange molecular-motion muscles would inspire no
friendship, no feeling of kinship, in the people of Earth. But the man
himself--a pleasant, kindly, sincere, intelligent giant--would be a far
greater argument for the world of Nansal that the most vivid orator
would ever be.

Arcot asked the others, and the vote was unanimous--let him come!

The next day, amid great ceremony, the first of the new Nansalian ships
came from the factories. When the celebration was over, the four
Earthmen and the giant Torlos entered the _Ancient Mariner_.

"Ready to go, Torlos?" Arcot grinned.

"Pearfactly, Ahcut. Tse soonah tse bettah!" he said in his oddly
accented English.

Five hours saw them out of the galaxy. Twelve hours more, and they were
heading for home at full speed, well out in space.

The Home Galaxy was looming large when they next stopped for
observation. Old Tharlano had guided them correctly!

They were going home!




CLASSICS OF GREAT SCIENCE-FICTION
from ACE BOOKS

G-547 (50 cents) THE BLIND SPOT
by Austin Hall and H. E. Flint

F-318 (40 cents) THE SPOT OF LIFE
by Austin Hall

F-319 (40 cents) CRASHING SUNS
by Edmond Hamilton

F-327 (40 cents) THE DARK WORLD
by Henry Kuttner

F-343 (40 cents) THE EXILE OF TIME
by Ray Cummings

F-344 (40 cents) THE WELL OF THE WORLDS
by Henry Kuttner

F-345 (40 cents) THE LORD OF DEATH
by Homer Eon Flint

F-346 (40 cents) THE BLACK STAR PASSES
by John W. Campbell

F-355 (40 cents) THE DEVOLUTIONIST
by Homer Eon Flint

F-356 (40 cents) THE TIME AXIS
by Henry Kuttner

F-363 (40 cents) TAMA OF THE LIGHT COUNTRY
by Ray Cummings

F-364 (40 cents) THE MIGHTIEST MACHINE
by John W. Campbell

M-132 (45 cents) THE KING IN YELLOW
by Robert W. Chambers

F-372 (40 cents) SPACEHOUNDS OF IPC
by Edward E. Smith

F-375 (40 cents) THE WORLDS OF ROBERT A. HEINLEIN

M-142 (45 cents) DOPPELGANGERS by H. F. Heard

       *       *       *       *       *

Available from Ace Books, Inc. (Dept. MM), 1120 Avenue
of the Americas, New York, N.Y. 10036. Send price
indicated, plus 5 cents handling fee.




=ISLANDS

OF

SPACE=

"John Campbell's book was written as a sequel to _The Black Star
Passes_ ... and believe me, it was a world-beater in those days.

"Arcot, Wade, Morey, and their computer, Fuller, put together a ship
