Nevian is coming up fast."

"Is there anything on this ship you fellows want?" Costigan asked.

"There may be, but we haven't any locks big enough to let her inside and
we haven't time to study her now. You might leave her controls in
neutral, so that Lyman can calculate her position if we should want her
later on."

"All right." The three armor-clad figures stepped into the _Boise_'s
open lock, the tractor beam was cut off, and the speedster flashed away
from the now stationary super-ship.

"Better let formalities go for a while," Captain Bradley interrupted the
general introduction taking place. "I was scared out of nine years'
growth when I saw you coming at us, and maybe I've still got the humps;
but that Nevian is coming up fast, and if you don't already know it I
can tell you that he's no light cruiser."

"That's so, too," Costigan concurred. "Have you fellows got enough stuff
so that you think you can take him? You've got the legs on him,
anyway--you can certainly run if you want to!"

"Run?" Cleveland laughed. "We have a bone of our own to pick with that
ship. We licked her to a standstill once, until we burned out a set of
generators, and since we got them fixed we've been chasing her all over
space. We were chasing her when we picked up your call. See there? She's
doing the running."

The Nevian was running, in truth. Her commander had seen and had
recognized the great vessel which had flashed out of nowhere to the
rescue of the three Terrestrials; and, having once been at grips with
that vengeful super-dreadnaught, he had little stomach for another
encounter. Therefore his side-thrust was now being exerted in the
opposite direction; he was frankly trying to put as much distance as
possible between himself and Triplanetary's formidable cruiser. In vain.
A light tractor was clamped on and the _Boise_ flashed up to close range
before Rodebush threw on her inertia and Cleveland brought the two
vessels relatively to rest by increasing gradually his tractor's pull.
And this time the Nevian could not cut the tractor. Again that shearing
plane of force bit into it and tore at it, but it neither yielded nor
broke. The rebuilt generators of Number Four were designed to carry the
load, and they carried it. And again Triplanetary's every mighty weapon
was brought into play.

The "cans" were thrown, ultra-and infra-beams were driven, the furious
macro-beam gnawed hungrily at the Nevian's defenses; and one by one
those defenses went down. In desperation the enemy commander threw his
every generator behind a polycyclic screen; only to see Cleveland's even
more powerful drill bore relentlessly through it. Punctured that last
defense, the end came soon. A secondary SX7 beam was now in place on
mighty Ten's inner rings, and one fierce blast blew a hole completely
through the Nevian cruiser. Into that hole entered Adlington's terrific
bombs and their gruesome fellows, and where they entered, life departed.
All defenses vanished, and under the blasts of the _Boise_'s projectors,
now unopposed, the metal of the Nevian vessel exploded instantly into a
widely spreading cloud of vapor. Sparkling vapor, with perhaps here and
there a droplet or two of material which had only been liquefied.

So passed the sister-ship, and Rodebush turned his plates upon the
vessel of Nerado. But that highly intelligent amphibian had seen all
that had occurred. He had long since given over the pursuit of the
speedster, and he did not rush in to do hopeless battle beside his
fellow Nevians against the Terrestrials. His analytical detectors had
written down each detail of every weapon and of every screen employed;
and even while prodigious streamers of red force were raving out from
his vessel, braking her terrific progress and swinging her around in an
immense circle back toward far Nevia, his scientists and mechanics were
doubling and redoubling the power of his already Titanic installations,
to match and if possible to overmatch those of Triplanetary's
super-dreadnaught.

"Do we kill him now or do we let him suffer a while longer?" Costigan
demanded.

"I don't think so, yet," replied Rodebush. "Would you, Lyman?"

"Not yet," replied Cleveland, grimly, reading the thought of the other
and agreeing with it. "Let him pilot us to Nevia; we might not be able
to find it without a guide. While we're at it we want to so pulverize
that crowd that if they never come near the Solarian system again
they'll think it's twenty minutes too soon!"

Thus it was that the _Boise_, under only a few dynes of propulsion,
pursued the Nevian ship. Apparently exerting every effort, she never
came quite within range of the fleeing raider; yet never was she so far
behind that the Nevian space-ship was not in clear register upon her
observation plates. Nor was Nerado alone in strengthening his vessel.
Costigan knew well and respected highly the Nevian scientist-captain,
and at his suggestion the entire time of the long and uneventful flight
was spent in re-enforcing the super-ship's armament to the iron-driven
limit of theoretical and mechanical possibility.

Thus, when Nevia and her hot, blue sun appeared upon his plates Rodebush
was ready for any emergency, and hurled his battleship upon the Nevian
with every weapon aflame. But so was Nerado ready; and, unlike her
sister-ship, his vessel was manned by scientists well versed in the
fundamental theory of the weapons with which they fought. Beams, rods,
and lances of energy flamed and flared; planes and pencils cut, slashed,
and stabbed; defensive screens glowed redly or flashed suddenly into
intensely brilliant, coruscating incandescence. Crimson opacity
struggled sullenly against violet curtain of annihilation. Material
projectiles and torpedoes were launched under full beam control; only to
be exploded harmlessly in mid-space, to be rayed into nothingness, or to
disappear innocuously against impenetrable polycyclic screens. Both
vessels were equipped completely with iron-driven mechanisms; both were
manned by scientists capable of wringing the last possible watt of power
from their sources. They were approximately equal in size, and each ship
now wielded the theoretical ultimate of power for her mass; therefore
neither could harm the other, furiously though each was trying. And more
and more nearly they were approaching the red atmosphere of the world of
the amphibians. Down into that crimson blanket the two warring
space-ships dropped, down toward a city which Costigan recognized as
that in which Nerado made his headquarters.

"Better hold off a bit," Costigan cautioned. "If I know that bird at
all, he's cooking up something," and even as he spoke there shot upward
from the city a multitude of flashing balls. The Nevians had mastered
the secret of the explosive of the fishes of the greater deeps and were
launching it in a veritable storm against the Terrestrial visitor.

"Those?" asked Rodebush, calmly. The detonating balls of destruction
were literally annihilating even the atmosphere beyond the polycyclic
screen, but that barrier was scarcely affected.

"No, that," pointing out a hemispherical dome which, redly translucent,
surrounded a group of buildings towering high above their neighbors.
"Neither those high towers nor those screens were there the last time I
was in this town. They're stalling for time down there, that's all those
fireballs are for. Good sign, too--maybe they aren't ready for us yet.
If not, you'd better take 'em while the taking's good; and if they _are_
ready for us, we'd better get out of here while we're all in one piece."

And in fact Nerado had been in touch with the scientists of his city;
had been instructing them in the construction of converters and
generators of such weight and power that they could crush even the
defenses of the super-ship. They were not, however, quite done; the
entirely unsuspected possibilities of speed inherent in absolute
inertialessness had not entered into Nerado's calculations.

"Better drop a few cans down on that dome, fellows, before they make
trouble for us," suggested Rodebush to his gunners.

"We can't," came Adlington's instant reply. "We've been trying it, but
that's a polycyclic screen. Can you drill it? If you can, I've got a
real bomb here--that special we built--that will do the trick if you can
protect it from their beams until it gets down into the water."

"I'll try it," Cleveland answered, at a nod from the physicist. "I
couldn't drill Nerado's polycyclics, but I couldn't use any momentum on
him. Couldn't ram him--he fell back with my thrust. But that screen down
there can't back off, so maybe I can work on it. Get your special ready,
and hang on, everybody!"

The _Boise_ looped upward, and from an altitude of miles dove downward
through a storm of force-balls, rays, and shells; a dive checked
abruptly as the hollow tube of energy, which was Cleveland's drill,
snarled savagely down ahead of her and struck the shielding hemisphere
with a grinding, lightning-splitting shock. As it struck, backed by all
the enormous momentum of the plunging space-ship and driven by the full
power of her mightiest generators, it bored in, clawing and gouging
viciously through the tissue of that rigid and unyielding barrier of
pure energy. Then, mighty drill and plunging mass against iron-driven
wall, eye-tearing and furiously spectacular warfare was waged. Well it
was for Triplanetary, that day, that its super ship carried ample supply
of allotropic iron; well it was that her originally Gargantuan
converters and generators had been doubled and quadrupled in power on
the long Nevian way! For that oven-girdled fortress was powered to
withstand any conceivable assault; but the _Boise_'s power and momentum
were now inconceivable, and every watt and every dyne was solidly behind
that hellishly flaming, that voraciously tearing, that irresistibly
ravening cylinder of energy incredible!

Through the Nevian shield that cylinder gnawed its frightful way, and
down its protecting length there drove Adlington's "Special" bomb.
"Special" it was indeed; so great of girth that it could barely pass
through the central orifice of Ten's mighty projector, so heavily
charged with sensitized atomic iron that its detonation upon any planet
would not have been considered for an instant if that planet's integrity
meant anything to its attackers. Down the shielding pipe of force the
"Special" screamed under full propulsion, and beneath the surface of
Nevia's ocean it plunged.

"Cut!" yelled Adlington, and as the scintillating drill expired, the
bomber snapped his detonating switch.

For a moment the effect of the explosion seemed unimportant. A dull, low
rumble was all that was to be heard of a concussion that jarred red
Nevia to her very center; and all that could be seen was a slow heaving
of the water. But that heaving did not cease. Slowly, _so_ slowly it
seemed to the observers now high in the heavens, the waters rose up and
parted; revealing a vast chasm blown deep into the ocean's rocky bed.
Higher and higher the lazy, mountains of water reared; effortlessly to
pick up, to smash, to grind into fragments, and finally to toss aside
every building, every structure, every scrap of material substance
pertaining to the whole Nevian city.

Flattened out, driven backward for miles the tortured waters were urged,
leaving exposed bare ground and broken rock where once had been the
ocean's busy floor; while tremendous blasts of incandescent gas raved
upward, buffeting even the enormous masses of the two space-ships,
poised by their breathless crews so high above the site of the
explosion. Then the displaced millions of tons of water rushed back into
that newly rived pit, seeming to seek in that mad rush to make even more
complete the already total destruction of the city. The raging torrents
poured into that yawning cavern, filled it, and piled mountainously
above it; receding and piling up, again and again, causing tidal waves
which swept a full half of Nevia's mighty, watery globe.

The city forever silenced, Rodebush again directed his weapons upon
Nerado's vessel, but the Nevian was no longer fighting. For the first
time in that long and bitter engagement, not a Nevian beam was in
operation. His screens, however, were as capable as ever, and after a
few fruitless attempts to make an impression upon them, Rodebush cut off
his own offensive and turned to Costigan.

"What do you make of it, Conway? You know these people better than we
do; what are they up to?"

"I wish to talk to you," Nerado's voice came from the speaker, "and I
could not do so while the beams were operating. You are, I now perceive,
a much higher form of life than any of us had thought possible; a form
perhaps as high in evolution as our own. It is a pity that we did not
meet you when we first neared your planet, so that much life, both
Tellurian and Nevian, might have been spared. But what is past cannot be
recalled. As reasoning beings, however, you will see the futility of
continuing a contest in which neither of us is capable of injuring the
other. You may, of course, destroy more of our Nevian cities, in which
case I should be compelled to go and destroy similarly upon your earth;
but, to reasoning minds, such a course of procedure is sheerest folly."

Rodebush cut the communicator beam.

"Does he mean it?" he demanded of Costigan. "It sounds reasonable,
but...."

"But fishy," broke in Cleveland. "Altogether too reasonable for a...."

"Yes, he means it; every word of it," interrupted Costigan in turn.
"That's the way they are. Reasonable, passionless. Funny--they lack a
lot of things we have, but they've got a lot of things that I wish more
of us Tellurians had too. Give me the plate--I'll talk for
Triplanetary," and the beam was restored.

"Captain Nerado." he greeted the Nevian commander. "Having been with you
and among your people, I know that you mean what you say and that you
speak for your race. Similarly, I believe that I can speak for the
Triplanetary Council--the government of three of the planets of our
solar system--in saying that there need be no more conflict between our
peoples. I also was compelled by circumstances to do certain things
which I now wish could be undone; but as you have said, the past is
past. Our two races have much to gain from each other by friendly
exchanges of materials and of ideas, while we can expect nothing except
mutual extermination, if we elect to continue this warfare. I offer you
the friendship of Triplanetary. Will you release your screens and come
aboard to sign a treaty?"

"I will come; my screens are down." Rodebush likewise cut off his power,
although somewhat apprehensively, and a Nevian lifeboat entered the main
airlock of the _Boise_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then, at a table in the control room of Triplanetary's first super-ship,
there was written the first Inter-Systemic Treaty. Upon one side the
three Nevians; amphibious, cone-headed, loop-necked, scale-bodies,
four-legged things to us monstrosities: upon the other the three humans,
air-breathing, rounded-headed, shortnecked, smooth-bodied, two-legged
creatures equally monstrous to the fastidious Nevians. Yet each of these
representatives, of two races so different, felt respect for the other
race increase within him minute by minute as the conversation went on.

The Nevians had destroyed Pittsburgh, but Adlington's bomb had blown an
equally populous Nevian city out of existence. One Nevian vessel had
wiped out an entire unit of Triplanetary's fleet; but Costigan,
practically unaided, had depopulated one Nevian city and had seriously
damaged another. He had also beamed down many Nevian ships. Therefore
loss of life and material could be balanced. The Solarian system was
rich in iron, to which the Nevians were welcome; red Nevia possessed
abundant stores of substances which upon earth were extremely rare and
of vital importance. Therefore commerce was to be encouraged. The
Nevians had knowledges and skills unknown to earthly science, but were
entirely ignorant of many things, to us commonplace. Therefore
interchange of students and of books was highly desirable. And so on.

Thus was signed the Triplanetario-Nevian Treaty of Eternal Peace. Nerado
and his two companions were escorted ceremoniously to their vessel, and
the _Boise_ took off in an inertialess dash toward earth, bearing the
good news that the Nevian menace was no more.

Clio, now a hardened space-flea, immune even to the horrible nausea of
inertialessness, wriggled lithely in the curve of Costigan's arm and
laughed up at him.

"You can talk all you want to, Conway, but I don't like them a bit. They
give me the purple jitters! I suppose that they are really estimable
folks; talented, cultured, and everything; but just the same I'll bet
that it will be a long, long time before anybody on earth will really,
truly _like_ them!"





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Triplanetary, by Edward Elmer Smith

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRIPLANETARY ***

***** This file should be named 20782.txt or 20782.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/7/8/20782/

Produced by Greg Weeks, V. L. Simpson, Flash Sheridan and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net. This file is gratefully uploaded to
the PG collection in honor of Distributed Proofreaders
having posted over 10,000 ebooks.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
