"I must have the informer's name," Barrent said. He took the needlebeam
out of his pocket and advanced toward the panel.

"A machine cannot be coerced," the robot-confessor told him.

"Give me the name!" Barrent shouted.

"I should not, for your own good. The danger would be too great. Believe
me, Will...."

"The name!"

"Very well. You will find the informer at Thirty-five Maple Street. But
I earnestly advise you not to go there. You will be killed. You simply
do not know--"

Barrent pressed the trigger, and the narrow beam scythed through the
panel. Lights flashed and faded as he cut through the intricate wiring.
At last all the lights were dead, and a faint gray smoke came from the
panel.

Barrent left the booth. He put the needlebeam back in his pocket and
walked to Maple Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

He had been here before. He knew this street, set upon a hill, rising
steeply between oak and maple trees. Those lampposts were old friends,
that crack in the pavement was an ancient landmark. Here were the
houses, heavy with familiarity. They seemed to lean expectantly toward
him, like spectators waiting for the final act of an almost forgotten
drama.

He stood in front of 35 Maple Street. The silence which surrounded that
plain white-shuttered house struck him as ominous. He took the
needlebeam out of his pocket, looking for a reassurance he knew he could
not find. Then he walked up the neat flagstones and tried the front
door. It opened. He stepped inside.

He made out the dim shades of lamps and furniture, the dull gleam of a
painting on the wall, a piece of statuary on an ebony pedestal.
Needlebeam in hand, he stepped into the next room.

And came face to face with the informer.

Staring at the informer's face, Barrent remembered. In an overpowering
flood of memory he saw himself, a little boy, entering the closed
classroom. He heard again the soothing hum of machinery, watched the
pretty lights blink and flash, heard the insinuating machine voice
whisper in his ear. At first, the voice filled him with horror; what it
suggested was unthinkable. Then, slowly, he became accustomed to it, and
accustomed to all the strange things that happened in the closed
classroom.

He _learned_. The machines taught on deep, unconscious levels. The
machines intertwined their lessons with the basic drives, weaving a
pattern of learned behavior with the life instinct. They taught, then
blocked off conscious knowledge of the lessons, sealed it--and fused it.

What had he been taught? _For the social good, you must be your own
policeman and witness. You must assume responsibility for any crime
which might conceivably be yours._

The face of the informer stared impassively at him. It was Barrent's own
face, reflected back from a mirror on the wall.

He had informed on himself. Standing with the gun in his hand that day,
looking down at the murdered man, learned unconscious processes had
taken over. The presumption of guilt had been too great for him to
resist, the similarity to guilt had turned into guilt itself. He had
walked to the robot-confessor's booth, and there he had given complete
and damning evidence against himself, had indicted himself on the basis
of probability.

The robot-confessor had passed the obligatory sentence and Barrent had
left the booth. Well-trained in the lessons of the classroom, he had
taken himself into custody, had gone to the nearest thought-control
center in Trenton. Already a partial amnesia had taken place, keyed to
and triggered by the lessons of the closed classroom.

The skilled android technicians in the thought-control center had
labored hard to complete this amnesia, to obliterate any remnants of
memory. As a standard safeguard against any possible recovering of his
memory, they had implanted a logical construct of his crime beneath the
conscious level. As the regulations required, this construct contained
an implication of the far-reaching power of Earth.

When the job was completed, an automatized Barrent had marched out of
the center, taken a special expressway to the prison ship depot, boarded
the prison ship, entered his cell, and closed the door and left Earth
behind him. Then he had slept until the checkpoint had been passed,
after which the newly arrived guards awakened the prisoners for
disembarkation on Omega....

Now, staring at his own face in the mirror, the last of the conscious
lessons of the classroom became conscious:

_The lessons of the closed classroom must never be consciously known by
the individual. If they become conscious the human organism must perform
an immediate act of self-destruction._

Now he saw why his conquest of Earth had been so easy; it was because he
had conquered nothing. Earth needed no security forces, for the
policeman and the executioner were implanted in every man's mind.
Beneath the surface of Earth's mild and pleasant culture was a
self-perpetuating robot civilization. An awareness of that civilization
was punishable by death.

And here, at this moment, the real struggle for Earth began.

Learned behavior patterns intertwined with basic life drives forced
Barrent to raise the needlebeam, to point it toward his head. This was
what the robot-confessor had tried to warn him about, and what the
mutant girl had skrenned. The younger Barrent, conditioned to absolute
and mindless conformity, had to kill himself.

The older Barrent who had spent time on Omega fought that blind urge. A
schizophrenic Barrent fought himself. The two parts of him battled for
possession of the weapon, for control of the body, for ownership of the
mind.

The needlebeam's movement stopped inches from his head. The muzzle
wavered. Then slowly, the new Omegan Barrent, Barrent-2, forced the
weapon away.

His victory was short-lived. For now the lessons of the closed classroom
took over, forcing Barrent-2 into a contrasurvival struggle with the
implacable and death-desiring Barrent-1.




Chapter Thirty


Conditioning took over and flung the fighting Barrents backward through
subjective time, to those stress points in the past where death had been
near, where the temporal life fabric had been weakened, where a
predisposition toward death had already been established. Conditioning
forced Barrent-2 to re-experience those moments. But this time, the
danger was augmented by the full force of the malignant half of his
personality--by the murderous informer, Barrent-1.

       *       *       *       *       *

Barrent-2 stood under glaring lights on the blood-stained sands of the
Arena, a sword in his hand. It was the time of the Omegan Games. Coming
at him was the Saunus, a heavily armored reptile with the leering face
of Barrent-1. Barrent-2 severed the creature's tail, and it changed
into three trichomotreds, rat-sized, Barrent-faced, with the
dispositions of rabid wolverines. He killed two, and the third grinned
and bit his left hand to the bone. He killed it, and watched
Barrent-1's blood leak into the soggy sand....

       *       *       *       *       *

Three ragged men sat laughing on a bench, and a girl handed him a small
gun. "Luck," she said. "I hope you know how to use this." Barrent nodded
his thanks before he noticed that the girl was not Moera; she was the
skrenning mutant who had predicted his death. Still, he moved into the
street and faced the three Hadjis.

Two of the men were mild-faced strangers. The third, Barrent-1,
stepped forward and quickly brought his gun into firing position.
Barrent-2 flung himself to the ground and pressed the trigger of his
unfamiliar weapon. He felt it vibrate in his hand and saw Hadji
Barrent's head and shoulders turn black and begin to crumble. Before he
could take aim again, his gun was wrenched violently from his hand.
Barrent-1's dying shot had creased the end of the muzzle.

Desperately he dived for the weapon, and as he rolled toward it he saw
the second man, now wearing the Barrent-1 face, take careful aim.
Barrent-2 felt pain flash through his arm, already torn by the
trichomotred's teeth. He managed to shoot this Barrent-1, and through
a haze of pain faced the third man, now also Barrent-1. His arm was
stiffening rapidly, but he forced himself to press the trigger....

       *       *       *       *       *

_You're playing their game_, Barrent-2 told himself. The
death-conditioning will wear you down, will kill you. _You must see
through it, get past it. It isn't really happening, it's in your
mind_....

But there was no time to think. He was in a large, circular,
high-ceilinged room of stone in the cellars of the Department of
Justice. It was the Trial by Ordeal. Rolling across the floor toward him
was a glistening black machine shaped like a half-sphere, standing
almost four feet high. It came at him, and in the pattern of red, green,
and amber lights he could see the hated face of Barrent-1.

Now his enemy was in its ultimate form: the invariant robot
consciousness, as false and stylized as the conditioned dreams of Earth.
The Barrent-1 machine extruded a single slender tentacle with a white
light winking at the end of it. As it approached, the tentacle withdrew,
and in its place appeared a jointed metal arm ending in a knife-edge.
Barrent-2 dodged, and heard the knife scrape against the stone.

_It isn't what you think it is_, Barrent-2 told himself. _It isn't a
machine, and you are not back on Omega. This is only half of yourself
you are fighting, this is nothing but a deadly illusion._

But he couldn't believe it. The Barrent machine was coming at him again,
its metal hide glistening with a foul green substance which Barrent-2
recognized immediately as Contact Poison. He broke into a sprint, trying
to stay away from the fatal touch.

_It isn't fatal_, he told himself.

Neutralizer washed over the metal surface, clearing away the poison. The
machine tried to ram him. Barrent tried half-heartedly to push it aside.
It crashed into him with stunning force, and he could feel ribs
splintering.

_It isn't real! You're letting a conditioned reflex talk you to death!
You aren't on Omega! You're on Earth, in your own home, staring into a
mirror!_

But the pain was real, and the clubbed metal arm felt real as it crashed
against his shoulder. Barrent staggered away.

He felt horror, not at dying, but at dying too soon, before he could
warn the Omegans of this ultimate danger planted deep in their own
minds. There was no one else to warn of the catastrophe that would
strike each man as he recovered his own specific memories of Earth. To
his best knowledge, no one had experienced this and lived. If _he_ could
live through it, countermeasures could be taken, counterconditioning
could be set up.

He pulled himself to his feet. Coached since childhood in social
responsibility, he thought of it now. He couldn't allow himself to die
when his knowledge was vital to Omega.

_This is not a real machine._

He repeated it to himself as the Barrent machine revved up, picked up
speed, and hurtled toward him from the far side of the room. He forced
himself to see beyond the machine, to see the patient droning lessons of
the classroom which had created this monster in his mind.

_This is not a real machine._

He believed it....

And swung his fist into the hated face reflected in the metal.

There was a moment of dazzling pain, and then he lost consciousness.
When he came to, he was alone in his own home on Earth. His arm and
shoulder ached, and several of his ribs seemed to be broken. On his left
hand he bore the stigmata of the trichomotred's bite.

But with his cut and bleeding right hand he had smashed the mirror. He
had shattered it and Barrent-1 utterly and forever.



                         OMEGA

                       RELIGION:
                 THE WORSHIP OF EVIL

                      PLEASURES:
        THE THRILL OF THE HUNT, WITH HUMAN PREY

                       STATUS:
            ATTAINED ONE CORPSE AT A TIME

                   LIFE EXPECTANCY:
                  THREE EARTH YEARS


  "ALL OF YOU ARE CRIMINALS THEREFORE MANKIND HAS REJECTED YOU,
  AND YOU HAVE BEEN SENT TO A WORLD WHERE YOUR OWN SORT IS KING.
  HERE YOU CAN MAKE YOUR OWN RULES, AND DIE BY THEM ..."

                 THE STATUS CIVILIZATION




Transcriber's List of Corrections

    Chapter One
      Page 1, "futher" changed to "further." (He awoke, rubbed his
    eyes, and waited for further memories to come.)
      Page 9, "ot think" changed to "to think." (All he wanted to
    do was lie down, to sleep, to have a chance to think about his
    situation.)

    Chapter Two
      Page 14, "theif" changed to "thief." (I'm ashamed to admit
    that I can't remember what a credit thief is.)

    Chapter Five
      Page 36, "wtih" changed to "with." (She appeared to be
    dissatisfied with her husband; and divorce was forbidden on
    Omega.)

    Chapter Nine
      Page 65, "murder" changed to "murderer." (Before his visit to
    the Dream Shop he had never felt himself a murderer, no matter
    what the Earth authorities had accused him of.)

    Chapter Sixteen
      Page 107, "undected" changed to "undetected." (By noon,
    Barrent was still undetected.)
      Page 114, "were were" changed to "were." (If he were able to
    get by the city gate, he would have to watch for the hunting
    patrols.)

    Chapter Eighteen
      Page 125, "Barren" changed to "Barrent." (Barrent ducked out
    of a corner in which the creeping vines were trapping him.)

    Chapter Twenty-Three
      Page 151, "coud" changed to "could." (Barrent backed away,
    wondering if a needlebeam could stop it.)

    Chapter Twenty-Four
      Page 159, Added a missing end-quote. (The full facilities of
    this park are waiting for all lovers of the great outdoors.")
      Page 159, "Presumbaly" changed to "Presumably." (Presumably
    they liked this sort of thing.)





End of Project Gutenberg's The Status Civilization, by Robert Sheckley

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STATUS CIVILIZATION ***

***** This file should be named 20919.txt or 20919.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/9/1/20919/

