second, so vast were the forces being drawn from it, and the searing,
blinding light would have been intolerable but for the protective
color-filters of his helmet. Tremendous flashes of lightning ripped and
tore from the relief-points of the bench to the ground-rods, which
flared at blue-white temperature under the incessant impacts. Knowing
that this corona-loss was but an infinitesimal fraction of the power
being used, Seaton's very mind staggered as he strove to understand the
magnitude of the forces at work upon that stubborn sphere of energy.

The aged scientist used no tools whatever, as we understand the term.
His laboratory was a power-house; at his command were the stupendous
forces of a battery of planetoid accumulators, and added to these were
the fourth-order, ninth-magnitude forces of the disintegrating copper
bar. Electricity, protelectricity, and fourth-order rays, under millions
upon millions of kilovolts of pressure, leaped to do the bidding of that
wonderful brain, stored with the accumulated knowledge of countless
thousands of years of scientific research. Watching the ancient
physicist work, Seaton compared himself to a schoolboy mixing chemicals
indiscriminately and ignorantly, with no knowledge whatever of their
properties, occasionally obtaining a reaction by pure chance. Whereas he
had worked with intra-atomic energy schoolboy fashion, the master
craftsman before him knew every reagent, every reaction, and worked with
known and thoroughly familiar agencies to bring about his exactly
predetermined ends--just as calmly certain of the results as Seaton
himself would have been in his own laboratory, mixing equivalent
quantities of solutions of barium chloride and of sulphuric acid to
obtain a precipitate of barium sulphate.

[Illustration: _Hour after hour Rovol labored on, oblivious to the
passage of time in his zeal of accomplishment, the while carefully
instructing Seaton, who watched every step with intense interest...._]

Hour after hour Rovol labored on, oblivious to the passage of time in
his zeal of accomplishment, the while carefully instructing Seaton, who
watched every step with intense interest and did everything possible for
him to do. Bit by bit a towering structure arose in the middle of the
laboratory. A metal foundation supported a massive compound bearing,
which in turn carried a tubular network of latticed metal, mounted like
an immense telescope. Near the upper, outer end of this openwork tube a
group of nine forces held the field of force rigidly in place in its
axis; at the lower extremity were mounted seats for two operators and
the control panels necessary for the operation of the intricate system
of forces and motors which would actuate and control that gigantic
projector. Immense hour and declination circles could be read by optical
systems from the operators' seats--circles fully forty feet in diameter,
graduated with incredible delicacy and accuracy into decimal fractions
of seconds of arc, and each driven by variable-speed motors through
gear-trains and connections having no backlash whatever.

While Rovol was working upon one of the last instruments to be installed
upon the controlling panel a mellow note sounded throughout the
building, and he immediately ceased his labors and opened the
master-switches of his power plants.

"You have done well, youngster," he congratulated his helper, as he
began to take off his protective covering, "Without your aid I could not
have accomplished nearly this much during one period of labor. The
periods of exercise and of relaxation are at hand--let us return to the
house of Orlon, where we all shall gather to relax and to refresh
ourselves for the labors of tomorrow."

"But it's almost done!" protested Seaton. "Let's finish it up and shoot
a little juice through it, just to try it out."

"There speaks the rashness and impatience of youth," rejoined the
scientist, calmly removing the younger man's suit and leading him out to
the waiting airboat. "I read in your mind that you are often guilty of
laboring continuously until your brain loses its keen edge. Learn now,
once and for all, that such conduct is worse than foolish--it is
criminal. We have labored the full period. Laboring for more than that
length of time without recuperation results in a loss of power which,
if persisted in, wreaks permanent injury to the mind; and by it you gain
nothing. We have more than ample time to do that which must be done--the
fifth-order projector shall be completed before the warning torpedo
shall have reached the planet of the Fenachrone--therefore over-exertion
is unwarranted. As for testing, know now that only mechanisms built by
bunglers require testing. Properly built machines work properly."

"But I'd have liked to see it work just once, anyway," lamented Seaton
as the small airship tore through the air on its way back to the
observatory.

"You must cultivate calmness, my son, and the art of relaxation. With
those qualities your race can easily double its present span of useful
life. Physical exercise to maintain the bodily tissues at their best,
and mental relaxation following mental toil--these things are the
secrets of a long and productive life. Why attempt to do more than can
be accomplished efficiently? There is always tomorrow. I am more
interested in that which we are now building than you can possibly be,
since many generations of the Rovol have anticipated its construction;
yet I realize that in the interest of our welfare and for the progress
of civilization, today's labors must not be prolonged beyond today's
period of work. Furthermore, you yourself realize that there is no
optimum point at which any task may be interrupted. Short of final
completion of any project, one point is the same as any other. Had we
continued, we would have wished to continue still farther, and so on
without end."

"You're probably right, at that," the impetuous chemist conceded, as
their craft came to earth before the observatory.

       *       *       *       *       *

Crane and Orlon were already in the common room, as were the scientists
Seaton already knew, as well as a group of women and children still
strangers to the Terrestrials. In a few minutes Orlon's companion, a
dignified, white-haired woman, entered; accompanied by Dorothy,
Margaret, and a laughing, boisterous group of men and women from the
Country of Youth. Introductions over, Seaton turned to Crane.

"How's every little thing, Mart?"

"Very well indeed. We are building an observatory in space--or rather,
Orlon is building it and I am doing what little I can to help him. In a
few days we shall be able to locate the system of the Fenachrone. How is
your work progressing?"

"Smoother than a kitten's ear. Got the fourth-order projector about
done. We're going to project a fourth-order force out to grab us some
dense material, a pretty close approach to pure neutronium. There's
nothing dense enough around here, even in the core of the central sun,
so we're going out to a white dwarf star--one a good deal like the
companion star to Sirius in Canis Major--get some material of the proper
density from its core, and convert our sender into a fifth-order
machine. Then we can really get busy--go places and do things."

"Neutronium? Pure mass?" queried Crane, "I have been under the
impression that it does not exist. Of what use can such a substance be
to you?"

"Can't get pure neutronium, of course--couldn't use it if we could. What
we need and are going to get is a material of about two and a half
million specific gravity. Got to have it for lenses and controls for the
fifth-order forces. Those rays go right through anything less dense
without measurable refraction. But I see Rovol's giving me a nasty look.
He's my boss on this job, and I imagine this kind of talk's barred
during the period of relaxation, as being work. That so, chief?"

"You know that it is barred, you incorrigible young cub!" answered
Rovol, with a smile.

"All right, boss; one more little infraction and I'll shut up like a
clam. I'd like to know what the girls have been doing."

"We've been having a wonderful time!" Dorothy declared. "We've been
designing fabrics and ornaments and jewels and things. Wait 'til you see
'em!"

"Fine! All right, Orlon, it's your party--what to do?"

"This is the time of exercise. We have many forms, most of which are
unfamiliar to you. You all swim, however, and as that is one of the best
of exercises, I suggest that we all swim."

"Lead us to it!" Seaton exclaimed, then his voice changed abruptly.
"Wait a minute--I don't know about our swimming in copper sulphate
solution."

"We swim in fresh water as often as in salt, and the pool is now filled
with distilled water."

The Terrestrials quickly donned their bathing suits and all went through
the observatory and down a winding path, bordered with the peculiarly
beautiful scarlet and green shrubbery, to the "pool"--an artificial lake
covering a hundred acres, its polished metal bottom and sides strikingly
decorated with jewels and glittering tiles in tasteful yet contrasting
inlaid designs. Any desired depth of water was available and plainly
marked, from the fenced-off shallows where the smallest children
splashed to the forty feet of liquid crystal which received the diver
who cared to try his skill from one of the many spring-boards, flying
rings, and catapults which rose high into the air a short distance away
from the entrance.

Orlon and the others of the older generation plunged into the water
without ado and struck out for the other shore, using a fast
double-overarm stroke. Swimming in a wide circle they came out upon the
apparatus and went through a series of methodical dives and gymnastic
performances. It was evident that they swam, as Orlon had intimated, for
exercise. To them, exercise was a necessary form of labor--labor which
they performed thoroughly and well--but nothing to call forth the
whole-souled enthusiasm they displayed in their chosen fields of mental
effort.

The visitors from the Country of Youth, however, locked arms and sprang
to surround the four Terrestrials, crying, "Let's do a group dive!"

"I don't believe that I can swim well enough to enjoy what's coming,"
whispered Margaret to Crane, and they slipped into the pool and turned
around to watch. Seaton and Dorothy, both strong swimmers, locked arms
and laughed as they were encircled by the green phalanx and swept out to
the end of a dock-like structure and upon a catapult.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Hold tight, everybody!" someone yelled, and interlaced, straining arms
and legs held the green and white bodies in one motionless group as a
gigantic force hurled them fifty feet into the air and out over the
deepest part of the pool. There was a mighty splash and a miniature
tidal wave as that mass of humanity struck the water. Many feet they
went down before the cordon was broken and the individual units came to
the surface. Then pandemonium reigned. Vigorous informal games, having
to do with floating and sinking balls and effigies: pushball, in which
the players never seemed to know, or to care, upon which side they were
playing; water-fights and ducking contests.... A green mermaid, having
felt the incredible power of Seaton's arms as he tossed her lightly away
from a goal he was temporarily defending, put both her small hands
around his biceps wonderingly, amazed at a strength unknown and
impossible upon her world; then playfully tried to push him under.
Failing, she called for help.

"He's needed a good ducking for ages!" Dorothy cried, and she and
several other girls threw themselves upon him. Over and around him the
lithe forms flashed, while the rest of the young people splashed water
impartially over all the combatants and cheered them on. In the midst of
the battle the signal sounded to end the period of exercise.

"Saved by the bell," Seaton laughed as, thoroughly ducked and almost
half drowned, he was allowed to swim ashore.

When all had returned to the common room of the observatory and had
seated themselves, Orlon took out his miniature ray-projector, no larger
than a fountain pen, and flashed it briefly upon one of the hundreds of
button-like lenses upon the wall. Instantly each chair converted itself
into a form-fitting divan, inviting complete repose.

"I believe that you of Earth would perhaps enjoy some of our music
during this, the period of relaxation and repose--it is so different
from your own," Orlon remarked, as he again manipulated his tiny
force-tube.

       *       *       *       *       *

Every light was extinguished and there was felt a profoundly deep
vibration--a note so low as to be palpable rather than audible; and
simultaneously the utter darkness was relieved by a tinge of red so dark
as to be barely perceptible, while a peculiar somber fragrance pervaded
the atmosphere. The music rapidly ran the gamut to the limit of
audibility and, in the same tempo, the lights traversed the visible
spectrum and disappeared. Then came a crashing chord and a vivid flare
of blended light; ushering in an indescribable symphony of sound and
color, accompanied by a slower succession of shifting, blending odors.

The quality of tone was now that of a gigantic orchestra, now that of a
full brass band, now that of a single unknown instrument--as though the
composer had had at his command every overtone capable of being produced
by any possible instrument, and with them had woven a veritable tapestry
of melody upon an incredibly complex loom of sound. As went the harmony,
so the play of light accompanied it. Neither music nor illumination came
from any apparent source; they simply pervaded the entire room. When the
music was fast--and certain passages were of a rapidity impossible for
any human fingers to attain--the lights flashed in vivid, tiny pencils,
intersecting each other in sharply drawn, brilliant figures, which
changed with dizzying speed; when the tempo was slow, the beams were
soft and broad, blending into each other to form sinuous, indefinite,
writhing patterns, whose very vagueness was infinitely soothing.

"What do you think of it, Mrs. Seaton?" Orlon asked.

"Marvelous!" breathed Dorothy, awed. "I never imagined anything like it.
I can't begin to tell you how much I like it. I never dreamed of such
absolute perfection of execution, and the way the lighting accompanies
the theme is just too perfectly wonderful for words! It was incredibly
brilliant."

"Brilliant--yes. Perfectly executed--yes. But I notice that you say
nothing of depth of feeling or of emotional appeal." Dorothy blushed
uncomfortably and started to say something, but Orlon silenced her and
continued: "You need not apologize. I had a reason for speaking as I
did, for in you I recognize a real musician, and our music is indeed
entirely soulless. That is the result of our ancient civilization. We
are so old that our music is purely intellectual, entirely mechanical,
instead of emotional. It is perfect, but, like most of our other arts,
it is almost completely without feeling."

"But your statues are wonderful!"

"As I told you, those statues were made myriads of years ago. At that
time we also had real music, but, unlike statuary, music at that time
could not be preserved for posterity. That is another thing you have
given us. Attend!"

At one end of the room, as upon a three-dimensional screen, the four
Terrestrials saw themselves seated in the control-room of the _Skylark_.
They saw and heard Margaret take up her guitar, and strike four sonorous
chords in "A." Then, as if they had been there in person, they heard
themselves sing "The Bull-Frog" and all the other songs they had sung,
far off in space. They heard Margaret suggest that Dorothy play some
"real music," and heard Seaton's comments upon the quartette.

"In that, youngster, you were entirely wrong," said Orlon, stopping the
reproduction for a moment. "The entire planet was listening to you very
attentively--we were enjoying it as no music has been enjoyed for
thousands of years."

"The whole planet!" gasped Margaret. "Were you broadcasting it? How
could you?"

"Easy," grinned Seaton. "They can do most anything with these rays of
theirs."

"When you have time, in some period of labor, we would appreciate it
very much if you four would sing for us again, would give us more of
your vast store of youthful music, for we can now preserve it exactly as
it is sung. But much as we enjoyed the quartette, Mrs. Seaton, it was
your work upon the violin that took us by storm. Beginning with
tomorrow, my companion intends to have you spend as many periods as you
will, playing for our records. We shall now have your music."

"If you like it so well, wouldn't you rather I'd play you something I
hadn't played before?"

"That is labor. We could not...."

"Piffle!" Dorothy interrupted. "Don't you see that I could really play
right now, with somebody to listen, who really enjoys music; whereas, if
I tried to play in front of a record, I'd be perfectly mechanical?"

"'At-a-girl, Dot! I'll get your fiddle."

"Keep your seat, son," instructed Orlon, as the case containing the
Stradivarius appeared before Dorothy, borne by a pencil of force. "While
that temperament is incomprehensible to every one of us, it is
undoubtedly true that the artistic mind does work in that manner. We
listen."

Dorothy swept into "The Melody in F," and as the poignantly beautiful
strains poured forth from that wonderful violin, she knew that she had
her audience with her. Though so intellectual that they themselves were
incapable of producing music of real depth of feeling, they could
understand and could enjoy such music with an appreciation impossible to
