
The warning siren stopped as the blaster beams of the battleship went
harmlessly into space, continuing to follow the probability course
plotted from the cruiser's last visible position and course by the
battleship's robot target tracers.

He lifted the detector screen, to find the battleship almost exactly
where the cruiser's course analyzers had predicted it would be. The
blasters of the battleship were blazing their full concentration of
firepower into an area behind and to one side of the cruiser.

They blinked out at sight of the cruiser in its new position and blazed
again a moment later, boring into the stern. He dropped the detector
screen and swung the cruiser in another curve, spiraling in the opposite
direction. As before, the screech of the alarm siren died as the
battleship's blasters followed the course given them by course analyzers
and target tracers that were built to presume that all enemy ships were
acceleration-limitator equipped.

The cruiser could have destroyed the battleship at any time--but they
wanted to capture their flagship unharmed. The maneuvering continued,
the cruiser drawing closer to the battleship. The battleship, in
desperation, began using the same hide-and-jump tactics the cruiser used
but it was of little avail--the battleship moved at known acceleration
limits and the cruiser's course analyzers predicted each new position
with sufficient accuracy.

The cruiser made its final dash in a tightening spiral, its detector
screen flickering on and off. It struck the battleship at a matched
speed, with a thump and ringing of metal as the magnetic grapples
fastened the cruiser like a leech to the battleship's side.

In that position neither the forward nor stern blasters of the
battleship could touch it. There remained only to convince the commander
of the battleship that further resistance was futile.

This he did with a simple ultimatum to the commander:

"This cruiser is firmly attached to your ship, its acceleration
limitator disconnected. Its drives are of sufficient power to thrust
both ships forward at a much higher degree of acceleration than persons
from one-gravity worlds can endure. You will surrender at once or we
shall be forced to put these two ships into a curve of such short radius
and at an acceleration so great that all of you will be killed."

Then he added, "If you surrender we'll do somewhat better by you than
you did with the humans two hundred years ago--we'll take all of you on
to Athena."

The commander, already sick from an acceleration that would have been
negligible to Ragnarok men, had no choice.

His reply came, choked with acceleration sickness and the greater
sickness of defeat:

"We will surrender."

       *       *       *       *       *

Narth regained consciousness. He saw Humbolt sitting beside him as
before, with no Gern rescuers crowding into the control room with
shouted commands and drawn blasters.

"Where are they?" he asked. "Where is the battleship?"

"We captured it," he said.

"You captured--a Gern battleship?"

"It wasn't hard," he said. "It would have been easier if only Ragnarok
men had been on the cruiser. We didn't want to accelerate to any higher
gravities than absolutely necessary because of the Gerns on it."

"You did it--you captured the battleship," Narth said, his tone like one
dazed.

He wet his lips, staring, as he contemplated the unpleasant implications
of it.

"You're freak mutants who can capture a battleship. Maybe you will take
Athena and Earth from us. But"--the animation of hatred returned to his
face--"What good will it do you? Did you ever think about that?"

"Yes," he said. "We've thought about it."

"Have you?" Narth leaned forward, his face shining with the malice of
his gloating. "You can never escape the consequences of what you have
done. The Gern Empire has the resources of dozens of worlds. The Empire
will build a fleet of special ships, a force against which your own will
be nothing, and send them to Earth and Athena and Ragnarok. The Empire
will smash you for what you have done and if there are any survivors of
your race left they will cringe before Gerns for a hundred generations
to come.

"Remember that while you're posturing in your little hour of glory on
Athena and Earth."

"You insist in thinking we'll do as Gerns would do," he said. "We won't
delay to do any posturing. We'll have a large fleet when we leave Earth
and we'll go at once to engage the Gern home fleet. I thought you knew
we were going to do that. We're going to cripple and capture your fleet
and then we're going to destroy your empire."

"Destroy the Empire--_now_?" Narth stared again, all the gloating gone
as he saw, at last, the quick and inexorable end. "Now--before we can
stop you--before we can have a chance?"

"When a race has been condemned to die by another race and it fights and
struggles and manages somehow to survive, it learns a lesson. It learns
it must never again let the other race be in position to destroy it. So
this is the harvest you reap from the seeds you sowed on Ragnarok two
hundred years ago.

"You understand, don't you?" he asked, almost gently. "For two hundred
years the Gern Empire has been a menace to our survival as a race. Now,
the time has come when we shall remove it."

       *       *       *       *       *

He stood in the control room of the battleship and watched Athena's sun
in the viewscreen, blazing like a white flame. Sigyn, fully recovered,
was stretched out on the floor near him; twitching and snarling a little
in her sleep as she fought again the battle with the Gerns. Fenrir was
pacing the floor, swinging his black, massive head restlessly, while Tip
and Freckles were examining with fascinated curiosity the collection of
bright medals that had been cleaned out of the Gern commander's desk.

Lake and Craig left their stations, as impatient as Fenrir, and came
over to watch the viewscreen with him.

"One day more," Craig said. "We're two hundred years late but we're
coming in to the world that was to have been our home."

"It can never be, now," he said. "Have any of us ever thought of
that--that we're different to humans and there's no human world we could
ever call home?"

"I've thought of it," Lake said. "Ragnarok made us different physically
and different in the way we think. We could live on human worlds--but
we would always be a race apart and never really belong there."

"I suppose we've all thought about it," Craig said. "And wondered what
we'll do when we're finished with the Gerns. Not settle down on Athena
or Earth, in a little cottage with a fenced-in lawn where it would be
adventure to watch the Three-D shows after each day at some safe,
routine job."

"Not back to Ragnarok," Lake said. "With metals and supplies from other
worlds they'll be able to do a lot there but the battle is already won.
There will be left only the peaceful development--building a town at the
equator for Big Winter, leveling land, planting crops. We could never be
satisfied with that kind of a life."

"No," he said, and felt his own restlessness stir in protest at the
thought of settling down in some safe and secure environment. "Not
Athena or Earth or Ragnarok--not any world we know."

"How long until we're finished with the Gerns?" Lake asked. "Ten years?
We'll still be young then. Where will we go--all of us who fought the
Gerns and all of the ones in the future who won't want to live out their
lives on Ragnarok? Where is there a place for us--a world of our own?"

"Where do we find a world of our own?" he asked, and watched the star
clouds creep toward them in the viewscreen; tumbled and blazing and
immense beyond conception.

"There's a galaxy for us to explore," he said. "There are millions of
suns and thousands of worlds waiting for us. Maybe there are races out
there like the Gerns--and maybe there are races such as we were a
hundred years ago who need our help. And maybe there are worlds out
there with things on them such as no man ever imagined.

"We'll go, to see what's there. Our women will go with us and there will
be some worlds on which some of us will want to stay. And, always, there
will be more restless ones coming from Ragnarok. Out there are the
worlds and the homes for all of us."

"Of course," Lake said. "Beyond the space frontier ... where else would
we ever belong?"

It was all settled, then, and there was a silence as the battleship
plunged through hyperspace, the cruiser running beside her and their
drives moaning and thundering as had the drives of the _Constellation_
two hundred years before.

A voyage had been interrupted then, and a new race had been born. Now
they were going on again, to Athena, to Earth, to the farthest reaches
of the Gern Empire. And on, to the wild, unknown regions of space
beyond.

There awaited their worlds and there awaited their destiny; to be a race
scattered across a hundred thousand light-years of suns, to be an empire
such as the galaxy had never known.

They, the restless ones, the unwanted and forgotten, the survivors.


THE END




FOR SCIENCE FICTION FANS--

A space-age collection of startling adventures!

BRAIN TWISTER

Mark Phillips. The fantastic story of a spy who could read minds. (F783)

WAR WITH THE ROBOTS

Harry Harrison. Men made the machines and found out the danger too late.
(F771)

MARS IS MY DESTINATION

Frank Belknap Long. A suspense story of Tomorrow and a crisis in the
advance into Space. (F742)

WORLDS OF WHEN

Groff Conklin, ed. Five short novels of improbable todays and possible
tomorrows. (F733)

VENUS PLUS X

Theodore Sturgeon. He woke up in a world of strange creatures and nearly
went mad. (F732)

THE CASTLE OF IRON

L. Sprague de Camp & Fletcher Pratt. They disappeared into a world of
wizards, werewolves, and magic spells. (F722)

WALL AROUND THE WORLD

Theodore R. Cogswell. Amazing stories from spaceships to flying
broomsticks. (F703)

THE HAUNTED STARS

Edmond Hamilton. A tense tale of the near future and of Man's destiny.
(F698)

THE FALLING TORCH

Algis Budrys. He had to free an enslaved planet or die. (F693)

NAKED TO THE STARS

Gordon R. Dickson. Soldiers of Space fight Earth's wars on the far
planets. (F682)

EACH BOOK ONLY 40c

(plus 5c handling charge)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PYRAMID BOOKS, Dept. F774, 444 Madison Ave., New York 22, N.Y.

Please send me the following books. Each book 40c plus 5c handling
charge. I enclose $_________________.

F783 F771 F742 F733 F732 F722 F703 F698 F693 F682

Name ___________________________________________________________________

Address ________________________________________________________________

City _________________________________ State ___________________________




Now available in paperback

INSIDE
RUSSIA
TODAY

       *       *       *       *       *

BY JOHN GUNTHER

       *       *       *       *       *

THE TREMENDOUS BEST-SELLER * * AT $5.95 NOW ONLY 95c * *

       *       *       *       *       *

Thoroughly revised and updated, this book is essential reading for
everyone who hopes to understand the Russia with which the world has to
deal.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The most comprehensive book ever written on de-Stalinized Russia"
                                               _New York Herald Tribune_

       *       *       *       *       *

Now on sale wherever paperback books are sold or from Pyramid Books, 444
Madison Ave., New York 22, N.Y. (add 5c to cover handling)




DOOMED

Crushing gravity--thin air--winters of unimaginable cold--searing
summers under two suns--a deadly wasteland teeming with monsters and
killing fever--

That was Ragnarok, the most dreaded planet yet discovered. And Ragnarok
was where a thousand untrained Earthmen--and women and children--were
brutally marooned by a sadistic enemy.

Two hundred died the first night.

In the morning, the survivors knew what they must live for--revenge!

A PYRAMID BOOK 40c

Cover: Ralph Brillhart

Printed in U.S.A.




Transcriber's Note:

The following typographical errors in the original text have been
corrected in this eBook:

Verso, p. 4: "arangement" changed to "arrangement"

Part 1, p. 22: comma changed to a period

Part 1, p. 22: "benefitted" changed to "benefited"

Part 1, p. 53: "say it it now" changed to "say it now"

Part 2, p. 105: "acknowledgement" changed to "acknowledgment"

Part 4, p. 134: "lightyears" changed to "light-years"





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Space Prison, by Tom Godwin

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SPACE PRISON ***
