"You will precede us," he said.

"No," Don told him, "I don't think I will. I think it will be better if
I leave that honor to one of the other wardens. I want to be able to
see you." He jerked his head at a man who stood to the left of the
door.

"Will you honor us, Mernar-dar?"

The other tilted his head. "It is I who am honored," he said. He turned
and went out the door.

Dazedly, Stern walked forward, pacing with the claimant. He paused as
he got to the porch. Michaels was still standing inside the door.

"Right here," he said coldly, "we shall return to a very old custom. I
shall remain, to protect the rear. And I shall watch the entire
progress of the advance to the Throne Room." He smiled grimly.

"You are, I suppose, familiar with the range of a medium duty blaster?"

Stern nodded. "I've seen them operate," he admitted.

"Good." Don nodded. "This thing will outrange them a little. I'll have
you in my sights all the way. Remember that, and don't do anything that
might cause me to fear for Pete's safety."

The wardens spread out, to fan out before Stern and Pete. Acting the
part of scouts before a column, they started across the wide lawn,
toward the Throne Room.

Stern watched them for a moment, then took Pete's arm. Together, they
walked down the long flight of steps. For a moment, they paused at the
path, as ritual demanded, for a signal to continue.

Stern allowed his thoughts to race.

There was no question about it now, he thought. This boy would be
upheld by the conclave--if he got before it. And if he were now
sustained, an ex-regent named Stern would find himself in very grave
trouble indeed.

This was much worse than that mob in Tonar City. He glanced toward the
gate in the wall ahead and to his right.

Just beyond that door lay his yacht--and safety. If he could only
figure out a way----

                    *      *      *      *      *

Across the lawn, a warden was making the signal for the advance. The
way, then, was ritually clear. Stern stepped forward, still glancing
toward that door.

They would pass within just a few meters of it. Now, where was that
Michaels?

Suddenly, he realized he could never hope to get out his hidden weapon,
find Michaels with it, and vaporize him. Not until the other had plenty
of time to release a beam of his own. He shuddered, remembering the
destruction that weapon had caused up in the Morek.

At this range, even the narrowest blaster beam would fan out enough to
destroy a man's entire body. And that thing, whatever it was----

Suddenly, he smiled. That was it! It would spread out too much.

He flipped out the little khroal from its hiding place in his sleeve
and placed it against Pete's back. With his other hand, he gripped the
boy around the throat. Then he turned, seeking to locate Michaels. The
fellow was out of sight.

Probably, Stern thought, he had remained in the shadow of the huge
pillars of the porch--or even inside the Blue Palace itself.

His whole body itched. The man might fire without thinking! He raised
his voice.

"Can you hear me, Michaels?"

He had been right. The answering voice came from the palace doorway.

"I can hear."

"Then listen carefully." Stern put all his persuasive power into his
voice.

"I shall not harm this boy unless I am forced to, but I assure you that
if I am interfered with, I'll not hesitate. From where you are, you can
do nothing. Any blast you release will spread out to kill him as well
as me. You realize that?"

"I can hear you." Don's voice was expressionless.

"And," added Stern loudly, "if I am struck or attacked, I will have
time to release this khroal. This is also obvious, is it not?"

There was no answer. Stern frowned. What was the fellow doing? He drew
a deep breath. He'd have to go through with it now, no matter what.

"I am going to the gate in the wall over there. Shortly after I go
through that gate, I shall release this boy, and use a means of escape
which I have prepared. You may watch me, of course, but make no effort
to stop me--or this boy dies."

He paused again, waiting for an answer.

The wardens, he could see, had stopped and stood, undecided. None of
them was close enough to be dangerous.

This, he thought with a surge of hope, was going to work out after all.
He turned his eyes for a swift glance at his captive.

Once at the yacht, he could release a bit of energy from the khroal.
This boy had destroyed all his careful plans. No, he decided, Pete
Waern could not be allowed to live and enjoy those good things the
palace afforded.

He tightened his grip about the boy's neck.

                    *      *      *      *      *

Don Michaels had strapped his sling on his arm. Now, he lay on the
floor of the Blue Palace. Stern's head was centered in the scope and
the cross hairs bobbed slowly about a spot just in front of the man's
right ear.

"No question about it," Don told himself, "if Stern gets Pete through
that gate, that'll be the end of Pete."

He put pressure on the trigger.

"The guy's as sore as a singed gersal," he told himself. "And half nuts
besides. He'll spray Pete with that thing if it's the last thing he
ever does." He continued his pressure on the trigger. The cross hairs
still hovered about the man's ear.

"Hope that anatomy book was right," he told himself.

Of course, he realized, if he missed the tiny target--if the bullet
failed to destroy the motor centers on impact--Stern would die anyway.
But he just might be able to press the release on that khroal. And that
wouldn't be good.

The aiming point moved a trifle and Don eased back into position.

What had happened to the trigger on this thing? Had he forgotten to
take off the safety? Again, the cross hairs started to wander and he
eased them back--back toward that little spot.

The rifle leaped upward with a roar, slamming back against Don's
shoulder. He let it settle again, examining the scene anxiously through
his sight.

Stern was still on his feet, but his hands were dropping limply to his
sides. Don could just see the glitter of the khroal by Pete's feet.
Then, Stern's knees bent and he flowed to the ground.

Pete had turned at the sound of the shot. He looked back at the palace
door, then glanced at the khroal.

At last, he knelt beside the body on the ground. He felt the throat,
then examined the man's head. For an instant, he looked a little sick,
then he looked away from the tiny hole in front of the man's ear. He
got to his feet and waved a hand.

"Pinwheel," he shouted.

                    *      *      *      *      *

The newly enrobed King of Oredan settled back in his chair and shook
the heavy cloth back from his shoulder.

"So," he said thoughtfully, "it's all over." He sighed.

"And it's all just beginning, too. Now, I'll have to form a
government." He smiled sadly.

"It's funny, Don. For years, I've dreamed of actually being king. Now
it's suddenly happened and I feel about as helpless as they come." He
stretched out a hand. "All at once, I'm realizing it's pretty rough for
a schoolboy to suddenly find himself with a whole nation to run. I
don't know where to start."

"You'll get used to it, Pete." Don smiled at him. "Get yourself a few
really competent advisors. Tell them what you want, and let them go out
and get some competent people to do things. And you've got it whipped."

"Yeah." Pete nodded. "Yeah, I guess that's the way it's done. But----
Well, I asked for it. And they handed it to me." He looked directly at
Don.

"How about you? You've got plenty of clan rank, you know. What
department do you want?"

Don shook his head slowly. "Don't look at me," he advised. "They
offered me a spot in the Stellar Guard and I'm signing up." He glanced
around the room.

"I've got no place here."

"What are you talking about?" Pete frowned. "I owe this whole thing to
you. I wouldn't even be alive if you hadn't been around. You can have
anything you want here, and you know it. What can the Federation offer
you?"

Don shrugged. "Oh, I don't know," he said. "Lot of work, of course.
Pride of accomplishment, maybe. Peace of mind. Hard to say. Only one
thing I'm sure of. I wouldn't work out here."

"I don't get it." Pete shook his head.

Don looked at him, his face expressionless.

"Look, Pete. Do you really like me?"

"Why, of course. You saved my life and set me on the throne. I told you
that."

"Not just what I mean. Do you feel perfectly relaxed and easy when I'm
around? Would you really call me a close friend?"

Pete squirmed in his chair. Uneasily, he looked overhead at the tassled
canopy.

"That's a lousy way to put it," he complained.

"Well?" Don's face was still expressionless.

Pete forced himself to look directly at him.

"I don't know. I ... well, you've done so darn much. Well, I guess I am
a little afraid of you, at that." He looked at the floor.

"Oh, all right. I'll have to admit it. You do actually make me uneasy.
Always did, even back at school. Lot of fellows felt the same way."

Don stood. "That's what I mean. And it would get worse if I hung
around. You'd get so you hated yourself--and me." He held out a hand.

"You're the king--the ruler of this whole nation. That means you've got
to be the head man. No one can give you orders. They can suggest, but
no one can be even capable of giving you orders." He smiled.

"Dad will rebuild the ranch, of course. And I may come back once in a
while, in a very quiet way. But for the most part, I'd better not be
around too often."

Pete got to his feet. Suddenly, he looked relieved and at ease.

"I'll make certain your ranch is never interfered with," he promised.
"It's yours, so long as you or your father want it. And I hope that
some day it'll be a home for your kids." He paused.

"If you ever do decide to come to the capital," he added, "you'll be a
welcome guest at the palace."

"O.K." Don grinned. "Let's leave it that way. Good-by, then, and I hope
yours is the longest reign in history."

He turned and walked through the curtain.


THE END






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Best Made Plans, by Everett B. Cole

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BEST MADE PLANS ***

***** This file should be named 22892.txt or 22892.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/8/9/22892/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Bruce Albrecht and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).
