Forrester reached the ground first. The eagle braked madly, trying to
escape a giant Kodiak bear. Forrester stood on his hind legs and
battered the air with great, murderous paws. Mars scooted upward,
already changing into something capable of coping with the bear. A huge,
bat-winged dragon, breathing barrels of smoke, flapped in the air,
looking all around for its opponent. It did not notice Forrester
scurrying away in the shape of an ant through the leaves and thick humus
of the jungle floor.

By now, the air was becoming smoky and the flames were licking up the
sides of trees all through the vicinity, and racing along the giant
vines that curled around them. The dragon belched more smoke, adding to
the general confusion, and roared in a voice like thunder:

"Coward! Dionysus! Come out and fight!"

There was an instant of crackling silence.

Then Forrester stepped out from behind a blazing tree. He, too, was a
dragon.

Mars snarled, breathed smoke and made a power dive. Forrester dodged and
the fangs of the monster missed him by inches. Mars sank claw-deep into
the ground, and Forrester slammed the War God on the side of his head
with one mighty forepaw. Mars blew out a cloud of evil-smelling smoke
and managed to jerk himself free. He leaped to all four feet, glaring at
Forrester with great, bulging, hate-filled eyes.

"Man to man, you bastard!" he said in a flame-filled roar.

Forrester leaped back to avoid being scorched. He poured out some smoke
of his own. Mars coughed.

"Damn it, no more shape-changing!" the War God thundered.

"Fair enough!" Forrester shouted. He changed back to his Dionysian form,
circling warily until Mars had followed suit. Then the two began to
close in slowly.

Around them the forest burned, vegetation even on the swampy ground
catching fire as the entire vicinity crackled and hissed with heat.
Neither of them seemed to take any notice of the fact.

Mars was a trained boxer and wrestler, Forrester knew. But it was
probably a good many centuries since he'd had any real workouts, and
Forrester was counting heavily on slowed-down reflexes. Those would give
him a slight edge.

At any rate, he hoped so.

The circling ceased as Mars leaped forward suddenly and lashed out with
a right to the jaw that could end the fight. But Forrester moved his
head aside just in time and the fist glanced off his cheek. He staggered
back just as Mars followed with a left jab to the belly.

Forrester clamped down on the War God's wrist and twisted violently,
pulling Mars on past him. The War God, caught off balance, lunged
forward, tripping over his own feet, and almost fell as he went by.
Forrester, grinning savagely, brought his right hand down on the back of
Mars' neck with a blow whose force would have killed an elephant
outright.

Mars, however, was no mere elephant. He grunted and went down on his
hands and knees, shaking his head groggily. But he wasn't out. Not
quite.

Forrester doubled up his fist as Mars tried to rise, and came down again
with all the force he could muster, squarely on his opponent's neck.

There was a satisfyingly loud crack, audible, even in the roar of the
burning forest. Mars collapsed to the ground, smothering small fires
beneath his bulk. Forrester leaped on top of him and grabbed his head,
beard with one hand and hair with the other. He twisted and the War God
screamed in agony. Forrester relaxed the pressure.

"All right, now," he said through clenched teeth. "Your neck's broken,
and all I've got to do is twist enough to sever your spinal column.
You'll be crippled for as long as Vulcan has--maybe longer."

Mars shrieked again. "I yield! I yield!"

Forrester held on. "Not just yet you don't," he said grimly. "I want
some information, and I'm going to get it out of you if I have to wring
them out vertebra by vertebra."

Mars tried to buck. Forrester twisted again and the War God subsided,
breathing hard. At last he muttered: "What do you want to know?"

"Why did you and the other Gods leave Earth for three thousand years?
And where did you come from in the first place? I want the _real_
reason, chum." He applied a little pressure, just as a reminder.

"I'll tell you!" Mars screamed. "I'll tell you!"

And as the roaring flames crackled in the Amazon forest, the agonized
Mars began to talk.




CHAPTER TWELVE


Zeus, Venus, Diana and Forrester sat in the Court of the Gods, listening
to a large, blue-skinned individual with bright red eyes and two long
white fangs coming from a lipless mouth. The eyes were like a cat's,
with slitted pupils, and the general expression on the individual's face
was one of feral hatred and bestial madness. However, as he had
explained, he was not responsible for the arrangement of his features.
He was, he kept saying, only interested in the general welfare. What was
more, it was his business to be interested. He was, as a matter of fact,
a cop: Bor Mellistos, of the Interstellar Police.

"My rank," he had told them mildly, "is about the equivalent of your
Detective Inspector."

"Technically," he was saying now, "you are all four guilty of being
accessories--as I understand your local law phrases it. However--"

He smiled. It made him look unbelievably horrible. Forrester tried not
to pay any attention to it.

"However," he went on, "in view of the fact that none of you could
possibly have known that you were, in fact, accessories--that is, that
you were dealing with a criminal group, if you understand me--plus the
fact that Mr. Forrester, as soon as he did discover the facts, called us
at once through the power machine--I feel that we can overlook your part
in the matter."

Venus frowned. "Wait a minute. I'm not sure I understand this at all.
What crime are the Gods supposed to have committed?"

"Not crime, miss," Bor Mellistos said. His eyes twinkled. Forrester
gulped and turned away. "Crimes. Misuse of a neural power machine, for
one--and the domination and enslavement of a less advanced intelligent
culture for another. Both those are very serious crimes."

"Less advanced culture?" Forrester said. "You mean us?"

"I'm afraid so, sir," Bor Mellistos said. "You see, all the members of
my culture are attuned to the power nodes of one neural machine or
another, but this power is not meant to be misused. We have been
searching for this group for a long time now."

"And you first got wind of them on Earth about three thousand years
ago?"

"A little more than that, actually," Bor Mellistos said, "if you don't
mind the correction."

"Not at all," Forrester said, looking at the fangs of the Detective
Inspector.

"We were alerted after the radiations had been coming in for some time.
The search for this group wasn't nearly as urgent then."

"And that's why they had to go into hiding?" Diana asked.

"Correct, miss," Bor Mellistos said. "The only one we managed to catch
was the woman calling herself Aphrodite, or Venus." He looked at the
substitute Venus. "That's the one you replaced, miss."

"How did you catch her?" Forrester pursued.

"Well," Bor Mellistos said, turning a faint shade of orange with
embarrassment, "she was--ah--engaged in a secret liaison with a mortal
at the time. Knowing that two of the other gentlemen would be furious
with her if they discovered this fact--"

"Mars and Vulcan," Forrester supplied.

"Quite correct, sir," Bor Mellistos said. "Knowing, as I say, that they
would be furious, she had taken special pains to hide herself. When the
alarm reached the others that we were coming, they could not warn her.
As a result, when she returned to Mount Olympus, we were waiting for
her."

"Serves her right!" Zeus said with indignation.

Bor Mellistos said: "Quite," very politely.

"And then," Forrester said, "you patrolled this place for a while."

Bor Mellistos nodded. "We left about three hundred years ago, finally
deciding that they had gone elsewhere. By the way, do you know where
they were hiding all this time?"

"My guess," Diana said, "is that they were here on Earth, of course."

"Naturally, miss," Bor Mellistos said. "But where?"

Zeus shrugged. "All sorts of places. I ran a tailor shop myself,
pressing and cleaning. I understand that Poseidon and Pluto entered
freak shows--they were fine attractions, too. Pan lived mostly in the
forests, doing well enough for himself running wild. Diana and Athena
ran a small hairdressing studio in Queens. And Venus--"

"Please," Venus interrupted.

"Perfectly honorable profession," Zeus objected. "One of the oldest.
Perhaps the very oldest. And I don't see why--"

"Please!" Venus insisted.

Zeus shut up with a little sigh.

"At any rate," Bor Mellistos said, "that's the story up to date. And now
there's only the question of the Overseer positions. Would you like to
fill them?"

"Who?" Venus asked. "_Us?_"

"Well," Bor Mellistos said, "you have the experience. And we do need
someone to take over. You see, three thousand years ago your technical
attainments were not large. There was little need for an Overseer. Now,
however, you are nearly at the stage where you will be invited to join
the Galactic Federation. And we must make sure you do not do any
irreparable harm to yourselves during the next few years."

"Well," Forrester said, "how could we--"

"If you'll permit me, sir," Bor Mellistos said, "I can explain. You
would work much as the so-called Gods did--but with no publicity, and a
greater sense of responsibility, if you understand me. Earth would never
know you were there."

"I'd have to--stay away from mortals?" Forrester asked.

"Exactly," Bor Mellistos said.

Well, Forrester thought, it had its compensations. In the three days
that the Detective Inspector had been on Earth, Forrester had had time
to think and to find out some things. Gerda, for instance, was getting
married to Alvin Sherdlap. Forrester wondered what kind of love would
let a woman choose a name like Gerda Sherdlap, and decided it was better
not to think about it.

What did he have to go back to? History classes? Students? Even students
like Maya Wilson?

Well, he was sure he could do better than that. He looked at Diana and
became even surer.

"The remaining eleven Overseers," Bor Mellistos was saying, "will be
along shortly. You will then be able to draw fully on the machine. You
need merely follow world events and make sure that any--ah--regrettably
_final_ decisions are not made. Your actions will, of course, be very
much undercover."

Forrester nodded. "This mass arrest of the Gods is going to cause an
upheaval all by itself."

"Quite true, sir. But that will be worked out. I'm afraid I don't really
know the details, but doubtless the other eleven who are coming will
inform you more thoroughly on that score."

Forrester sighed. "About the Gods--what kind of punishment will they
receive?"

"Well, sir," Bor Mellistos said, "it varies. Vulcan, for instance--the
person who called himself Vulcan, or Hephaestus--will probably get off
with a lighter sentence than the others. He was a mechanic, brought
along under some duress to service the machine. But the sentences will
be severe, you may be sure. Very severe."

Forrester didn't feel like asking any more questions about that. There
was a pause. He looked at Diana again, and she looked back at him.

"Do you accept?" Bor Mellistos said.

Forrester and the others nodded.

Bor Mellistos said: "Very well. In that case, I will inform the other
eleven Overseers already picked that they will be met by you here, on
Mount Olympus, and that--"

But Forrester wasn't listening.

He had begun whistling, very softly.

The song he was whistling was Tenting Tonight.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Pagan Passions, by
Gordon Randall Garrett and Laurence Mark Janifer

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PAGAN PASSIONS ***

***** This file should be named 22767.txt or 22767.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/7/6/22767/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Geoffrey Kidd, Stephen Blundell
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.
