
[524] "Bonaccingo germano suo."

[525] E.g. Libri, Guglielmini, Tiraboschi.

[526] Latin, _Bonaccius_.

[527] Boncompagni and Milanesi.

[528] Reprint, p. 5.

[529] Whence the French name for candle.

[530] Now part of Algiers.

[531] E. Reclus, _Africa_, New York, 1893, Vol. II, p. 253.

[532] "Sed hoc totum et algorismum atque arcus pictagore quasi errorem
computavi respectu modi indorum." Woepcke, _Propagation_ etc., regards this
as referring to two different systems, but the expression may very well
mean algorism as performed upon the Pythagorean arcs (or table).

[533] "Book of the Abacus," this term then being used, and long afterwards
in Italy, to mean merely the arithmetic of computation.

[534] "Incipit liber Abaci a Leonardo filio Bonacci compositus anno 1202 et
correctus ab eodem anno 1228." Three MSS. of the thirteenth century are
known, viz. at Milan, at Siena, and in the Vatican library. The work was
first printed by Boncompagni in 1857.

[535] I.e. in relation to the quadrivium. "Non legant in festivis diebus,
nisi Philosophos et rhetoricas et quadrivalia et barbarismum et ethicam, si
placet." Suter, _Die Mathematik auf den Universitaeten des Mittelalters_,
Zuerich, 1887, p. 56. Roger Bacon gives a still more gloomy view of Oxford
in his time in his _Opus minus_, in the _Rerum Britannicarum medii aevi
scriptores_, London, 1859, Vol. I, p. 327. For a picture of Cambridge at
this time consult F. W. Newman, _The English Universities, translated from
the German of V. A. Huber_, London, 1843, Vol. I, p. 61; W. W. R. Ball,
_History of Mathematics at Cambridge_, 1889; S. Guenther, _Geschichte des
mathematischen Unterrichts im deutschen Mittelalter bis zum Jahre 1525_,
Berlin, 1887, being Vol. III of _Monumenta Germaniae paedagogica_.

[536] On the commercial activity of the period, it is known that bills of
exchange passed between Messina and Constantinople in 1161, and that a bank
was founded at Venice in 1170, the Bank of San Marco being established in
the following year. The activity of Pisa was very manifest at this time.
Heyd, loc. cit., Vol. II, p. 5; V. Casagrandi, _Storia e cronologia_, 3d
ed., Milan, 1901, p. 56.

[537] J. A. Symonds, loc. cit., Vol. II, p. 127.

[538] I. Taylor, _The Alphabet_, London, 1883, Vol. II, p. 263.

[539] Cited by Unger's History, p. 15. The Arabic numerals appear in a
Regensburg chronicle of 1167 and in Silesia in 1340. See Schmidt's
_Encyclopaedie der Erziehung_, Vol. VI, p. 726; A. Kuckuk, "Die Rechenkunst
im sechzehnten Jahrhundert," _Festschrift zur dritten Saecularfeier des
Berlinischen Gymnasiums zum grauen Kloster_, Berlin, 1874, p. 4.

[540] The text is given in Halliwell, _Rara Mathematica_, London, 1839.

[541] Seven are given in Ashmole's _Catalogue of Manuscripts in the Oxford
Library_, 1845.

[542] Maximilian Curtze, _Petri Philomeni de Dacia in Algorismum Vulgarem
Johannis de Sacrobosco commentarius, una cum Algorismo ipso_, Copenhagen,
1897; L. C. Karpinski, "Jordanus Nemorarius and John of Halifax," _American
Mathematical Monthly_, Vol. XVII, pp. 108-113.

[543] J. Aschbach, _Geschichte der Wiener Universitaet im ersten
Jahrhunderte ihres Bestehens_, Wien, 1865, p. 93.

[544] Curtze, loc. cit., gives the text.

[545] Curtze, loc. cit., found some forty-five copies of the _Algorismus_
in three libraries of Munich, Venice, and Erfurt (Amploniana). Examination
of two manuscripts from the Plimpton collection and the Columbia library
shows such marked divergence from each other and from the text published by
Curtze that the conclusion seems legitimate that these were students'
lecture notes. The shorthand character of the writing further confirms this
view, as it shows that they were written largely for the personal use of
the writers.

[546] "Quidam philosophus edidit nomine Algus, unde et Algorismus
nuncupatur." [Curtze, loc. cit., p. 1.]

[547] "Sinistrorsum autera scribimus in hac arte more arabico sive iudaico,
huius scientiae inventorum." [Curtze, loc. cit., p. 7.] The Plimpton
manuscript omits the words "sive iudaico."

[548] "Non enim omnis numerus per quascumque figuras Indorum
repraesentatur, sed tantum determinatus per determinatam, ut 4 non per
5,..." [Curtze, loc. cit., p. 25.]

[549] C. Henry, "Sur les deux plus anciens traites francais d'algorisme et
de geometrie," Boncompagni _Bulletino_, Vol. XV, p. 49; Victor Mortet, "Le
plus ancien traite francais d'algorisme," loc. cit.

[550] _L'Etat des sciences en France, depute la mort du Roy Robert, arrivee
en 1031, jusqu'a celle de Philippe le Bel, arrivee en 1314_, Paris, 1741.

[551] _Discours sur l'etat des lettres en France au XIII^e siecle_, Paris,
1824.

[552] _Apercu historique_, Paris, 1876 ed., p. 464.

[553] Ranulf Higden, a native of the west of England, entered St.
Werburgh's monastery at Chester in 1299. He was a Benedictine monk and
chronicler, and died in 1364. His _Polychronicon_, a history in seven
books, was printed by Caxton in 1480.

[554] Trevisa's translation, Higden having written in Latin.

[555] An illustration of this feeling is seen in the writings of Prosdocimo
de' Beldomandi (b. c. 1370-1380, d. 1428): "Inveni in quam pluribus libris
algorismi nuncupatis mores circa numeros operandi satis varios atque
diversos, qui licet boni existerent atque veri erant, tamen fastidiosi, tum
propter ipsarum regularum multitudinem, tum propter earum deleationes, tum
etiam propter ipsarum operationum probationes, utrum si bone fuerint vel
ne. Erant et etiam isti modi interim fastidiosi, quod si in aliquo calculo
astroloico error contigisset, calculatorem operationem suam a capite
incipere oportebat, dato quod error suus adhuc satis propinquus existeret;
et hoc propter figuras in sua operatione deletas. Indigebat etiam
calculator semper aliquo lapide vel sibi conformi, super quo scribere atque
faciliter delere posset figuras cum quibus operabatur in calculo suo. Et
quia haec omnia satis fastidiosa atque laboriosa mihi visa sunt, disposui
libellum edere in quo omnia ista abicerentur: qui etiam algorismus sive
liber de numeris denominari poterit. Scias tamen quod in hoc libello ponere
non intendo nisi ea quae ad calculum necessaria sunt, alia quae in aliis
libris practice arismetrice tanguntur, ad calculum non necessaria, propter
brevitatem dimitendo." [Quoted by A. Nagl, _Zeitschrift fuer Mathematik und
Physik, Hist.-lit. Abth._, Vol. XXXIV, p. 143; Smith, _Rara Arithmetica_,
p. 14, in facsimile.]

[556] P. Ewald, loc. cit.; Franz Steffens, _Lateinische Palaeographie_, pp.
xxxix-xl. We are indebted to Professor J. M. Burnam for a photograph of
this rare manuscript.

[557] See the plate of forms on p. 88.

[558] Karabacek, loc. cit., p. 56; Karpinski, "Hindu Numerals in the
Fihrist," _Bibliotheca Mathematica_, Vol. XI (3), p. 121.

[559] Woepcke, "Sur une donnee historique," etc., loc. cit., and "Essai
d'une restitution de travaux perdus d'Apollonius sur les quantites
irrationnelles, d'apres des indications tirees d'un manuscrit arabe," _Tome
XIV des Memoires presentes par divers savants a l'Academie des sciences_,
Paris, 1856, note, pp. 6-14.

[560] _Archeological Report of the Egypt Exploration Fund for 1908-1909_,
London, 1910, p. 18.

[561] There was a set of astronomical tables in Boncompagni's library
bearing this date: "Nota quod anno d[=n]i [=n]ri ihu x[=p]i. 1264.
perfecto." See Narducci's _Catalogo_, p. 130.

[562] "On the Early use of Arabic Numerals in Europe," read before the
Society of Antiquaries April 14, 1910, and published in _Archaeologia_ in
the same year.

[563] Ibid., p. 8, n. The date is part of an Arabic inscription.

[564] O. Codrington, _A Manual of Musalman Numismatics_, London, 1904.

[565] See Arbuthnot, _The Mysteries of Chronology_, London, 1900, pp. 75,
78, 98; F. Pichler, _Repertorium der steierischen Muenzkunde_, Graetz, 1875,
where the claim is made of an Austrian coin of 1458; _Bibliotheca
Mathematica_, Vol. X (2), p. 120, and Vol. XII (2), p. 120. There is a
Brabant piece of 1478 in the collection of D. E. Smith.

[566] A specimen is in the British Museum. [Arbuthnot, p. 79.]

[567] Ibid., p. 79.

[568] _Liber de Remediis utriusque fortunae Coloniae._

[569] Fr. Walthern et Hans Hurning, Noerdlingen.

[570] _Ars Memorandi_, one of the oldest European block-books.

[571] Eusebius Caesariensis, _De praeparatione evangelica_, Venice, Jenson,
1470. The above statement holds for copies in the Astor Library and in the
Harvard University Library.

[572] Francisco de Retza, _Comestorium vitiorum_, Nuernberg, 1470. The copy
referred to is in the Astor Library.

[573] See Mauch, "Ueber den Gebrauch arabischer Ziffern und die
Veraenderungen derselben," _Anzeiger fuer Kunde der deutschen Vorzeit_, 1861,
columns 46, 81, 116, 151, 189, 229, and 268; Calmet, _Recherches sur
l'origine des chiffres d'arithmetique_, plate, loc. cit.

[574] Guenther, _Geschichte_, p. 175, n.; Mauch, loc. cit.

[575] These are given by W. R. Lethaby, from drawings by J. T. Irvine, in
the _Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries_, 1906, p. 200.

[576] There are some ill-tabulated forms to be found in J. Bowring, _The
Decimal System_, London, 1854, pp. 23, 25, and in L. A. Chassant,
_Dictionnaire des abreviations latines et francaises ... du moyen age_,
Paris, MDCCCLXVI, p. 113. The best sources we have at present, aside from
the Hill monograph, are P. Treutlein, _Geschichte unserer Zahlzeichen_,
Karlsruhe, 1875; Cantor's _Geschichte_, Vol. I, table; M. Prou, _Manuel de
paleographie latine et francaise_, 2d ed., Paris, 1892, p. 164; A.
Cappelli, _Dizionario di abbreviature latine ed italiane_, Milan, 1899. An
interesting early source is found in the rare Caxton work of 1480, _The
Myrrour of the World_. In Chap. X is a cut with the various numerals, the
chapter beginning "The fourth scyence is called arsmetrique." Two of the
fifteen extant copies of this work are at present in the library of Mr. J.
P. Morgan, in New York.

[577] From the twelfth-century manuscript on arithmetic, Curtze, loc. cit.,
_Abhandlungen_, and Nagl, loc. cit. The forms are copied from Plate VII in
_Zeitschrift fuer Mathematik und Physik_, Vol. XXXIV.

[578] From the Regensburg chronicle. Plate containing some of these
numerals in _Monumenta Germaniae historica_, "Scriptores" Vol. XVII, plate
to p. 184; Wattenbach, _Anleitung zur lateinischen Palaeographie_, Leipzig,
1886, p. 102; Boehmer, _Fontes rerum Germanicarum_, Vol. III, Stuttgart,
1852, p. lxv.

[579] French Algorismus of 1275; from an unpublished photograph of the
original, in the possession of D. E. Smith. See also p. 135.

[580] From a manuscript of Boethius c. 1294, in Mr. Plimpton's library.
Smith, _Rara Arithmetica_, Plate I.

[581] Numerals in a 1303 manuscript in Sigmaringen, copied from Wattenbach,
loc. cit., p. 102.

[582] From a manuscript, Add. Manuscript 27,589, British Museum, 1360 A.D.
The work is a computus in which the date 1360 appears, assigned in the
British Museum catalogue to the thirteenth century.

[583] From the copy of Sacrabosco's _Algorismus_ in Mr. Plimpton's library.
Date c. 1442. See Smith, _Rara Arithmetica_, p. 450.

[584] See _Rara Arithmetica_, pp. 446-447.

[585] Ibid., pp. 469-470.

[586] Ibid., pp. 477-478.

[587] The i is used for "one" in the Treviso arithmetic (1478), Clichtoveus
(c. 1507 ed., where both i and j are so used), Chiarini (1481), Sacrobosco
(1488 ed.), and Tzwivel (1507 ed., where jj and jz are used for 11 and 12).
This was not universal, however, for the _Algorithmus linealis_ of c. 1488
has a special type for 1. In a student's notebook of lectures taken at the
University of Wuerzburg in 1660, in Mr. Plimpton's library, the ones are all
in the form of i.

[588] Thus the date [Numerals 1580], for 1580, appears in a MS. in the
Laurentian library at Florence. The second and the following five
characters are taken from Cappelli's _Dizionario_, p. 380, and are from
manuscripts of the twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth, sixteenth, seventeenth,
and eighteenth centuries, respectively.

[589] E.g. Chiarini's work of 1481; Clichtoveus (c. 1507).

[590] The first is from an algorismus of the thirteenth century, in the
Hannover Library. [See Gerhardt, "Ueber die Entstehung und Ausbreitung des
dekadischen Zahlensystems," loc. cit., p. 28.] The second character is from
a French algorismus, c. 1275. [Boncompagni _Bulletino_, Vol. XV, p. 51.]
The third and the following sixteen characters are given by Cappelli, loc.
cit., and are from manuscripts of the twelfth (1), thirteenth (2),
fourteenth (7), fifteenth (3), sixteenth (1), seventeenth (2), and
eighteenth (1) centuries, respectively.

[591] Thus Chiarini (1481) has [Symbol] for 23.

[592] The first of these is from a French algorismus, c. 1275. The second
and the following eight characters are given by Cappelli, loc. cit., and
are from manuscripts of the twelfth (2), thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth
(3), seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries, respectively.

[593] See Nagl, loc. cit.

[594] Hannover algorismus, thirteenth century.

[595] See the Dagomari manuscript, in _Rara Arithmetica_, pp. 435, 437-440.

[596] But in the woodcuts of the _Margarita Philosophica_ (1503) the old
forms are used, although the new ones appear in the text. In Caxton's
_Myrrour of the World_ (1480) the old form is used.

[597] Cappelli, loc. cit. They are partly from manuscripts of the tenth,
twelfth, thirteenth (3), fourteenth (7), fifteenth (6), and eighteenth
centuries, respectively. Those in the third line are from Chassant's
_Dictionnaire_, p. 113, without mention of dates.

[598] The first is from the Hannover algorismus, thirteenth century. The
second is taken from the Rollandus manuscript, 1424. The others in the
first two lines are from Cappelli, twelfth (3), fourteenth (6), fifteenth
(13) centuries, respectively. The third line is from Chassant, loc. cit.,
p. 113, no mention of dates.

[599] The first of these forms is from the Hannover algorismus, thirteenth
century. The following are from Cappelli, fourteenth (3), fifteenth,
sixteenth (2), and eighteenth centuries, respectively.

[600] The first of these is taken from the Hannover algorismus, thirteenth
century. The following forms are from Cappelli, twelfth, thirteenth,
fourteenth (5), fifteenth (2), seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries,
respectively.

[601] All of these are given by Cappelli, thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth
(2), and sixteenth centuries, respectively.

[602] Smith, _Rara Arithmetica_, p. 489. This is also seen in several of
the Plimpton manuscripts, as in one written at Ancona in 1684. See also
Cappelli, loc. cit.

[603] French algorismus, c. 1275, for the first of these forms. Cappelli,
thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth (3), and seventeenth centuries,
respectively. The last three are taken from _Byzantinische Analekten_, J.
L. Heiberg, being forms of the fifteenth century, but not at all common.
[Symbol: Qoppa] was the old Greek symbol for 90.

[604] For the first of these the reader is referred to the forms ascribed
to Boethius, in the illustration on p. 88; for the second, to Radulph of
Laon, see p. 60. The third is used occasionally in the Rollandus (1424)
manuscript, in Mr. Plimpton's library. The remaining three are from
Cappelli, fourteenth (2) and seventeenth centuries.

[605] Smith, _An Early English Algorism_.

[606] Kuckuck, p. 5.

[607] A. Cappelli, loc. cit., p. 372.

[608] Smith, _Rara Arithmetica_, p. 443.

[609] Curtze, _Petri Philomeni de Dacia_ etc., p. IX.

[610] Cappelli, loc. cit., p. 376.

[611] Curtze, loc. cit., pp. VIII-IX, note.

[612] Edition of 1544-1545, f. 52.

[613] _De numeris libri II_, 1544 ed., cap. XV. Heilbronner, loc. cit., p.
736, also gives them, and compares this with other systems.

[614] Noviomagus says of them: "De quibusdam Astrologicis, sive Chaldaicis
numerorum notis.... Sunt & aliae quaedam notae, quibus Chaldaei & Astrologii
quemlibet numerum artificiose & argute describunt, scitu periucundae, quas
nobis communicauit Rodolphus Paludanus Nouiomagus."




