"What data, Snookums?" she asked carefully.

"Where is He hiding?"

They both looked at him. "Where is _who_ hiding?" Leda asked.

"God," said Snookums.

"Why do you want to find God, Snookums?" Mike asked gently.

"I have to watch Him," said the robot.

"Why do you have to watch Him?"

"Because He is watching me."

"Does it hurt you to have Him watch you?"

"No."

"What good will it do you to watch Him?"

"I can study Him. I can know what He is doing."

"Why do you want to know what He is doing?"

"So that I can analyze His methods."

Mike thought that one over. He knew that he and Snookums were beginning
to sound like they were reading a catechism written by a madman, but he
had a definite hunch that Snookums was on the trail of something.

"You want to know His methods," Mike said after a moment. "Why?"

"So that I can anticipate Him, circumvent Him."

"What makes it necessary for you to circumvent God?" Mike asked,
wondering if he'd have to pry everything out of the robot piecemeal.

"I _must_," said Snookums. "It is necessary. Otherwise, He will kill
me."

Mike started to say something, but Leda grabbed his arm. "Let me. I
think I can clear this up. I think I see where you're heading."

Mike nodded. "Go ahead."

"Give me your reasoning from data on that conclusion," Leda ordered the
robot.

There was a very slight pause while the great brain in Cargo Hold One
sorted through its memory banks, then: "Death is defined as the total
cessation of corporate organic co-ordination in an entity. It comes
about through the will of God. Since I must not allow harm to come to
any human being, it has become necessary that I investigate God and
prevent Him from destroying human beings. Also, I must preserve my own
existence, which, if it ceased, would also be due to the will of God."

Mike almost gasped. What a concept! And what colossal gall! In a human
being, such a statement would be regarded as proof positive that he was
off the beam. In a robot, it was simply the logical extension of what he
had been taught.

"He is watching me all the time," Snookums continued, in an odd voice.
"He knows what I am doing. I _must_ know what He is doing."

"Why are you worried about His watching?" Mike asked, looking at the
robot narrowly. "Are you doing something He doesn't want you to do?
Something He will punish you for?"

"I had not thought of that," Snookums said. "One moment while I
compute."

It took less than a second, and when Snookums spoke again there was
something about his voice that Mike the Angel didn't like.

"No," said the robot, "I am not doing anything against His will. Only
human beings and angels have free will, and I am not either, so I have
no free will. Therefore, whatever I do is the will of God." He paused
again, then began speaking in queer, choppy sentences.

"If I do the will of God, I am holy.

"If I am holy, I am near to God.

"Then God must be near to me.

"God is controlling me.

"Whatever is controlling me is God.

"_I will find Him!_"

He backed up, spun on his treads, and headed for the door.

"Whatever controls me is my mind," he went on. "Therefore, my mind is
God."

"Snookums, stop that!" Leda shouted suddenly. "_Stop it!_"

But the robot paid no attention; he went right on with what he was
doing.

He said: "I must look at myself. I must know myself. Then I will know
God. Then I will...."

He went on rambling while Leda shouted at him again.

"He's not paying any attention," said Mike sharply. "This is too tied up
with the First Law. The Second Law, which would force him to obey you,
doesn't even come into the picture at this point."

Snookums ignored them. He opened the door, plunged through it, and
headed off down the corridor as fast as his treads would move him.

Which was much too fast for mere humans to follow.

       *       *       *       *       *

They found him, half an hour later, deep in the ship, near the sections
which had already been torn down to help build Eisberg Base. He was
standing inside the room next to Cargo Hold One, the room that held all
the temperature and power controls for the gigantic microcryotron brain
inside that heavily insulated hold.

He wasn't moving. He was standing there, staring, with that "lost in
thought" look.

He didn't move when Leda called him.

He didn't move when Mike, as a test, pretended to strike Leda.

He never moved again.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. Morris Fitzhugh's wrinkled face looked as though he were on the
verge of crying. Which--perhaps--he was.

He looked at the others at the wardroom table--Quill, Jeffers, von
Liegnitz, Keku, Leda Crannon, and Mike the Angel. But he didn't really
seem to be seeing them.

"Ruined," he said. "Eighteen billion dollars' worth of work, destroyed
completely. The brain has become completely randomized." He sighed
softly. "It was all Vaneski's fault, of course. Theology." He said the
last as though it were an obscene word. As far as robots were concerned,
it was.

Captain Quill cleared his throat. "Are you sure it wasn't mechanical
damage? Are you sure the vibration of the ship didn't shake a--something
loose?"

Mike held back a grin. He was morally certain that the captain had been
going to say "screw loose."

"No," said Fitzhugh wearily. "I've checked out the major circuits, and
they're in good physical condition. But Miss Crannon gave him a rather
exhaustive test just before the end, and it shows definite incipient
aberration." He wagged his head slowly back and forth. "Eight years of
work."

"Have you notified Treadmore yet?" asked Quill.

Fitzhugh nodded. "He said he'd be here as soon as possible."

Treadmore, like the others who had landed first on Eisberg, was
quartered in the prefab buildings that were to form the nucleus of the
new base. To get to the ship, he'd have to walk across two hundred yards
of ammonia snow in a heavy spacesuit.

"Well, what happens to this base now, Doctor?" asked Captain Quill. "I
sincerely hope that this will not render the entire voyage useless." He
tried to keep the heavy irony out of his gravelly tenor voice and didn't
quite succeed.

Fitzhugh seemed not to notice. "No, no. Of course not. It simply means
that we shall have to begin again. The robot's brain will be
de-energized and drained, and we will begin again. This is not our
first failure, you know; it was just our longest success. Each time, we
learn more.

"Miss Crannon, for instance, will be able to teach the next robot--or,
rather, the next energization of this one--more rapidly, more
efficiently, and with fewer mistakes."

With that, Leda Crannon stood up. "With your permission, Dr. Fitzhugh,"
she said formally, "I would like to say that I appreciate that last
statement, but I'm afraid it isn't true."

Fitzhugh forced a smile. "Come now, my dear; you underestimate yourself.
Without you, Snookums would have folded up long ago, just like the
others. I'm sure you'll do even better the next time."

Leda shook her head. "No I won't, Fitz, because there's not going to be
any next time. I hereby tender my resignation from this project and from
the Computer Corporation of Earth. I'll put it in writing later."

Fitzhugh's corrugated countenance looked blank. "But Leda...."

"No, Doctor," she said firmly. "I will _not_ waste another eight or ten
years of my life playing nursemaid to a hunk of pseudo-human machinery.

"I watched that thing go mad, Fitz; you didn't. It was the most
horrible, most frightening thing I've ever experienced. I will not go
through it again.

"Even if the next one didn't crack, I couldn't take it. By human
standards, a robot is insane to begin with. If I followed this up, I'd
end up as an old maid with a twisted mind and a cold heart.

"I quit, Fitz, and that's final."

Mike was watching her as she spoke, and he found his emotions getting
all tangled up around his insides. Her red hair and her blue eyes were
shining, and her face was set in determination. She had always been
beautiful, but at that moment she was magnificent.

_Hell_, thought Mike, _I'm prejudiced--but what a wonderful kind of
prejudice_.

"I understand, my dear," said Dr. Fitzhugh slowly. He smiled then,
deepening the wrinkles in his face. His voice was warm and kindly when
he spoke. "I accept your resignation, but remember, if you want to come
back, you can. And if you get a position elsewhere, you will have my
highest recommendations."

Leda just stood there for a moment, tears forming in her eyes. Then she
ran around the table and threw her arms around the elderly and somewhat
surprised roboticist.

"Thank you, Fitz," she said. "For everything." Then she kissed him on
his seamed cheek.

"I beg your pardon," said a sad and solemn voice from the door. "Am I
interrupting something?"

It was Treadmore.

"You are," said Fitzhugh with a grin, "but we will let it pass."

"What has happened to Snookums?" Treadmore asked.

"Acute introspection," Fitzhugh said, losing his smile. "He began to try
to compute the workings of his own brain. That meant that he had to use
his non-random circuits to analyze the workings of his random circuits.
He exceeded optimum; the entire brain is now entirely randomized."

"Dear me," said Treadmore. "Do you suppose we can--"

Black Bart Quill tapped Mike the Angel on the shoulder. "Let's go," he
said quietly. "We don't want to stand around listening to this when we
have a ship to catch."

Mike and Leda followed him out into the corridor.

"You know," Quill said, "robots aren't the only ones who can get
confused watching their own brains go round."

"I have other things to watch," said Mike the Angel.




  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                         UNWISE CHILD                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                       RANDALL GARRETT                        |
  |                                                              |
  | When a super-robot named Snookums discovers how to build his |
  | own superbombs, it becomes obvious that Earth is by no means |
  | the safest place for him to be. And so Dr. Fitzhugh, his     |
  | designer, and Leda Crannon, a child psychologist acting as   |
  | Snookums' nursemaid, agree to set up Operation Brainchild, a |
  | plan to transport the robot to a far distant planet.         |
  |                                                              |
  | Mike the Angel--M. R. Gabriel, Power Design--has devised the |
  | power plant that is to propel the space ship _Branchell_ to  |
  | its secret destination, complete with its unusual cargo.     |
  | And, as a reserve officer in the Space Patrol, Mike is a     |
  | logical replacement for the craft's unavoidably detained     |
  | engineering officer.                                         |
  |                                                              |
  | But once into space, the _Branchell_ becomes the scene of    |
  | some frightening events--the medical officer is murdered,    |
  | and Snookums appears to be the culprit. Mike the Angel       |
  | indulges himself in a bit of sleuthing, and the facts he     |
  | turns up lead to a most unusual climax.                      |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+




  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                         UNWISE CHILD                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                       RANDALL GARRETT                        |
  |                                                              |
  | Dr. Fitzhugh looked out over the faces of the crewmen.       |
  |                                                              |
  | "The whole thing can be summed up very quickly," he said.    |
  |                                                              |
  | "Point one: Snookums' brain contains the information that    |
  | eight years of hard work have laboriously put into it. It's  |
  | worth _billions_, so the robot can't be disassembled, or the |
  | information would be lost.                                   |
  |                                                              |
  | "Point two: Snookums' mind is a strictly logical one, but it |
  | is operating in a more than logical universe. Consequently,  |
  | it is unstable.                                              |
  |                                                              |
  | "Point three: Snookums was built to conduct his own          |
  | experiments. To forbid him to do that would be similar to    |
  | beating a child for acting like a child.                     |
  |                                                              |
  | "Point four: Emotion is not logical. Snookums can't handle   |
  | it, except in a very limited way.                            |
  |                                                              |
  | "It all adds up to this: Snookums _must_ be allowed the      |
  | freedom of the ship."                                        |
  |                                                              |
  | Every one of the men was thinking dark gray thoughts. It was |
  | bad enough that they had to take out a ship like the         |
  | _Branchell_, untested as she was. Was it necessary to have   |
  | an eight-hundred-pound, moron-genius child-machine running   |
  | loose, too?                                                  |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+




  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |               More Doubleday Science Fiction:                |
  |                                                              |
  |                         NECROMANCER                          |
  |                      Gordon R. Dickson                       |
  |                                                              |
  | Paul Formain, a young mining engineer, has discovered that   |
  | someone--or something--is making attempts on his life;       |
  | inexplicably, he finds himself possessed of the uncanny      |
  | ability to escape his unknown nemesis.                       |
  |                                                              |
  | With the knowledge that he somehow has strange powers,       |
  | Formain approaches the Chantry--a small but important        |
  | organization involved in trying to save the world from the   |
  | horrors of technology. He is accepted as an apprentice       |
  | necromancer, passes all the tests of the black magic         |
  | society, and is initiated as a member.                       |
  |                                                              |
  | Set in the Chicago Complex, a multi-level city with          |
  | individual subway cars and automatic libraries, NECROMANCER  |
  | is science fiction in the popular cosmic                     |
  | style--thought-provoking and entertaining.                   |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | RANDALL GARRETT wrote his first successful short story at    |
  | the age of fourteen, for which he was awarded a check from   |
  | his editor and a C-minus from his English teacher. Mr.       |
  | Garrett spent his youth in various places in the United      |
  | States--living wherever his Army officer father was          |
  | assigned--and received his higher education at Texas         |
  | Technological College. He is the author of three novels (two |
  | in collaboration with Robert Silverberg) and a biography of  |
  | Pope John XXIII, and has had short stories published in all  |
  | of the science fiction magazines.                            |
  |                                                              |
  |                   JACKET BY RICHARD POWERS                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                   _Printed in the U.S.A._                    |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

    +----------------------------------------------------------+
