oxygen, which renders it lighter than sulphur_ic_ acid?

MRS. B.

Probably; for by adding oxygen to the weaker acid, it may be converted
into the stronger kind. But this change of state may also be connected
with a change of affinity with regard to caloric.

EMILY.

And may sulphureous acid be obtained from sulphuric acid by a diminution
of oxygen?

MRS. B.

Yes; it can be done by bringing any combustible substance in contact
with the acid. This decomposition is most easily performed by some of
the metals; these absorb a portion of the oxygen from the sulphuric
acid, which is thus converted into the sulphureous, and flies off in its
gaseous form.

CAROLINE.

And cannot the sulphureous acid itself be decomposed and reduced to
sulphur?

MRS. B.

Yes; if this gas be heated in contact with charcoal, the oxygen of the
gas will combine with it, and the pure sulphur is regenerated.

Sulphureous acid is readily absorbed by water; and in this liquid state
it is found particularly useful in bleaching linen and woollen cloths,
and is much used in manufactures for those purposes. I can show you its
effect in destroying colours, by taking out vegetable stains--I think I
see a spot on your gown, Emily, on which we may try the experiment.

EMILY.

It is the stain of mulberries; but I shall be almost afraid of exposing
my gown to the experiment, after seeing the effect which the sulphuric
acid produced on that of Caroline--

MRS. B.

There is no such danger from the sulphureous; but the experiment must be
made with great caution, for, during the formation of sulphureous acid
by combustion, there is always some sulphuric produced.

CAROLINE.

But where is your sulphureous acid?

MRS. B.

We may easily prepare some ourselves, simply by burning a match; we must
first wet the stain with water, and now hold it in this way, at a little
distance, over the lighted match: the vapour that arises from it is
sulphureous acid, and the stain, you see, gradually disappears.

EMILY.

I have frequently taken out stains by this means, without understanding
the nature of the process. But why is it necessary to wet the stain
before it is exposed to the acid fumes?

MRS. B.

The moisture attracts and absorbs the sulphureous acid; and it serves
likewise to dilute any particles of sulphuric acid which might injure
the linen.

Sulphur is susceptible of a third combination with oxygen, in which the
proportion of the latter is too small to render the sulphur acid. It
acquires this slight oxygenation by mere exposure to the atmosphere,
without any elevation of temperature: in this case, the sulphur does not
change its natural form, but is only discoloured, being changed to red
or brown; and in this state it is an oxyd of sulphur.

Before we take leave of the sulphuric acid, we shall say a few words of
its principal combinations. It unites with all the alkalies, alkaline
earths and metals, to form compound salts.

CAROLINE.

Pray, give me leave to interrupt you for a moment: you have never
mentioned any other salts than the compound or neutral salts; is there
no other kind?

MRS. B.

The term _salt_ has been used, from time immemorial, as a kind of
general name for any substance that has savour, odour, is soluble in
water, and crystallisable, whether it be of an acid, an alkaline, or
compound nature; but the compound salts alone retain that appellation in
modern chemistry.

The most important of the salts, formed by the combinations of the
sulphuric acid, are, first, _sulphat of potash_, formerly called _sal
polychrest_: this is a very bitter salt, much used in medicine; it is
found in the ashes of most vegetables, but it may be prepared
artificially by the immediate combination of sulphuric acid and potash.
This salt is easily soluble in boiling water. Solubility is, indeed,
a property common to all salts; and they always produce cold in melting.

EMILY.

That must be owing to the caloric which they absorb in passing from a
solid to a fluid form.

MRS. B.

That is, certainly, the most probable explanation.

_Sulphat of soda_, commonly called Glauber's salt, is another medicinal
salt, which is still more bitter than the preceding. We must prepare
some of these compounds, that you may observe the phenomena which take
place during their formation. We need only pour some sulphuric acid over
the soda which I have put into this glass.

CAROLINE.

What an amazing heat is disengaged! --I thought you said that cold was
produced by the melting of salts?

MRS. B.

But you must observe that we are now _making_, not _melting_ a salt.
Heat is disengaged during the formation of compound salts, and a faint
light is also emitted, which may sometimes be perceived in the dark.

EMILY.

And is this heat and light produced by the union of the opposite
electricities of the alkali and the acid?

MRS. B.

No doubt it is, if that theory be true.

CAROLINE.

The union of an acid and an alkali is then an actual combustion?

MRS. B.

Not precisely, though there is certainly much analogy in these
processes.

CAROLINE.

Will this sulphat of soda become solid?

MRS. B.

We have not, I suppose, mixed the acid and the alkali in the exact
proportions that are required for the formation of the salt, otherwise
the mixture would have been almost immediately changed to a solid mass;
but, in order to obtain it in crystals, as you see it in this bottle, it
would be necessary first to dilute it with water, and afterwards to
evaporate the water, during which operation the salt would gradually
crystallise.

CAROLINE.

But of what use is the addition of water, if it is afterwards to be
evaporated?

MRS. B.

When suspended in water, the acid and the alkali are more at liberty to
act on each other, their union is more complete, and the salt assumes
the regular form of crystals during the slow evaporation of its solvent.

Sulphat of soda liquefies by heat, and effloresces in the air.

EMILY.

Pray what is the meaning of the word _effloresces_? I do not recollect
your having mentioned it before.

MRS. B.

A salt is said to effloresce when it loses its water of crystallisation
on being exposed to the atmosphere, and is thus gradually converted into
a dry powder: you may observe that these crystals of sulphat of soda are
far from possessing the transparency which belongs to their crystalline
state; they are covered with a white powder, occasioned by their having
been exposed to the atmosphere, which has deprived their surface of its
lustre, by absorbing its water of crystallisation. Salts are, in
general, either _efflorescent_ or _deliquescent_: this latter property
is precisely the reverse of the former; that is to say, deliquescent
salts absorb water from the atmosphere, and are moistened and gradually
melted by it. Muriat of lime is an instance of great deliquescence.

EMILY.

But are there no salts that have the same degree of attraction for water
as the atmosphere, and that will consequently not be affected by it?

MRS. B.

Yes; there are many such salts, as, for instance, common salt, sulphat
of magnesia, and a variety of others.

_Sulphat of lime_ is very frequently met with in nature, and constitutes
the well-known substance called _gypsum_, or _plaster of Paris_.

_Sulphat of magnesia_, commonly called _Epsom salt_, is another very
bitter medicine, which is obtained from sea-water and from several
springs, or may be prepared by the direct combination of its
ingredients.

We have formerly mentioned _sulphat of alumine_ as constituting the
common _alum_; it is found in nature chiefly in the neighbourhood of
volcanos, and is particularly useful in the arts, from its strong
astringent qualities. It is chiefly employed by dyers and
calico-printers, to fix colours; and is used also in the manufacture of
some kinds of leather.

Sulphuric acid combines also with the metals.

CAROLINE.

One of these combinations, _sulphat of iron_, we are already well
acquainted with.

MRS. B.

That is the most important metallic salt formed by sulphuric acid, and
the only one that we shall here notice. It is of great use in the arts;
and, in medicine, it affords a very valuable tonic: it is of this salt
that most of those preparations called _steel medicines_ are composed.

CAROLINE.

But does any carbon enter into these compositions to form steel?

MRS. B.

Not an atom: they are, therefore, very improperly called steel: but it
is the vulgar appellation, and medical men themselves often comply with
the general custom.

Sulphat of iron may be prepared, as you have seen, by dissolving iron in
sulphuric acid; but it is generally obtained from the natural production
called _Pyrites_, which being a sulphuret of iron, requires only
exposure to the atmosphere to be oxydated, in order to form the salt;
this, therefore, is much the most easy way of procuring it on a large
scale.

EMILY.

I am surprised to find that both acids and compound salts are generally
obtained from their various combinations, rather than from the immediate
union of their ingredients.

MRS. B.

Were the simple bodies always at hand, their combinations would
naturally be the most convenient method of forming compounds; but you
must consider that, in most instances, there is great difficulty and
expense in obtaining the simple ingredients from their combinations; it
is, therefore, often more expedient to procure compounds from the
decomposition of other compounds. But, to return to the sulphat of iron.
--There is a certain vegetable acid called _Gallic acid_, which has the
remarkable property of precipitating this salt black--I shall pour a few
drops of the gallic acid into this solution of sulphat of iron--

CAROLINE.

It is become as black as ink!

MRS. B.

And it is ink in reality. Common writing ink is a precipitate of sulphat
of iron by gallic acid; the black colour is owing to the formation of
gallat of iron, which being insoluble, remains suspended in the fluid.

This acid has also the property of altering the colour of iron in its
metallic state. You may frequently see its effect on the blade of a
knife, that has been used to cut certain kinds of fruits.

CAROLINE.

True; and that is, perhaps, the reason that a silver knife is preferred
to cut fruits; the gallic acid, I suppose, does not act upon silver.
--Is this acid found in all fruits?

MRS. B.

It is contained, more or less, in the rind of most fruits and roots,
especially the radish, which, if scraped with a steel or iron knife, has
its bright red colour changed to a deep purple, the knife being at the
same time blackened. But the vegetable substance in which the gallic
acid most abounds is _nutgall_, a kind of excrescence that grows on
oaks, and from which the acid is commonly obtained for its various
purposes.


MRS. B.

We now come to the PHOSPHORIC and PHOSPHOROUS ACIDS. In treating of
phosphorus, you have seen how these acids may be obtained from it by
combustion?

EMILY.

Yes; but I should be much surprised if it was the usual method of
obtaining them, since it is so very difficult to procure phosphorus in
its pure state.

MRS. B.

You are right, my dear; the phosphoric acid, for general purposes, is
extracted from bones, in which it is contained in the state of phosphat
of lime; from this salt the phosphoric acid is separated by means of the
sulphuric, which combines with the lime. In its pure state, phosphoric
acid is either liquid or solid, according to its degree of
concentration.

Among the salts formed by this acid, _phosphat of lime_ is the only one
that affords much interest; and this, we have already observed,
constitutes the basis of all bones. It is also found in very small
quantities in some vegetables.




CONVERSATION XVIII.

OF THE NITRIC AND CARBONIC ACIDS: OR THE COMBINATIONS OF OXYGEN WITH
NITROGEN AND CARBON; AND OF THE NITRATS AND CARBONATS.


MRS. B.

I am almost afraid of introducing the subject of the NITRIC ACID, as I
am sure that I shall be blamed by Caroline for not having made her
acquainted with it before.

CAROLINE.

Why so, Mrs. B.?

MRS. B.

Because you have long known its radical, which is nitrogen or azote; and
in treating of that element, I did not even hint that it was the basis
of an acid.

CAROLINE.

And what could be your reason for not mentioning this acid sooner?

MRS. B.

I do not know whether you will think the reason sufficiently good to
acquit me; but the omission, I assure you, did not proceed from
negligence. You may recollect that nitrogen was one of the first simple
bodies which we examined; you were then ignorant of the theory of
combustion, which I believe was, for the first time, mentioned in that
lesson; and therefore it would have been in vain, at that time, to have
attempted to explain the nature and formation of acids.

CAROLINE.

I wonder, however, that it never occurred to us to enquire whether
nitrogen could be acidified; for, as we knew it was classed among the
combustible bodies, it was natural to suppose that it might produce an
acid.

MRS. B.

That is not a necessary consequence; for it might combine with oxygen
only in the degree requisite to form an oxyd. But you will find that
nitrogen is susceptible of various degrees of oxygenation, some of which
convert it merely into an oxyd, and others give it all the acid
properties.

The acids, resulting from the combination of oxygen and nitrogen, are
called the NITROUS and NITRIC acids. We will begin with the NITRIC, in
which nitrogen is in the highest state of oxygenation. This acid
naturally exists in the form of gas; but is so very soluble in water,
and has so great an affinity for it, that one grain of water will absorb
and condense ten grains of acid gas, and form the limpid fluid which you
see in this bottle.

CAROLINE.

What a strong offensive smell it has!

MRS. B.

This acid contains a greater abundance of oxygen than any other, but it
retains it with very little force.

EMILY.

Then it must be a powerful caustic, both from the facility with which it
parts with its oxygen, and the quantity which it affords?

MRS. B.

Very well, Emily; both cause and effect are exactly such as you
describe: nitric acid burns and destroys all kinds of organised matter.
It even sets fire to some of the most combustible substances. --We shall
pour a little of it over this piece of dry warm charcoal--you see it
inflames it immediately; it would do the same with oil of turpentine,
phosphorus, and several other very combustible bodies. This shows you
how easily this acid is decomposed by combustible bodies, since these
effects must depend upon the absorption of its oxygen.

Nitric acid has been used in the arts from time immemorial, but it is
only within these twenty-five years that its chemical nature has been
ascertained. The celebrated Mr. Cavendish discovered that it consisted
of about 10 parts of nitrogen and 25 of oxygen.* These principles, in
their gaseous state, combine at a high temperature; and this may be
effected by repeatedly passing the electrical spark through a mixture of
the two gases.

    [Footnote *: The proportion stated by Sir H. Davy, in his Chemical
    Researches, is as 1 to 2.389.]

EMILY.

The nitrogen and oxygen gases, of which the atmosphere is composed, do
not combine, I suppose, because their temperature is not sufficiently
elevated?

CAROLINE.

But in a thunder-storm, when the lightning repeatedly passes through
them, may it not produce nitric acid? We should be in a strange
situation, if a violent storm should at once convert the atmosphere into
nitric acid.

MRS. B.

There is no danger of it, my dear; the lightning can affect but a very
small portion of the atmosphere, and though it were occasionally to
produce a little nitric acid, yet this never could happen to such an
extent as to be perceivable.

EMILY.

But how could the nitric acid be known, and used, before the method of
combining its constituents was discovered?

MRS. B.

Before that period the nitric acid was obtained, and it is indeed still
extracted, for the common purposes of art, from the compound salt which
it forms with potash, commonly called _nitre_.

CAROLINE.

Why is it so called? Pray, Mrs. B., let these old unmeaning names be
entirely given up, by us at least; and let us call this salt _nitrat of
potash_.

MRS. B.

With all my heart; but it is necessary that I should, at least, mention
the old names, and more especially those which are yet in common use;
otherwise, when you meet with them, you would not be able to understand
their meaning.

EMILY.

And how is the acid obtained from this salt?

MRS. B.

By the intervention of sulphuric acid, which combines with the potash,
and sets the nitric acid at liberty. This I can easily show you, by
mixing some nitrat of potash and sulphuric acid in this retort, and
heating it over a lamp; the nitric acid will come over in the form of
vapour, which we shall collect in a glass bell. This acid, diluted in
water, is commonly called _aqua fortis_, if Caroline will allow me to
mention that name.

CAROLINE.

I have often heard that aqua fortis will dissolve almost all metals; it
is no doubt because it yields its oxygen so easily.

MRS. B.

Yes; and from this powerful solvent property, it derived the name of
aqua fortis, or strong water. Do you not recollect that we oxydated, and
afterwards dissolved, some copper in this acid?

EMILY.

If I remember right, the nitrat of copper was the first instance you
gave us of a compound salt.

CAROLINE.

Can the nitric acid be completely decomposed and converted into nitrogen
and oxygen?

EMILY.

That cannot be the case, Caroline; since the acid can be decomposed only
by the combination of its constituents with other bodies.

MRS. B.

True; but caloric is sufficient for this purpose. By making the acid
pass through a red hot porcelain tube, it is decomposed; the nitrogen
and oxygen regain the caloric which they had lost in combining, and are
thus both restored to their gaseous state.

The nitric acid may also be partly decomposed, and is by this means
converted into NITROUS ACID.

CAROLINE.

This conversion must be easily effected, as the oxygen is so slightly
combined with the nitrogen.

MRS. B.

The partial decomposition of nitric acid is readily effected by most
metals; but it is sufficient to expose the nitric acid to a very strong
light to make it give out oxygen gas, and thus be converted into nitrous
acid. Of this acid there are various degrees, according to the
proportions of oxygen which it contains; the strongest, and that into
which the nitric is first converted, is of a yellow colour, as you see
in this bottle.

CAROLINE.

How it fumes when the stopper is taken out!

MRS. B.

The acid exists naturally in a gaseous state, and is here so strongly
concentrated in water, that it is constantly escaping.

Here is another bottle of nitrous acid, which, you see, is of an orange
red; this acid is weaker, the nitrogen being combined with a smaller
quantity of oxygen; and with a still less proportion of oxygen it is an
olive-green colour, as it appears in this third bottle. In short, the
weaker the acid, the deeper is its colour.

Nitrous acid acts still more powerfully on some inflammable substances
than the nitric.

EMILY.

I am surprised at that, as it contains less oxygen.

MRS. B.

But, on the other hand, it parts with its oxygen much more readily: you
may recollect that we once inflamed oil with this acid.

The next combinations of nitrogen and oxygen form only oxyds of
nitrogen, the first of which is commonly called _nitrous air_; or more
properly _nitric oxyd gas_. This may be obtained from nitric acid, by
exposing the latter to the action of metals, as in dissolving them it
does not yield the whole of its oxygen, but retains a portion of this
principle sufficient to convert it into this peculiar gas, a specimen of
which I have prepared, and preserved within this inverted glass bell.

EMILY.

It is a perfectly invisible elastic fluid.

MRS. B.

Yes; and it may be kept any length of time in this manner over water, as
it is not, like the nitric and nitrous acids, absorbable by it. It is
rather heavier than atmospherical air, and is incapable of supporting
either combustion or respiration. I am going to incline the glass gently
on one side, so as to let some of the gas escape--

EMILY.

How very curious! --It produces orange fumes like the nitrous acid! that
is the more extraordinary, as the gas within the glass is perfectly
invisible.

MRS. B.

It would give me much pleasure if you could make out the reason of this
curious change without requiring any further explanation.

CAROLINE.

It seems, by the colour and smell, as if it were converted into nitrous
acid gas: yet that cannot be, unless it combines with more oxygen; and
how can it obtain oxygen the very instant it escapes from the glass?

EMILY.

From the atmosphere, no doubt. Is it not so, Mrs. B.?

MRS. B.

You have guessed it; as soon as it comes in contact with the atmosphere,
it absorbs from it the additional quantity of oxygen necessary to
convert it into nitrous acid gas. And, if I now remove the bottle
entirely from the water, so as to bring at once the whole of the gas
into contact with the atmosphere, this conversion will appear still more
striking--

EMILY.

Look, Caroline, the whole capacity of the bottle is instantly tinged of
an orange colour!

MRS. B.

Thus, you see, it is the most easy process imaginable to convert
_nitrous oxyd gas_ into _nitrous acid gas_. The property of attracting
oxygen from the atmosphere, without any elevation of temperature, has
occasioned this gaseous oxyd being used as a test for ascertaining the
degree of purity of the atmosphere. I am going to show you how it is
applied to this purpose. --You see this graduated glass tube, which is
closed at one end, (PLATE X. Fig. 2.) --I first fill it with water, and
then introduce a certain measure of nitrous gas, which, not being
absorbable by water, passes through it, and occupies the upper part of
the tube. I must now add rather above two-thirds of oxygen gas, which
will just be sufficient to convert the nitrous oxyd gas into nitrous
acid gas.

CAROLINE.

So it has! --I saw it turn of an orange colour; but it immediately
afterwards disappeared entirely, and the water, you see, has risen, and
almost filled the tube.

MRS. B.

That is because the acid gas is absorbable by water, and in proportion
as the gas impregnates the water, the latter rises in the tube. When the
oxygen gas is very pure, and the required proportion of nitrous oxyd gas
very exact, the whole is absorbed by the water; but if any other gas be
mixed with the oxygen, instead of combining with the nitrous oxygen, it
will remain and occupy the upper part of the tube; or, if the gases be
not in the due proportion, there will be a residue of that which
predominates. --Before we leave this subject, I must not forget to
remark that nitrous acid may be formed by dissolving nitrous oxyd gas in
nitric acid. This solution may be effected simply by making bubbles of
nitrous oxyd gas pass through nitric acid.

EMILY.

That is to say, that nitrogen at its highest degree of oxygenation,
being mixed with nitrogen at its lowest degree of oxygenation, will
produce a kind of intermediate substance, which is nitrous acid.

MRS. B.

You have stated the fact with great precision. --There are various other
methods of preparing nitrous oxyd, and of obtaining it from compound
bodies; but it is not necessary to enter into these particulars. It
remains for me only to mention another curious modification of
oxygenated nitrogen, which has been distinguished by the name of
_gaseous oxyd of nitrogen_. It is but lately that this gas has been
accurately examined, and its properties have been investigated chiefly
by Sir H. Davy. It has obtained also the name of _exhilarating_ gas,
from the very singular property which that gentleman has discovered in
it, of elevating the animal spirits, when inhaled into the lungs, to a
degree sometimes resembling delirium or intoxication.

CAROLINE.

Is it respirable, then?

MRS. B.

It can scarcely be called respirable, as it would not support life for
any length of time; but it may be breathed for a few moments without any
other effects, than the singular exhilaration of spirits I have just
mentioned. It affects different people, however, in a very different
manner. Some become violent, even outrageous: others experience a
languor, attended with faintness; but most agree in opinion, that the
sensations it excites are extremely pleasant.

CAROLINE.

I think I should like to try it--how do you breathe it?

MRS. B.

By collecting the gas in a bladder, to which a short tube with a
stop-cock is adapted; this is applied to the mouth with one hand, whilst
the nostrils are kept closed with the other, that the common air may
have no access. You then alternately inspire, and expire the gas, till
you perceive its effects. But I cannot consent to your making the
experiment; for the nerves are sometimes unpleasantly affected by it,
and I would not run any risk of that kind.

EMILY.

I should like, at least, to see somebody breathe it; but pray by what
means is this curious gas obtained?

MRS. B.

It is procured from _nitrat of ammonia_, an artificial salt which yields
this gas on the application of a gentle heat. I have put some of the
salt into a retort, and by the aid of a lamp the gas will be
extricated.--

CAROLINE.

Bubbles of air begin to escape through the neck of the retort into the
water apparatus; will you not collect them?

MRS. B.

The gas that first comes over need not be preserved, as it consists of
little more than the common air that was in the retort; besides, there
is always in this experiment a quantity of watery vapour which must come
away before the nitrous oxyd appears.

EMILY.

Watery vapour! Whence does that proceed? There is no water in nitrat of
ammonia?

MRS. B.

You must recollect that there is in every salt a quantity of water of
crystallisation, which may be evaporated by heat alone. But, besides
this, water is actually generated in this experiment, as you will see
presently. First tell me, what are the constituent parts of nitrat of
ammonia?

EMILY.
