"A wild tale, obviously a mistake. One of the crewmen passed her
stateroom about an hour ago. Door was open and he looked in, the way
anybody does. Says he saw her standing inside her cabin embracing a man.
Says he didn't stop to look close, but he was pretty sure it was E Gray.
Says he knows because he's had access to the viewscope and has watched E
Gray on the surface of Eden."

"There's been no report of any ship leaving Eden, joining you, Captain,"
Hayes said accusingly.

"Because there hasn't been any," the captain snapped back. "So it can't
have been E Gray she was embracing. That's why I called you. Looks like
we're going to have some petty scandal mixed up with everything else."

"Looks like it, then," Hayes said with a vast weariness. "Some member of
your crew, or one of the scientists," he said. "Keep looking. Somebody's
hiding her, probably to keep the scandal from breaking. But it seems odd
to me that she was so anxious to get out there near her husband and then
in ten days she'd ..."

"Maybe her real anxiety was to be near somebody already assigned to the
ship," the captain said. "I mean, we've got to consider all the
possibilities. Somebody she knew there at E.H.Q."

"Keep checking, Captain. I'll see if the Board wants to contact E
McGinnis. Maybe he knows what's been going on around here that could
lead us to the guy who's hiding her."

"I'll keep checking, but she's not on board _my_ ship," the captain
said. He sighed. Bill Hayes sighed. They broke connection.

Hayes made contact with the Board chairman. It took only a few minutes
to spin the latest tale of woe. Another minute for the Board to decide
direct intervention.

"Now they want me to make contact with the other ship," the operator
said to the supervisor. "The Wheel himself wants to know if E McGinnis
will talk to him."

"Well, contact it, contact it," the supervisor commanded urgently.

"I'm doing it! I'm doing it!" the operator quarreled back.

The both of them listened in on the conversation, on the grounds that
testing the quality of reception was a necessity. E McGinnis's pilot was
quite explicit.

"E McGinnis left orders that under no circumstances was he to be
disturbed," the pilot said. "He, E Gray and Mrs. Gray are in his cabin,
in conference."

"E Gray! Mrs. Gray!" the chairman exploded. "Impossible. How the devil
did they get into your ship?"

"Don't ask me," the pilot said in a tired voice. "I just work here. I'm
sitting here minding my own business. I see E McGinnis's door open. He
leans out the door and gives me my orders. I look past him and I see E
Gray and Mrs. Gray sitting in the room. Don't ask me how they got in
there. I don't know. But I do know this, I'm going to get myself a nice
quiet milk run to Saturn or someplace, soon as I get back to E.H.Q. If I
ever do get back."

"Now, now," the Board chairman soothed. "I'm sure there's a simple
explanation." Crewmen willing to pilot an E around the universe were
hard to find.

"Yeah? After what I've seen out here, I don't think I'd even want to
hear it," the pilot said, and without apology cut off the
communication.




28


Had the pilot been able, a moment later, to look into the E's stateroom
he would have seen still another visitor, another who had not entered
his ship by any normal means.

Attorney General Gunderson sat in a chair facing the two E's and Linda.
He seemed stunned, frozen into immobility. Only his eyes were alive,
darting here and there, unbelieving. There is limit to the number of
shocks the mind can withstand, and the series had come too fast for him
to adjust to them.

He too had picked up Junior E Gray as soon as he came through the arch
of the quartz outcropping on top of the mountain, the structure that
somehow interfered with their visoscope's ability to penetrate and see
what went on inside. He had been watching when Gray suddenly disappeared
from where he had been talking with the astronavigator. That had been a
shock, immediately followed by a greater one, when the ship's operator
had scanned the valley and found Gray talking with the E's pilot and the
chief of the colonists. There was no way in which the journey could have
been made that rapidly.

He was still watching when the village, the fields, the escape ship, the
E ship all had suddenly materialized before his eyes. And the people
were all clothed. It couldn't be done, but he had seen it. But he kept
his head. E science must be farther along than he'd realized, to
produce a miracle such as this--but it was science. He must hold to
that, otherwise ...

He saw his case begin to melt out from under him, and he made one more
effort to regain some measure of control. He gave his own pilot orders
to land on the surface of Eden. He transmitted orders to the other two
police ships to follow in close formation; the three of them to land and
take custody.

But the barrier still remained, and the ships could not penetrate it.

He told himself that all wasn't lost. Maybe the E was back in control of
Eden, but he, Gunderson, still had a morals case. All those photographs!
Some of the press and commentators might desert him, now that the Junior
had proved adequate to the job. Unless he chose carefully, some stupid
judge might decide the means were justified by the end result. But there
were those photographs, and the world was full of Mrs. Grundy. He might
have to back up a little bit on the incompetence of the Junior E, but
Mrs. Grundy would be behind him a hundred per cent on the morals
issue--when he released some of the photographs, and titillated her
nasty imagination by reference to others too indecent to release.

It was then that the observer ship got a call through to him, and told
him that the photographs, every one of them, had disappeared from the
ship's vault where they had been locked, and the only thing remaining in
the vault was one little slip of paper which read, "Shame on you for
taking feelthy pictures. Naughty, naughty! Calvin Gray."

The case was crumbling, but all was not lost. He still had witnesses. He
thought for a minute and began to wonder about those witnesses. Any
judge, anybody around the courts, anybody connected with the press, and
maybe even some of the public knew that any police officer will swear to
any lie to back up another police officer because he might need the
favor returned tomorrow.

Without concrete evidence ...

He suddenly found himself standing in the cabin of the E ship,
confronted by E McGinnis, Junior E Gray, and Mrs. Gray. He sank down in
a chair and sat frozen, immobile. Only his eyes were alive, darting
frantically here and there as if expecting some hole to open up and
swallow him--perhaps wishing one would.

"I don't know just what to do with you," Cal said a little sadly,
ruefully. "Far as the E's are concerned, you've only been a minor
nuisance, hardly worth noticing, but your intentions were dangerous. As
far back as man's history goes the growth of police powers immediately
preceded and caused the fall and destruction of each culture.

"It is a law of the nature of man that he will resist the ascendancy of
any special me-and-mine group over him; that this resistance will grow
until man will even destroy himself in the attempt to destroy that
ascendancy. In more recent history it was the growth, extension, and
severity of the police in controlling every activity of man that
destroyed both the United States and Russia.

"Now you are attempting to rebuild that same police control in world
government. The result will be the same. Man will destroy himself in
trying to destroy you.

"We in E don't want that to happen. We see no need of it. We have
already warned that the attitude of the police toward the public is the
major cause of crime, that crime will increase with each increase of
police power and severity until the whole structure rots and crumbles.

"Yet man has not yet progressed far enough to know how to maintain an
organized society without some special body to enforce that
organization. It's a problem which the E's haven't solved, probably
because we know too little about the natural laws affecting the behavior
of man. Perhaps it is still a field belonging to non-science, because
science doesn't know enough yet to take hold of it.

"I would suggest, Gunderson, that you turn your talents and your
organization to solving this problem of how to build an organized
society instead of destroying it."

The chair where Gunderson had sat was empty.

E McGinnis looked at Cal; he too was sitting silent and immobile. But E
science had inured him to shock. He waited because it was E Gray's show,
and he was letting Cal handle it.

"Where is he now?" McGinnis asked when he saw the empty chair.

"Sitting at his desk in his office back on Earth," Cal said with a grin.
"Our boy has a few things to think about."

"You've explained the theory back of all this"--McGinnis changed the
subject--"but I still find it incredible. It's still just theory."

"Well," Cal said, "theory comes first. Even to add two and two, you
first have to get the idea that it can be done, a theory of how it is
done, but that still won't get you four. You've got to learn how to
apply the theory.

"When I first found I knew how, I was pretty concerned. The whole basis
of science is that anybody can do it, anybody who follows the
step-by-step method. It doesn't take any special gifts that can't be
trained. I had visions of a world, a universe of people, in possession
of this theory and method before they were wise enough to use it, and
chaos.

"But when I thought it over, I stopped worrying. The methods of science
are also open to all. But few bother to learn them. Most prefer their
frustrations and their miseries to making the effort which will solve
them. For centuries the libraries containing all the accumulated
knowledge and wisdom of mankind have been free and open to anybody who
wants to read, but few have bothered to absorb that knowledge and that
wisdom.

"This new key we have that unlocks the door to another vista of
knowledge, another point of view whereby we can change material things
to suit our desire, is merely another advance of science. For science,
after all, is no more than organized knowledge of reality. You can't
multiply six times six until you've learned how to add two and two. Most
people won't bother.

"It will be a long, long time before any significant number will
graduate through all the normal seven steps of E science to become ready
for the eighth. Some of the E's will master it, but you know how few E's
there are. And the E's have enough restraint, wisdom, and selflessness
to use this new knowledge for the benefit of man instead of his
detriment.

"I suspect that one has to be graduated beyond the desire to make
me-and-mine ascendant over others before he can absorb this knowledge."

"Maybe that's my trouble," McGinnis said slowly. "I've been thinking,
all along, of how much power this gives the E's. Wondering if even the
E's should have that much power over others."

Linda spoke up.

"E McGinnis," she said, "Cal has solved the problem of what happened to
the colonists, why they didn't communicate. Do you think this will
qualify him for his big E?"

Both men burst into laughter.

"No question of it, Linda," E McGinnis said with a chuckle. "But I doubt
it really matters to E Gray, now. He can do things none of the rest of
us can do, and the real question now is whether we have the right to
call ourselves Seniors until we can match his ability."

"I think," Cal said slowly, "we'd better recommend to E.H.Q. that the
colonists be withdrawn from Eden, assigned somewhere else. I've left the
shield around the planet so none can enter or leave without the eighth
key. I can unlock the door and close it again. Perhaps Eden should
become the next step for the E, the next hurdle he must cross.

"When I've sent my ship and crew back to Earth, and we've removed all
the colonists, it might be a good idea to restore Eden to what it was
when I arrived--a place where no tools will work, no physical tools. To
qualify for E, a man will be put on the island, where he can live as we
lived, to work out the step-by-step method. When he's ready, he can go
into the thought-amplifier on top of the mountain, and if his mind is
open enough to the potentials he'll receive the final step of
instruction--as I did.

"One by one, as the E's shake free of their present projects, they can
take this next step."

"I'm not working on any project right now," E McGinnis said hopefully.

"I'll be right back," Cal said with a grin, "and we'll get started on
it."

The chair where he had been sitting was empty.




29


Cal stood within the crystal amphitheater atop the mountain and watched
the interplay of lights until he felt communion come.

Rapture! Joy!

Question?

"Be patient," he said. "There will be more, and more, and more.

"You had an advantage," he reminded Them. "You started with a
crystalline vibration nearer to the force field than that possible in
protoplasm. We've had to come up the hard way.

"But we have come up.

"You had no competition. We've had to fight for our very lives every
inch of the way, endure the setbacks lasting for centuries, millennia.
It is no wonder that the me-and-mine-ascendant concept has dominated all
our thought, and does still. Without it, we'd not have survived at all.

"It takes time to outgrow it, to learn we can survive without it. Five
hundred years after Copernicus, a survey of the high school students in
the United States revealed that a third of them still rejected his
knowledge, still believed the Earth to be at the center of the universe
and man was the reason why the universe had been created at all. But two
thirds had adjusted.

"More important, there _was_ a Copernicus.

"Don't sell man short because he's slow to learn, and you are impatient
for fuller, deeper exploration of the truths in reality. He has much to
offer you, as you to him. Competition for survival has given him
ingenuity.

"Once all learned men believed the Earth to be the center of the
universe, but there _was_ a Copernicus who asked the question, 'What if
it isn't so?'

"Millions of men watched apples fall to the ground, but one _did_ ask if
this might not be the key to the structure of the universe, the balance
of the stars.

"Billions watched the stars, but finally one _did_ ask, 'What if the
light be curved instead of straight?'

"There is capacity in man, this protoplasmic life, that had to learn an
ingenuity which might surpass even yours.

"This is not the final door in the corridor of thought. Still other
doors, on down the corridor, are yet to be explored. And you may need
these special gifts of man to open them, as he has needed this new room
of thought.

"Be patient. A million or a billion may come here to seek the method
that can change things to fit the equation of desire, before one comes
who asks a question even you have not conceived.

"But someday he _will_ come--and ask."

The lights danced faster now in patterns of delight.





End of Project Gutenberg's Eight Keys to Eden, by Mark Irvin Clifton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EIGHT KEYS TO EDEN ***

***** This file should be named 27595.txt or 27595.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/5/9/27595/

