accompanying other diseases of debility, as strokes on the head, fainting
fits, and paralytic seizures. For in this vertigo from intoxication so much
sensorial power in general is expended on the increased actions of the
stomach, and its nearest connections, as the capillaries of the skin; that
there is a deficiency for the purposes of the other irritative associations
of motions usually connected with it. This auditory vertigo attends both
the rotatory and the visual vertigo above mentioned; in the former it is
introduced by reverse sympathy, that is, by the diminution of sensorial
power; too great a quantity of it being expended on the increased
irritative motions of vision; in the latter it is produced either by the
same causes which produce the visual vertigo, or by direct sympathy with
it. See Sect. XX. 7.

M. M. Stimulate the internal ear by ether, or with essential oil diluted
with expressed oil, or with a solution of opium in wine, or in water. Or
with salt and water.

16. _Tactus, gustus, olfactius vertiginosi._ Vertiginous touch, taste, and
smell. In the vertigo of intoxication, when the patient lies down in bed,
it sometimes happens even in the dark, that the bed seems to librate under
him, and he is afraid of falling out of it. The same occurs to people, who
are sea-sick, even when they lie down in the dark. In these the irritative
motions of the nerves of touch, or irritative tangible ideas, are performed
with less energy, in one case by reverse sympathy with the stomach, in the
other by reverse sympathy with the nerves of vision, and in consequence
become attended with sensation, and produce the fear of falling by other
associations.

A vertigo of the sense of touch may be produced, if any one turns round for
a time with his eyes shut, and suddenly stops without opening them; for he
will for a time seem to be still going forwards; which is difficult to
explain. See the notes at the end of the first and second volume belonging
to Sect. XX. 6.

In the beginning of some fevers, along with incessant vomiting, the
patients complain of disagreeable tastes in their mouth, and disagreeable
odours; which are to be ascribed to the general debility of the great
trains and tribes of associated irritative motions, and to be explained
from their direct sympathy with the decreased action of a sick stomach; or
from the less secretion of sensorial power in the brain. These organs of
sense are constantly stimulated into action by the saliva or by the air;
hence, like the sense of hunger, when they are torpid from want of
stimulus, or from want of sensorial power, pain or disagreeable sensation
ensues, as of hunger, or faintness, or sickness in one case; and the ideas
of bad tastes or odours in the other. This accords with the laws of
causation, Sect. IV. 5.

17. _Pulsus mollis in vomitione._ The softness of the pulse in the act of
vomiting is caused by direct association between the heart and the stomach;
as explained in Sect. XXV. 17. A great slowness of the pulsation of the
heart sometimes attends sickness, and even with intermissions of it, as in
the exhibition of too great a dose of digitalis.

18. _Pulsus intermittens a ventriculo._ When the pulse first begins to
intermit, it is common for the patient to bring up a little air from his
stomach; which if he accomplishes before the intermission occurs, always
prevents it; whence that this debility of the heart is owing to the direct
association of its motions with those of the stomach is well evinced. See
Sect. XXV. 17.

I this morning saw Mr. ----, who has long had at times an unequal pulse,
with indigestion and flatulency, and occasional asthma; he was seized two
days ago with diarrhoea, and this morning with sickness, and his pulse was
every way unequal. After an emetic his pulse still continued very
intermittent and unequal. He then took some breakfast of toast and butter,
and tea, and to my great surprise his pulse became immediately perfectly
regular, about 100 in a minute, and not weak, by this stimulus on his
stomach.

A person, who for many years had had a frequent intermission of his pulse,
and occasional palpitation of his heart, was relieved from them both for a
time by taking about four drops of a saturated solution of arsenic three or
four times a day for three or four days. As this intermission of the pulse
is occasioned by the direct association of the motions of the heart with
those of the stomach, the indication of cure must be to strengthen the
action of the stomach by the bark. Spice. Moderate quantities of wine. A
blister. Half a grain of opium twice a day. Solution of arsenic?

19. _Febris inirritativa._ Inirritative fever described in Class I. 2. 1.
1. belongs to this place, as it consists of disordered trains and tribes of
associated irritative motions, with lessened actions of the associated
organs. In this fever the pulsations of the heart and arteries are weakened
or lessened, not only in the cold paroxysm, as in the irritative fever, but
also in the hot paroxysm. The capillary arteries or glands have their
actions nevertheless increased after the first cold fit, as appears by the
greater production of heat, and the glow of arterial blood, in the
cutaneous vessels; and lastly, the action of the stomach is much impaired
or destroyed, as appears by the total want of appetite to solid food.
Whence it would seem, that the torpid motions of the stomach, whatever may
occasion them, are a very frequent cause of continued fever with weak
pulse; and that these torpid motions of the stomach do not sufficiently
excite the sensorial power of association, which contributes in health to
actuate the heart and arteries along with the irritation produced by the
stimulus of the blood; and hence the actions of these organs are weaker.
And lastly, that the accumulation of the sensorial power of association,
which ought to be expended on the motions of the heart and arteries,
becomes now exerted on the cutaneous and pulmonary capillaries. See
Supplement I. 8. and Sect. XXXV. 1. 1. and XXXIII. 2. 10.

I have dwelt longer on the vertiginous diseases in this genus, both because
of their great intricacy, and because they seem to open a road to the
knowledge of fever, which consists of associated trains and tribes of
irritative or sensitive motions, which are sometimes mixed with the
vertiginous ones, and sometimes separate from them.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORDO II.

_Decreased Associate Motions._

GENUS II.

_Catenated with Sensitive Motions._

In this genus the sensorial power of association is exerted with less
energy, and thence the actions produced by it are less than natural; and
pain is produced in consequence, according to the fifth law of animal
causation, Sect. IV. This pain is generally attended with coldness of the
affected part, and is seldom succeeded by inflammation of it. This
decreased action of the secondary link of the associated motions, belonging
to this genus, is owing to the previous exhaustion of sensorial power
either in the increased actions of the primary link of the associated
motions, or by the pain which attends them; both which are frequently the
consequence of the stimulus of something external to the affected fibres.

As pain is produced either by excess or defect of the natural exertions of
the fibres, it is not, considered separately, a criterion of the presence
of either. In the associations belonging to this genus the sensation of
pain or pleasure produces or attends the primary link of the associated
motions, and very often gives name to the disease.

When great pain exists without causing any fibrous motions, I conjecture
that it contributes to exhaust or expend the general quantity of sensorial
power; because people are fatigued by enduring pain, till at length they
sleep. Which is contrary to what I had perhaps erroneously supposed in
Sect. XXXV. 2. 3. If it causes fibrous motions, it then takes the name of
sensation, according to the definition of sensation in Sect. II. 2. 9.; and
increased fibrous action or inflammation is the consequence. This
circumstance of the general exhaustion of sensorial power by the existence
of pain will assist in explaining many of the diseases of this genus.

Many of the canals of the body, as the urethra, the bile-duct, the throat,
have the motions of their two extremities associated by having been
accustomed to feel pleasurable or painful sensations at the same time or in
succession. This is termed sensitive association, though those painful or
pleasurable sensations do not cause the motions, but only attend them; and
are thus perhaps, strictly speaking, only catenated with them.

SPECIES.

1. _Torpor genae a dolore dentis._ In tooth-ach there is generally a
coldness of the cheek, which is sensible to the hand, and is attended in
some degree with the pain of cold. The cheek and tooth have frequently been
engaged in pleasurable action at the same time during the masticating of
our food; whence they have acquired sensitive associations. The torpor of
the cheek may have for its cause the too great expenditure of sensorial
power by the painful sensation of the membranes of the diseased tooth;
whence the membranes of the cheek associated with those of the alveolar
process are deprived of their natural share of it, and become torpid; thus
they produce less secretions, and less heat, and the pain of cold is the
consequence. This torpor of the vessels of the cheek cannot be produced by
the activity of the sensorial power of sensation; for then they would act
more violently than natural, or become inflamed. And though the pain by
exhausting so much sensorial power may be a remote cause, it is the defeat
of the power of association, which is the immediate cause of the torpor of
the cheek.

After some hours this pain occasioned by the torpor of the vessels of the
cheek either gradually ceases along with the pain of the diseased tooth;
or, by the accumulation of sensorial power during their state of torpor,
the capillaries of the cheek act with greater violence, and produce more
secretions, and heat, and consequent tumour, and inflammation. In this
state the pain of the diseased tooth ceases; as the sensorial power of
sensation is now expended on the inflamed vessels of the cheek. It is
probable that most other internal membranous inflammations begin in a
similar manner; whence there may seem to be a double kind of sensitive
association; first, with decreased action of the associated organ, and then
with increased action of it; but the latter is in this case simply the
consequence of the former; that is, the tumor or inflammation of the cheek
is in consequence of its previous quiescence or torpor.

2. _Stranguria a dolore vesicae._ The strangury, which has its origin from
pain at the neck of the bladder, consists of a pain in the external
extremity of the urethra or of the glans penis of men, and probably in the
external termination of the urethra or of the clitoris of women; and is
owing to the sympathy of these with some distant parts, generally with the
other end of the urethra; an endeavour and difficulty of making water
attends this pain.

Its remote cause is from the internal or external use of cantharides, which
stimulate the neck of the bladder; or from a stone, which whenever it is
pushed into the neck of the bladder, gives this pain of strangury, but not
at other times; and hence it is felt most severely in this case after
having made water.

The sensations or sensitive motions of the glans penis, and of the
sphincter of the bladder, have been accustomed to exist together during the
discharge of the urine; and hence the two ends of the urethra sympathize by
association. When there is a stone at the neck of the bladder, which is not
so large or rough as to inflame the part, the sphincter of the bladder
becomes stimulated into pain; but as the glans penis is for the purposes of
copulation more sensitive than the sphincter of the bladder, as soon as it
becomes affected with pain by the association above mentioned, the
sensation at the neck of the bladder ceases; and then the pain of the glans
penis would seem to be associated with the irritative motions only of the
sphincter of the bladder, and not with the sensitive ones of it. But a
circumstance similar to this occurs in epileptic fits, which at first are
induced by disagreeable sensation, and afterwards seem to occur without
previous pain, from the suddenness in which they follow and relieve the
pain, which occasioned them. From this analogy I imagine the pain of the
glans penis is associated with the pain of the sphincter of the bladder;
but that _as soon as the greater pain in a more sensible part is produced;
the lesser one, which occasioned it, ceases_; and that this is one of the
laws of sensitive association. See Sect. XXXV. 2. 1.

A young man had by an accident swallowed a large spoonful or more of
tincture of cantharides; as soon as he began to feel the pain of strangury,
he was advised to drink large quantities of warmish water; to which, as
soon as it could be got, some gum arabic was added. In an hour or two he
drank by intervals of a few minutes about two gallons of water, and
discharged his urine every four or five minutes. A little blood was voided
towards the end, but he suffered no ill consequence.

M. M. Warm water internally. Clysters of warm water. Fomentation. Opium.
Solution of fixed alkali supersaturated with carbonic acid. A bougie may be
used to push back a stone into the bladder. See Class I. 1. 3. 10.

3. _Stranguria convulsiva._ The convulsive strangury, like that before
described, is probably occasioned by the torpor or defective action of the
painful part in consequence of the too great expenditure of sensorial power
on the primary link of the associated motions, as no heat or inflammation
attends this violent pain. This kind of strangury recurs by stated periods,
and sometimes arises to so great a degree, that convulsion or temporary
madness terminates each period of it. It affects women oftener than men, is
attended with cold extremities without fever, and is distinguished from the
stone of the bladder by the regularity of its periods, and by the pain
being not increased after making water.

On introducing the catheter sometimes part of the urine will come away and
not the whole, which is difficult to explain; but may arise from the
weakness of the muscular fibres of the bladder; which are not liable
suddenly to contract themselves so far as to exclude the whole of the
urine. In some old people, who have experienced a long retention of urine,
the bladder never regains the power of completely emptying itself; and many
who are beginning to be weak from age can make water a second time, a few
minutes after they supposed they had emptied the bladder.

I have believed this pain to originate from sympathy with some distant
part, as from ascarides in the rectum, or from piles in women; or from
caruncles in the urethra about the caput gallinaginis in men; and that the
pain has been in the glans or clitoris by reverse sympathy of these more
sensible parts with those above mentioned.

M. M. Venesection. Opium in large quantities. Warm bath. Balsams. Bark.
Tincture of cantharides. Bougie, and the treatment for haemorrhoids.
Leeches applied to the sphincter ani. Aerated alcaline water. Soap and sal
soda. Opium in clysters given an hour before the expected return. Smoke of
tobacco in clysters. Arsenic?

4. _Dolor termini intestinalis ductus choledochi._ Pain at the intestinal
end of the gall-duct. When a gall-stone is protruded from the gall-bladder
a little way into the end of the gall-duct, the pain is felt at the other
end of the gall-duct, which terminates in the duodenum. For the actions of
the two terminations of this canal are associated together from the same
streams of bile passing through them in succession, exactly as the two
terminations of the urethra have their actions associated, as described in
Species 2 and 3 of this genus. But as the intestinal termination of the
bile-duct is made more sensible for the purpose of bringing down more bile,
when it is stimulated by new supplies of food from the stomach, it falls
into violent pain from association; and then the pain on the region of the
gall-bladder ceases, exactly as above explained in the account of the pain
of the glans penis from a stone in the sphincter of the bladder.

The common bile-duct opens into the intestine exactly at what is called the
pit of the stomach; and hence it has sometimes happened, that this pain
from association with the sensation of a gall-stone at the other end of the
bile-duct has been mistaken for a pain of the stomach.

For the method of cure see Class I. 1. 3. 8. to which should be added the
use of strong electric shocks passed through the bile-duct from the pit of
the stomach to the back, and from one side to the other. A case of the good
effect of electricity in the jaundice is related in Sect. XXX. 2. And
another case, where it promoted the passage of a painful gall-stone, is
described by Dr. Hall, experienced on himself. Trans. of the College at
Philadelphia, Vol. I. p. 192.

Half a pint of warm water two or three times a day is much recommended to
dilute the inspissated bile.

5. _Dolor pharyngis ab acido gastrico._ The two ends of the throat
sympathize by sensitive association in the same manner as the other canals
above mentioned, namely, the urethra and the bile-duct; hence when too
great acidity of undigested aliment, or the carbonic acid air, which
escapes in fermentation, stimulates the cardia ventriculi, or lower end of
the gula, into pain; the pharinx, or upper end of it, is affected with
greater pain, or a disagreeable sensation of heat.

6. _Pruritus narium a vermibus._ The itching of the nose from worms in the
intestines is another curious instance of the sensitive associations of the
motions of membranes; especially of those which constitute the canals of
the body. Previous to the deglutition of agreeable food, as milk in our
earliest infancy, an agreeable odour affects the membrane, which lines the
nostrils; and hence an association seems to take place between the
agreeable sensations produced by food in the stomach and bowels, and the
agreeable sensations of the nostrils. The existence of ascarides in the
rectum I believe produces this itching of the nostrils more than the worms
in other parts of the intestines; as we have already seen, that the
terminations of canals sympathize more than their other parts, as in the
urethra and gall-ducts. See Class I. 1. 5. 9. IV. 1. 2. 9.

7. _Cephalaea._ Head-ach. In cold fits of the ague, the head-ach arises
from consent with some torpid viscus, like the pain of the loins. After
drunkenness the head-ach is very common, owing to direct sympathy of the
membranes of the head with those of the stomach; which is become torpid
after the too violent stimulus of the preceding intoxication; and is hence
removeable by spirit of wine, or opium, exhibited in smaller quantities. In
some constitutions these head-achs are induced, when the feet are exposed
to much external cold; in this case the feet should be covered with oiled
silk, which prevents the evaporation of the perspirable matter, and thence
diminishes one cause of external cold.

M. M. Valerian in powder two drams three or four times a day is
recommended. The bark. Chalybeates. A grain of opium twice a day for a long
time. From five to ten drops of the saturated solution of arsenic two or
three times a day. See Class I. 2. 4. 11. A lady once assured me, that when
her head-ach was coming on, she drank three pints (pounds) of hot water, as
hastily as she could; which prevented the progress of the disease. A
solution of arsenic is recommended by Dr. Fowler of York. Very strong
errhines are said sometimes to cure head-achs taken at the times the pain
recurs, till a few drops of blood issue from the nostrils. As one grain of
turpeth mineral (vitriolic calx of mercury) mixed with ten grains of fine
sugar. Euphorbium or cayan pepper mixed with sugar, and used with caution
as an errhine. See the M. M. of the next Species.

8. _Hemicrania._ Pain on one side of the head. This disease is attended
with cold skin, and hence whatever may be the remote cause, the immediate
one seems to be want of stimulus, either of heat or distention, or of some
other unknown stimulus in the painful part; or in those, with which it is
associated. The membranes in their natural state are only irritable by
distention; in their diseased state, they are sensible like muscular
fibres. Hence a diseased tooth may render the neighbouring membranes
sensible, and is frequently the cause of this disease.

Sometimes the stomach is torpid along with the pained membrane of the head;
and then sickness and inappetency attends either as a cause or consequence.
The natural cure of hemicrania is the accumulation of sensorial power
during the rest or sickness of the patient. Mrs. ---- is frequently liable
to hemicrania with sickness, which is probably owing to a diseased tooth;
the paroxysm occurs irregularly, but always after some previous fatigue, or
other cause of debility. She lies in bed, sick, and without taking any
solid food, and very little of fluids, and those of the aqueous kind, and,
after about 48 or 50 hours, rises free from complaint. Similar to this is
the recovery from cold paroxysms of fever, from the torpor occasioned by
fear, and from syncope; which are all owing to the accumulation of
sensorial power during the inactivity of the system. Hence it appears,
that, though when the sensorial power of volition is much exhausted by
fatigue, it can be restored by eight or ten hours of sleep; yet, when the
sensorial power of irritation is exhausted by fatigue, that it requires two
whole solar or lunar days of rest, before it can be restored.

The late Dr. Monro asserted in his lectures, that he cured the hemicrania,
or megrim, by a strong vomit, and a brisk purge immediately after it. This
method succeeds best if opium and the bark are given in due quantity after
the operation of the cathartic; and with still more certainty, if bleeding
in small quantity is premised, where the pulse will admit of it. See Sect.
XXXV. 2. 1.

The pain generally affects one eye, and spreads a little way on that side
of the nose, and may sometimes be relieved by pressing or cutting the
nerve, where it passes into the bone of the orbit above the eye. When it
affects a small defined part on the parietal bone on one side, it is
generally termed Clavus hystericus, and is always I believe owing to a
diseased dens molaris. The tendons of the muscles, which serve the office
of mastication, have been extended into pain at the same time, that the
membranous coverings of the roots of the teeth have been compressed into
pain, during the biting or mastication of hard bodies. Hence when the
membranes, which cover the roots of the teeth, become affected with pain by
a beginning decay, or perhaps by the torpor or coldness of the dying part
of the tooth, the tendons and membranous fascia of the muscles about the
same side of the head become affected with violent pain by their sensitive
associations: and as soon as this associated pain takes place, the pain of
the tooth entirely ceases, as explained in the second species of this
genus.

A remarkable circumstance attends this kind of hemicrania, viz. that it
recurs by periods like those of intermittent fevers, as explained in the
Section on Catenation of Motions; these periods sometimes correspond with
alternate lunar or solar days like tertian agues, and that even when a
decaying tooth is evidently the cause; which has been evinced by the cure
of the disease by extracting the tooth. At other times they observe the
monthly lunations, and seem to be induced by the debility, which attends
menstruation.

The dens sapientiae, or last tooth of the upper jaw, frequently decays
first, and gives hemicrania over the eye on the same side. The first or
second grinder in the under-jaw is liable to give violent pain about the
middle of the parietal bone, or side of the head, on the same side, which
is generally called the Clavus hystericus, of which an instructive case is
related in Sect. XXXV. 2. 1.

M. M. Detect and extract the diseased tooth. Cut the affected nerve, or
stimulate the diseased membrane by acu-puncture. Venesection to six ounces
by the lancet or by leeches. A strong emetic and a subsequent cathartic;
and then an opiate and the bark. Pass small electric shocks through the
pained membrane, and through the teeth on the same side. Apply vitriolic
ether externally, and a grain of opium with camphor internally, to the
cheek on the affected side, where a diseased tooth may be suspected. Foment
the head with warm vinegar. Drink two large spoonfuls of vinegar. Stimulate
the gums of the suspected teeth by oil of cloves, by opium. See Class I. 1.
4. 4. Snuff volatile spirit of vinegar up the nostrils. Lastly, in
permanent head-achs, as in permanent vertigo, I have seen good effect by
the use of mercurial ointment rubbed on the shaved head or about the
throat, till a mild salivation commences, which by inflaming the membranes
of the teeth may prevent their irritative sympathy with those of the
cranium. Thus by inflaming the tendon, which is the cause of locked jaw,
and probably by inflaming the wound, which is the cause of hydrophobia,
those diseases may be cured, by disuniting the irritative sympathy between
those parts, which may not possess any sensitive sympathy. This idea is
well worth our attention.

_Otalgia._ Ear-ach is another disease occasioned by the sympathy of the
membranes of the ear with those which invest or surround a decaying tooth,
as I have had frequent reason to believe; and is frequently relieved by
filling the ear with tincture of opium. See Class I. 2. 4.

9. _Dolor humeri in hepatitide._ In the efforts of excluding the faeces and
urine the muscles of the shoulders are exerted to compress the air in the
lungs, that the diaphragm may be pressed down. Hence the distention of the
tendons or fibres of these muscles is associated with the distention of the
tendons or fibres of the diaphragm; and when the latter are pained by the
enlargement or heat of the inflamed liver, the former sympathize with them.
Sometimes but one shoulder is affected, sometimes both; it is probable that
many other pains, which are termed rheumatic, have a similar origin, viz.
from sensitive associations.

As no inflammation is produced in consequence of this pain of the shoulder,
it seems to be owing to inaction of the membranous part from defect of the
sensorial power of association, of which the primary link is the inflamed
membrane of the liver; which now expends so much of the sensorial power in
general by its increased action, that the membranes about the shoulder,
which are links of association with it, become deprived of their usual
share, and consequently fall into torpor.

10. _Torpor pedum in eruptione variolarum._ At the commencement of the
eruption of the small-pox, when the face and breast of children are very
hot, their extremities are frequently cold. This I ascribe to sensitive
association between the different parts of the skin; whence when a part
acts too violently, the other part is liable to act too weakly; and the
skin of the face being affected first in the eruption of the small-pox, the
skin of the feet becomes cold in consequence by reverse sympathy.

M. M. Cover the feet with flannel, and expose the face and bosom to cool
air, which in a very short time both warms the feet and cools the face; and
hence what is erroneously called a rash, but which is probably a too hasty
eruption of the small-pox, disappears; and afterwards fewer and more
distinct eruptions of the small-pox supervene.

11. _Testium dolor nephriticus._ The pain and retraction of the testicle on
the same side, when there is a stone in the ureter, is to be ascribed to
sensitive association; whether the connecting cause be a branch of the same
nerve, or from membranes, which have been frequently affected at the same
time.

12. _Dolor digiti minimi sympatheticus._ When any one accidentally strikes
his elbow against any hard body, a tingling pain runs down to the little
finger end. This is owing to sensitive association of motions by means of
the same branch of a nerve, as in hemicrania from a decaying tooth the pain
is owing to the sensitive association of tendons or membranes.

13. _Dolor brachii in hydrope pectoris._ The pain in the left arm which
attends some dropsies of the chest, is explained in Sect. XXIX. 5. 2. 10.
which resembles the pain of the little finger from a percussion of the
nerve at the elbow in the preceding article. A numbness of this kind is
produced over the whole leg, when the crural nerve is much compressed by
sitting for a time with one leg crossed over the other.

Mr. ----, about sixty, had for two years been affected with difficulty of
respiration on any exertion, with pain about the sternum, and of his left
arm; which last was more considerable than is usual in dropsy of the chest;
some months ago the pain of his arm, after walking a mile or two, became
excessive, with coldness and numbness; and on the next day the back of the
hand, and a part of the arm swelled, and became inflamed, which relieved
the pain; and was taken for the gout, and continued several days. He after
some months became dropsical both in respect to his chest and limbs, and
was six or seven times perfectly relieved by one dram of saturated tincture
of digitalis, taken two or three times a day for a few days in a glass of
peppermint water. He afterwards breathed oxygen gas undiluted, in the
quantity of six or eight gallons a day for three or four weeks without any
effect, and sunk at length from general debility.

In this instructive case I imagine the pressure or stimulus of one part of
the nerve within the chest caused the other part, which serves the arm, to
become torpid, and consequently cold by sympathy; and that the inflammation
was the consequence of the previous torpor and coldness of the arm, in the
same manner as the swelling and inflammation of the cheek in tooth-ach, in
the first species of this genus; and that many rheumatic inflammations are
thus produced by sympathy with some distant part.

14. _Diarrhoea a dentitione._ The diarrhoea, which frequently attends
dentition, is the consequence of indigestion; the aliment acquires chemical
changes, and by its acidity acts as a cathartic; and changes the yellow
bile into green, which is evacuated along with indigested parts of the
coagulum of milk. The indigestion is owing to the torpor of the stomach and
intestines caused by their association with the membranes of the gums,
which are now stimulated into great exertion with pain; both which
contribute to expend the general quantity of sensorial power, which belongs
to this membranous association; and thus the stomach and intestines act
with less than their natural energy. This is generally esteemed a
favourable symptom in difficult dentition, as the pain of the alveolar
membranes exhausts the sensorial power without producing convulsions for
its relief. See Class I. 1. 4. 5. And the diarrhoea ceases, as the tooth
advances.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORDO II.

_Decreased Associate Motions._

GENUS III.

_Catenated with Voluntary Motions._

SPECIES.

1. _Titubatio linguae._ Impediment of speech is owing to the associations
of the motions of the organs of speech being interrupted or dissevered by
ill-employed sensation or sensitive motions, as by awe, bashfulness,
ambition of shining, or fear of not succeeding, and the person uses
voluntary efforts in vain to regain the broken associations, as explained
in Sect. XVII. 1. 10. and XVII. 2. 10.

The broken association is generally between the first consonant and the
succeeding vowel; as in endeavouring to pronounce the word parable, the p
is voluntarily repeated again and again, but the remainder of the word does
not follow, because the association between it and the next vowel is
dissevered.

M. M. The art of curing this defect is to cause the stammerer to repeat the
word, which he finds difficult to speak, eight or ten times without the
initial letter, in a strong voice, or with an aspirate before it, as
arable, or harable; and at length to speak it very softly with the initial
letter p, parable. This should be practised for weeks or months upon every
word, which the stammerer hesitates in pronouncing. To this should be added
much commerce with mankind, in order to acquire a carelessness about the
opinions of others.

2. _Chorea St. Viti._ In the St. Vitus's dance the patient can at any time
lie still in bed, which shews the motions not to be convulsive; and he can
at different times voluntarily exert every muscle of his body; which
evinces, that they are not paralytic. In this disease the principal muscle
in any designed motion obeys the will; but those muscles, whose motions
were associated with the principal one, do not act; as their association is
dissevered, and thus the arm or leg is drawn outward, or inward, or
backward, instead of upward or forward, with various gesticulations exactly
resembling the impediment of speech.

This disease is frequently left after the itch has been too hastily cured.
See Convulsio dolorifica, Class III. 1. 1. 6. A girl about eighteen, after
wearing a mercurial girdle to cure the itch, acquired the Chorea St. Viti
in so universal a manner, that her speech became affected as well as her
limbs; and there was evidently a disunion of the common trains of ideas; as
the itch was still among the younger children of the family, she was
advised to take her sister as a bedfellow, and thus received the itch
again; and the dance of St. Vitus gradually ceased. See Class II. 1. 5. 6.

M. M. Give the patient the itch again. Calomel a grain every night, or
sublimate a quarter of a grain twice a day for a fortnight. Steel. Bark.
Warm-bath. Cold-bath. Opium. Venesection once at the beginning of the
disease. Electricity. Perpetual slow and repeated efforts to move each limb
in the designed direction, as in the titubatio linguae above described.

3. _Risus._ Laughter is a perpetual interruption of voluntary exertion by
the interposition of pleasurable sensation; which not being checked by any
important consequences rises into pain, and requires to be relieved or
moderated by the frequent repetition of voluntary exertion. See Sect.
XXXIV. 1. 4. and Class III. 1. 1. 4. and IV. 1. 3. 3.

4. _Tremor ex ira._ The trembling of the limbs from anger. The interruption
of the voluntary associations of motions by anger, originates from too
great a part of the sensorial power being exerted on the organs of sense;
whence the muscles, which ought to support the body upright, are deprived
of their due quantity, and tremble from debility. See Class III. 2. 1. 1.

5. _Rubor ex ira._ Redness from anger. Anger is an excess of aversion, that
is of voluntarity not yet employed. It is excited by the pain of offended
pride; when it is employed it becomes outrage, cruelty, insanity. The
cutaneous capillaries, especially those of the face, are more mobile, that
is, more easily excited into increased action, or more easily become
torpid, from less variation of sensorial power, than any other parts of the
system, which is owing to their being perpetually subject to the
vicissitudes of heat and cold, and of extension and corrugation. Hence,
when an excess of voluntarity exists without being immediately expended in
the actions of the large muscles, the capillary arteries and glands acquire
more energetic action, and a flushed skin is produced, with increased
secretion of perspirable matter, and consequent heat, owing to the pause or
interruption of voluntary action; and thus the actions of these cutaneous
vessels become associated between the irascent ideas and irascent muscular
actions, which are thus for a time interrupted.

6. _Rubor criminati._ The blushing of accused people, whether guilty or
not, appears to be owing to circumstances similar to that of anger; for in
these situations there is always a sudden voluntarity, or wish, of clearing
their characters arises in the mind of the accused person; which, before an
opportunity is given for it to be expended on the large muscles, influences
the capillary arteries and glands, as in the preceding article. Whence the
increased actions of the capillaries, and the consequent redness and heat,
become exerted between the voluntary ideas of self-defence, and the
muscular actions necessary for that purpose; which last are thus for a time
interrupted or delayed.

Even in the blush of modesty or bashfulness there is a self-condemnation
for some supposed defect or indecorum, and a sudden voluntarity, or wish,
of self-defence; which not being expended in actions of the larger muscles
excites the capillaries into action; which in these subjects are more
mobile than in others.

The blush of young girls on coming into an assembly room, where they expect
their dress, and steps, and manner to be examined, as in dancing a minuet,
may have another origin; and may be considered as a hot fit of returning
confidence, after a previous cold fit of fear.

7. _Tarditas paralytica._ By a stroke of the palsy or apoplexy it
frequently happens, that those ideas, which were associated in trains,
whose first link was a voluntary idea, have their connection dissevered;
and the patient is under the necessity by repeated efforts slowly to renew
their associations. In this situation those words, which have the fewest
other words associated with them, as the proper names of persons or places,
are the most difficult to recollect. And in those efforts of recollection
the word opposite to the word required is often produced, as hot for cold,
winter for summer, which is owing to our associating our ideas of things by
their opposites as well as by their similitudes, and in some instances
perhaps more frequently, or more forcibly. Other paralytic patients are
liable to give wrong names to external objects, as using the word pigs for
sheep, or cows for horses; in this case the association between the idea of
the animal and the name of it is dissevered; but the idea of the class or
genus of the thing remains; and he takes a name from the first of the
species, which presents itself, and sometimes can correct himself, till he
finds the true one.

8. _Tarditas senilis._ Slowness of age. The difficulty of associating ideas
increases with our age; as may be observed from old people forgetting the
business of the last hour, unless they impress it strongly, or by frequent
repetition, though they can well recollect the transactions of their youth.
I saw an elderly man, who could reason with great clearness and precision
and in accurate language on subjects, which he had been accustomed to think
upon; and yet did not know, that he had rang the bell by his fire-side in
one minute afterwards; nor could then recollect the object he had wanted,
when his servant came.

Similar to this is the difficulty which old people experience in learning
new bodily movements, that is, in associating new muscular actions, as in
learning a new trade or manufactury. The trains of movements, which obey
volition, are the last which we acquire; and the first, which are
disassociated.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORDO II.

_Decreased Associate Motions._

GENUS IV.

_Catenated with External Influences._

As the diseases, which obey solar or lunar periods, commence with torpor or
inactivity, such as the cold paroxysms of fevers, the torpor and consequent
pain of hemicrania, and the pains which precede the fits of epilepsy and
convulsion, it would seem, that these diseases are more generally owing to
the diminution than to the excess of solar or lunar gravitation; as the
diseases, which originate from the influence of the matter of heat, are
much more generally in this country produced by the defect than by the
excess of that fluid.

The periodic returns of so many diseases coincide with the diurnal,
monthly, and annual rounds of time; that any one, who would deny the
influence of the sun and moon on the periods of quotidian, tertian, and
quartan fevers, must deny their effect on the tides, and on the seasons. It
has generally been believed, that solar and lunar effect was exerted on the
blood; which was thus rendered more or less stimulant to the system, as
described in Sect. XXXII. 6. But as the fluid matter of gravitation
permeates and covers all things, like the fluid matter of heat; I am
induced to believe, that gravitation acts in its medium state rather as a
causa sine qua non of animal motion, like heat; which may disorder the
system chemically or mechanically, when it is diminished; but may
nevertheless stimulate it, when increased, into animal exertion.

Without heat and motion, which some philosophers still believe to be the
same thing, as they so perpetually appear together, the particles of matter
would attract and move towards each other, and the whole universe freeze or
coalesce into one solid mass. These therefore counteract the gravitation of
bodies to one center; and not only prevent the planets from falling into
the sun, but become either the efficient causes of vegetable and animal
life, or the causes without which life cannot exist; as by their means the
component particles of matter are enabled to slide over each other with all
the various degrees of fluidity and repulsion.

As the attraction of the moon countervails or diminishes the terrene
gravitation of bodies on the surface of the earth; a tide rises on that
side of the earth, which is turned towards the moon; and follows it, as the
earth revolves. Another tide is raised at the same time on the opposite
side of the revolving earth; which is owing to the greater centrifugal
motion of that side of the earth, which counteracts the gravitation of
bodies near its surface. For the earth and moon may be considered as two
cannon balls of different sizes held together by a chain, and revolving
once a month round a common center of gravity between them, near the
earth's surface; at the same time that they perform their annual orbits
round the sun. Whence the centrifugal force of that side of the earth,
which is farthest from this center of motion, round which the earth and
moon monthly revolve, is considerably greater, than the centrifugal force
of that side of the earth, which is nearest it; to which should be added,
that this centrifugal force not only contributes to diminish the terrene
gravitation of bodies on the earth's surface on that side furthest from
this center of motion, but also to increase it on that side, which is
nearest it.

Another circumstance, which tends to raise the tide on the part of the
earth's surface, which is most distant from the moon, is, that the
attraction of the moon is less on that part of the ocean, than it is on the
other parts of the earth. Thus the moon may be supposed to attract the
water on the side of the earth nearest it with a power equal to three; and
to attract the central parts of the earth with a power equal to two; and
the water on the part of the earth most distant from the moon with a power
only equal to one. Hence on the side of the earth most distant from the
moon, the moon's attraction is less, and the centrifugal force round their
common center of motion is greater; both which contribute to raise the
tides on that side of the earth. On the side of the earth nearest the moon,
the moon's attraction is so much greater as to raise the tides; though the
centrifugal force of the surface of the earth round their common center of
motion in some degree opposes this effect.

On these accounts, when the moon is in the zenith or nadir, the gravitation
of bodies on the earth's surface will be greatest at the two opposite
quadratures; that is, the greatest gravitation of bodies on the earth's
surface towards her center during the lunar day is about six hours and an
half after the southing, or after the northing of the moon.

Circumstances similar to these, but in a less degree, must occur in respect
to the solar influence on terrestrial bodies; that is, there must be a
diminution of the gravity of bodies, near the earth's surface at noon, when
the sun is over them; and also at midnight from the greater centrifugal
force of that side of the earth, which is most distant from the center,
round which the earth moves in her annual orbit, than on the side nearest
that center. Whence it likewise follows, that the gravitation of bodies
towards the earth is greatest about six hours after noon, and after
midnight.

Now when the sun and moon have their united gravitation on the same side of
the earth, as at the new moon; or when the solar attraction coincides with
the greater centrifugal motion of that side of the earth, which is furthest
distant from the moon, as at the full moon; and when this happens about
noon or midnight, the gravitation of terrene bodies towards the earth will
be greater about six hours after noon, and after midnight, than at any
other part of the lunar period; because the attraction of both these
luminaries is then exerted on those sides of the earth over which they
hang, which at other times of the month are more or less exerted on other
parts of it.

Lastly, as heat and motion counteract the gravitation of the particles of
bodies to each other, and hence become either the efficient causes of
vegetable and animal life, or the causes without which life cannot exist,
it seems to follow, that when our gravitation towards the earth's center is
greatest, the powers of life should be the least; and hence that those
diseases, which begin with torpor, should occur about six hours after the
solar or lunar noon, or about six hours after the solar or lunar midnight;
and this most frequently about six hours after or before the new or full
moon; and especially when these happen at noon or at midnight; or lastly,
according to the combination of these powers in diminishing or increasing
the earth's attraction to bodies on its surface.

The returns or exacerbations of many fevers, both irritative and
inflammatory, about six in the evening, and of the periodic cough described
in Sect. XXXVI. 3. 9. countenance this theory. Tables might be made out to
shew the combined powers of the sun and moon in diminishing the gravitation
of bodies on the earth's surface, at every part of their diurnal, monthly,
and annual periods; and which might facilitate the elucidation of this
subject. But I am well aware of the difficulty of its application to
diseases, and hope these conjectures may induce others to publish more
numerous observations, and more conclusive reasonings.

SPECIES.

1. _Somni periodus._ The periods of sleeping and of waking are shortened or
prolonged by so many other circumstances in animal life, besides the minute
difference between diurnal and nocturnal solar gravitation, that it can
scarcely be ascribed to this influence. At the same time it is curious to
observe, that vegetables in respect to their times of sleeping more
regularly observe the hour of the day, than the presence or absence of
light, or of heat, as may be seen by consulting the calendar of Flora.
Botanic Garden, Part II. Canto 2. l. 165. note.

Some diseases, which at first sight might be supposed to be influenced by
solar periods, seem to be induced by the increasing sensibility of the
system to pain during our sleeping hours; as explained in Sect. XVIII. 15.
Of these are the fits of asthma, of some epilepsies, and of some
haemoptoes; all which disturb the patient after some hours sleep, and are
therefore to be ascribed to the increase of our dormant sensibility. There
may likewise be some doubt, whether the commencement of the pain of gout in
the foot, as it generally makes its attack after sleep, should be ascribed
to the increased sensibility in sleep, or to solar influence?

M. M. When asthmatic or epileptic fits or haemoptoe occur after a certain
number of hours of sleep, the patient should be forcibly awakened before
the expected time by an alarm clock, and drink a cup of chocolate or
lemonade.--Or a grain of opium should be given at going to bed.--In one
case to prevent the too great increase of sensibility by shortening the
time of sleep; and in the other by increasing the irritative motions, and
expending by that means a part of the sensorial power.

2. _Studii inanis periodus._ Class III. 1. 2. 2. The cataleptic spasm which
preceded the reverie and somnambulation in the patient, whose case is
related in Sect. XIX. 2. occurred at exactly the same hour, which was about
eleven in the morning for many weeks; till those periods were disturbed by
large doses of opium; and must therefore be referred to some effect of
solar gravitation. In the case of Master A. Sect. XXXIV. 3. as the reverie
began early in the morning during sleep, there may be a doubt, whether this
commenced with torpor of some organ catenated with solar gravitation; or
was caused by the existence of a previous torpid part, which only became so
painful as to excite the exertions of reverie by the perpetual increase of
sensibility during the continuance of sleep, as in some fits of epilepsy,
asthma, and haemoptoe mentioned in the preceding article.

3. _Hemicraniae periodus._ Periods of hemicrania. Class IV. 2. 2. 8. The
torpor and consequent pain of some membranes on one side of the head, as
over one eye, is frequently occasioned by a decaying tooth, and is liable
to return every day, or on alternate days at solar or lunar periods. In
this case large quantities of the bark will frequently cure the disease,
and especially if preceded by venesection and a brisk cathartic; but if the
offending tooth can be detected, the most certain cure is its extraction.
These partial head-achs are also liable to return at the greater lunar
periods, as about once a month. Five drops from a two-ounce phial of a
saturated solution of arsenic twice a day for a week or two have been said
to prevent the returns of this disease. See a Treatise on Arsenic by Dr.
Fowler, of York. Strong errhines have also been recommended.

4. _Epilepsiae dolorificae periodus._ Class III. 1. 1. 8. The pain which
induces after about an hour the violent convulsions or insanity, which
constitute the painful epilepsy, generally observe solar diurnal periods
for four or five weeks, and are probably governed by solar and lunar times
in respect to their greater periods; for I have observed that the daily
paroxysms, unless disturbed by large doses of opium, recur at very nearly
the same hour, and after a few weeks the patients have recovered to relapse
again at the interval of a few months. But more observations are wanted
upon this subject, which might be of great advantage in preventing the
attacks of this disease; as much less opium given an hour before its
expected daily return will prevent the paroxysm, than is necessary to cure
it, after it has commenced.
