"What's wrong with them?" demanded Alden as the agonized screams rang
louder still.

"I don't know," was Alden's breathless reply. "But what's that noise?"

A curious metallic clanking sound filled the poisoned air, and for a
moment Nelson remained utterly puzzled. Then, as the noise grew
louder, the allosauri commenced to betray a strange restlessness. They
ceased basking and feeding, and their hideous heads commenced to dart
quickly this way and that.

       *       *       *       *       *

While the terrific shrieks of the wretches across the court rang to
the copper-hued sky, the two Americans remained in doubt; then all at
once the chill of death gripped their hearts, as they saw the bars of
that cell directly opposite slowly but surely rising! Uttering
heart-rending cries, the doomed prisoners clung frantically to stay
the vanishing barrier separating them from those appalling man-eaters.
But, disdainful of their pitiful efforts, the bronze bars rose
relentlessly with metallic rattlings and janglings from some unseen
mechanism.

Rooted to the floor, both Americans watched the distant grille vanish
into the upper stone-work and heard the ghastly hissing as the
allosauri herd commenced to move forward. Sick and shaken, Nelson
beheld one of the doomed men cling in desperation to the bars; he was
lifted clear of the floor and borne towards the ceiling, meanwhile
venting his terror with such screams as could otherwise have risen
only from an inquisitor's torture chamber.

The tragedy was swiftly completed. Half a dozen of the nearest
allosauri, taller than any giraffes, suddenly sprang forward, their
long, naked tails rising as their gait increased. Snarling horribly,
the vast slate-colored beasts plunged into the cell, terminating
shrieks of mortal terror. Backs broader than bus tops squirmed and
tugged, then one of the loathsome monsters reappeared carrying in its
dripping jaws a mangled, yet struggling victim much as a cat carries a
mouse. In a trice the other allosauri came rushing eagerly up, seeking
to snatch the prey from the first monster.

Nelson stiffened. "Great God! And that's what'll happen to us!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Weakened by his head wound, and blind with nausea, he stumbled to the
rear of the cell to collapse upon a pile of foul straw, littered with
equipment which the superstitious captors must have condemned together
with the owners.

Nelson sank upon them, then stiffened, for his outflung hand had
encountered a hard, familiar outline. It was a .45 automatic pistol.

A moment's furious search revealed that the captors had missed or not
understood the use of the weapon in Alden's leather flying coat.

"God, but we're lucky," Nelson panted. "The Atlanteans never saw this
pistol of yours. They're only used to my rifle."

Hope lit Alden's features, then faded. "But what good is a .45
against brutes like those? Might at well have a pop gun!"

"Still we're lucky," grunted Nelson, delighted to find the magazine
yet filled. "Can't tell what's ahead. Yes, we're the luckiest--"

He broke off in quick alarm. From overhead had come a premonitory
clang! Somewhere a tackle whined and, with a sense of suffocation,
both men realised that now the bars of _their_ prison were beginning
to creep up into a long slit in the stone ceiling!

Cold fingers of fear clutched Nelson's heart as the terrible
allosauri, their jaws yet dripping redly, wheeled about at the
familiar sound--to stand listening. Up and up crept the ponderous
grille, while the allosauri commenced to shuffle forward, fixing on
their next victims enormous, unblinking green eyes.

       *       *       *       *       *

While the whole loathsome cell spun about, Victor Nelson forced stiff
fingers to throw off the safety catch as the nearest allosaurus opened
its cavernous mouth in anticipation, displaying an array of curved
teeth, as long and sharp as bayonets. Standing some fifteen feet high
at the shoulder the horrible creature's body was; it all but blotted
out the light. The bars rose inexorably. Now they were waist high....
Now above Nelson's head.... In a moment would come the rush.

Richard Alden stood up straight and squared his shoulders. "Good-by,
Vic," he said, in clear, unafraid tones. "I don't imagine that .45
will even tickle those ghastly brutes."

Nelson nodded. "All over but the cheering," he replied with that
strange, macabre humor which often comes to solace men about to die.

"See you in church." There was an equally gallant lightness to Alden's
reply.

The dark haired pilot, with a curious, detached sense of unreality,
stepped into the middle of the room, the automatic in his hand seeming
no more potent than a water pistol, for a ponderous, lambent eyed
monster was now hopping forward. While minute particles of dust and
dirt rained down from the disappearing barrier, the foremost
allosaurus opened its enormous jaws, uttered an eery scream and
charged straight at the unbarred cell.

Drawing a deep breath, Nelson raised the .45, sighted, and,
remembering his former experience, fired at the enormous right eye. As
in a dream, he felt the recoil. The monster neither slowed nor swerved
in the least, though its great, saucer-like eye disintegrated
horribly. Immediately Nelson swiftly sighted at the other eye and
fired, just as the allosaurus' shadow filled the threshold.

_Crack!_ A swirl of bitter smoke stung the aviator's staring eyes.
He'd hit; he knew it!

       *       *       *       *       *

Cyclopean moments followed as the blinded monster dashed forward,
missed the circular door, and, butting his head against the stone wall
to the left, fell completely stunned, effectively blocking the doorway
with its huge body. One enormous hind leg, fully ten feet long, and
equipped with three razor-like claws, projected into the cell and
lashed aimlessly back and forth, forcing the two prisoners to dodge
wildly.

There ensued that indescribable kind of a moment when men go mad.
Outside the cell the ravenous herd pounced upon their fallen mate and
with hideous grunts and snarls promptly commenced to tear it apart.
The shaken prisoners realized that the rending jaws would before long
undoubtedly remove the temporary obstacle; but meanwhile the hideous
hissing and the fetid stench of the allosauri breath made the cell a
mad-house.

Gradually, the gigantic carcass at the door commenced to quiver and
roll violently under the ferocious tugs of the eager feasters. A gap
of light appeared over the huge haunches, and, all at once, another
of those terrible heads slipped over the carcass and into the cell.

Again the .45 thundered, lighting the darkened cell with a brief
orange flame. A noise like the furious trumpeting of a dozen elephants
nearly blew Nelson flat as the wounded monster drew back its head, but
the respite promised to be short, for the other reptiles only
re-doubled their horrid, cannibalistic rending of the carcass. When
the barrier was removed there would be a general rush which the shaken
aviators could not hope to stay.

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly, Alden uttered a low shout and pointed to the small, oval
door which had, up to this point, remained securely bolted and shut.
It was swinging gradually open, rimmed with a strong reddish light.

Wide-eyed, and with black hair streaming lank over his forehead,
Nelson, in the act of reloading, swung about to meet this new menace.
Hell! What point was there in prolonging the pitiful struggle? What
was happening?

Slowly, the door swung back, and a rosy glow lit the opening, a glow
that became as strong as the gleam of a spotlight. Then, slowly, a
glittering, green-crested helmet of highly polished bronze appeared,
and, under it, Hero Giles' familiar features, now distorted by a
terrible fear. The blue eyes seemed enormous. "Quickly!" he called.
"Quick or ye are lost!"

Unbelieving of the reprieve, both the aviators stared an instant at
that martial figure clad in brazen armor liberally studded with
enormous diamonds and emeralds, then leaped forward with the speed of
desperation, for from behind came a fierce squalling from the
allosauri. As he darted towards the door Nelson had a glimpse of the
carcass blocking the door commencing to slip sidewise.

Alden was already out and Nelson sped through the door barely in time
to escape the razor-sharp talons of the foremost allosaurus as it
scrambled into the deserted cell with a resounding bellow of
disappointed fury.


CHAPTER VIII

As the door clanged shut, drowning out the allosauri's furious
screams, both aviators, shaken to the depths of their beings, could do
nothing but stare about them in surprise. Completely surrounding and
protecting the exit stood a double rank of hoplites in bronze armor.
Like unreal automata, they remained utterly motionless, fixed in the
various postures of an ancient Macedonian phalanx, their broad backs
gleaming dully in the light of the neon flares. As in a dream, Nelson
recognized on top of each spearsman's casque the graceful Atlantean
military crest--a metal dolphin from the back of which sprouted a
series of bright blue feathers, arranged like a dorsal fin.

"Thank Poseidon, ye still live!" cried Hero Giles, gripping their
hands eagerly. "I had fear for ye, oh my friends."

Nelson grinned. "You cut the rescue act pretty fine, but of course
we're damned grateful. And now,"--eagerly seizing the Hero's
splendidly muscled arm--"in God's name tell us what's happened. Why we
were arrested and--nearly made into allosaurus fodder?"

Hero Giles turned from snapping an order to a subaltern who was
peering down a great, shadowy hallway with a distinctly uneasy manner.

"Much," he said. "Scarcely had ye two departed from Heliopolis than
the priests, mad with rage over Altara's continued captivity, dared to
seize the person of His Splendor and proclaim a regency. Herakles, the
arch-priest is--"

       *       *       *       *       *

From far down the gloomy, vaulted corridor came a faint sound, rather
like the distant cheering of a crowd. The hoplites, standing about,
turned their helmeted heads and stared uneasily, their brazen armor
glowing dully with each movement.

"I'll tell ye more later, but now--"--Hero Giles' voice took on a
ringing quality like the clash of steel--"there is work to be done. To
rescue ye, oh Hero Nelson, I slew the guards at the lower gate, for
this prison lies in the hands of a caitiff rogue, Hero Edmund, one who
clings to the priestly party. We had best be off lest we be trapped
and slaughtered like rats in a pit."

Very distinctly to the ears of the aviator now came the dull clash of
equipment and the tread of feet.

"Forward! We must hasten to reach the podokos waiting below," cried
Hero Giles, settling his ponderous helmet more squarely on his leonine
head.

At once the escort of fifteen-odd hoplites commenced to move down the
corridor to the left, their hands tightly gripping the butts of their
retortii pistols. At their head ran Hero Giles, and by his side Alden
and Victor Nelson, who gripped his .45 vowing never again to return to
that ghastly cell.

A long ringing cry from the rear brought home the dread realization
that the enemy had appeared. Looking back, Nelson could see the far
end of the great corridor filled with menacing figures. Then his heart
leaped like a deer in a thicket, for _from ahead_ sounded the clash of
weapons! The rescue party's retreat was cut off!

       *       *       *       *       *

Hero Giles acted with the speed of a veteran accustomed to
emergencies. "Forward!" he roared, making the bare walls reverberate
and rumble with his voice. "_Halor van! Ula Storr!_"[1]

[Footnote 1: Make ready for your retortii.]

As by magic, there appeared before the retreating force a double rank
of blue-crested hoplites who debouched from a side passage into the
hall and clawed desperately for fungus bombs and retortii. Evidently
they had not expected to come upon the invaders so abruptly.

"_Storr!_" Like a brazen trumpet's call, the voice of Hero Giles rang
out the order to fire--which was instantly drowned out in the furious
hissing of the retortii of his followers.

Ever watchful, Nelson fired at a gigantic officer who, avoiding the
first steam jets, flung back his arms to hurl one of the deadly fungus
bombs among the rescuers. Shattering the bronze helmet, the American's
bullet struck the Atlantean squarely between the eyes, but
nevertheless the stricken officer's grenade rolled forward and burst
among the hindermost of Hero Giles' followers. Instantly, the deadly
green mold flung itself upon the nearest hoplites and in a moment they
crashed to the smooth granite floor, the yellowish growths already
sprouting from nose, mouth and ears.

In the corridor reigned chaos, for Hero Giles' followers were now
turning the full fury of their retortii upon the rank of men barring
further flight. With dreadful ease, the scalding steam struck dead the
opposing warriors, stripping the flesh from their bones as easily as a
boy peels a banana.

Amid the swirling white clouds, Nelson had ghastly visions of yellow
skulls, of steaming accoutrement, of limp heaps of disintegrating
bodies; then silence fell, and, before he quite realized it, he,
together with Alden and three hoplites who had survived the disastrous
fungus grenade, were bounding along after Hero Giles' glittering
figure as he led the way down one passage after another.

       *       *       *       *       *

Louder than ever rang the fierce cry from the rear. Behind him Nelson
could see dozens upon dozens of yelling pursuers, and knew that if he
were to live he must run as never before.

Into a succession of spacious rooms dashed the fugitives; on through
deserted armories where hundreds of bronze helmets dangled in orderly
rows; and across silent barrack halls.

Closer and closer sounded the pursuing feet, spurring the runners to
an even more headlong gait.

All at once a door loomed to the right; into this darted Hero Giles
and after him pounded the two Americans and three hoplites. In an
instant the six men set their shoulder to the ponderous bronze door
and swung it to, just as the hiss of a retortii on the other side rose
above the mad, blood-hungry clamor of the momentarily baffled rebels.
Gasping and sweat-bathed, the fugitives paused only an instant.

"We've gained a short passage," gasped the Atlantean wrenching off his
helmet and breast plate. The veins stood out in great blue cords on
his forehead, for the weight of the armor could not have been
inconsiderable. "Below wait our podokos."

Nelson stripped off his leather coat, following the example of the
hoplites, who swiftly divested themselves of such cumbersome equipment
as could readily be removed. Then, while the shouts of the thwarted
pursuers swelled like a demonic chorus, and while feathers of steam
crept under the great door, Hero Giles spun about and, with his short
yellow hair gleaming bright, led on down another series of passages.

       *       *       *       *       *

All at once the fugitives, now reduced by exhaustion to five, found
themselves on a balcony overlooking the great valley of Atlans. Before
them opened an enormous staircase and down this they dashed at top
speed, infinitely relieved to be once more in the open air.

Running like hunted stags, the fugitives had descended but a third of
the great staircase, when, from behind, came a sudden, menacing cry
that warned Nelson that the pursuers had, after going a longer way
around, come once more in sight.

"Ah! Poseidon blast the traitorous Edmund and his varlets! See?"
panted Hero Giles pointing to a huge arch from beneath which was
issuing a glittering column of shouting, swift running warriors at
whose head dashed a splendidly-proportioned figure that must be Hero
Edmund.

With the speed of the hunted, Hero Giles bounded forward, taking three
and four steps at a stride, his jade green cloak snapping out behind.
Down, ever downwards over the endless flight of stairs the aviators
followed him until, spent and panting, the hard pressed five plunged
down a final circular staircase and so gained a courtyard where waited
a detachment of armored lancers whose yellow plumes and pennons shone
bright in the glare of the flame suns. Staring anxiously upwards, the
troopers nevertheless stood to attention in an orderly rank beside
those curious Atlantean mounts called podokos.

During all his sojourn in Atlans, Nelson had never become used to the
hideous and awe-inspiring podokos which closely resembled the
allosauri but were only eighteen feet long. Like the other monsters,
they had tremendously developed hind legs which promised the speed now
so vital for escape and safety. Ready in the tooth-studded jaws of
each podoko was fitted a bronze bit together with a bridle and reins;
and cinched up on each creature's back was one of those curious
Atlantean saddles, which was built up at the cantle to overcome the
downward slope of the podokos' spines.

Need for vital haste was but too obvious and, as he drew near, Hero
Giles gasped the command to be off.

"Quick," he shouted, his scarred visage flushed and sweat-bathed.
"Saddles! Speed! Speed! Cling fast as your beasts arise!"

       *       *       *       *       *

All five literally hurled themselves into gorgeously caparisoned
saddles. Instantly, the urging squatting podokos leaped to their feet.

It was the work of a moment for Nelson to wrench his reptile around,
for already Alden and the Atlantean cavalrymen were speeding across
the wide paved court, their lance pennons fluttering bravely in the
orange-hued glare.
