had built fires about themselves as if to make a wall of flame. And
once Tommy saw twin, monstrous eyes, gazing from the blackness of the
tree-fern forest. They were huge eyes, and they were far apart, so
that the head of the creature who used them must have been enormous.
And they were all of fifteen feet above the ground when they
speculatively looked over the ring of fires and the ragged, degraded
men within them. Then that creature, whatever it was, turned away and
vanished.

But Tommy felt a curious shivering horror of the thing. It had moved
soundlessly, without a doubt, because not one of the Ragged Men had
noted its presence. It had been kept away by the fires. But Denham and
Evelyn were somewhere in the tree-fern forest, and they would not dare
to make fires....

Tommy drew away from the dimensoscope, shivering. He had been looking
only, but the place into which he looked was real, and the dangers
that lay hidden there were very genuine, and there was a man and a
girl of his own race and time struggling desperately, without arms or
hope, to survive.

       *       *       *       *       *

Smithers was casually fitting together an intricate array of little
rings made of copper tubing. There were three of them, and each was
fitted into the next largest by pins which enabled them to spin
noiselessly and swiftly at the touch of Smithers' finger. He had them
spinning now, each in a separate direction, and the effect was
bewildering.

As Tommy watched, Smithers stopped them, oiled the pins carefully, and
painstakingly inserted a fourth ring. Only this ring was of a white
metal that looked somehow more pallid than silver. It had a whiteness
like that of ivory beneath its metallic gleam.

Tommy blinked.

"Did Von Holtz give you that metal?" he asked suddenly.

Smithers looked up and puffed at a short brown pipe.

"Nope. There was some splashes of it by the castin' box. I melted 'em
together an' run a ring. Pressed it to shape; y' can't hammer this
stuff. It goes to water and dries up quicker'n lightning--an' you hold
y'nose an' run. I used it before for the Professor."

Tommy went over to him excitedly. He picked up the little contrivance
of many concentric rings. The big motor was throbbing rhythmically,
and the generator was humming at the back of the laboratory. Von Holtz
was out of sight.

       *       *       *       *       *

With painstaking care Tommy went over the little device. He looked up.

"A coil?"

"I wound one," said Smithers calmly. "On the lathe. Not so hot, but
it'll do, I guess. But I can't fix these rings like the Professor
did."

"I think I can," said Tommy crisply. "Did you make some wire for
springs?"

"Yeah!"

Tommy fingered the wire. Stout, stiff, and surprisingly springy wire
of the same peculiar metal. It was that metallic ammonium which
chemists have deduced must exist because of the chemical behavior of
the compound NH3, but which Denham alone had managed to procure.
Tommy deduced that it was an allotropic modification of the substance
which forms an amalgam with mercury, as metallic tin is an allotrope
of the amorphous gray powder which is tin in its normal, stable state.

He set to work with feverish excitement. For one hour, for two he
worked. At the end of that time he was explaining the matter curtly to
Smithers, so intent on his work that he wholly failed to hear a motor
car outside or to realize that it had also grown dark in this world of
ours.

"You see, Smithers, if a two-dimensioned creature wanted to adjust two
right angles at right angles to each other, he'd have them laid flat,
of course. And if he put a spring at the far ends of those right
angles--they'd look like a T, put together--so that the cross-bar of
that T was under tension, he'd have the equivalent of what I'm doing.
To make a three-dimensioned figure, that imaginary man would have to
bend one side of the cross-bar up. As if the two ends of it were under
tension by a spring, and the spring would only be relieved of tension
when that cross-bar was bent. But the vertical would be his time
dimension, so he'd have to have something thin, or it couldn't be
bent. He'd need something 'thin in time.'

"We have the same problem. But metallic ammonium is 'thin in time.'
It's so fugitive a substance that Denham is the only man ever to
secure it. So we use these rings and adjust these springs to them so
they're under tension which will only be released when they're all at
right angles to each other. In our three dimensions that's impossible,
but we have a metal that can revolve in a fourth, and we reinforce
their tendency to adjust themselves by starting them off with a jerk.
We've got 'em flat. They'll make a good stiff jerk when they try to
adjust themselves. And the solenoid's a bit eccentric--"

"Shut up!" snapped Smithers suddenly.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was facing the door, bristling. Von Holtz was in the act of coming
in, with a beefy, broad-shouldered man with blue jowls. Tommy
straightened up, thought swiftly, and then smiled grimly.

"Hullo, Von Holtz," he said pleasantly. "We've just completed a model
catapult. We're all set to try it out. Watch!"

He set a little tin can beneath the peculiar device of copper-tubing
rings. The can was wholly ordinary, made of thin sheet-iron plated
with tin as are all the tin cans of commerce.

"You have the catapult remade?" gasped Von Holtz. "Wait! Wait! Let me
look at it!"

For one instant, and one instant only, Tommy let him see. The massed
set of concentric rings, each one of them parallel to all the others.
It looked rather like a flat coil of tubing; certainly like no
particularly obscure form of projector. But as Von Holtz's weak eyes
fastened avidly upon it, Tommy pressed the improvised electric switch.
At once that would energize the solenoid and release all the tensed
springs from their greater tension, for an attempt to reach a
permanent equilibrium.

As Von Holtz and the blue-jowled man stared, the little tin can leaped
upward into the tiny coil. The small copper rings twinkled one within
the other as the springs operated. The tin can was wrenched this way
and that, then for the fraction of a second hurt the eyes that gazed
upon it--and it was gone! And then the little coil came spinning down
to the work bench top from its broken bearings and the remaining
copper rings spun aimlessly for a moment. But the third ring of
whitish metal had vanished utterly, and so had the coiled-wire springs
which Von Holtz had been unable to distinguish. And there was an
overpowering smell of ammonia in the room.

       *       *       *       *       *

Von Holtz flung himself upon the still-moving little instrument. He
inspected it savagely, desperately. His full red lips drew back in a
snarl.

"How did you do it?" he cried shrilly. "You must tell me! I--I--I will
kill you if you do not tell me!"

The blue-jowled man was watching Von Holtz. Now his lips twisted
disgustedly. He turned to Tommy and narrowed his eyes.

"Look here," he rumbled. "This fool's no good! I want the secret of
that trick you did. What's your price?"

"I'm not for sale," said Tommy, smiling faintly.

The blue-jowled man regarded him with level eyes.

"My name's Jacaro," he said after an instant. "Maybe you've heard of
me. I'm from Chicago."

Tommy smiled more widely.

"To be sure," he admitted. "You were the man who introduced
machine-guns into gang warfare, weren't you? Your gunmen lined up half
a dozen of the Buddy Haines gang against a wall and wiped them out, I
believe. What do you want this secret for?"

The level eyes narrowed. They looked suddenly deadly.

"That's my business," said Jacaro briefly. "You know who I am. And I
want that trick y'did. I got my own reasons. I'll pay for it. Plenty.
You know I got plenty to pay, too. Or else--"

"What?"

"Something'll happen to you," said Jacaro briefly. "I ain't sayin''
what. But it's damn likely you'll tell what I want to know before it's
finished. Name your price and be damn quick!"

Tommy took his hand out of his pocket. He had a gun in it.

"The only possible answer to that," he said suavely, "is to tell you
to go to hell. Get out! But Von Holtz stays here. He'd better!"


CHAPTER IV

Within half an hour after Jacaro's leaving, Smithers was in the
village, laying in a stock of supplies and sending telegrams that
Tommy had written out for transmission. Tommy sat facing an ashen Von
Holtz and told him pleasantly what would be done to him if he failed
to make the metallic ammonium needed to repair the big solenoid. In an
hour, Smithers was back, reporting that Jacaro was also sending
telegrams but that he, Smithers, had stood over the telegraph operator
until his own messages were transmitted. He brought back weapons,
too--highly illegal things to have in New York State, where a citizen
is only law-abiding when defenseless. And then four days of hectic,
sleepless labor began.

On the first day one of Tommy's friends drove in in answer to a
telegram. It was Peter Dalzell, with men in uniform apparently
festooned about his car. He announced that a placard warning passersby
of smallpox within, had been added to the decorative signs upon the
gate, and stared incredulously at the interior of the big brick barn.
Tommy grinned at him and gave him plans and specifications of a light
steel globe in which two men might be transported into the fifth
dimension by a suitably operating device. Tommy had sat up all night
drawing those plans. He told Dalzell just enough of what he was up
against to enlist Dalzell's enthusiastic cooperation without
permitting him to doubt Tommy's sanity. Dalzell had known Tommy as an
amateur tennis player, but not as a scientist.

He marveled, refused to believe his eyes when he looked through the
dimensoscope, and agreed that the whole thing had to be kept secret or
the rescue expedition would be prevented from starting by the
incarceration of both Tommy and Smithers in comfortable insane
asylums. He feigned to admire Von Holtz, deathly white and nearly
frantic with a corroding rage, and complimented Tommy on his taste for
illegality. He even asked Von Holtz if he wanted to leave, and Von
Holtz snarled insults at him. Von Holtz was beginning to work at the
manufacture of metallic ammonium.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was an electrolytic process, of course. Ordinarily,
when--say--ammonium chloride is broken down by an electric current,
ammonium is deposited at the cathode and instantly becomes a gas which
dissolves in the water or bubbles up to the surface. With a mercury
cathode, it is dissolved and becomes a metallic amalgam, which also
breaks down into gas with much bubbling of the mercury. But Denham had
worked out a way of delaying the breaking-down, which left him with a
curiously white, spongy mass of metal which could be carefully melted
down and cast, but not under any circumstances violently struck or
strained.

Von Holtz was working at that. On the second day he delivered,
snarling, a small ingot of the white metal. He was imprisoned in the
lean-to-shed in which the electrolysis went on. But Tommy had more
than a suspicion that he was in communication with Jacaro.

"Of course," he said drily to Smithers, who had expressed his doubts.
"Jacaro had somebody sneak up and talk to him through the walls, or
maybe through a bored hole. While there's a hope of finding out what
he wants to know through Von Holtz, Jacaro won't try anything. Not
anything rough, anyhow. We mustn't be bumped off while what we are
doing is in our heads alone. We're safe enough--for a while."

Smithers grumbled.

"We need that ammonium," said Tommy, "and I don't know how to make it.
I bluffed that I could, and in time I might, but it would need time
and meanwhile Denham needs us. Dalzell is going to send a plane over
today, with word of when we can expect our own globe. We'll try to
have the big catapult ready when it comes. And the plane will drop
some extra supplies. I've ordered a sub-machine gun. Handy when we get
over there in the tree-fern forests. Right now, though, we need to be
watching...."

Because they were taking turns looking through the dimensoscope. For
signs of Denham and Evelyn. And Tommy was finding himself thinking
wholly unscientific thoughts about Evelyn, since a pretty girl in
difficulties is of all possible things the one most likely to make a
man romantic.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the four days of their hardest working, he saw her three times. The
globe was wrecked and ruined. Its glass was broken out and its
interior ripped apart. It had been pillaged so exhaustively that there
was no hope that whatever device had been included in its design, for
its return, remained even repairably intact. That device had not
worked, to be sure, but Tommy puzzled sometimes over the fact that he
had seen no mechanical device of any sort in the plunder that had been
brought out to be demolished. But he did not think of those things
when he saw Evelyn.

The Ragged Men's encampment was gone, but she and her father lingered
furtively, still near the pillaged globe. The first day Tommy saw her,
she was still blooming and alert. The second day she was paler. Her
clothing was ripped and torn, as if by thorns. Denham had a great raw
wound upon his forehead, and his coat was gone and half his shirt was
in ribbons. Before Tommy's eyes they killed a nameless small animal
with the trunchionlike weapon Evelyn carried. And Denham carted it
triumphantly off into the shelter of the tree-fern forest. But to
Tommy that shelter began to appear extremely dubious.

That same afternoon some of the Ragged Men came suspiciously to the
globe and inspected it, and then vented a gibbering rage upon it with
blows and curses. They seemed half-mad, these men. But then, all the
Ragged Men seemed a shade less than sane. Their hatred for the Golden
City seemed the dominant emotion of their existence.

And when they had gone, Tommy saw Denham peering cautiously from
behind a screening mass of fern. And Denham looked sick at heart. His
eyes lifted suddenly to the heavens, and he stared off into the
distance again, and then he regarded the heavens again with an
expression that was at once of the utmost wistfulness and the
uttermost of despair.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tommy swung the dimensoscope about and searched the skies of that
other world. He saw the flying machine, and it was a swallow-winged
device that moved swiftly, and now soared and swooped in abrupt short
circles almost overhead. Tommy could see its pilot, leaning out to
gaze downward. He was no more than a hundred feet up, almost at the
height of the tree-fern tops. And the pilot was moving too swiftly for
Tommy to be able to focus accurately upon his face, but he could see
him as a man, an indubitable man in no fashion distinguishable from
the other men of this earth. He was scrutinizing the globe as well as
he could without alighting.

He soared upward, suddenly, and his plane dwindled as it went toward
the Golden City.

And then, inevitably, Tommy searched for the four Ragged Men who had
inspected the globe a little while since. He saw them, capering
horribly behind a screening of verdure. They did not shake their
clenched fists at the flying machine. Instead, they seemed filled with
a ghastly mirth. And suddenly they began to run frantically for the
far distance, as if bearing news of infinite importance.

And when he looked back at Denham, it seemed to Tommy that he wrung
his hands before he disappeared.

       *       *       *       *       *

But that was the second day of the work upon our own world, and just
before sunset there was a droning in the earthly sky above the
laboratory, and Tommy ran out, and somebody shot at him from a patch
of woodland a quarter of a mile away from the brick building. Isolated
as Denham's place was, the shot would go unnoticed. The bullet passed
within a few feet of Tommy, but he paid no attention. It was one of
Jacaro's watchers, no doubt, but Jacaro did not want Tommy killed. So
Tommy waited until the plane swooped low--almost to the level of the
laboratory roof--and a thickly padded package thudded to the ground.
He picked it up and darted back into the laboratory as other bullets
came from the patch of woodland.

"Funny," he said dryly to Smithers, inside the laboratory again; "they
don't dare kill me--yet--and Von Holtz doesn't dare leave or refuse to
do what I tell him to do; and yet they expect to lick us."

Smithers growled. Tommy was unpacking the wrapped package. A grim,
blued-steel thing came out of much padding. Boxes tumbled after it.

"Sub-machine gun," said Tommy, "and ammunition. Jacaro and his little
pals will try to get in here when they think we've got the big
solenoid ready for use. They'll try to get it before we can use it.
This will attend to them."

"An' get us in jail," said Smithers calmly, "for forty-'leven years."

"No," said Tommy, and grinned. "We'll be in the fifth dimension. Our
job is to fling through the catapult all the stuff we'll need to make
another catapult to fling us back again."

