"It's coming from this way!" Sue said excitedly, pointing into the
darkness on one side of the cavern. "And it goes up the hole we made
in the ceiling!"

Phil turned eagerly to the old inventor. "It must come from
somewhere," he said, "and that somewhere may take us toward the
surface. Let's follow it!"

"We might as well," the other agreed wearily. His was the tone of a
man who has only a certain time to live.

But Phil was more eager. "While there's life, there's hope," he said
cheerfully. "Come on, Sue, Professor!" And he led the way forward
toward the dim, distorted rock shapes in the distance.

       *       *       *       *       *

The roof and sides of the cavern angled down into a rough, tunnel-like
opening, from which the draft swept. It was a heavy air, weighted with
the smell of moist earth and lifeless water and a nameless, flat,
stale gas. They slowly made their way through the impeding
stalagmites, surrounded by a dark blur of shadows, the ghostly
phosphorescent light illuminating well only the few rods around them.
Utter silence brooded over the tunnel.

Phil paused when they had gone about seventy-five feet. "I left that
rope behind," he said, "and we may need it. I'll return and get it,
and you both wait right here." With the words he turned and went back
into the shadows.

He went as fast as he could, not liking to leave the other two alone.
But when he had retrieved the rope and tied it to his waist, he
permitted himself a last look up as he passed under the hole in the
ceiling--and what he saw there tensed every muscle in his body, and
made his heart beat like mad. Again there was a tiny spot of orange in
the blackness above!

"Professor!" he yelled excitedly. "Sue! Come here! The sphere's
coming back!"

There was no doubt about it. The pin-point of light was growing each
second, with the flame of the descending exhausts. Guinness and his
daughter ran from the tunnel, and, guided by Phil's excited
ejaculations, hurried to his side. Their eyes confirmed what his had
seen. The earth-borer was coming down!

"But," Guinness said bewilderedly, "those rockets were enough to lift
him!"

This was a mystery. Even though ten rockets were on--ten tiny spots of
orange flame--the sphere came down swiftly. The same force which some
time before had lifted it slowly up was now insufficient. The roar of
the tubes rose rapidly. "Get back!" Phil ordered, remembering the
danger, and they all retreated to the mouth of the tunnel, ready to
peep cautiously around the edge. Holmes' jaws were locked tight with
grim resolution. Quade was coming back! he told himself exultantly.
This time he must not go up alone! This time--!

But his half-formed resolutions were idle. He could not know what
frightful thing was bringing Quade down--what frightful experience was
in store for them all....


CHAPTER IV

_Spawn of the Cavern_

In a crescendo of noise that stunned their ears, the earth-borer came
down. Tongues of fire flared from the hole, speared to the ground and
were deflected upward, cradling the metal ball in a wave of flame.
Through this fiery curtain the machine slowly lowered to the floor,
where a shower of sparks spattered out, blinding the eyes of the
watchers with their brilliance. For a full minute the orange-glowing
sphere lay there, quivering from the vibration; then the exhausts died
and the wave of flame wavered and sank into nothingness. While their
ear-drums continued the thunder, the three stared at the borer, not
daring to approach, yet striving to solve the mystery of why it had
sunk despite the up-thrust of ten rocket tubes.

As their eyes again became accustomed to the familiar phosphorescent
illumination, pallid and cold after the fierce orange flame, they saw
why--and their eyes went wide with surprise and horror.

A strange mass was covering the top of the earth-borer--something that
looked like a heap of viscid, whitish jelly. It was sprawled
shapelessly over the round upper part of the metal sphere, a
half-transparent, loathsome stuff, several feet thick in places.

And Phil Holmes, striving to understand what it could be, saw an awful
thing. "It's moving!" he whispered, unconsciously drawing Sue closer.
"There's--there's life in it!"

Lazy quiverings were running through the mound of jelly, pulsings that
gave evidence of its low organism. They saw little ripples of even
beat run over it, and under them steady, sluggish convulsions that
told of life; that showed, perhaps, that the thing was hungry and
preparing to move its body in quest of food.

It was alive, unquestionably. The borer lay still, but this thing
moved internally, of itself. It was life in its lowest, most primate
form. The mass was mind, stomach, muscle and body all in one, stark
and raw before their startled eyes.

"Oh, God!" Phil whispered through the long pause. "It can't be
real!..."

"Protoplasm--a monster amoeba," David Guinness's curiously cracked
voice said. "Just as it exists on the surface, only microscopically.
Primate life...."

       *       *       *       *       *

The lock of the earth-borer clicked. Phil gasped. "Quade is coming
out!" he said. A little cry of horror came from Sue. And the metal
door opened.

James Quade stepped through, automatic in hand. He was fresh from the
light inside, and he could not see well. He was quite unconscious of
what was oozing down on him from above, of the flabby heap that was
carefully stretching down for him. He peered into the gloom, looking
for the three he had deserted, and all the time an arm from the mass
above crept nearer. Sue Guinness's nerves suddenly gave, and she
shrieked; but Quade's ears were deaf from the borer's thunder, and he
did not hear her.

It was when he lifted one foot back into the sphere--probably to get
out the searchlight--that he felt the thing's presence. He looked
up--and a strange sound came from him. For seconds he apparently could
not move, stark fear rooting him to the ground, the gun limp in his
hand.

Then a surge ran through the mound of flesh, and the arm, a pseudopod,
reached more rapidly for him.

It stung Quade into action. He leaped back, brought up his automatic,
and fired at the thing once; then three times more. He, and each one
of the others, saw four bullets thud into the heap of pallid matter
and heard them clang on the metal of the sphere beneath. They had gone
right through its flesh--but they showed no slightest effect!

Quade was evidently unwilling to leave the sphere. Jerking his arm up
he brought his trigger finger back again. A burst of three more shots
barked through the cavern, echoing and re-echoing. The man screamed an
inarticulate oath as he saw how useless his bullets were, and hurled
the empty gun at the monster--which was down on the floor now, and
bunching its sluggish body together.

The automatic went right into it. They could all see it there, in the
middle of the amorphous body, while the creature stopped, as if
determining whether or not it was food. Quade screwed his courage
together in the pause, and tried to dodge past to the door of the
sphere; but the monster was alert: another pseudopod sprang out from
its shapeless flesh, sending him back on his heels.

The feeler had all but touched Quade, and with the closeness of his
escape, the remnants of his courage gave. He yelled, and turned and
ran.

       *       *       *       *       *

He ran straight for the three who watched from the tunnel mouth, and
the mound of shapeless jelly came fast on his trail. It came in
surging rolls, like thick fluid oozing forward; it would have been
hard to measure its size, for each moment it changed. The only
impression the four humans had was that of a wave of half-transparent
matter that one instant was a sticky ball of viscid flesh and the next
a rapidly advancing crescent whose horns reached far out on each flank
to cut off retreat.

By instinct Phil jerked Sue around and yelled at the professor to run,
for the old man seemed to be frozen into an attitude of fearful
interest. Bullets would not stop the thing--could anything? Holmes
wondered. He could visualize all too easily the death they would meet
if that shapeless, naked protoplasmic mass overtook and flowed over
them....

But he wasted no time with such thoughts. They ran, all three, into
the dark tunnel.

Quade caught up with them quickly. Personal enmity was suspended
before this common peril. They could not run at full speed, for a
multitude of obstacles hindered them. Tortuous ridges of rock lay
directly across their path, formations that had been whipped in some
mad, eon-old convulsion and then, through the ages, remained frozen
into their present distortion; black pits gaped suddenly before them;
half-seen stalagmites, whose crystalline edges were razor-sharp, tore
through to their flesh. Haste was perilous where every moment they
might stumble into an unseen cleft and go pitching into awful depths
below. They were staking everything on the draft that blew steadily
in their faces; Phil told himself desperately that it must lead to
some opening--it must!

But what if the opening were a vertical, impassable tunnel? He would
not think of that....

Old David Guinness tired fast, and was already lagging in the rear
when Quade gasped hoarsely:

"Hurry! It's close behind!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Surging rapidly at a constant distance behind them, it came on. It was
as fast as they were, and evidently untiring. It was in its own
element; obstacles meant nothing to it. It oozed over the jagged
ridges that took the humans precious moments to scramble past, and the
speed of its weird progress seemed to increase as theirs faltered. It
was a heartless mass driven inexorably by primal instinct towards the
food that lay ahead. The dim phosphorescent illumination tinged its
flabby tissues a weird white.

The passage they stumbled through narrowed. Long irregular spears of
stalactites hung from the unseen ceiling; others, the drippings of
ages, pronged up from the floor, shredding their clothes as they
jarred into them. One moment they were clambering up-hill, slipping on
the damp rock; the next they were sliding down into unprobed darkness,
reckless of where they would land. They were aware only that the
water-odorous draft was still in their faces, and the hungry mound of
flesh behind....

"I can't last much longer!" old Guinness's winded voice gasped. "Best
leave me behind. I--I might delay it!"

For answer, Phil went back, grabbed him by the arm and dragged his
tired body forward. He was snatching a glance behind to see how close
the monster was, when Sue's frightened voice reached him from ahead.

"There's a wall here, Phil--and no way through!"

And then Holmes came to it. It barred the passage, and was apparently
unbroken. Yet the draft still came!

"Search for where the draft enters!" he yelled. "You take that side!"
And he started feeling over the clammy, uneven surface, searching
frantically for a cleft. It seemed to be hopeless. Quade stood staring
back into the gloom, his eyes looking for what he knew was surging
towards them. His face had gone sickly white, he was trembling as if
with fever, and he sucked in air with long, racking gasps.

"Here! I have it!" cried the girl suddenly at her end of the wall. The
other three ran over, and saw, just above her head, a narrow rift in
the rock, barely wide enough to squirm through. "Into it!" Phil
ordered tersely. He grasped her, raised her high, and she wormed
through. Quade scrambled to get in next, but Holmes shoved him aside
and boosted the old man through. Then he helped the other.

A second after he had swung himself up, a wave of whitish matter
rolled up below, hungry pseudopods reaching for the food it knew was
near. It began to trickle up the wall....

       *       *       *       *       *

The crack was narrow and jagged; utterly black. Phil could hear Quade
frantically worming himself ahead, and he wondered achingly if it
would lead anywhere. Then a faint, clear voice from ahead rang out:

"It's opening up!"

Sue's voice! Phil breathed more easily. The next moment Quade
scrambled through; dim light came; and they were in another vast,
ghostly-lit cavern.

The crack came out on its floor-level; Guinness was resting near, and
his daughter had her hands on a large boulder of rock. "Let's shove it
against the hole!" she suggested to Phil. "It might stop it!"

"Good, Sue, good!" he exclaimed, and at once all four of them strained
at the chunk, putting forth every bit of strength they had. The
boulder stirred, rolled over, and thudded neatly in front of the
crack, almost completely sealing it. There was only a cleft of five
inches on one side.

But their expression of relief died in their throats. A tiny trickle
of white appeared through the niche. The amorphous monster was
compressing itself to a single stream, thin enough to squeeze through
even that narrow space.

They could not block it. They had nothing to attack it with. There was
nothing to do but run.... And hope for a chance to double back....

As nearly as they could make out, this second cavern was as large as
the first. They could dimly see the fantastic shapes of hundreds of
stalactites hanging from the ceiling. Clumps of stalagmites made the
floor a maze which they threaded painfully. The strong steady draft
guided them like a radio beacon, leading them to their only faint hope
of escape and life. Guinness, very tired, staggered along
mechanically, a heavy weight on Phil's supporting arm; James Quade ran
here and there in frantic spurts of speed. Sue was silent, but the
hopelessness in her eyes tortured Phil like a wound. His shirt had
long since been ripped to shreds; his face, bruised in the first place
by the borer he had crashed in, now was scratched and bloody from
contact with rough stalagmites.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then, without warning, they suddenly found among the rough walls on
the far side of the cavern, the birthplace of the draft. It lay at the
edge of the floor--a dark hole, very wide. Black, sinister and clammy
from the draft that poured from it, it pierced vertically down into
the very bowels of the earth. It was impassable.

James Quade crumpled at the brink; "It's the end!" he moaned. "We
can't go farther! It's the end of the draft!"

The hole blocked their forward path completely. They could not go
ahead.... In seconds, it seemed, the slithering that told of the
monster's approach sounded from behind. Sue's eyes were already fixed
on the awful, surging mass when a voice off to one side yelled:

"Here! Quick!"

It was Phil Holmes. He had been scouting through the gloom, and had
found something.

The other three ran to him. "There's another draft going through
here," he explained rapidly, pointing to an angled crevice in the
rocky wall. "There's a good chance it goes to the cavern where the
sphere and the hole to the surface are. Anyway, we've got to take it.
I'd better go first, after this--and you, Quade, last. I trust you
less than the monster behind."

He turned and edged into the crack, and the others followed as he had
ordered. Quickly the passageway broadened, and they found the going
much easier than it had been before. For perhaps ten minutes they
scrambled along, with the draft always on their backs and the blessed,
though faint, fire of hope kindling again. In all that time they did
not see their pursuer once, and the hope that they had lost it brought
a measure of much needed optimism to drive their tired bodies onward.
They found but few time-wasting obstacles. If only the tunnel would
continue right into the original cavern! If only their path would stay
clear and unhindered!

But it did not. The sound of Phil's footsteps ahead stopped, and when
Sue and her father came up they saw why.

"A river!" Phil said.

       *       *       *       *       *

They were standing on a narrow ledge that overhung an underground
river. A fetid smell of age-old, lifeless water rose from it. Dimly,
at least fifty feet across, they could see the other side, shrouded in
vague shadows. The inky stream beneath did not seem to move at all,
but remained smooth and hard and thick-looking.

They could not go around it. The ledge was only a few feet wide, and
blocked at each side.

"Got to cross!" Phil said tersely.

Quade, sickly-faced, stared down. "There--there might be other things
in that water!" he gasped. "Monsters!"

"Sure," agreed Phil contemptuously. "You'd better stay here." He
turned to the others. "I'll see how deep it is," he said, and without
the faintest hesitation dove flatly in.

Oily ripples washed back, and they saw his head poke through,
sputtering. "Not deep," he said. "Chest-high. Come on."

He reached for Sue, helped her down, and did the same for her father.
