of Ledum palustre, a similar species found at the far North,
knows the tea-like fragrance given forth by the leaves of this
common shrub when crushed in a warm hand. But because the
homeopathists claim that like is cured by like, are we to assume
that these little bushes, both of which afford a soothing lotion,
also irritate and poison? It may be; for they are next of kin to
the azaleas, laurels, and rhododendrons, known to be injurious
since Xenophon's day. At the end of May, when the Labrador tea is
white with abundant flower clusters, one cannot but wonder why so
desirable an acquisition is never seen in men's gardens here
among its relatives. Over a hundred years ago the dense, compact
little shrub was taken to England to adorn sunny bog gardens on
fine estates. Doubtless the leaves have woolly mats underneath
for the reason given in reference to the Steeple-bush.


WILD ROSEMARY; MARCH HOLY ROSE; WATER ANDROMEDA; MOORWORT
  (Andromeda Polifolia)  Heath family

Flowers - White or pink-tinted, small, round, tubular, 5-toothed
at the tip; drooping from curved footstalks in few-flowered
terminal umbels. Calyx deeply 5-parted; 10 bearded stamens; style
like a column. Stem: A sparingly branched, dwarf shrub, 6 in. to
3 ft. tall. Leaves: Linear to lance-shape, evergreen, dark and
glossy above, with a prominent white bloom underneath, the
margins curled.
Preferred Habitat - Cool bogs, wet places.
Flowering Season - May-June.
Distribution - Pennsylvania and Michigan, far northward.

Only a delightfully imaginative optimist like Linnaeus could feel
the enthusiasm he expended on this dwarf shrub, with its little,
white, heath-like flowers, which most of us consider rather
insignificant, if the truth be told. But then the blossoms he
found in Lapland must have been much pinker than any seen in
American swamps, since they reminded him of "a fine female
complexion."

"This plant is always fixed on some little turfy hillock in the
midst of the swamps," he wrote, "just as Andromeda herself was
chained to a rock in the sea, which bathed her feet as the fresh
water does the roots of this plant.... As the distressed virgin
cast down her blushing face through excessive affliction, so does
this rosy-colored flower hang its head, growing paler and paler
till it withers away." Under the old go-as-you-please method of
applying scientific names, most of this shrub's relatives shared
with it the name of the fair maid whom Perseus rescued from the
dragons.

The beautiful, low-growing STAGGERBUSH (Pieris Mariana) has its
small, cylindric, five-parted, white or pink-tinted flowers
clustered at intervals along one side of the upright, nearly
leafless, smooth, dark-dotted branches of the preceding year.
When the glossy oval leaves, black dotted beneath, are freshly
put forth in early summer - for the shrub is not strictly an
evergreen, however late the old leaves may cling - it is said
that stupid sheep and calves, which find them irresistibly
attractive, stagger about from their poisonous effect just as
they do after feeding on this shrub's relative the Lambkill
(q.v.). In sandy soil from southern New England to Florida,
rarely far inland, one finds the staggerbush in bloom from May to
July. On the dry plains of Long Island, where it is common
indeed, it appears a not unworthy relative of the FETTERBUSH
(Pieris fioribunda), that exquisite little evergreen with
quantities of small white urns drooping along its twigs, which
nurserymen acquire from the mountains of our Southern States to
adorn garden shrubbery at home and abroad. Mr. William Robinson,
in his delightful book, "The English Flower Garden" (a book, by
the way, that Rudyard Kipling reads as the Puritan read his
Bible), counts this fetterbush among the "indispensables."

Much taller than the preceding dwarfs is the COMMON PRIVET
ANDROMEDA found in swamps and low ground from New England to the
Gulf and in the southwest (Xolisma ligustrina). Whoever has seen
the privet almost universally grown in hedges is familiar with
the general aspect of this much-branched shrub. Most farmers'
boys know the Andromeda's mock May-apple, a hollow, stringy
growth of insect origin, which they are not likely to confuse
with the pulpy, juicy apple found on the closely related azaleas
(q.v.). Abundant terminal spike-like or branched clusters of
white, globular, four or five parted flowers in close array,
attract quantities of bees from the end of May to early July,
notwithstanding each individual flower measures barely an eighth
of an inch across. We have seen the fine hair-triggers which
other members of this same family, the beautiful pink laurels
(q.v.), have set to be sprung by an incoming visitor. Now this
Andromeda, and similarly several of its immediate kin, have a
quite different, but equally effective, method of throwing pollen
on its friends who come to call. When one of the little banded
bees clings, as he must, to the tiny flower scarce half his size,
thrusting his tongue obliquely through the globe's narrow opening
to reach the nectar, suddenly a shower of pollen is inhospitably
thrown upon him from within. In probing between the ring of
anthers (that are pressed against the style by the S-shaped
curvature of the filaments so as to retain the pollen), he needs
must displace some of them and release the vitalizing dust
through the large terminal pores in the anther-sacs. Is he
discouraged by such rough treatment? Not at all. Off he flies to
another Andromeda blossom, and leaves some of the dust with which
he is powdered on the sticky stigma that impedes his entrance,
before precipitating a fresh shower as he sips another reward.
The straight column-like pistil, stigmatic on its tip only,
allows the flower's own pollen to slide harmlessly down its
sides. How exquisite are the most minute adjustments of floral
mechanism! Is it possible for one to remain an agnostic after the
evidences even the flowers show us of infinite wisdom and love?

Another denizen of swamps and low ground, next of kin to the
trailing arbutus, is the LEATHERLEAF, or DWARF CASSANDRA
(Chamaedaphne calyculata), a modest little shrub, its stiff,
slender branches plentifully set with thick oblong leaves that
grow gradually smaller the higher they go, and when young are
densely covered with minute scurfy scales. Sometimes before the
snow has melted in April, the leafy terminal shoots are hung with
multitudes of little waxy-white, cylindric, typical heath flowers
only about a quarter of an inch long, each nodding from a leaf
axil, and the whole forming one-sided racemes. But as the shrub
ranges from Newfoundland to Georgia, and westward to Illinois,
British Columbia, and Alaska, some people find it blooming even
in July.
Mythological names were evidently in high favor among the
botanists who labeled the genuses comprising the heath family:
Phyllodoce, the sea-nymph; Cassiope, mother of Andromeda;
Leucothoe; Andromeda herself; Pieris, a name sometimes applied to
the Muses from their supposed abode at Pieria, Thessaly; and
Cassandra, daughter of Priam, the prophetess who was shut up in a
mad-house because she prophesied the ruin of Troy - these names
are as familiar to the student of this group of shrubs today as
they were to the devout Greeks in the brave days of old.


CREEPING WINTERGREEN; CHECKERBERRY; PARTRIDGE-BERRY; MOUNTAIN
TEA; GROUND TEA; DEER, BOX, or SPICE BERRY
  (Gaultheria procumbens)  Heath family

Flowers - White, small, usually solitary, nodding from a leaf
axil. Corolla rounded bell-shape, 5-toothed; calyx 5-parted,
persistent; 10 included stamens, their anther-sacs opening by a
pore at the top. Stem: Creeping above or below ground, its
branches 2 to 6 in. high. Leaves: Mostly clustered at top of
branches; alternate, glossy, leathery, evergreen, much darker
above than underneath, oval to oblong, very finely saw-edged; the
entire plant aromatic. Fruit: Bright red, mealy, spicy,
berry-like; ripe in October.
Preferred Habitat - Cool woods, especially under evergreens.
Flowering Season - June-September.
Distribution - Newfoundland to Georgia, westward to Michigan and
Manitoba.

However truly the poets may make us feel the spirit of Nature in
their verse, can many be trusted when it comes to the letter of
natural science? "Where camels arch their cool, dark boughs o'er
beds of wintergreen," wrote Bryant; yet it is safe to say that
nine colonies of this hardy little plant out of every ten he saw
were under evergreen trees, not dogwoods. When the July sun melts
the fragrance out of the pines high overhead, and the dim, cool
forest aisles are more fragrant with commingled incense from a
hundred natural censers than any stone cathedral's, the
wintergreen's little waxy bells hang among the glossy leaves that
form their aromatic carpet. On such a day, in such a resting
place, how one thrills with the consciousness that it is good to
be alive!

Omnivorous children who are addicted to birch-chewing, prefer
these tender yellow-green leaves tinged with red, when newly put
forth in June - "Youngsters" rural New Englanders call them then.
In some sections a kind of tea is steeped from the leaves, which
also furnish the old-fashioned embrocation, wintergreen oil. Late
in the year the glossy bronze carpet of old leaves dotted over
with vivid red "berries" invites much trampling by hungry birds
and beasts, especially deer and bears, not to mention well-fed
humans. Coveys of Bob Whites and packs of grouse will plunge
beneath the snow for fare so delicious as this spicy, mealy fruit
that hangs on the plant till spring, of course for the benefit of
just such colonizing agents as they. Quite a different species,
belonging to another family, bears the true Partridgeberry,
albeit the wintergreen shares with it a number of popular names.
In a strict sense neither of these plants produces a berry; for
the fruit of the true partridge[berry] vine (Mitchella repens) is
a double drupe, or stone bearer, each half containing four hard,
seed-like nutlets; while the wintergreen's so called berry is
merely the calyx grown thick, fleshy, and gaily colored - only a
coating for the five-celled ovary that contains the minute seeds.
Little baskets of wintergreen berries bring none too high prices
in the fancy fruit and grocery shops when we calculate how many
charming plants such unnatural use of them sacrifices.

Closely allied to the wintergreen is the RED BEARBERRY,
KINNIKINIC, BEAR'S GRAPE, FOXBERRY or MEALBERRY, as it is
variously called (Arctostaphylos-uva-ursi = bearberry). Trailing
its spreading branches over sandy ground, rocky hillsides and
steeps until it sometimes forms luxuriant mats, it closely
resembles its cousin the arbutus in its manner of growth, and has
been mistaken for it by at least one poet. But its tiny, rounded,
urn-shaped flowers, which come in May and June, are white, not
salver form and pink; the entire plant is not rusty-hairy; the
dark little leathery evergreen leaves are spatulate, and,
moreover, it bears small but abundant clusters of round,
berry-like fruit, an attainment the arbutus still struggles for,
but cannot yet reach. Bumblebees are the flower's chief
benefactors. Game fowl, especially grouse, but many other birds
too, and various animals which are glad to add the clusters of
smooth red bearberries to their scanty winter menu, however
insipid and dry they may be, have distributed the seed from
Labrador across Arctic America to Alaska, southward to
Pennsylvania, Illinois, Nebraska, and California. How plants do
compel insects, birds, and beasts to work for them! The entire
plant is astringent, and has been used in medicine; also by
leather dressers.


BLACK or HIGH-BUSH HUCKLEBERRY; WHORTLEBERRY [now TALL
HUCKLEBERRY]
  (Gaylussacia resinosa)  Huckleberry family

Flowers - White and pink, pale or deep, small, cylindric,
bell-shaped. 5-parted, borne in 1-sided racemes from the sides of
the stiff, grayish branches. Stem: A shrub to 3 ft. high. Leaves:
Alternate, oval to oblong, firm, entire edged, green on both
sides, dotted underneath with resinous spots, especially when
young. Fruit: A round, black, bloomless, sweet, berry-like drupe,
containing 10 seed-like nutlets, in each of which is a solitary
seed. Ripe, July-August.
Preferred Habitat - Moist, sandy soil, thickets, open woods.
Flowering Season - May-June.
Distribution - Newfoundland to Georgia, west to Manitoba and
Kentucky.

This common huckleberry, oftener found in pies and muffins by the
average observer than in its native thickets, unfortunately
ripens in fly-time, when the squeamish boarder in the summer
hotel does well to carefully scrutinize each mouthful. For the
abundant fruit set on huckleberry bushes, as on so many others,
we are indebted chiefly to the lesser bees, which, receiving the
pollen jarred out from the terminal chinks in the anther-sacs on
their undersides as they cling, transfer it to the protruding
stigmas of the next blossom visited. After fertilization, when
the now useless corolla falls, the ten-celled ovary is protected
by the encircling calyx, that grows rapidly, swells, fills with
juice, and takes on color until it and the ovary together become
a so-called berry, whose seeds are dropped far and wide by birds
and beasts. "The name huckleberry, which is applied
indiscriminately to several species of Vaccinium and
Gaylussacia," says Professor L. H. Bailey, "is evidently a
corruption of whortleberry. Whortleberry is in turn a corruption
of myrtleberry. In the Middle Ages, the true myrtleberry was
largely used in cookery and medicine, but the European bilberry
or Vaccinium so closely resembled it that the name was
transferred to the latter plant, a circumstance commemorated by
Linnaeus in the giving of the name Vaccinium Myrtillus to the
bilberry. From the European whortleberry the name was transferred
to the similar American plants."

A common little bushy shrub, not a true blueberry, found in moist
woods, especially beside streams, from New England to the Gulf
States, and westward to Ohio, is the BLUE TANGLE, TANGLEBERRY, or
DANGLEBERRY [now TALL HUCKLEBERRY (G. frondosa). It bears a few
tiny greenish-pink flowers dangling from pedicels in loose
racemes, and corresponding clusters of most delicious, sweet,
dark-blue berries, covered with hoary bloom in midsummer. The
abundant resinous leaves on its slender gray branches are pale
and hoary beneath. The caterpillars of several species of sulphur
butterflies (Colias) feed on huckleberry leaves.

To a genus quite distinct from the huckleberries belong the true
blueberries, however interchangeably these names are misused.
Perhaps the first species to send its fruit to market in June and
July is the DWARF, SUGAR, or LOW-BUSH BLUEBERRY (Vaccinium
Pennsylvanicum), sometimes six inches tall, never more than
twenty inches. It prefers sandy or rocky soil from southern New
Jersey far northward, and west to Illinois. Shortly after the
small, bell-shaped, white or pink flowers, that grow in racemes
on the ends or sides of the angular, green, warty branches of
nearly all blueberry bushes, have been fertilized by bees, this
species forms an especially sweet berry with a bloom on its blue
surface. The alternate oblong leaves, smooth and green on both
sides, are very finely and sharply saw-edged.

Another, and perhaps the commonest, as it is the finest, species,
whose immature fruit is still green or red when the dwarf's is
ripe, is the HIGH-BUSH, TALL, or SWAMP BLUEBERRY (V. corymbosum),
found in low wet ground from Virginia westward to the
Mississippi, and very far north. Only the bees and their kind
concern themselves with the little cylindric, five-parted,
nectar-bearing flowers. These appear with the oblong, entire
leaves, paler below than above. But thousands of fruit sellers
and housekeepers depend on the sweet blueberries (with a pleasant
acid flavor) as a market staple. In July and August, even in
early September, the berries arrive in the cities. One picker in
New Jersey claims to have filled an entire crate with the fruit
of a single bush.

The DEERBERRY, BUCKBERRY, or SQUAW HUCKLEBERRY (V. stainineum),
common in dry woods and thickets from Maine and Minnesota to the
Gulf States, puts forth quantities of small greenish-white,
yellow, or purplish-green, open bell-shaped, five-cleft flowers,
nodding from hair-like pedicels in graceful, leafy-bracted
racemes. Both the tips of the stamens and the style protrude like
a fringe. No creature, unless hard pressed by hunger, could
relish the greenish or yellowish berries. This is a low-growing,
spreading shrub, with firm oval or oblong tapering leaves, dull
above, and pale, sometimes even hoary, underneath.


CREEPING SNOWBERRY
  (Chiogenes hispidula)  Huckleberry family

Flowers - Very small, white, few, solitary, nodding on short,
curved peduncles from the leaf axils. Calyx 2-bracted, 4-cleft;
corolla a short 4-cleft bell; 8 short stamens, each anther sac
opening by a slit to the middle; 1 pistil, the ovary 4-celled.
Stem: Creeping along the ground, the slender, leafy, hairy
branches 3 to 12 in. long. Leaves: Evergreen, alternate,
2-ranked, oval, very small, dark and glossy above, coated with
stiff, rusty hairs underneath, the edges curled. Fruit: A
snow-white, round or oval, mealy, aromatic berry; ripe
August-September.
Preferred Habitat - Cool bogs; low, moist, mossy woods.
Flowering Season - May-June.
Distribution - North Carolina and Michigan northward to the
British Possessions.

Allied on the one hand to the cranberry, so often found with it
in the cool northern peat bogs, and on the other to the delicious
blueberries, this "snow-born" berry, which appears on no dining
table, nevertheless furnishes many a good meal to hungry birds
and fagged pedestrians. Both the pretty foliage and the fruit
have the refreshing flavor of sweet birch.


PYXIE; FLOWERING MOSS; PINE-BARREN BEAUTY
  (Pyxidanthera barbulata)  Diapensia family

Flowers - Abundant, white, or sometimes pink, about 1/4 in.
across, 5-parted, solitary, seated at tips of branches. Stem:
Prostrate, creeping, much branched, the main branches often 1 ft.
long, very leafy, growing in mat-like patches. Leaves: Moss-like,
very narrow, pointed, seated on stem, and overlapping like
scales, on upper part of branches.
Preferred Habitat - Dry sandy soil; pine barrens.
Flowering Season - March-May.
Distribution - New Jersey, south to North Carolina.

Curiously enough, this creeping, tufted, mat-like little plant is
botanically known as a shrub, yet it is lower than many mosses,
and would seem to the untrained eye to be certainly of their kin.
In earliest spring, when Lenten penitents, jaded with the
winter's frivolities in the large cities, seek the salubrious
pine lands of southern New Jersey and beyond, they are amazed and
delighted to find the abundant little evergreen mounds of pyxie
already starred with blossoms. The dense mossy cushions,
plentifully sprinkled with pink buds and white flowers, are so
beautiful, one cannot resist taking a few tuffets home to
naturalize in the rock garden. Planted in a mixture of clear sand
and leaf-mould, with exposure to the morning sun, pyxie will
smile up at us from under our very windows, spring after spring,
with increased charms; whereas the arbutus, that untamable
wildling, carried home from the pinewoods at the same time, soon
sulks itself to death.


STARFLOWER; CHICKWEED-WINTERGREEN; STAR ANEMONE
  (Trientalis Americana)  Primrose family

Flowers - White, solitary, or a few rising on slender, wiry
foot-stalks above a whorl of leaves. Calyx of 5 to 9 (usually 7)
narrow sepals. Corolla wheel-shaped, 1/2 in. across or less,
deeply cut into (usually) 7 tapering, spreading, petal-like
segments. Stem: A long horizontal rootstock, sending up smooth
stem-like branches 3 to 9 in. high, usually with a scale or two
below. (Trientalis = one-third of a foot, the usual height of a
plant.) Leaves: 5 to 10, in a whorl at summit; thin, tapering at
both ends, of unequal size, 1 1/2 to 4 in. long.
Preferred Habitat - Moist shade of woods and thickets.
Flowering Season - May-June.
Distribution - From Virginia and Illinois far north.


Is any other blossom poised quite so airily above its whorl of
leaves as the delicate, frosty-white little starflower? It is
none of the anemone kin, of course, in spite of one of its
misleading folk names; but only the wind-flower has a similar
lightness and grace. No nectar rewards the small bee and fly
visitors; they get pollen only. Those coming from older blossoms
to a newly opened one leave some of the vitalizing dust clinging
to them on the moist and sticky stigma, which will wither to
prevent self-fertilization before the flower's own curved anthers
mature and shed their grains. Sometimes, when the blossoms do not
run on schedule time, or the insects are not flying in stormy
weather, this well laid plan may gang a-gley. An occasional lapse
matters little; it is perpetual self-fertilization that Nature
abhors.


INDIAN HEMP: AMY-ROOT
  (Apocynum cannabinum)  Dogbane family

Flowers - Greenish white, about 1/4 in. across, on short
pedicels, in dense clusters at ends of branches and from the
axils. Calyx of 5 segments; corolla nearly erect, bell-shaped,
5-lobed, with 5 small triangular appendages alternating with the
stamens within its tube. Stem: 1 to 4 ft. high, branching,
smooth, often dull reddish, from a deep, vertical root. Leaves:
Opposite, entire, 2 to 6 in. long, mostly oblong, abruptly
pointed, variable. Fruit: A pair of slender pods, the numerous
seeds tipped with tufts of hairs.
Preferred Habitat - Gravelly soil, banks of streams, low fields.
Flowering Season - June-August.
Distribution - Almost throughout the United States and British
Possessions.

Instead of setting a trap to catch flies and hold them by the
tongue in a vise-like grip until death alone releases them, as
its heartless sister the spreading dogbane does (q.v.), this
awkward, rank herb lifts clusters of smaller, less conspicuous,
but innocent, flowers, with nectar secreted in rather shallow
receptacles, that even short-tongued insects may feast without
harm. Honey and mining bees, among others; wasps and flies in
variety, and great numbers of the spangled fritillary (Argynnis
cybele) and the banded hair-streak (Thecla calanus) among the
butterfly tribe; destructive bugs and beetles attracted by the
white color, a faint odor, and liberal entertainment, may be seen
about the clusters. Many visitors are useless pilferers, no
doubt; but certainly the bees which depart with pollen masses
cemented to their lips or tongues, to leave them in the stigmatic
cavities of the next blossoms their heads enter, pay a fair price
for all they get.

>From the fact that Indians used to substitute this very common
plant's tough fiber for hemp in making their fishnets, mats,
baskets, and clothing, came its popular name; and from their use
of the juices to poison mangy old dogs about their camps, its
scientific one.

WHORLED or GREEN-FLOWERED MILKWEED
  (Asclepias verticillata)  Milkweed family

Flowers - White or greenish, on short pedicels, in several small
terminal clusters. Calyx inferior; corolla deeply 5-parted, the
oblong segments turned back; a 5-parted, erect crown of hooded
nectaries between them and the stamens, each shorter than the
incurved horn within. Stem: 1 to 2 1/2 ft. tall, simple or
sparingly branched, hairy, leafy to summit, containing milky
juice. Leaves: In upright groups, very narrow, almost
thread-like, from 3 to 7 in each whorl. Fruit: 2 smooth, narrow,
spindle-shaped, upright pods, the seeds attached to silky fluff;
1 pod usually abortive.
Preferred Habitat - Dry fields, hills, uplands.
Flowering Season - July-September.
Distribution - Maine and far westward, south to Florida and
Mexico.

In describing the common milkweed (q.v.), so many statements were
made that apply quite as truly to this far daintier and more
ethereal species, the reader is referred back to the pink and
magenta section. Compared with some of its rank-growing, heavy
relatives, how exquisite is this little denizen of the uplands,
with its whorls of needle-like leaves set at intervals along a
slender swaying stem! The entire plant, with its delicate foliage
and greenish-white umbels of flowers, rather suggests a member of
the carrot tribe; and much the same class of small-sized,
short-tongued visitors come to seek its accessible nectar as we
find about the parsnips, for example. When little bees alight -
and these are the truest benefactors, however frequently larger
bees, wasps, flies, and even the almost useless butterflies come
around - their feet slip about within the low crown to find a
secure lodging. As they rise to fly away after sucking, the
pollen masses which have attached themselves to the hairs on the
lower part of their legs are drawn out, to be transferred to
other blossoms, perhaps today, perhaps not for a fortnight.
Annoying as they may be, it is very rarely, indeed, that an
insect can rid itself of the pollen masses carried from either
orchids or milkweeds, except by the method Nature intended; and
it is not until the long-suffering bee is outrageously loaded
that he attains his greatest usefulness to milkweed blossoms. "Of
ninety-two specimens bearing corpuscula of Asclepias
verticillata," says Professor Robertson, "eighty-eight have them
on hairs alone, and four on the hairs and claws." And again: "As
far as the mere application of pollen to an insect is concerned,
a flower with loose pollen has the advantage. But the advantage
is on the side of Asclepias after the insect is loaded with it.
It is only a general rule that insects keep to flowers of a
particular species on their honey and pollen gathering
expeditions. If a bee dusted with loose pollen visits flowers of
another species, it will not long retain pollen in sufficient
quantity to effectually fertilize flowers of the original
species. On the other hand, if an insect returns at any time
during the day, or even after a few days, to the species of
Asclepias from which it got a load of pollinia, it may bring with
it all or most of the pollinia which it has carried from the
first plants visited. The firmness with which the pollinia keep
their hold on the insect is one of the best adaptations for
cross-fertilization."

Ants, the worst pilferers of nectar extant, find the hairy stem
of the whorled milkweed, as well as its sticky juice, most
discouraging, if not fatal, obstacles to climbing. How daintily
the goldfinch picks at the milkweed pods and sets adrift the
seeds attached to silky aeronautic fluff!

WILD POTATO-VINE; MAN-OF-THE-EARTH; MECHA-MECK
  (Ipomoea pandurata)  Morning-glory family

Flowers - Funnel form, wide-spread, 2 to 3 in. long, pure white
or pinkish purple inside the throat; the peduncles 1 to 5
flowered. Stem: Trailing over the ground or weakly twining, 2 to
12 ft. long. Leaves: Heart, fiddle, or halbert shaped (rarely
3-lobed), on slender petioles. Root: Enormous, fleshy.
Preferred Habitat - Dry soil, sandy or gravelly fields or hills.
Flowering Season - May-September.
Distribution - Ontario, Michigan, and Texas, east to the Atlantic
Ocean.

No one need be told that this flaring, trumpet-shaped flower is
next of kin to the morning-glory that clambers over the trellises
of countless kitchen porches, and escapes back to Nature's garden
whenever it can. When the ancestors of these blossoms welded
their five petals into a solid deep bell, which still shows on
its edges the trace of five once separate parts, they did much to
protect their precious contents from rain; but some additional
protection was surely needed against the little interlopers not
adapted to fertilize the flower, which could so easily crawl down
its tube. Doubtless the hairs on the base of the filaments,
between which certain bumblebees and other long-tongued
benefactors can easily penetrate to suck the nectar secreted in a
fleshy disk below, act as a stockade to little would-be
pilferers. The color in the throat serves as a pathfinder to the
deep-hidden sweets. How pleasant the way is made for such insects
as a flower must needs encourage! For these the perennial wild
potato vine keeps open house far later in the day than its annual
relatives. Professor Robertson says it is dependent mainly upon
two bees, Entechnia taurea and Xenoglossa ipomoeae, the latter
its namesake.

One has to dig deep to find the huge, fleshy, potato-like root
from which the vine derived its name of man-of-the-earth. Such a
storehouse of juices is surely necessary in the dry soil where
the wild potato lives.

Happily, the COMMON MORNING-GLORY (I. purpurea)  - the
Convolvulus major of seedsmen's catalogues - has so commonly
escaped from cultivation in the eastern half of the United States
and Canada as now to deserve counting among our wild flowers,
albeit South America is its true home. Surely no description of
this commonest of all garden climbers is needed; everyone has an
opportunity to watch how the bees cross-fertilize it.

The vine has a special interest because of Darwin's illuminating
experiments upon it when he planted six self-fertilized seeds and
six seeds fertilized with the pollen brought from flowers on a
different vine, on opposite sides of the same pot. Vines produced
by the former reached an average height of five feet four inches,
whereas the cross-pollenized seed sent its stems up two feet
higher, and produced very many more flowers. If so marked a
benefit from imported pollen may be observed in a single
generation, is it any wonder that ambitious plants employ every
sort of ingenious device to compel insects to bring them pollen
from distant flowers of the same species? How punctually the
MOON-FLOWER (I. grandiflora), next of kin to the morning-glory,
opens its immense, pure white, sweet-scented flowers at night to
attract night-flying moths, because their long tongues, which
only can drain the nectar, may not be withdrawn until they are
dusted with vitalizing powder for export to some waiting sister.


GRONOVIUS' or COMMON DODDER; STRANGLE-WEED; LOVE VINE; ANGEL'S
HAIR
  (Cuscuta gronovii)  Dodder family

Flowers - Dull white, minute, numerous, in dense clusters. Calyx
inferior, greenish white, 5-parted; corolla bell-shaped, the 5
lobes spreading, 5 fringed scales within; 5 stamens, each
inserted on corolla throat above a scale; 2 slender styles. Stem:
Bright orange yellow, thread-like, twining high, leafless.
Preferred Habitat - Moist soil, meadows, ditches, beside streams.
Flowering Season - July-September.
Distribution - Nova Scotia and Manitoba, south to the Gulf
States.

Like tangled yellow yarn wound spirally about the herbage and
shrubbery in moist thickets, the dodder grows, its beautiful
bright threads plentifully studded with small flowers tightly
bunched. Try to loosen its hold on the support it is climbing up,
and the secret of its guilt is out at once; for no honest vine is
this, but a parasite, a degenerate of the lowest type, with
numerous sharp suckers (haustoria) penetrating the bark of its
victim, and spreading in the softer tissues beneath to steal all
their nourishment. So firmly are these suckers attached, that the
golden thread-like stem will break before they can be torn from
their hold.

Not a leaf now remains on the vine to tell of virtue in its
remote ancestors; the absence of green matter (chlorophyll)
testifies to dishonest methods of gaining a living (see Indian
pipe); not even a root is left after the seedling is old enough
to twine about its hard-working, respectable neighbors. Starting
out in life with apparently the best intentions, suddenly the
tender young twiner develops an appetite for strong drink and
murder combined, such as would terrify any budding criminal in
Five Points or Seven Dials! No sooner has it laid hold of its
victim and tapped it, than the now useless root and lower portion
wither away, leaving the dodder in mid-air, without any
connection with the soil below, but abundantly nourished with
juices already stored up, and even assimilated, at its host's
expense. By rapidly lengthening the cells on the outer side of
its stem more than on the inner side, the former becomes convex,
the latter concave; that is to say, a section of spiral is formed
by the new shoot, which, twining upward, devitalizes its
benefactor as it goes. Abundant, globular seed vessels, which
develop rapidly, while the blossoming continues unabated, soon
sink into the soft soil to begin their piratical careers close
beside the criminals which bore them; or better still, from their
point of view, float downstream to found new colonies afar. When
the beautiful jewelweed - a conspicuous sufferer - is hung about
with dodder, one must be grateful for at least such symphony of
yellows.


VIRGINIA WATERLEAF
  (Hydrophyllum Virginicum)  Waterleaf family

Flowers - White or purplish tinged, in a single or forking
cluster on a long peduncle. Calyx deeply 5-parted, the spreading
segments very narrow, bristly hairy. Corolla erect, bell-shaped,
deeply 5-lobed; 5 protruding stamens, with soft hairs about their
middle; 2 styles united to almost the summit. Stem: Slender,
rather weak, to 3 ft. long, leafy, sparingly branched, from a
scaly rootstock. Leaves: Alternate, lower ones on long petioles,
6 to 10 in. long, pinnately divided into 5 to 7 oblong, sharply
toothed, acute leaflets or segments; upper leaves similar, but
smaller, and with fewer divisions.
Preferred Habitat - Rich, moist woods.
Flowering season - May-August.
Distribution - Quebec to South Carolina, west to Kansas and
Washington.

So very many flowers especially adapted to the bumblebee are in
bloom when the cymes of the waterleaf uncoil, like the borages,
from their immature roll, that some special inducement to attract
this benefactor were surely needed. In high altitudes the
clusters became deeper hued; but much as the more specialized
bees love color, food appeals to them far more. Accordingly the
five lobes of each little flower stand erect to increase the
difficulty a short-tongued insect would have to drain its
precious stores; the stamens are provided with hairs for the same
reason; and even the calyx is bristly, to discourage crawling
ants, the worst pilferers out. By these precautions against
theft, plenty of nectar remains for the large bees. To prevent
