difference. Except for Nargyll, none'll come near."

"You never heard of him again?"

"No! Dammit, no! Say, didn't they have any dumber strappers around
than you? I told you once--I tell you again--I never saw hide nor hair
of him after that."

"Aw-right, aw-right!" Olear regarded Morones placidly. "And so you
took the job of factor and radioed for an assistant, and when the
assistant came he disappeared."

Morones grunted, "He went out to get acquainted with the country and
didn't come back."

       *       *       *       *       *

Olear masked his close scrutiny of the factor under his idle and
expressionless gaze. He was not ready to jump to the conclusion that
Morones' uneasiness sprang from a sense of guilt. Guilty or not, he
had a right to feel uneasy. The man would be dense indeed if he did
not realize he was in line for suspicion, and he did not look dense.
Indeed, he was obviously a shrewd character.

"Let me see your 'lucene."

Morones rose. Despite his bulk he stepped nimbly. He had the
nimbleness of a Saturnian bear, which is great, as some of the earlier
explorers learned to their dismay.

"That's the first sensible question you've asked," Morones snorted.
"Take a look at our 'lucene. Ha! Have a good look!"

He led the way across the compound, waved his hand before the door of
a strongly built shed in a swift, definite combination, and the door
opened, revealing the interior. He waved invitingly.

"You go first," Olear said.

With a sneer Morones stepped in. "You're safe, boy, you're safe."

Olear looked at the small pile on the floor in astonishment. Instead
of the beautiful, semi-transparent chips of translucene, the dried sap
of a Mercurian tree which is invaluable to the world as the source of
an unfailing cancer cure, there were only a few dirty, dried up
shavings, hardly worth shipping back to Earth for refining. The full
significance of the affair began to dawn on the officer. The
translucene trees grew only in this favored section of Mercury, and
the Earth company had a monopoly of the entire supply. Justly, for
only on Earth was cancer known, and it was on the increase. That
small, almost useless pile on the floor connoted a terrible drug
famine for the human race.

       *       *       *       *       *

Morones' smile might have been a grin of satisfaction, at Olear's
question:

"Is that all you've bought since the last freighter was here?"'

"It is," he replied. "The last load went off six months ago, and this
here shed should be full to the eaves. There'll be hell to pay."

"It may not be tactful," Olear remarked, "but if you've got your
takings cached away somewhere to hold up the Earth for a big ransom,
you'd better come across right now. You can't get by with it, fellow.
You should have close to six million dollars' worth of it, and you
can't get away. You just can't."

Morones controlled his anger with an effort.

"Like any dumb strapper, you've got your mind made up, ain't you?
Well, go ahead. Get something on me. Here I was almost set to give you
a lead that might get you somewhere. And you come shooting
off--trying to make out I stole the 'lucene and killed those two
fellows, eh? Go ahead! Get something on me! But not on Company
grounds. You're leaving now!"

With that he made a lunge at the officer, quite beside himself with
rage. Olear could have burnt him down, but he was far too experienced
for such an amateurish trick. Instead he ducked to evade Morones'
blow. But the big man was as agile as a panther. In mid-air, so it
seemed, he changed his direction of attack. The big fist swept
downward, striking Olear's head a glancing blow.

But the men of the Force have always been fighters, whatever their
shortcomings as diplomats. Olear countered with a strong right to the
body, thudding solidly, for Morones' softness did not go far below the
surface. The factor whirled instantly, but not quite fast enough to
bar the door. Olear was out and inside his ship in a few seconds,
slamming the hatch.

"Tact!" he grinned to himself, inserting the activator key. "Tact is
what a fella needs." The little space flier shot aloft, until the tiny
figure of the factor stopped shaking its fist and entered the
residence. The post had a flier of its own, of course, but Morones was
too wise to use it in pursuit.

Olear considered what was best to do. Of course he could have placed
Morones under arrest; could still do it; but that would not solve the
mystery of the two deaths and the missing 'lucene. If the choleric
factor was really guilty of the crimes, it would be better to let him
go his way in the hope that he would betray himself. Olear regretted
that he had not kept his tongue under closer curb. But there was no
use regretting. Perhaps, after all, he ought to turn back to pump
Morones for some helpful information.

       *       *       *       *       *

His mind made up, he descended again until he was hovering a few feet
from the ground.

"Morones!" he called. "Morones!" He held the hatch open.

Morones came to the door of the residence. He had a tube in his hand,
a long-range weapon.

"Morones," Olear declared pompously. "I place you under arrest!"

The effect was instantaneous. Morones lifted the tube, and a
glimmering, iridescent beam sprang out. The ship was up and away in a
second, lurching and shivering uncomfortably every time the beam
struck it in its upward flight. A good few seconds continued
impingement....

But a miss is as good as a light-year. Miles high, Olear looked into
his telens. Morones had laid aside his tube and was working with an
instrument like a twin transit. Plotting the ship's course, naturally.
Olear set his course for the Earth, and kept on it for a good
twenty-four hours. Morones, if he was still watching him, would think
he'd gone back for reinforcements. Such an assumption would be
incredible now, but that was before the I. F. P. had achieved its
present tremendous reputation.

Beyond observation range, Olear curved back toward Mercury again, and
was almost inside its atmosphere when he made a discovery that caused
him to lose for a moment his natural indifference, and to clamp his
jaws in anger. The current oxygen tank became empty, and when he
removed it from the rack and put in a new one he found someone had let
out all of this essential gas. The valve of every one of the spare
tanks had been opened. Had Olear actually continued on his way to
Earth he would have perished miserably of suffocation long before he
could have returned to the Mercurian atmosphere. The officer whistled
tunelessly through his teeth as he considered this fact.

The visibility was by this time normal; that is, so poor it would have
been possible to land very close to the trading station. Olear was
taking no chances, however, and came down a good three Earth miles
away. The egg-shaped hull sank through the glossy, brilliant treetops,
through twisted vines, and was buried in the dank gloom of the jungle.
Here it might remain hidden for a hundred years.

       *       *       *       *       *

The twilight of the jungle was almost darkness. Landmarks were not.
But Olear made a few small, inconspicuous marks on trees with his
knife until he came to an outcropping rock. He had noticed the
scarlike white of it slashing through the jungle from the air, and
used it as a guide to direct his stealthy return to the trading post.
His belt chronometer told him it would be about time for Morones to
get up from his "night's" sleep. A little discreet observation might
tell much.

Long before he reached the compound, Olear heard the rushing of the
great Blue River in its headlong plunge to the corrosive heat of the
desert. And then, through the mists, he glimpsed the white metal walls
of the Company sheds.

He climbed a tree and for a long time watched patiently, lying prone on
a limb. Blood-sucking insects tortured him, and flat tree-lice,
resembling discs with legs, crawled over him inquisitively. Olear
tolerated them with stoic indifference until at last his patience was
rewarded. Morones was coming out of the compound. He was alone and
obviously did not suspect that he was being watched, for he stepped
out briskly. Once in the jungle he walked even faster, watching out
warily for the panther-like carnivora that were the most dangerous to
man on Mercury.

Olear shinned to the ground and followed cautiously. Morones had his
ray-tube with him, as any traveler in these jungles did. Olear could
and did draw fast, but a dead trader would be valueless to him in his
investigation, so he stalked him with every faculty strained to
maintain complete silence. Often, in occasional clearings where the
brown darkness grew less, he had to grovel on the slimy ground,
picking up large bacteria that could be seen with the naked eye, and
which left tiny, festering red marks on the skin. Mercury has no
snakes.

The trader seemed to be heading for higher ground, for the path led
ever upward, though not far from the tossing waters of the river. And
then, suddenly, he disappeared.

Olear did not immediately hurry after him. A canny fugitive, catching
sight of his pursuer, might suddenly drop to the ground and squirm to
the side of the trail, there to wait and catch his pursuer as he
passed. So Olear sidled into the all but impenetrable underbrush and
slowly, with infinite caution, wormed his way along.

       *       *       *       *       *

Presently he came to the little rise of ground where Morones had
disappeared, but a painstaking search did not reveal the factor. There
were, however, a number of other trails that joined the very faint
trail he had been following, and now there was a well-defined track
which continued to lead upward. With a grimace of disgust Olear again
plunged into the odorous underbrush and traveled parallel to the
trail. It was well he did so, for several Mercurians passed swiftly,
intent, so it seemed, in answering a shrill call that at times came
faintly to the ear. They carried slender spears.

Several more Mercurians passed. The growth was thinning out, and Olear
did not dare to proceed further. However, from his hiding place he
could discern a number of irregular cave openings, apparently leading
downward. They were apparently the entrances to one of the native
cavern colonies, or possibly of a meeting place. No Earthman had ever
entered one, but it was thought they had underground openings into the
river.

As the cave openings were obviously natural, Olear conjectured that
there might be others that were not used. After an anxious search he
found one, narrow and irregular, well hidden under the broad, glossy
leaves of some uncatalogued vegetation. As it showed no evidence of
use, Olear unhesitatingly slid down into it. It was very narrow and
irregular, so that often he was barely able to squeeze through. The
roots of trees choked the passage for a dozen feet or so, requiring
the vigorous use of a knife. Bathed in sweat, his uniform a filthy
mass of rags, Olear at last saw light.

The passage ended abruptly near the roof of a large natural cavern.
Lights glistened on stalactites which cut off Olear's larger view, and
voices came from below. By craning his neck the officer could look
between the pendent icicles of rock and see a fire burning on a huge
oblong block of stone. Figures were sitting on the floor around this
block--hundreds of Mercurians. The leaping flames made their white and
green faces and bodies look frog-like and less human than usual.

       *       *       *       *       *

But the figure that dominated the whole assemblage, both by its own
hugeness and the magnetic power that flowed from it, was not of
Mercury but of Pluto. For the benefit of those who have never seen a
stuffed Plutonian in our museums--and they are very rare--let me refer
you to the pious books still to be found in ancient library
collections. The ancients personified their fears and hates in a being
they called the Devil. The resemblance between the Devil of their
imagination and a Plutonian is really astounding. Horns, hoofs,
tail--almost to the smallest detail, the resemblance is there.

Philosophers have written books on the "coincidence" in appearance of
the ancient Devil and the modern decadent Plutonians. The Plutonians
were once numerous and far advanced in science, and no doubt they
called on the Earth many times, in prehistoric days, and the so-called
Devil was a true picture of those vicious invaders, who are somewhat
less human than usually portrayed. What was once classed as
superstition was therefore a true racial memory. Long before our
ancestors came out of their caves to build houses, the Plutonians had
mastered interplanetary travel--only to forget the secret until human
ingenuity should reveal it once more.

The modern Plutonian in that dank cave was over ten feet tall, and it
is easy to see why he dominated the assemblage. His black visage was
set in an evil smile; his ebony body glistened in the firelight. He
held a three-pronged spear in one hand, and sat on a pile of rocks, a
sort of rough throne, so that he towered magnificently above all
others.

He spoke the Mercurian language, although the liquid intonations came
harshly from his sneering lips.

"Are ye assembled, frogfolk, that ye may hear the decision of your
Thinking Ones?" he asked.

       *       *       *       *       *

A respectful peeping chorus signified assent. But in that there was a
hint of unrest; even of fear.

"Speak, ye Thinking One, your commands!"

"Hear me first!" An old Mercurian, unusually tall, faded and dry
looking, his thick hide wrinkled like crushed leather, rose slowly to
his feet and stepped before the oblong stone. His back was to the
Plutonian, his face to the crescent of chiefs.

"The Old Wise One!" A twittering murmur went around the assemblage.
"Hear the Old Wise One!"

"My people, I like this not!" began the ancient. "The Lords of the
Green Star[1] have dealt with us fairly. Each phase[2] they have
brought us the things we wanted"--he touched his spear and a few gaudy
ornaments on his otherwise naked body--"in exchange for the worthless
white sap of our trees. If we longer offend the Lords of the Green
Star--"

[Footnote 1: In their various languages, almost all solar races call
Earth "The Green Star." Although conditions on Mercury are
unfavorable, Earth can be seen from the dark star, on mountain tops,
during occasional dispersals of the cloud masses.]

[Footnote 2: The Mercurians had no conception of time before the
Earthmen came. A "phase" is the time between calls of the freight
ships, and is therefore variable; but in those days it was about six
or seven months.]

A raucous laugh interrupted the Mercurian's feeble voice, and it
echoed eerily from the walls of the chamber.

"Valueless ye call the white sap?" sneered the Plutonian. "Hear me.
That sap you call valueless is dearer than life itself to the Lords of
the Green Star. For they are afflicted in great numbers with a
stinking death they call cancer. It destroys their vitals, and
nothing--nothing in this broad universe can help them save this white
sap ye give them. In your hands ye have the power to bring the proud
Lords of the Green Star to their knees. They would fill this chamber
many times with their most priceless treasures for the sap ye give
them so freely. Withhold the sap, and your Thinking Ones may go to the
Green Star itself to rule over its Lords. They are desperate. Their
emissaries may even now be on the way to beg your pleasure. Speak,
Thinking Ones! Would ye not rule the Green Star?"

       *       *       *       *       *

But the chiefs failed to become enthused. One of them rose and
addressed the Plutonian:

"O Lord of the Outer Orbit! For near one full phase have ye dwelt
among us. And well should ye know we have no desire for conquest. We
fear to go to the Green Star to rule."

