electric incandescences.

The crater was threaded with the lightnings of the Metal People; was
broidered with them; was a Pit woven with vast and changing patterns of
electric flame.

What was it that Drake had said? That if but we could have known we
could have destroyed these--Things--Destroyed--Them? Things that could
thrust their will and power up through ninety million miles of space and
suck from the sun the honey of power! Drain it and hive it within these
great mountains of the cones!

Destroy Things that could feed their own life into a machine to draw
back from the sun a greater life--Things that could forge of their
strength a spear which, piercing the side of the sun, sent gushing back
upon them a tenfold, nay, a thousandfold strength!

Destroy this City that was one vast and living dynamo feeding upon the
magnetic life of earth and sun!

The clamor had grown stupendous, destroying--like armored Gods roaring
at sword play in a hundred Valhallas; like the war drums of battling
universe; like the smitings of warring suns.

And all the City was throbbing, beating with a gigantic pulse of
life--was fed and drunken with life. I felt that pulsing become my own;
I echoed to it; throbbed in unison. I saw Drake outlined in flame; that
around me a radiant nimbus was growing.

I thought I saw Norhala floating, clothed in shouting, flailing fires. I
strove to call out to her. By me slipped the body of Drake; lay flaming
at my feet upon the narrow ledge.

There was a roaring within my head--louder, far louder, than that which
beat against my ears. Something was drawing me forth; drawing me out of
my body into unimaginable depths of blackness. Something was hurling me
out into those cold depths of space that alone could darken the fires
that encircled me--the fires of which I was becoming a part.

I felt myself leap outward--outward and outward--into--oblivion.




CHAPTER XXI. PHANTASMAGORIA METALLIQUE.

Wearily I opened my eyes. Stiffly, painfully, I stirred. High above
me was the tremendous circle of sky, ringed with the hosts of feeding
shields. But the shields were now wanly gleaming and the sky was the sky
of night.

Night? How long had I lain here? And where was Drake? I struggled to
rise.

"Steady, old man," his voice came from beside me. "Steady--and quiet.
How are you feeling?"

"Badly battered," I groaned. "What happened?"

"We weren't used to the show," he said. "We got all fed up at the orgy.
Too much magnetism--we had a sudden and violent attack of electrical
indigestion. Sh-h--look ahead of you."

Gingerly I turned. I had been lying, I now saw, head toward and prone
at the base of one of the crater's walls. As my gaze swept away I noted
with a curious relief that the tiny eye-points were no longer sparkling
with their enigmatic life, that they were dulled and dim once more.

Before me, glimmering pallidly, bristled the mount of the Cones. Around
its crystal base glittered immense egg-shaped diamond incandescences.
They were both rayless and strangely--lightless; they threw no shadows
nor did their lambency lessen the dimness. Beside each of these curious
luminosities stood one of the sullen-fired, cruciform shapes--the Things
that now I knew for the opened cubes.

They were smaller than the Keeper, indeed less than half his height.
They were ranged in an almost unbroken crescent around the visible arc
of the immense pedestal--and now I saw that the lights were a few feet
closer to that pedestal than they. Egg-shaped as I have said, the wider
end was undermost, resting in a broad cup upheld by a slender pedicle
silvery-gray and metallic.

"They're building out the base," whispered Drake. "The Cones got so big
they have to give them more room."

"Magnetism," I whispered in return. "Electricity--they drew down from
the sun spot. And it was more than that--I saw the Cones grow under it.
It fed them as it fed the Hordes--but the Cones grew. It was as though
the shields and the Cones turned pure energy into substance."

"And if we hadn't been pretty thoroughly magnetized to start with it
would have done for us," he said.

We watched the operation going on in front of us. The cross shapes had
bent, hinging above the transverse arms. They bowed in absolute unison
as at some signal. Down from the horizontal plane of each whipped the
long and writhing tentacles.

At the foot of every one I could now perceive a heap of some faintly
glistening material. The tendrils coiled among this, then drew up
something that looked like a thick rod of crystal. The bent planes
straightened; simultaneously they thrust the crystalline bars toward the
incandescences.

There came a curious, brittle hissing. The ends of the rods began to
dissolve into dazzling, diamond rain, atomically minute, that passing
through the egg-shaped lights poured upon the periphery of the pedestal.
Rapidly the bars melted. Heat there must be in these lights, terrific
heat--yet the Keeper's workers seemed impervious to it.

As the ends of the bars radiated into the annealing mist I saw the
tentacles creep closer and ever closer to the rayless flame through
which the mist flew. And at the last, as the ultimate atoms drove
through, the holding tendrils were thrust almost within it; touched it,
certainly.

A score of times they repeated this process while we watched. Unaware of
us they seemed, or--if aware, then indifferent. More rapid became their
movements, the glassy ingots streaming through the floating braziers
with hardly a pause in their passing. Abruptly, as though switched, the
incandescences lessened into candle-points; instantly, as at a signal,
the crescent of crosses closed into a crescent of cubes.

Motionless they stood, huge blocks blackened against the dim glowing
of the cones--sentient monoliths; a Druid curve; an arc of a metal
Stonehenge. And as at dusk and dawn the great menhirs of Stonehenge fill
with a mysterious, granitic life, seem to be praying priests of stone,
so about these gathered hierophantic illusion.


They quivered; the slender pedicles cupping, the waned lights swayed;
the lights lifted and soared, upright, to their backs.

Two by two with measured pace, solemnly the cubes glided off into the
encircling darkness. As they swept away there streamed behind them other
scores not until then visible to us, joining pair by pair from hidden
arcs.

Into the secret shadows they flowed, two by two, each bearing over it
the slim shaft holding the serene flame.

Grotesquely were they like a column of monks marching with dimmed
flambeau of their worship. Angled metal monks of some god of metal,
carrying tapers of electric fire, withdrawing slowly from a Holy of
Holies whose metallically divine Occupant knew nothing of man--nor cared
to know.

Grotesque--yes. But would that I had the power to crystallize in words
the underlying, alien terror every movement of the Metal Monster
when disintegrate, its every manifestation when combined, evoked; the
incredulous, amazed lurking always close behind the threshold of the
mind; the never lifting, thin-shuddering shadow.

Smaller, dimmer waned the lights--they were gone.

We crouched, motionless. Nothing stirred; there was no sound. Without
speaking we arose; crept together over the smooth floor toward the
cones.

As we crossed I saw that the pave, like the walls, was built of the
bodies of the Metal People; and, like the walls, they were dormant,
filmed eyes oblivious to our passing. Closer we crept--were only a scant
score of rods from that colossal mechanism. I noted that the crystal
foundation was set low; was not more than four feet above the floor.
The sturdy, dwarfed pilasters supporting it thrust up in crowded copses,
merging through distance into apparent solidity.

Now, too, I realized, as I had not when looking down from above, how
stupendous the structure rising from the crystal foundation was.

I began to wonder how so thin a support could bear the mount bristling
above it--then remembered what it was that at first had flown from them,
shrinking them, and at last had fed and swelled them.

Light! Weightless magnetic ions; swarms of electric ions; the misty
breath of the infinite energy breathing upon, condensing upon, them.
Could it be that the Cones for all their apparent mass had little,
if any, weight? Like ringed Saturn, thousands of times Earth's bulk,
flaunting itself in the Heavens--yet if transported to our world so
light that rings and all it would float like a bubble upon our oceans.
The Cones towered above me--close, so close.

The Cones were weightless. How I knew I cannot say--but now, almost
touching them, I did know. Nebulous, yet solid, were they; compact, yet
tenuous, dense and unsubstantial.

Again the thought came to me--they were force made visible; energy made
concentrate into matter.

We skirted, seeking for the tablet over which the Keeper had hovered;
the mechanism which, under his tentacles, had shifted the circling
shields, thrust the spear of green fire into the side of the wounded
sun. Hesitantly I touched the crystal base; the edge was warm, but
whether this warmth came from the dazzling rain which we had just
watched build it outward or whether it was a property inherent with the
substance itself I do not know.

Certainly there was no mark upon it to show where the molten mists had
fallen. It was diamond hard and smooth. The nearest cones were but a
scant nine feet from its rim.

Suddenly we saw the tablet; stood beside it. The shape of a great T,
glimmering with a faint and limpid violet phosphorescence, it might have
been, in shape and size, the palely shining shadow of the Keeper. It was
a foot above the floor, and had apparently no connection with the cones.

It was made of thousands of close-packed tiny octagonal rods the tops of
some of which were cupped, of others pointed; none was more than half
an inch in width. There was about it a suggestion of wedded crystal
and metal--as about its burden was the suggestion of mated energy and
matter.

The rods were movable; they formed a keyboard unimaginably complex;
a keyboard whose infinite combinations were like a Fourth Dimensional
chess game. I saw that only the swarms of tentacles that were the
Keeper's hands and these only could be masters of its incredible
intricacies. No Disk--not even the Emperor, no Star shape could play on
it, draw out its chords of power.

But why? Why had it been so made that sullen flaming Cross alone could
release its hidden meanings, made articulate its interwoven octaves?
And how were its messages conveyed? Up to its bases pressed the dormant
cubes--that under it they lay as well I did not doubt.

There was no visible copula of the tablet with cones; no antennae
between it and the circled shields. Could it be that the impulses
released by the Keeper's coilings passed through the Metal People of
the pave on the upthrust Metal People of the crater rim who held the
shields?

That WAS unthinkable--unthinkable because if so this mechanism was
superfluous.

The swift response to the communal will that we had observed showed that
the Metal Monster needed nothing of this kind for transmission of the
thought of any of its units.

There was some gap here--a gap that the grouped consciousness could not
bridge without other means. Clearly that was true--else why the tablet,
why the Keeper's travail?

Was each of these tiny rods a mechanism akin, in a fashion, to the
sending keys of the wireless; were they transmitters of subtle energy
in which was enfolded command? Spellers-out of a super-Morse carrying
to each responsive cell of the Metal Monster the bidding of those higher
units which were to It as the brain cells are to us? That, advanced
as the knowledge it implied might be, was closer to the heart of the
possible.

I bent, determined, despite the well-nigh unconquerable shrinking I
felt, to touch the tablet's rods.

A flickering shadow fell upon me; a flock of pulsating ochreous and
scarlet shadows--

The Keeper glowed above us!

In a life that has had its share of dangers, its need for quick
decisions, I recognize that few indeed of my reactions to peril have
been more than purely instinctive; no more consciously courageous
nor intellectually dissociate from the activating stimulus than the
shrinking of the burned hand from the brand, the will-to-live dictated
rush of the cornered animal upon the thing menacing it.

One such higher functioning was when I followed Larry O'Keefe and Lakla,
the Handmaiden, out to what we believed soul-destroying death in a place
almost as strange as this *; another was now. Deliberately, detachedly, I
studied the angrily flaming Shape.

     * See "The Moon Pool" and "The Conquest of the Moon Pool."

Compared to it we were as a pair of Hop-o'-my-Thumbs to the Giant; had
it been man-shaped we would have come less than a third way up to its
knees. I focussed my attention upon the twenty-foot-wide square that was
the Keeper's foot. Its surface was jewel smooth, hyaline--yet beneath
it was a suggestion of granulation, of close-packed, innumerable,
microscopic crystals.

Within these grains whose existence was more sensed than seen glowed
dull red light, smoky and sullen. At each end of the square, close to
the bottom, was a diamond-shaped lozenge, cabochon, perhaps a yard in
width. These were dim yellow, translucent, with no suggestion of the
underlying crystallization. Sense organs I set them down to be--similar
to the great ovals within the Emperor's golden zone.


My gaze traveled up to the transverse arms. They stretched sixty feet
from tip to tip. At each tip were two more of the diamond figures, not
dull but burning angrily with orange-and-scarlet luster. In the center
of the beam was something that might have been a smoldering rubrous
reflection of the Emperor's pulsing multicolored rose had each of the
petals of the latter been clipped and squared.

It deepened toward its heart into a singular pattern of vermilion
latticings. Into the entire figure ran numerous tiny rivulets of angry
crimson and orange light, angling in interwoven patterns with never a
curve nor arching.

Set at intervals between them were what looked like octagonal rosettes
filled with slender silvery flutings, wan striations--like--it came to
me--immense chrysanthemum buds, half opened, and carved in gray jade.

Above towered the gigantic vertical beam. Toward its top I glimpsed a
huge square of flaring crimsons and bright topaz; two other diamonds
stared down upon us from just beneath it--like eyes. And over all its
height the striated octagons clustered.

I felt myself lifted, floated upward. Drake's hand shot out, clung to me
as together we drifted up the living wall. Opposite the latticed heart
of the square-petaled rose our flight was checked. There for an instant
we hung. Then the octagonal symbols stirred, unfolded like buds--

They were the nests of the Keeper's tentacles, and out from them the
whiplike tendrils uncoiled, shot out and writhed toward us.

My skin flinched from their touch; my body, held in the unseen grip, was
motionless. Yet when they touched their contact was not unpleasant. They
were like flexible strands of glass; their smooth tips questioned
us, passing through our hair, searching our faces, writhing over our
clothing.

There was a pulse in the great clipped rose, a rhythmic throbbing of
vermilion fire that ran into it from the angled veins, beat through the
latticed nucleus and throbbed back whence it had come. The huge, high
square of scarlet and yellow was liquid flame; the diamond organs
beneath it seemed to smoke, to send out swirls of orange red vapor.

Holding us so the Keeper studied us.

The rhythm of the square rose, became the rhythm of my own mind. But
here was none of the vast, serene and elemental calm that Ruth had
described as emanating from the Metal Emperor. Powerful it was, without
doubt, but in it were undertones of rage, of impatience, overtones of
revolt, something incomplete and struggling. Within the disharmonies I
seemed to sense a fettered force striving for freedom; energy battling
against itself.

Greater grew the swarms of the tentacles winding about us like slender
strands of glass, covering our faces, making breathing more and
more difficult. There was a coil of them around my throat and
tightening--tightening.

I heard Drake gasping, laboring for breath. I could not turn my head
toward him, could not speak. Was this then to be our end?

The strangling clutch relaxed, the mass of the tentacles lessened. I was
conscious of a surge of anger through the cruciform Thing that held us.

Its sullen fires blazed. I was aware of another light beating past
us--beating down the Keeper's. The hosts of tendrils drew back from me.
I felt myself picked from the unseen grasp, whirled in the air and drawn
away.

Drake beside me, I hung now before the Shining Disk--the Metal Emperor!

He it was who had plucked us from the Keeper--and even as I swung I saw
the Keeper's multitudinous, serpentine arms surge out toward us angrily
and then sullenly, slowly, draw back into their nests.

And out of the Disk, clothing me, permeating me, came an immense
tranquillity, a muting of all human thought, all human endeavor, an
unthinkable, cosmic calm into which all that was human of me seemed to
be sinking, drowning as in a fathomless abyss. I struggled against
it, desperately, striving in study of the Disk to erect a barrier of
preoccupation against the power pouring from it.

