spiracles. It fought furiously, making ferocious charges at the dogs who
tormented and bewildered it. But they created the most zestfully excited
of tumults.

Burl and Saya were, of course, at least as absorbed and excited as the
dogs, or they would have noticed the thing that was to make so much
difference to every human being, not only on the plateau but still down
in the lowlands. This unnoticed thing was beyond their imagining. There
had been nothing else like it on this world in many hundreds of years.
It was half a dozen miles away and perhaps a thousand feet high when
Burl and Saya prepared to intervene professionally on behalf of the
dogs. It was a silvery needle, floating unsupported in the air. As they
entered the battle, it swerved and moved swiftly in their direction.

It was silent, and they did not notice. They knew of no reason to scan
the sky in daytime. And there was business on hand, anyhow.

Burl leaped in toward the beetle with a lance-thrust at the tough
integument where an armored leg joined the creature's body. He missed,
and the beetle whirled. Saya flashed her cloak before the monster so
that it seemed a larger and a nearer antagonist. As the creature whirled
again, Burl stabbed and a hind-leg crumpled.

Instantly the thing was limping. A beetle does not use its legs like
four-legged creatures. A beetle moving shifts the two end legs on one
side and the central leg on the other, so that it always stands on an
adjustable tripod of limbs. It cannot adjust readily to crippling. A dog
snatched at a spiny lower leg and crunched,--and darted away. The
machine-like monster uttered a formless, deep-bass cry and was spurred
to unbelievable fierceness. The fight became a thing of furious movement
and joyous uproar, with Burl striking once at a multiple eye so the pain
would deflect it from a charge at Saya, and Saya again deflecting it
with her cloak and once breathlessly trying to strike it with her
shorter spear.

They struck it again, and a third time, and it sank horribly to the
ground, all three legs on one side crippled. The remaining three thrust
and thrust and struggled senselessly,--and suddenly it was on its back,
still striking its gigantic jaws frantically in the hope of murder. But
then Burl struck home between two armor-plates where a ganglion was
almost exposed. The blow killed it instantly.

Burl and Saya were smiling at each other when there was a monstrous
sound of crashing trees. They whirled. The dogs pricked up their ears.
One of them barked defiantly.

Something huge--truly huge!--had settled to the ground a bare two
hundred yards away. It was metal, and there were ports in its sides, and
it was quite beyond imagining. Because, of course, no space-ship had
landed on this planet in forty-odd human generations.

A port opened as they stared at it. Men came out. Burl and Saya were
barbarically attired, but they had been fighting some sort of local
monster--the men on the space-ship could not quite grasp what they had
seen--and they had been helped by dogs. Human beings and dogs, together,
always mean some sort of civilization.

The dogs gave an impression of a very high level indeed. They trotted
confidently over to the ship, and they sniffed cautiously at the men who
had landed. Then their behavior was admirable. They greeted the new-come
men with the self-confident cordiality of dogs who are on the best
possible terms with human beings,--and there was no question of any
suspicion by anybody. The attitude of a man toward a dog is a perfectly
valid indication of his character, if not of his technical education.
And the newcomers knew how to treat dogs.

So Burl and Saya went forward, with the confident pleasure with which
well-raised children and other persons of innate dignity greet
strangers.

The ship was the _Wapiti_, a private cruiser doing incidental
exploration for the Biological Survey in the course of a trip after good
hunting. It had touched on the forgotten planet, and it would never be
forgotten again.




_EPILOGUE_


The survey-ship _Tethys_ made the first landing on the forgotten planet,
and the _Orana_ followed, and some centuries later the _Ludred_. Then
the planet was forgotten until the _Wapiti_ arrived. The arrival of the
_Wapiti_ was as much an accident as the loss of the punched card which
caused the planet to be overlooked for some thousands of years.
Somebody had noticed that the sun around which it circled was of a type
which usually has useful planets, but there was no record that it had
ever been visited. So a request to the sportsmen on the _Wapiti_ had
caused them to turn aside. They considered, anyhow, that it would be
interesting to land on a brand-new world or two. They considered it
fascinating to find human beings there before them. But they could not
understand the use of such primitive weapons or garments of such
barbaric splendor. They had trouble, too, because in forty-odd
generations the speech of the universe had changed, while Burl and Saya
spoke a very archaic language indeed.

But there was an educator on the _Wapiti_. It was quite standard
apparatus,--simply basic-education for a human child, so that one's
school-years could be begun with a backlog of correct speech, and
reading, with the practical facts of mathematics, sanitation, and the
general information that any human being anywhere needs to know.
Children use it before they start school, and they absorb its
information quite painlessly. It is rare that an adult needs it. But
Burl and Saya did.

Burl was politely invited to wear the head-set, and he politely obliged.
He found himself equipped with a new language and what seemed to him an
astonishing amount of information. Among the information was the item
that he was going to have--as an adult--a severe headache. Which he did.
Also included was the fact that the making of records for such educators
was so laborious a process that it took generations to compile one
master-record for the instruments.

Burl, with a splitting headache, nevertheless urged Saya to join him in
getting an education. And she did. And thereafter they were able to
converse with the sportsmen on the _Wapiti_ comfortably enough,--except
for their headaches.

And all this led to extremely satisfactory arrangements. Sportsmen
could not but be enthusiastic about the hunting of giant insects with
dogs and spears. The sportsmen on the _Wapiti_ wanted some of that kind
of sport. Burl's fellow-tribesmen were delighted to oblige,--though they
had not quite the zest of Burl. They had to acquire educations in their
turn, so they could talk to their new hunting-companions. But the
hunting was magnificent. The _Wapiti_ abandoned its original plans and
settled down for a stay.

Presently Burl's casual talk of the lowlands produced results. An
atmosphere-flier came out of the ship's storage-compartments. And
through the educator Burl was now a civilized man. He had not the
specialized later information of his guests, but he had knowledge they
could not dream of, and which it would take much of a century to put in
recordable form for an educator.

So an atmosphere-flier went down into the lowlands through the
cloud-banks. There were three men on board. They had good hunting.
Magnificent hunting. Even more importantly, they found another cluster
of human beings who lived as fugitives among the insect giants. They
brought them to the plateau, a few at a time. Sportsmen stayed in the
lowlands with modern weapons, hunting enthusiastically, while the
transfer took place.

In all, the _Wapiti_ stayed for two months Earth-time. When it left, its
sportsmen had such trophies as would make them envied of all other
hunters in three star-clusters. They left behind weapons and
atmosphere-fliers and their library and tools. But they took with them
enthusiasm for the sport on the once-forgotten planet, and rather warm
feelings of friendship for Burl.

They sent their friends back. The next ship to come in found a small
city on the plateau, with a population of three hundred souls,--all
civilized by educator. Naturally, they'd had no trouble building
civilized dwellings or practising sanitation, or developing a neatly
adapted culture-pattern for their particular environment. This second
ship brought more weapons and fliers and news from the first party
about commercial demand for the incredibly luxurious moth-fur, to be
found on only one planet in all the galaxy.

The fourth ship to land on the plateau was a trading-ship anxious to
load such furs for recklessly bidding merchants in a dozen
interplanetary marts. There were then nearly a thousand people living on
the plateau. They had a natural monopoly,--not of moth-fur and
butterfly-wing fabric, and panels of irridescent chitin for luxurious
decoration, but--of the strictly practical and detailed knowledge of
insect-habits which made it possible to obtain them. Off-planet visitors
who tried to hunt without local knowledge did not come back from the
lowlands. In time, Burl firmly enacted a planetary law which forbade the
inexperienced to go below the cloud-layer.

Because, of course, a government had to be formed for the planet. But
men with the basic education of citizens everywhere did not fumble it.
They had a job to do which was more important than anybody's vanity. It
was a job which gave deep and abiding satisfaction. When naked,
trembling folk were found in the mushroom-jungles and brought to the
plateau, they had one instant, feverish desire as soon as they got over
the headache from the educator.

They wanted to go back to the lowlands. It was profitable, to be sure.
But it was even more of a satisfaction to hunt and kill the monsters
that had hunted and killed men for so long. It felt good, too, to find
other humans and bring them out to sunshine.

So nowadays the forgotten planet has ceased to be forgotten. It is
hardly necessary to name it, because its name is known through all the
Galaxy. Its population is not large, so far, but it is an interesting
place to live in. In the popular mind, it is the most glamorous of all
possible worlds,--and for easily understandable reasons. The inhabitants
of its capital city wear moth-fur garments and butterfly-wing cloaks for
the benefit of their fellows in the lowlands. There is no day but
fliers take off and dive down into the mists. When human hunters are in
the lowlands, they dress as the lowlanders they used to be, so that
lowlanders who may spy them will be sure that they are men, and friends,
and come to them to be raised to proper dignity above the insects. It is
not unusual for a man to be brought up to sunshine, and have his session
with the educator, and be flying his own assigned atmosphere-flier
within a week, diving back above what used to be the place where he was
hunted, but where he has become the hunter.

It is a very pleasant arrangement. The search for more humans in the
lowlands is a prosperous business, even when it is unsuccessful. The
wings of white Morpho butterflies bring the highest prices, but even a
common swallow-tail is riches, and the fur of caterpillars--duly
processed--goes into the holds of the planet-owned space-line ships with
the care given elsewhere to platinum and diamonds.

And also it is good sport. The planet is a sportsman's paradise. There
are not too many visitors. Nobody may go hunting without an experienced
host. And off-planet sportsmen tend to feel somewhat queasy after a
session as guest of the folk who have made Burl their planet-president.
Visitors are not so much alarmed at fighting flying beetles in mid-air,
even though the beetles may compare with the hunters' craft in size and
are terrifically tenacious of life. The thing that appalls strangers is
the insistence of Burl's fellow-citizens--no longer only tribesmen--upon
fighting spiders on the ground. With their memories, they like it that
way. It's more satisfactory.

Not long ago the Planet President of Sumor XI was Burl's guest for a
hunt. Sumor XI is a highly civilized planet, and life there has become
tame. Its president is an ardent hunter. He liked Burl, who is still all
hard muscle despite his graying hair. He and Saya have a very
comfortable dwelling, and now that their children are grown they have
room in it even for a planet president, if he comes as a sportsman
guest. The Planet President of Sumor XI even liked the informal
atmosphere of a house where pleasantly self-possessed dogs curl up
comfortably on rugs of emperor-moth down that elsewhere are beyond
price.

But the President of Sumor XI was embarrassed on his visit. He and Burl
are both hunters, and they are highly congenial. But the President of
Sumor XI was upset on his last flight to the lowlands. Burl got out of
the atmosphere-flier alone, and for pure deep personal satisfaction he
fought a mastodon-sized wolf spider with nothing but a spear.

He killed the creature, of course. But the President of Sumor XI was
embarrassed. He wouldn't have dared try it. He felt that, however
sporting it might be, it was too risky a thing for a Planet President to
do.

But Saya took it for granted.

       *       *       *       *       *

_You're missing the big thrills in science-fiction if you miss any of
the_

_ACE SCIENCE FICTION NOVELS_


For instance, here's what the _New York Herald-Tribune_ (just one of the
many applauding reviewers) said about Ace Book D-103:

SOLAR LOTTERY by Philip K. Dick and THE BIG JUMP by Leigh Brackett

"The latest Ace double-volume offers, for the first time, two new books
at one low price, and both well worth reading. _Solar Lottery_, a first
novel by one of the most striking young magazine writers, creates a
strange and fascinating civilization for the year 2203, a culture based
upon Heisenberg's idea of randomness and Von Neumann's Games-Theory....
Against this background two plots develop, one of intricately deadly and
suspenseful palace politics, one of an ambitious attempt to rediscover
our sun's once-glimpsed tenth planet.... As elaborately exciting as
vintage Van Vogt--with an added touch of C. M. Kornbluth's social
satire.

"_The Big Jump_ is more conventional ... the battle of a monopolist
family to hold the secret of interstellar flight makes a lively
melodrama, with a virtually compelling finale of alien life on a remote
star."


_Ace Book D-103--35c_

_Some recent titles in the outstanding_ ACE SCIENCE FICTION _lists are
as follows_:

    D-139 ALIEN FROM ARCTURUS by Gordon R. Dickson
             THE ATOM CURTAIN by Nick Boddie Williams

    S-133 (25c) ADVENTURES ON OTHER PLANETS
             A new anthology edited by Donald A. Wollheim

    D-121 THREE FACES OF TIME by Sam Merwin, Jr.
             THE STARS ARE OURS! by Andre Norton

    D-118 THE PARADOX MEN by Charles L. Harness
             DOME AROUND AMERICA by Jack Williamson

    D-113 ONE IN THREE HUNDRED by J. T. McIntosh
             THE TRANSPOSED MAN by Dwight V. Swain

    D-110 NO WORLD OF THEIR OWN by Poul Anderson
             THE 1,000 YEAR PLAN by Isaac Asimov

    D-125 THE MAN WHO UPSET THE UNIVERSE
             by Isaac Asimov

Except as marked, any of these books may be obtained for 35c (plus 5c
handling charges) directly from Ace Books, (Sales Dept.), 23 W. 47th
St., New York 36, N. Y.

_Order by Number_





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Forgotten Planet, by Murray Leinster

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FORGOTTEN PLANET ***

***** This file should be named 41637.txt or 41637.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/1/6/3/41637/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
