above the waves. A bazooka-shell hit it. Something huge and stupid and
monstrous fought the impalpable thing that hurt it....

Davis approached.

"These," he said absurdly, "aren't the creatures who made the plastic
objects. Maybe we ought to try to open communication with their masters.
Why should we fight? If we prove we can defend ourselves...."

"I suspect," said Terry, "that all intelligent beings think the same
way, intelligently. If we landed on another planet, on some part of that
planet that the natives didn't use but we could, it wouldn't be sensible
for those natives to welcome us! Trade with us, perhaps. But let us
settle down, no!"

There was a bomb explosion out at sea. A plane had dropped a
hundred-pound bomb on a monster at the surface. The flattop was now
distinct. Golden, almost horizontal sunlight struck upon it. Off to the
west a plane dived steeply, something dropped from it, and the plane
levelled off. A three-hundred-foot fountain erupted from the surface.
Then there came absolute proof that intelligence lay behind all this. It
was not human intelligence, to be sure. Men are tool-using creatures
nowadays. They imagine robots for fighting, and nowadays they make them,
but many centuries ago men ceased to try to use animals as combatants in
war.

The creatures under the sea had not. They'd send up giant squids to do
battle with men, as men once sent elephants against the Macedonian army.
It was naive. But the generals, the tacticians, the strategists of the
Deep did not remain wedded to the one weapon. Already, they saw that
beasts could be fought by men. So their instruments of battle changed.
Doubtless, orders were given, and five miles under the sea
something--something men could not have duplicated--began the
transformation of seawater into gas, in quantities past imagining. Tiny,
tiny bubbles were produced by some unguessable engine, and rose toward
the surface, in a steady stream. At the bottom they were under a
pressure of tons to the square inch. But the pressure lessened as they
rose, and as they rose they swelled. A bubble which was pinhead-size at
the sea-bed grew to be the size of a basketball a half-mile up, and
would have been the size of a house a mile up, except that then it
separated into smaller ones. They rose and rose and expanded and
separated. Five miles up from their origin, at little more than
atmospheric pressure, they made a rising column of insubstantiality. At
the surface they became foam. But under the foam there was more foam,
and under that still more. A ship sailing from normal ocean water into
such airy stuff would drop like a stone into the miles-long cone of
semi-nothingness. Nothing solid could float there. Nothing substantial
could rest its weight upon such rushing thistledown.

And the first of the bubble-weapons appeared at the surface in the form
of a patch of foam. Its source--and hence the place of its
appearance--could be moved. It could be shifted under any ship, though
there would be a time-interval, always, before the foam at the surface
was exactly above the gas-generating engine below. It could be moved to
anticipate the movements of a ship. But there was always that time-lag.

The _Esperance_ headed back toward the heap of monsters at the break in
the reef. Other giant squids emerged and joined the pack. A plane came
over and bombed it. The _Esperance_ turned away. The mine layer from
Manila appeared at the horizon. The flattop made a sudden violent turn,
and more foam appeared upon the water. It curled and writhed and piled
up to be ten--twenty--thirty yards in height.

The flattop fired a shell into it. There was a gigantic flash and flame,
and for an instant there was no foam, but only peculiarly pock-marked
ocean surface, instantly covered by more foam which piled up as before.

"Gas," said Terry grimly. "Hydrogen. You guessed right, Deirdre!"

Now the flattop shot off plane after plane, as if they were projectiles.
They swung in the air and flew low to drop bombs in the now wabbling,
moving, sweeping patch of white stuff. It was a huge discoloration of
the ocean surface. It was almost in diameter as the flattop's length.
Now the carrier dodged it warily.

There were dull concussions everywhere. Giant squids writhed in
death-agonies. White foam-patches appeared here and there--but somehow
haphazardly--as if fumbling for the ships. One patch swept close to _La
Rubia_, and that small derelict seemed to tremble. And then the fishing
boat touched the very edge of the white stuff, and was engulfed in it.
She vanished instantly, as if she had fallen into a hole in the sea.
When the foam-patch passed on, the sea was empty.

The effect of the foam, actually, was that of a gigantic, slavering,
blind gullet straining to devour. It moved erratically over the surface.
Terry called to Deirdre, "Have Nick tell the flattop that the foam only
comes up from deep water. If they can get inside the hundred-fathom
curve they're safe! Maybe even five hundred. Maybe more. But the foam
only comes up from deep water!"

The mine layer came on from the horizon at topmost speed. Apparently,
they had received warning from the carrier, because the ship suddenly
began to zig-zag. The carrier itself adopted the unpredictable
change-of-course system which had been originally designed to frustrate
submarines lying in wait. Both ships adopted it just in time. A ravening
area of foam appeared directly before the mine layer's bow just as she
turned aside. The mine layer dumped a mine. Terry saw it go overboard.
But it would have five miles to sink before it hit bottom.

Terry called Davis and jerkily explained that the mines would have to be
armed when they went overboard--set so that they would explode when they
hit bottom. He explained that depth-bombs might be useful against
squids, but if they went off at a fixed depth they would be harmless
against the enemy which deployed the squids.

The carrier, in the middle of a ninety-degree zig-zag turn, found her
bow projecting into a foam-patch. The bow sank deep. The carrier's
propellers were out of the water as her bow pointed downward. Had the
foam stayed still for two seconds, the carrier would have slid into the
column of gigantic ascending bubbles and plunged to destruction. But the
foam swerved sidewise.

The carrier escaped, and was infinitely cautious after that. She made
short, swift, unpredictable dashes this way and that.... Her
anti-aircraft guns rumbled and rattled at things upon the surface.
Presently, her depth-finder discovered an underwater extension of the
island's mountain-foundation, and the ship took refuge where the water
was less than a hundred fathoms deep. There she lay, shooting off planes
and retrieving them, her guns flashing at whatever targets appeared.

Twice, as it happened, snaky, monstrous arms flung themselves up and
heaved at the flattop as if the giant squids hoped to overturn even an
aircraft carrier by their weight. But those arms were blasted to
nothingness. The only damage they did was that a twenty-foot section of
tentacle--writhing independently on the flight-deck--broke the
landing-gear of a returning plane which collided with it.

The mine layer ploughed across the sea. From time to time she heaved
something overboard. Nothing seemed to happen. But each mine was,
nevertheless, so adjusted that it could explode any time it touched
something underwater. They did not allow the usual time so that the mine
layer could get away. The mine layer had ample time, because the mines
had to go slowly spinning down five long miles to the bottom of the
Luzon Deep.

Twenty mines went down before the first one detonated. The concussion
was felt on the _Esperance_, twenty-seven thousand feet up and in
shallow water. Then another, and another, and another. The mine layer
continued to sow her destructive seed. Far behind her, a monstrous
spouting of gas and spume rose up hundreds of feet. There was another
concussion, and another....

The _Esperance_ quivered, and Terry said grimly to Deirdre, "We set off
five pounds of explosive down the Deep, and the bathyscaphe returned all
smashed. What will the creature do now? I wish we could get some mines
down to the bottom there!"

Davis came up, beaming--but shaking.

"The carrier's sending some planes down to drop eggs at the spot where
the fish were dragged down!" he said zestfully.

Gigantic, terrifying masses of gas leaped skyward where the gases
released by the exploding mines finally reached the surface. The mine
layer zig-zagged, and dropped a mine. She zig-zagged again, and dropped
another. Presently, she took refuge beside the carrier. The _Esperance_
drove over and came to a stop between the two armed vessels. Someone
shouted down by megaphone from the carrier's deck, "What happened to
you? What hit your bowsprit?"

Terry shouted back, "You shot those beasts. We've been wrestling with
'em!"

An enormous eruption of gas.... Then the underwater ear began to emit an
unprecedented sound. It was a rushing sound, but it was only vaguely
like the noise of whatever had come up from the depths last Tuesday
night. This was powerful beyond imagining.

"Something's coming up!" roared Terry. "Better alert for a real fight
now!"

Deirdre said with a little gasp, "The real creatures are coming up!
Terry! The ... things that come in the bolides...."

He said savagely, "They've been shaken up badly by the concussions
underwater. They resented five pounds of explosive! There's been four
hundred pounds in every mine! If they try to fight after what they've
taken down below...."

The rushing sound from underwater was a loud, throbbing hum which had no
relationship with the humming sound that drove fish. Two spoutings of
gas from mine-explosions shot up. There were more concussions in the
water.

Then something broke surface. It was huge, and looked like a rocket. It
leaped. No, it dashed upward, toward the sky. It flashed skyward,
accelerating as it rose. Something else broke the surface and headed for
the heavens. This one was globular.

There were dull concussions coming from far underwater, and more rockets
broke surface and shot skyward.

Anti-aircraft guns were fired. Shell-bursts came close, but not close
enough. Not less than twenty enormous rockets leaped out of the water
and shot up toward the sky. Some observers claimed there were more than
thirty. Down to southward, where the bathyscaphe had been crushed, the
planes that were dropping mines reported that four other objects broke
loose from the ocean and fled for empty space at speeds too great to be
estimated.

Terry looked suddenly astonished.

"But ... of course!" he told Deirdre. "When you need high pressure, of
course you've got a weakness. You can't take concussions! Anything
underwater is completely vulnerable to bombs! Whatever was down there
has found out that the natives--we aborigines--have a weapon they can't
face. Primitive stuff. Explosives! Chemical explosives! And creatures
that can travel between planets and undoubtedly have atomic power
and--who knows what else--can't fight back if we drop submarine mines on
them!"

A last object broke surface and hurtled skyward. Behind it, deep, deep
down, there was a titanic explosion.

"Ah!" said Terry. "That was a time-bomb! They've gone home for good!"

       *       *       *       *       *

A task force of a private yacht, a fishing boat, a satellite-tracking
station, an airplane carrier and a mine layer had driven off an invasion
of earth. But the public could not be told that the earth had been
invaded. The people who had been involved in this secret adventure had
to be satisfied with the realization that they had saved mankind.

After a jubilant dinner Terry and Deirdre sat in the veranda.

Davis came out. He blinked at the night.

"Deirdre? Terry?"

"Here," said Terry.

Davis joined them. They had drawn apart a little.

"Good news by short-wave," said Davis. "Those rockets were picked up by
radar. They divided into two groups. One headed sunward. The other
headed for deep space. My guess is Venus for one group and Jupiter for
the other. They couldn't have come from Mars. But they've gone home.
Both groups."

Terry paused, and then said wryly, "Two races! Some of the bolides were
bullet-shaped and some were globular. That figures. But two races
capable of space travel and both in our own solar system!"

Davis grimaced. "We've been talking about it. Our guess is that the
Venus race developed in deep water, and therefore at high pressure. And
anything that developed on the solid surface of Jupiter would also be
accustomed to extremely high pressure."

Terry nodded. He was not exactly absorbed in what Davis had to say. But
he said suddenly, "I make a guess. They didn't want to start a colony
here. The sea-bottom here is too cold to be comfortable for the beings
from Venus, and far too hot to suit those from Jupiter. But both needed
terrific pressure. In order to keep contact with each other, in order to
do business, they could have set up a trading post here. To meet and
trade. Neither one could take over the earth. When you think of it, we
couldn't take over Venus or Jupiter! Maybe that's the answer!"

"Eh?" said Davis.

"We won't have to fight as planets," said Terry, "when we have
space-ships like they do. We couldn't gain anything by fighting. All we
can gain by is trade. They'll be pleased. It must have been horribly
inconvenient to have to set up a trading post here on earth. There were
always the natives, you know. Lately, they've noticed that we've been
getting restless. We have been. I imagine that now they'll wait for us
to make space-ships and start up interplanetary trade."

Davis said, "Very true. There's going to be the devil of a mess, though.
Morton will still have to explain the accuracy of his prediction about
the bolides' landings. I suspect he'll be censured for assuming anything
as unlikely as the truth has turned out to be."

Terry did not answer. Deirdre was saying something, and he did not hear
at all.

"There are still loose ends," added Davis. "For instance, how do you
suppose they controlled those squids down below? What did they use for
eyesight? How the devil would Jovians and Venusians agree on a meeting
place in our oceans?"

Terry answered what Deirdre'd said. She smiled at him. They'd forgotten
that Davis was there.





End of Project Gutenberg's Creatures of the Abyss, by Murray Leinster

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CREATURES OF THE ABYSS ***

***** This file should be named 42901.txt or 42901.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/9/0/42901/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
