
"Just what I am going to do," answered his chum. "And after we've got
that----" He paused suggestively.

"We'll go in for inventing airships, or something like that, eh?"

"Yes. We've learned a great deal from Mr. Henderson, and in the course
of time we ought to be able to turn out something even more wonderful
than the _Electric Monarch_, the _Porpoise_, or the _Flying Mermaid_."

"Yes, and when we've invented something better----"

"We'll take another trip."

"Right you are!"

And then the two chums shook hands warmly; and here we will say
good-bye.

                                THE END.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                            NEW ALGER BOOKS

                           JOE, THE HOTEL BOY
                        Or, Winning Out by Pluck
                         By HORATIO ALGER, Jr.

                   Illustrated, 12mo. Cloth, 60 cents

[Illustration: small image of book cover]

This is one of the last stories penned by that prince of all juvenile
writers, Horatio Alger, Jr., and is one of his best. It describes the
adventures of a youth brought up in the country by an old hermit. When
the hermit dies the boy obtains work at a nearby hotel, and later on
drifts to the city and obtains a position in another hotel. There is a
mystery concerning the lad's identity and likewise the disappearance of
a certain blue box, but in the end all terminates satisfactorily.

                          BEN LOGAN'S TRIUMPH
                    Or, The Boys of Boxwood Academy
                         By HORATIO ALGER, Jr.

                   Illustrated, 12mo. Cloth, 60 cents

[Illustration: small image of book cover]

This story was penned by Mr. Alger some years before his death, but has
never appeared in book form. Ben was a city newsboy, rather rough, but
with a heart of gold. He did a great service for a good-hearted farmer,
and the latter took Ben home with him. The lad had never been in the
country before, and his eyes were opened to a new world. Then the youth
was sent to a boarding school, where he made his way to the front amid
many difficulties. Mr. Alger's charm as a juvenile writer is so well
known it is needless to mention it here, and this story is in his best
vein.

                CUPPLES & LEON CO., Publishers, NEW YORK

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                         THE JACK RANGER SERIES
                           By Clarence Young
                    Author of the Motor Boys Series

      Cloth. 12mo. Illustrated, Price per volume, $1.00, postpaid

[Illustration: small image of book cover]

                        JACK RANGER'S SCHOOLDAYS
                   Or, The Rivals of Washington Hall

You will love Jack Ranger--you simply can't help it. He is so bright and
cheery, and so real and lifelike. A typical boarding school tale,
without a dull line in it.

                     JACK RANGER'S SCHOOL VICTORIES
                    Or, Track, Gridiron and Diamond

In this tale Jack gets back to Washington Hall and goes in for all sorts
of school games. There are numerous contests on the athletic field, and
also a great baseball game and a football game, all dear to a boy's
heart. The rivalry is bitter at times, and enemies try to put Jack "in a
hole" more than once.

                       JACK RANGER'S WESTERN TRIP
              Or, From Boarding School to Ranch and Range

This volume takes the hero and several of his chums to the great West.
Jack is anxious to clear up the mystery surrounding his father's
disappearance. At the ranch and on the range adventures of the strenuous
sort befall him.

                       JACK RANGER'S OCEAN CRUISE
                     Or, The Wreck of the Polly Ann

Here is a tale of the bounding sea, with many stirring adventures. How
the ship was wrecked, and Jack was cast away, is told in a style all
boys and girls will find exceedingly interesting. There is plenty of fun
as well as excitement.

                         JACK RANGER'S GUN CLUB
                 Or, From Schoolroom to Camp and Trail

Jack, with his chums, goes in quest of big game. The boys fall in with a
mysterious body of men, and have a terrific slide down a mountain side.

                CUPPLES & LEON CO., Publishers, NEW YORK

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                        THE DOROTHY DALE SERIES
                          By Margaret Penrose

     Cloth, 12mo. Illustrated. Price per volume, 60 cents, postpaid

                     DOROTHY DALE: A GIRL OF TO-DAY

Dorothy is the daughter of an old Civil War veteran who is running a
weekly newspaper in a small Eastern town. When her father falls sick,
and the newspaper property is in danger of going to pieces, the girl
shows what she can do to support the family.

[Illustration: small image of book cover]

                    DOROTHY DALE AT GLENWOOD SCHOOL

More prosperous times have come to the Dale family, and Major Dale
resolves to send Dorothy to a boarding school to complete her education.
At Glenwood School the girl makes a host of friends and has many good
times. But some girls are jealous of Dorothy's popularity, and they seek
to get her into trouble in more ways than one.

                      DOROTHY DALE'S GREAT SECRET

A splendid story of one girl's devotion to another. Dorothy's chum ran
away to join a theatrical company. What Dorothy did, and how she kept
the secret, makes a tale no girl will care to miss.

                       DOROTHY DALE AND HER CHUMS

A story of school life, and of strange adventures among the gypsies.
Dorothy befriends a little French girl and also a gypsy waif, in a
manner sure to touch the hearts of all readers.

                     DOROTHY DALE'S QUEER HOLIDAYS

Relates the details of a mystery that surrounded Tanglewood Park. There
is a great snowstorm, and the young folks become snowbound, much to
their dismay.

                CUPPLES & LEON CO., Publishers, NEW YORK

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                        BOYS OF BUSINESS SERIES
                            By Allen Chapman

             Illustrated, 12mo. Cloth, 60 cents per volume

[Illustration: small image of book cover]

                        THE YOUNG EXPRESS AGENT
                  Or, Bart Stirling's Road to Success

Bart's father was the express agent in a country town. When an explosion
of fireworks rendered him unfit for work, the boy took it upon himself
to run the express office. The tale gives a good idea of the express
business in general.

                           TWO BOY PUBLISHERS
                  Or, From Typecase to Editor's Chair

This tale will appeal strongly to all lads who wish to know how a
newspaper is printed and published. The two boy publishers work their
way up, step by step, from a tiny printing office to the ownership of a
town paper.

                            MAIL ORDER FRANK
                    Or, A Smart Boy and His Chances

Here we have a story covering an absolutely new field--that of the
mail-order business. How Frank started in a small way and gradually
worked his way tip to a business figure of considerable importance is
told in a fascinating manner.

                             A BUSINESS BOY
                          Or, Winning Success

This relates the ups and downs of a young storekeeper. He has some keen
rivals, but "wins out" in more ways than one. All youths who wish to go
into business will want this volume.

                CUPPLES & LEON CO., Publishers, NEW YORK

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                           MOTOR BOYS SERIES
                   (Trade Mark, Reg. U. S. Pat. Of.)
                           By Clarence Young

     Cloth. 12mo. Illustrated. Price per volume. 60 cents, postpaid

[Illustration: small image of book cover]

                             THE MOTOR BOYS
                    Or, Chums Through Thick and Thin

In this volume is related how the three boys got together and planned to
obtain a touring car and make a trip lasting through the summer.

                        THE MOTOR BOYS OVERLAND
                  Or, A Long Trip for Fun and Fortune

With the money won at the great motorcycle race the three boys purchase
their touring car and commence their travels.

                        THE MOTOR BOYS IN MEXICO
                   Or, The Secret of the Buried City

From our own country the scene is shifted to Mexico, where the motor
boys journey in quest of a city said to have been buried centuries ago
by an earthquake.

                    THE MOTOR BOYS ACROSS THE PLAINS
                      Or, The Hermit of Lost Lake

Unraveling the mystery surrounding an old hermit and a poor boy.

                         THE MOTOR BOYS AFLOAT
                Or, The Stirring Cruise of the Dartaway

In this volume the boys take to a motorboat, and have many adventures.

                     THE MOTOR BOYS ON THE ATLANTIC
                   Or, The Mystery of the Lighthouse

How the lads foiled the bad men who wanted to wreck a steamer by means
of false lights is dramatically related.

                    THE MOTOR BOYS IN STRANGE WATERS
                     Or, Lost in a Floating Forest

Telling of many adventures in the mysterious Everglades of Florida.

                     THE MOTOR BOYS ON THE PACIFIC
                     Or, The Young Derelict Hunters

The derelict was of great value, and the hunt for it proved full of
perils.

                      THE MOTOR BOYS IN THE CLOUDS
                    Or, A Trip for Fame and Fortune

The boys fall in with an inventor and invest in a flying machine. After
a number of stirring adventures in the clouds they enter a big race.

                CUPPLES & LEON CO., Publishers, NEW YORK

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                         THE BOY HUNTERS SERIES
                       By Captain Ralph Bonehill

     Cloth. 15mo. Illustrated. Price per volume, 60 cents, postpaid

[Illustration: small image of book cover]

                            FOUR BOY HUNTERS
                     Or, The Outing of the Gun Club

A fine, breezy story of the woods and waters, of adventures in search of
game, and of great times around the campfire, told in Captain Bonehill's
best style. In the book are given full directions for camping out.

                           GUNS AND SNOWSHOES
               Or, The Winter Outing of the Young Hunters

In this volume the young-hunters leave home for a winter outing on the
shores of a small lake. They hunt and trap to their heart's content, and
have adventures in plenty, all calculated to make boys "sit up and take
notice." A good healthy book; one with the odor of the pine forests and
the glare of the welcome campfire in every chapter.

                       YOUNG HUNTERS OF THE LAKE
                        Or, Out with Rod and Gun

Another tale of woods and waters, with some strong hunting scenes and a
good deal of mystery. The three volumes make a splendid outdoor series.

                        OUT WITH GUN AND CAMERA
                  Or, The Boy Hunters in the Mountains

Takes up the new fad of photographing wild animals as well as shooting
them. An escaped circus chimpanzee and an escaped lion add to the
interest of the narrative.

                CUPPLES & LEON CO., Publishers, NEW YORK

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                       THE DAREWELL CHUMS SERIES
                            By Allen Chapman

           Cloth. 12mo. Illustrated. 60 cents each, postpaid.

                           THE DAREWELL CHUMS
                      Or, The Heroes of the School

A bright, lively story for boys, telling of the doings of four chums, at
school and elsewhere. There is a strong holding plot, and several
characters who are highly amusing. Any youth getting this book will
consider it a prize and tell all his friends about it.

                     THE DAREWELL CHUMS IN THE CITY
                  Or, The Disappearance of Ned Wilding

From a country town the scene is changed to a great city. One of the
chums has disappeared in an extraordinary manner, and the others
institute a hunt for him. The youths befriend a city waif, who in turn
makes a revelation which clears up the mystery.

[Illustration: small image of book cover]

                      DAREWELL CHUMS IN THE WOODS
                       Or, Frank Roscoe's Secret

The boys had planned for a grand outing when something happened of which
none of them had dreamed. They thought one of their number had done a
great wrong--at least, it looked so. But they could not really believe
the accusations made, so they set to work to help Frank all they could.
All went camping some miles from home, and when not hunting and fishing
spent their time in learning the truth of what had occurred.

                     THE DAREWELL CHUMS ON A CRUISE
                   Or, Fenn Masterson's Odd Discovery

A tale of the Great Lakes. The boys run across some Canadian smugglers
and stumble on the secret of a valuable mine. Some curious adventures
underground are well told.

                CUPPLES & LEON CO., Publishers, NEW YORK




