evident from the majority of blue and purple flowers that, although now
abundant here and so perfectly at home, are really quite recent
immigrants from Europe and Asia. But our dryer, hotter climate never
brings to the perfection attained in England

  "The sweet forget-me-nots
  That grow for happy lovers."

Tennyson thus ignores the melancholy association of the flower in the
popular legend which tells how a lover, when trying to gather some of
these blossoms for his sweetheart, fell into a deep pool, and threw a
bunch on the bank, calling out, as he sank forever from her sight,
"Forget me not." Another dismal myth sends its hero forth seeking hidden
treasure caves in a mountain, under the guidance of a fairy. He fills
his pockets with gold, but not heeding the fairy's warning to "forget
not the best"--_i.e._, the myosotis--he is crushed by the closing
together of the mountain. Happiest of all is the folk-tale of the
Persians, as told by their poet Shiraz: "It was in the golden morning of
the early world, when an angel sat weeping outside the closed gates of
Paradise. He had fallen from his high estate through loving a daughter
of earth, nor was he permitted to enter again until she whom he loved
had planted the flowers of the forget-me-not in every corner of the
world. He returned to earth and assisted her, and together they went
hand in hand. When their task was ended, they entered Paradise together,
for the fair woman, without tasting the bitterness of death, became
immortal like the angel whose love her beauty had won when she sat by
the river twining forget-me-nots in her hair."

It was the golden ring around the forget-me-not's centre that first led
Sprengel to believe the conspicuous markings at the entrance of many
flowers served as pathfinders to insects. This golden circle also
shelters the nectar from rain, and indicates to the fly or bee just
where it must probe between stigma and anthers to touch them with
opposite sides of its tongue. Since it may probe from any point of the
circle, it is quite likely that the side of the tongue that touched a
pollen-laden anther in one flower will touch the stigma in the next
one visited, and so cross-fertilize it. But forget-me-nots are not
wholly dependent on insects. When these fail, a fully mature flower is
still able to set fertile seed by shedding its own pollen directly on
the stigma.


Viper's Bugloss; Blue-weed; Viper's Herb or Grass; Snake-flower; Blue
Thistle; Blue Devil

_Echium vulgare_

_Flowers_--Bright blue, afterward reddish purple, pink in the bud,
numerous, clustered on short, 1-sided curved spikes rolled up at first,
and straightening out as flowers expand. Calyx deeply 5-cleft; corolla 1
in. long or less, funnel form, the 5 lobes unequal, acute; 5 stamens
inserted on corolla tube, the filaments spreading below, and united
above into slender appendage, the anthers forming a cone; 1 pistil with
2 stigmas. _Stem:_ 1 to 2 1/2 ft. high; bristly-hairy, erect, spotted.
_Leaves:_ Hairy, rough, oblong to lance-shaped, alternate, seated on
stem, except at base of plant.

_Preferred Habitat_--Dry fields, waste places, roadsides

_Flowering Season_--June-July.

_Distribution_--New Brunswick to Virginia, westward to Nebraska;
Europe and Asia.

Years ago, when simple folk believed God had marked plants with some
sign to indicate the special use for which each was intended, they
regarded the spotted stem of the bugloss, and its seeds shaped like a
serpent's head, as certain indications that the herb would cure snake
bites. Indeed, the genus takes its name from _Echis_, the Greek viper.




VERVAIN FAMILY _(Verbenaceae)_


Blue Vervain; Wild Hyssop; Simpler's Joy

_Verbena hastata_

_Flowers_--Very small, purplish blue, in numerous slender, erect,
compact spikes. Calyx 5-toothed; corolla tubular, unequally 5-lobed; 2
pairs of stamens; 1 pistil. _Stem:_ 3 to 7 ft. high, rough, branched
above, leafy, 4-sided. _Leaves:_ Opposite, stemmed, lance-shaped,
saw-edged rough, lower ones lobed at base.

_Preferred Habitat--_Moist meadows, roadsides, waste places.

_Flowering Season_--June-September.

_Distribution_--United States and Canada in almost every part.

Seeds below, a circle of insignificant purple-blue flowers in the
centre, and buds at the top of the vervain's slender spires do not
produce a striking effect, yet this common plant certainly does not lack
beauty. John Burroughs, ever ready to say a kindly, appreciative word
for any weed, speaks of its drooping, knotted threads, that "make a
pretty etching upon the winter snow." Bees, the vervain's benefactors,
are usually seen clinging to the blooming spikes, and apparently asleep
on them. Borrowing the name of Simpler's Joy from its European sister,
the flower has also appropriated much of the tradition and folk-lore
centred about that plant which herb-gatherers, or simplers, truly
delighted to see, since none was once more salable.

Ages before Christians ascribed healing virtues to the vervain--found
growing on Mount Calvary, and therefore possessing every sort of
miraculous power, according to the logic of simple peasant folk--the
Druids had counted it among their sacred plants. "When the dog-star
arose from unsunned spots" the priests gathered it. Did not
Shakespeare's witches learn some of their uncanny rites from these
reverend men of old? One is impressed with the striking similarity of
many customs recorded of both. Two of the most frequently used
ingredients in witches cauldrons were the vervain and the rue. "The
former probably derived its notoriety from the fact of its being sacred
to Thor, an honor which marked it out, like other lightning plants, as
peculiarly adapted for occult uses," says Mr. Thiselton Dyer in his
"Folk-lore of Plants." "Although vervain, therefore, as the enchanter's
plant, was gathered by witches to do mischief in their incantations,
yet, as Aubrey says, it 'hinders witches from their will,' a
circumstance to which Drayton further refers when he speaks of the
vervain as ''gainst witchcraft much avayling.'" Now we understand why
the children of Shakespeare's time hung vervain and dill with a
horseshoe over the door.

In his eighth Eclogue, Virgil refers to vervain as a charm to recover
lost love. Doubtless this was the verbena, the _herba sacra_ employed in
ancient Roman sacrifices, according to Pliny. In his day the bridal
wreath was of _verbena_, gathered by the bride herself.




MINT FAMILY _(Labiatae)_


Mad-dog Skullcap or Helmet-flower; Mad weed; Hoodwort

_Scutellaria lateriflora_

_Flowers_--Blue, varying to whitish; several or many, 1/4 in. long,
growing in axils of upper leaves or in 1-sided spike-like racemes. Calyx
2-lipped, the upper lip with a helmet-like protuberance; corolla
2-lipped; the lower, 3-lobed lip spreading; the middle lobe larger than
the side ones. Stamens, 4, in pairs, under the upper lip; upper pair the
shorter; 1 pistil, the style unequally cleft in two. _Stem:_ Square,
smooth, leafy, branched, 8 in. to 2 ft. high. _Leaves:_ Opposite, oblong
to lance-shaped, thin, toothed, on slender pedicles, 1 to 3 in. long,
growing gradually smaller toward top of stem. _Fruit:_ 4 nutlets.

_Preferred Habitat_--Wet, shady ground.

_Flowering Season_--July-September.

_Distribution_--Uneven throughout United States and the British
Possessions.

By the helmet-like appendage on the upper lip of the calyx, which to the
imaginative mind of Linnaeus suggested _Scutellum_ (a little dish),
which children delight to spring open for a view of the four tiny seeds
attached at the base when in fruit, one knows this to be a member of the
skullcap tribe, a widely scattered genus of blue and violet two-lipped
flowers, some small to the point of insignificance, like the present
species, others showy enough for the garden, but all rich in nectar,
and eagerly sought by their good friends, the bees.

The Larger or Hyssop Skullcap (_S. integrifolia_) rarely has a dent in
its rounded oblong leaves, which, like the stem, are covered with fine
down. Its lovely, bright blue flowers, an inch long, the lips of about
equal length, are grouped opposite each other at the top of a stem that
never lifts them higher than two feet; and so their beauty is often
concealed in the tall grass of roadsides and meadows and the undergrowth
of woods and thickets, where they bloom from May to August, from
southern New England to the Gulf of Mexico, westward to Texas.


Self-heal; Heal-all; Blue Curls; Heart-of-the-Earth; Brunella;
Carpenter-weed

_Prunella vulgaris_

_Flowers_--Purple and violet, in dense spikes, somewhat resembling a
clover head; from 1/2 to 1 in. long in flower, becoming 4 times the
length in fruit. Corolla tubular, irregularly 2-lipped, the upper lip
darker and hood-like; the lower one 3-lobed, spreading, the middle and
largest lobe fringed; 4 twin-like stamens ascending under upper lip;
filaments of the lower and longer pair 2-toothed at summit, one of the
teeth bearing an anther, the other tooth sterile; style thread-like,
shorter than stamens, and terminating in a 2-cleft stigma. Calyx
2-parted, half the length of corolla, its teeth often hairy on edges.
_Stem:_ 2 in. to 2 ft. high, erect or reclining, simple or branched.
_Leaves:_ Opposite, oblong. _Fruit:_ 4 nutlets, round and smooth.

_Preferred Habitat_--Fields, roadsides, waste places.

_Flowering Season_--May-October

_Distribution_--North America, Europe, Asia.

This humble, rusty green plant, weakly lopping over the surrounding
grass, so that often only its insignificant purple, clover-like
flower-heads are visible, is another of those immigrants from the old
countries which, having proved fittest in the fiercer struggle for
existence there, has soon after its introduction here exceeded most of
our more favored native flowers in numbers. Everywhere we find the
heal-all, sometimes dusty and stunted by the roadside, sometimes truly
beautiful in its fresh purple, violet, and white when perfectly
developed under happy conditions. In England, where most flowers are
deeper hued than with us, the heal-all is rich purple. What is the
secret of this flower's successful march across three continents? As
usual, the chief reason is to be found in the facility it offers insects
to secure food; and the quantity of fertile seed it is therefore able to
ripen as the result of their visits is its reward. Also, its flowering
season is unusually long, and it is a tireless bloomer. It is finical in
no respect; its sprawling stems root easily at the joints, and it is
very hardy.


Motherwort

_Leonurus Cardiaca_

_Flowers_--Dull purple pink, pale purple, or white, small, clustered in
axils of upper leaves. Calyx tubular, bell-shaped, with 5 rigid awl-like
teeth; corolla 2-lipped, upper lip arched, woolly without; lower lip
3-lobed, spreading, mottled; the tube with oblique ring of hairs inside.
Four twin-like stamens, anterior pair longer, reaching under upper lip;
style 2-cleft at summit. _Stem:_ 2 to 5 ft. tall, straight, branched,
leafy, purplish. _Leaves:_ Opposite, on slender petioles; lower ones
rounded, 2 to 4 in. broad, palmately cut into 2 to 5 lobes; upper leaves
narrower, 3-cleft or 3-toothed.

_Preferred Habitat_--Waste places near dwellings.

_Flowering Season_--June-September.

_Distribution_--Nova Scotia southward to North Carolina, west to
Minnesota and Nebraska. Naturalized from Europe and Asia.

How the bees love this generous, old-fashioned entertainer! One nearly
always sees them clinging to the close whorls of flowers that are strung
along the stem, and of course transferring pollen, in recompense, as
they journey on. A more credulous generation imported the plant for its
alleged healing virtues. What is the significance of its Greek name,
meaning a lion's tail? Let no one suggest, by a far-stretched metaphor,
that our grandmothers, in Revolutionary days, enjoyed pulling it to vent
their animosity against the British.


Oswego Tea; Bee Balm; Indian's Plume; Fragrant Balm; Mountain Mint

_Monarda didyma_

_Flowers_--Scarlet, clustered in a solitary, terminal, rounded head of
dark-red calices, with leafy bracts below it. Calyx narrow, tubular,
sharply 5-toothed; corolla tubular, widest at the mouth, 2-lipped, 1 1/2
to 2 inches long; 2 long, anther-bearing stamens ascending, protruding;
1 pistil; the style 2-cleft. _Stem:_ 2 to 3 ft. tall. _Leaves:_
Aromatic, opposite, dark green, oval to oblong lance-shaped, sharply
saw-edged, of ten hairy beneath, petioled; upper leaves and bracts
often red.

_Preferred Habitat_--Moist soil, especially near streams, in hilly or
mountainous regions.

_Flowering Season_--July-September.

_Distribution_--Canada to Georgia, west to Michigan.

Gorgeous, glowing scarlet heads of Bee Balm arrest the dullest eye,
bracts and upper leaves often taking on blood-red color, too, as if it
had dripped from the lacerated flowers. Where their vivid doubles are
reflected in a shadowy mountain stream, not even the Cardinal Flower is
more strikingly beautiful. Thrifty clumps transplanted from Nature's
garden will spread about ours and add a splendor like the flowers of
salvia, next of kin, if only the roots get a frequent soaking.

With even longer flower tubes than the Wild Bergamot's the Bee Balm
belies its name, for, however frequently bees may come about for nectar
when it rises high, only long-tongued bumblebees could get enough to
compensate for their trouble. Butterflies, which suck with their wings
in motion, plumb the depths. The ruby-throated humming bird--to which
the Brazilian salvia of our gardens has adapted itself--flashes about
these whorls of Indian plumes just as frequently--of course transferring
pollen on his needle-like bill as he darts from flower to flower. Even
the protruding stamens and pistil take on the prevailing hue. Most of
the small, blue, or purple flowered members of the mint family cater to
bees by wearing their favorite color; the bergamot charms butterflies
with magenta, and tubes so deep the short-tongued mob cannot pilfer
their sweets; and from the frequency of the humming bird's visits, from
the greater depth of the Bee Balm's tubes and their brilliant, flaring
red--an irresistibly attractive color to the ruby-throat--it would
appear that this is a bird flower. Certainly its adaptation is quite as
perfect as the salvia's. Mischievous bees and wasps steal nectar they
cannot reach legitimately through bungholes of their own making in the
bottom of the slender casks.


Wild Bergamot

_Monarda fistulosa_

_Flowers_--Extremely variable, purplish lavender, magenta, rose, pink,
yellowish pink, or whitish, dotted; clustered in a solitary, nearly flat
terminal head. Calyx tubular, narrow, 5-toothed, very hairy within.
Corolla 1 to 1-1/2 in. long, tubular, 2-lipped, upper lip erect,
toothed; lower lip spreading, 3-lobed, middle lobe longest; 2
anther-bearing stamens protruding; 1 pistil; the style 2-lobed. _Stem:_
2 to 3 ft. high, rough, branched. _Leaves:_ Opposite, lance-shaped,
saw-edged, on slender petioles; aromatic; bracts and upper leaves
whitish or the color of flower.

_Preferred Habitat_--Open woods, thickets, dry rocky hills.

_Flowering Season_--June-September.

_Distribution_--Eastern Canada and Maine, westward to Minnesota, south
to Gulf of Mexico.

Only a few bergamot flowers open at a time; the rest of the slightly
rounded head, thickly set with hairy calices, looks as if it might be
placed in a glass cup and make an excellent penwiper. If the cultivated
human eye (and stomach) revolt at magenta, it is ever a favorite shade
with butterflies. They flutter in ecstasy over the gay flowers; indeed,
they are the principal visitors and benefactors, for the erect corollas,
exposed organs, and level-topped heads are well adapted to their
requirements.




NIGHTSHADE FAMILY _(Solanaceae)_


Nightshade; Blue Bindweed; Felonwort; Bittersweet; Scarlet or Snake
Berry; Poison-flower; Woody Nightshade

