U.S. Patent Office




How to Obtain Letters Patent for New Inventions.

Information about Caveats, Extensions, Interferences Designs, Trade
Marks; also, Foreign Patents.


For a period of nearly twenty-five years, MUNN & CO. have occupied the
position of leading Solicitors of American and European Patents, and
during this extended experience of nearly a quarter of a century, they
have examined not less than fifty thousand alleged new inventions, and
have prosecuted upward of thirty thousand applications for patents, and,
in addition to this, they have made, at the Patent Office, over twenty
thousand preliminary examinations into the novelty of inventions, with a
careful report on the same.

The important advantages of MUNN & CO.'S Agency are, that their practice
has been ten-fold greater than that of any other Agency in existence,
with the additional advantage of having the assistance of the best
professional skill in every department, and a Branch Office at
Washington, which watches and supervises, when necessary, cases as they
pass through official examination.


CONSULTATIONS AND OPINIONS FREE.

Those who have made inventions and desire a consultation are cordially
invited to advise with MUNN & CO. who will be happy to see them in
person at the office, or to advise them by letter. In all cases, they
may expect an HONEST OPINION. For such consultations, opinion, and
advice, NO CHARGE is made. A pen-and-ink sketch and a description of the
invention should be sent.


TO APPLY FOR A PATENT,

a model must be furnished, not over a foot in any dimension. Send model
to MUNN & CO., 37 Park Row, New York, by express, charges paid, also, a
description of the improvement, and remit $16 to cover first Government
fee, and revenue and postage stamps.

The model should be neatly made, of any suitable materials, strongly
fastened, without glue, and neatly painted. The name of the inventor
should be engraved or painted upon it. When the invention consists of an
improvement upon some other machine, a full working model of the whole
machine will not be necessary. But the model must be sufficiently
perfect to show with clearness the nature and operation of the
improvement.


PRELIMINARY EXAMINATION

is made into the patentability of an invention by personal search at the
Patent Office, among the models of the patents pertaining to the class
to which the improvement relates. For this special search, and a report
in writing, a fee of $5 is charged. This search is made by a corps of
examiner of long experience.

Inventors who employ us are not required to incur the cost of a
preliminary examination. But it is advised in doubtful cases.


COST OF APPLICATIONS.

When the model is received, and first Government fee paid, the drawings
and specification are carefully prepared and forwarded to the applicant
for his signature and oath, at which time the agency fee is called for.
This fee is generally not over $25. The cases are exceptionally complex
if a higher fee than $25 is called for, and, upon the return of
the papers, they are filed at the Patent Office to await Official
examination. If the case should be rejected for any cause, or objections
made to a claim, the reasons are inquired into and communicated to the
applicant, with sketches and explanations of the references; and should
it appear that the reasons given are insufficient, the claims are
prosecuted immediately, and the rejection set aside, and usually WITHOUT
EXTRA CHARGE TO THE APPLICANT.

MUNN & CO. are determined to place within the reach of those who confide
to them their business, the best facilities and the highest professional
skill and experience.

The only cases of this character, in which MUNN & CO. expect an extra
fee, are those wherein appeals are taken from the decision of the
Examiner after a second rejection; and MUNN & CO. wish to state very
distinctly, that they have but few cases which can not be settled
without the necessity of an appeal; and before an appeal is taken, in
any case, the applicant is fully advised of all facts and charges, and
no proceedings are had without his sanction; so that all inventors who
employ MUNN & CO. know in advance what their applications and patents
are to cost.

MUNN & CO. make no charge for prosecuting the rejected claims of their
own clients before the Examiners and when their patents are granted, the
invention is noticed editorially in the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN.


REJECTED CASES.

MUNN & CO. give very special attention to the examination and
prosecution of rejected cases filed by inventors and other attorneys. In
such cases a fee of $5 is required for special examination and report,
and in case of probable success by further prosecution, and the papers
are found tolerably well prepared, MUNN & Co. will take up the case and
endeavor to get it through for a reasonable fee, to be agreed upon in
advance of prosecution.


CAVEATS

Are desirable if an inventor is not fully prepared to apply for a
Patent. A Caveat affords protection, for one year, against the issue
of a patent to another for the same invention. Caveat papers should be
carefully prepared. The Government fee on filing a Caveat is $10, and
MUNN & Co.'s charges for preparing the necessary papers are usually from
$10 to $12.


REISSUES.

A patent when discovered to be defective, may be reissued by the
surrender of the original patent, and the filing of amended papers. This
proceeding should be taken with great care.


DESIGNS, TRADE MARKS, AND COMPOSITIONS

can be patented for a term of years, also, new medicines or medical
compounds, and useful mixtures of all kinds. When the invention consists
of a medicine or compound, or a new article of manufacture, or a new
composition, samples of the article must be furnished, neatly put up.
Also, send a full statement of the ingredients, proportions, mode of
preparation, uses, and merits.


PATENTS CAN BE EXTENDED.

All patents issued prior to 1861, and now in force, may be extended for
a period of seven years upon the presentation of proper testimony. The
extended term of a patent is frequently of much greater value than the
first term; but an application for an extension, to be successful,
must be carefully prepared. MUNN & Co. have had a large experience in
obtaining extensions, and are prepared to give reliable advice.


INTERFERENCES

Between pending applications before the Commissioners are managed and
testimony taken; also, Assignments, Agreements, and Licenses prepared.
In fact, there is no branch of the Patent Business which MUNN & Co. are
not fully prepared to undertake and manage with fidelity and dispatch.


FOREIGN PATENTS.

American inventors should bear in mind that five Patents--American,
English, French, Belgian, and Prussian--will secure an inventor
exclusive monopoly to his discovery among ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY
MILLIONS of the most intelligent people in the world. The facilities of
business and steam communication are such, that patents can be obtained
abroad by our citizens almost as easily as at home. MUNN & Co. have
prepared and taken a larger number of European Patents than any other
American Agency. They have Agents of great experience in London, Paris,
Berlin, and other Capitals.

A Pamphlet, containing a synopsis of the Foreign Patent Laws, sent free.
Address

MUNN & CO., 37 Park Row, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *




Official List of Patents.

Issued by the United States Patent Office

FOR THE WEEK ENDING DEC. 14, 1869.

_Reported Officially for the Scientific American_


SCHEDULE OF PATENT OFFICE FEES:

  On each caveat                                                $10
  On filing each application for a Patent (seventeen years)     $15
  On issuing each original Patent                               $20
  On appeal to Commissioner of Patents                          $20
  On application for Reissue                                    $30
  On application for Extension of Patent                        $50
  On granting the Extension                                     $50
  On filing a Disclaimer                                        $10
  On an application for Design (three and a half years)         $10
  On an application for Design (seven years)                    $15
  On an application for Design (fourteen years)                 $30

In addition to which there are some small revenue-stamp taxes. Residents
of Canada and Nova Scotia pay $500 on application.

_For copy of Claim of any Patent issued within 30 years_ $1

_A sketch from the model or drawing, relating to such portion of a
machine as the Claim covers, from_ $1 _upward, but usually at the price
above-named_.

_The full Specification of any patent issued since Nov. 20,1866, at
which time the Patent Office commenced printing them_ $1.25

_Official Copies of Drawings of any patent issued since 1836, we can
supply at a reasonable cost, the price depending upon the amount of
labor involved and the number of views.

Full information, as to price of drawings, in each case, may be had by
addressing_

MUNN & CO.,

Patent Solicitors, No. 37 Park Row, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

97,751.--FLUTING MACHINE.--Henry B. Adams, New York city.

97,752.--ELASTIC WASHER FOR CARRIAGES, ETC.--George W. Billings,
Chicago, Ill. Antedated December 4, 1869.

97,753.--ADJUSTABLE WAGON BOTTOM AND CHUTE.--Abraham Bitner, Jr.,
Lancaster, Pa.

97,754.--MODE OF TREATING CONGLOMERATES OF CAST IRON.--Thomas
Schoenberger Blair, Pittsburgh, Pa.

97,755.--ANIMAL TRAP.--John Blume, Mount Pleasant, Md.

97,756.--ELECTRO-MAGNETIC ADVERTISING FRAME.--Joshua Brooks, (assignor
to himself and Benjamin E. Corlew), Boston, Mass., Antedated December 1,
1869.

97,757.--LAMP EXTINGUISHER.--Wm.I.Bunker, Yankton, Dakota Territory.

97,758.--MACHINE FOR POLISHING THE EDGES OF BOOT AND SHOE SOLES.--Robert
F. Burns, Albany, N.Y.

97,759.--BEEHIVE.--Peter Campbell, Carrolltown, Pa.

97,760.--RAILWAY GATE.--Peter Campbell, Carrolltown, Pa.

97,761.--REDUCING ORES.--Thomas J. Chubb, Williamsburg, N.Y. Antedated
June 14, 1869.

97,762.--MACHINE FOR BENDING AND FOLDING SHEET METAL.--James B. Clark
and Lucas C. Clark, Plantsville, Conn.

97,763.--SAW SWAGE.--Joseph S. Clark, New York city.

97,764.--SASH HOLDER.--Nelson C. Cole (assignor to himself and Leverett
H. Marvin), Beaver Dam, Wis.

97,765.--MACHINE FOR CRIMPING AND FORMING THE FRONT OF
BOOTS.--Christopher Day, Mineral Point, Wis. Antedated November 30,
1869.

97,766.--WATER HEATER FOR CULINARY PURPOSES.--Royal E. Deane, Brooklyn,
N.Y.

97,767.--PUMP.--Joseph W. Douglas, Middletown, Conn., assignor to W.& B.
Douglas.

97,768.--DEPURATOR.--S. C. Frink and L. D. Harlan, Indianapolis, Ind.

97,769.--SHUTTER FASTENER.--Charles B. Goodrich, Jr., Boston, Mass.

97,770.--Suspended.

97,771.--MANUFACTURE OF GLUE.--George Guenther, Chicago, Ill., assignor
to himself and E. H. Heymann, New York city.

97,772.--SHADE RINGS FOR LAMP BURNERS.--Hiram W. Hayden (assignor to
Holmes, Booth & Haydens), Waterbury, Conn.

97,773.--LAMP.--Hiram W. Hayden (assignor to Holmes, Booth & Haydens),
Waterbury, Conn.

97,774.--FLUTING MACHINE.--Frederick Hewitt, Bloomfield, N.J.

97,775.--WAGON BRAKE.--Abram C. Jaques, Levenworth, Kansas.

97,776.--WICK-TRIMMER FOR LAMPS.--E.C.Jenkins, Jr., Worcester, Mass.
Antedated December 11, 1869.

97,777.--LUMBER DRYER.--Jesse.B. Johnson and Thomas E. Johnson,
Indianapolis, Ind.

97,778.--TURBINE WATER WHEEL.--Julius H. Jones, Charlton, Mass.

97,779.--HYDRAULIC ENGINE.--Henry J. King and Benton L. Beebe,
Middletown, N. Y.

97,780.--BREECH-LOADING REVOLVING FIREARMS.--Francois Alexandre Le Mat,
New Orleans, La., assignor to Charles Pietroni, London, England.

97,781.--COMPOSITION FOR COVERING STEAM BOILERS AND FOR OTHER
PURPOSES.--Ferdinand Leroy (Ferdinand Leroy, administrator), of
Commercial Road, London, England, assignor to himself and P. A. Victor
Le Luoez, England.

97,782.--WINE AND CIDER MILL.--Edward C. Lewis, Benton Harbor, Mich.

97,783.--EXCAVATOR.--John R. Lewis, Piper City, Ill.

97,784.--BAND TIGHTENER.--Francis M. Lottridge, Portland, Ind., assignor
to himself, James M. Templer, and James C. Jay. Antedated December 14,
1869.

97,785.--CLOD FENDER.--Francis M. Lowden and John D. Lowden, Lawrence,
Ind.

