Linneus names buds and bulbs the winter-cradles of the plant or
hybernacula, and might have given the same term to seeds. In warm
climates few plants produce buds, as the vegetable life can be
compleated in one summer, and hence the hybernacle is not wanted; in
cold climates also some plants do not produce buds, as philadelphus,
frangula, viburnum, ivy, heath, wood-nightshade, rue, geranium.

The bulbs of plants are another kind of winter-cradle, or hybernacle,
adhering to the descending trunk, and are found in the perennial
herbaceous plants which are too tender to bear the cold of the winter.
The production of these subterraneous winter lodges, is not yet perhaps
clearly understood, they have been distributed by Linneus according to
their forms into scaly, solid, coated, and jointed bulbs, which however
does not elucidate their manner of production. As the buds of trees may
be truly esteemed individual annual plants, their roots constituting the
bark of the tree, it follows that these roots (viz. of each individual
bud) spread themselves over the last years bark, making a new bark over
the old one, and thence descending cover with a new bark the old roots
also in the same manner. A similar circumstance I suppose to happen in
some herbaceous plants, that is, a new bark is annually produced over
the old root, and thus for some years at least the old root or caudex
increases in size and puts up new stems. As these roots increase in size
the central part I suppose changes like the internal wood of a tree and
does not possess any vegetable life, and therefore gives out no fibres
or rootlets, and hence appears bitten off, as in valerian, plantain, and
devil's-bit. And this decay of the central part of the root I suppose
has given occasion to the belief of the root-fibres drawing down the
bulb so much insisted on by Mr. Milne in his Botanical Dictionary, Art.
Bulb.

From the observations and drawings of various kinds of bulbous roots at
different times of their growth, sent me by a young lady of nice
observation, it appears probable that all bulbous roots properly so
called perish annually in this climate: Bradley, Miller, and the Author
of Spectacle de la Nature, observe that the tulip annually renews its
bulb, for the stalk of the old flower is found under the old dry coat
but on the outside of the new bulb. This large new bulb is the flowering
bulb, but besides this there are other small new bulbs produced between
the coats of this large one but from the same caudex, (or circle from
which the root-fibres spring;) these small bulbs are leaf-bearing bulbs,
and renew themselves annually with increasing size till they bear
flowers.

Miss ---- favoured me with the following curious experiment: She took a
small tulip-root out of the earth when the green leaves were
sufficiently high to show the flower, and placed it in a glass of water;
the leaves and flower soon withered and the bulb became wrinkled and
soft, but put out one small side bulb and three bulbs beneath descending
an inch into the water by long processes from the caudex, the old bulb
in some weeks intirely decayed; on dissecting this monster, the middle
descending bulb was found by its process to adhere to the caudex and to
the old flower-stem, and the side ones were separated from the flower-
stem by a few shrivelled coats but adhered to the caudex. Whence she
concludes that these last were off-sets or leaf-bulbs which should have
been seen between the coats of the new flower-bulb if it had been left
to grow in the earth, and that the middle one would have been the new
flower-bulb. In some years (perhaps in wet seasons) the florists are
said to lose many of their tulip-roots by a similar process, the new
leaf-bulbs being produced beneath the old ones by an elongation of the
caudex without any new flower-bulbs.

By repeated dissections she observes that the leaf-bulbs or off-sets of
tulip, crocus, gladiolus, fritillary, are renewed in the same manner as
the flowering-bulbs, contrary to the opinion of many writers; this new
leaf-bulb is formed on the inside of the coats from whence the leaves
grow, and is more or less advanced in size as the outer coats and leaves
are more or less shrivelled. In examining tulip, iris, hyacinth, hare-
bell, the new bulb was invariably found _between_ the flower-stem and
the base of the innermost leaf of those roots which had flowered, and
_inclosed_ by the base of the innermost leaf in those roots which had
not flowered, in both cases adhering to the caudex or fleshy circle from
which the root-fibres spring.

Hence it is probable that the bulbs of hyacinths are renewed annually,
but that this is performed from the caudex within the old bulb, the
outer coat of which does not so shrivel as in crocus and fritillary and
hence this change is not so apparent. But I believe as soon as the
flower is advanced the new bulbs may be seen on dissection, nor does the
annual increase of the size of the root of cyclamen and of aletris
capensis militate against this annual renewal of them, since the leaf-
bulbs or off-sets, as described above, are increased in size as they are
annually renewed. See note on orchis, and on anthoxanthum, in Vol. II.
of this work.




                       NOTE XV.--SOLAR VOLCANOS.


     _From the deep craters of his realms of fire
     The whirling sun this ponderous planet hurld_.

                                            CANTO II. l. 14.


Dr. Alexander Wilson, Professor of Astronomy at Glasgow, published a
paper in the Philosophical Transactions for 1774, demonstrating that the
spots in the sun's disk are real cavities, excavations through the
luminous material, which covers the other parts of the sun's surface.
One of these cavities he found to be about 4000 miles deep and many
times as wide. Some objections were made to this doctrine by M. De la
Laude in the Memoirs of the French Academy for the year 1776, which
however have been ably answered by Professor Wilson in reply in the
Philos. Trans. for 1783. Keil observes, in his Astronomical Lectures, p.
44, "We frequently see spots in the sun which are larger and broader not
only than Europe or Africa, but which even equal, if they do not exceed,
the surface of the whole terraqueous globe." Now that these cavities are
made in the sun's body by a process of nature similar to our earthquakes
does not seem improbable on several accounts. 1. Because from this
discovery of Dr. Wilson it appears that the internal parts of the sun
are not in a state of inflammation or of ejecting light, like the
external part or luminous ocean which covers it; and hence that a
greater degree of heat or inflammation and consequent expansion or
explosion may occasionally be produced in its internal or dark nucleus.
2. Because the solar spots or cavities are frequently increased or
diminished in size. 3. New ones are often produced. 4. And old ones
vanish. 5. Because there are brighter or more luminous parts of the
sun's disk, called faculae by Scheiner and Hevelius, which would seem to
be volcanos in the sun, or, as Dr. Wilson calls them, "eructations of
matter more luminous than that which covers the sun's surface." 6. To
which may be added that all the planets added together with their
satellites do not amount to more than one six hundred and fiftieth part
of the mass of the sun according to Sir Isaac Newton.

Now if it could be supposed that the planets were originally thrown out
of the sun by larger sun-quakes than those frequent ones which occasion
these spots or excavations above-mentioned, what would happen? 1.
According to the observations and opinion of Mr. Herschel the sun itself
and all its planets are moving forwards round some other centre with an
unknown velocity, which may be of opake matter corresponding with the
very antient and general idea of a chaos. Whence if a ponderous planet,
as Saturn, could be supposed to be projected from the sun by an
explosion, the motion of the sun itself might be at the same time
disturbed in such a manner as to prevent the planet from falling again
into it. 2. As the sun revolves round its own axis its form must be that
of an oblate spheroid like the earth, and therefore a body projected
from its surface perpendicularly upwards from that surface would not
rise perpendicularly from the sun's centre, unless it happened to be
projected exactly from either of its poles or from its equator. Whence
it may not be necessary that a planet if thus projected from the sun by
explosion should again fall into the sun. 3. They would part from the
sun's surface with the velocity with which that surface was moving, and
with the velocity acquired by the explosion, and would therefore move
round the sun in the same direction in which the sun rotates on its
axis, and perform eliptic orbits. 4. All the planets would move the same
way round the sun, from this first motion acquired at leaving its
surface, but their orbits would be inclined to each other according to
the distance of the part, where they were thrown out, from the sun's
equator. Hence those which were ejected near the sun's equator would
have orbits but little inclined to each other, as the primary planets;
the plain of all whose orbits are inclined but seven degrees and a half
from each other. Others which were ejected near the sun's poles would
have much more eccentric orbits, as they would partake so much less of
the sun's rotatory motion at the time they parted from his surface, and
would therefore be carried further from the sun by the velocity they had
gained by the explosion which ejected them, and become comets. 5. They
would all obey the same laws of motion in their revolutions round the
sun; this has been determined by astronomers, who have demonstrated that
they move through equal areas in equal times. 6. As their annual periods
would depend on the height they rose by the explosion, these would
differ in them all. 7. As their diurnal revolutions would depend on one
side of the exploded matter adhering more than the other at the time it
was torn off by the explosion, these would also differ in the different
planets, and not bear any proportion to their annual periods. Now as all
these circumstances coincide with the known laws of the planetary
system, they serve to strengthen this conjecture.

This coincidence of such a variety of circumstances induced M. de Buffon
to suppose that the planets were all struck off from the sun's surface
by the impact of a large comet, such as approached so near the sun's
disk, and with such amazing velocity, in the year 1680, and is expected
to return in 2255. But Mr. Buffon did not recollect that these comets
themselves are only planets with more eccentric orbits, and that
therefore it must be asked, what had previously struck off these comets
from the sun's body? 2. That if all these planets were struck off from
the sun at the same time, they must have been so near as to have
attracted each other and have formed one mass: 3. That we shall want new
causes for separating the secondary planets from the primary ones, and
must therefore look out for some other agent, as it does not appear how
the impulse of a comet could have made one planet roll round another at
the time they both of them were driven off from the surface of the sun.

If it should be asked, why new planets are not frequently ejected from
the sun? it may be answered, that after many large earthquakes many
vents are left for the elastic vapours to escape, and hence, by the
present appearance of the surface of our earth, earthquakes prodigiously
larger than any recorded in history have existed; the same circumstances
may have affected the sun, on whose surface there are appearances of
volcanos, as described above. Add to this, that some of the comets, and
even the georgium sidus, may, for ought we know to the contrary, have
been emitted from the sun in more modern days, and have been diverted
from their course, and thus prevented from returning into the sun, by
their approach to some of the older planets, which is somewhat
countenanced by the opinion several philosophers have maintained, that
the quantity of matter of the sun has decreased. Dr. Halley observed,
that by comparing the proportion which the periodical time of the moon
bore to that of the sun in former times, with the proportion between
them at present, that the moon is found to be somewhat accelerated in
respect to the sun. Pemberton's View of Sir Isaac Newton, p. 247. And so
large is the body of this mighty luminary, that all the planets thus
thrown out of it would make scarcely any perceptible diminution of it,
as mentioned above. The cavity mentioned above, as measured by Dr.
Wilson of 4000 miles in depth, not penetrating an hundredth part of the
sun's semi-diameter; and yet, as its width was many times greater than
its depth, was large enough to contain a greater body than our
terrestrial world.

I do not mean to conceal, that from the laws of gravity unfolded by Sir
Isaac Newton, supposing the sun to be a sphere and to have no
progressive motion, and not liable itself to be disturbed by the
supposed projection of the planets from it, that such planets must
return into the sun. The late Rev. William Ludlam, of Leicester, whose
genius never met with reward equal to its merits, in a letter to me,
dated January, 1787, after having shewn, as mentioned above, that
planets so projected from the sun would return to it, adds, "That a body
as large as the moon so projected, would disturb the motion of the earth
in its orbit, is certain; but the calculation of such disturbing forces
is difficult. The body in some circumstances might become a satellite,
and both move round their common centre of gravity, and that centre be
carried in an annual orbit round the sun."

There are other circumstances which might have concurred at the time of
such supposed explosions, which would render this idea not impossible.
1. The planets might be thrown out of the sun at the time the sun itself
was rising from chaos, and be attracted by other suns in their vicinity
rising at the same time out of chaos, which would prevent them from
returning into the sun. 2. The new planet in its course or ascent from
the sun, might explode and eject a satellite, or perhaps more than one,
and thus by its course being affected might not return into the sun. 3.
If more planets were ejected at the same time from the sun, they might
attract and disturb each others course at the time they left the body of
the sun, or very soon afterwards, when they would be so much nearer each
other.




                      NOTE XVI.--CALCAREOUS EARTH.


     _While Ocean wrap'd it in his azure robe_.

                                            CANTO II. l. 34.


From having observed that many of the highest mountains of the world
consist of lime-stone replete with shells, and that these mountains bear
the marks of having been lifted up by subterraneous fires from the
interior parts of the globe; and as lime-stone replete with shells is
found at the bottom of many of our deepest mines some philosophers have
concluded that the nucleus of the earth was for many ages covered with
water which was peopled with its adapted animals; that the shells and
bones of these animals in a long series of time produced solid strata in
the ocean surrounding the original nucleus.

These strata consist of the accumulated exuviae of shell-fish, the
animals perished age after age but their shells remained, and in
progression of time produced the amazing quantities of lime-stone which
almost cover the earth. Other marine animals called coralloids raised
walls and even mountains by the congeries of their calcareous
habitations, these perpendicular corralline rocks make some parts of the
Southern Ocean highly dangerous, as appears in the journals of Capt.
Cook. From contemplating the immense strata of lime-stone, both in
respect to their extent and thickness, formed from these shells of
animals, philosophers have been led to conclude that much of the water
of the sea has been converted into calcareous earth by passing through
their organs of digestion. The formation of calcareous earth seems more
particularly to be an animal process as the formation of clay belongs to
the vegetable economy; thus the shells of crabs and other testaceous
fish are annually reproduced from the mucous membrane beneath them; the
shells of eggs are first a mucous membrane, and the calculi of the
kidneys and those found in all other parts of our system which sometimes
contain calcareous earth, seem to originate from inflamed membranes; the
bones themselves consist of calcareous earth united with the phosphoric
or animal acid, which may be separated by dissolving the ashes of
calcined bones in the nitrous acid; the various secretions of animals,
as their saliva and urine, abound likewise with calcareous earth, as
appears by the incrustations about the teeth and the sediments of urine.
It is probable that animal mucus is a previous process towards the
formation of calcareous earth; and that all the calcareous earth in the
world which is seen in lime-stones, marbles, spars, alabasters, marls,
(which make up the greatest part of the earth's crust, as far as it has
yet been penetrated,) have been formed originally by animal and
vegetable bodies from the mass of water, and that by these means the
solid part of the terraqueous globe has perpetually been in an
increasing state and the water perpetually in a decreasing one.

After the mountains of shells and other recrements of aquatic animals
were elevated above the water the upper heaps of them were gradually
dissolved by rains and dews and oozing through were either perfectly
crystallized in smaller cavities and formed calcareous spar, or were
imperfectly crystallized on the roofs of larger cavities and produced
stalactes; or mixing with other undissolved shells beneath them formed
marbles, which were more or less crystallized and more or less pure; or
lastly, after being dissolved, the water was exhaled from them in such a
manner that the external parts became solid, and forming an arch
prevented the internal parts from approaching each other so near as to
become solid, and thus chalk was produced. I have specimens of chalk
formed at the root of several stalactites, and in their central parts;
and of other stalactites which are hollow like quills from a similar
cause, viz. from the external part of the stalactite hardening first by
its evaporation, and thus either attracting the internal dissolved
particles to the crust, or preventing them from approaching each other
so as to form a solid body. Of these I saw many hanging from the arched
roof of a cellar under the high street in Edinburgh.

If this dissolved limestone met with vitriolic acid it was converted
into alabaster, parting at the same time with its fixable air. If it met
with the fluor acid it became fluor; if with the siliceous acid, flint;
and when mixed with clay and sand, or either of them, acquires the name
of marl. And under one or other of these forms composes a great part of
the solid globe of the earth.

Another mode in which limestone appears is in the form of round
granulated particles, but slightly cohering together; of this kind a bed
extends over Lincoln heath, perhaps twenty miles long by ten wide. The
form of this calcareous sand, its angles having been rubbed off, and the
flatness of its bed, evinces that that part of the country was so formed
under water, the particles of sand having thus been rounded, like all
other rounded pebbles. This round form of calcareous sand and of other
larger pebbles is produced under water, partly by their being more or
less soluble in water, and hence the angular parts become dissolved,
first, by their exposing a larger surface to the action of the
menstruum, and secondly, from their attrition against each other by the
streams or tides, for a great length of time, successively as they were
collected, and perhaps when some of them had not acquired their hardest
state.

This calcareous sand has generally been called ketton-stone and believed
to resemble the spawn of fish, it has acquired a form so much rounder
than siliceous sand from its being of so much softer a texture and also
much more soluble in water. There are other soft calcareous stones
called tupha which are deposited from water on mosses, as at Matlock,
from which moss it is probable the water may receive something which
induces it the readier to part with its earth.

In some lime-stones the living animals seem to have been buried as well
as their shells during some great convulsion of nature, these shells
contain a black coaly substance within them, in others some phlogiston
or volatile alcali from the bodies of the dead animals remains mixed
with the stone, which is then called liver-stone as it emits a
sulphurous smell on being struck, and there is a stratum about six
inches thick extends a considerable way over the iron ore at Wingerworth
near Chesterfield in Derbyshire which seems evidently to have been
formed from the shells of fresh-water muscles.

There is however another source of calcareous earth besides the aquatic
one above described and that is from the recrements of land animals and
vegetables as found in marls, which consist of various mixtures of
calcareous earth, sand, and clay, all of them perhaps principally from
vegetable origin.

Dr. Hutton is of opinion that the rocks of marble have been softened by
fire into a fluid mass, which he thinks under immense pressure might be
done without the escape of their carbonic acid or fixed air. Edinb.
Transact. Vol. I. If this ingenious idea be allowed it might account for
the purity of some white marbles, as during their fluid state there
might be time for their partial impurities, whether from the bodies of
the animals which produced the shells or from other extraneous matter,
either to sublime to the uppermost part of the stratum or to subside to
the lowermost part of it. As a confirmation of this theory of Dr.
Hutton's it may be added that some calcareous stones are found mixed
with lime, and have thence lost a part of their fixed air or carbonic
gas, as the bath-stone, and on that account hardens on being exposed to
the air, and mixed with sulphur produces calcareous liver of sulphur.
Falconer on Bath-water. Vol. I. p. 156. and p. 257. Mr. Monnet found
lime in powder in the mountains of Auvergne, and suspected it of
volcanic origin. Kirwan's Min. p. 22.




                         NOTE XVII.--MORASSES.


     _Gnomes! you then taught transuding dews to pass
     Through time-fallen woods, and root-inwove morass_.

                                            CANTO II. l. 115.


Where woods have repeatedly grown and perished morasses are in process
of time produced, and by their long roots fill up the interstices till
the whole becomes for many yards deep a mass of vegetation. This fact is
curiously verified by an account given many years ago by the Earl of
Cromartie, of which the following is a short abstract.

In the year 1651 the EARL OF CROMARTIE being then nineteen years of age
saw a plain in the parish of Lockburn covered over with a firm standing
wood, which was so old that not only the trees had no green leaves upon
them but the bark was totally thrown off, which he was there informed by
the old countrymen was the universal manner in which fir-woods
terminated, and that in twenty or thirty years the trees would cast
themselves up by the roots. About fifteen years after he had occasion to
travel the same way and observed that there was not a tree nor the
appearance of a root of any of them; but in their place the whole plain
where the wood stood was covered with a flat green moss or morass, and
on asking the country people what was become of the wood he was informed
that no one had been at the trouble to carry it away, but that it had
all been overturned by the wind, that the trees lay thick over each
other, and that the moss or bog had overgrown the whole timber, which
they added was occasioned by the moisture which came down from the high
hills above it and stagnated upon the plain, and that nobody could yet
pass over it, which however his Lordship was so incautious as to attempt
and slipt up to the arm-pits. Before the year 1699 that whole piece of
ground was become a solid moss wherein the peasants then dug turf or
peat, which however was not yet of the best sort. Philos. Trans. No.
330. Abridg. Vol. V. p. 272.

Morasses in great length of time undergo variety of changes, first by
elutriation, and afterwards by fermentation, and the consequent heat. 1.
By water perpetually oozing through them the most soluble parts are
first washed away, as the essential salts, these together with the salts
from animal recrements are carried down the rivers into the sea, where
all of them seem to decompose each other except the marine salt. Hence
the ashes of peat contain little or no vegetable alcali and are not used
in the countries, where peat constitutes the fuel of the lower people,
for the purpose of washing linen. The second thing which is always seen
oozing from morasses is iron in solution, which produces chalybeate
springs, from whence depositions of ochre and variety of iron ores. The
third elutriation seems to consist of vegetable acid, which by means
unknown appears to be converted into all other acids. 1. Into marine and
nitrous acids as mentioned above. 2. Into vitriolic acid which is found
in some morasses so plentifully as to preserve the bodies of animals
from putrefaction which have been buried in them, and this acid carried
away by rain and dews and meeting with calcareous earth produces gypsum
or alabaster, with clay it produces alum, and deprived of its vital air
produces sulphur. 3. Fluor acid which being washed away and meeting with
calcareous earth produces fluor or cubic spar. 4. The siliceous acid
which seems to have been disseminated in great quantity either by
solution in water or by solution in air, and appears to have produced
the sand in the sea uniting with calcareous earth previously dissolved
in that element, from which were afterwards formed some of the grit-
stone rocks by means of a siliceous or calcareous cement. By its union
with the calcareous earth of the morass other strata of siliceous sand
have been produced; and by the mixture of this with clay and lime arose
the beds of marl.

In other circumstances, probably where less moisture has prevailed,
morasses seem to have undergone a fermentation, as other vegetable
matter, new hay for instance is liable to do from the great quantity of
sugar it contains. From the great heat thus produced in the lower parts
of immense beds of morass the phlogistic part, or oil, or asphaltum,
becomes distilled, and rising into higher strata becomes again condensed
forming coal-beds of greater or less purity according to their greater
or less quantity of inflammable matter; at the same time the clay beds
become purer or less so, as the phlogistic part is more or less
completely exhaled from them. Though coal and clay are frequently
produced in this manner, yet I have no doubt, but that they are likewise
often produced by elutriation; in situations on declivities the clay is
washed away down into the valleys, and the phlogistic part or coal left
behind; this circumstance is seen in many valleys near the beds of
rivers, which are covered recently by a whitish impure clay, called
