to be of service to you in any research, however difficult and
trying, would be an honor and a privilege that I never dared to hope
for.'

"'That,' thought I to myself, 'will do its own work.'

"But the professor was still suspicious. How could he help it, when he
remembered Jack's escapades, in which my name was always blended!
Doubtless he was satisfied that my influence on Jack was evil. The
contrary was the case, too.

"'Fossils,' he said, worrying the edge of the excavation with his
spade--'fossils are not things to be lightly considered.'

"'No, indeed!' I protested.

"'Fossils are the most interesting as well as puzzling things in the
world,' said he.

"'They are!' I cried, enthusiastically.

"'But I am not looking for fossils,' observed the professor, mildly.

"This was a facer. I looked at Daisy Holroyd. She bit her lip and
fixed her eyes on the sea. Her eyes were wonderful eyes.

"'Did you think I was digging for fossils in a salt meadow?' queried
the professor. 'You can have read very little about the subject. I am
digging for something quite different.'

"I was silent. I knew that my face was flushed. I longed to say,
'Well, what the devil are you digging for?' but I only stared into the
hole as though hypnotized.

"'Captain McPeek and Frisby ought to be here,' he said, looking first
at Daisy and then across the meadows.

"I ached to ask him why he had subpoenaed Captain McPeek and Frisby.

"'They are coming,' said Daisy, shading her eyes. 'Do you see the
speck on the meadows?'

"'It may be a mud-hen,' said the professor.

"'Miss Holroyd is right,' I said. 'A wagon and team and two men are
coming from the north. There's a dog beside the wagon--it's that
miserable yellow dog of Frisby's.'

"'Good gracious!' cried the professor, 'you don't mean to tell me that
you see all that at such a distance?'

"'Why not?' I said.

"'I see nothing,' he insisted.

"'You will see that I'm right, presently,' I laughed.

"The professor removed his blue goggles and rubbed them, glancing
obliquely at me.

"'Haven't you heard what extraordinary eyesight duck-shooters have?'
said his daughter, looking back at her father. 'Jack says that he can
tell exactly what kind of a duck is flying before most people could
see anything at all in the sky.'

"'It's true,' I said; 'it comes to anybody, I fancy, who has had
practice.'

"The professor regarded me with a new interest. There was inspiration
in his eyes. He turned towards the ocean. For a long time he stared at
the tossing waves on the beach, then he looked far out to where the
horizon met the sea.

"'Are there any ducks out there?' he asked, at last.

"'Yes,' said I, scanning the sea, 'there are.'

"He produced a pair of binoculars from his coat-tail pocket, adjusted
them, and raised them to his eyes.

"'H'm! What sort of ducks?'

"I looked more carefully, holding both hands over my forehead.

"'Surf-ducks and widgeon. There is one bufflehead among them--no, two;
the rest are coots,' I replied.

"'This,' cried the professor, 'is most astonishing. I have good eyes,
but I can't see a blessed thing without these binoculars!'

"'It's not extraordinary,' said I; 'the surf-ducks and coots any
novice might recognize; the widgeon and buffleheads I should not have
been able to name unless they had risen from the water. It is easy to
tell any duck when it is flying, even though it looks no bigger than a
black pin-point.'

"But the professor insisted that it was marvellous, and he said that I
might render him invaluable service if I would consent to come and
camp at Pine Inlet for a few weeks.

"I looked at his daughter, but she turned her back. Her back was
beautifully moulded. Her gown fitted also.

"'Camp out here?' I repeated, pretending to be unpleasantly surprised.

"'I do not think he would care to,' said Miss Holroyd, without
turning.

"I had not expected that.

"'Above all things,' said I, in a clear, pleasant voice, 'I like to
camp out.'

"She said nothing.

"'It is not exactly camping,' said the professor. 'Come, you shall see
our conservatory. Daisy, come, dear! You must put on a heavier frock;
it is getting towards sundown.'

"At that moment, over a near dune, two horses' heads appeared,
followed by two human heads, then a wagon, then a yellow dog.

"I turned triumphantly to the professor.

"'You are the very man I want,' he muttered--'the very man--the very
man.'

"I looked at Daisy Holroyd. She returned my glance with a defiant
little smile.

"'Waal,' said Captain McPeek, driving up, 'here we be! Git out,
Frisby.'

"Frisby, fat, nervous, and sentimental, hopped out of the cart.

"'Come,' said the professor, impatiently moving across the dunes. I
walked with Daisy Holroyd. McPeek and Frisby followed. The yellow dog
walked by himself.




XVIII


"The sun was dipping into the sea as we trudged across the meadows
towards a high, dome-shaped dune covered with cedars and thickets of
sweet bay. I saw no sign of habitation among the sand-hills. Far as
the eye could reach, nothing broke the gray line of sea and sky save
the squat dunes crowned with stunted cedars.

"Then, as we rounded the base of the dune, we almost walked into the
door of a house. My amazement amused Miss Holroyd, and I noticed also
a touch of malice in her pretty eyes. But she said nothing, following
her father into the house, with the slightest possible gesture to me.
Was it invitation or was it menace?

"The house was merely a light wooden frame, covered with some
waterproof stuff that looked like a mixture of rubber and tar. Over
this--in fact, over the whole roof--was pitched an awning of heavy
sail-cloth. I noticed that the house was anchored to the sand by
chains, already rusted red. But this one-storied house was not the
only building nestling in the south shelter of the big dune. A hundred
feet away stood another structure--long, low, also built of wood. It
had rows on rows of round port-holes on every side. The ports were
fitted with heavy glass, hinged to swing open if necessary. A single,
big double door occupied the front.

"Behind this long, low building was still another, a mere shed. Smoke
rose from the sheet-iron chimney. There was somebody moving about
inside the open door.

"As I stood gaping at this mushroom hamlet the professor appeared at
the door and asked me to enter. I stepped in at once.

"The house was much larger than I had imagined. A straight hallway ran
through the centre from east to west. On either side of this hallway
were rooms, the doors swinging wide open. I counted three doors on
each side; the three on the south appeared to be bedrooms.

"The professor ushered me into a room on the north side, where I found
Captain McPeek and Frisby sitting at a table, upon which were drawings
and sketches of articulated animals and fishes.

"'You see, McPeek,' said the professor, 'we only wanted one more man,
and I think I've got him--Haven't I?' turning eagerly to me.

"'Why, yes,' I said, laughing; 'this is delightful. Am I invited to
stay here?'

"'Your bedroom is the third on the south side; everything is ready.
McPeek, you can bring his trunk to-morrow, can't you?' demanded the
professor.

"The red-faced captain nodded, and shifted a quid.

"'Then it's all settled,' said the professor, and he drew a sigh of
satisfaction. 'You see,' he said, turning to me, 'I was at my wit's
end to know whom to trust. I never thought of you. Jack's out in
China, and I didn't dare trust anybody in my own profession. All you
care about is writing verses and stories, isn't it?'

"'I like to shoot,' I replied, mildly.

"'Just the thing!' he cried, beaming at us all in turn. 'Now I can see
no reason why we should not progress rapidly. McPeek, you and Frisby
must get those boxes up here before dark. Dinner will be ready before
you have finished unloading. Dick, you will wish to go to your room
first.'

"My name isn't Dick, but he spoke so kindly, and beamed upon me in
such a fatherly manner, that I let it go. I had occasion to correct
him afterwards, several times, but he always forgot the next minute.
He calls me Dick to this day.

"It was dark when Professor Holroyd, his daughter, and I sat down to
dinner. The room was the same in which I had noticed the drawings of
beast and bird, but the round table had been extended into an oval,
and neatly spread with dainty linen and silver.

"A fresh-cheeked Swedish girl appeared from a farther room, bearing
the soup. The professor ladled it out, still beaming.

"'Now, this is very delightful--isn't it, Daisy?' he said.

"'Very,' said Miss Holroyd, with a tinge of irony.

"'Very,' I repeated, heartily.

"'I suppose,' said the professor, nodding mysteriously at his
daughter, 'that Dick knows nothing of what we're about down here?'

"'I suppose,' said Miss Holroyd, 'that he thinks we are digging for
fossils.'

"I looked at my plate. She might have spared me that.

"'Well, well,' said her father, smiling to himself, 'he shall know
everything by morning. You'll be astonished, Dick, my boy.'

"'His name isn't Dick,' corrected Daisy.

"The professor said, 'Isn't it?' in an absent-minded way, and relapsed
into contemplation of my necktie.

"I asked Miss Holroyd a few questions about Jack, and was informed
that he had given up law and entered the consular service--as what, I
did not dare ask, for I know what our consular service is.

"'In China,' said Daisy.

"'Choo Choo is the name of the city,' added her father, proudly; 'it's
the terminus of the new trans-Siberian railway.'

"'It's on the Pong Ping,' said Daisy.

"'He's vice-consul,' added the professor, triumphantly.

"'He'll make a good one,' I observed. I knew Jack. I pitied his
consul.

"So we chatted on about my old playmate, until Freda, the red-cheeked
maid, brought coffee, and the professor lighted a cigar, with a little
bow to his daughter.

"'Of course, you don't smoke,' she said to me, with a glimmer of
malice in her eyes.

"'He mustn't,' interposed the professor, hastily; 'it will make his
hand tremble.'

"'No, it won't,' said I, laughing; 'but my hand will shake if I don't
smoke. Are you going to employ me as a draughtsman?'

"'You'll know to-morrow,' he chuckled, with a mysterious smile at his
daughter. 'Daisy, give him my best cigars--put the box here on the
table. We can't afford to have his hand tremble.'

"Miss Holroyd rose and crossed the hallway to her father's room,
returning presently with a box of promising-looking cigars.

"'I don't think he knows what is good for him,' she said. 'He should
smoke only one every day.'

"It was hard to bear. I am not vindictive, but I decided to treasure
up a few of Miss Holroyd's gentle taunts. My intimacy with her brother
was certainly a disadvantage to me now. Jack had apparently been
talking too much, and his sister appeared to be thoroughly acquainted
with my past. It was a disadvantage. I remembered her vaguely as a
girl with long braids, who used to come on Sundays with her father and
take tea with us in our rooms. Then she went to Germany to school, and
Jack and I employed our Sunday evenings otherwise. It is true that I
regarded her weekly visits as a species of infliction, but I did not
think I ever showed it.

"'It is strange,' said I, 'that you did not recognize me at once, Miss
Holroyd. Have I changed so greatly in five years?'

"'You wore a pointed French beard in Paris,' she said--'a very downy
one. And you never stayed to tea but twice, and then you only spoke
once.'

"'Oh!' said I, blankly. 'What did I say?'

"'You asked me if I liked plums,' said Daisy, bursting into an
irresistible ripple of laughter.

"I saw that I must have made the same sort of an ass of myself that
most boys of eighteen do.

"It was too bad. I never thought about the future in those days. Who
could have imagined that little Daisy Holroyd would have grown up into
this bewildering young lady? It was really too bad. Presently the
professor retired to his room, carrying with him an armful of
drawings, and bidding us not to sit up late. When he closed his door
Miss Holroyd turned to me.

"'Papa will work over those drawings until midnight,' she said, with a
despairing smile.

"'It isn't good for him,' I said. 'What are the drawings?'

"'You may know to-morrow,' she answered, leaning forward on the table
and shading her face with one hand. 'Tell me about yourself and Jack
in Paris.'

"I looked at her suspiciously.

"'What! There isn't much to tell. We studied. Jack went to the law
school, and I attended--er--oh, all sorts of schools.'

"'Did you? Surely you gave yourself a little recreation occasionally?'

"'Occasionally,' I nodded.

"'I am afraid you and Jack studied too hard.'

"'That may be,' said I, looking meek.

"'Especially about fossils.'

