while a man, adorned with a necklace of green human teeth and carrying a
shining broadsword, prepared to decapitate her.

"We must take them with us, I see," said Crane, as he brushed the guards
aside. Followed by the slaves, the party entered the Skylark, and the
dark green people embarked in their airplanes and helicopters.

Nalboon rode in a large and gaily-decorated plane, which led the fleet
at its full speed of six hundred miles an hour, the Skylark taking a
placing a few hundred yards above the flagship.

"I don't get these folks at all, Mart," said Seaton, after a moment's
silence. "They have machines far ahead of anything we have on Earth and
big guns that shoot as fast as machine-guns, and yet are scared to death
at a little simple sleight-of-hand. They don't seem to understand
matches at all, and yet treat fire-works as an every-day occurrence."

"We will have to wait until we know them better," replied Crane, and
DuQuesne added:

"From what I have seen, their power seems to be all electrical. Perhaps
they aren't up with us in chemistry, even though they are ahead of us in
mechanics?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Flying above a broad, but rapid and turbulent stream, the fleet soon
neared a large city, and the visitors from Earth gazed with interest at
this metropolis of the unknown world. The buildings were all the same
height, flat-roofed, and arranged in squares very much as our cities are
arranged. There were no streets, the spaces between the buildings being
park-like areas, evidently laid out for recreation, amusement, and
sport. There was no need for streets; all traffic was in the air. The
air seemed full of flying vehicles, darting in all directions, but it
was soon evident that there was exact order in the apparent confusion,
each class of vessel and each direction of traffic having its own level.
Eagerly the three men studied the craft, which ranged in size from
one-man helicopters, little more than single chairs flying about in the
air, up to tremendous multiplane freighters, capable of carrying
thousands of tons.

Flying high over the city to avoid its congested air-lanes, the fleet
descended toward an immense building just outside the city proper, and
all landed upon its roof save the flagship, which led the Skylark to a
landing-dock nearby--a massive pile of metal and stone, upon which
Nalboon and his retinue stood to welcome the guests. After Seaton had
anchored the vessel immovably by means of the attractor, the party
disembarked, Seaton remarking with a grin:

"Don't be surprised at anything I do, folks. I'm a walking storehouse of
junk of all kinds, so that if occasion arises I can put on a real
exhibition."

As they turned toward their host, a soldier, in his eagerness to see the
strangers, jostled another. Without a word two keen swords flew from
their scabbards and a duel to the death ensued. The visitors stared in
amazement, but no one else paid any attention to the combat, which was
soon over; the victor turning away from the body of his opponent and
resuming his place without creating a ripple of interest.

Nalboon led the way into an elevator, which dropped rapidly to the
ground-floor level. Massive gates were thrown open, and through ranks of
people prostrate upon their faces the party went out into the palace
grounds of the Domak, or Emperor, of the great nation of Mardonale.

Never before had Earthly eyes rested upon such scenes of splendor. Every
color and gradation of their peculiar spectrum was present, in solid,
liquid, and gas. The carefully-tended trees were all colors of the
rainbow, as were the grasses and flowers along the walks. The fountains
played streams of many and constantly-changing hues, and even the air
was tinted and perfumed, swirling through metal arches in billows of
ever-varying colors and scents. Colors and combinations of colors
impossible to describe were upon every hand, fantastically beautiful in
that peculiar, livid light. Diamonds and rubies, their colors so
distorted by the green radiance as to be almost unrecognizable; emeralds
glowing with an intense green impossible in earthly light, together with
strange gems peculiar to this strange world, sparkled and flashed from
railings, statues, and pedestals throughout the ground.

"Isn't this gorgeous, Dick?" whispered Dorothy. "But what do I look
like? I wish I had a mirror--you look simply awful. Do I look like you
do?"

"Not being able to see myself, I can't say, but I imagine you do. You
look as you would under a county-fair photographer's mercury-vapor arc
lamps, only worse. The colors can't be described. You might as well try
to describe cerise to a man born blind as to try to express these
colors in English, but as near as I can come to it, your eyes are a dark
sort of purplish green, with the whites of your eyes and your teeth a
kind of plush green. Your skin is a pale yellowish green, except for the
pink of your cheeks, which is a kind of black, with orange and green
mixed up in it. Your lips are black, and your hair is a funny kind of
color, halfway between black and old rose, with a little green and...."

"Heavens, Dick, stop! That's enough!" choked Dorothy. "We all look like
hobgoblins. We're even worse than the natives."

"Sure we are. They were born here and are acclimated to it--we are
strangers and aren't. I would like to see what one of these people would
look like in Washington."

       *       *       *       *       *

Nalboon led them into the palace proper and into a great dining hall,
where a table was already prepared for the entire party. This room was
splendidly decorated with jewels, its many windows being simply masses
of gems. The walls were hung with a cloth resembling silk, which fell to
the floor in shimmering waves of color.

Woodwork there was none. Doors, panels, tables, and chairs were
cunningly wrought of various metals. Seaton and DuQuesne could recognize
a few of them, but for the most part they were unknown upon the Earth;
and were, like the jewels and vegetation of this strange world, of many
and various peculiar colors. A closer inspection of one of the marvelous
tapestries showed that it also was of metal, its threads numbering
thousands to the inch. Woven of many different metals, of vivid but
harmonious colors in a strange and intricate design, it seemed to writhe
as its colors changed with every variation in the color of the light;
which, pouring from concealed sources, was reflected by the
highly-polished metal and innumerable jewels of the lofty, domed
ceiling.

"Oh ... isn't this too perfectly gorgeous?" breathed Dorothy. "I'd give
anything for a dress made out of that stuff, Dick. Cloth-of-gold is
common by comparison!"

"Would you dare wear it, Dottie?" asked Margaret.

"_Would_ I? I'd wear it in a minute if I could only get it. It would
take Washington by storm!"

"I'll try to get a piece of it, then," smiled Seaton. "I'll see about it
while we are getting the copper."

"We'd better be careful in choosing what we eat here, Seaton," suggested
DuQuesne, as the Domak himself led them to the table.

"We sure had. With a copper ocean and green teeth, I shouldn't be
surprised if copper, arsenic, and other such trifles formed a regular
part of their diet."

"The girls and I will wait for you two chemists to approve every dish
before we try it, then," said Crane.

Nalboon placed his guests, the light-skinned slaves standing at
attention behind them, and numerous servants, carrying great trays,
appeared. The servants were intermediate in color between the light and
the dark races, with dull, unintelligent faces, but quick and deft in
their movements.

The first course--a thin, light wine, served in metal goblets--was
approved by the chemists, and the dinner was brought on. There were
mighty joints of various kinds of meat; birds and fish, both raw and
cooked in many ways; green, pink, purple, and white vegetables and
fruits. The majordomo held each dish up to Seaton for inspection, the
latter waving away the fish and the darkest green foods, but approving
the others. Heaping plates, or rather metal trays, of food were placed
before the diners, and the attendants behind their chairs handed them
peculiar implements--knives with razor edges, needle-pointed stilettoes
instead of forks, and wide, flexible spatulas, which evidently were to
serve the purposes of both forks and spoons.

"I simply can't eat with these things!" exclaimed Dorothy in dismay,
"and I don't like to drink soup out of a can, so there!"

"That's where my lumberjack training comes in handy," grinned Seaton.
"With this spatula I can eat faster than I could with two forks. What do
you want, girls, forks or spoons, or both?"

"Both, please."

Seaton reached out over the table, seizing forks and spoons from the air
and passing them to the others, while the natives stared in surprise.
The Domak took a bowl filled with brilliant blue crystals from the
major-domo, sprinkled his food liberally with the substance, and passed
it to Seaton, who looked at the crystals attentively.

"Copper sulphate," he said to Crane. "It's a good thing they add it at
the table instead of cooking with it, or we'd be out of luck."

Waving the copper sulphate away, he again reached out, this time
producing a pair of small salt-and pepper-shakers, which he passed to
the Domak after he had seasoned the dishes before him. Nalboon tasted
the pepper cautiously and smiled in delight, half-emptying the shaker
upon his plate. He then sprinkled a few grains of salt into his palm,
stared at them with an expression of doubting amazement, and after a few
rapid sentences poured them into a dish held by an officer who had
sprung to his side. The officer studied them closely, then carefully
washed his chief's hand. Nalboon turned to Seaton, plainly asking for
the salt-cellar.

"Sure, old top. Keep 'em both, there's lots more where those came from,"
as he produced several more sets in the same mysterious way and handed
them to Crane, who in turn passed them to the others.

       *       *       *       *       *

The meal progressed merrily, with much conversation in the sign-language
between the two parties. It was evident that Nalboon, usually stern and
reticent, was in an unusually pleasant mood. The viands, though of
peculiar flavor, were in the main pleasing to the palates of the Earthly
visitors.

"This fruit salad, or whatever it is, is divine," remarked Dorothy,
after an experimental bite. "May we eat as much as we like, or had we
better just eat a little?"

"Go as far as you like," returned her lover. "I wouldn't recommend it,
as a steady diet, as I imagine everything contains copper and other
heavy metals in noticeable amounts, and probably considerable arsenic,
but for a few days it can't very well hurt us much."

After the meal, Nalboon bade them a ceremonious farewell, and they were
escorted to a series of five connecting rooms by the royal usher,
escorted by an entire company of soldiers, who mounted guard outside the
doors. Gathered in one room, they discussed sleeping arrangements. The
girls insisted that they would sleep together, and that the men should
occupy the rooms at either side. As the girls turned away, the four
slaves followed.

"We don't want these people, and I can't make them go away!" cried
Dorothy.

"I don't want them, either," replied Seaton, "but if we chase them out
they'll get their heads chopped off. You girls take the women and we'll
take the men."

Seaton waved all the women into the girls' room, but they paused
irresolutely. One of them went up to the man wearing the metal belt,
evidently their leader, and spoke to him rapidly as she threw her arms
around his neck. He shook his head, motioning toward Seaton several
times as he spoke to her reassuringly. With his arm about her tenderly,
he led her to the door, the other women following. Crane and DuQuesne
having gone to their rooms with their attendants, the man wearing the
belt drew the blinds and turned to assist Seaton in taking off his
clothes.

"I never had a valet before, but go as far as you like if it pleases
you," remarked Seaton, as he began to throw off his clothes. A multitude
of small articles fell from their hiding-places in his garments as he
removed them. Almost stripped, Seaton stretched vigorously, the muscles
writhing and rippling in great ridges under the satin skin of his broad
back and mighty arms and shoulders as he filled his capacious lungs and
twisted about, working off the stiffness caused by the days of
comparative confinement.

The four slaves stared in open-mouthed astonishment at this display of
muscular development and conversed among themselves as they gathered up
Seaton's discarded clothing. Their leader picked up a salt-shaker, a
couple of silver knives and forks, and some other articles, and turned
to Seaton, apparently asking permission to do something with them.
Seaton nodded assent carelessly and turned to his bed. As he did so, he
heard a slight clank of arms in the hall as the guard was changed, and
lifting the blind a trifle he saw that guards were stationed outside as
well. As he went to bed, he wondered whether the guards were guards of
honor or jailers; whether he and his party were honored guests or
prisoners.

Three of the slaves, at a word from their chief, threw themselves upon
the floor and slept, but he himself did not rest. Opening the apparently
solid metal belt, he took out a great number of small tools, many tiny
instruments, and several spools of insulated wire. He then took the
articles Seaton had given him, taking great pains not to spill a single
grain of salt, and set to work. Hour after hour he labored, a strange,
exceedingly complex instrument taking form under his clever fingers.




    +--------------------------------------+
    |                                      |
    | _By the time you finish reading the  |
    | final instalment of "The Skylark of  |
    | Space," we are certain that you will |
    | agree with us that it is one of the  |
    | outstanding scienti-fiction stories  |
    | of the decade; an interplanetarian   |
    | story that will not be eclipsed      |
    | soon. It will be referred to by all  |
    | scienti-fiction fans for years to    |
    | come. It will be read and reread.    |
    | This is not a mere prophecy of ours, |
    | because we have been deluged with    |
    | letters since we began publishing    |
    | this story. In the closing chapters, |
    | you will follow the adventures with  |
    | bated breath, and you will find that |
    | though the two preceding instalments |
    | were hair-raising and thought        |
    | absorbing, the final instalment      |
    | eclipses the others a good deal.     |
    | Plots, counterplots, hair-raising    |
    | and hair-breadth escapes, mixed with |
    | love, adventure and good science     |
    | seem to fairly tumble all over the   |
    | pages. By the time you finish this   |
    | instalment, you will wish to go back |
    | to the beginning of the story and    |
    | read it more carefully and thrill    |
    | all over again._                     |
    |                                      |
    +--------------------------------------+




CHAPTER XIV

Nalboon Unmasked


After a long, sound sleep, Seaton awoke and sprang out of bed. No sooner
had he started to shave, however, than one of the slaves touched his
arm, motioning him into a reclining chair and showing him a keen blade,
long and slightly curved. Seaton lay down and the slave shaved him with
a rapidity and smoothness he had never before experienced, so
wonderfully sharp was the peculiar razor. After Seaton had dressed, the
barber started to shave the chief slave, without any preliminary
treatment save rubbing his face with a perfumed oil.

"Hold on a minute," interjected Seaton, who was watching the process
with interest, "here's something that helps a lot." He lathered the face
with his brush and the man looked up in surprised pleasure as his stiff
beard was swept away without a sound.

Seaton called to the others and soon the party was assembled in his
room, all dressed very lightly, because of the unrelieved and unvarying
heat, which was constant at one hundred degrees. A gong sounded, and one
of the slaves opened the door, ushering in a party of servants bearing a
table, ready set. During the meal, Seaton was greatly surprised at
hearing Dorothy carrying on a halting conversation, with one of the
women standing behind her.

"I knew that you were a language shark, Dottie, with five or six
different ones to your credit, but I didn't suppose you could learn to
talk this stuff in one day."

"I can't," she replied, "but I've picked up a few words of it. I can
understand very little of what they are trying to tell me."

The woman spoke rapidly to the man standing behind Seaton, and as soon
as the table had been carried away, he asked permission to speak to
Dorothy. Fairly running across to her, he made a slight obeisance and in
eager tones poured forth such a stream of language that she held up her
hand to silence him.
