a fair allowance when loading threads.

No difficulty will be experienced in mounting threads having a
diameter of 0.0002 inch or over.  With finer threads it is necessary
to employ very dark backgrounds (Mr. Boys uses the darkness of a
slightly opened drawer), or the threads cannot be sufficiently well
seen.

In the case of instruments in which threads remain highly twisted for
long periods of time, the above rule as to the safe limit of twist
does not allow of a sufficient margin;  it is only applicable to
galvanometric and similar purposes.

The cause of the increase in tenacity as the diameter diminishes is at
present unknown.  It is due neither to an effect of annealing
(annealed threads are rotten), nor is it a skin effect, nor is it due
to the cooling of the thread under higher capillary pressure.  It is,
however, possible that it may be associated with some kind of
permanent set taken by the fibres during the stage of passage from the
liquid to the solid state.

Sec. 90.  On the Attachment of Quartz Fibres.

For many purposes it is sufficient to cement the fibres in position by
means of ordinary yellow shellac, but where very great accuracy is
aimed at, the shellac (being itself imperfectly elastic and exposed to
shearing stress) imposes its imperfections on the whole system. This
source of error can be got over by soldering the threads in position.
Attempts were made by the writer in this direction, with fair success,
in 1889, but as Mr. Boys has carried the art to a high degree of
perfection, I will suppress the description of my own method and
describe his in preference.  It has, of course, been frequently
repeated in my laboratory.

In many cases, however, if not in all, it may be replaced by Margot
soldering, as already described, a note on the application of which to
this purpose will follow.

A thread of the proper diameter having been selected, it is cut to the
right length.  With fine threads this is not always a perfectly easy
matter.  The best way is for the operator to station himself facing a
good light, not sunlight, which is too tiring to the eye, but bright
diffused light.  The thread will be furnished with bits of paper stuck
on with paraffin at both ends, as already described.

A rough sketch of the apparatus--or, at all events, two lines showing
the exact length which the free part of the thread must have--are
marked on a smooth board, and this is supported with its plane
vertical.  The thread is held against the board, and the upper piece
of paper is stuck lightly to the board with a trace of soft wax, so
that the lower edge of the paper is at any desired height above the
upper mark.  This distance is measured, and forms the length of thread
allowed to overlap the support.  A second bit of paper is attached
below the lower mark, a margin for the attachment of the lower end
being measured and left as before.  The thread will be most easily
seen if the board is painted a dead black.

If it is desired to attach the thread to its supports merely by
shellac, this is practically all that needs to be done.  The supports
should resemble large pins.  The upper support will be a brass wire in
most cases, and will require to be filed away as shown in the sketch
(Fig.  71).  It is then coated with shellac by heating and rubbing
upon the shellac.  As previously noted, the shellac must not be
overheated.

The thread is cut off below the lower slip of paper, and the upper
support being conveniently laid in a horizontal position on another
dead-black surface, the thread is carried to it and laid as designed
against the shellac, which is now cold.  When the thread is in place,
a soldering iron is put against the brass wire, and the shellac
gradually melted till it closes over the thread.

Fig.  71.

The iron is then withdrawn and the thread pulled away from the point
for one-twentieth of an inch or less.  This ensures that the thread
makes proper contact with the cement, and also that it is free from
kinks; of course, it must leave the cement in the proper direction.  A
similar process is next carried out with respect to the lower
attachment, and the ends of the thread are neatly trimmed off.

Both ends of the thread being secured, the next step is to transfer
the upper support to a clip stand, the suspended parts being held by
hand, so that the weight comes on the thread very gradually.  In this
way it will be easily seen whether the thread is bent where it enters
the shellac, and should this be the case, a hot iron must be brought
up to the shellac and the error rectified.

When both the support and the suspended parts are brought nearly to
the required bearing, the hot iron is held for a moment close up to
each attachment, the hand being held close below but not touching the
suspended parts, and both attachments are allowed to straighten
themselves out naturally.

These details may appear tiresome, and so they are when written out at
length, but the time occupied in carrying them out is very short, and
quartz threads break easily, unless the pull upon them is accurately
in the direction of their length at all points.

In the event of its being decided to attach the thread by soldering,
the process is rather more expensive in time, but not otherwise more
troublesome.

Fig.  72.                                     Fig.  73.

The thread being cut as before to the proper length, little bits of
aluminium foil are smeared all over with melted shellac and suspended
from the thread replacing the paper slips before described.  It is
important that no paraffin should be allowed to touch the thread
anywhere near a point intended to be soldered.  The thread is hung up
from a clip stand by one of the bits of foil, and the lower end is
washed by dipping it into strong nitric acid for a moment and thence
into water.  The object of smearing the foils all over with shellac is
to prevent them being acted upon by the acid.  The threads are not
very easily washed acid free, but the process may be assisted by means
of a fine camel's-hair pencil.

Some silvering solution made as described (Sec. 65) is put into a test
tube;  the thread, after rinsing with distilled water, is lowered into
the solution so far as is required, and is allowed to receive a
coating of silver.  It has been observed that the coating of silver
must not be too thick--not sufficiently thick to be opaque.  A watch
may be kept on the process by immersing a minute strip of mica
alongside the thread.

The silvered thread is rinsed with distilled water and allowed to dry.

Meanwhile the other end of the thread may be silvered.  When both ends
are silvered the process of coppering by electro deposit is commenced.
A test tube is partially filled with a ten per cent solution of
sulphate of copper, and several copper wires are dipped into it to
form an anode.  The thread is lowered carefully into the solution so
as not to introduce air bubbles, and the silvered part is allowed to
project far enough above the surface of the solution to come in
contact with a fine copper wire.  The circuit is closed through a
Leclanche cell and a resistance box.

It is as well to begin with a fair resistance, say 100 ohms out in the
box, and the progress of the deposit is watched by means of a
low-power microscope set up in front of the thread.  If the copper
appears to come down in a granular form, the resistance is too small
and must be increased;  if no headway appears to be made, the
resistance must be diminished.

As soon as a fair coat of copper has come down, i.e.  when the
diameter of the thread is about doubled, the process is interrupted.
The thread is withdrawn, washed, dipped in a solution of chloride of
zinc, and carefully tinned by dragging it over a small clean drop of
solder on a soldering bit.

During this part of the process the shellac is apt to get melted if
the iron is held too close, so that it is advisable to begin by making
the thread somewhat over long.  The end of the thread must only be
trimmed off at the conclusion of the operation, i.e.  after the thread
is soldered up.  The thread is attached to the previously tinned
supports much in the same way as has been described under the head of
shellac attachments.  It does not very much matter whether both ends
are coppered before one is soldered up or not.  At the conclusion of
the whole process the superfluous copper and silver are dissolved off
by a little hot strong nitric acid applied on a glass hair pencil.
This is best done by holding the thread horizontally with the
assistance of clip stands.

If the thread is too delicate to bear brushing, the nitric acid may be
applied by pouring out a big drop into a bit of platinum foil and
holding this below the thread so as to touch it lightly.  The
dissolving of the copper and silver is, of course, followed by copious
washing with hot water.  This process is more laborious than might be
imagined, but it may be shortened by heating the platinum foil
supporting the water (Fig.  74).

Fig.  74

The washing part of the process is, in the opinion of the writer, the
most difficult part of the whole business, and it requires to be very
thorough, or the thread will end by drawing out of the solder.  In
many cases it is better to try to do without any application of nitric
acid at all, but, of course, this involves silvering and coppering to
exact distances from the ends of the thread--at all events, in
apparatus where the effective length of the thread is narrowly
prescribed.

It is important not to leave the active parts of the thread
appreciably silvered, for the sake of avoiding zero changes due to the
imperfect elasticity of the silver.  In this soldering process
ordinary tinman's solder may be employed;  it must be applied very
free from dust or oxide.

Sec. 91.  Other Modes of soldering Quartz.

Thick rods of quartz may be treated for attachment by solder in the
same way as glass was treated by Professor Kundt to get a foundation
for his electrolytically deposited prisms. [Footnote: See Appendix at
end of book.]

The application of a drop of a strong solution of platinum
tetrachloride to the rod will, on drying, give rise to a film of the
dry salt, and this may be reduced in the luminous gas flame.  During
the process, however, the quartz is apt to get rotten, especially if
the temperature has been anything approaching a full red heat.  The
resulting platinum deposit adheres very strongly to the quartz, and
may be soldered to as before.  This method has been employed by the
writer with success since 1887, and may even be extended to thick
threads.

It was also found that fusible metal either stuck to or contracted
upon clean quartz so as to make a firm joint.  In the light of M.
Margot's researches (already described), it occurred to me that
perhaps my experience was only a special case of the phenomena of
adhesion investigated with so much success by M. Margot.  I therefore
tried whether the alloy of tin and zinc used for soldering aluminium
would stick to quartz, and instantly found that this was indeed the
case.

Adhesion between the alloy and perfectly clean quartz takes place
almost without rubbing.  A rod of quartz thus "tinned" can be soldered
up to anything to which solder will stick, at once.  On applying the
method to thick quartz threads, success was instantaneous (the threads
were some preserved for ordinary galvanometer suspensions);  but when
the method was applied to very fine threads, great difficulty in
tinning the threads was experienced.  The operation is best performed
by having the alloy on the end of an aluminium soldering bit, and
taking care that it is perfectly free from oxide before the thread is
drawn across it.  There was no difficulty in soldering a thread
"tinned"    in this manner to a copper wire with tinman's solder, and
the joint appeared perfect, the thread breaking finally at about an
inch away from the joint.

I allow Mr. Boys' method to stand as I have written it, simply because
I have not had time as yet to make thorough tests of the durability of
"Margot" joints on the finest threads;  but I have practically no
doubt as to its perfect applicability, provided always that the solder
can be got clean enough when melted on the bit.  Very fine threads
will require to be stretched before tinning, in order to enable them
to break through the capillary barrier of the surface of the melted
solder.

Sec. 92.  Soldering.

It is almost unfair to the arts of the glass-blower or optician to
describe them side by side with the humble trade of soldering.
Nevertheless, no accomplishment of a mechanical kind is so serviceable
to the physicist as handiness with the soldering bit;  and, as a rule,
there is no other exercise in which the average student shows such
lamentable incapacity.  The following remarks on the subject are
therefore addressed to persons presumably quite ignorant of the way in
which soldering is carried out, and do not profess to be more than of
the most elementary character.

For laboratory purposes three kinds of solder are in general
sufficient.  One is the ordinary tinman's solder composed of lead and
tin.  The second is "spelter," or soft fusible brass, and the third is
an alloy of silver and brass called silver solder.

Tinman's solder is used for most purposes where high temperatures are
not required, or where the apparatus is intended to be temporary.  The
"spelter," which is really only finely granulated fusible brass, is
used for brazing iron joints.  The silver solder is convenient for
most purposes where permanency is required, and is especially suited
to the joining of small objects.

Sec. 93.  Soft tinman's solder is made by melting together two parts of
grain tin and one of soft lead--the exact proportions are not of
consequence--but, on the other hand, the purer the constituents the
better the solder.  Within certain limits, the greater the proportion
of tin the cleaner and more fusible is the solder.  It is usually
worth while to prepare the solder in the laboratory, for in this way a
uniform and dependable product is assured.  Good soft lead is melted
in an iron ladle and skimmed;  the temperature is allowed to rise very
little above the melting-point.  The tin is then added little by
little, the alloy stirred vigorously and skimmed, and sticks of solder
conveniently cast by sweeping the ladle over a clean iron plate, so as
to pour out a thin stream of solder.  If the solder be properly made
it will have a mat and bright mottled surface, and will "crackle" when
held up to the ear and bent.

Perhaps the chief precaution necessary in making solder is to exclude
zinc.  The presence of a very small percentage of this metal entirely
spoils the solder for tinman's work by preventing its "running" or
flowing smoothly under the soldering bit.

Fig.  75.

Fig.   76.

Fig.  77.

Sec. 94.  Preparing a Soldering Bit.

The wedge-shaped edge of one of the forms of bit shown in the sketch
is filed to shape and the bit heated in a fire or on a gas heater.  A
bit of rough sandstone, or even a clean soft brick, or a bit of tin
plate having some sand sprinkled over it, is placed in a convenient
position and sprinkled with resin.

As soon as the bit is hot enough to melt solder it is withdrawn and a
few drops of solder melted on to the brick or its equivalent.  The
iron or bit is then rubbed to and fro over the solder and resin till
the former adheres to and tins the copper head.  It will be found
advisable to tin every side of the point of the bit and to carry the
tinning back at least half an inch from the edge.

If the solder obstinately refuses to adhere, the cause is to be sought
in the oxidation of the copper, or of the solder, or both--in either
case the result of too high a temperature or too prolonged heating.
The simple remedy is to get the iron hot, and then to dress it with an
old file, so as to expose a bright surface, which is instantly passed
over the resin as a means of preserving it from oxidation.  If the
process above described be now carried out, it will be found that the
difficulty disappears.

Before using the iron, wipe off any soot or coke or burned resin by
means of an old rag.  An iron tinned in this way is much to be
preferred to one tinned by means of chloride of zinc.

A shorter and more usual method is carried out as follows:  The
solution of chloride of zinc is prepared by adding bits of zinc to
some commercial hydrochloric acid diluted with a little (say 25 per
cent) of water.  The acid may conveniently be placed in a small glazed
white jar (a jam pot does excellently), and this should only be filled
to about one-quarter of its capacity.  An excess of zinc may be added.

It may be fancy, but I prefer a soldering solution made in this way to
a solution of chloride of zinc bought as a chemical product.  The jar
is generally mounted on a heavy leaden base, so as to avoid any danger
of its getting knocked over, for nothing is so nasty or bad for tools
as a bench on which this noxious liquid has been upset (Fig.  78).

Fig. 78.

To tin a soldering bit, a little of the fluid is dipped out of the jar
on to a bit of tin plate bent up at the edges--a few drops is
sufficient--and the iron is heated and rubbed about in the liquid
with a drop of solder.  If the iron is anything like clean it will tin
at once and exhibit a very bright surface, but quite dirty copper may
be tinned by dipping it for a moment in the liquid in the pot and then
working it about over the solder.  An iron so tinned remains covered
with chloride of zinc, and this must be carefully wiped off if it is
intended to use the iron with a resin or tallow flux in lead
soldering.

One disadvantage of this process is that the copper bit soon gets
eaten into holes and requires to be dressed up afresh.  On the other
hand, an iron so tinned always presents a nice clean solder surface
until the next time it is heated, when it generally becomes very dirty
and requires to be carefully wiped before using.

In my experience also an iron so tinned is more easily spoiled as to
the state of its surface, "detinned," in fact, by overheating than
when the tinning is carried out by resin and friction.  When this
happens, the shortest way out of the difficulty is the application of
