"Lovely," Malone said. "Meanwhile, what was San Francisco doing?"

Boyd smiled. "San Francisco was getting confused," he said. "Like
everybody else. The San Francisco man got a copy of an affidavit
dealing with merchant-ship tonnage. That was supposed to go to the
attorney general."

"Good work," Malone said. "So when the Frisco boys woke up to what was
happening--"

"They called the head man, and he put two and two together, resigned
and went into hiding. Right now, he's probably living an undercover
life as a shoe salesman in Paris, Kentucky."

"And, after all," Malone added, "why not? It's a peaceful life."

"The attorney general, of course, impounded the second set of books,"
Boyd went on. "A grand jury is hearing charges now."

"You know," Malone said reflectively, "I almost feel sorry for the
man. Almost, but not quite."

"I see what you mean," Boyd said. "It is a hell of a thing to happen."

"On the other hand--" Malone leafed through the papers in a hurry,
then put them back on Boyd's desk with a sigh of relief. "I've got the
main details now," he said. "I can go through the thing more
thoroughly later. Anything else?"

"Oh, lots," Boyd said. "And all in the same pattern. The FPM, for
instance, literally dropped one in our laps."

"Literally?" Malone said. "What was the Federation of Professional
Musicians doing in your lap?"

"Not mine," Boyd said hastily. "Not mine. But it seems that some
secretary put a bunch of file folders on the windowsill of their
second-floor offices, and they fell off. At the same time, an agent
was passing underneath, slipped on a banana peel and sat down on the
sidewalk. Bingo, folders in lap."

"Wonderful," Malone said. "The hand of God."

"The hand of something, for sure," Boyd said. "Those folders contain
all the ammunition we've ever needed to get after the FPM. Kickbacks,
illegal arrangements with nightclubs, the whole works. We're putting
it together now, but it looks like a long, long term ahead for our
friends from the FPM."

And Boyd went to his desk, picked up a particularly large stack of
papers. "This," he said, "is really hot stuff."

"What do you call the others?" Malone said. "Crime on ice?"

"The new show at the Winter Garden," Boyd said blithely. "Don't miss
it if you can."

"Sure," Malone said. "So what's so hot?"

Boyd smiled. "The police departments of seven major cities," he said.
"They're all under attack either by the local prosecuting attorney or
the state's attorney general. It seems there's a little graft and
corruption going on."

"This," Malone said, "is not news."

"It is to the people concerned," Boyd said. "Four police chiefs have
resigned, along with great handfuls of inspectors, captains and
lieutenants. It's making a lovely wingding all over the country, Ken."

"I'll bet," Malone said.

"And I checked back on every one," Boyd went on. "Your hunch was
absolutely right, Ken. The prosecuting attorneys and the attorneys
general are all new men--all the ones involved in this stuff. Each one
replaced a previous incumbent in a recent election. In two cases, the
governor was new, too--elected last year."

"That figures," Malone said. "What about the rest?"

Boyd's grandiose wave of a hand took in all the papers on the desk.
"It's all the same," he said. "They all follow a pattern, Ken, _the_
pattern. The one you were looking for."

Malone blinked. "I'll be damned," he said. "I'll be doubly damned."

"And how about the Russians?" Boyd said.

"You mean the _Meeneestyerstvoh Vnootrenikh Dyehl_?" Malone said.

"Now," Boyd said, "I'll be damned. And after I practiced for days."

"Ah," Malone said. "But I was _there_. The Russians are about as mixed
up as a group of Transylvanian villagers with two vampires to track
down and not enough flambeaux for all. Here, for instance, is just one
example: the conflicting sets of orders that were given about me and
Her Majesty and L--Miss Garbitsch."

Briefly, he outlined what had happened.

"Sounds like fun," Boyd said.

"They were so busy arguing with each other," Malone finished, "that I
have a feeling we hardly needed the teleportation to escape. It would
just have taken longer, that's all." He paused. "By the way, Tom,
about the stakeout--"

"Luba Garbitsch is being protected as if she were Fort Knox," Boyd
said. "If any Soviet agent tries to approach her with a threat of any
kind, we'll have him nabbed before he can say Ivan Robinovitch."

"Or," Malone suggested, "_Meeneestyerstvoh_--"

"If we waited for that one," Boyd said, "we might have to wait all
day." He paused. "But who's doing it?" he went on. "That's still the
question. Martians? Venerians? Or is that last one Venusians?"

"Aphrodisiacs," Malone suggested diplomatically.

"Thank you, no," Boyd said politely. "I never indulge while on duty."

"Thomas," Malone said, "you are a Rover Boy First-Class."

"Good," Boyd said. "But, meanwhile, who is doing all this? Would you
prefer Evil Beings from the Planet Ploor?"

"I would not," Malone said firmly.

"But I have a strange feeling," Boyd said, "that, in spite of all the
evidence to the contrary, you do not hold with the Interplanetary
Alien Theory."

"Frankly," Malone said, "I'm not sure of anything. Not really. But I
do want to know why, if it's interplanetary aliens doing this stuff,
they're picking such a strange way of going about it."

"Strange?" Boyd said. "What's strange about it? You wouldn't expect
Things from Ploor to come right out and _tell_ us what they want,
would you? It's against custom. It may even be against the law."

"Well, maybe," Malone said. "But it is pretty strange. The difference
between what's happening in Russia and what's happening here--"

"What difference?" Boyd said. "Everybody's confused. Here, and over
there. It all looks the same to me."

"Well, it isn't," Malone said. "Take a look at the paper, for
instance." He tossed the _Post_ at Boyd, who caught it with a
spasmodic clutching motion and reassembled it slowly.

"Why throw things?" Boyd said. "You sore or something?"

"I guess I am," Malone said. "But not at you. It's--somebody or
something. Person or persons unknown."

"Or Ploorians," Boyd said.

"Whatever," Malone said. "But take a look at the paper and see if you
see what I see." He paused. "Does that mean anything?" he said.

"Probably," Boyd said. "We'll figure it out later." He leafed through
the newspaper slowly, pulling thoughtfully at his beard from time to
time. Malone watched him in breathless silence.

"See it?" he said at last.

Boyd looked up and, very slowly, nodded. "You're right, Ken," he said
in a quiet voice. "You're absolutely right. It's as plain as the nose
on your face."

"And that," Malone said, "sounds like an insult. It's much plainer
than that. Suppose you tell me."

Boyd considered. "Over here," he said at last, "there are a lot of
confused jerks and idiots. Right?"

"Correct," Malone said.

"And in Russia," Boyd went on, "there's a lot of confusion. Right?"

"Sure," Boyd said. "It's perfectly clear. I wonder why I didn't see it
before."

"That's it!" Malone cried. "That's the difference!"

"Sure," Boyd said. "It's perfectly clear. I wonder why I didn't see it
before."

"Because you weren't looking for it," Malone said. "Because nobody
was. But there's one more check I want to make. There's one area I'm
not sure of, simply because I don't have enough to go on."

"What area is that?" Boyd said. "It seems to me we did a pretty good
job--"

"The Mafia," Malone said. "We know they're having trouble, but--"

"But we don't know what kind of trouble," Boyd finished. "Right you
are."

Malone nodded. "I want to talk to Manelli," he said. "Can we set it
up?"

"I don't see why not," Boyd said. "The A-in-C can give us the latest
on him. You want me with you?"

"No," Malone said after some thought. "No. You go and see Mike Sand,
heading up the International Truckers' Union. We know he's tied up
with the Syndicate, and maybe you can get some information from him.
You know what to dig for?"

"I do now," Boyd said. He reached for the intercom phone.

* * * * *

Cesare Antonio Manelli was a second-generation Prohibition mobster,
whose history can most easily be described by reference to the various
affairs of State which coincided with his development. Thus:

When Cesare was a small toddler of uncertain gait and chubby visage,
the Twenty-First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States
canceled out not only the Eighteenth Amendment, but the thriving
enterprises conducted by Manelli, Sr., and many of his friends.

When Cesare was a young schoolboy, poring over the multiplication
tables, his father and his father's friends were busy dividing. They
were dividing, to put it more fully, husbands from families as a means
of requesting ransom, and money from banks as a means of getting the
same cash without use of the middleman, or victim. This was the period
of the Great Readjustment, and the frenzied search among gangland's
higher echelons for a substitute for bootlegging.

And when Cesare was an innocent high-schooler, sporting a Paleolithic
switchblade knife and black leather jacket, his father and his
father's friends had reached a new plateau. They consolidated into a
Syndicate, and began to concentrate on gambling and the whole,
complex, profitable network of unions.

And then World War II had come along, and it was time for Cesare to do
his part. Bidding a fond farewell to his father and such of his
father's friends as had survived the disagreements of Prohibition, the
painful legal processes of the early Thirties and the even more
painful consolidations of the years immediately before the war, young
Cesare went off to foreign lands, where he distinguished himself by
creating and running the largest single black-market ring in all of
Southern Europe.

Cesare had followed in his father's footsteps. And, before his sudden
death during a disagreement in Miami, Giacomo "Jack the Ripper"
Manelli was proud of his son.

"Geez," he often said. "Whattakid, huh? Whattakid!"

At the war's end, young Cesare, having proven himself a man, took unto
himself a nickname and a shotgun. He did not have to use the shotgun
very much, after the first few lessons; soon he was on his way to the
top.

There was nowhere for Cesare "Big Cheese" Antonio Manelli to go,
except up.

Straight up.

Now, in 1973, he occupied a modestly opulent office on Madison Avenue,
where he did his modest best to pretend to the world at large that he
was only a small cog--indeed, an almost invisible cog--in a large
advertising machine. His best was, for all practical purposes, good
enough.

Though it was common knowledge among the spoil-sport law enforcement
officers who cared to look into the matter that Manelli was the real
owner of the agency, there was no way to prove this. He didn't even
have a phone under his own name. The only way to reach him was by
going through his front man in the agency, a blank-faced, truculent
Arab named Atif Abdullah Aoud.

According to the agent-in-charge of the New York office, Malone had
his choice of two separate methods of getting to Manelli. One, more
direct, was to walk in, announce that he was an agent of the FBI, and
insist on seeing Manelli. If he had a search warrant, the A-in-C told
him, he might even get in. But, even if he did, he would probably not
get anything out of Manelli.

The second and more diplomatic way was to call up Atif Abdullah Aoud
and arrange for an appointment.

Malone made his decision in a flash. He flipped on the phone and
punched for a PLaza exchange.

The face that appeared on the screen was that of a fairly pretty, if
somewhat vapid, brunette. "Rodger, Willcoe, O'Vurr and Aoud, good
afternoon," she said.

Malone blinked.

"Who is calling, please?" the girl said. She snapped gum at the screen
and Malone winced and drew away.

"This is Kenneth J. Malone," he said from what he considered a safe
distance. "I want to talk to Mr. Aoud."

"Mr. Aoud?" she said in a high, unhelpful whine.

"That's right," Malone said patiently. "You can tell him that there
may be some government business coming his way."

"Oh," she said. "But Mr. Aoud isn't in."

Mr. Aoud wasn't in. Mr. Aoud was out. Malone turned that over in his
mind a few times, and decided to try and forget it just as quickly as
possible. "Then," he said, "let me talk to one of the other partners."

"Partners?" the girl said. She popped her gum again. Malone moved back
another inch.

"You know," he said. "The other people he works with. Rodger, or
Willcoe, or O'Vurr."

"Oh," the girl said. "Them."

"That's right," Malone said patiently.

"How about Mr. Willcoe?" the girl said after a second of deep and
earnest thought. "Would he do?"

"Why not let's try him and see?" Malone said.

"Okay," the girl said brightly. "Let's." She flashed Malone a dazzling
smile, only slightly impeded by the gum, and flipped off. Malone
stared at the blank screen for a few seconds, and then the girl's
voice said, invisibly: "Mr. Willcoe will speak to you now, Mr. Melon.
Thank you for waiting."

"I'm not--" Malone started to say, and then the face of Frederick
Willcoe appeared on the screen.

Willcoe was a thin, wrinkle-faced man with very pale skin. He seemed
to be in his sixties, and he looked as if he had just lost an
all-night bout with Count Dracula. Malone looked interestedly for
puncture marks, but failed to find any.

"Ah," Willcoe said, in a voice that sounded like crinkled paper. "Mr.
Melon. Good afternoon."

"I'm not Mr. Melon," Malone said testily.

Willcoe looked gently surprised, like a man who has discovered that
his evening sherry contains cholesterol. "Really?" he said. "Then I
must be on the wrong line. I beg your pardon."

"You're not on the wrong line," Malone said. "I am Mr. Melon in a
way." That didn't sound very clear when he got it out, so he added:
