and seated myself gingerly on one of the dilapidated seats, noting that
the warning signs "For White" and "For Colored" had been smeared over
with just enough paint to make the intent of obliteration clear without
actually doing so.


_58._ How Miss Francis contrived to make every place she lived in,
apartment, chickenhouse or cottage, look exactly alike was remarkable.
Nothing is more absurd than the notion that socalled intellectual
workers are always alert--as Miss Francis demonstrated by her greeting
to me.

"Well, Weener, what is it this time? Selling on commission or an
interview?"

It was inconceivable any literate person in the United States could be
ignorant of my position. "It is neither," I returned with some dignity.
"I am here to do you a favor. To help you in your work." And I explained
my proposition.

She squatted back on her heels and gave me that old, familiar, searching
look. "So you have made a good thing out of the Metamorphizer afterall,"
she said irrelevantly and untruthfully. "Weener, you are a consistent
character--a beautifully consistent character."

"Please come to the point, Miss Francis. I am a busy man and I have come
down here simply to see you. Will you accept?"

"No."

"No?"

"I doubt if I could combine my research with your attempt to process the
inoculated _Cynodon dactylon_. However, that would not prevent me from
taking you up and using you in order to further a good cause. But I am
not yet ready--I shall not be ready for some time, to go directly to the
Grass. That must come later. No, Weener."

I was exasperated at the softness of my impulse which had made me seek
out this madwoman to do her a favor. I could not regret my charitable
nature, but I mentally resolved to be more discriminating in future.
Besides, the thought of Miss Francis for the work had been sheer
sentimentality, the sort of false reasoning which would make of every
mother an obstetrician or every hen an oologist.

As I sauntered through the drowsy streets, killing time till the driver
of the ridiculous "bus" should decide to guide his mules back to the
airport, I was struck by the lack of tension, of apprehension and
anxiety, so apparent in New York. Evidently the Black South suffered
little from the brooding fear and terror; I put it down to their
childish thoughtlessness.

Walking thus reflectively, head down, I looked up suddenly--straight
into the face of the Strange Lady I had driven from Los Angeles to Yuma.

I'm sure I opened my mouth, but no words came out. She was hurrying
rapidly along, paying no attention either to me or to her surroundings,
aloof and exquisite. I think I put out my hand, or made some other
reflexive gesture to stop her, but either she failed to notice or
misunderstood. When I finally recovered myself and set out after her,
she had vanished.

I waited for the bus, wondering if I had been victim of an
hallucination....


_59._ In spite of Miss Francis' blindness to her own interest I still
had a prospective superintendent for the gathering and shipping of the
grass: George Thario. Unless his obsession had sent him down into
Mississippi or Louisiana, I expected to find him in Indianapolis.

The short journey west was tedious and uncomfortable, repeating the
pattern of the one southward. At the end of it there was no garrulous
chief dispatcher, for the airport was completely deserted, and I was
thankful for an ample stock of gas for the return flight.

I had no difficulty locating Joe in an immense, highceilinged
furnishedroom in one of the ugliest gray weatherboarded houses, of which
the city, never celebrated for its architecture, could boast. The first
thing to impress me was the room's warmth. For the first time since
landing I did not shiver. A woodfire burned in an open grate and a
kerosene heater smelled obstinately in an opposite corner. A grandpiano
stood in front of the long narrow windows and on it slouched several
thick piles of curlyedged paper.

He greeted me with something resembling affection. "The tycoon himself!
Workers of the world--resume your chains. A W, it's a pleasure to see
you. And looking so smooth and ordinary and unharassed too, at the
moment everyone else is tearing himself with panic or anguish. How do
you do it?"

"I look on the bright side of things, Joe," I answered. "Worry never
helped anybody accomplish anything--and it takes fewer muscles to smile
than to frown."

"You hear that, Florence?"

I had not noticed her when I came in, the original of the snapshot,
sitting placidly in a corner darning socks. I must say the photograph
had done her less than justice, for though she was undoubtedly
commonlooking and sloppy, with heavy breasts and coarse red cheeks and
unconcealedly dyed hair, there was yet about her an air of great
vitality, kindness, and good nature. Parenthetically she acknowledged my
presence with a pleasant smile.

"You hear that? Remind me the next time I am troubled by a transposition
or a solopassage that it takes less muscles to smile than to frown. For
I have got to work at last, A W; the loafing and inviting of my soul is
past, my soul has responded to my invitation. You remember Crisodd's
Devilgrass Symphony? A horrible misconception if ever there was one, a
personal insult to anyone who ever saw the Grass; a dull, unintentional
joke; bad Schoenberg--if that isnt a tautology--combined with faint
memories of the most vulgar Wagner--if that isnt another
tautology--threaded together on _Mighty Like a Rose_ and _Alexander's
Ragtime Band_. But what am I saying, A W, to you who are so free from
the virus of culture? What the hell interest have you in Crisodd's
symphony or my symphony or anybody's symphony, except the polyphony of
profits?"

"I hope no one thinks I'm a narrowminded man, Joe," I reproved him. "I
venture to say I have as much interest in Art as the next person. Ive
done a bit of writing myself, you know, and literature--"

"Oh sure. I didnt mean to hurt your feelings."

"You did not. But while I believe Music is a fine thing in its place, I
came to discuss a different subject."

"If you mean taking Joe back to Europe with you, youre out of luck, Mr
Weener," put in Florence placidly. "He's almost finished the first
movement and we'll never leave the Grass till it's all done."

"You mistake me, Mrs Thario. I have a proposition for your husband, but
far from taking him away from the Grass, it will bring him closer to
it."

"Impossible," exclaimed Joe. "I am the Grass and the Grass is me; in
mystical union we have become a single entity. I speak with its voice
and in the great cadences which come from its heart you can hear
Thario's first, transfigured and magnified a hundred thousand times."

I was sorry to note his speech, always so simple and unaffected in
contrast to his letters, was infected with an unbecoming pomposity.
Looking at him closely I saw he had lost weight. His flesh had shrunk
closer to his big frame and the lines of his skull stood out sharply in
his cheek and jaw. There was the faintest touch of gray in his hair and
his fingers played nervously with the ragged and illadvised beard on his
chin. He hardly looked the man who had evaded serious work in order to
encourage a silly obsession, comfortably supported all the while by a
sizable remittance from his father.

I outlined to them my plans for gathering samples of the weed. Florence
tucked her stillthreaded needle between her teeth and inspected the
current pair of socks critically. Joe walked over to the piano and
struck several discordant notes.

"I understand there are several parties making expeditions onto the
Grass," I said.

"Lots," confirmed Joe. "There's a group sent out by Brother Paul on some
very mysterious mission. It's called the Sanctification of the
Forerunner. God knows how many thousands he's made his suckers cough up,
for theyre equipped with all the latest gadgets for polar exploration,
skis and dogsleds, moompitcher cameras, radios and unheardof quantities
of your very best pemmican. They started as soon as the snow was thick
enough to bear their weight and if we have an untimely thaw theyll go to
join the Russians.

"Then there's the government bunch, the Disruptions Commission having
finally and reluctantly produced an idea, but exactly what it is they
havent confided to an eager citizenry. Smaller groups too: scientists
and nearscientists, enthusiasts who have got the notion somehow that
animals or migratory game are roaming the snow on top of the
grass--exactly how they got there is not explained--planning to
photograph, hunt or trap; and just plain folk making the trip for the
hell of it. We might have gone ourselves if it hadnt been for the
symphony."

"Your symphony is concerned with the Grass?" I asked politely.

"It's concerned with combinations of sound." He looked at me sharply and
banged out harsher discords. "With life, if you want to talk like a
programnote."

"If you go on this expedition it will give you an opportunity to gather
new material," I pointed out.

"If I look out the window or consult my navel or 'meditate while at
stool' or cut my finger I will get new material with much less hardship.
The last thing a composer or writer or painter needs is material; it is
from excess of material he is the besotted creature he is. He may lack
leisure or energy or ability or an active colon, but no masterpiece ever
was or conceivably could be thwarted from lack of material."

"Yet you have tied yourself to the Grass."

"Not to prostitute it to whatever talents I have, but because it is the
most magnificent thing on earth."

"Then of course youll go," I said.

"Why don't you go yourself, A W? Do you good to live out in the open."

"I can't afford the time, Joe; I have too many things that need my
personal attention."

He struck a series of great thumping notes. "And so have I, A W, so have
I. I'm afraid youll have to get somebody else."

I could neither understand nor shake his obstinacy and when I left them
I had almost determined to abandon the whole project, for I could not
think whom else trustworthy I could get. His idea of my own
participation was fantastic; I had long since come to the point where it
was necessary to delegate all such duties to subordinates.


_60._ Perhaps it was Joe's sly remark about it doing me good to be out
in the open, or the difficulty of getting a conveyance, but I decided to
walk to my hotel. Taxis of course disappeared with gasoline, but
ingenious men, unwilling to be pauperized by accepting the dole, had
devised rickshaws and bicycle carriages which were the only means of
local transportation. The night was clear and cold, the stars gleaming
in distant purity, but all around, the offensive smell of the disheveled
city played on my disgusted nostrils.

"In the name of Jesus Christ, Amen. Brother, are you saved?"

When the figure had come out from the shadow of a building to accost me
my first thought had been of a holdup, but the odd salutation made this
seem unlikely. "What do you want?" I asked.

"Brother, are you a Christian man?"

I resented the impertinence and started to walk on; he followed close
beside me. "Harden not your heart, miserable sinner, but let Jesus
dissolve your pride as he washes away your other sins. Be not high and
mighty for the high shall be low and the mighty powerless; in a short
time you will be food for grass. The Grass is food for the Ox, the
divine Ox with seven horns which shall come upon the world with a great
trumpeting and bellowing soon after the Forerunner."

I knew of the great multiplication of insanity and hoped I could reach
the hotel before he grew violent. "What is your name?" I temporized.

"Call me Brother Paul, for I was once Saul the worldly; now I am your
brother in Christ."

"Brother Paul! The radio preacher?"

"We are all members one of another and He who watches the sparrow fall
makes no distinction between one manmade label and another. All of us
who have found Christ Jesus with the help of Brother Paul are called
Brother Paul. Come to the Loving Arms, O miserable sinner, and be
Brother Paul also."

I thought it might be very confusing. "I have always been interested in
religion."

"O puny man. Interested in life and interested in death, interested in
being and interested in begetting, interested in religion and interested
in dung. Turn from those interests which the devil pays upon your soul's
mortgage; your Savior resides in the heart of the Grass--withhold not
your precious soul from Him. At this very moment the Forerunner is being
sanctified and after her there will come the Ox to eat the Grass and
then the end of the world. Give Brother Paul your worthless earthly
possessions, give your soul to Jesus and hasten that glorious day.
Hallelujah!"

The fervid jumble ended in a near scream. What a waste of oratorical and
perhaps organizational energy, I mused as I strode along rapidly, still
intent on escaping the fanatic. Under different circumstances, I
thought, a man like this might turn out to be a capable clerk or minor
executive. Suddenly I had a hunch.

"Mr--?"

"Brother Paul. I have no earthly name."

"I wish youd come with me for a few minutes; I have a proposition which
might interest you."

In the darkness I could see him peering at me suspiciously. "Is this
some worldly seduction from the Christian path?"

"I think you will find what I have to offer a material aid to your
church."

"I have no church," he said. "We are Christians and recognize no manmade
institution."

"Well, then, to your movement or whatever you call it." In spite of his
reluctance, which was now as great as mine had been originally, I
persuaded him to accompany me. He sat uneasily forward while I told him
who I was and sketched the plan for collecting some of the Grass.

"What is this to me? I have long ago put aside all material thoughts and
now care only for the life of the spirit."

This must be true, I thought, noting his shabby clothes, sweatgreasy
muffler at once hiding and revealing lack of necktie, and cracked shoes,
one sock brown, the other black. "It is this to you: if you don't want
the salary and bonus attached to organizing and superintending the
expedition--and I am prepared to be generous--you can turn it over to
Brother Paul. I imagine it will be acceptable."

He shook his head, muttering, "Satan, Satan." The lower part of his face
was wide and divided horizontally, like an inverted jellymold. It
tapered up into bracketing ears, supporting gingery eaves. I pressed
home my arguments.

"I will put your proposition to Brother Paul," he conceded at length.

"I thought distinctions between one man and another were worldly and
trivial," I prodded him. "Arent you Brother Paul?"

"Satan, Satan," he repeated.

I'm sure it could have been nothing but one of those flashes of
intuition for which successful executives are noted which caused me to
pick this man in spite of his absurd ranting and illfavored appearance.
Not intuition really, but an ability to evaluate and classify
personalities instantly. I always had this faculty; it helped me in my
early experiences as a salesman and blossomed out when I entered my
proper field.

Anthony Preblesham--for that was his worldly name--did not disappoint my
judgment for he proved one of the most aggressive men I ever hired. The
Brother Paul hocuspocus, which he quickly dropped, had merely caught and
canalized an abounding energy that would otherwise have flowed aimlessly
in a stagnant world. In Consolidated Pemmican he found his true faith;
his zeal for our products proved as great if not greater than his former
hysteria for the salvation of mankind. It was no fault of his that the
expedition he led proved fruitless.

The men Tony Preblesham took with him were all Brother Pauls who--since
they disdained them--had not been told of material rewards but given the
impression they were furthering their fanatical creed. They built a camp
upon the Grass, or rather upon the snow which overlay the Grass, near
what had once been Springfield, Illinois. Digging down through the snow
to the weed, they discovered it to have lost most of its rubbery
qualities of resistance in dormancy, and cut with comparative ease more
than four tons which were transported with the greatest difficulty to
the Florida plant. Here, to anticipate, their work came to nothing, for
no practicable method was found for reducing the grass to a form in
which its nutritive elements could be economically extracted.


_61._ The secrecy surrounding the government expedition could not be
maintained and it was soon learned that what was planned was nothing
less than an attempt to burn great areas of the weed while in its
dormant state. All previous attempts to fire the Grass had been made
when the sap was running and it was thought that in its dryer condition
some measure of success might be obtained. The public instantly
translated possibility into probability and probability into virtual
certainty, their enthusiastic optimism making the winter more bearable.

The party proceeded not more than a couple of miles beyond the eastern
edge, dragging with them a flexible pipeline through which was pumped
fueloil, now priceless in the freezing cities. Methodically they sprayed
a square mile and set it afire, feeding the flames with the oil. The
burning area sank neatly through the snow, exposing the grass beneath:
dry, yellow and brittle. The stiff, interwoven stolons caught; oil was
applied unstintedly; the crackling and roaring and snapping could be
heard by those well beyond the perimeter of the Grass and the terrific
heat forced the temporary abandonment of the work.

The spotbroadcasters in emotional voices gave the news to those whose
radios still functioned. Reporters flashed their editors, BURNING
SUCCESSFUL. WILL STOP GRASS IF MULTIPLIED. All over the country
volunteer crews were instantly formed to repeat the experiment.

When the flames died down the men crept closer to inspect the results.
The heat had melted the snow for many yards outside the orbit of fire,
revealing a border of dull and sodden grass. Beyond this border a
blackened crater had eaten its way straight down to the reclaimed earth
below. Shouting and rejoicing greeted this evidence of triumph. What if
the Grass could advance at will in summer? It could be subdued in winter
and thus kept in check till the ingenuity which devised this one victory
could win another.

Working furiously, the oil was again sprayed, this time over a still
larger piece and again the flames lit the sky. The President issued a
Proclamation of Thanksgiving; the American dollar rose to $175 to the
pound, and several prominent expatriates began to think seriously of
returning home.

The second fire burned through the night and aided by a slight change in
the weather thawed the snow over a great area. Eagerly the expedition,
now swollen into a small army, returned to continue their triumphant
labors. The bright sun shone upon the dirtied snow, upon naked muddy
earth in the center of the crater, upon the network of burnt and
blackened stems and upon the wide band of grayishgreen grass the
retreating snow had laid open to its rays. Grayishgreen, but changing in
color at every moment as the work of spraying began again.

Changing color, becoming more verdant, thrusting blades into the air,
moving its long runners upward and sideways and downward toward the
destroyed part. Revived by the heat, relieved of the snow, the Grass,
fighting for its life with the same intensity which animated its
attackers, burst into a fury of growth. It covered the evidences of
destruction in less time than the burning had taken. It tore the
pipeline from its tormentors' hands and drove them away with threats of
swift immolation. Defiantly it rose to a pinnacle, hiding its
mutilation, and flaunted its vivid tendrils to bear witness to its
invulnerability till a killing frost followed by another snowfall
covered it again.

Since the delusive hope had been so high, the disappointment threw the
public into a despair greater than ever before. The nervous tension of
anxiety was replaced by a listlessness of resignation and the suicide
rate, high before, now doubled. For the first time a general admission
was to be heard that no solution would be found and in another season
the end would come for the United States. Facing the prospect squarely,
an exodus of the little people, as distinguished from the earlier flight
of men of wealth and foresight, from the country began.

This was the first countermeasure attempted since the Grass crossed the
Mississippi, and in reaction to its collapse, the return of Brother
Paul's expedition passed almost unnoticed. Only _Time_, now published in
Paris, bothered to report it for general circulation: "Last week from
some undisclosed spot in mid U.S. returned Mother, 'The Forerunner' Joan
(real name: unknown), and party. Dispatched Grassward by Brother Paul,
doom-predicting, advent-prophesying graminophile evangelist, the purpose
of Mother Joan's expedition had been her 'Sanctification,' above the
exact spot where the Savior was waiting in the midst of the Grass to
receive His faithful disciples. Said Brother Paul to reporters after
embracing The Forerunner enthusiastically, 'The expedition has been
successful.' Said Mother Joan, off the record, 'My feet hurt.'"


_62._ The coming of spring was awaited with grim foreboding, but the
Grass was not bound by any manmade almanac and unable to contain itself
till the melting of the snow, again leaped the barrier of the
Mississippi, this time near Natchez, and ran through the South like
water from a sloshed dishpan. The prized reforms of the black
legislatures were wiped out more quickly even than their
greatgrandfathers' had been in 1877. The wornout cotton and tobacco
lands offered hospitable soil while cypress swamps and winter-swollen
creeks pumped vitality into the questing runners. Southward and
eastward it spread, waiting only the opening of the first pussywillow
and the showing of the first crocus to jump northward and meet the
western advance there.

The dwindling remnants of cohesion and selfcontrol existing before now
disappeared completely. The capital was moved to Portland, Maine. Local
law and order vanished. The great gangs took over the cities and
extracted what tribute they could from the impoverished inhabitants.
Utilities ceased functioning entirely, what little goods remained were
obtainable only by barter, and epidemic after epidemic decreased the
population to fit the shrinking boundaries.

Brother Paul, deprived of the radio, now multiplied himself infinitely
in the person of his disciples, preaching unremittingly against
resistance, even by thought, to the oncoming Grass. Mother Joan's
infrequent public appearances attracted enormous crowds as she
proclaimed, "O be joyful; give your souls to Jesus and your bodies to
the Grass. I am The Forerunner and after me will come the Ox. Rejoice,
brothers and sisters, for this is the end of all your suffering and
misery."

On foot or rarely with the aid of a horse or mule, the panicstricken
population marched northward and eastward. Canadian officials, anxious
to apply immigration controls with the greatest possible latitude, were
