proportion to the hurting powers which have produced the disease, and
the delicacy or importance of the part affected.

The effect produced on the excitability by any stimulus, must
evidently be in a ratio compounded of the degree of excitability and
the force of the stimulus. The same stimulus will produce greater
contractions upon a fibre that is more irritable than upon one which
possesses less irritability; and the irritability or excitability of
the fibre being given, or remaining the same, the contraction will be
in proportion to the strength of the stimulus. Hence it is evident,
that the effect or excitement must be in a ratio compounded of the
exciting powers and excitability.

Sthenic diathesis and disease is caused by the operation of different
exciting powers, which produce too great a degree of excitement in
the system: this at first increases all the functions, and, when
increased, produces a disturbance and inordinate action of them,
which is communicated to the whole body. In diseases of this kind
there is often an appearance of debility, but this is extremely
fallacious, and arises from the disturbed state of the different
functions. Hence it is evidently of the utmost consequence to
ascertain carefully whether this debility is real, or the effect of
asthenic disease: or whether it is owing to the disturbance of the
functions by over stimulating, and in this case fallacious; for
should a sthenic disease be treated by stimulants and cordials, the
effect would be an aggravation of all the symptoms, and a much higher
degree of disease.

Asthenic diathesis and disease is brought on by the excitement of the
system being diminished: and this may proceed either from a
diminution of common stimulant powers, while the excitability is
sufficiently abundant, or it may proceed from an exhausted
excitability, while the stimulus is sufficiently abundant. The former
is called direct, and the latter indirect debility. The exciting
causes therefore of asthenic disease, first impair the functions,
then occasion a disturbed or inordinate action of them, giving many
of them a false appearance; some of them, for instance, appear to be
increased, for in hysteria and epilepsy, which are both diseases of
debility, the action of the muscles seems to be preternaturally
increased; but this depends chiefly on the accumulated excitability,
which gives such a degree of irritability to the system, that the
smallest irritation, whether external, such as heat, exercise, &c. or
internal, as emotions of the mind, excite a strong spasmodic action,
which brings on the symptoms of epilepsy and hysteria. This
inordinate action however soon exhausts the morbid excitability, and
thus suspends itself, a sleep often follows, from which the patient
wakes with only a general sense of languor and debility: but as the
same cause still remains, the excitability of the body again becomes
morbidly accumulated, and thus the slightest stimulus produces a
recurrence of the fit, and the tendency to return will increase with
its recurrence, so that at last the slightest imaginable cause will
produce it, on account of the power of habit and association.

Gout likewise appears like a sthenic disease, and in inflammation
takes place, which resembles pleurisy or peripneumony; but this
symptom is fallacious, for it depends on debility, and is only to be
cured by means, which in pleurisy and peripneumony, would produce
death.

Hence it must be evident that those phenomena of diseases, which we
call symptoms, are generally fallacious; but this may be owing to our
imperfect knowledge of the animal economy, so that we are not able to
explain or understand the manner in which they are produced: we ought
however carefully to guard against being misled by them in practice.
The great difficulty is to distinguish the nature of the disease,
whether it is sthenic or asthenic, or whether it depends on too great
excitement, or on debility; for this being once clearly ascertained,
we proceed with certainty in our mode of treatment, instead of the
random practice, which must be the consequence of not taking a proper
view of the laws of life, and the causes of diseases.

The nature of the disease may be generally ascertained, by attending
to the habits of the patient, and the manner in which he has lived,
as well as to the state of the pulse; but in cases where these
circumstances do not render it clear, it may be ascertained, beyond a
doubt, by a trifling degree of stimulus, as, for instance, by any
cordial, as a little wine or spirits. If the disease be of an
inflammatory or sthenic kind, the symptoms will be aggravated, and
the cordial will not produce its usual pleasant effects on the
system; but on the contrary, if the nature of the disease be
asthenic, then the usual pleasant effects of the cordial will be
perceived, and the pain and other symptoms will be alleviated. This
trial, which is soon made, and without danger, will determine our
plan of cure, and we can then proceed with the most perfect
certainty. Thus you will see that this view we have taken leads to a
very different and much more rational plan of practice than is
generally followed, in which the most judicious physicians confess
that they have no clue to guide them; and complain that the science
of medicine consists merely in a number of insulated facts, not
connected by any theory: that they merely prescribe a remedy because
they have seen it of use in an apparently similar state, but that
they have no certainty of its producing a similar effect in the cases
in which they prescribe it. This all depends on trusting to the
fallacious appearance of symptoms, and not having taken a proper view
of the laws of life, or the manner in which the exciting powers act
on living bodies.

After these observations on the diagnosis, or the method of
distinguishing the nature of diseases, I shall proceed to consider
more particularly the nature of sthenic diseases, and the methods of
curing them, which will occupy the remainder of our time this
evening.

The powers or causes, which by their action produce inflammatory or
sthenic diseases, are, first, heat, which is a very frequent cause,
particularly when it succeeds cold; for the cold accumulates the
excitability, and then renders the whole body, or a part, more liable
to be affected by the heat afterwards applied. In this way is
produced rheumatism, catarrh, or, as it is commonly called, a cold,
and peripneumony. These complaints have been often attributed to
cold, but I believe that there never was a well attested instance
where cold alone, without being either followed by heat or some other
stimulus, produced a real sthenic, or inflammatory disease. This is
not merely a distinction, it is a circumstance of the utmost
importance, because it influences the mode of practice to be pursued.
Heat is one of the exciting or stimulant powers which support life,
and one of the most powerful of these stimulants; but cold is only a
diminution of it: how then can this produce a sthenic state, or a
state of too high excitement? The blood is one of the exciting
powers, which, by its continual circulation supports life; but surely
if we abstracted a quantity of this fluid from the body, no person
will be bold enough to say, that we by that means should produce an
inflammatory disease. Cold renders the body more liable to be
affected by heat, or any other stimulus applied, but does not of
itself produce any stimulant or inflammatory effects.

To see more clearly the manner in which cold acts, let us inquire how
it produces or contributes towards the production of catarrh. When we
go into the cold air, at every respiration we take a quantity of it
into the lungs, which brushes over the surface of the mucous membrane
that lines the nostrils and trachea, and thus, robbing them of their
heat, allows the excitability to accumulate. But we feel no fever, no
sense of tightness or stuffing, nor any other symptom of catarrh, so
long as we continue in the cold. If however we afterwards go into a
warm room, and particularly near a fire, we receive by the act of
respiration the warm air into those very parts which have been
previously exposed to cold, and whose excitability is consequently
accumulated. The first effect we perceive is a glow of the parts,
which is by no means unpleasant, this however increases; and, in the
course of half an hour or an hour, a sense of dryness and huskiness
comes on, with a sensation of stuffing in the nostrils, and a
tendency to a short dry cough: often likewise, if the exposure to
cold has been considerable, and the heat afterwards applied great and
sudden, we experience a shivering, and other symptoms of fever. These
symptoms are all increased by taking into the stomach any liquid that
is either of warm temperature or stimulating quality, or particularly
both; we spend a restless night, and awake with all the symptoms of a
catarrh, or cold, as it is improperly called. For it is evidently an
inflammatory fever, and can be speedily cured by the debilitating
plan, and particularly by keeping in a moderately cool place, where
the temperature is equable, and not subject to alternations of heat
and cold.

But how easily might this complaint have been avoided, were the
person subject to it acquainted with its real nature, and the manner
in which it is brought on. When we come out of a very cold
atmosphere, we should not at first go into a room that has a fire in
it; or, if this cannot be well avoided, we should keep for a
considerable time at as great a distance from the fire as possible,
that the accumulated excitability may be gradually exhausted by the
moderate and gentle action of heat; and then we may bear the heat of
the fire without any danger; but above all, we should refrain from
taking warm or strong liquors while we are hot. In confirmation of
this opinion, numerous instances might be brought, where catarrh was
cured merely by exposure to cold.

When a part of the body only has been exposed to the action of cold,
and the rest kept heated; if, for instance, a person in a warm room
has been sitting so that a current of air, coming through a broken
window, has fallen upon any part of the body, that part will soon be
affected with an inflammation, or what is called a rheumatic
affection. In this case, the excitability of the part exposed to the
action of the cold, becomes accumulated, and the warm blood, rushing
through it, from every other part of the body, excites an
inflammation.

Thus catarrh and rheumatism are inflammatory complaints, or depend on
too great a degree of excitement, and are to be cured by lowering the
excitement, or diminishing the action of the exciting powers; by
bleeding, purging, low diet, and particularly keeping in a moderately
cool place; and these complaints will be as speedily and certainly
cured by these methods, properly and judiciously persevered in, as a
slight cut or wound will be healed by what surgeons call the first
intention.

There are complaints which resemble these, but whose nature, however,
is very different, and which require a very different mode of
treatment. After a part has been long affected with rheumatic
inflammation the excitability of the muscular fibres becomes so far
exhausted, that a state of indirect debility takes place, and an
inflammation, accompanied with pain and redness, which is very
different from that I formerly described, as it depends upon a
debilitated or relaxed state of the parts, instead of too great a
degree of excitement. This instance shows strongly the fallacy of
symptoms; but it may be readily distinguished from the inflammatory
rheumatism, by attention to the effects of the exciting causes. The
inflammatory rheumatism is aggravated by heat, hence it is more
violent in bed than at any other time. The latter complaint, however,
is greatly relieved by heat: the warm bath alleviates all the
symptoms; so does a warm bed. It is evident that these diseases,
though attended by the same symptoms, are as opposite, and require as
different modes of treatment as an inflammation of the brain, and a
dropsy. The inflammatory state has been called the acute rheumatism,
and the other, the chronic rheumatism; I would, however, prefer the
terms sthenic and asthenic rheumatism.

In the same manner, there is a catarrh, which is liable to afflict
persons who have often been subject to an inflammatory cold,
particularly persons advanced in years; and this depends on a state
of indirect debility of the parts, the excitability of which has been
exhausted by frequent and violent inflammatory affections. This
complaint, which I would call asthenic catarrh, requires directly
opposite treatment from the inflammatory or sthenic catarrh. The
latter is aggravated by heat, but relieved by a cool temperature.
Warm air is peculiarly grateful to those who are afflicted with the
former, and if they go into a cool temperature, they are immediately
seized with cough, and expectoration; for the disease being a disease
of debility, the withdrawing the stimulus of heat, must increase it.
The excitability of the parts is so far exhausted, that it requires a
stimulus even more than natural to keep them in tone: hence persons
labouring under asthenic catarrh, and some species of asthma, which
are only varieties of this disease, find themselves best when exposed
to a warm temperature, but on the heat being diminished, and
consequently the parts relaxed, the cough and difficulty of breathing
immediately come on.

Having examined the effect of heat, in producing inflammatory or
sthenic disease, I now proceed to the consideration of the other
powers. Of the articles of diet, the only food in danger of being too
stimulant, is perhaps flesh or land animal food, used in too great
quantity, particularly when seasoned, a preparation which adds much
to its stimulant power. Spirituous and vinous liquors, let them be
ever so weak or much diluted, stimulate more quickly, and more
readily than seasoned food, and their stimulus is in proportion to
the quantity of alcohol which they contain. These substances, when
conjoined with rich food, must bring on a predisposition to sthenic
disease, in almost any constitution, particularly in the young and
healthy, and, in many instances, those diseases actually take place;
or should this not be the case, should the person avoid, or escape
the effects of inflammatory diseases, the excitability will be
exhausted, and diseases of indirect debility, such as gout, apoplexy,
indigestion, palsy, &c. will take place.

These stimulants are never necessary to a good constitution, and
their effects will always, sooner or later, be experienced: for
though a person with a good constitution may continue for years to
indulge in the pleasures of the bottle, or the luxuries of the table,
depend upon it that a continuance of them will sap the vigour of the
strongest constitution that ever existed.

As nothing contributes more to the health of the body than moderate
and frequently repeated exercise, which rouses the muscles to
contraction, and promotes the circulation of the blood in the veins
towards the heart: it thus produces excitement; but an excess of it
will produce sthenic diathesis; and, if carried to great excess, it
will produce a state of indirect debility, or exhausted excitability.

When any, or all of these exciting powers act too strongly on the
body, the first effect they produce is a preternatural acuteness of
all the senses; the motions, both voluntary and involuntary, are
performed with vigour, and there is an acuteness of genius and
intellectual power. In short, every part of the body seems in a state
of complete vigour and strength; that this is the case with the heart
and arteries, appears from the strong and firm pulse; in the stomach
it is shown by the appetite; and, in the extreme parts, by the ruddy
colour and complexion. In short, every appearance marks vigour of the
body, and abundance of blood. Could the body be kept in this state,
nothing could be more to be desired; this, however, is impossible;
the excitement, though still within the bounds of health, has
overstepped the point of good health, and is verging fast to
predisposition to sthenic disease; so that, to secure a permanent
state of health, it is always better to keep the excitement rather
under the middle point, or 40 degrees, than above it. During the
predisposition to sthenic disease, which is produced by the longer
continued, or increased action of these powers, no symptoms of
disease appear; but shortly after, disturbed sleep, depressed
spirits, languor, a sense of fulness, heaviness, particularly after
eating, show that this sthenic state cannot be further increased with
impunity. The least increase of sthenic diathesis now brings on a
disturbance of the functions, or actual disease; the commencement of
which is generally a shivering, and a sense of cold; thirst and heat
succeed; and then generally a pain in some part, either external or
internal: costiveness generally attends this state, the urine is
clear, and secreted in small quantity; memory and imagination become
diminished, and there is generally less appetite for food.

In peripneumony, inflammatory sore throat, and acute rheumatism,
there is an inflamed condition of the lungs, of the parts about the
throat, or of the muscles of the extremities: this shows that the
excitement here is greater than in other parts of the body; but it is
still increased or too great in every part, only those parts which
give the peculiar character to the disease are more affected than
other parts of the body, by being more exposed to the exciting
causes: thus, if a person be in perfect health, or a little below, he
will not be easily affected by any of the exciting causes of sthenic
disease, unless their application be very violent; he will go into a
warm room out of the cold air, and feel no other effect than a
pleasant glow: but if, by high living, or other means, he is brought
near the point of predisposition to sthenic disease, then the
slightest additional stimulus will bring it on, and if the throat has
been exposed to the application of cold, and the person comes
afterwards into a heated room, an inflammation of the parts about the
throat, or an inflammatory sore throat, accompanied by a sthenic
diathesis of the whole system, will be the consequence. This cannot
be cured by merely diminishing the excitement of the part, while the
excitement of the whole system remains: if we apply leeches to the
throat in this state, to diminish the quantity of blood, we only
debilitate the vessels, while fresh quantities of blood are poured
into them from the too full vessels of the body; even if we could
thus remove the sthenic diathesis of the part, we should go but a
little way towards removing the inflammatory disease, which
universally pervades the system.

The mode to be pursued therefore is, to take a quantity of blood from
the body, by opening a vein; to keep the body cool, by remaining in a
room where the temperature is at temperate, or a little below; by
abstaining from animal food, and from spirituous or fermented
liquors; and by the exhibition of purgatives, or at least of
laxatives. Then leeches or blisters applied to the part affected will
produce a good effect; and even stimulant applications to the
inflamed part may be advantageous; for a topical inflammation, as we
shall afterwards have occasion to see, depends on a debilitated state
of the minute vessels of the part, while at the same time the action
of the whole system is increased.

Besides the energy of the exciting hurtful powers, which I have
mentioned, there is in the parts which undergo the inflammation, a
greater sensibility, or an accumulated excitability; by which it
happens that some are more affected than the rest. To this we may
add, that whatsoever part may have been injured by inflammation, that
part in every future sthenic attack is in more danger of being
inflamed than the rest. Hence inflammatory sore throat, rheumatism,
and some other complaints of the kind, when once they have
supervened, are very apt to recur.

Among the sthenic or inflammatory diseases may be enumerated
rheumatism, catarrh, cynanche, or sore throat, scarlet fever,
inflammations of the brain, stomach, lungs, &c. &c.

Many of the contagious diseases, particularly small pox and measles,
produce a sthenic state, and are to be cured, or their action
moderated, by the debilitating plan which has been pointed out; and
particularly by a moderate, constant, and equable diminution of
temperature. Hence the violence of these diseases is greater when
they attack a person already predisposed to sthenic diathesis, but
much more mild when the excitement is rather under par.

LECTURE XII.
ON INFLAMMATION AND ASTHENIC DISEASES.

The last lecture was taken up chiefly with an account of sthenic
diseases, or those depending on too great a degree of excitement, and
which have been generally, but improperly, called inflammatory or
phlogistic. In that lecture I attempted to show, that when the
natural exciting powers, which support life, act with too much power,
or particularly if we employ any stimulants not natural to the body,
the functions both of body and mind become increased in vigour; but
if the exciting causes are continued and increased, the functions
become disturbed, and their action becomes painful and distressing.
This state, which is called sthenic diathesis, is often accompanied
by a redness, swelling, pain, and increased heat of some particular
part: these symptoms constitute what is usually termed an
inflammation of the part.

The method of cure in sthenic diseases was shown to be, by reducing
or moderating the action of the exciting powers; by keeping the body
cool; abstaining from high seasoned, and, in general, from animal
food; by the use of purgatives, and in many cases by diminishing the
quantity of blood in the body. I mentioned likewise, that it would be
but of little use to attempt to subdue the excitement of the inflamed
part, unless the excitement of the whole system was previously
diminished; but that after a general bloodletting, stimulant remedies
