
5. _Convulsionis dolorificae periodus._ Class III. 1. 1. 6. The pains,
which produce these convulsions, are generally left after rheumatism, and
come on when the patients are become warm in bed, or have been for a short
time asleep, and are therefore perhaps rather to be ascribed to the
increasing sensibility of the system during sleep, than to solar diurnal
periods, as in Species first and second of this Genus.

6. _Tussis periodicae periodus._ Periodic cough, Class IV. 2. 1. 9. returns
at exact solar periods; that described in Sect. XXXVI. 3. 9. recurred about
seven in the afternoon for several weeks, till its periods were disturbed
by opium, and then it recurred at eleven at night for about a week, and was
then totally destroyed by opium given in very large quantities, after
having been previously for a few days omitted.

7. _Catameniae periodus._ Periods of menstruation. The correspondence of
the periods of the catamenia with those of the moon was treated of in Sect.
XXXII. 6. and can admit of no more doubt, than that the returns of the
tides are governed by lunar influence. But the manner in which this is
produced, is less evident; it has commonly been ascribed to some effect of
the lunar gravitation on the circulating blood, as mentioned in Sect.
XXXII. 6. But it is more analogous to other animal phenomena to suppose
that the lunar gravitation immediately affects the solids by its influx or
stimulus. Which we believe of the fluid element of heat, in which we are
equally immersed; and of the electric fluid, which also surrounds and
pervades us. See Sect. XXXVI. 2. 3.

If the torpor of the uterine veins, which induces the monthly periods of
the catamenia, be governed by the increase of terrene gravitation; that is,
by the deficiency of the counter-influence of solar and lunar gravitation;
why does not it occur most frequently when the terrene gravitation is the
greatest, as about six hours after the new moon, and next to that at about
six hours after the full moon? This question has its difficulty; first, if
the terrene gravitation be greatest about six hours after the new moon, it
must become less and less about the same time every lunar day, till the end
of the first quarter, when it will be the least; it must then increase
daily till the full. After the full the terrene gravitation must again
decrease till the end of the third quarter, when it will again be the
least, and must increase again till the new moon; that is, the solar and
lunar counter-gravitation is greatest, when those luminaries are vertical,
at the new moon, and full moon, and least about six hours afterwards. If it
was known, whether more menstruations occur about six hours after the moon
is in the zenith or nadir; and in the second and fourth quarters of the
moon, than in the first and third; some light would be thrown on this
subject; which must in that respect wait for future observations.

Secondly, if the lunar influence produces a very small degree of
quiescence, suppose of the uterine veins, at first; and if that recurs at
certain periods, as of lunar days, or about 25 hours, even with less power
to produce quiescence than at first; yet the quiescence will daily increase
by the acquired habit acting at the same time, as explained in Sect. XII.
3. 3. till at length so great a degree of quiescence will be induced as to
cause the inaction of the veins of the uterus, and consequent venous
haemorrhage. See Sect. XXXII. 6. Class I. 2. 1. 11. IV. 1. 4. 4. See the
introduction to this Genus.

8. _Haemorrhoidis periodus._ The periods of the piles depend on the torpor
of the veins of the rectum, and are believed to recur nearly at monthly
intervals. See Sect. XXVII. 2. and Class I. 2. 1. 6.

9. _Podagrae periodus._ The periods of gout in some patients recur at
annual intervals, as in the case related above in Class IV. 1. 2. 15. in
which the gouty paroxysm returned for three successive years on nearly the
same day of the month. The commencement of the pain of each paroxysm is
generally a few hours after midnight, and may thence either be induced by
diurnal solar periods, or by the increasing sensibility during sleep, as
mentioned in the first species of this genus.

10. _Erysipelatis periodus._ Some kinds of erysipelas which probably
originate from the association of the cutaneous vessels with a diseased
liver, occur at monthly periods, like the haemorrhois or piles; and others
at annual periods like the gout; as a torpor of some part I suppose always
precedes the erysipelatous inflammation, the periods should accord with the
increasing influence of terrene gravitation, as described in the
introduction to this Genus, and in Species the seventh of it. Other periods
of diseases referable to solar and lunar influence are mentioned in Sect
XXXVI. and many others will probably be discovered by future observation.

11. _Febrium periodus._ Periods of fevers. The commencement of the cold
fits of intermittent fevers, and the daily exacerbations of other fevers,
so regularly recur at diurnal solar or lunar periods, that it is impossible
to deny their connection with gravitation; as explained in Sect. XXXVI. 3.
Not only these exacerbations of fever, and their remissions, obey the
diurnal solar and lunar periods; but the preparatory circumstances, which
introduce fevers, or which determine their crisises, appear to be governed
by the parts of monthly lunar periods, and of solar annual ones. Thus the
variolous fever in the natural small-pox commences on the 14th day, and in
the inoculated small-pox on the seventh day. The fever and eruption in the
distinct kind take up another quarter of a lunation, and the maturation
another quarter.

The fever, which is termed canine madness, or hydrophobia, is believed to
commence near the new or full moon; and, if the cause is not then great
enough to bring on the disease, it seems to acquire some strength, or to
lie dormant, till another, or perhaps more powerful lunation calls it into
action. In the spring, about three or four years ago, a mad dog very much
worried one swine confined in a sty, and bit another in the same sty in a
less degree; the former became mad, refused his meat, was much convulsed,
and died in about four days; this disease commenced about a month after the
bite. The other swine began to be ill about a month after the first, and
died in the same manner.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORDO III.

_Retrograde Associate Motions._

GENUS I.

_Catenated with Irritative Motions._

Those retrograde associate motions, the first links of which are catenated
with irritative motions, belong to this genus. All the retrograde motions
are consequent to debility, or inactivity, of the organ; and therefore
properly belong to the genera of decreased actions both in this and the
former classes.

SPECIES.

1. _Diabaetes irritata._ When the absorbents of the intestines are
stimulated too strongly by spirit of wine, as in the beginning of
drunkenness, the urinary absorbents invert their motions. The same happens
from worms in the intestines. In other kinds of diabetes may not the remote
cause be the too strong action of the cutaneous absorbents, or of the
pulmonary ones? May not in such cases oil externally or internally be of
service? or warm bathing for an hour at a time? In hysteric inversions of
motion is some other part too much stimulated? or pained from the want of
stimulus?

2. _Sudor frigidus in asthmate._ The cause of the paroxysms of humoral
asthma is not well understood; I suppose it to be owing to a torpidity or
inaction of the absorbents belonging to the pulmonary vessels, as happens
probably to other viscera at the commencement of intermittent fevers, and
to a consequent accumulation of fluids in them; which at length producing
great irritation or uneasy sensation causes the violent efforts to produce
the absorption of it. The motions of the cutaneous absorbent vessels by
their association with those of the pulmonary ones become retrograde, and
effuse upon the skin a fluid, which is said to be viscid, and which adheres
in drops.

A few days ago I saw a young man of delicate constitution in what was
called a fit of the asthma; he had about two months before had a
peripneumony, and had been ever since subject to difficult respiration on
exertion, with occasional palpitation of his heart. He was now seized about
eight at night after some exertion of mind in his business with cold
extremities, and difficulty of breathing. He gradually became worse, and in
about half an hour, the palpitation of his heart and difficult respiration
were very alarming; his whole skin was cold and pale, yet he did not
shudder as in cold paroxysm of fever; his tongue from the point to the
middle became as cold as his other extremities, with cold breath. He seemed
to be in the act of dying, except that his pulse continued equal in time,
though very quick. He lost three ounces of blood, and took ten drops of
laudanum with musk and salt of hartshorn, and recovered in an hour or two
without any cold sweat.

There being no cold sweat seems to indicate, that there was no accumulation
of serous fluid in the lungs; and that their inactivity, and the coldness
of the breath, was owing to the sympathy of the air-cells with some distant
part. There was no shuddering produced, because the lungs are not sensible
to heat and cold; as any one may observe by going from a warm room into a
frosty air, and the contrary. So the steam of hot tea, which scalds the
mouth, does not affect the lungs with the sensation of heat. I was induced
to believe, that the whole cold fit might be owing to suppuration in some
part of the chest; as the general difficulty of breathing seemed to be
increased after a few days with pulse of 120, and other signs of empyema.
Does the cold sweat, and the occurrence of the fits of asthma after sleep,
distinguish the humoral asthma from the cold paroxysm of intermittents, or
which attends suppuration, or which precedes inflammation?--I heard a few
weeks afterwards, that he spit up much matter at the time he died.

3. _Diabaetes a timore._ The motions of the absorbent vessels of the neck
of the bladder become inverted by their consent with those of the skin;
which are become torpid by their reverse sympathy with the painful ideas of
fear, as in Sect. XVI. 8. 1. whence there is a great discharge of pale
urine, as in hysteric diseases.

The same happens from anxiety, where the painful suspense is continued,
even when the degree of fear is small; as in young men about to be examined
for a degree at the universities the frequency of making water is very
observable. When this anxiety is attended with a sleepless night, the
quantity of pale urine is amazingly great in some people, and the
micturition very frequent.

M. M. Opium. Joy. Consolations of friendship.

4. _Diarrhoea a timore._ The absorbent vessels of the intestines invert
their motions by direct consent with the skin; hence many liquid stools as
well as much pale urine are liable to accompany continued fear, along with
coldness of the skin. The immediate cause of this is the decreased
sensorial power of association, which intervenes between the actions of the
absorbents of the cold skin, and those of the intestinal absorbents; the
motions of the latter become on that account weakened and at length
retrograde. The remote cause is the torpor of the vessels of the skin
catenated with the pain of fear, as explained in Sect. XVI. 8. 1.

The capillaries of the skin consent more generally by direct sympathy with
those of the lower intestines, and of the bladder; but by reverse sympathy
more generally with those of the stomach and upper intestines. As appears
in fevers, where the hot skin accompanies indigestion of the stomach; and
in diarrhoeas attended with cold extremities.

The remote cause is the torpor of the skin owing to its reverse sympathy
with the painful sensual motions, or ideas, of fear; which are now actuated
with great energy, so as to deprive the second link of associated motions
of their due share of sensorial power. It is also probable, that the pain
of fear itself may contribute to exhaust the sensorial power, even when it
produces no muscular action. See Class IV. 2. 2.

5. _Pallor et tremor a timore._ A retrograde action of the capillaries of
the skin producing paleness, and a torpor of the muscular fibres of the
limbs occasioning trembling, are caused by their reverse associations with
the ideas or imaginations of fear; which are now actuated with violent
energy, and accompanied with great pain. The cause of these associations
are explained in Sect XVI. 8. 1.

These torpid actions of the capillaries and muscles of the limbs are not
caused immediately by the painful sensation of fear; as in that case they
would have been increased and not decreased actions, as occurs in anger;
where the painful volition increases the actions of the capillaries,
exciting a blush and heat of the skin. Whence we may gain some knowledge of
what is meant by depressing and exciting passions; the former confiding of
ideas attended with pain, which pain occasions no muscular actions, like
the pain of cold head-ach; the latter being attended with volitions, and
consequent muscular exertions.

That is, the pain of fear, and the pain of anger, are produced by the
exertion of certain ideas, or motions of certain nerves of sense; in the
former case, the painful sensation of fear produces no muscular actions,
yet it exhausts or employs so much sensorial power, that the whole system
acts more feebly, or becomes retrograde; but some parts of it more so than
others, according to their early associations described in Sect. XVI. 8. 1.
hence the tremor of the limbs, palpitation of heart, and even syncope. In
anger the painful volition produces violent muscular actions; but if
previous to these any deliberation occurs, a flushed countenance sometimes,
and a red skin, are produced by this superabundance of volition exerted on
the arterial system; but at other times the skin becomes pale, and the legs
tremble, from the exhaustion or expenditure of the sensorial power by the
painful volitions of anger on the organs of sense, as by the painful
sensations of fear above mentioned.

Where the passion of fear exists in a great degree, it exhausts or expends
so much sensorial power, either simply by the pain which attends it, or by
the violent and perpetual excitement of the terrific imaginations or ideas,
that not only a cold and pale skin, but a retrograde motion of the
cutaneous absorbents occurs, and a cold sweat appears upon the whole
surface of the body, which probably sometimes increases pulmonary
absorption; as in Class II. 1. 6. 4. and as in the cold sweats, which
attend the paroxysms of humoral asthma. Hence anxiety, which is a continued
pain of fear, so universally debilitates the constitution as to occasion a
lingering death; which happens much more frequently than is usually
supposed; and these victims of continued anxiety are said to die of a
broken heart. Other kinds of paleness are described in Class I. 2. 2. 2.

M. M. Opium. Wine. Food. Joy.

6. _Palpitatio cordis a timore._ The palpitation of the heart from fear is
owing to the weak action of it, and perhaps sometimes to the retrograde
exertion of the ventricules and auricles; because it seems to be affected
by its association with the capillaries, the actions of which, with those
of the arteries and veins, constitute one great circle of associate
motions. Now when the capillaries of the skin become torpid, coldness and
paleness succeed; and with these are associated the capillaries of the
lungs, whence difficult respiration; and with these the weak and retrograde
actions of the heart. At the same time the absorbents of the skin, and of
the bladder, and of the intestines, sometimes become retrograde, and
regurgitate their contents; as appears by the pale urine in large
quantities, which attends hysteric complaints along with this palpitation
of the heart; and from the cold sweats, and diarrhoea; all which, as well
as the hysteric complaints, are liable to be induced or attended by fear.

When fear has still more violently affected the system, there have been
instances where syncope, and sudden death, or a total stoppage of the
circulation, have succeeded: in these last cases, the pain of fear has
employed or exhausted the whole of the sensorial power, so that not only
those muscular fibres generally exerted by volition cease to act, whence
the patient falls down; and those, which constitute the organs of sense,
whence syncope; but lastly those, which perform the vital motions, become
deprived of sensorial power, and death ensues. See Class. I. 2. 1. 4. and
I. 2. 1. 10. Similar to this in some epileptic fits the patient first
suddenly falls down, without even endeavouring to save himself by his hands
before the convulsive motions come on. In this case the great exertion of
some small part in consequence of great irritation or sensation exhausts
the whole sensorial power, which was lodged in the extremities of the
locomotive nerves, for a short time, as in syncope; and as soon as these
muscles are again supplied, convulsions supervene to relieve the painful
sensation. See Class III. 1. 1. 7.

7. _Abortio a timore._ Women miscarry much more frequently from a fright,
than from bodily injury. A torpor or retrograde motion of the capillary
arteries of the internal uterus is probably the immediate cause of these
miscarriages, owing to the association of the actions of those vessels with
the capillaries of the skin, which are rendered torpid or retrograde by
fear. By this contraction of the uterine arteries, the fine vessels of the
placenta, which are inserted into them, are detruded, or otherwise so
affected, that the placenta separates at this time from the uterus, and the
fetus dies from want of oxygenation. A strong young woman, in the fifth or
sixth month of her pregnancy, who has since borne many children, went into
her cellar to draw beer; one of the servant boys was hid behind a barrel,
and started out to surprise her, believing her to be the maid-servant; she
began to flood immediately, and miscarried in a few hours. See Sect. XXXIX.
6. 5. and Class I. 2. 1. 14.

8. _Hysteria a timore._ Some delicate ladies are liable to fall into
hysteric fits from sudden fright. The peristaltic motions of the bowels and
stomach, and those of the oesophagus, make a part of the great circle of
irritative motions with those of the skin, and many other membranes. Hence
when the cutaneous vessels become torpid from their reverse sympathy with
the painful ideas of fear; these of the bowels, and stomach, and
oesophagus, become first torpid by direct sympathy with those of the skin,
and then feebly and ineffectually invert the order of their motions, which
constitutes a paroxysm of the hysteric disease. See Class I. 3. 1. 10.
These hysteric paroxysms are sometimes followed by convulsions, which
belong to Class III. as they are exertions to relieve pain; and sometimes
by death. See Species 9 of this Genus, and Class I. 2. 1. 4.

Indigestion from fear is to be ascribed in the same manner to the torpor of
the stomach, owing to its association with the skin. As in Class IV. 1. 2.
5. IV. 2. 1.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORDO III.

_Retrograde Associate Motions._

GENUS II.

_Catenated with Sensitive Motions._

SPECIES.

1. _Nausea idealis._ Nausea from disgustful ideas, as from nauseous
stories, or disgustful sights, or smells, or tastes, as well as vomiting
from the same causes, consists in the retrograde actions of the lymphatics
of the throat, and of the oesophagus, and stomach; which are associated
with the disgustful ideas, or sensual motions of sight, or hearing, or
smell, or taste; for as these are decreased motions of the lymphatics, or
of the oesophagus, or stomach, they cannot immediately be excited by the
sensorial power of painful sensation, as in that case they ought to be
increased motions. So much sensorial power is employed for a time on the
disgustful idea, or expended in the production of inactive pain, which
attends it, that the other parts of the associated chain of action, of
which this disgustful idea is now become a link, is deprived of their
accustomed share; and therefore first stop, and then invert their motions.
Owing to deficiency of sensorial power, as explained more at large in Sect.
XXXV. 1. 3.

2. _Nausea a conceptu._ The nausea, which pregnant women are so subject to
during the first part of gestation, is owing to the reverse sympathy
between the uterus and stomach, so that the increased action of the former,
excited by the stimulus of the growing embryon, which I believe is
sometimes attended with sensation, produces decreased actions of the latter
with the disagreeable sensation of sickness with indigestion and consequent
acidity. When the fetus acquires so much muscular power as to move its
limbs, or to turn itself, which is called quickening, this sickness of
pregnancy generally ceases.

M. M. Calcined magnesia. Rhubarb. Half a grain of opium twice a day.
Recumbent posture on a sofa.

3. _Vomitio vertiginosa._ Sea-sickness, the irritative motions of vision,
by which we balance ourselves, and preserve our perpendicularity, are
disturbed by the indistinctness of their objects; which is either owing to
the similarity of them, or to their distance, or to their apparent or
unusual motions. Hence these irritative motions of vision are exerted with
greater energy, and are in consequence attended with sensation; which, at
first is agreeable, as when children swing on a rope; afterwards the
irritative motions of the stomach, and of the absorbent vessels, which open
their mouths into it, become inverted by their associations with them by
reverse sympathy.

For the action of vomiting, as well as the disagreeable sensation of
sickness, are shewn to be occasioned by defect of the sensorial power;
which in this case is owing to the greater expenditure of it by the sense
of vision. On the same account the vomiting, which attends the passage of a
stone through the ureter, or from an inflammation of the bowels, or in the
commencement of some fevers, is caused by the increased expenditure of the
sensorial power by the too great action of some links of the associations
of irritative motions; and there being in consequence a deficiency of the
quantity required for other links of this great catenation.

It must be observed, that the expenditure of sensorial power by the retinas
of the eyes is very great; which may be estimated by the perpetual use of
those organs during our waking hours, and during most of our sleeping ones;
and by the large diameters of the two optic nerves, which are nearly the
size of a quill, or equal to some of the principal nerves, which serve the
limbs.

4. _Vomitio a calculo in uretere._ The action of vomiting in consequence of
the increased or decreased actions of the ureter, when a stone lodges in
it. The natural actions of the stomach, which consist of motions subject to
intermitted irritations from the fluids, which pass through it, are
associated with those of the ureter; and become torpid, and consequently
retrograde, by intervals, when the actions of the ureter becomes torpid
owing to previous great stimulus from the stone it contains; as appears
from the vomiting existing when the pain is least. When the motions of the
ureter are thus lessened, the sensorial power of association, which ought
to actuate the stomach along with the sensorial power of irritation, ceases
to be excited into action; and in consequence the actions of the stomach
become less energetic, and in consequence retrograde.

For as vomiting is a decreased action of the stomach, as explained in Sect.
XXXV. 1. 3. it cannot be supposed to be produced by the pain of gravel in
the ureter alone, as it should then be an increased action, not a decreased
one.

The perpetual vomiting in ileus is caused in like manner by the defective
excitement of the sensorial power of association by the bowel, which is
torpid during the intervals of pain; and the stomach sympathizes with it.
See Enteritis, Class II. 1. 2. 11. Does this symptom of vomiting indicate,
whether the disease be above or below the valve of the colon? Does not the
softer pulse in some kinds of enteritis depend on the sympathy of the heart
and arteries with the sickness of the stomach? See Ileus and Cholera.

Hence this sickness, as well as the sickness in some fevers, cannot be
esteemed an effort of nature to dislodge any offensive material; but like
the sea-sickness described above, and in Sect. XX. 4. is the consequence of
the associations of irritative or sensitive motions. See Class I. 1. 3. 9.

5. _Vomitio ab insultu paralytico._ Paralytic affections generally commence
with vomiting, the same frequently happens from a violent blow with a stick
on the head; this curious connection of the brain and stomach has not been
explained; as it resembles the sickness in consequence of vertigo at sea,
it would seem to arise from a similar cause, viz. from disturbed irritative
or sensitive associations.

6. _Vomitio a titillatione faucium._ If the throat be slightly tickled with
a feather, a nausea is produced, that is, an inverted action of the mouths
of the lymphatics of the fauces, and by direct sympathy an inverted action
of the stomach ensues. As these parts have frequently been stimulated at
the same time into pleasurable action by the deglutition of our daily
aliment, their actions become strongly associated. And as all the food, we
swallow, is either moist originally, or mixed with our moist saliva in the
mouth; a feather, which is originally dry, and which in some measure repels
the moist saliva, is disagreeable to the touch of the fauces; at the same
time this nausea and vomiting cannot be caused by the disagreeable
sensation simply, as then they ought to have been increased exertions, and
not decreased ones, as shewn in Section XXXV. 1. 3. But the mouths of the
lymphatics of the fauces are stimulated by the dry feather into too great
action for a time, and become retrograde afterwards by the debility
consequent to too great previous stimulus.

7. _Vomitio cute sympathetica._ Vomiting is successfully stopped by the
application of a blister on the back in some fevers, where the extremities
are cold, and the skin pale. It was stopped by Sydenham by producing a
sweat on the skin by covering the head with the bed-clothes. See Class IV.
1. 1. 3. and Suppl. I. 11. 6.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORDO III.

_Retrograde Associate Motions._

GENUS III.

_Catenated with Voluntary Motions._

SPECIES.

1. _Ruminatio._ In the rumination of horned cattle the food is brought up
from the first stomach by the retrograde motions of the stomach and
oesophagus, which are catenated with the voluntary motions of the abdominal
muscles.

2. _Vomitio voluntaria._ Voluntary vomiting. Some human subjects have been
said to have obtained this power of voluntary action over the retrograde
motions of the stomach and oesophagus, and thus to have been able to empty
their stomach at pleasure. See Sect. XXV. 6. This voluntary act of emptying
the stomach is possessed by some birds, as the pigeon; who has an organ for
secreting milk in its stomach, as Mr. Hunter observed; and softens the food
for its young by previously swallowing it; and afterwards putting its bill
into theirs returns it into their mouths. See Sect. XXXIX. 4. 8. The
pelicans use a stomach, or throat bag, for the purpose of bringing the
fish, which they catch in the sea to shore, and then eject them, and eat
them at their leisure. See Sect. XVI. 11. And I am well informed of a
bitch, who having puppies in a stable at a distance from the house,
swallowed the flesh-meat, which was given her, in large pieces, and
carrying it immediately to her whelps, brought it up out of her stomach,
and laid it down before them.

3. _Eructatio voluntaria._ Voluntary eructation. Some, who have weak
digestions, and thence have frequently been induced to eruct the quantity
of air discharged from the fermenting aliment in their stomachs, have
gradually obtained a power of voluntary eructation, and have been able thus
to bring up hogsheads of air from their stomachs, whenever they pleased.
This great quantity of air is to be ascribed to the increase of the
fermentation of the aliment by drawing off the gas as soon as it is
produced. See Sect. XXIII. 4.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORDO III.

_Retrograde Associate Motions._

GENUS. IV.

_Catenated with External Influences._

SPECIES.

1. _Catarrhus periodicus._ Periodical catarrh is not a very uncommon
disease; there is a great discharge of a thin saline mucous material from
the membranes of the nostrils, and probably from the maxillary and frontal
sinuses, which recur once a day at exact solar periods; unless it be
disturbed by the exhibition of opium; and resembles the periodic cough
mentioned below. See Class I. 3. 2. 1. It is probably owing to the
retrograde action of the lymphatics of the membranes affected, and produced
immediately by solar influence.

2. _Tussis periodica._ Periodic cough, called nervous cough, and tussis
serina. It seems to arise from a periodic retrograde action of the
lymphatics of the membrane, which lines the air-cells of the lungs. And the
action of coughing, which is violently for an hour or longer, is probably
excited by the stimulus of the thin fluid thus produced, as well as by the
disagreeable sensation attending membranous inactivity; and resembles
periodic catarrh not only in its situation on a mucous membrane, but in the
discharge of a thin fluid. As it is partly restrainable, it does not come
under the name of convulsion; and as it is not attended with difficult
respiration, it cannot be called asthma; it is cured by very large doses of
opium, see a case and cure in Sect. XXXVI. 3. 9. see Class IV. 2. 4. 6. and
seems immediately to be induced by solar influence.

3. _Histeria a frigore._ Hysteric paroxysms are occasioned by whatever
suddenly debilitates the system, as fear, or cold, and perhaps sometimes by
external moisture of the air, as all delicate people have their days of
greater or less debility, see Class IV. 3. 1. 8.

4. _Nausea pluvialis._ Sickness at the commencement of a rainy season is
very common among dogs, who assist themselves by eating the agrostris
canina, or dog's grass, and thus empty their stomachs. The same occurs with
less frequency to cats, who make use of the same expedient. See Sect. XVI.
11. I have known one person, who from his early years has always been sick
at the beginning of wet weather, and still continues so. Is this owing to a
sympathy of the mucous membrane of the stomach with the mechanical
relaxation of the external cuticle by a moister atmosphere, as is seen in
the corrugated cuticle of the hands of washing-women? or does it sympathize
with the mucous membrane of the lungs, which must be affected along with
the mucus on its surface by the respiration of a moister atmosphere?

       *       *       *       *       *


SUPPLEMENT TO CLASS IV.

_Sympathetic Theory of Fever._

As fever consists in the increase or diminution of direct or reverse
associated motions, whatever may have been the remote cause of them, it
properly belongs to the fourth class of diseases; and is introduced at the
end of the class, that its great difficulties might receive elucidation
from the preceding parts of it. These I shall endeavour to enumerate under
the following heads, trusting that the candid reader will discover in these
rudiments of the theory of fever a nascent embryon, an infant Hercules,
which Time may rear to maturity, and render serviceable to mankind.

     I. Simple fever of two kinds.
    II. Compound fever.
   III. Termination of the cold fit.
    IV. Return of the cold fit.
     V. Sensation excited in fever.
    VI. Circles of associated motions.
   VII. Alternations of cold and hot fits.
  VIII. Orgasm of the capillaries.
    IX. Torpor of the lungs.
     X. Torpor of the brain.
    XI. Torpor of the heart and arteries.
   XII. Torpor of the stomach and intestines.
  XIII. Case of continued fever explained.
   XIV. Termination of continued fever.
    XV. Inflammation excited in fever.
   XVI. Recapitulation.

I. _Simple fever._

1. When a small part of the cutaneous capillaries with their mucous or
perspirative glands are for a short time exposed to a colder medium, as
when the hands are immersed in iced water for a minute, these capillary
vessels and their glands become torpid or quiescent, owing to the eduction
of the stimulus of heat. The skin then becomes pale, because no blood
passes through the external capillaries; and appears shrunk, because their
sides are collapsed from inactivity, not contracted by spasm; the roots of
the hair are left prominent from the seceding or subsiding of the skin
around them; and the pain of coldness is produced.

In this situation, if the usual degree of warmth be applied, these vessels
regain their activity; and having now become more irritable from an
accumulation of the sensorial power of irritation during their quiescence,
a greater exertion of them follows, with an increased glow of the skin, and
another kind of pain, which is called the hot-ach; but no fever, properly
so called, is yet produced; as this effect is not universal, nor permanent,
nor recurrent.

2. If a greater part of the cutaneous capillaries with their mucous and
perspirative glands be exposed for a longer time to cold, the torpor or
quiescence becomes extended by direct sympathy to the heart and arteries;
which is known by the weakness, and consequent frequency of the pulse in
cold fits of fever.

This requires to be further explained. The movements of the heart and
arteries, and the whole of the circulatory vessels, are in general excited
into action by the two sensorial powers of irritation, and of association.
The former is excited by stimulus, the latter by the previous actions of a
part of the vital circle of motions. In the above situation the capillaries
act weakly from defect of irritation, which is caused by deficient stimulus
of heat; but the heart and arteries act weakly from defect of association,
which is owing to the weak action of the capillaries; which does not now
excite the sensorial power of association into action with sufficient
energy.

After a time, either by the application of warmth, or by the increase of
their irritability owing to the accumulation of the sensorial power of
irritation during their previous quiescence, the capillary vessels and
glands act with greater energy than natural; whence the red colour and heat
of the skin. The heart and arteries acquire a greater strength of
pulsation, and continue the frequency of it, owing to the accumulation of
the sensorial power of association during their previous torpor, and their
consequent greater associability; which is now also more strongly excited
by the increased actions of the capillaries. And thus a fit of simple fever
is produced, which is termed Febris irritativa; and consists of a torpor of
the cutaneous capillaries with their mucous and perspirative glands,
accompanied with a torpor of the heart and arteries; and afterwards of an
increased action of all these vessels, by what is termed direct sympathy.

This fever, with strong pulse without inflammation, or febris irritativa,
described in Class I. 1. 1. 1. is frequently seen in vernal intermittents,
as the orgasm of the heart and arteries is then occasioned by their
previous state of torpor; but more rarely I believe exists in the type of
continued fever, except there be an evident remission, or approximation to
a cold fit; at which time a new accumulation of the sensorial power of
association is produced; which afterwards actuates the heart and arteries
with unnatural vigour; or unless there be some stimulus perpetually acting
on the system so as to induce an increased secretion of sensorial power in
the brain, as occurs in slight degrees of intoxication. Since without one
or other of these circumstances in continued fevers without inflammation,
that is, without the additional sensorial power of sensation being
introduced, it seems difficult to account for the production of so great a
quantity of sensorial power, as must be necessary to give perpetual
increase of action to the whole sanguiferous system.

3. On the contrary, while the cutaneous capillaries with their mucous and
perspirative glands acquire an increased irritability, as above, by the
accumulation of that sensorial power during their previous quiescence, and
thus constitute the hot fit of fever; if the heart and arteries do not
acquire any increase of associability, but continue in their state of
torpor, another kind of simple fever is produced; which is generally of the
continued kind, and is termed Febris inirritativa; which consists of a
previous torpor of the capillaries of the skin, and of the heart and
arteries by direct sympathy with them; and afterwards of an orgasm or
increased action of the capillaries of the skin, with a decreased action,
or continued torpor, of the heart and arteries by reverse sympathy with
them. This orgasm of the cutaneous capillaries, which appears by the blush
and heat of the skin, is at first owing to the accumulation of the
sensorial power of irritation during their previous torpid state, as in the
febris irritata above described; but which is afterwards supported or
continued by the reverse sympathy of these capillaries with the torpid
state of the heart and arteries, as will be further explained in article 8
of this Supplement.

4. The renovated activity of the capillaries commences as soon or sooner
than that of the heart and arteries after the cold fit of irritative fever;
and is not owing to their being forced open by the blood being impelled
into them mechanically, by the renovated action of the heart and arteries;
for these capillaries of the skin have greater mobility than the heart and
arteries, as appears in the sudden blush of shame; which may be owing to
their being more liable to perpetual varieties of activity from their
exposure to the vicissitudes of atmospheric heat. And because in
inirritative fevers, or those with arterial debility, the capillaries
acquire increased strength, as is evinced by the heat of the skin, while
the pulsations of the heart and arteries remain feeble.

5. It was said above, that the cutaneous capillaries, when they were
rendered torpid by exposure to cold, either recovered their activity by the
reapplication of external warmth; or by their increased irritability, which
is caused by the accumulation of that sensorial power during their
quiescence. An example of the former of these may be seen on emerging from
a very cold bath; which produces a fit of simple fever; the cold fit, and
consequent hot fit, of which may be prolonged by continuing in the bath;
which has indeed proved fatal to some weak and delicate people, and to
others after having been much exhausted by heat and exercise. See Sect.
XXXII. 3. 2. An example of the latter may be taken from going into a bath
of about eighty degrees of heat, as into the bath at Buxton, where the
bather first feels a chill, and after a minute becomes warm, though he
remains in the same medium, owing to the increase of irritability from the
accumulation of that sensorial power during the short time, which the
chilness continued.

6. Hence simple fevers are of two kinds; first, the febris irritativa, or
fever with strong pulse; which consists of a previous torpor of the heart,
arteries, and capillaries, and a succeeding orgasm of those vessels.
Secondly, the febris inirritativa, or fever with weak pulse, which consists
of a previous torpor of the heart, arteries, and capillaries; and of a
succeeding orgasm of the capillaries, the torpor of the heart and arteries
continuing. But as the frequency of the pulse occurs both in the state of
torpor, and in that of orgasm, of the heart and arteries; this constitutes
a criterion to distinguish fever from other diseases, which are owing to
the torpor of some parts of the system, as paresis, and hemicrania.

7. The reader will please to observe, that where the cutaneous or pulmonary
capillaries are mentioned, their mucous and perspirative glands are to be
understood as included; but that the absorbents belonging to those systems
of vessels, and the commencement of the veins, are not always included; as
these are liable to torpor separately, as in anasarca, and petechiae; or to
orgasm, or increased action, as in the exhibition of strong emetics, or in
the application of vinegar to the lips; yet he will also please to observe,
that an increased or decreased action of these absorbents and veins
generally occurs along with that of the capillaries, as appears by the dry
skin in hot fits of fever; and from there being generally at the same time
no accumulation of venous blood in the cutaneous vessels, which would
appear by its purple colour.

II. _Compound fever._

1. When other parts of the system sympathize with this torpor and orgasm of
the cutaneous capillaries, and of the heart and arteries; the fever-fit
becomes more complicated and dangerous; and this in proportion to the
number and consequence of such affected parts. Thus if the lungs become
affected, as in going into very cold water, a shortness of breath occurs;
which is owing to the collapse or inactivity (not to the active
contraction, or spasm), of the pulmonary capillaries; which, as the lungs
are not sensible to cold, are not subject to painful sensation, and
consequent shuddering, like the skin. In this case after a time the
pulmonary capillaries, like the cutaneous ones, act with increased energy;
the breathing, which was before quick, and the air thrown out at each
respiration in less quantity, and cool to the back of the hand opposed to
it, now becomes larger in quantity, and warmer than natural; which however
is not accompanied with the sensation of heat in the membrane, which lines
the air-vessels of the lungs, as in the skin.

2. One consequence of this increased heat of the breath is the increased
evaporation of the mucus on the tongue and nostrils. A viscid material is
secreted by these membranes to preserve them moist and supple, for the
purposes of the senses of taste and of smell, which are extended beneath
their surfaces; this viscid mucus, when the aqueous part of it is
evaporated by the increased heat of the respired air, or is absorbed by the
too great action of the mucous absorbents, adheres closely on those
membranes, and is not without difficulty to be separated from them. This
dryness of the tongue and nostrils is a circumstance therefore worthy to be
attended to; as it shews the increased action of the pulmonary capillaries,
and the consequent increased heat of the expired air; and may thus
indicate, when colder air should be admitted to the patient. See Class I.
1. 3. 1. The middle part of the tongue becomes dry sooner, and recovers its
moisture later, than the edges of it; because the currents of respired air
pass most over the middle part of it. This however is not the case, when
the dryness of the tongue is owing only to the increased mucous absorption.
When however a frequent cough attends pulmonary inflammation, the edges of
the tongue are liable to be as much furred as the middle of it; as during
the action of coughing the middle of the tongue is depressed, so as to form
half a cylinder, to give a greater aperture for the emission of air from
the larynx; and the edges of it become thus as much exposed to the currents
of air, as the middle parts of it.

3. When the internal capillaries or glands sympathize with the cutaneous
capillaries; or when any of them are previously affected with torpor, and
the external or cutaneous capillaries are affected secondarily; other
symptoms are produced, which render the paroxysms of fever still more
complicate. Thus if the spleen or pancreas are primarily or secondarily
affected, so as to be rendered torpid or quiescent, they are liable to
become enlarged, and to remain so even after the extinction of the
fever-fit. These in some intermittent fevers are perceptible to the hand,
and are called ague-cakes; their tumour seems to be owing to the permanent
torpor of the absorbent system, the secerning vessels continuing to act
some time afterwards. If the secretory vessels of the liver are affected
first with torpor, and afterwards with orgasm, a greater secretion of bile
is produced, which sometimes causes a diarrhoea. If a torpor of the
kidneys, and of the absorbents of the bladder occurs, either primarily, or
by sympathy with the cutaneous capillaries, the urine is in small quantity
and pale, as explained in Class I. 2. 2. 5.; and if these secretory vessels
of the kidneys, and the absorbents of the bladder act more strongly than
natural afterwards by their increased irritability or associability, the
urine becomes in larger quantity, and deeper coloured, or deposits its
earthy parts, as in Class I. 1. 2. 4. which has been esteemed a favourable
circumstance. But if the urine be in small quantity, and no sediment
appears in it, after the hot fit is over; it shews, that the secerning
vessels of the kidneys and the absorbent vessels of the bladder have not
regained the whole of their activity, and thence indicates a greater
tendency to a return of the cold fit.

4. When the stomach is affected with torpor either primarily; or
secondarily by its sympathy with the cutaneous capillaries; or with some
internal viscus; sickness occurs, with a total want of appetite to any
thing solid; vomiting then supervenes, which may often be relieved by a
blister on the skin, if the skin be cool and pale; but not if it be hot and
flushed. The intestines cease to perform their office of absorption from a
similar torpor; and a diarrhoea supervenes owing to the acrimony of their
putrid, or of their acid contents. The loose undigested or fetid stools
indicate the inability of the intestines to perform their proper office; as
the mucus and gastric acid, which are vomited up, does that of the stomach;
this torpor of the stomach is liable to continue after the cold paroxysm
ceases, and to convert intermittent fevers into continued ones by its
direct sympathy with the heart and arteries. See article 10 of this
Supplement.

5. If the meninges of the brain sympathize with other torpid parts, or are
primarily affected, delirium, stupor, and perhaps hydrocephalus internus
occur, see Class II. 1. 7. 1. and I. 2. 5. 10; and sometimes the pulse
becomes slow, producing paresis instead of fever. But if the membranes,
which cover the muscles about the head, or of the pericranium, become
torpid by their sympathy with other torpid parts, or are primarily
affected, a head-ach supervenes; which however generally ceases with the
cold paroxysm of fever. For as when the sensorial power of volition is
exhausted by labour, a few hours, or half a solar day, passed in sleep
recruits the system by accumulation of this sensorial power; so when the
sensorial power of irritation is exhausted, one or two solar or lunar days
of rest or quiescence of the affected part will generally restore its
action by accumulation of irritability, and consequent increase of
association, as in hemicrania, Class IV. 2. 2. 8. But when the heart and
arteries become torpid, either primarily, or by their sympathy with the
stomach, this accumulation of the sensorial power of irritation can take
place but slowly; _as to rest is death_! This explains the cause of the
duration of fevers with weak pulse, which continue a quarter, or half, or
three quarters, or a whole lunation, or still longer, before sufficient
accumulation of irritability can be produced to restore their natural
strength of action.

6. If the absorbent vessels, which are spread around the neck of the
bladder, become torpid by their direct sympathy with the absorbents of the
skin in cold fits of fever; the urine, which is poured into the bladder in
but small quantity from the torpid kidneys, has nevertheless none of its
aqueous saline part reabsorbed; and this saline part stimulates the bladder
to empty itself frequently, though the urine is in small quantity. Which is
not therefore owing to any supposed spasm of the bladder, for the action of
it in excluding the urine is weak, and as much controlable by the will as
in ordinary micturition.

7. If the beginnings or absorbent mouths of the venous system remain
torpid, petechiae or vibices are produced in fevers, similar to those which
are seen in scurvy without fever. If the skin was frequently moistened for
an hour, and at the same time exposed to the common air, or to oxygen gas,
it might contribute to turn the black colour of these points of
extravasated blood into scarlet, and thus by increasing its stimulus
facilitate its reabsorption? For oxygen gas penetrates moist animal
membranes though not dry ones, as in the lungs during respiration.

8. When the sensorial power of sensation is introduced into the arterial
system, other kinds of compound fevers are produced, which will be spoken
of in their place.

III. _Termination of the cold Fit._

1. If all the parts, which were affected with torpor, regain their
irritability, and associability, the cold paroxysm of fever ceases; but as
some of the parts affected were previously accustomed to incessant action,
as the heart and arteries, and others only to intermitted action, as the
stomach and intestines; and as those, which are subjected during health to
perpetual action, accumulate sensorial power faster, when their motions are
impeded, than those which are subjected to intermitted action; it happens,
