     plane of reference or "invariable plane," by [theta]_1, [theta]_2,
     &c.; then all these quantities (except m) are liable to
     fluctuate; but, however much they change, an increase for one
     planet will be accompanied by a decrease for some others; so that,
     taking all the planets into account, the sum of a set of terms like
     these, m_1e_1^2 [square root]r_1 + m_2e_2^2 [square root]r_2
     + &c., will remain always the same. This is summed up briefly in
     the following statement:

  [Sigma](me^2 [square root]r) = constant.

     That is one law, and the other is like it, but with inclination of
     orbit instead of excentricity, viz.:

  [Sigma](m[theta]^2 [square root]r) = constant.

     The value of each of these two constants can at any time be
     calculated. At present their values are small. Hence they always
     were and always will be small; being, in fact, invariable. Hence
     neither _e_ nor _r_ nor [theta] can ever become infinite, nor can
     their average value for the system ever become zero.

The planets may share the given amount of total excentricity and
obliquity in various proportions between themselves; but even if it were
all piled on to one planet it would not be very excessive, unless the
planet were so small a one as Mercury; and it would be most improbable
that one planet should ever have all the excentricity of the solar
system heaped upon itself. The earth, therefore, never has been, nor
ever will be, enormously nearer the sun than it is at present: nor can
it ever get very much further off. Its changes are small and are
periodic--an increase is followed by a decrease, like the swing of a
pendulum.

The above two laws have been called the Magna Charta of the solar
system, and were long supposed to guarantee its absolute permanence. So
far as the theory of gravitation carries us, they do guarantee its
permanence; but something more remains to be said on the subject in a
future lecture (XVIII).

And now, finally, we come to a sublime speculation, thrown out by
Laplace, not as the result of profound calculation, like the results
hitherto mentioned, not following certainly from the theory of
gravitation, or from any other known theory, and therefore not to be
accepted as more than a brilliant hypothesis, to be confirmed or
rejected as our knowledge extends. This speculation is the "Nebular
hypothesis." Since the time of Laplace the nebular hypothesis has had
ups and downs of credence, sometimes being largely believed in,
sometimes being almost ignored. At the present time it holds the field
with perhaps greater probability of ultimate triumph than has ever
before seemed to belong to it--far greater than belonged to it when
first propounded.

It had been previously stated clearly and well by the philosopher Kant,
who was intensely interested in "the starry heavens" as well as in the
"mind of man," and who shewed in connexion with astronomy also a most
surprising genius. The hypothesis ought by rights perhaps to be known
rather by his name than by that of Laplace.

The data on which it was founded are these:--Every motion in the solar
system known at that time took place in one direction, and in one
direction only. Thus the planets revolve round the sun, all going the
same way round; moons revolve round the planets, still maintaining the
same direction of rotation, and all the bodies that were known to rotate
on their own axis did so with still the same kind of spin. Moreover,
all these motions take place in or near a single plane. The ancients
knew that sun moon and planets all keep near to the ecliptic, within a
belt known as the zodiac: none strays away into other parts of the sky.
Satellites also, and rings, are arranged in or near the same plane; and
the plane of diurnal spin, or equator of the different bodies, is but
slightly tilted.

Now all this could not be the result of chance. What could have caused
it? Is there any connection or common ancestry possible, to account for
this strange family likeness? There is no connection now, but there may
have been once. Must have been, we may almost say. It is as though they
had once been parts of one great mass rotating as a whole; for if such a
rotating mass broke up, its parts would retain its direction of
rotation. But such a mass, filling all space as far as or beyond Saturn,
although containing the materials of the whole solar system in itself,
must have been of very rare consistency. Occupying so much bulk it could
not have been solid, nor yet liquid, but it might have been gaseous.

Are there any such gigantic rotating masses of gas in the heaven now?
Certainly there are; there are the nebulae. Some of the nebulae are now
known to be gaseous, and some of them at least are in a state of
rotation. Laplace could not have known this for certain, but he
suspected it. The first distinctly spiral nebula was discovered by the
telescope of Lord Rosse; and quite recently a splendid photograph of the
great Andromeda nebula, by our townsman, Mr. Isaac Roberts, reveals what
was quite unsuspected--and makes it clear that this prodigious mass also
is in a state of extensive and majestic whirl.

Very well, then, put this problem:--A vast mass of rotating gas is left
to itself to cool for ages and to condense as it cools: how will it
behave? A difficult mathematical problem, worthy of being attacked
to-day; not yet at all adequately treated. There are those who believe
that by the complete treatment of such a problem all the history of the
solar system could be evolved.

[Illustration: FIG. 80.--Lord Rosse's drawing of the spiral nebula in
Canes Venatici, with the stub marks of the draughtsman unduly emphasised
into features by the engraver.]

Laplace pictured to himself this mass shrinking and thereby whirling
more and more rapidly. A spinning body shrinking in size and retaining
its original amount of rotation, as it will unless a brake is applied,
must spin more and more rapidly as it shrinks. It has what
mathematicians call a constant moment of momentum; and what it loses in
leverage, as it shrinks, it gains in speed. The mass is held together by
gravitation, every particle attracting every other particle; but since
all the particles are describing curved paths, they will tend to fly off
tangentially, and only a small excess of the gravitation force over the
centrifugal is left to pull the particles in, and slowly to concentrate
the nebula. The mutual gravitation of the parts is opposed by the
centrifugal force of the whirl. At length a point is reached where the
two forces balance. A portion outside a certain line will be in
equilibrium; it will be left behind, and the rest must contract without
it. A ring is formed, and away goes the inner nucleus contracting
further and further towards a centre. After a time another ring will be
left behind in the same way, and so on. What happens to these rings?
They rotate with the motion they possess when thrown or shrunk off; but
will they remain rings? If perfectly regular they may; if there be any
irregularity they are liable to break up. They will break into one or
two or more large masses, which are ultimately very likely to collide
and become one. The revolving body so formed is still a rotating gaseous
mass; and it will go on shrinking and cooling and throwing off rings,
like the larger nucleus by which it has been abandoned. As any nucleus
gets smaller, its rate of rotation increases, and so the rings last
thrown off will be spinning faster than those thrown off earliest. The
final nucleus or residual central body will be rotating fastest of all.

The nucleus of the whole original mass we now see shrunk up into what we
call the sun, which is spinning on its axis once every twenty-five days.
The rings successively thrown off by it are now the planets--some large,
some small--those last thrown off rotating round him comparatively
quickly, those outside much more slowly. The rings thrown off by the
planetary gaseous masses as they contracted have now become satellites;
except one ring which has remained without breaking up, and is to be
seen rotating round Saturn still.

One other similar ring, an abortive attempt at a planet, is also left
round the sun (the zone of asteroids).

Such, crudely and baldly, is the famous nebular hypothesis of Laplace.
It was first stated, as has been said above, by the philosopher Kant,
but it was elaborated into much fuller detail by the greatest of French
mathematicians and astronomers.

The contracting masses will condense and generate great quantities of
heat by their own shrinkage; they will at a certain stage condense to
liquid, and after a time will begin to cool and congeal with a
superficial crust, which will get thicker and thicker; but for ages they
will remain hot, even after they have become thoroughly solid. The small
ones will cool fastest; the big ones will retain their heat for an
immense time. Bullets cool quickly, cannon-balls take hours or days to
cool, planets take millions of years. Our moon may be nearly cold, but
the earth is still warm--indeed, very hot inside. Jupiter is believed by
some observers still to glow with a dull red heat; and the high
temperature of the much larger and still liquid mass of the sun is
apparent to everybody. Not till it begins to scum over will it be
perceptibly cooler.

[Illustration: FIG. 81.--Saturn.]

Many things are now known concerning heat which were not known to
Laplace (in the above paragraph they are only hinted at), and these
confirm and strengthen the general features of his hypothesis in a
striking way; so do the most recent telescopic discoveries. But fresh
possibilities have now occurred to us, tidal phenomena are seen to have
an influence then wholly unsuspected, and it will be in a modified and
amplified form that the philosopher of next century will still hold to
the main features of this famous old Nebular Hypothesis respecting the
origin of the sun and planets--the Evolution of the solar system.




NOTES TO LECTURE XII


The subject of stellar astronomy was first opened up by Sir William
Herschel, the greatest observing astronomer.

_Frederick William Herschel_ was born in Hanover in 1738, and brought up
as a musician. Came to England in 1756. First saw a telescope in 1773.
Made a great many himself, and began a survey of the heavens. His sister
Caroline, born in 1750, came to England in 1772, and became his devoted
assistant to the end of his life. Uranus discovered in 1781. Music
finally abandoned next year, and the 40-foot telescope begun. Discovered
two moons of Saturn and two of Uranus. Reviewed, described, and gauged
all the visible heavens. Discovered and catalogued 2,500 nebulae and 806
double stars. Speculated concerning the Milky Way, the nebulosity of
stars, the origin and growth of solar systems. Discovered that the stars
were in motion, not fixed, and that the sun as one of them was
journeying towards a point in the constellation Hercules. Died in 1822,
eighty-four years old. Caroline Herschel discovered eight comets, and
lived on to the age of ninety-eight.




LECTURE XII

HERSCHEL AND THE MOTION OF THE FIXED STARS


We may admit, I think, that, with a few notable exceptions, the work of
the great men we have been recently considering was rather to complete
and round off the work of Newton, than to strike out new and original
lines.

This was the whole tendency of eighteenth century astronomy. It appeared
to be getting into an adult and uninteresting stage, wherein everything
could be calculated and predicted. Labour and ingenuity, and a severe
mathematical training, were necessary to work out the remote
consequences of known laws, but nothing fresh seemed likely to turn up.
Consequently men's minds began turning in other directions, and we find
chemistry and optics largely studied by some of the greatest minds,
instead of astronomy.

But before the century closed there was destined to arise one remarkable
exception--a man who was comparatively ignorant of that which had been
done before--a man unversed in mathematics and the intricacies of
science, but who possessed such a real and genuine enthusiasm and love
of Nature that he overcame the force of adverse circumstances, and
entering the territory of astronomy by a by-path, struck out a new line
for himself, and infused into the science a healthy spirit of fresh life
and activity.

This man was William Herschel.

"The rise of Herschel," says Miss Clerke, "is the one conspicuous
anomaly in the otherwise somewhat quiet and prosy eighteenth century. It
proved decisive of the course of events in the nineteenth. It was
unexplained by anything that had gone before, yet all that came after
hinged upon it. It gave a new direction to effort; it lent a fresh
impulse to thought. It opened a channel for the widespread public
interest which was gathering towards astronomical subjects to flow in."

Herschel was born at Hanover in 1738, the son of an oboe player in a
military regiment. The father was a good musician, and a cultivated man.
The mother was a German _Frau_ of the period, a strong, active,
business-like woman, of strong character and profound ignorance. Herself
unable to write, she set her face against learning and all new-fangled
notions. The education of the sons she could not altogether control,
though she lamented over it, but the education of her two daughters she
strictly limited to cooking, sewing, and household management. These,
however, she taught them well.

It was a large family, and William was the fourth child. We need only
remember the names of his younger brother Alexander, and of his much
younger sister Caroline.

They were all very musical--the youngest boy was once raised upon a
table to play the violin at a public performance. The girls were
forbidden to learn music by their mother, but their father sometimes
taught them a little on the sly. Alexander was besides an ingenious
mechanician.

At the age of seventeen, William became oboist to the Hanoverian Guards,
shortly before the regiment was ordered to England. Two years later he
removed himself from the regiment, with the approval of his parents,
though probably without the approbation or consent of the commanding
officer, by whom such removal would be regarded as simple desertion,
which indeed it was; and George III. long afterwards handed him an
official pardon for it.

At the age of nineteen, he was thus launched in England with an outfit
of some French, Latin, and English, picked up by himself; some skill in
playing the hautboy, the violin, and the organ, as taught by his father;
and some good linen and clothing, and an immense stock of energy,
provided by his mother.

He lived as musical instructor to one or two militia bands in Yorkshire,
and for three years we hear no more than this of him. But, at the end of
that time, a noted organist, Dr. Miller, of Durham, who had heard his
playing, proposed that he should come and live with him and play at
concerts, which he was very glad to do. He next obtained the post of
organist at Halifax; and some four or five years later he was invited to
become organist at the Octagon Chapel in Bath, and soon led the musical
life of that then very fashionable place.

About this time he went on a short visit to his family at Hanover, by
all of whom he was very much beloved, especially by his young sister
Caroline, who always regarded him as specially her own brother. It is
rather pitiful, however, to find that her domestic occupations still
unfairly repressed and blighted her life. She says:--

     "Of the joys and pleasures which all felt at this long-wished-for
     meeting with my--let me say my dearest--brother, but a small
     portion could fall to my share; for with my constant attendance at
     church and school, besides the time I was employed in doing the
     drudgery of the scullery, it was but seldom I could make one in the
     group when the family were assembled together."

While at Bath he wrote many musical pieces--glees, anthems, chants,
pieces for the harp, and an orchestral symphony. He taught a large
number of pupils, and lived a hard and successful life. After fourteen
hours or so spent in teaching and playing, he would retire at night to
instruct his mind with a study of mathematics, optics, Italian, or
Greek, in all of which he managed to make some progress. He also about
this time fell in with some book on astronomy.

In 1763 his father was struck with paralysis, and two years later he
died.

William then proposed that Alexander should come over from Hanover and
join him at Bath, which was done. Next they wanted to rescue their
sister Caroline from her humdrum existence, but this was a more
difficult matter. Caroline's journal gives an account of her life at
this time that is instructive. Here are a few extracts from it:--

     "My father wished to give me something like a polished education,
     but my mother was particularly determined that it should be a
     rough, but at the same time a useful one; and nothing further she
     thought was necessary but to send me two or three months to a
     sempstress to be taught to make household linen....

     "My mother would not consent to my being taught French, ... so all
     my father could do for me was to indulge me (and please himself)
     sometimes with a short lesson on the violin, when my mother was
     either in good humour or out of the way.... She had cause for
     wishing me not to know more than was necessary for being useful in
     the family; for it was her certain belief that my brother William
     would have returned to his country, and my eldest brother not have
     looked so high, if they had had a little less learning."

However, seven years after the death of their father, William went over
to Germany and returned to England in triumph, bringing Caroline with
him: she being then twenty-two.

So now began a busy life in Bath. For Caroline the work must have been
tremendous. For, besides having to learn singing, she had to learn
English. She had, moreover, to keep accounts and do the marketing.

When the season at Bath was over, she hoped to get rather more of her
brother William's society; but he was deep in optics and astronomy, used
to sleep with the books under his pillow, read them during meals, and
scarcely ever thought of anything else.

He was determined to see for himself all the astronomical wonders; and
there being a small Gregorian reflector in one of the shops, he hired
it. But he was not satisfied with this, and contemplated making a
telescope 20 feet long. He wrote to opticians inquiring the price of a
mirror suitable, but found there were none so large, and that even the
smaller ones were beyond his means. Nothing daunted, he determined to
make some for himself. Alexander entered into his plans: tools, hones,
polishers, and all sorts of rubbish were imported into the house, to the
sister's dismay, who says:--

[Illustration: FIG. 82.--Principle of Newtonian reflector.]

     "And then, to my sorrow, I saw almost every room turned into a
     workshop. A cabinet-maker making a tube and stands of all
     descriptions in a handsomely furnished drawing-room; Alex. putting
     up a huge turning-machine (which he had brought in the autumn from
     Bristol, where he used to spend the summer) in a bed-room, for
     turning patterns, grinding glasses, and turning eye-pieces, &c. At
     the same time music durst not lie entirely dormant during the
     summer, and my brother had frequent rehearsals at home."

Finally, in 1774, at the age of thirty-six, he had made himself a
5-1/2-foot telescope, and began to view the heavens. So attached was he
to the instrument that he would run from the concert-room between the
parts, and take a look at the stars.

He soon began another telescope, and then another. He must have made
some dozen different telescopes, always trying to get them bigger and
bigger; at last he got a 7-foot and then a 10-foot instrument, and began
a systematic survey of the heavens; he also began to communicate his
results to the Royal Society.

He now took a larger house, with more room for workshops, and a grass
plot for a 20-foot telescope, and still he went on grinding
mirrors--literally hundreds of them.

I read another extract from the diary of his sister, who waited on him
and obeyed him like a spaniel:--

     "My time was taken up with copying music and practising, besides
     attendance on my brother when polishing, since by way of keeping
     him alive I was constantly obliged to feed him by putting the
     victuals by bits into his mouth. This was once the case when, in
     order to finish a 7-foot mirror, he had not taken his hands from it
     for sixteen hours together. In general he was never unemployed at
     meals, but was always at those times contriving or making drawings
     of whatever came in his mind. Generally I was obliged to read to
     him whilst he was at the turning-lathe, or polishing mirrors--_Don
     Quixote_, _Arabian Nights' Entertainments_, the novels of Sterne,
     Fielding, &c.; serving tea and supper without interrupting the work
     with which he was engaged, ... and sometimes lending a hand. I
     became, in time, as useful a member of the workshop as a boy might
     be to his master in the first year of his apprenticeship.... But as
     I was to take a part the next year in the oratorios, I had, for a
     whole twelvemonth, two lessons per week from Miss Fleming, the
     celebrated dancing-mistress, to drill me for a gentlewoman (God
     knows how she succeeded). So we lived on without interruption. My
     brother Alex. was absent from Bath for some months every summer,
     but when at home he took much pleasure in executing some turning or
     clockmaker's work for his brother."

The music, and the astronomy, and the making of telescopes, all went on
together, each at high pressure, and enough done in each to satisfy any
ordinary activity. But the Herschels knew no rest. Grinding mirrors by
day, concerts and oratorios in the evening, star-gazing at night. It is
strange his health could stand it.

The star-gazing, moreover, was no _dilettante_ work; it was based on a
serious system--a well thought out plan of observation. It was nothing
less than this--to pass the whole heavens steadily and in order through
the telescope, noting and describing and recording every object that
should be visible, whether previously known or unknown. The operation is
called sweeping; but it is not a rapid passage from one object to
another, as the term might suggest; it is a most tedious business, and
consists in following with the telescope a certain field of view for
some minutes, so as to be sure that nothing is missed, then shifting it
to the next overlapping field, and watching again. And whatever object
appears must be scrutinized anxiously to see what there is peculiar
about it. If a star, it may be double, or it may be coloured, or it may
be nebulous; or again it may be variable, and so its brightness must be
estimated in order to compare with a subsequent observation.

Four distinct times in his life did Herschel thus pass the whole visible
heavens under review; and each survey occupied him several years. He
discovered double stars, variable stars, nebulae, and comets; and Mr.
