to find evidence in some direction of an overpoweringly great
force,--the centre of gravity of all these bodies.

It is noticed, too, that although the stars increase in number with
decrease in magnitude, so that as we descend in the scale we find three
times as many stars in each magnitude as in the one immediately above
it, yet this progression does not go on after a while. There is, in
fact, a rapid falling off in numbers below the twelfth magnitude; which
looks as if, at a certain distance from us, the stellar universe were
beginning to _thin out_.

Again, it is estimated, by Mr. Gore and others, that only about 100
millions of stars are to be seen in the whole of the sky with the best
optical aids. This shows well the limited extent of the stellar system,
for the number is not really great. For instance, there are from fifteen
to sixteen times as many persons alive upon the earth at this moment!

Last of all, there appears to be strong photographic evidence that our
sidereal system is limited in extent. Two photographs taken by the late
Dr. Isaac Roberts of a region rich in stellar objects in the
constellation of Cygnus, clearly show what has been so eloquently called
the "darkness behind the stars." One of these photographs was taken in
1895, and the other in 1898. On both occasions the state of the
atmosphere was practically the same, and the sensitiveness of the films
was of the same degree. The exposure in the first case was only one
hour; in the second it was about two hours and a half. And yet both
photographs show _exactly the same stars, even down to the faintest_.
From this one would gather that the region in question, which is one of
the most thickly star-strewn in the Milky Way, is _penetrable right
through_ with the means at our command. Dr. Roberts himself in
commenting upon the matter drew attention to the fact, that many
astronomers seemed to have tacitly adopted the assumption that the stars
extend indefinitely through space.

From considerations such as these the foremost astronomical authorities
of our time consider themselves justified in believing that the
collection of stars around us is _finite_; and that although our best
telescopes may not yet be powerful enough to penetrate to the final
stars, still the rapid decrease in numbers as space is sounded with
increasing telescopic power, points strongly to the conclusion that the
boundaries of the stellar system may not lie very far beyond the
uttermost to which we can at present see.

Is it possible then to make an estimate of the extent of this stellar
system?

Whatever estimates we may attempt to form cannot however be regarded as
at all exact, for we know the actual distances of such a very few only
of the nearest of the stars. But our knowledge of the distances even of
these few, permits us to assume that the stars close around us may be
situated, on an average, at about eight light-years from each other; and
that this holds good of the stellar spaces, with the exception of the
encircling girdle of the Milky Way, where the stars seem actually to be
more closely packed together. This girdle further appears to contain the
greater number of the stars. Arguing along these lines, Professor
Newcomb reaches the conclusion that the farthest stellar bodies which we
see are situated at about between 3000 and 4000 light-years from us.

Starting our inquiry from another direction, we can try to form an
estimate by considering the question of proper motions.

It will be noticed that such motions do not depend entirely upon the
actual speed of the stars themselves, but that some of the apparent
movement arises indirectly from the speed of our own sun. The part in a
proper motion which can be ascribed to the movement of our solar system
through space is clearly a displacement in the nature of a parallax--Sir
William Herschel called it "_Systematic_ Parallax"; so that knowing the
distance which we move over in a certain lapse of time, we are able to
hazard a guess at the distances of a good many of the stars. An inquiry
upon such lines must needs be very rough, and is plainly based upon the
assumption that the stars whose distances we attempt to estimate are
moving at an average speed much like that of our own sun, and that they
are not "runaway stars" of the 1830 Groombridge order. Be that as it
may, the results arrived at by Professor Newcomb from this method of
reasoning are curiously enough very much on a par with those founded on
the few parallaxes which we are really certain about; with the exception
that they point to somewhat closer intervals between the individual
stars, and so tend to narrow down our previous estimate of the extent of
the stellar system.

Thus far we get, and no farther. Our solar system appears to lie
somewhere near the centre of a great collection of stars, separated each
one from the other, on an average, by some 40 billions of miles; the
whole being arranged in the form of a mighty globular cluster. Light
from the nearest of these stars takes some four years to come to us. It
takes about 1000 times as long to reach us from the confines of the
system. This globe of stars is wrapt around closely by a stellar girdle,
the individual stars in which are set together more densely than those
in the globe itself. The entire arrangement appears to be constructed
upon a very regular plan. Here and there, as Professor Newcomb points
out, the aspect of the heavens differs in small detail; but generally it
may be laid down that the opposite portions of the sky, whether in the
Milky Way itself, or in those regions distant from it, show a marked
degree of symmetry. The proper motions of stars in corresponding
portions of the sky reveal the same kind of harmony, a harmony which may
even be extended to the various colours of the stars. The stellar
system, which we see disposed all around us, appears in fine to bear all
the marks of an _organised whole_.

The older astronomers, to take Sir William Herschel as an example,
supposed some of the nebulae to be distant "universes." Sir William was
led to this conclusion by the idea he had formed that, when his
telescopes failed to show the separate stars of which he imagined these
objects to be composed, he must put down the failure to their stupendous
distance from us. For instance, he thought the Orion Nebula, which is
now known to be made up of glowing gas, to be an external stellar
system. Later on, however, he changed his mind upon this point, and came
to the conclusion that "shining fluid" would better account both for
this nebula, and for others which his telescopes had failed to separate
into component stars.

The old ideas with regard to external systems and distant universes have
been shelved as a consequence of recent research. All known clusters and
nebulae are now firmly believed to lie _within_ our stellar system.

This view of the universe of stars as a sort of island in the
immensities, does not, however, give us the least idea about the actual
extent of space itself. Whether what is called space is really infinite,
that is to say, stretches out unendingly in every direction, or whether
it has eventually a boundary somewhere, are alike questions which the
human mind seems utterly unable to picture to itself.


[35] The Ptolemaic idea dies hard!

[36] Even the Milky Way itself is far from being a blaze of light, which
shows that the stars composing it do not extend outwards indefinitely.

[37] Mr. Gore has recently made some remarkable deductions, with regard
to the amount of light which we get from the stars. He considers that
most of this light comes from stars below the sixth magnitude; and
consequently, if all the stars visible to the naked eye were to be
blotted out, the glow of the night sky would remain practically the same
as it is at present. Going to the other end of the scale, he thinks also
that the combined light which we get from all the stars below the
seventeenth magnitude is so very small, that it may be neglected in such
an estimation. He finds, indeed, that if there are stars so low as the
twentieth magnitude, one hundred millions of them would only be equal in
brightness to a single first-magnitude star like Vega. On the other
hand, it is possible that the light of the sky at night is not entirely
due to starlight, but that some of it may be caused by phosphorescent
glow.




CHAPTER XXVI

THE STELLAR UNIVERSE--_continued_


It is very interesting to consider the proper motions of stars with
reference to such an isolated stellar system as has been pictured in the
previous chapter. These proper motions are so minute as a rule, that we
are quite unable to determine whether the stars which show them are
moving along in straight lines, or in orbits of immense extent. It
would, in fact, take thousands of years of careful observation to
determine whether the paths in question showed any degree of curving. In
the case of the more distant stars, the accurate observations which have
been conducted during the last hundred years have not so far revealed
any proper motions with regard to them; but one cannot escape the
conclusion that these stars move as the others do.

If space outside our stellar system is infinite in extent, and if all
the stars within that system are moving unchecked in every conceivable
direction, the result must happen that after immense ages these stars
will have drawn apart to such a distance from each other, that the
system will have entirely disintegrated, and will cease to exist as a
connected whole. Eventually, indeed, as Professor Newcomb points out,
the stars will have separated so far from each other that each will be
left by itself in the midst of a black and starless sky. If, however, a
certain proportion of stars have a speed sufficiently slow, they will
tend under mutual attraction to be brought to rest by collisions, or
forced to move in orbits around each other. But those stars which move
at excessive speeds, such, for instance, as 1830 Groombridge, or the
star in the southern constellation of Pictor, seem utterly incapable of
being held back in their courses by even the entire gravitative force of
our stellar system acting as a whole. These stars must, therefore, move
eventually right through the system and pass out again into the empty
spaces beyond. Add to this; certain investigations, made into the speed
of 1830 Groombridge, furnish a remarkable result. It is calculated,
indeed, that had this star been _falling through infinite space for
ever_, pulled towards us by the combined gravitative force of our entire
system of stars, it could not have gathered up anything like the speed
with which it is at present moving. No force, therefore, which we can
conjure out of our visible universe, seems powerful enough either to
have impressed upon this runaway star the motion which it now has, or to
stay it in its wild course. What an astounding condition of things!

Speculations like this call up a suspicion that there may yet exist
other universes, other centres of force, notwithstanding the apparent
solitude of our stellar system in space. It will be recollected that the
idea of this isolation is founded upon such facts as, that the heavens
do not blaze with light, and that the stars gradually appear to thin out
as we penetrate the system with increasing telescopic power. But
perchance there is something which hinders us from seeing out into space
beyond our cluster of stars; which prevents light, in fact, from
reaching us from other possible systems scattered through the depths
beyond. It has, indeed, been suggested by Mr. Gore[38] that the
light-transmitting ether may be after all merely a kind of "atmosphere"
of the stars; and that it may, therefore, thin off and cease a little
beyond the confines of our stellar system, just as the air thins off and
practically ceases at a comparatively short distance from the earth. A
clashing together of solid bodies outside our atmosphere could plainly
send us no sound, for there is no air extending the whole way to bear to
our ears the vibrations thus set up; so light emitted from any body
lying beyond our system of stars, would not be able to come to us if the
ether, whose function it is to convey the rays of light, ceased at or
near the confines of that system.

Perchance we have in this suggestion the key to the mystery of how our
sun and the other stellar bodies maintain their functions of temperature
and illumination. The radiations of heat and light arriving at the
limits of this ether, and unable to pass any further, may be thrown back
again into the system in some altered form of energy.

But these, at best, are mere airy and fascinating speculations. We have,
indeed, no evidence whatever that the luminiferous ether ceases at the
boundary of the stellar system. If, therefore, it extends outwards
infinitely in every direction, and if it has no absorbing or weakening
effect on the vibrations which it transmits, we cannot escape from the
conclusion that practically all the rays of light ever emitted by all
the stars must chase one another eternally through the never-ending
abysses of space.


[38] _Planetary and Stellar Studies_, by John Ellard Gore, F.R.A.S.,
M.R.I.A., London, 1888.




CHAPTER XXVII

THE BEGINNING OF THINGS


LAPLACE'S NEBULAR HYPOTHESIS

Dwelling upon the fact that all the motions of revolution and rotation
in the solar system, as known in his day, took place in the same
direction and nearly in the same plane, the great French astronomer,
Laplace, about the year 1796, put forward a theory to account for the
origin and evolution of that system. He conceived that it had come into
being as a result of the gradual contraction, through cooling, of an
intensely heated gaseous lens-shaped mass, which had originally occupied
its place, and had extended outwards beyond the orbit of the furthest
planet. He did not, however, attempt to explain how such a mass might
have originated! He went on to suppose that this mass, _in some manner_,
perhaps by mutual gravitation among its parts, had acquired a motion of
rotation in the same direction as the planets now revolve. As this
nebulous mass parted with its heat by radiation, it contracted towards
the centre. Becoming smaller and smaller, it was obliged to rotate
faster and faster in order to preserve its equilibrium. Meanwhile, in
the course of contraction, rings of matter became separated from the
nucleus of the mass, and were left behind at various intervals. These
rings were swept up into subordinate masses similar to the original
nebula. These subordinate masses also contracted in the same manner,
leaving rings behind them which, in turn, were swept up to form
satellites. Saturn's ring was considered, by Laplace, as the only
portion of the system left which still showed traces of this
evolutionary process. It is even probable that it may have suggested the
whole of the idea to him.

Laplace was, however, not the first philosopher who had speculated along
these lines concerning the origin of the world.

Nearly fifty years before, in 1750 to be exact, Thomas Wright, of
Durham, had put forward a theory to account for the origin of the whole
sidereal universe. In his theory, however, the birth of our solar system
was treated merely as an incident. Shortly afterwards the subject was
taken up by the famous German philosopher, Kant, who dealt with the
question in a still more ambitious manner, and endeavoured to account in
detail for the origin of the solar system as well as of the sidereal
universe. Something of the trend of such theories may be gathered from
the remarkable lines in Tennyson's _Princess_:--

"This world was once a fluid haze of light,
Till toward the centre set the starry tides,
And eddied into suns, that wheeling cast
The planets."

The theory, as worked out by Kant, was, however, at the best merely a
_tour de force_ of philosophy. Laplace's conception was much less
ambitious, for it did not attempt to explain the origin of the entire
universe, but only of the solar system. Being thus reasonably limited in
its scope, it more easily obtained credence. The arguments of Laplace
were further founded upon a mathematical basis. The great place which
he occupied among the astronomers of that time caused his theory to
exert a preponderating influence on scientific thought during the
century which followed.

A modification of Laplace's theory is the Meteoritic Hypothesis of Sir
Norman Lockyer. According to the views of that astronomer, the material
of which the original nebula was composed is presumed to have been in
the meteoric, rather than in the gaseous, state. Sir Norman Lockyer
holds, indeed, that nebulae are, in reality, vast swarms of meteors, and
the light they emit results from continual collisions between the
constituent particles. The French astronomer, Faye, also proposed to
modify Laplace's theory by assuming that the nebula broke up into rings
all at once, and not in detail, as Laplace had wished to suppose.

The hypothesis of Laplace fits in remarkably well with the theory put
forward in later times by Helmholtz, that the heat of the sun is kept up
by the continual contraction of its mass. It could thus have only
contracted to its present size from one very much larger.

Plausible, however, as Laplace's great hypothesis appears on the
surface, closer examination shows several vital objections, a few of
those set forth by Professor Moulton being here enumerated--

Although Laplace held that the orbits of the planets were sufficiently
near to being in the one plane to support his views, yet later
investigators consider that their very deviations from this plane are a
strong argument against the hypothesis.

Again, it is thought that if the theory were the correct explanation,
the various orbits of the planets would be much more nearly circular
than they are.

It is also thought that such interlaced paths, as those in which the
asteroids and the little planet Eros move, are most unlikely to have
been produced as a result of Laplace's nebula.

Further, while each of the rings was sweeping up its matter into a body
of respectable dimensions, its gravitative power would have been for the
time being so weak, through being thus spread out, that any lighter
elements, as, for instance, those of the gaseous order, would have
escaped into space in accordance with the principles of the kinetic
theory.

_The idea that rings would at all be left behind at certain intervals
during the contraction of the nebula is, perhaps, one of the weakest
points in Laplace's hypothesis._

Mathematical investigation does not go to show that the rings, presuming
they could be left behind during the contraction of the mass, would have
aggregated into planetary bodies. Indeed, it rather points to the
reverse.

Lastly, such a discovery as that the ninth satellite of Saturn revolves
in a _retrograde_ direction--that is to say, in a direction contrary to
the other revolutions and rotations in our solar system--appears
directly to contradict the hypothesis.

Although Laplace's hypothesis seems to break down under the keen
criticism to which it has been subjected, yet astronomers have not
relinquished the idea that our solar system has probably had its origin
from a nebulous mass. But the apparent failure of the Laplacian theory
is emphasised by the fact, that _not a single example of a nebula, in
the course of breaking up into concentric rings, is known to exist in
the entire heaven_. Indeed, as we saw in Chapter XXIV., there seems to
be no reliable example of even a "ring" nebula at all. Mr. Gore has
pointed this out very succinctly in his recently published work,
_Astronomical Essays_, where he says:--"To any one who still persists in
maintaining the hypothesis of ring formation in nebulae, it may be said
that the whole heavens are against him."

The conclusions of Keeler already alluded to, that the spiral is the
normal type of nebula, has led during the past few years to a new theory
by the American astronomers, Professors Chamberlin and Moulton. In the
detailed account of it which they have set forth, they show that those
anomalies which were stumbling-blocks to Laplace's theory do not
contradict theirs. To deal at length with this theory, to which the name
of "Planetesimal Hypothesis" has been given, would not be possible in a
book of this kind. But it may be of interest to mention that the authors
of the theory in question remount the stream of time still further than
did Laplace, and seek to explain the _origin_ of the spiral nebulae
themselves in the following manner:--

Having begun by assuming that the stars are moving apparently in every
direction with great velocities, they proceed to point out that sooner
or later, although the lapse of time may be extraordinarily long,
collisions or near approaches between stars are bound to occur. In the
case of collisions the chances are against the bodies striking together
centrally, it being very much more likely that they will hit each other
rather towards the side. The nebulous mass formed as a result of the
disintegration of the bodies through their furious impact would thus
come into being with a spinning movement, and a spiral would ensue.
Again, the stars may not actually collide, but merely approach near to
each other. If very close, the interaction of gravitation will give rise
to intense strains, or tides, which will entirely disintegrate the
bodies, and a spiral nebula will similarly result. As happens upon our
earth, two such tides would rise opposite to each other; and,
consequently, it is a noticeable fact that spiral nebulae have almost
invariably two opposite branches (see Plate XXII., p 314). Even if not
so close, the gravitational strains set up would produce tremendous
eruptions of matter; and in this case, a spiral movement would also be
generated. On such an assumption the various bodies of the solar system
may be regarded as having been ejected from parent masses.

The acceptance of the Planetesimal Hypothesis in the place of the
Hypothesis of Laplace will not, as we have seen, by any means do away
with the probability that our solar system, and similar systems, have
originated from a nebulous mass. On the contrary it puts that idea on a
firmer footing than before. The spiral nebulae which we see in the
heavens are on a vast scale, and may represent the formation of stellar
systems and globular clusters. Our solar system may have arisen from a
small spiral.

We will close these speculations concerning the origin of things with a
short sketch of certain investigations made in recent years by Sir
George H. Darwin, of Cambridge University, into the question of the
probable birth of our moon. He comes to the conclusion that at least
fifty-four millions of years ago the earth and moon formed one body,
which had a diameter of a little over 8000 miles. This body rotated on
an axis in about five hours, namely, about five times as fast as it does
at present. The rapidity of the rotation caused such a tremendous strain
that the mass was in a condition of, what is called, unstable
equilibrium; very little more, in fact, being required to rend it
asunder. The gravitational pull of the sun, which, as we have already
seen, is in part the cause of our ordinary tides, supplied this extra
strain, and a portion of the mass consequently broke off, which receded
gradually from the rest and became what we now know as the moon. Sir
George Darwin holds that the gravitational action of the sun will in
time succeed in also disturbing the present apparent harmony of the
earth-moon system, and will eventually bring the moon back towards the
earth, so that after the lapse of great ages they will re-unite once
again.

In support of this theory of the terrestrial origin of the moon,
Professor W.H. Pickering has put forward a bold hypothesis that our
satellite had its origin in the great basin of the Pacific. This ocean
is roughly circular, and contains no large land masses, except the
Australian Continent. He supposes that, prior to the moon's birth, our
globe was already covered with a slight crust. In the tearing away of
that portion which was afterwards destined to become the moon the
remaining area of the crust was rent in twain by the shock; and thus
were formed the two great continental masses of the Old and New Worlds.
These masses floated apart across the fiery ocean, and at last settled
in the positions which they now occupy. In this way Professor Pickering
explains the remarkable parallelism which exists between the opposite
shores of the Atlantic. The fact of this parallelism had, however, been
noticed before; as, for example, by the late Rev. S.J. Johnson, in his
book _Eclipses, Past and Future_, where we find the following passage:--

"If we look at our maps we shall see the parts of one Continent that jut
out agree with the indented portions of another. The prominent coast of
Africa would fit in the opposite opening between North and South
America, and so in numerous other instances. A general rending asunder
of the World would seem to have taken place when the foundations of the
great deep were broken up."

Although Professor Pickering's theory is to a certain degree anticipated
in the above words, still he has worked out the idea much more fully,
and given it an additional fascination by connecting it with the birth
of the moon. He points out, in fact, that there is a remarkable
similarity between the lunar volcanoes and those in the immediate
neighbourhood of the Pacific Ocean. He goes even further to suggest that
Australia is another portion of the primal crust which was detached out
of the region now occupied by the Indian Ocean, where it was originally
connected with the south of India or the east of Africa.
