Hudson's Bay. There won't be a one of your damned British Band left
alive when I'm done._

He would make them suffer. From this moment on, he had only one thing to
think of and only one thing to do: kill Indians.




BOOK 3

1832


Moon of Strawberries

_June_




18

The Trembling Lands


Redbird thought, _Our land by the Rock River was so good to us, and now
see what we have come to_.

Only starving people tried to make food from cattail seeds and the inner
bark of slippery elm and willow trees.

With a small steel knife Redbird cut cattails, dropping them into a
basket she carried over her arm. It would take thousands of the tiny
seeds, painstakingly picked from the white fuzz and then ground into
meal, to make a little bread that must be shared among five people.

Redbird moved slowly, pushing her swollen belly before her. As much as
her back and her feet hurt, she was determined to spend every day out
foraging until the baby was born. For the baby's sake she had to eat as
much as she could, but she did not want to take that extra portion from
the rest of her family without contributing as much as she could to the
common supply.

She sang as she walked along, asking the Trembling Lands to yield fruits
and berries. She found no fruits or berries, but singing kept her
spirits up, and she thought it helped the others too. Yellow Hair smiled
and nodded to her to show that she liked the song.

Sweat trickled down her back and inside her doeskin dress. Gray clouds
lay heavily over the Trembling Lands, and the air was warm and wet. Even
though the water of the lake was dark and muddy, Redbird was looking
forward to bathing in it.

And she was looking forward to a private talk with Yellow Hair. Yellow
Hair had been with them for many days and nights. It was time she went
to bed with White Bear.

Yellow Hair walked beside her around the edge of the lake. Ahead of them
ran Eagle Feather with a captive pale eyes boy named Woodrow. Iron Knife
had brought Woodrow back from a raid, and White Bear had taken him under
his protection too.

Woodrow, a few years older than Eagle Feather, was darting this way and
that, uprooting plants and throwing them down, tasting berries and
spitting them out. Redbird watched him with amusement. She had already
grown fond of him.

Woodrow said something to Yellow Hair, who smiled and turned to Redbird.

Speaking the pale eyes' tongue slowly, adding the few Sauk words she
knew and using gestures, Yellow Hair managed to explain to Redbird that
Woodrow was unhappy because he did not know what to pick.

"If look good, pick," Redbird said, using the little English White Bear
had taught her. "Not eat. If I say good, then eat."

Woodrow grinned and nodded to Redbird to show he understood. He ran off
after Eagle Feather, who was looking for birds and squirrels to shoot
with his small bow and arrow. Woodrow had been a captive only half as
long as Yellow Hair, but unlike her, he seemed happy with his lot.

Redbird doubted that Eagle Feather and Woodrow would find any squirrels
or birds. Very little that was edible, plant or animal, lived in this
marsh, and over a thousand people had been foraging in the area for more
than a moon. The last time the British Band had eaten well was when Wolf
Paw brought the cattle. And among so many people, those cattle had not
lasted long. Many people were digging in the ground for worms and grubs,
roasting them and eating them in handfuls. Some people were even
secretly killing and eating horses, though Black Hawk had decreed death
for anyone caught doing that.

As for Redbird herself, she felt an emptiness in her belly from the time
she woke till the time she went to sleep, and she found herself wanting
to sleep longer and longer as her strength ebbed away. She worried
constantly that the baby inside her was not getting enough nourishment
and would die or be stunted. The people around her were starting to look
like walking skeletons.

They came to a point of land covered with pale green shrubs thrusting
out into the lake. Redbird called Eagle Feather.

"Go for a swim around the other side of this point and take the pale
eyes boy with you."

Eagle Feather's blue eyes glowed. "Maybe I can shoot a frog."

Once the boys were gone, she said to Yellow Hair, "We take bath." Yellow
Hair smiled gratefully.

As they waded naked into the greenish, murky water, Redbird eyed Yellow
Hair's body, so different from a Sauk woman's. She remembered how
hungrily the braves had stared at Yellow Hair when Wolf Paw's wife
stripped her before the tribe.

Yet it was easy to imagine that such pale skin was a sign of sickness.
Yellow Hair's face and hands were somewhat tan, but every other part of
her was white as milk. Her ribs were showing, a sign of the hunger they
were all suffering. Still, her breasts were round, with pretty pink
nipples. Her legs were long, and her buttocks curved out sharply; those
of Sauk women were flatter. Even though the hair under her arms and
between her legs was light in color, she had an abundance of it, much
more than the fine tufts of black hair Redbird had in those places. She
had undone her braids, and her hair fell like a golden curtain down her
back halfway to her waist.

_What a beautiful creature she is!_

What an evil, stupid thing it would have been if Running Deer and the
others had been allowed to cut her to bits and burn her.

A man might find Yellow Hair's differences from Sauk women attractive. A
man such as White Bear.

She felt no fear that the pale eyes woman would take White Bear away
from her. He showed many times every day, with his looks, with his
movements, with his words, that Redbird, and not Yellow Hair, was first
in his heart.

Redbird waded into the lake until the water was up to her breasts and
her feet were sinking in the ooze. Then she pushed herself forward and
dog-paddled through the reeds. It was wonderful to let the water take
the weight of her belly off her hips and legs, a welcome relief to feel
so cool.

In the night in the wickiup she often heard Yellow Hair moving or
weeping softly. And that meant that Yellow Hair must have heard White
Bear and Redbird loving each other in bed. This was only to be expected.
When families slept all together in lodges and wickiups, the children
early came to know how their parents took pleasure together during the
night, and were unembarrassed when they grew up and their turn came. But
how did the sounds of White Bear and Redbird together make Yellow Hair
feel?

White Bear had said that Yellow Hair had wanted him when he lived among
the pale eyes. And lately Redbird and White Bear had been sleeping apart
on their separate pallets more often, because Redbird, in the discomfort
of the final moon of carrying this baby, rarely wanted White Bear inside
her.

And so Redbird had searched her heart and knew that she was willing to
share her husband with Yellow Hair.

White Bear and Yellow Hair could go to bed with each other.

And should.

It would be good for Yellow Hair if her yearning for White Bear could be
satisfied, at least for a time. The pleasure of mating was a healing
thing. It restored the ill to health, and it made the well strong and
happy.

Redbird could see in Yellow Hair's eyes--such a bright blue--how much
she longed for White Bear. Being close to him, Redbird thought, helped
Yellow Hair forget she was a captive.

Some days ago, not long after White Bear had taken in Woodrow, Redbird
had told White Bear she would not mind if he took Yellow Hair into his
bed. He had laughed and patted her belly and insisted he could wait
until she wanted him again.

Why should he _have_ to wait, when a woman who desired him was right
there in his wickiup?

It was good that she had spoken to him, even though he claimed he did
not want Yellow Hair. At least he knew that if Yellow Hair did come to
him in the night, they both had Redbird's blessing. But she doubted that
Yellow Hair would ever approach White Bear that way. Not without
encouragement.

She stopped swimming, and let her feet down into the mud so that she
stood beside Yellow Hair. Here the water of the lake almost came up to
Redbird's shoulders, but Yellow Hair's breasts were well above it. They
smiled at each other.

Yellow Hair crouched down in the water till it was up to her neck. She
dipped her hair into the water, then lifted her head and squeezed the
water out of her hair with her hands.

The water was good and cool, she said, but she wished she had some soap.

White Bear had explained what soap was, and Redbird smiled and shook
her head. If water would not wash dirt away, a Sauk scrubbed with sand.
As for hair, Redbird left hers braided. Once at the beginning of summer
and once at the end, she felt, was often enough to let water touch her
unbound hair.

Now that she had decided to talk to Yellow Hair, Redbird felt a
tightness in her throat. What if the idea of sharing White Bear made
Yellow Hair angry? Sharing a mate was not, Redbird knew, according to
pale eyes custom.

There was only one way: to begin in spite of her fear.

She said, "You know about woman and man? What they do?" She signed with
her fingers to make her meaning plain, and saw that she had succeeded
when the pale eyes woman's face turned a deep red. Redbird wished Yellow
Hair were standing up in the water, so she could see whether the rest of
her body turned red too.

Yellow Hair said she knew a little about what men and women did, but her
mother had died a long time ago and her father never spoke of such
things.

"You want me teach?" Redbird asked.

Yellow Hair turned red again, looked down at the water and nodded.

So, as they waded back to the shore of the lake, Redbird tried with many
gestures and a few words to teach Yellow Hair, as Sun Woman many summers
ago had taught her. When they were out of the water, Redbird picked up a
stick and drew a little picture on the mudbank. When she was finished,
she giggled. Yellow Hair took a good look and turned red again, all the
way down to her waist, Redbird noticed. She turned away, but Redbird saw
to her relief that she was laughing. Redbird scratched out the picture.

They sat on the bank where they had left their clothing, letting the air
dry their bodies. From a pouch she had brought with her Redbird took a
wood-stoppered gourd containing musk oil. She and Yellow Hair rubbed the
oil on their bodies to keep mosquitoes off.

Yellow Hair wanted to know if the first time with a man hurt very much.

"Some women hurt much. Other women little."

She patted Yellow Hair's wrist to reassure her. "I think you hurt
little. After that, feel very, very good." She patted herself between
her legs to make plain what she was talking about, and Yellow Hair
blushed again.

"_Best_ feeling," Redbird added, smiling. It was surprising, Redbird
thought, that Yellow Hair could become a fully grown woman and yet still
have her first time with a man to look forward to.

They sat in silence for a time, Redbird afraid again because now she had
to take the next step.

But before she could speak, tears began to trickle down Yellow Hair's
cheeks. She spoke brokenly, and it was hard for Redbird to follow her.
She seemed to be saying that she expected to die before she ever knew
those good feelings Redbird talked about with a man she loved. She had
already lived for twenty summers, and now it seemed she might not live
much longer. And never have a man.

It was true. There was big danger to Yellow Hair. If anything happened
to White Bear, she would have no protector. Many Sauk hated pale eyes.
One might get at her. Or her own people might even kill her by mistake.

Yellow Hair had missed so much. So tall and beautiful, but she had
nothing to show for her life--no man, no children. Redbird felt sorry
for her.

"You love White Bear?" she asked, hugging herself as she said the word
"love" to show what she meant.

Now Yellow Hair turned pale--even paler than usual--and drew away from
Redbird. She shook her head violently, her bright golden hair swinging
all wild and loose, and said, "No, no, no!"

But she stared at Redbird too fixedly, and Redbird could see that she
did not mean what she said.

White Bear wanted Yellow Hair, but said he did not want her. Yellow Hair
loved White Bear, but said she did not love him.

White Bear and Yellow Hair were both being foolish. It came of Yellow
Hair being pale eyes and White Bear being part pale eyes.

And so now Redbird took a deep breath and said, "When we sleep tonight,
you go to bed of White Bear. He make you happy."

Yellow Hair's eyes grew huge and her face glowed with a joyous wonder.
She stammered and gasped as she asked Redbird if she really meant it, if
she would really let such a thing happen.

"I happy when you happy, White Bear happy," Redbird said.

Redbird had come to see Yellow Hair as a younger sister who needed her
help and guidance. She liked Yellow Hair much more, in fact, than she
liked either Wild Grape or Robin's Nest. Her sisters had always sneered
at White Bear, and Yellow Hair saw what a fine man he was.

Yellow Hair suddenly looked frightened. She stood up abruptly, picked up
her fringed doeskin dress and struggled into it. When her head appeared
through the neck of the dress and she shook her hair free, she was
crying again.

No, she insisted, she couldn't do that. It would be wrong.

Redbird thought she understood. This hungry, dangerous time was a
terrible time for a woman to be carrying a baby.

"You not want baby? Sun Woman makes tea keeps woman from getting baby."

Yellow Hair talked for a long time. Redbird tried hard to follow what
she said, asking questions and making her repeat herself. It had to do
with Jesus, the pale eyes spirit Pere Isaac always talked about. Jesus
would not like it if Yellow Hair went to bed with White Bear.

Redbird remembered White Bear telling her that Yellow Hair was the
daughter of a pale eyes shaman. The Jesus spirit might be a special
spirit for her, then.

_But I am also the daughter of a shaman. I can teach her what we
believe._

"Jesus not here," Redbird pointed out. "We children of Earthmaker."

But also, Yellow Hair explained, by pale eyes custom a woman who slept
with another woman's husband was a bad woman.

"White Bear _is_ your husband," Redbird said. "My father shaman. He
marry you and White Bear." Surely that was more important than what a
lot of pale eyes who were not even here to see might think. Among the
Sauk, many would call Yellow Hair a bad woman for _not_ sleeping with
White Bear.

"We Sauk people. What you do with my Sauk man is good."

Yellow Hair sighed and wiped her tears with her fingers. Maybe she would
go to White Bear in the night, and maybe not. She spread her hands
helplessly. She did not know what to do.

Redbird saw that she could tell Yellow Hair no more. The pale eyes would
have to make up her own mind.

Yellow Hair gave Redbird a sad smile and thanked her for her kindness.
And after Redbird had put on her dress and her moccasins, Yellow Hair
gave her a little kiss on the cheek.

With a wooden comb Redbird had given her, Yellow Hair combed out her
long blond locks and began to braid them again.

They rejoined Eagle Feather and Woodrow and spent the rest of the
afternoon searching for food, returning to camp when the clouds overhead
turned purple and the sun made a brief appearance, blazing like a
prairie fire on the flat horizon of the marshland.

Redbird bit her lip anxiously as they walked back to the camp. If Yellow
Hair decided not to go to bed with White Bear, she might think,
according to her pale eyes custom, that Redbird was a bad woman for
saying she should. But what if Yellow Hair went to bed with White Bear
and he came to love Yellow Hair more than he did Redbird? She had
thought that could not happen, but now that she had spoken out, she was
not so sure.

That night Redbird curled up on her solitary pallet of blankets laid
over a mat of reeds on one side of the wickiup. Yellow Hair lay in her
sleeping place, and the boys were in the one they shared. White Bear was
still visiting and treating ill people. Many people, especially the very
old and the very young, were falling ill in the Trembling Lands. There
had been many deaths since they crossed the Great River. Bit by bit the
band was losing the wisdom of the old and the promise of the young.

White Bear came in long after the two women and the boys had settled
down for the night. He went to his own pallet on the east side of the
wickiup.

Now that Redbird was ready for sleep, the baby within her woke up, and
its kicking, along with burning feelings that rose from her stomach to
her throat, kept her awake.

The stillness was disturbed only by the chirping of countless frogs.

_Where were those frogs today when we were looking for food? We must ask
the Frog spirit to let us catch some of them._

Then she heard another movement. Someone was crawling across the
reed-covered floor of the wickiup. She caught her breath. Yellow Hair's
sleeping place was on the side opposite White Bear's, and the movement
was unmistakably from her bed to his.

A little later she heard other sounds that were also easy to
recognize--the crackling of a bed's reed matting, whispers, little gasps
and groans, loud, fast breathing.

Yellow Hair's cry of pain sounded as if it had come through clenched
teeth. She still did not want anyone to know. Redbird smiled to herself.

As she listened to White Bear's heavy panting, Redbird remembered the
sharp pain inside her when she first received him on the island near
Saukenuk.

White Bear sighed loudly, and then everything was still for a time, and
Redbird heard the frogs once more. They were probably mating too. How
wise of Earthmaker to make his creatures into woman and man, so they
could give each other such wonderful pleasure. Earthmaker knew
everything, but it was hard to see how he could have invented man and
woman without having seen something that gave him the idea.

Him? Redbird had always pictured Earthmaker as a man, a giant warrior,
but now she wondered whether the spirit that gave life to the world and
all things in it might be a she. Or, better yet, maybe there were two
Earthmakers, a he and a she.

As she had so many times before, she wished now that the tribe's custom
would permit her to become a shaman, so that she might see into these
mysteries with her own eyes, as White Bear and Owl Carver had.

The sounds started up again from White Bear's bed, the movements, the
whisperings. Redbird thought about how good it was to have her man
filling her solidly, giving her delicious feelings as he moved in and
out. And she felt herself warm with desire.

She smiled ruefully in the dark.

_Now I want him and I cannot have him, because I sent Yellow Hair to his
bed._

_I hope this baby will be born soon, so I can lie with White Bear again.
Of course, even then I will still let Yellow Hair have him, sometimes._

When Redbird awoke at sunrise and got up to begin the day's foraging,
Yellow Hair was back sleeping in her own place. In the faint light that
filtered through the wickiup's elm-bark skin, her pink mouth looked soft
and childlike.

White Bear was seated cross-legged on his bed, loading the rifle he had
brought with him when he came back to the tribe. With food so short,
even the shaman had to go out and try to hunt to supply his family; the
people he treated had no gifts to give him. She stood looking at him,
waiting for him to speak to her, but he kept his eyes on his rifle with
foolish shyness.

Did he think she was angry at him, or that she was going to tease him,
the way Water Flows Fast might?

Poor Water Flows Fast--she made few jokes since her husband, Three
Horses, was killed at Old Man's Creek.

Redbird said, "I know what happened last night. I am glad that it
happened. It was good for her and for you."

Now White Bear's dark eyes met hers, troubled. "Yes, it is good for me
and Nancy--Yellow Hair--but only for now."

"What troubles you?" she asked him.

"One day, when Yellow Hair must leave us and go back to her own people,
I think she will be very sad. That is why I did not lie with her when
she wanted me to at Victor. I knew we would have to part."

"Now she has what she wants, at least for as long as she stays with us.
Now she will have something to think about besides how afraid she is."

He smiled at her. "And you made it happen. I know that you sent her to
me. You are a great troublemaker."

He stood up and stroked her cheek with his fingertips, and she felt a
glow inside, certain now that speaking to Yellow Hair had been right.

       *       *       *       *       *

The afternoon sun heated the interior of the birthing wickiup till it
felt like a sweat lodge.

Redbird screamed. It was not a baby; it was a wild horse down there,
kicking its way out. She felt about to faint.

The pain died away. Groaning, Redbird went limp between Wind Bends Grass
and Yellow Hair, who held her arms. Sun Woman crouched before Redbird,
observing the progress of the birth by the light of a single candle.

Her skin slick with sweat, Redbird was squatting naked over a pile of
blankets in the center of the wickiup. Her back and legs ached
unbearably.

"You don't have to scream so loud," Wind Bends Grass said abruptly. "It
doesn't hurt that much."

Redbird wished her mother could feel this pain and know how much it
hurt. She felt like telling Wind Bends Grass to leave the birthing
wickiup.

Sun Woman said gently, "No one knows how much another person hurts."

_I don't remember this much pain when Eagle Feather was born. Maybe I am
going to die._

Sun Woman stood up and wiped Redbird's forehead with a cool, wet
kerchief, then cleaned her bottom for her, where a little blood was
dripping.

"I can see the top of the baby's head," Sun Woman said. "It will be a
good birth. You are almost done now."

Redbird looked up at the mare's tail, dyed red, that hung over the
wickiup doorway, medicine to make the birth go easier.

_Let it be over soon_, she prayed. Her pains had started at dawn, and
now it was past midday. Sun Woman had used up four candles, and in the
whole band there were hardly any candles left. It had not taken this
long with Eagle Feather.

Yellow Hair rubbed the arm she was holding, and Redbird managed to look
at her and smile. Though Redbird had meant to honor Yellow Hair by
asking her to help here, she was not sure now that she had done the
right thing. The pale eyes woman's face was icy white, and she kept
biting her lips as if trying to keep from being sick. She had probably
never seen anything like this before.

Wind Bends Grass had insisted that it was bad luck to have Yellow Hair
present, but Redbird had ignored her.

The next pain came, and Redbird, to show her mother how much it hurt,
screamed even louder and longer than she had to. This time the pain gave
her hardly any rest before it came again. And another came stepping on
its heels. And another.

Her screams were continuous now, and she was hoarse and coughing and did
not have to pretend. Her eyes were blind with tears. She dug her nails
into the arms of Wind Bends Grass and Yellow Hair and bent forward,
pushing as hard as she could.

She felt the enormous mass breaking out of her, and found her voice
again in a scream that could split the very sky open even as the baby
was tearing her in two.

Her ears rang. She felt broken and useless, like an empty eggshell. She
hurt terribly, but a great weight was gone from inside her.

Wind Bends Grass said, "You have done well, my daughter."

Redbird started to cry, from pain, from relief, and because she had
finally pleased her mother.

From the floor she heard a tiny cough, and then a drawn-out wail. She
looked down and saw the little bright red figure in Sun Woman's arms,
its eyes screwed shut, its mouth wide open, at the joining of its legs
the life-giving crevice. A glistening blue cord coiling up from the
baby's belly joined her still to Redbird's body.

She felt another pain now, and pushed out the afterbirth with a groan.
Wind Bends Grass and Yellow Hair helped her to stumble to the bed
against the wall of the wickiup. They wrapped her in a light blanket,
while Sun Woman cut the cord and set it aside to be dried and put in the
baby's medicine bag. Then Wind Bends Grass bathed the tiny body first
with water, then with oil. She put her granddaughter in her daughter's
arms.

"What will you call her?" she asked.

Redbird had thought of a name in the lake where she and Yellow Hair had
been bathing several days ago. "I will call her Floating Lily."

"A good name," Sun Woman said.

Floating Lily's voice was strong. Hungry already, and she had only been
in the world a few moments. Redbird pressed the little mouth against her
breast. She prayed that she would have milk. She had eaten as much as
she could; now she must give nourishment.

She felt the rhythmic pull on her breast. The baby's mouth was full of
milk; no more crying. A warm feeling spread through Redbird's body.

After Redbird had fed Floating Lily, they both slept. It was near
sundown when the three women attending her helped her limp with the baby
back to her own wickiup. Each time she took a step it felt as if a club
hit her between her legs, but her heart rejoiced that the ordeal was
over.

Yellow Hair said that she would go and look for Woodrow and Eagle
Feather. She was crying. Redbird was not sure why.

In the wickiup, White Bear was waiting for her. As she lay on her bed
with Floating Lily, his eyes lit up with joy at the sight of his
daughter. He picked the baby up, which made her cry, and he laughed and
handed her back to Redbird.

"I was not with you to see our son born," he said. "I have never been
happier in my life than I am at this moment."

The hide curtain over the wickiup doorway was pulled aside and Owl
Carver entered, holding his owl's head medicine stick in one hand and a
bowl of smoking aromatic herbs and wood shavings in another. His white
hair was getting thinner and thinner, Redbird noticed, and he walked
with a permanent stoop. He blew the smoke over Redbird and Floating Lily
to bless them.

"May she walk her path with honor," he said, laying his hand on Floating
Lily's head. He left, the scented smoke lingering behind him.

When Redbird bared her breast, White Bear leaned over and kissed her
nipple, his lips catching a droplet of milk that had formed there. She
put Floating Lily to her breast and lay in contented silence with her
husband sitting beside her.

He took up his book and read aloud:

    "Whence Hail to thee,
    Eve, rightly called Mother of all Mankind,
    Mother of all things living, since by thee
    Man is to live, and all things live for Man."

"What does that mean?" she asked.

He translated the words into Sauk, and said, "It means that all life
comes from woman."

Iron Knife's head suddenly appeared in the doorway, his eyes wide, his
mouth drawn down.

"White Bear! Long knives coming this way, thousands of them."

Redbird's body went cold, and she clutched the baby to her. How could
she keep this tender new life safe in the midst of flight and fighting?

"Maybe they will not be able to find us," White Bear said.

"No, the scouts say they have Potawatomi guides riding with them, who
know where to look for us. Potawatomi dogs! To side with the long knives
against us."

"The Potawatomi must have been forced to help," said White Bear quietly.

Iron Knife said, "Black Hawk says we must break camp right now. We will
head west as quickly as we can toward the Great River."

Redbird tightened her arms around Floating Lily until the baby cried out
in pain. Instantly she relaxed her grip, but in her mind she saw the
long knives coming, with their cruel, hairy faces, murdering them all
with their guns and their swords. She saw the people she loved sprawled
dead in the mud of the Trembling Lands. White Bear had told her that
Black Hawk's war parties had killed many pale eyes, even women and
children. Now the long knives would take terrible vengeance. Even as she
stroked the baby and whispered to soothe her, her heart pounded in her
chest.

There would be hard traveling ahead and even less food, thought Redbird.
Trying to walk after just giving birth, the pain would kill her.

For an instant she hated Black Hawk for having led them into this
suffering. If only the British Band had listened last winter to White
Bear. And to her. Then hatred gave way to sick despair. She would die
before they ever reached the Great River. And Floating Lily, who had
just come into the world, would die too.

Iron Knife left them. White Bear turned to Redbird, and she saw in his
eyes the same hopelessness she felt. But if he gave up, too, they were
truly lost. Why, then, go through the agony of a flight from the long
knives? They might as well stay here and let the long knives come and
kill them.

White Bear said, "The Turtle told me, 'The many who follow Black Hawk
across the Great River will be few when they cross back.'" A chill went
through her as she saw how those prophetic words were coming true.

The little bundle in Redbird's arms stirred. Anger rose in her. Despite
Black Hawk's blundering, despite the deadly hatred of the long knives,
she and her husband and her son and her baby daughter would not let
themselves be killed.

"Then if we do not cross the Great River we will escape in some other
direction," she said firmly. "Go and find Eagle Feather and Woodrow. I
will start to pack our belongings."

He smiled gratefully at her, reached for her and held her. She felt
herself gaining strength from his strong arms around her.

"For a few days I will not be able to walk or ride. You will have to tie
me to a travois and pull me along, as we do with old people."

"If I have to carry you in my arms," said White Bear, "I will do that."

Now that she was determined to fight to stay alive, she smiled up at
White Bear and pressed herself against him. She _was_ love. The power of
a great spirit, perhaps that she-Earthmaker she had once thought of,
filled her.

The Turtle, she thought, had said that many would die. But he had also
said that a few would live.

She and her husband and her children, they would live.




19

The Band Divided


The setting sun, warming the flat land at the foot of a hill beside the
Great River, cast deep shadows in the hollows of Redbird's and Nancy's
faces. How thin they were getting to be. Fear for them wriggled
snakelike through White Bear's own empty stomach.

_Has Earthmaker abandoned his people? No--worse--this is the fate he has
chosen for us. He bestows evil as well as good on his children._

Redbird said wearily, "What did the council decide?" She unfastened the
sling in which she carried Floating Lily on her back and cradled the
baby in her arms, frowning into the tiny brown face. White Bear knew
what she was thinking. Floating Lily was too quiet.

White Bear said, "Black Hawk wants to go north and seek refuge with the
Chippewa. He took the compass my father gave him out of his medicine bag
and showed it to the chiefs and braves. He said we must follow its arrow
north. But Iron Knife disagreed with him."

Redbird's eyes widened. "My brother never disagrees with Black Hawk.
Black Hawk has lived three times as long as he has."

"Iron Knife spoke for many of the younger braves," White Bear said.
"They want to cross the Great River here, now, and bring the war to an
end. Black Hawk reminded them that we have only three canoes. Each canoe
can hold only six people, and two of those six must paddle back and
forth. They would have to ferry nearly a thousand people. He said the
long knives would reach us long before we all got across. Iron Knife
said they would make rafts and more canoes. In the end the three chiefs
and most of the braves said they would cross the river. Only a few have
agreed to go north with Black Hawk."

It had taken a whole moon to cross from east to west, from their camp in
the Trembling Lands to this place where the Bad Axe River emptied into
the Great River. The land through which they passed, following an old
Winnebago trail, was rolling prairie at first. Then they plunged into
country that was ever wilder and more mountainous as they struggled
westward. At the last they had to cut their own trail. They marked their
passage with kettles, blankets, tent poles and other possessions too
heavy to carry--and their dying old people who could walk no more, and
their dead children. The only good thing about this rugged land was that
it slowed down the long knives even more than it did Black Hawk's
people, who knew by the time they reached the Great River that their
pursuers were two days behind them.

White Bear told Nancy in English what he had just told Redbird about the
council.

"If the band is dividing, where will _we_ go?" Nancy asked.

"I asked Black Hawk--I begged him--to let you and Woodrow go." Anger
crept into White Bear's voice as he recalled Black Hawk's stubbornness.
"He still refuses. He wants to take the two of you north with him."

Redbird said, "But pale eyes prisoners are no good to Black Hawk now."
White Bear was pleased to see that she had learned to get the drift of
English conversations between him and Nancy. He did not like to feel
that he was leaving Redbird out of anything, especially since he _knew_
Nancy now.

"True," White Bear said to Redbird in Sauk. "And if we meet up with long
knives again they will shoot first and not think to look for pale eyes
among us. I want to get Yellow Hair and Woodrow away from the tribe
before there is another battle."

There had been one great battle with the long knives halfway through
their trek, on the south shore of the Ouisconsin River. Many had died on
both sides, but Black Hawk had managed to get most of his people away
after nightfall. Right now White Bear could almost hear the huge army of
long knives crashing through the forests behind them.

But Nancy shook her head violently. "I feel safer with you." Her eyes
glistened with tears.

Ever since Redbird had encouraged Nancy to seek his bed, White Bear had
feared that when the time came for their parting, it would hurt her
badly.

And him as well. In the moon just past he and Nancy had joined bodies
and hearts many times. Now it seared his throat to speak aloud his
decision that Nancy must leave the British Band.

He sat down on a fallen tree trunk and reached out to her. Nancy came
over and took his hands and sat beside him.

"With the band going in two different directions, this is your best
chance to get away. You and I have loved each other, but you are still a
white woman, and my people murdered your father. Why should you share
our fate? And what about Woodrow? If you and he go together, you have a
better chance of reaching safety."

She bent over, her shoulders shaking with sobs. "If you're going to die,
I want to die with you."

A moon ago, he thought, she had desperately wanted to escape from the
British Band. Now her own heart was holding her captive.

Eve's words to Adam as they left Paradise rose unbidden in his mind:
_With thee to go, is to stay here; without thee here to stay, is to go
hence unwilling._

"But no one wants to die," he said gently. "For you to stay now when you
can escape would be madness."

It was a madness he felt himself. There was a part of him that wanted to
keep her with him, to let her stay, however all this might end. He had
to force himself to keep to his plan to help her get away.

Eagle Feather and Woodrow came from the woods along the south bank of
the Bad Axe River, arms loaded with boughs for the wickiup that now they
would not bother to build.

White Bear squatted down before Woodrow and grasped his shoulders.

"Tonight I am going to help you and Miss Nancy to get away from our band
and back to the white people." He would be sorry to lose the boy.

Eagle Feather, standing nearby, said nothing. But his face, full of woe,
told White Bear that he understood.

"I guess Miss Nancy and me could find our way to white folks if we
follow the river," Woodrow said uncertainly. With the beaded headband
Iron Knife had given him wrapped around his high forehead, and his face
browned by the summer sun, he looked like a Sauk boy, except for his
light brown hair. He seemed not much happier about leaving the band than
Nancy.

"I'm not going to send you to find your way alone," White Bear said.
"I'll go with you until I see you in safe hands. Prairie du Chien and
Fort Crawford are south of here on the river. If we go in that direction
we're bound to meet some of your people."

"I got no people but you," said Woodrow. "You treated me better than my
folks ever did."

White Bear felt a catch in his throat. He remembered how, seven years
ago, he had fought against being sent from the tribe when Star Arrow
came looking for him.

