"No. Maybe not."

From across the room somebody was saying, "If the _Comet_ hadn't smashed
on us, damn me but I'd ask the Commander to let some of us take her
back. The discarded equipment could go."

"Shut up, Billy. She is smashed."

The little _Comet_, cruising in search of the ore, had come to grief
just as the ore was found. It lay now on the crater floor with its nose
bashed into an upflung spire of rock. Wrecked beyond repair. Save for
the pre-arrangement with the _Planetara_, the Grantline party would have
been helpless here on the Moon. Knowledge of that--although no one ever
suspected but that the _Planetara_ would come safely--served to add to
the men's depression. They were cut off, virtually helpless on a strange
world. Their signalling devices were inadequate even to reach Earth.
Grantline's power batteries were running low.[F] He could not attempt
wide-flung signals without jeopardizing the power necessary for the
routine of his camp in the event of the _Planetara_ being delayed. Nor
was his electro-telescope adequate to pick small objects at any great
distance.[G]

All of Grantline's effort, in truth, had gone into equipment for the
finding and gathering of the treasure. The safety of the expedition had
to that extent been neglected.

Swenson was mentioning that now.

"You all agreed to it," Johnny said shortly. "Every man here voted that,
above everything, what we wanted was to get the radium."


  [F] The Gravely storage tanks--the power used by the Grantline
  expedition--were heavy and bulky affairs. Economy of space on the Comet
  allowed but few of them.

  [G] Electro-telescopes of most modern use and power were too large and
  used too much power to be available to Grantline.

       *       *       *       *       *

A dynamic little fellow, this Johnny Grantline. Short of temper
sometimes, but always just, and a perfect leader of men. In stature he
was almost as small as Snap. But he was thick-set, with a smooth shaven,
keen-eyed, square-jawed face, and a shock of brown tousled hair. A man
of thirty-five, though the decision of his manner, the quiet dominance
of his voice, mode him seem older. He stood up now, surveying the
blue-lit glassite room with its low ceiling close overhead. He was
bowlegged; in movement he seemed to roll with a stiff-legged gait like
some sea captain of former days on the deck of his swaying ship.
Queer-looking figure! Heavy flannel shirt and trousers, boots heavily
weighted, and bulky metal-loaded belt strapped about his waist.

He grinned at Swenson. "When we divide this treasure, everyone will be
happy, Ollie."

The treasure was estimated by Grantline to be the equivalent of ninety
millions in gold-leaf. A hundred and ten millions in the gross as it now
stood, with twenty millions to be deducted by the Federated Refiners for
reducing it to the standard purity of commercial radium. Ninety
millions, with only a million and a half to come off for expedition
expenses, and the _Planetara_ Company's share another million. A nice
little stake.

Grantline strode across the room with his rolling gait.

"Cheer up, boys. Who's winning there? I say, you fellows--"

An audiphone buzzer interrupted him, a call from the duty man in the
instrument room of the nearby building.

Grantline clicked the receiver. The room fell into silence. Any call was
unusual--nothing ever happened here in the camp.

The duty man's voice sounded over the room.

"Signals coming! Not clear. Will you come over, Commander?"

Signals!

       *       *       *       *       *

It was never Grantline's way to enforce needless discipline. He offered
no objection when every man in the camp rushed through the connecting
passages. They crowded the instrument room where the tense duty man sat
bending over his helio receivers. The mirrors were swaying.

The duty man looked up and met Grantline's gaze.

"I ran it up to the highest intensity. Commander. We ought to get
it--not let it pass."

"Low scale, Peter?"

"Yes. Weakest infra-red. I'm bringing it up, even though it uses too
much of our power." The duty man was apologetic.

"Get it," said Grantline shortly.

"I had a swing a minute ago. I think it's the _Planetara_."

"_Planetara!_" The crowding group of men chorused it. How could it be
the _Planetara_?

But it was. The call presently came in clear. Unmistakably the
_Planetara_, turned back now from her course to Ferrok-Shahn.

"How far away, Peter?"

The duty man consulted the needles of his dial scale. "Close! Very weak
infra-red. But close. Around thirty thousand miles, maybe. It's Snap
Dean calling."

The _Planetara_ here within thirty thousand miles! Excitement and
pleasure swept the room. The _Planetara's_ coming had for so long been
awaited so eagerly!

The excitement communicated to Grantline. It was unlike him to be
incautious; yet now with no thought save that some unforeseen and
pleasing circumstance had brought the _Planetara_ ahead of time;
incautious Grantline certainly was.

"Raise the ore-barrage."

"I'll go! My suit is here."

       *       *       *       *       *

A willing volunteer rushed out to the ore-shed. The Gamma rays, which in
the helio-room of the _Planetara_ came so unwelcome to Snap and me, were
loosed.

"Can you send, Peter?" Grantline demanded.

"Yes, with more power."

"Use it."

Johnny dictated the message of his location which we received. In his
incautious excitement he ignored the secret code.

An interval passed. The ore was occulted again. No message had come from
us--just Snap's routine signal in the weak infra-red, which we hoped
Grantline would not get.

The men crowding Grantline's instrument room waited in tense silence.
Then Grantline tried the telescope. Its current weakened the lights with
the drain upon the distributors, and cooled the room with a sudden
deadly chill as the Erentz insulating system slowed down.

The duty man looked suddenly frightened. "You'll bulge out our walls,
Commander. The internal pressure--"

"We'll chance it."

They picked up the image of the _Planetara_! It came from the telescope
and shone clear on the grid--the segment of star-field with a tiny,
cigar-shaped blob. Clear enough to be unmistakable. The _Planetara_!
Here now over the Moon, almost directly overhead, poised at what the
altimeter scale showed to be a fraction under thirty thousand miles.

The men gazed in awed silence. The _Planetara_ coming....

But the altimeter needle was motionless. The _Planetara_ was hanging
poised.

A sudden gasp went about the room. The men stood with whitening faces,
gazing at the _Planetara's_ image. And at the altimeter needle. It was
moving. The _Planetara_ was descending. But not with an orderly swoop.

The image showed the ship clearly. The bow tilted up, then dipped down.
But then in a moment it swung up again. The ship turned partly over.
Righted itself. Then swayed again, drunkenly.

The watching men were stricken into horrified silence. The _Planetara's_
image momentarily, horribly, grew larger. Swaying. Then turning
completely over, rotating slowly end over end.

The _Planetara_, out of control, was falling!




CHAPTER XXI

_The Wreck of the_ Planetara


On the _Planetara_, in the helio-room, Snap and I stood with Moa's
weapon upon us. Miko held Anita. Triumphant. Possessive. Then as she
struggled, a gentleness came to this strange Martian giant. Perhaps he
really loved her. Looking back on it, I sometimes think so.

"Anita, do not fear me." He held her away from him. "I would not harm
you. I want your love." Irony came to him. "And I thought I had killed
you! But it was only your brother."

He partly turned. I was aware of how alert was his attention. He
grinned. "Hold them, Moa--don't let them do anything foolish. So, Anita,
you were masquerading to spy upon me? That was wrong of you." He was
again ironic.

Anita had not spoken. She held herself tensely away from Miko; she had
flashed me a look--just one. What horrible mischance to have brought
this catastrophe!

The completion of Grantline's message had come unnoticed by us all.

"Look! Grantline again!" Snap said abruptly.

But the mirrors were steadying. We had no recording-tape apparatus; the
rest of the message was lost. The mirrors pulsed and then steadied.

No further message came. There was an interval while Miko waited. He
held Anita in the hollow of his great arm.

"Quiet, little bird. Do not fear me. I have work to do, Anita--this is
our great adventure. We will be rich, you and I. All the luxuries three
worlds can offer, all for us when this is over. Careful, Moa! This
Haljan has no wit."

Well could he say it! I, who had been so witless to let this come upon
us! Moa's weapon prodded me. Her voice hissed at me with all the venom
of a reptile enraged. "So that was your game, Gregg Haljan! And I was so
graceless to admit love for you!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Snap murmured in my ear, "Don't move, Gregg! She's reckless."

She heard it. She whirled on him. "We have lost George Prince, it seems.
Well, we will survive without his ore knowledge. And you, Dean--and this
Haljan--mark me, I will kill you both if you cause trouble!"

Miko was gloating. "Don't kill them yet, Moa. What was it Grantline
said? Near the crater of Archimedes? Ring us down, Haljan! We'll land."

He signaled the turret. Gave Coniston the Grantline message, and
audiphoned it below to Hahn. The news spread about the ship. The bandits
were jubilant.

"We'll land now, Haljan. Ring us down. Come, Anita and I will go with
you to the turret."

I found my voice. "To what destination?"

"Near Archimedes. The Apennine side. Keep well away from the Grantline
camp. We will probably sight it as we descend."

There was no trajectory needed. We were almost over Archimedes now. I
could drop us with a visible, instrumental course. My mind was whirling
with a confusion of thoughts. What could we do? What could we dare
attempt to do? I met Snap's gaze.

"Ring us down, Gregg," he said quietly.

I nodded. I pushed Moa's weapon away. "You don't need that. I obey
orders."

       *       *       *       *       *

We went to the turret. Moa watched me and Snap, a grim, cold Amazon. She
avoided looking at Anita, whom Miko helped down the ladders with a
strange mixture of courtierlike grace and amused irony. Coniston gazed
at Anita with falling jaw.

"I say! Not George Prince? The girl--"

"No time for argument now," Miko commanded. "It's the girl, masquerading
as her brother. Get below, Coniston. Haljan takes us down."

The astounded Englishman continued gazing at Anita. "I mean to say,
where to on the Moon? Not to encounter Grantline at once, Miko? Our
equipment is not ready."

"Of course not. We will land well away. He won't be suspicious--we can
signal him again after we land. We will have time to plan, to assemble
the equipment. Get below, I told you."

The reluctant Coniston left us. I took the controls. Miko, still holding
Anita as though she were a child, sat beside me. "We will watch him,
little Anita. A skilled fellow at this sort of work."

I rang my signals for the shifting of the gravity plates. The answer
should have come from below within a second or two. But it did not. Miko
regarded me with his great bushy eyebrows upraised.

"Ring again, Haljan."

I duplicated. No answer. The silence was frightening. Ominous.

Miko muttered, "That accursed Hahn. Ring again!"

I sent the imperative emergency demand.

       *       *       *       *       *

No answer. A second or two. Then all of us in the turret were startled.
Transfixed. From below came a sudden hiss. It sounded in the turret: it
came from shifting-room call-grid. The hissing of the pneumatic valves
of the plate-shifters in the lower control room. The valves were
opening; the plates automatically shifting into neutral, and
disconnecting!

An instant of startled silence. Miko may have realized the significance
of what had happened. Certainly Snap and I did. The hissing ceased. I
gripped the emergency plate-shifter switch which hung over my head. Its
disc was dead! The plates were dead in neutral. In the positions they
were only placed while in port! And their shifting mechanisms were
imperative!

I was on my feet. "Snap! Good God, we're in neutral!"

Miko, if he had not realized it before, was aware if it now. The
Moon-disc moved visibly as the _Planetara_ lurched. The vault of the
heavens was slowly swinging.

Miko ripped out a heavy oath. "Haljan! What is this?"

He stood up, still holding Anita. But there was nothing that he could do
in this emergency. "Haljan--what--"

The heavens turned with a giant swoop. The Moon was over us. It swung in
dizzying arc. Overhead, then back past our stern; under us, then
appearing over our bow.

The _Planetara_ had turned over. Upending. Rotating, end over end.

For a moment or two I think all of us in that turret stood and clung.
The Moon-disc, the Earth, Sun and all the stars were swinging past our
windows. So horribly dizzying. The _Planetara_ seemed lurching and
tumbling. But it was an optical effect only. I stared with grim
determination at my feet. The turret seemed to steady.

Then I looked again. That horrible swoop of all the heavens! And the
Moon, as it went past, seemed expanded. We were falling! Out of control,
with the Moon-gravity pulling us inexorably down!

