"It can't be done," said Smithers flatly.

"Maybe not," agreed Tommy, "especially since we ruin all our springs
and one gymbal ring every time we use the thing. But I've got an idea.
I'll want five coils with hollow iron cores, and the whole works
shaped like this, with two holes bored so...."

       *       *       *       *       *

He sketched. He had been working on the idea for several days, and the
sketch was ready in his mind to be transferred to paper.

"What you goin' to do?"

"Something crazy," said Tommy. "A mirror isn't the only thing that
changes angles to right ones."

"You're the doctor," said the imperturbable Smithers.

He set to work. He puzzled Tommy sometimes, Smithers did. So far he
hadn't asked how much his pay was going to be. He'd worked
unintermittantly. He had displayed a colossal, a tremendous calmness.
But no man could work as hard as Smithers did without some powerful
driving-force. It was on the fourth day that Tommy learned what it
was.

The five coils had been made, and Tommy was assembling them with an
extraordinary painstaking care behind a screen, to hide what he was
doing. He'd discovered a peep-hole bored through the brick wall from
the lean-to where Von Holtz worked. He was no longer locked in there.
Tommy abandoned the pretense of imprisonment after finding an
automatic pistol and a duplicate key to the lock in Von Holtz's
possession. He'd had neither when he was theoretically locked up, and
Tommy laughed.

"It's a farce, Von Holtz," he said dryly, "this pretending you'll run
away. You're here spying now, for Jacaro. Of course. And you don't
dare harm either of us until you find out from me what you can't work
out for yourself, and know I have done. How much is Jacaro going to
pay you for the secret of the catapult, Von Holtz?"

Von Holtz snarled. Smithers moved toward him, his hands closing and
unclosing. Von Holtz went gray with terror.

"Talk!" said Smithers.

"A--a million dollars," said Von Holtz, cringing away from the brawny
red-headed man.

"It would be interesting to know what use it would be to him," said
Tommy dryly. "But to earn that million you have to learn what we know.
And to learn that, you have to help us do it again, on the scale we
want. You won't run away. So I shan't bother to lock you up hereafter.
Jacaro's men come and talk to you at night, don't they?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Von Holtz cringed again. It was an admission.

"I don't want to have to kill any of them," said Tommy pleasantly,
"and we'll all be classed as mad if this thing gets out. So you go and
talk to them in the lane when you want to, Von Holtz. But if any of
them come near the laboratory, Smithers and I will kill them, and if
Smithers is hurt I'll kill you; and I don't imagine Jacaro wants that,
because he expects you to build another catapult for him. But I warn
you, if I find another gun on you I'll thrash you."

Von Holtz's pallor changed subtly from the pallor of fear to the awful
lividness of rage.

"You--Gott! You dare threaten--" He choked upon his own fury.

"I do," said Tommy. "And I'll carry out the threat."

Smithers moved forward once more.

"Mr. Von Holtz," he said in a very terrible steadiness, "I aim to kill
you some time. I ain't done it yet because Mr. Reames says he needs
you a while. But I know you got Miss Evelyn marooned off in them
fern-woods on purpose! And--God knows she wouldn't ever look at me,
but--I aim to kill you some time!"

His eyes were flames. His hands closed and unclosed horribly. Von
Holtz gaped at him, shocked out of his fury into fear again. He went
unsteadily back to his lean-to. And Smithers went back to the
dimensoscope. It was his turn to watch that other world for signs of
Denham and Evelyn, and for any sign of danger to them.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tommy adjusted the screen before the bench on which he was working, so
Von Holtz could not see his task, and went back to work. It was a
rather intricate task he had undertaken, and before the events of the
past few days he would have said it was insane. But now he was taking
it quite casually.

Presently he said:

"Smithers."

Smithers did not look away from the brass tube.

"Yeah?"

"You're thinking more about Miss Denham than her father."

Smithers did not reply for a moment. Then he said:

"Well? What if I am?"

"I am, too," said Tommy quietly. "I've never spoken to her, and I
daresay she's never even heard of me, and she certainly has never seen
me, but--"

Smithers said with a vast calmness:

"She'll never look at me, Mr. Reames. I know it. She talks to me, an'
laughs with me, but she's never sure-'nough looked at me. An' she
never will. But I got the right to love her."

Tommy nodded very gravely.

"Yes. You have. So have I. And so, when that globe comes, we both get
into it with what arms and ammunition we can pack in, and go where she
is, to help her. I intended to have you work the switch and send me
off. But you can come, too."

Smithers was silent. But he took his eyes from the dimensoscope
eye-piece and regarded Tommy soberly. Then he nodded and turned back.
And it was a compact between the two men that they should serve
Evelyn, without any rivalry at all.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tommy went on with his work. The essential defect in the catapult
Denham had designed was the fact that it practically had to be rebuilt
after each use. And, moreover, the metallic ammonium was so fugitive a
substance that it was hard to keep. Once it had been strained by
working, it gradually adverted to a gaseous state and was lost. And
while he still tried to keep the little catapult in a condition for
use, he was at no time sure that he could send a pair of automatics
and ammunition through in a steel box at any moment that Denham came
close enough to notice a burning smoke-fuse attached.

But he was working on another form of catapult entirely, now. In this
case he was using hollow magnets placed at known angles to each other.
And they were so designed that each one tended to adjust its own
hollow bore at right angles to the preceding one, and each one would
take any moving, magnetic object and swing it through four successive
right angles into the fifth dimension.

He fitted the first magnet on twin rods of malleable copper, which
also would carry the current which energized the coil. He threaded the
second upon the same twin supports. When the current was passed
through the two of them, the magnetic field itself twisted the
magnets, bending the copper supports and placing the magnets in their
proper relative positions. A third magnet on the same pair of rods,
and a repetition of the experiment, proved the accuracy of the idea.
And since this device, like the dimensoscope, required only a
forty-five degree angle to our known dimensions, instead of a right
angle as the other catapult did, Tommy was able to work with ordinary
and durable materials. He fitted on the last two coils and turned on
the current for his final experiment. And as he watched, the twin
three-eighths-inch rods twisted and writhed in the grip of the
intangible magnetic force. They bent, and quivered, and twisted....
And suddenly there seemed to be a sort of inaudible _snap_, and one of
the magnets hurt the eyes that looked at it, and only the edge of the
last of the series was visible.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tommy drew in his breath sharply. "Now we try it," he said tensely. "I
was trying to work this as the mirrors of the dimensoscope were
fitted. Let's see."

He took a long piece of soft-iron wire and fed it into the hollow of
the first magnet. He saw it come out and bend stiffly to enter the
hollow of the second. It required force to thrust it through. It went
still more stiffly into the third magnet. It required nearly all his
strength to thrust it on, and on.... The end of it vanished. He pushed
two feet or more of it beyond the last place where it was visible. It
went into the magnet that hurt one's eyes. After that it could not be
seen.

Tommy's voice was strained.

"Swing the dimensoscope, Smithers," he ordered. "See if you can see
the wire. The end of it should be in the other world."

It seemed an age, an aeon, that Smithers searched. Then:

"Move it," he said.

Tommy obeyed.

"It's there," said Smithers evenly. "Two or three feet of it."

       *       *       *       *       *

Tommy drew a deep, swift breath of relief.

"All right!" he said crisply. "Now we can fling anything we need
through there, when our globe arrives. We can built up a dump of
supplies, all sent through just before we slide through in the globe."

"Yeah," said Smithers. "Uh--Mr. Reames. There's a bunch of Ragged Men
in sight, hauling something heavy behind them. I don't know what it's
all about."

Tommy went to the brass tube and stared through it. The tree-fern
forest, drawing away in the distance. The vast and steaming morass.
The glittering city, far, far in the distance.

And then a mob of the Ragged Men, hauling at some heavy thing. They
were a long way off. Some of them came capering on ahead, and Tommy
swung the dimensoscope about to see Denham and Evelyn dart for cover
and vanish amid the tree-ferns. Denham was as ragged as the Ragged
Men, by now, and Evelyn's case was little better.

Frightened for them, Tommy swung the instrument about again. But they
had not been seen. The leaders who ran gleefully on ahead were merely
in haste. And they were followed more slowly by burly men and lean
ones, whole men and limping men, who hauled frantically on long ropes
of hide, dragging some heavy thing behind them. Tommy saw it only
indistinctly as the filthy, nearly naked bodies moved. But it was an
intricate device of a golden-colored metal, and it rested upon the
crudest of possible carts. The wheels were sections of tree trunks,
pierced for wooden axles. The cart itself was made of the most
roughly-hewed of timbers. And there were fifty or more of the Ragged
Men who dragged it.

The men in advance now attacked the underbrush at the edge of the
forest. They worked with a maniacal energy, clearing away the long
fern-fronds while they capered and danced and babbled excitedly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Irrelevantly, Tommy thought of escaped galley slaves. Just such
hard-bitten, vice-ridden men as these, and filled with just such a
mad, gibbering hatred of the free men they had escaped from. Certainly
these men had been civilized once. As the golden-metal device came
nearer, its intricacy was the more apparent. No savages could utilize
a device like this one. And there was a queer deadliness in the very
grace of its outlines. It was a weapon of some sort, but whose nature
Tommy could not even guess.

And then he caught the gleam of metal also in the fern-forest. On the
ground. In glimpses and in fragments of glimpses between the swarming
naked bodies of the Ragged Men, he pieced together a wholly incredible
impression. There was a roadway skirting the edge of the forest. It
was not wide; not more than fifteen feet at most. But it was a solid
road-bed of metal! The dull silver-white of aluminum gleamed from the
ground. Two or more inches thick and fifteen feet wide, there was a
seamless ribbon of aluminum that vanished behind the tree-ferns on
either side.

The intricate device of golden metal was set up, now, and a shaggy,
savage-seeming man mounted beside it grinning. He manipulated its
levers and wheels with an expert's assurance. And Tommy saw repairs
upon it. Crude repairs, with crude materials, but expertly done. Done
by the Ragged Men, past doubt, and so demolishing any idea that they
came of a savage race.

"Watch here, Smithers," said Tommy grimly.

       *       *       *       *       *

He sat to work upon the little catapult after Denham's design. His own
had seemed to work, but the other was more sure. This would be an
ambush the Ragged Men were preparing, and of course they would be
preparing it for men of the Golden City. The plane had sighted
Denham's steel globe. It had hovered overhead, and carried news of
what it had seen to the Golden City. And here was a roadway that must
have been made by the folk of the Golden City at some time or another.
Its existence explained why Denham remained nearby. He had been hoping
that some vehicle would travel along its length, containing civilized
people to whom he could signal and ultimately explain his plight. And,
being near the steel globe, his narrative would have its proofs at
hand.

And now it was clear that the Ragged Men expected some ground-vehicle,
too. They were preparing for it. They were setting a splendid ambush,
with a highly-treasured weapon they ordinarily kept hidden. Their
triumphant hatred could apply to nothing else than an expectation of
inflicting injury on men of the Golden City.

So Tommy worked swiftly upon the catapult. A new little ring of
metallic ammonium was ready, and so were the necessary springs. The
Ragged Men would lay their ambush. The men of the Golden City might
enter it. They might. But the aviator who had spotted the globe would
have seen the shredded contents of the sphere about. He would have
known the Ragged Men had found it. And the men who came in a
ground-vehicle from the Golden City should be expecting just such an
ambush as was being laid.

There would be a fight, and Tommy, somehow, had no doubt that the men
of the Golden City would win. And when they had cleared the field he
would fling a smoking missile through the catapult. The victors should
see it and should examine it. And though writing would serve little
purpose, they should at least recognize it as written communication in
a language other than their own. And mathematical diagrams would
certainly be lucid, and proof of a civilized man sending the missile,
and photographs....

       *       *       *       *       *

The catapult was ready, and Tommy prepared his message-carrying
projectile. He found snapshots and included them. He tore out a
photograph of Evelyn and her father, which had been framed above a
work bench in the laboratory. He labored, racking his brain for a
means of conveying the information that the globe was of any other
world.... And suddenly he had an idea. A cord attached to his missile
would lead to nothingness from either world, yet one end would be in
that other world, and the other end in this. A wire would be better.
Tugs upon it would convey the idea of living beings nearby but
invisible. The photograph would identify Denham and his daughter as
associated with the phenomenon and competent to explain it....

Tommy worked frantically to get the thing ready. He almost prayed that
the men of the Golden City would be victors, would find his little
missile when the fray was over, and would try to comprehend it....

All he could do was try.

Then Smithers said, from the dimensoscope:

"They're all set, Mr. Reames. Y'better look."

Tommy stared through the eye-piece. Strangely, the golden weapon had
vanished. All seemed to be exactly as before. The cleared-away
underbrush was replaced. Nothing was in any way changed from the
normal in that space upon a mad world. But there was a tiny movement
and Tommy saw a Ragged Man. He was lying prone upon the earth. He
seemed either to hear or see something, because his lips moved as he
spoke to another invisible man beside him, and his expression of
malevolent joy was horrible.

Tommy swung the tube about. Nothing.... But suddenly he saw
swiftly-moving winkings of sunlight from the edge of the tree-fern
forest. Something was moving in there, moving with lightning swiftness
along the fifteen-foot roadway of solid aluminum. It drew nearer, and
more near....

       *       *       *       *       *

The carefully camouflaged ambuscade was fully focussed and Tommy was
watching tensely when the thing happened.

He saw glitterings through the tree-fronds come to a smoothly
decelerated stop. There was a pause; and suddenly the underbrush fell
flat. As if a single hand had smitten it, it wavered, drooped, and lay
prone. The golden weapon was exposed, with its brawny and horribly
grinning attendant. For one-half a split second Tommy saw the wheeled
thing in which half a dozen men of the Golden City were riding. It was
graceful and stream-lined and glittering. There was a platform on
which the steel sphere would have been mounted for carrying away.

But then there was a sudden intolerable light as the men of the Golden
City reached swiftly for peculiar weapons beside them. The light came
