the warning shout. Cowering under the saving key-boards, shrinking
from the metallic arms not quite long enough to reach them, I could
count only a score. The others--but what use to describe the slaughter
out there! I see it in nightmares too often.

A thunder from the speakers grew till it drowned out the agonized
shrieks in the great hall. On the screens horror flared. All over the
world, it appeared, the machines had gone mad. I saw Antarcha crash as
a dozen air freighters plunged through the crystal towers. I saw a
huge dredge strip the roof from a great playhouse, and smash the
startled crowd within with stones it plucked from an embankment. I saw
untenanted land cars shooting wild through packed streets. Great
ponderous tractors left the fields and moved in ordered array on the
panic-stricken cities. Methodically they pursued the fleeing aristos,
and crushed them beneath their tread like scurrying ants.

       *       *       *       *       *

I realized that the scraping of the tentacles reaching for us had
ceased, that the arms had all returned to the button banks. Then it
dawned on me that Keston's master machine was directing all the
destruction I was watching, that the intelligence he had given it was
being used to divert the machines from their regular tasks
to--conquer the world. "You sure started something, Keston," I said.

"Yes," he gasped, white-faced, "something that I should have expected
when that model machine went for me. Do you understand? I've given the
machines intelligence, created a new race, and they are trying to wipe
out the humans; conquer the world for themselves. The possibility
flashed on me when I was half-mad with rage and disappointment at the
callous cruelty of the aristo Council. I threw that switch with the
thought that it would be far better for all of us to be wiped out. But
now, I don't know. After all, they are men, like ourselves, and it
hurts to see our own race annihilated. If only I can get to that
switch."

He started to push out from under the scant shelter, but an alert
tentacle hissed through the air in a swift stab at him, and he dodged
back, hopelessly.

"Don't be a damn fool," I snapped at him. "Forget that mushy
sentimentality. Even if you save the aristos, we're due for extinction
just the same. Better that the whole human race be wiped out
together."

Then a thought struck me. "Maybe we have a chance to get out of this
ourselves."

"Impossible. Where could we hide from the machines?" He waved a hand
at the screens. "Look."

"The Glacier, man, the Glacier!" He started. "There are no machines
out there. If we can get to the ice we are safe."

"But the aircraft will find us."

"They won't know we're there. There are no microphones or radio-eyes
in the wastes."

       *       *       *       *       *

A rough voice came from the cowering files behind us. "Hey, Keston,
let's get a move on. You're the smart guy around here: get us out of
this mess you've started."

It was Abud. When so many better prolats had perished, he was alive
and whole.

We got out, crawling under the key-boards till we could make a dash
for the door. We emerged into a world ablaze with the light of many
fires, and reverberating with the far off crashing of destruction. To
the right we could see the tumbled remains of what a short hour before
had been our barracks. Two digging machines were still ponderously
moving about among the ruins, pounding down their heavy buckets
methodically, reducing the concrete structure to a horrible dead
level. Ten score prolats had been sleeping there when I left.

As we rushed into the open, the machines turned and made for us; but
they had not been built for speed, and we easily outdistanced them.
The rest of that day will always remain a dim haze to me. I can
remember running, running, Abud's broad form always in the lead. I can
remember long minutes of trembling under tangled underbrush, while
from above sounded the burring of an air machine searching ceaselessly
for us. I can remember seeing at last the tall white ramparts of the
Glacier. Then a blackness swallowed me up, hands tugged at me, and I
knew no more....

       *       *       *       *       *

The great white waste of hummocky ice dazzled under the blinding sun.
My eyes were hurting terribly. There was a great void in my stomach.
For two days I had not eaten.

Keston, tottering weakly at my side, was in an even worse state. His
trembling hand could scarcely hold the primitive bone-tipped spear.
God knows I had difficulty enough with mine.

Yet, tired, hungry, shivering as we were, we forced our dragging feet
along, searching the interminable expanse for sign of polar bear or
the wild white dogs that hunted in packs. We had to find flesh--any
kind--to feed our shriveled stomachs--or go under.

Keston uttered a weak shout. I looked. From behind a frozen hummock a
great white bear padded. He saw us, sniffed the air a moment, then
turned contemptuously away. He must have sensed our weakness.

Almost crying in his eagerness, Keston raised his spear and cast it
with what strength he had at the animal that meant food and warmth for
our bodies.

The weapon described a slow arc, and caught the shaggy bear flush in
the shoulder. But there had been no force behind the throw. The
sharpened bone tip stuck in the flesh, quivered a bit, and dropped
harmlessly to the ice.

Aroused, the creature whirled about. We caught a glimpse of small,
vindictive eyes. Then, with a roar, it made for us.

"Look out!" I cried. Keston started to run, but I knew he could not
match the wounded animal in speed. I threw my futile spear, but the
bear shook it off as though it were a pin prick, and would not be
diverted from his prey.

I ran after, shouting for help. Then Keston stumbled and went down in
a sprawl on the rough gray ice. The bear was almost on him and there
was nothing I could do.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then the figure of a man darted from behind a sheltering mound. It was
Abud, swathed in warm white furs, brawny of body, strong, well fed,
heavy jowled. He swung easily a long spear, far heavier than ours, and
pointed with keen barbs.

He stopped short at the sight of us, and his brutal features contorted
in merriment. The desperate plight of my friend seemed to afford him
infinite amusement. Nor did he make any move to help.

I shouted to him. "Quick, kill it before it's too late!"

"So it is Abud you turn to now," he sneered heavily. "Abud, whom you
thought deserving of the Death Bath not so long ago. No, my fine
friends, let me see you help yourselves, you two who thought you were
king pins down in the valley. Men? Bah! Weaklings, that's all you
are!"

I ran blindly over the uneven ice, unarmed, some crazy notion in my
mind of tackling the brute with bare fists, to drag him off my friend.
Abud shouted with laughter, leaning on his spear.

For some strange animal reason, the mocking laughter enraged the bear.
He had almost reached the motionless figure of Keston when he swerved
suddenly, and made for Abud.

The ghastly merriment froze on the heavy jowled man. Like lightning he
lifted his heavy lance, and drove it with a powerful arm squarely into
the breast of the advancing brute. It sank a full foot into the
blubbery flesh, and, while the stricken bear clawed vainly at the
wound and sought to push himself along toward the man, Abud held the
spear firmly as in a vise, so that the animal literally impaled
itself. With a gush of blood, it sank motionless to the ground.

       *       *       *       *       *

Abud plucked the spear away with a dexterous twist.

Keston was feebly groping to his feet. I was torn between joy at his
deliverance and rage at the inhuman callousness of Abud.

The latter grinned at us hatefully.

"You see what poor weakling creatures you are," he jeered. "Good for
nothing but to push a lot of senseless buttons. Down there you were
the bosses, the ones to look upon me as dirt. Here, on the ice, where
it takes guts to get along, _I_ am the boss. I let you live on my
scraps and leavings, simply because it tickled me to see you cringe
and beg. But I am growing weary of that sport. Henceforth you keep
away from my camp. Don't let me catch you prowling around, d'you hear?
Let's see how long you'll last on the ice!"

"This animal is mine." He prodded the carcass. "I killed it. I'll make
the prolats skin and, cut it up for me. Ho-ho, how they cringe and
obey me--Abud, the dull one! Ho-ho!"

On this he strode away, still laughing thunderously.

I looked to Keston in blank dismay. What was to be our fate now, but
death by cold and slow starvation!

Three-months had passed since we had escaped to the ice from the
dreadful machines--a score of us. For a while it seemed that we had
fled in vain. We were not fit to cope with the raw essentials of life:
it was uncounted centuries since man fought nature bare handed. So we
huddled together for warmth, and starved. Even Keston's keen brain was
helpless in this waste of ice, without tools, without machines.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then it was that Abud arose to take command. He, dull brute that he
was amid the complexities of our civilization, fairly reveled in this
primitive combat with hunger and cold. He was an anachronism in our
midst, a throwback to our early forebears.

It did not take him long to fashion cunning nooses and traps to catch
the few beasts that roamed the ice. Once he pounced upon a wolf-like
creature, and strangled it with bare hands. He fashioned with apt
fingers spears and barbs of bone, curved knives from shin bones, and
skinned the heavy fur pelts and made them into garments.

No wonder the prolats in their helplessness looked to him as their
leader. Keston and I were thrust aside. But Abud did not forget. His
slow witted mind harbored deadly rancor for former days, when we were
in command. He remembered our contempt for his slow dull processes;
for the many errors he was guilty of. By a queer quirk, the very fact
that Keston had saved him from the Death Bath on several occasions but
fed the flames of his hatred. Perhaps that was an ancient human trait,
too.

So he set himself to twit and humiliate us. His jibes were heavy
handed and gross. He refused to let us eat at the communal mess, but
forced us to wait until all were through, when he tossed us a few
scraps as though we were dogs.

Many times I started up in hot rage, ready to match my softened
muscles against his brawn. But always Keston caught me in time and
whispered patience. Some plan was taking shape in his mind, I could
see, so I stopped short, and was content to bide my time.

Now we were through, discarded, as a last brutal gesture. What was
there to be done now?

       *       *       *       *       *

In utter silence I looked at Keston. To my great surprise he did not
seem downcast. Quite the contrary. His eyes were sparkling, once more
alive with the red fire. The weariness was gone from him; there was
energy, decision stamped on his finely cut features.

"Now is our time to act," he said. "I've been hesitating too long."

"What are you talking about?"

"Abud forced my hand," Keston explained. "You didn't think we were
going to live here in this fashion the rest of our lives? I'd rather
die now than have such a future staring me in the face. No, we're
going down into the valley to fight the machines."

I stared at him aghast. "Man, you're crazy. They'd crush us in a
minute!"

"Maybe," he said unconcernedly. "But we have no time to lose. Abud
will be back with the prolats, and we'll have to clear out before
then. Quick--cut off a few chunks of meat. We'll need them."

"But Abud will kill us when he finds out what's been done."

"And we'll starve if we don't."

Which was an unanswerable argument. So with our bone knives we hacked
off gobs of the still warm flesh, covered with great layers of fat.

Looking up from my task, I saw black figures coming toward us from the
direction of the camp. They quickened into a run even as I noticed
them--Abud and the prolats.

"Quick, Keston," I cried, "they're coming."

Keston glanced around and started to run. I followed as fast as I
could.

"They'll catch us," I panted. "Where can we hide?"

"Down in the valley."

"But the machines will get us then."

"Save your breath and follow me. I know a place."

       *       *       *       *       *

We were racing along as fast as our weakened legs could carry us,
toward the edge of the Glacier. I looked back to see Abud, his brute
face distorted with rage, gaining rapidly on us. The other prolats
were being outdistanced.

Abud shouted threateningly for us to stop, but that only made us
re-double our efforts. I knew he would kill us if he caught up with
us. He had his spear and we were without ours.

The steep terminus of the great Northern Glacier hove into view. Far
below was the broad fertile habitable belt, stretching as far as the
eye could see. A lump rose in my throat as I ran. It was our earth,
our heritage down there--and here we were, fleeing for our lives,
dispossessed by bits of metal and quartz, machines that we had
fashioned.

Hovering in the air, on a level with us, were scout planes, vigilant
guardians of the frontier.

Once a prolat had become crazed by the eternal ice and cold, and had
ventured down the side of the Glacier, to reach the warm lands his
thin blood hungered for. As soon as he had painfully clambered to the
bottom, within the area of the televisors, a plane had swooped and
crushed him, while we, lining the edge, had witnessed the horror
helplessly.

Yet Keston ran on confidently. Abud was just a little way behind,
bellowing exultantly, when we came to the jumping-off place. He was
sure he had us now.

Keston slid from view. It was sheer suicide to go down there, I knew;
yet, to remain where I was, meant certain death. Abud's spear was
already poised to thrust. There was only one thing to do, and I did
it. I threw myself over the rim, just where Keston had disappeared.

       *       *       *       *       *

I landed with a thud on a narrow ledge of ice. The surface was glassy
smooth, and I started slipping straight toward the outer edge, a sheer
drop of a thousand feet to the valley below. I strove to recover my
balance, but only accelerated my progress. Another moment and I would
have plunged into the abyss, but a hand reached out and grabbed me
just in time. It was Keston.

"Hold tight and follow me," he whispered urgently, "we've no time to
lose. The master machine is seeing us now in the visor screen, and
will act."

I had an impulse to turn back, but Abud's face was leering down at us.

"I'll get you for this!" he screamed, and let himself down heavily
over the ledge.

Keston edged his way along the treacherous trail, I after him. It was
ticklish work. A misstep, and there would be nothing to break our
fall.

I heard a siren sound, then another; and another. I wasted a precious
moment to look up. A scout plane was diving for us, on a terrific
slant. The air was black with aircraft converging on us. The master
machine had seen us! I sensed utter malevolence in the speed of these
senseless metals, thrown at us by the thing my friend had created.

But there was no time for thought. In desperate haste, we inched our
way along. Abud had seen the peril, too, and lost all his truculence
in the face of the greater danger. He clawed after us, intent only on
reaching whatever safety we were heading for.

I could hear the zoom of the great wings when the path took a sudden
turn and we catapulted headlong into a black cavern thrusting into the
