A dozen feet away from us the sapphire ovals centered upon us their
regard. They were limpid, pellucid as gems whose giant replicas they
seemed to be. The surface of the Disk ringed about by the aureate zodiac
in which the nine ovals shone was a maze of geometric symbols traced
in the lines of living gem fires; infinitely complex those patterns and
infinitely beautiful; an infinite number of symmetric forms in which I
seemed to trace all the ordered crystalline wonders of the snowflakes,
the groupings of all crystalline patternings, the soul of ordered beauty
that are the marvels of the Radiolaria, Nature's own miraculous book of
the soul of mathematical beauty.

The flashing, petaled heart was woven of living rainbows of cold flame.

Silently we floated there while the Disk--LOOKED--at us.

And as though I had been not an actor but an observer, the weird picture
of it all came to me--two men swinging like motes in mid air, on one
side the flickering scarlet and orange Cruciform shape, on the other
side the radiant Disk, behind the two manikins the pallid mount of the
bristling cones; and high above the wan circle of the shields.

There was a ringing about us--an elfin chiming, sweet and crystalline.
It came from the cones--and strangely was it their vocal synthesis,
their voice. Into the vast circle of sky pierced a lance of green fire;
swift in its wake uprose others.

We slid gently down, stood swaying at the Disk's base. The Keeper bent;
angled. Again the planes above the supporting square hovered over the
tablet. The tendrils swept down, pushed here and there, playing upon the
rods some unknown symphony of power.

Thicker pulsed the lances of the aurora; changed to vast billowing
curtains. The faceted wheel at the top of the central spire of the cones
swung upward; a light began to stream from the cones themselves--no
pillar now, but a vast circle that shot whirling into the heavens like a
noose.

And like a noose it caught the aurora, snared it!

Into it the coruscating mists of mysterious flame swirled; lost their
colors, became a torrent of light flying down through the ring as though
through a funnel top.

Down poured the radiant corpuscles, bathing the cones. They did not glow
as they had beneath the flood from the shields, and if they grew it was
too slowly for me to see; the shields were motionless. Now here, now
there, I saw the other rings whirl up--smaller mouths of lesser cones
hidden within the body of the Metal Monster, I knew, sucking down this
magnetic flux, these countless ions gushing forth from the sun.

Then as when first we had seen the phenomenon in the valley of the blue
poppies, the ring vanished, hidden by a fog of coruscations--as though
the force streaming through the rings became diffused after it had been
caught.

Crouching, forgetful of our juxtaposition to these two unhuman,
anomalous Things, we watched the play of the tentacles upon the upthrust
rods.

But if we forgot, we were not forgotten!

The Emperor slipped nearer; seemed to contemplate us--quizzically,
AMUSED; as a man would look down upon some curious and interesting
insect, a puppy, a kitten. I sensed this amusement in the Disk's regard
even as I had sensed its soul of awful tranquillity; as we had sensed
the playful malice in the eye stars of the living corridor, the
curiosity in the column that had dropped us into the valley.

I felt a push--a push that was filled with a colossal, GLITTERING
playfulness.

Under it I went spinning away for yards--Drake twirling close behind me.
The force, whatever it was, swept out from the Emperor, but in it was
no slightest hint of anger or of malice, no slightest shadow of the
sinister.

Rather it was as though one would blow away a feather; urge gently some
little lesser thing away.

The Disk watched our whirlings--with a sparkling, jeweled LAUGHTER in
its pulsing radiance.

Again came the push--farther yet we spun. Suddenly before us, across the
pave, shone out a twinkling trail--the wakened eyes of the cubes that
formed it, marking out a pathway for us to follow.

Immediately upon their gleaming forth I saw the Emperor turn--his
immense, oval, metallic back now black against the radiance of the
cones.

Up from the narrow gleaming path--a path opened I knew by some
command--lifted the hosts of tiny unseen hands; the sentient currents of
magnetic force that were the fingers and arms of the Metal Hordes. They
held us, thrust us along, passed us forward. Faster and faster we moved,
speeding on the wake of the long-vanished metal monks.

I turned my head--the cones were already far away. Over the tablet of
limpid violet phosphorescence still hovered the planes of the Keeper;
and still was the oval of the Emperor black against the radiance.

But the twinkling, sparkling path between us and them was gone--was
fading out close behind us as we swept onward.

Faster and faster grew our pace. The cylindrical wall loomed close. A
high oblong portal showed within it. Into this we were carried. Before
us stretched a corridor precisely similar to that which, closing upon
us, had forced us completely out into the hall.

Unlike that passage, its floor lifted steeply--a smooth and shining
slide up which no man could climb. A shaft, indeed, which thrust upward
straight as an arrow at an angle of at least thirty degrees and whose
end or turning we could not see. Up and up it cleared its way through
the City--through the Metal Monster--closed only by the inability of
the eye to pierce the faint luminosity that thickened by distance became
impenetrable.

For an instant we hovered upon its threshold. But the impulse, the
command, that had carried us thus far was not to stop here. Into it and
up it we were thrust, our feet barely touching the glimmering surface;
lifted by the force that emanated from its floor, carried on by the
force that pressed out from the sides.

Up and up we went--scores of feet--hundreds--




CHAPTER XXII. THE ENSORCELLED CHAMBER

"Goodwin!" Drake broke the silence; desperately he was striving to keep
his fear out of his voice. "Goodwin--this isn't the way to get out.
We're going up--farther away all the time from the--the gates!"

"What can we do?" My anxiety was no less than his, but my realization of
our helplessness was complete.

"If we only knew how to talk to these Things," he said. "If we could
only have let the Disk know we wanted to get out--damn it, Goodwin, it
would have helped us."

Grotesque as the idea sounded, I felt that he spoke the truth. The
Emperor meant no harm to us; in fact in speeding us away I was not at
all sure that he had not deliberately wished us well--there was that
about the Keeper--

Still up we sped along the shaft. I knew we must now be above the level
of the valley.

"We've got to get back to Ruth! Goodwin--NIGHT! And what may have
HAPPENED to her?"

"Drake, boy"--I dropped into his own colloquialism--"we're up against
it. We can't help it. And remember--she's there in Norhala's home. I
don't believe, I honestly don't believe, Dick, that there's any danger
as long as she remains there. And Ventnor ties her fast."

"That's true," he said, more hopefully. "That's true--and probably
Norhala is with her by now."

"I don't doubt it," I said cheerfully. An idea came to me--I half
believed it myself. "And another thing. There's not an action here
that's purposeless. We're being driven on by the command of that Thing
we call the Metal Emperor. It means us no harm. Maybe--maybe this IS the
way out."

"Maybe so," he shook his head doubtfully. "But I'm not sure. Maybe that
long push was just to get us away from THERE. And it strikes me that the
impulse has begun to weaken. We're not going anywhere near as fast as we
were."

I had not realized it, but our speed was slackening. I looked
back--hundreds of feet behind us fell the slide. An unpleasant chill
went through me--should the magnetic grip upon us relax, withdraw,
nothing could stop us from falling back along that incline to be broken
like eggs at its end; that our breaths would be snuffed out by the
terrific descent long before we reached that end was scant comfort.

"There are other passages opening up along this shaft," Drake said.
"I'm not for trusting the Emperor too far--he has other things on his
metallic mind, you know. The next one we get to, let's try to slip
into--if we can."

I had noticed; there had been openings along the ascending shaft;
corridors running apparently transversely to its angled way.

Slower and slower became our pace. A hundred yards above I glimpsed one
of the apertures. Could we reach it? Slower and slower we arose. Now the
gap was but a yard off--but we were motionless--were tottering!

Drake's arms wrapped round me. With a tremendous effort he hurled me
into the portal. I dropped at its edge, writhed swiftly around, saw him
slipping, slipping down--thrust my hands out to him.

He caught them. There came a wrench that tortured my arm sockets as
though racked. But he held!

Slowly--I writhed back into the passage, dragging up his almost dead
weight. His head appeared, his shoulders; there was a convulsion of the
long body and he lay before me.


For a minute or two we lay, flat upon our backs resting. I sat up. The
passage was broad, silent; apparently as endless as that from which we
had just escaped.

Along it, above us, under us, the crystalline eyes were dim. It showed
no sign of movement--yet had it done so there was nothing we could do
save drop down the annihilating slant. Drake arose.

"I'm hungry," he said, "and I'm thirsty. I move that we eat and drink
and approximately be merry."

He slung aside the haversack. From it we took food; from the canteens
we drank. We did not talk. Each knew what the other was thinking;
infrequently, and thank the eternal law that some call God for that,
come crises in which speech seems not only petty but when against it the
mind rebels as a nauseous thing.

This was such a time. At last I drew myself to my feet.

"Let's be going," I said.

The corridor stretched straight before us; along it we paced. How far we
walked I do not know; mile upon mile, it seemed. It broadened abruptly
into a vast hall.

And this hall was filled with the Metal Hordes--was a gigantic workshop
of them. In every shape, in every form, they seethed and toiled about
it. Upon its floor were heaps of shining ores, mounds of flashing gems,
piles of ingots, metallic and crystalline. High and low throughout
flamed the egg-shaped incandescences; floating furnaces both great and
small.

Before one of these forges, close to us, stood a Metal Thing. Its body
was a twelve-foot column of smaller cubes. Upon the top was a hollow
square formed of even lesser blocks--blocks hardly larger than the
Little Things themselves. In the center of the open rectangle was
another shaft, its top a two-foot square plate formed of a single cube.

From the sides of the hollow square sprang long arms of spheres, each
tipped by a tetrahedron. They moved freely, slipping about upon their
curved points of contact and like a dozen little thinking hammers,
the pyramid points at their ends beat down upon as many thimble shaped
objects which they thrust alternately into the unwinking brazier then
laid upon the central block to shape.

A goblin workman the Thing seemed, standing there, so intent upon and so
busy with its forgings.

There were scores of these animate machines; they paid no slightest
heed to us as we slipped by them, clinging as closely to the wall of the
immense workshop as we could.

We passed a company of other Shapes which stood two by two and close
together, their tops wide spinning wheels through which the tendrils
of an opened globe fed translucent, colorless ingots--the substance it
seemed to me of which Norhala's shadowy walls were made, the crystal of
which the bars that built out the base of the Cones were formed.

The ingots passed between the whirling faces; emerged from them as
slender, long cylinders; were seized as they slipped down by a crouching
block, whose place as it glided away was instantly taken by another. In
many bewildering forms, intent upon unknown activities directed toward
unguessable ends, the composite, animate mechanisms labored. And all the
place was filled with a goblin bustle, trollish racketings, ringing of
gnomish anvils, clanging of kobold forges--a clamorous cavern filled
with metal Nibelungens.

We came to the opening of another passage, a doorway piercing the walls
of the workshop. Its incline, though steep, was not dangerous.

Into it we stepped; climbed onward it seemed interminably. Far ahead
of us at last appeared the outline of its further entrance, silhouetted
against and filled with a brighter luminosity. We drew near; stopped
cautiously at its threshold, peering out.

Well it was that we had hesitated. Before us was open space--an abyss in
the body of the Metal Monster.

The corridor opened into it like a window. Thrusting out our heads,
we saw an unbroken wall both above and below. Half a mile away was
its opposite side. Over this pit was a misty sky and not more than a
thousand feet above and black against the heavens was the lip of it--the
cornices of this chasm within the City.

Far, far beneath us we watched the Hordes throw themselves across the
abyss in webs of curving arches and girder-straight bridges; gigantic
we knew these spans must be yet dwarfed to slender footways by
distance. Over them moved hurrying companies; from them came flashings,
glitterings--prismatic, sun golden; plutonic scarlets, molten blues;
javelins of colored light piercing upward from unfolded cubes and globes
and pyramids crossing them or from busy bearers of the shining fruits of
the mysterious workshops.

And as they passed the bridges swung up, coiled and thrust themselves
from sight through openings that closed behind them. Ever, as they
passed, close on their going whipped out other spans so that always
across that abyss a sentient, shifting web was hung.

We drew back, stared into each other's white face. Panic swept through
me, in quick, alternate pulse of ice and fire. For crushingly, no longer
to be denied, came certainty that we were lost within the mazes of this
incredible City--lost in the body of the Metal Monster which that City
was. There was a sick despair in my heart as we turned and slowly made
our way back along the sloping corridor.

A hundred yards, perhaps, we had gone in silence before we stopped,
gazing stupidly at an opening in the wall beside us. The portal had not
been there when we had passed--of that I was certain.

"It's opened since we went by," whispered Drake.

We peered through it. The passage was narrow; its pave led downward.
For a moment we hesitated, the same foreboding in both our minds. And
yet--among the perils that crowded in upon us what choice had we? There
could be no more danger there than here.

Both ways were--ALIVE, both obedient to impulses over which we had
no more control and no more way of predetermining than mice in some
complex, man-made trap. Furthermore, this shaft also ran downward, and
although its pitch was less and it did not therefore drop as quickly
toward that level we sought and wherein lay the openings of escape into
the outer valley, it fell at right angles to the corridor through which
we had come.

We knew that to retrace our steps now would but take us back to the
forges and thence to the hall of the Cones and the certain peril waiting
for us there.

We stepped into this opened way. For a little distance it ran
straightly, then turned and sloped gently upward; and a little distance
more we climbed. Then suddenly, not a hundred yards from us, gushed out
a flood of soft radiance, opalescent, filled with pearly glimmerings and
rosy shadows of light.

It was as though a door had opened into some world of luminescence. From
it the lambent torrent poured; billowed down upon us. In its wake
came music--if music the mighty harmonies, the sonorous chords, the
crystalline themes and the linked chaplet of notes that were like
spiralings of tiny golden star bells could be named.

Toward source of light and sound we moved, nor could we have halted nor
withdrawn had we willed; the radiance drew us to it as the sun the water
drop, and irresistibly the sweet, unearthly music called. Closer we
came--it was a narrow alcove from which sound and light poured--into it
we crept--and went no further.

We peered into a vast and columnless vault, a limitless temple of light.
High up in it, strewn manifold, danced and shone soft orbs like tender
suns. No pale gilt luminaries of frozen rays were these. Effulgent,
jubilant, they flamed--orbs red as wine of rubies that Djinns of Al
Shiraz press from his enchanted vineyards of jewels; twin orbs
rosy white as breasts of pampered Babylonian maids; orbs of pulsing
opalescences and orbs of the murmuring green of bursting buds of spring,
crocused orbs and orbs of royal coral; suns that throbbed with singing
rays of wedded rose and pearl and of sapphires and topazes amorous; orbs
born of cool virginal dawns and of imperial sunsets and orbs that were
the tuliped fruit of mating rainbows of fire.

They danced, these countless aureoles; they swung and threaded in
radiant choral patterns, in linked harmonies of light. And as they
danced their gay rays caressed and bathed myriads of the Metal Folk open
beneath them. Under the rays the jewel fires of disk and star and cross
leaped and pulsed and danced to the same bright rhythm.

We sought the source of the music--a tremendous thing of shimmering
