

By R.P. WILLIAMS, Instructor in Chemistry, English High School,
Boston. 12mo. Boards. xvi + 200 pages. by mail, 30 cents; for
introduction, 25 cents.

The book contains one hundred experiments in general chemistry
aNd qualitative analysis, blanks opposite each for pupils to to
take notes, laboratory rules, complete tables of symbols, with
chemical and common names, reagents, solutions, chemicals, and
apparatus, and the plan of a model laboratory.


AN ELEMENTARY CHEMISTRY


By GEORGE R. WHITE, Instructor in Chemistry at Phillips Academy,
Exeter. 12mo. Cloth. xxix + 272 pages. Mailing price, $1.10; for
introduction, $1.00.

This is an excellent text-book for High Schools and Academies,
and for elementary classes in Colleges. The strictly inductive
method here followed, together with the insertion of numerous
questions that must cause the student to do his own reasoning
from the observations, renders this book particularly useful.

T.H. Norton, Professor of Chemistry, University of Cincinnati,
Cincinnati, Ohio.:

"I am greatly pleased with the plan and its execution. It is an
admirable arrangement for our inductive course in chemistry and
should not fail to yield good results."


A STUDENTS' MANUAL OF A LABORATORY COURSE IN PHYSICAL
MEASUREMENTS


By Wallace C. Sabine, Assistant Professor of Physics, Harvard
University. 8vo. Cloth. ix + 126 pages. Mailing price, $1.35; for
introduction, $1.25.

This manual, which is intended for use in supplementing college
courses in physics, contains an outline of seventy experiments,
arranged with special regard to a systematic and progressive
development of the subject.

Le Roy C. Cooley, Professor of Physics, Vassar College:

"I have examined it and am ready to commend it."

J.F. Woodhull, Professor of Sciences, Teachers' College, New
York:

"I find Sabine's Laboratory Manual a thoroughly good thing."


HIGH SCHOOL LABORATORY MANUAL OF PHYSICS


By Dudley G. Hays, Charles D. Lowry, and Austin C. Rishel,
Teachers of Physics in the Chicago High Schools. 8vo. Cloth. iv +
154 pages. Mailing price, 60 cents; for introduction, 50 cents.

This manual has been written: First, to present a logically
arranged course of experimental work covering the ground of
Elementary Physics. Second, to provide sufficient laboratory work
to meet college entrance requirements.

The experiments are largely quantitative, but qualitative work is
introduced.

W.S. Jackman, Teacher of Science, Cook Co. Normal School,
Englewood, Ill.:

"It is a most excellent manual, and I believe it meets the needs
of high schools on this subject better than any other book I have
seen."


YOUNG'S LESSONS IN ASTRONOMY


Including Uranography. Revised Edition. By CHARLES A. YOUNG,
Professor of Astronomy in the College of New Jersey. 12mo. Cloth.
Illustrated. ix + 357 pages, exclusive of four double-page star
maps. By mail, $1.30; for introduction, $1.20.

The revised edition of this book has been prepared for schools
that desire a brief course free from mathematics. It is based
upon the author's Elements of Astronomy, but many changes of
arrangement have been made. In fact, everything has been
carefully worked over and re-written to adapt it to the special
requirements. Great pains has been taken not to sacrifice
accuracy and truth to brevity, and no less to bring everything
thoroughly down to date. The latest results of astronomical
investigation will be found here. The author has endeavored, too,
while discarding mathematics, to give the student a clear
understanding and a good grasp of the subject. As a body of
information and as a means of discipline, this book will be
found, it is believed, of notable value. The most important
change in the arrangement of the book has been in bringing the
Uranography, or constellation tracing, into the body of the text
and placing it near the beginning, a change in harmony with the
accepted principle that those whose minds are not mature succeed
best in the study of a new subject by beginning with what is
concrete and appeals to the senses, rather than with the abstract
principles. Brief notes on the legendary mythology of the
constellations have been added for the benefit of such pupils as
are not likely to become familiar with it in the study of
classical literature.

N.W. Rarrington, President of University of Washington, Seattle,
Wash., formerly chief of the U.S. Weather Bureau, Washington,
D.C.:

"I shall take pleasure in commending it to schools requiring an
astronomy of this grade. The whole series of Astronomies reflects
credit on their distinguished author and shows that he
appreciates the needs of the schools."

Clarence E. Kelly, Prin. of High School, Haverhill, Mass.:

"It seems to me the book is admirably adapted to its purpose, and
that it accomplishes the difficult task of presenting to the
student or reader not conversant with Algebra and Geometry, an
excellent selection of what may with profit be given him as an
introduction to the science of astronomy."


YOUNG'S ELEMENTS OF ASTRONOMY


With a Uranography. By CHARLES A. YOUNG, Professor of Astronomy
in the College of New Jersey. 12mo. Half leather. x + 472 pages,
and four star maps. Mailing price, $1.55: for introduction,
$1.40.

Uranography.

From Youpg's Elements of Astronomy. 12mo. Flexible covers. 42
pages. besides four star maps. By mail, 35 cents; for
introduction, 30 cents.

This volume is an independent work, and not an abridgment of the
author's General Astronomy. It is a text-book for advanced High
Schools, Seminaries, and Brief Courses in colleges generally. It
was prepared by one of the most distinguished astronomers of the
world, a most popular lecturer, and most successful teacher. It
had every presumption in its favor, and the event has more than
justified expectations. Special attention has been paid to making
all statements correct and accurate so far as they go.

In the text no mathematics higher than elementary algebra and
geometry is introduced; in the foot-notes and in the Appendix an
occasional trigonometric formula appears, for the benefit of the
very considerable number of High school students who understand
such expressions.

G.B. Merriman, formerly Prof. of Mathemutics and Astronomy,
Rutgers College, New Brunswick, N.J.:

"For a short course in elementary astronomy, it is by far the
best book I have ever examined."

Warren Mann, State Normal School, Potsdam, N. Y.:

"Accuracy in use of terms is a marked feature. I consider it the
best text-book on this subject."

H.N. Chute, High School, Ann Arbor, Mich.:

"It is just the book the scholars have been waiting for."

G.H. Howe, State Normal School, Warrensburg, MO.:

"It is indeed an admirable book, up to the times, clear, and
complete."

Jeremiah Slocum, South Division High School, C&ugo, Ill.:

"It is well adapted both as to scope and manner of treatment to
high-school work."

Ray G. Huling, Prin. of English High School, Cambridge, Mass.:

"It is delightfully fresh, full, and clear."

A.S. Roe, recently of High School, Worcester, Muss.:

"The book is extended enough to please the exacting teacher."

I.P. Bishop, State Normal School, Buffalo, N.Y.:

"The book seems to have all the essentials of a first-class text
for high school work; viz., conciseness, clearness, and the
results of recent research."


YOUNG'S GENERAL ASTRONOMY


A Text-book for Colleges and Technical Schools. By CHARLES A .
YOUNG, Professor of Astronomy in the College of New Jersey. 8vo.
viii + 551 pages. Half morocco. Illustrated with over 250 cuts
and and diagrams, and supplemented with the necessary tables.
Mailing price, $2.50; for introduction, $2.25.

In amount, the work has been adjusted as closely as possible to
the prevailing courses of study in our colleges. By omitting the
fine print, a briefer course may be arranged.

The eminence of Professor Young as an original investigator in
astronomy, a lecturer and writer on the subject, and an
instructor of college classes, and his scrupulous care in
preparing this volume, led the publishers to present the work
with the highest confidence; and this confidence has been fully
justified by the event. More than one hundred colleges adopted
the work within a year from its publication, and it is conceded
to be the best astronomical text-book of its grade to be found
anywhere.

Edw. C. Pickering, Prof. of Astronomy, Harvard University:

"I think this work the best of its kind, and admirably adapted to
its purpose."

S.P. Langley, Sec. Smithsonian Inst., Washington, D.C.:

"I know no better book (not to say as good a one) for its
purpose, on the subject."


AN INTRODUCTION TO SPHERICAL AND PRACTICAL ASTRONOMY


By DASCOM GREENE, Professor of Mathematics and Astronomy in the
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, N.Y. NW. Cloth.
Illustrated. viii + 158 pages. Mailing price, $1.60; for
introduction, $1.50.

The book is intended for class-room use and affords such a
preparation as the student needs before entering upon the study
of the larger and more elaborate works on this subject.

The appendix contains an elementary exposition of the method of
least squares.

Daniel Carhart, Act. Prof. Mathematics, Western Univ. of Pa.,
Allegheny, Pa.:

"Professor Greene has supplied that which is needed to make the
usual course in Astronomy in our colleges more practical."

Rodney G. Kimball, Polytechnic Institute, Brooklyn, N.Y.:

"The hasty examination which I have given it has left a very
favorable impression as to its merits as a judicious compound of
the practical work which it professes to cover."


SCHEINER'S ASTRONOMICAL SPECTROSCOPY


Department of Special Publication.--Revised Edition. Translated,
revised and enlarged by E.B. FROST, Professor of Astronomy in
Dartmouth College. 8vo. Half leather. Illustrated. xiii + 482
pages. Price by mail, $5.00; for introdoctiort, $4.75.

This work aims to explain the most practical and modern methods
of research, and to state our present knowledge of the
constitution, physical condition alld motions of the heavenly
bodies, as revealed by the spectroscope.

Edward S. Holden, Director of the Lick Observatory, Mt. Hamilton,
California:

"I congratulate you on the appearance of this very important
book; it is indispensable to all astronomers and students of
spectroscopy."


ELEMENTS OF PLANT ANATOMY


By EMILY L. GREGORY, Professor of Botany in Barnard College. 8vo.
Cloth. viii + 148 pages. Illustrated. Mailing price, $1.35; for
introduction, $1.25.

This book is designed as a text-book for students who have
already some knowledge of general botany. It consists of an
outline of the principal facts of plant anatomy, in a form
available not only for those who wish to specialize in botany but
for all who wish to know the leading facts about the inner
structure of plants. It affords a preparation for the study of
the more intricate and difficult questions of plant anatomy and
physiology, while it is especially adapted to the wants of
students, who need a practical knowledge of plant structure.


ELEMENTS OF STRUCTURAL AND SYSTEMATIC BOTANY


For High Schools and Elementary College Courses. By DOUGLAS H.
CAMPBELL, Professor of Botany in the Leland Stanford Junior
University. 12mo. Cloth. ix + 253 pages. Price by mail, $1.25;
for introduction, $1.12.

The special merit of this book is that it begins with the simple
forms, and follows the order of nature to the complex ones.


PLANT ORGANIZATION


By R. HALSTEAD WARD, formerly Professor of Botany in the
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, N.Y. Quarto. 176 pages.
Illustrated. Flexible boards. Mailing price, 85 cents; for
introduction, 75 cents.


ELEMENTARY METEOROLOGY


By WILLIAM MORRIS DAVIS, Professor of Physical Geography in
Harvard College. With maps and charts. 8vo. Cloth. xi + 355
pages. Mailing price, $2.70; for introduction, $2.50.

This work is believed to be very opportune, since no elementary
work on the subject has been issued for over a quarter of a
century. It represents the modern aspects of the science. It is
adapted to the use of advanced students, and will meet the needs
of members of the National and State Weather Services who wish to
acquaint themselves with something more than methods of
observation.

The essential theories of modern Meteorology are presented in
such form that the student shall perceive their logical
connection, and shall derive from their mastery something of the
intellectual training that comes with the grasp of well-tested
conclusions.

The charts of temperature, pressure, winds, etc., are reduced
from the latest available sources, while the diagrams freely
introduced through the text are for the most part new.

A.W. Greeley, retired Brigadier General U.S.A., and formerly
Chief of Signal Office, Washington:

"A valuable and timely contribution to scientific text-books."

Winslow Upton, Professor of Astronomy, Brown University:

"The best general book on the subject in our language."

Wm. B. Clark, Professor of Geology, Johns Hopkins University:

"An excellent book and of great value to the teacher of
meteorology."

David Todd, Professor of Astronomy, Amherst College:

"Clear, concise, and direct. To teach meteorology with it must be
a delight."


MOLECULES AND THE MOLECULAR THEORY OF MATTER


Department of Special Publioation. By A. D. RISTEEN. 8vo. Cloth.
Illustrated. viii + 223 pages. Retail price, $2.00

This work is a complete popular exposition of the molecular
theory of matter, as it is held by the leading physicists of
today. Considerable space is devoted to the kinetic theory of
gases. Liquids also are discussed, and solids receive much
attention. There is also a division discussing the methods that
have been proposed for finding the sizes of molecules, and here,
as elsewhere throughout the book, the methods described are
illustrated by numerical examples. The last division of the book
touches upon the constitution of molecules. The subject is
everywhere treated from a physical standpoint.



END OF AN INTRODUCTION TO CHEMICAL SCIENCE



INFORMATION ABOUT THIS ELECTRONIC EDITION

The original edition of this text was published by Ginn and
Company, Publishers, Boston, U.S.A. in 1896. The typography was
by J.S. Cushing and Co., Boston and the Presswork was by Ginn
and Co., Boston. The book was "Entered according to Act of
Congress, in the year 1887, by R.P. Williams, in the Office
of the Librarian of Congress, at Washington."

This electronic text was prepared by John Mamoun with help from
numerous other proofreaders, including those associated with
Charles Franks' Distributed Proofreaders website. Thanks to
R. Zimmerman, D. Starner, B. Schak, K. Rieff, D. Kokales,
N. Harris, K. Peterson, E. Beach, W.M. Maull, M. Beauchamp
J. Roberts and others for proofing this e-text.

This e-text is public domain, freely copyable and distributable
for any non-commercial purpose, and may be included without royalty
or permission on a mass media storage product, such as a cd-rom,
that contains at least 50 public domain electronic texts, whether
offered for non-commercial or commercial purposes. Any other
commercial usage requires permission.

