
8. What weight of carnallite is necessary in the preparation of 500 g.
of magnesium?

9. Account for the fact that paints made of zinc oxide are not colored
by hydrosulphuric acid.

10. What hydroxide studied, other than zinc hydroxide, has both acid and
basic properties?

11. Write equations showing how the following compounds of zinc may be
obtained from metallic zinc: the oxide, chloride, nitrate, carbonate,
sulphate, sulphide, hydroxide.




CHAPTER XXVI

THE ALUMINIUM FAMILY


~The family.~ The element aluminium is the most abundant member of the
group of elements known as the aluminium family; indeed, the other
members of the family--gallium, indium, and thallium--are of such rare
occurrence that they need not be separately described. The elements of
the family are ordinarily trivalent, so that the formulas for their
compounds differ from those of the elements so far studied. Their
hydroxides are practically insoluble in water and are very weak bases;
indeed, the bases are so weak that their salts are often hydrolyzed into
free base and free acid in solution. The salts formed from these bases
usually contain water of crystallization, which cannot be driven off
without decomposing them more or less.

The trivalent metals, which in addition to aluminium include also iron
and chromium, are sometimes called the _earth metals_. The name refers
to the earthy appearance of the oxides of these metals, and to the fact
that many earths, soils, and rocks are composed in part of these
substances.


ALUMINIUM

~Occurrence.~ Aluminium never occurs in the free state in nature, owing to
its great affinity for oxygen. In combined form, as oxides, silicates,
and a few other salts, it is both abundant and widely distributed, being
an essential constituent of all soils and of most rocks excepting
limestone and sandstone. Cryolite (Na_{3}AlF_{6}), found in Greenland,
and bauxite, which is an aluminium hydroxide usually mixed with some
iron hydroxide, are important minerals. It is estimated that aluminium
composes about 8% of the earth's crust. In the industries the metal is
called aluminum, but its chemical name is aluminium.

[Illustration: Fig. 82]

~Preparation.~ Aluminium was first prepared by Woehler, in 1827, by heating
anhydrous aluminium chloride with potassium:

    AlCl_{3} + 3K = 3KCl + Al.

This method was tried after it was found impossible to reduce the oxide
of aluminium with carbon. The metal possessed such interesting
properties and promised to be so useful that many efforts were made to
devise a cheap way of preparing it. The method which has proved most
successful consists in the electrolysis of the oxide dissolved in melted
cryolite.

     ~Metallurgy.~ An iron box A (Fig. 82) about eight feet long and
     six feet wide is connected with a powerful generator in such a
     way as to serve as the cathode upon which the aluminium is
     deposited. Three or four rows of carbon rods B dip into the
     box and serve as the anodes. The box is partially filled with
     cryolite and the current is turned on, generating enough heat
     to melt the cryolite. Aluminium oxide is then added, and under
     the influence of the electric current it decomposes into
     aluminium and oxygen. The temperature is maintained above the
     melting point of aluminium, and the liquid metal, being heavier
     than cryolite, sinks to the bottom of the vessel, from which it
     is tapped off from time to time through the tap hole C. The
     oxygen in part escapes as gas, and in part combines with the
     carbon of the anode, the combustion being very brilliant. The
     process is carried on at Niagara Falls.

     The largest expense in the process, apart from the cost of
     electrical energy, is the preparation of aluminium oxide free
     from other oxides, for most of the oxide found in nature is too
     impure to serve without refining. Bauxite is the principal ore
     used as a source of the aluminium because it is converted into
     pure oxide without great difficulty. Since common clay is a
     silicate of aluminium and is everywhere abundant, it might be
     expected that this would be utilized in the preparation of
     aluminium. It is, however, very difficult to extract the
     aluminium from a silicate, and no practical method has been
     found which will accomplish this.

~Physical properties.~ Aluminium is a tin-white metal which melts at 640 deg.
and is very light, having a density of 2.68. It is stiff and strong, and
with frequent annealing can be rolled into thin foil. It is a good
conductor of heat and electricity, though not so good as copper for a
given cross section of wire.

~Chemical properties.~ Aluminium is not perceptibly acted on by boiling
water, and moist air merely dims its luster. Further action is prevented
in each case by the formation of an extremely thin film of oxide upon
the surface of the metal. It combines directly with chlorine, and when
heated in oxygen burns with great energy and the liberation of much
heat. It is therefore a good reducing agent. Hydrochloric acid acts upon
it, forming aluminium chloride: nitric acid and dilute sulphuric acid
have almost no action on it, but hot, concentrated sulphuric acid acts
upon it in the same way as upon copper:

    2Al + 6H_{2}SO_{4} = Al_{2}(SO_{4})_{3} + 6H_{2}O + 3SO_{2}.

Alkalis readily attack the metal, liberating hydrogen, as in the case of
zinc:

    Al + 3KOH = Al(OK)_{3} + 3H.

Salt solutions, such as sea water, corrode the metal rapidly. It alloys
readily with other metals.

~Uses of aluminium.~ These properties suggest many uses for the metal. Its
lightness, strength, and permanence make it well adapted for many
construction purposes. These same properties have led to its extensive
use in the manufacture of cooking utensils. The fact that it is easily
corroded by salt solutions is, however, a disadvantage. Owing to its
small resistance to electrical currents, it is replacing copper to some
extent in electrical construction, especially for trolley and power
wires. Some of its alloys have very valuable properties, and a
considerable part of the aluminium manufactured is used for this
purpose. Aluminium bronze, consisting of about 90% copper and 10%
aluminium, has a pure golden color, is strong and malleable, is easily
cast, and is permanent in the air. Considerable amounts of aluminium
steel are also made.

~Goldschmidt reduction process.~ Aluminium is frequently employed as a
powerful reducing agent, many metallic oxides which resist reduction by
carbon being readily reduced by it. The aluminium in the form of a fine
powder is mixed with the metallic oxide, together with some substance
such as fluorspar to act as a flux. The mixture is ignited, and the
aluminium unites with the oxygen of the metallic oxide, liberating the
metal. This collects in a fused condition under the flux.

An enormous quantity of heat is liberated in this reaction, and a
temperature as high as 3500 deg. can be reached. The heat of the reaction is
turned to practical account in welding car rails, steel castings, and in
similar operations where an intense local heat is required. A mixture of
aluminium with various metallic oxides, ready prepared for such
purposes, is sold under the name of _thermite_.

[Illustration: Fig. 83]

     ~Preparation of chromium by the Goldschmidt method.~ A mixture of
     chromium oxide and aluminium powder is placed in a Hessian
     crucible (A, Fig. 83), and on top of it is placed a small
     heap B of a mixture of sodium peroxide and aluminium, into
     which is stuck a piece of magnesium ribbon C. Powdered
     fluorspar D is placed around the sodium peroxide, after which
     the crucible is set on a pan of sand and the magnesium ribbon
     ignited. When the flame reaches the sodium peroxide mixture
     combustion of the aluminium begins with almost explosive
     violence, so that great care must be taken in the experiment.
     The heat of this combustion starts the reaction in the chromium
     oxide mixture, and the oxide is reduced to metallic chromium.
     When the crucible has cooled a button of chromium will be found
     in the bottom.

~Aluminium oxide~ (Al_{2}O_{3}). This substance occurs in several forms in
nature. The relatively pure crystals are called corundum, while emery is
a variety colored dark gray or black, usually with iron compounds. In
transparent crystals, tinted different colors by traces of impurities,
it forms such precious stones as the sapphire, oriental ruby, topaz, and
amethyst. All these varieties are very hard, falling little short of
the diamond in this respect. Chemically pure aluminium oxide can be made
by igniting the hydroxide, when it forms an amorphous white powder:

    2Al(OH)_{3} = Al_{2}O_{3} + 3H_{2}O.

The natural varieties, corundum and emery, are used for cutting and
grinding purposes; the purest forms, together with the artificially
prepared oxide, are largely used in the preparation of aluminium.

~Aluminium hydroxide~ (Al(OH)_{3}). The hydroxide occurs in nature as the
mineral hydrargyllite, and in a partially dehydrated form called
bauxite. It can be prepared by adding ammonium hydroxide to any soluble
aluminium salt, forming a semi-transparent precipitate which is
insoluble in water but very hard to filter. It dissolves in most acids
to form soluble salts, and in the strong bases to form aluminates, as
indicated in the equations

    Al(OH)_{3} + 3HCl = AlCl_{3} + 3H_{2}O,
    Al(OH)_{3} + 3NaOH = Al(ONa)_{3} + 3H_{2}O.

It may act, therefore, either as a weak base or as a weak acid, its
action depending upon the character of the substances with which it is
in contact. When heated gently the hydroxide loses part of its hydrogen
and oxygen according to the equation

    Al(OH)_{3} = AlO.OH + H_{2}O.

This substance, the formula of which is frequently written HAlO_{2}, is
a more pronounced acid than is the hydroxide, and its salts are
frequently formed when aluminium compounds are fused with alkalis. The
magnesium salt Mg(AlO_{2})_{2} is called spinel, and many other of its
salts, called aluminates, are found in nature.

When heated strongly the hydroxide is changed into oxide, which will not
again take up water on being moistened.

     ~Mordants and dyeing.~ Aluminium hydroxide has the peculiar
     property of combining with many soluble coloring materials and
     forming insoluble products with them. On this account it is
     often used as a filter to remove objectionable colors from
     water. This property also leads to its wide use in the dye
     industry. Many dyes will not adhere to natural fibers such as
     cotton and wool, that is, will not "dye fast." If, however, the
     cloth to be dyed is soaked in a solution of aluminium compounds
     and then treated with ammonia, the aluminium salts which have
     soaked into the fiber will be converted into the hydroxide,
     which, being insoluble, remains in the body of it. If the fiber
     is now dipped into a solution of the dye, the aluminium
     hydroxide combines with the color material and fastens, or
     "fixes," it upon the fiber. A substance which serves this
     purpose is called a _mordant_, and aluminium salts,
     particularly the acetate, are used in this way.

~Aluminium chloride~ (AlCl_{3}.6 H_{2}O). This substance is prepared by
dissolving the hydroxide in hydrochloric acid and evaporating to
crystallization. When heated it is converted into the oxide, resembling
magnesium in this respect:

    2(AlCl_{3}.6 H_{2}O) = Al_{2}O_{3} + 6HCl + 9H_{2}O.

The anhydrous chloride, which has some important uses, is made by
heating aluminium turnings in a current of chlorine.

~Alums.~ Aluminium sulphate can be prepared by the action of sulphuric
acid upon aluminium hydroxide. It has the property of combining with the
sulphates of the alkali metals to form compounds called _alums_. Thus,
with potassium sulphate the reaction is expressed by the equation

    K_{2}SO_{4} + Al_{2}(SO_{4})_{3} + 24H_{2}O
       = 2(KAl(SO_{4})_{2}.12H_{2}O).

Under similar conditions ammonium sulphate yields ammonium alum:

    (NH_{4})_{2}SO_{4} + Al_{2}(SO_{4})_{3} + 24H_{2}O
        = 2(NH_{4}Al(SO_{4})_{2}.12H_{2}O).

Other trivalent sulphates besides aluminium sulphate can form similar
compounds with the alkali sulphates, and these compounds are also called
alums, though they contain no aluminium. They all crystallize in
octahedra and contain twelve molecules of water of crystallization. The
alums most frequently prepared are the following:

    Potassium alum               KAl(SO_{4})_{2}.12H_{2}O.
    Ammonium alum                NH_{4}Al(SO_{4})_{2}.12H_{2}O.
    Ammonium iron alum           NH_{4}Fe(SO_{4})_{2}.12H_{2}O.
    Potassium chrome alum        KCr(SO_{4})_{2}.12H_{2}O.

An alum may therefore be regarded as a compound derived from two
molecules of sulphuric acid, in which one hydrogen atom has been
displaced by the univalent alkali atom, and the other three hydrogen
atoms by an atom of one of the trivalent metals, such as aluminium,
iron, or chromium.

     Very large, well-formed crystals of an alum can be prepared by
     suspending a small crystal by a thread in a saturated solution
     of the alum, as shown in Fig. 84. The small crystal slowly
     grows and assumes a very perfect form.

[Illustration: Fig. 84]

~Other salts of aluminium.~ While aluminium hydroxide forms fairly stable
salts with strong acids, it is such a weak base that its salts with weak
acids are readily hydrolyzed. Thus, when an aluminium salt and a soluble
carbonate are brought together in solution we should expect to have
aluminium carbonate precipitated according to the equation

    3Na_{2}CO_{3} + 2AlCl_{3} = Al_{2}(CO_{3})_{3} + 6NaCl.

But if it is formed at all, it instantly begins to hydrolyze, the
products of the hydrolysis being aluminium hydroxide and carbonic acid,

    Al_{2}(CO_{3})_{3} + 6H_{2}O = 2Al(OH)_{3} + 3H_{2}CO_{3}.

Similarly a soluble sulphide, instead of precipitating aluminium
sulphide (Al_{2}S_{3}), precipitates aluminium hydroxide; for hydrogen
sulphide is such a weak acid that the aluminium sulphide at first formed
hydrolyzes at once, forming aluminium hydroxide and hydrogen sulphide:

    3Na_{2}S + 2AlCl_{3} + 6H_{2}O = 2Al(OH)_{3} + 6NaCl + 3H_{2}S.

~Alum baking powders.~ It is because of the hydrolysis of aluminium
carbonate that alum is used as a constituent of some baking powders. The
alum baking powders consist of a mixture of alum and sodium hydrogen
carbonate. When water is added the two compounds react together, forming
aluminium carbonate, which hydrolyzes into aluminium hydroxide and
carbonic acid. The carbon dioxide from the latter escapes through the
dough and in so doing raises it into a porous condition, which is the
end sought in the use of a baking powder.

~Aluminium silicates.~ One of the most common constituents of rocks is
feldspar (KAlSi_{3}O_{8}), a mixed salt of potassium and aluminium with
the polysilicic acid (H_{4}Si_{3}O_{8}). Under the influence of
moisture, carbon dioxide, and changes of temperature this substance is
constantly being broken down into soluble potassium compounds and
hydrated aluminium silicate. This compound has the formula
Al_{2}Si_{2}O_{7}.2H_{2}O. In relatively pure condition it is called
kaolin; in the impure state, mixed with sand and other substances, it
forms common clay. Mica is another very abundant mineral, having varying
composition, but being essentially of the formula KAlSiO_{4}.
Serpentine, talc, asbestos, and meerschaum are important complex
silicates of aluminium and magnesium, and granite is a mechanical
mixture of quartz, feldspar, and mica.

     ~Ceramic industries.~ Many articles of greatest practical
     importance, ranging from the roughest brick and tile to the
     finest porcelain and chinaware, are made from some form of
     kaolin, or clay. No very precise classification of such ware
     can be made, as the products vary greatly in properties,
     depending upon the materials used and the treatment during
     manufacture.

     Porcelain is made from the purest kaolin, to which must be
     added some less pure, plastic kaolin, since the pure substance
     is not sufficiently plastic. There is also added some more
     fusible substance, such as feldspar, gypsum, or lime, together
     with some pure quartz. The constituents must be ground very
     fine, and when thoroughly mixed and moistened must make a
     plastic mass which can be molded into any desired form. The
     article molded from such materials is then burned. In this
     process the article is slowly heated to a point at which it
     begins to soften and almost fuse, and then it is allowed to
     cool slowly. At this stage, a very thin vessel will be
     translucent and have an almost glassy fracture; if, however, it
     is somewhat thicker, or has not been heated quite so high, it
     will still be porous, and partly on this account and partly to
     improve its appearance it is usually glazed.

     Glazing is accomplished by spreading upon the object a thin
     layer of a more fusible mixture of the same materials as
     compose the body of the object itself, and again heating until
     the glaze melts to a transparent glassy coating upon the
     surface of the vessel. In some cases fusible mixtures of quite
     different composition from that used in fashioning the vessel
     may be used as a glaze. Oxides of lead, zinc, and barium are
     often used in this way.

     When less carefully selected materials are used, or quite thick
     vessels are made, various grades of stoneware are produced. The
     inferior grades are glazed by throwing a quantity of common
     salt into the kiln towards the end of the first firing. In the
     form of vapor the salt attacks the surface of the baked ware
     and forms an easily fusible sodium silicate upon it, which
     constitutes a glaze.

     Vitrified bricks, made from clay or ground shale, are burned
     until the materials begin to fuse superficially, forming their
     own glaze. Other forms of brick and tile are not glazed at all,
     but are left porous. The red color of ordinary brick and
     earthenware is due to an oxide of iron formed in the burning
     process.

     The decorations upon china are sometimes painted upon the baked
     ware and then glazed over, and sometimes painted upon the glaze
     and burned in by a third firing. Care must be taken to use such
     pigments as are not affected by a high heat and do not react
     chemically with the constituents of the baked ware or the
     glaze.


EXERCISES

1. What metals and compounds studied are prepared by electrolysis?

2. Write the equation for the reaction between aluminium and
hydrochloric acid; between aluminium and sulphuric acid (in two steps).

3. What hydroxides other than aluminium hydroxide have both acid and
basic properties?

4. Write equations showing the methods used for preparing aluminium
hydroxide and sulphate.

5. Write the general formula of an alum, representing an atom of an
alkali metal by X and an atom of a trivalent metal by Y.

6. What is meant by the term polysilicic acid, as used in the discussion
of aluminium silicates?

7. Compare the properties of the hydroxides of the different groups of
metals so far studied.

8. In what respects does aluminium oxide differ from calcium oxide in
properties?

9. Supposing bauxite to be 90% aluminium hydroxide, what weight of it is
necessary for the preparation of 100 kg. of aluminium?




CHAPTER XXVII

THE IRON FAMILY


===================================================================
        |        |        |         |             |
        |        |        |         | APPROXIMATE |
        | SYMBOL | ATOMIC | DENSITY |   MELTING   | OXIDES
        |        | WEIGHT |         |    POINT    |
________|________|________|_________|_____________|________________
        |        |        |         |             |
Iron    |   Fe   |  55.9  |   7.93  |    1800 deg.    | FeO, Fe_{2}O_{3}
Cobalt  |   Co   |  59.0  |   8.55  |    1800 deg.    | CoO, Co_{2}O_{3}
Nickel  |   Ni   |  58.7  |   8.9   |    1600 deg.    | NiO, Ni_{2}O_{3}
===================================================================

~The family.~ The elements iron, cobalt, and nickel form a group in the
eighth column of the periodic table. The atomic weights of the three are
very close together, and there is not the same gradual gradation in the
properties of the three elements that is noticed in the families in
which the atomic weights differ considerably in magnitude. The elements
are very similar in properties, the similarity being so great in the
case of nickel and cobalt that it is difficult to separate them by
chemical analysis.

The elements occur in nature chiefly as oxides and sulphides, though
they have been found in very small quantities in the native state,
usually in meteorites. Their sulphides, carbonates, and phosphates are
insoluble in water, the other common salts being soluble. Their salts
are usually highly colored, those of iron being yellow or light green as
a rule, those of nickel darker green, while cobalt salts are usually
rose colored. The metals are obtained by reducing the oxides with
carbon.


IRON

~Occurrence.~ The element iron has long been known, since its ores are
very abundant and it is not difficult to prepare the metal from them in
fairly pure condition. It occurs in nature in many forms of
combination,--in large deposits as oxides, sulphides, and carbonates,
and in smaller quantities in a great variety of minerals. Indeed, very
few rocks or soils are free from small amounts of iron, and it is
assimilated by plants and animals playing an important part in life
processes.

~Metallurgy.~ It will be convenient to treat of the metallurgy of iron
under two heads,--Materials Used and Process.

~Materials used.~ Four distinct materials are used in the metallurgy of
iron:

     1. _Iron ore._ The ores most frequently used in the metallurgy
     of iron are the following:

         Hematite      Fe_{2}O_{3}.
         Magnetite     Fe_{3}O_{4}.
         Siderite      FeCO_{3}.
         Limonite      2Fe_{2}O_{2}.3H_{2}O.

     These ores always contain impurities, such as silica,
     sulphides, and earthy materials. All ores, with the exception
     of the oxides, are first roasted to expel any water and carbon
     dioxide present and to convert any sulphide into oxide.

     2. _Carbon._ Carbon in some form is necessary both as a fuel
     and as a reducing agent. In former times wood charcoal was used
     to supply the carbon, but now anthracite coal or coke is almost
     universally used.

     3. _Hot air._ To maintain the high temperature required for the
     reduction of iron a very active combustion of fuel is
     necessary. This is secured by forcing a strong blast of hot air
     into the lower part of the furnace during the reduction
     process.

     4. _Flux._ (a) _Purpose of the flux._ All the materials which
     enter the furnace must leave it again either in the form of
     gases or as liquids. The iron is drawn off as the liquid metal
     after its reduction. To secure the removal of the earthy matter
     charged into the furnace along with the ore, materials are
     added to the charge which will, at the high temperature of the
     furnace, combine with the impurities in the ore, forming a
     liquid. The material added for this purpose is called the
     _flux_; the liquid produced from the flux and the ore is called
     _slag_.

     (b) _Function of the slag._ While the main purpose of adding
     flux to the charge is to remove from the furnace in the form of
     liquid slag the impurities originally present in the ore, the
     slag thus produced serves several other functions. It keeps the
     contents of the furnace in a state of fusion, thus preventing
     clogging, and makes it possible for the small globules of iron
     to run together with greater ease into one large liquid mass.

     (c) _Character of the slag._ The slag is really a kind of
     readily fusible glass, being essentially a calcium-aluminium
     silicate. The ore usually contains silica and some aluminium
     compounds, so that limestone (which also contains some silica
     and aluminium) is added to furnish the calcium required for the
     slag. If the ore and the limestone do not contain a sufficient
     amount of silica and aluminium for the formation of the slag,
     these ingredients are added in the form of sand and feldspar.
     In the formation of slag from these materials the ore is freed
     from the silica and aluminium which it contained.

[Illustration: Fig. 85]

~Process.~ The reduction of iron is carried out in large towers called
blast furnaces. The blast furnace (Fig. 85) is usually about 80 ft. high
and 20 ft. in internal diameter at its widest part, narrowing somewhat
both toward the top and toward the bottom. The walls are built of steel
and lined with fire-brick. The base is provided with a number of pipes
T, called tuyers, through which hot air can be forced into the
furnace. The tuyers are supplied from a large pipe S, which circles
the furnace as a girdle. The base has also an opening M, through which
the liquid metal can be drawn off from time to time, and a second
opening P, somewhat above the first, through which the excess of slag
overflows. The top is closed by a movable trap C and C, called the
cone, and through this the materials to be used are introduced. The
gases produced by the combustion of the fuel and the reduction of the
ore, together with the nitrogen of the air forced in through the tuyers,
escape through pipes D, called downcomer pipes, which leave the
furnace near the top. These gases are very hot and contain combustible
substances, principally carbon monoxide; they are therefore utilized as
fuel for the engines and also to heat the blast admitted through the
tuyers. The lower part of the furnace is often furnished with a water
jacket. This consists of a series of pipes W built into the walls,
through which water can be circulated to reduce their temperature.

Charges consisting of coke (or anthracite coal), ore, and flux in proper
proportions are introduced into the furnace at intervals through the
trap top. The coke burns fiercely in the hot-air blast, giving an
intense heat and forming carbon monoxide. The ore, working down in the
furnace as the coke burns, becomes very hot, and by the combined
reducing action of the carbon and carbon monoxide is finally reduced to
metal and collects as a liquid in the bottom of the furnace, the slag
floating on the molten iron. After a considerable amount of the iron has
collected the slag is drawn off through the opening P. The molten iron
is then drawn off into large ladles and taken to the converters for the
manufacture of steel, or it is run out into sand molds, forming the bars
or ingots called "pigs." The process is a continuous one, and when once
started it is kept in operation for months or even years without
interruption.

     It seems probable that the first product of combustion of the
     carbon, at the point where the tuyers enter the furnace, is
     carbon dioxide. This is at once reduced to carbon monoxide by
     the intensely heated carbon present, so that no carbon dioxide
     can be found at that point. For practical purposes, therefore,
     we may consider that carbon monoxide is the first product of
     combustion.

~Varieties of iron.~ The iron of commerce is never pure, but contains
varying amounts of other elements, such as carbon, silicon, phosphorus,
sulphur, and manganese. These elements may either be alloyed with the
iron or may be combined with it in the form of definite chemical
compounds. In some instances, as in the case of graphite, the mixture
may be merely mechanical.

The properties of iron are very much modified by the presence of these
elements and by the form of the combination between them and the iron;
the way in which the metal is treated during its preparation has also a
marked influence on its properties. Owing to these facts many kinds of
iron are recognized in commerce, the chief varieties being cast iron,
wrought iron, and steel.

~Cast iron.~ The product of the blast furnace, prepared as just described,
is called cast iron. It varies considerably in composition, usually
containing from 90 to 95% iron, the remainder being largely carbon and
silicon with smaller amounts of phosphorus and sulphur. When the melted
metal from the blast furnace is allowed to cool rapidly most of the
