
"Go slower, please," she said, and added a couple of words in his own
tongue.

There ensued a strange dialogue, with many repetitions and much use of
signs. She turned to Seaton, with a puzzled look.

"I can't make out all he says, Dick, but he wants you to take him into
another room of the palace here, to get back something or other that
they took from him when they captured him. He can't go alone--I think he
says he will be killed if he goes anywhere without you. And he says that
when you get there, you must be sure not to let the guards come inside."

"All right, let's go!" and Seaton motioned the man to precede him. As
Seaton started for the door, Dorothy fell into step beside him.

"Better stay back, Dottie, I'll be back in a minute," he said at the
door.

"I will not stay back. Wherever you go, I go," she replied in a voice
inaudible to the others. "I simply will not stay away from you a single
minute that I don't have to."

"All right, little girl," he replied in the same tone. "I don't want to
be away from you, either, and I don't think that we're in any danger
here."

Preceded by the chief slave and followed by half a dozen others, they
went out into the hall. No opposition was made to their progress, but a
full half-company of armed guards fell in around them as an escort,
regarding Seaton with looks composed of equal parts of reverence and
fear. The slave led the way rapidly to a room in a distant wing of the
palace and opened the door. As Seaton stepped in, he saw that it was
evidently an audience-chamber or court-room, and that it was now
entirely empty. As the guard approached the door, Seaton waved them
back. All retreated across the hall except the officer in charge, who
refused to move. Seaton, the personification of offended dignity, first
stared at the offender, who returned the stare, and stepped up to him
insolently, then pushed him back roughly, forgetting that his strength,
great upon Earth, would be gigantic upon this smaller world. The officer
spun across the corridor, knocking down three of his men in his flight.
Picking himself up, he drew his sword and rushed, while his men fled in
panic to the extreme end of the corridor. Seaton did not wait for him,
but in one bound leaped half-way across the intervening space to meet
him. With the vastly superior agility of his earthly muscles he dodged
the falling broadsword and drove his left fist full against the fellow's
chin, with all the force of his mighty arm and all the momentum of his
rapidly moving body behind the blow. The crack of breaking bones was
distinctly audible as the officer's head snapped back. The force of the
blow lifted him high into the air, and after turning a complete
somersault, he brought up with a crash against the opposite wall,
dropping to the floor stone dead. As several of his men, braver than the
others, lifted their peculiar rifles, Seaton drew and fired in one
incredibly swift motion, the X-plosive bullet obliterating the entire
group of men and demolishing that end of the palace.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the meantime the slave had taken several pieces of apparatus from a
cabinet in the room and had placed them in his belt. Stopping only to
observe for a few moments a small instrument which he clamped upon the
head of the dead man, he rapidly led the way back to the room they had
left and set to work upon the instrument he had constructed while the
others had been asleep. He connected it, in an intricate system of
wiring, with the pieces of apparatus he had just recovered.

"That's a complex job of wiring," said DuQuesne admiringly. "I've seen
several intricate pieces of apparatus myself, but he has so many
circuits there that I'm lost. It would take an hour to figure out the
lines and connections alone."

Straightening abruptly, the slave clamped several electrodes upon his
temples and motioned to Seaton and the others, speaking to Dorothy as he
did so.

"He wants us to let him put those things on our heads," she translated.
"Shall we let him, Dick?"

"Yes," he replied without hesitation. "I've got a real hunch that he's
our friend, and I'm not sure of Nalboon. He doesn't act right."

"I think so, too," agreed the girl, and Crane added:

"I can't say that I relish the idea, but since I know that you are a
good poker player, Dick, I am willing to follow your hunch. How about
you, DuQuesne?"

"Not I," declared that worthy, emphatically. "Nobody wires me up to
anything I can't understand, and that machine is too deep for me."

Margaret elected to follow Crane's example, and, impressed by the need
for haste evident in the slave's bearing, the four walked up to the
machine without further talk. The electrodes were clamped into place
quickly and the slave pressed a lever. Instantly the four visitors felt
that they had a complete understanding of the languages and customs of
both Mardonale, the nation in which they now were, and of Kondal, to
which nation the slaves belonged, the only two civilized nations upon
Osnome. While the look of amazement at this method of receiving
instruction was still upon their faces, the slave--or rather, as they
now knew him, Dunark, the Kofedix or Crown Prince of the great nation of
Kondal--began to disconnect the wires. He cut out the wires leading to
the two girls and to Crane, and was reaching for Seaton's, when there
was a blinding flash, a crackling sound, the heavy smoke of burning
metal and insulation, and both Dunark and Seaton fell to the floor.

Before Crane could reach them, however, they were upon their feet and
the stranger said in his own tongue, now understood by every one but
DuQuesne:

"This machine is a mechanical educator, a thing entirely new, in our
world at least. Although I have been working on it for a long time, it
is still in a very crude form. I did not like to use it in its present
state of development, but it was necessary in order to warn you of what
Nalboon is going to do to you, and to convince you that the best way of
saving your lives would save our lives as well. The machine worked
perfectly until something, I don't know what, went wrong. Instead of
stopping, as it should have done, at teaching your party to speak our
languages, it short-circuited us two completely, so that every
convolution in each of our brains has been imprinted upon the brain of
the other. It was the sudden formation of all the new convolutions that
rendered us unconscious. I can only apologize for the break-down, and
assure you that my intentions were of the best."

"You needn't apologize," returned Seaton. "That was a wonderful
performance, and we're both gainers, anyway, aren't we? It has taken us
all our lives to learn what little we know, and now we each have the
benefit of two lifetimes, spent upon different worlds! I must admit,
though, that I have a whole lot of knowledge that I don't know how to
use."

"I am glad you take it that way," returned the other warmly, "for I am
infinitely the better off for the exchange. The knowledge I imparted was
nothing, compared to that which I received. But time presses--I must
tell you our situation. I am, as you now know, the Kofedix of Kondal.
The other thirteen are fedo and fediro, or, as you would say, princes
and princesses of the same nation. We were captured by one of Nalboon's
raiding parties while upon a hunting trip, being overcome by some new,
stupefying gas, so that we could not kill ourselves. As you know, Kondal
and Mardonale have been at war for over ten thousand karkamo--something
more than six thousand years of your time. The war between us is one of
utter extermination. Captives are never exchanged and only once during
an ordinary lifetime does one ever escape. Our attendants were killed
immediately. We were being taken to furnish sport for Nalboon's party by
being fed to one of his captive kolono--animals something like your
earthly devilfish--when the escort of battleships was overcome by those
four karlono, the animals you saw, and one of them seized Nalboon's
plane, in which we were prisoners. You killed the karlon, saving our
lives as well as those of Nalboon and his party.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Having saved his life, you and your party should be honored guests of
the most honored kind, and I venture to say that you would be so
regarded in any other nation of the universe. But Nalboon, the Domak--a
title equivalent to your word 'Emperor' and our word 'Karfedix'--of
Mardonale, is utterly without either honor or conscience, as are all
Mardonalians. At first he was afraid of you, as were we all. We thought
you visitors from a planet of our fifteenth sun, which is now at its
nearest possible approach to us. After your display of superhuman power
and ability, we expected instant annihilation. However, after seeing the
Skylark as a machine, discovering that you are short of power, and
finding that you are gentle instead of bloodthirsty by nature, Nalboon
lost his fear of you and resolved to rob you of your vessel, with its
wonderful secrets of power. Though we are so ignorant of chemistry that
I cannot understand the thousandth part of what I just learned from you,
we are a race of mechanics and have developed machines of many kinds to
a high state of efficiency, including electrical machines of all kinds.
In fact, electricity, generated by our great waterfalls, is our only
power. No scientist upon Osnome has ever had an inkling that
intra-atomic energy exists. Nalboon cannot understand the power, but he
solved the means of liberating it at a glance--and that glance sealed
your death-warrants. With the Skylark, he could conquer Kondal, and to
assure the downfall of my nation he would do anything.

"Also, he or any other Osnomian scientist would go to any lengths
whatever--would challenge the great First Cause itself--to secure even
one of those little bottles of the chemical you call 'salt.' It is far
and away the scarcest and most precious substance in the world. It is so
rare that those bottles you produced at the table held more than the
total amount previously known to exist upon Osnome. We have great
abundance of all the heavy metals, but the lighter metals are rare.
Sodium and chlorin are the rarest of all known elements. Its immense
value is due, not to its rarity, but to the fact that it is an
indispensable component of the controlling instruments of our wireless
power stations and that it is used as a catalyst in the manufacture of
our hardest metals.

"For these reasons, you understand why Nalboon does not intend to let
you escape and why he intends that this kokam (our equivalent of a day)
shall be your last. About the second or third kam (hour) of the sleeping
period he intends to break into the Skylark, learn its control, and
secure the salt you undoubtedly have in the vessel. Then my party and
myself will be thrown to the kolon. You and your party will be killed
and your bodies smelted to recover the salt that is in them. This is the
warning I had to give you. Its urgency explains the use of my untried
mechanical educator; the hope that my party could escape with yours, in
your vessel, explains why you saw me, the Kofedix of Kondal, prostrate
myself before that arch-fiend Nalboon."

"How do you, a captive prince of another nation, know these things?"
asked Crane, doubtfully.

"I read Nalboon's ideas from the brain of that officer whom the Karfedix
Seaton killed. He was a ladex of the guards--an officer of about the
same rank as one of your colonels. He was high in Nalboon's favor, and
he was to have been in charge of the work of breaking into the Skylark
and killing us all. Let me caution you now; do not let any Mardonalian
touch our hands with a wire, for if you do, your thoughts will be
recorded and the secrets of the Skylark and your many other mysterious
things, such as smoking, matches, and magic feats, will be secrets no
longer."

"Thanks for the information," responded Seaton, "but I want to correct
your title for me. I'm no Karfedix--merely a plain citizen."

"In one way I see that that is true," replied the Kofedix with a puzzled
look. "I cannot understand your government at all--but the inventor of
the Skylark must certainly rank as a Karfedix."

As he spoke, a smile of understanding passed over his face and he
continued:

"I see. Your title is Doctor of Philosophy, which must mean that you are
the Karfedix of Knowledge of the Earth."

"No, no. You're way off. I'm...."

"Certainly Seaton is the Karfedix of Knowledge," broke in DuQuesne. "Let
it go at that, anyway, whatever it means. The thing to do now is to
figure a way out of this."

"You chirped it then, Blackie. Dunark, you know this country better than
we do; what do you suggest?"

"I suggest that you take my party into the Skylark and escape from
Mardonale as soon as possible. I can pilot you to Kondalek, the capital
city of our nation. There, I can assure you, you will be welcomed as you
deserve. My father, the Karfedix, will treat you as a Karfedix should be
treated. As far as I am concerned, nothing I can ever do will lighten
the burden of my indebtedness to you, but I promise you all the copper
you want, and anything else you may desire that is within the power of
man to give you."

       *       *       *       *       *

Seaton thought deeply a moment, then shook Dunark's hand vigorously.

"That suits me, Kofedix," he said warmly. "I thought from the first that
you were our friend. Shall we make for the Skylark right now, or wait a
while?"

"We had better wait until after the second meal," the prince replied.
"We have no armor, and no way of making any. We would be helpless
against the bullets of any except a group small enough so that you could
kill them all before they could fire. The kam after the second meal is
devoted to strolling about the grounds, so that our visiting the Skylark
would look perfectly natural. As the guard is very lax at that time, it
is the best time for the attempt."

"But how about my killing his company of guards and blowing up one wing
of his palace? Won't he have something to say about that?"

"I don't know," replied the Kofedix doubtfully. "It depends upon whether
his fear of you or his anger is the greater. He should pay his call of
state here in your apartment in a short time, as it is the inviolable
rule of Osnome, that any visitor shall receive a call of state from one
of his own rank before leaving his apartment for the first time. His
actions may give you some idea as to his feelings, though he is an
accomplished diplomat and may conceal his real feelings entirely. But
let me caution you not to be modest or soft-spoken. He will mistake
softness for fear."

"All right," grinned Seaton. "In that case I won't wait to try to find
out what he thinks. If he shows any signs of hostility at all, I'll open
up on him."

"Well," remarked Crane, calmly, "if we have some time to spare, we may
as well wait comfortably instead of standing in the middle of the room.
I, for one, have a lot of questions to ask about this new world."

Acting upon this suggestion, the party seated themselves upon
comfortable divans, and Dunark rapidly dismantled the machine he had
constructed. The captives remained standing, always behind the visitors
until Seaton remonstrated.

"Please sit down, everybody. There's no need of keeping up this farce of
your being slaves as long as we're alone, is there, Dunark?"

"No, but at the first sound of the gong announcing a visitor we must be
in our places. Now that we are all comfortable and waiting, I will
introduce my party to yours.

"Fellow Kondalians, greet the Karfedo Seaton and Crane," he began, his
tongue fumbling over the strange names, "of a distant world, the Earth,
and the two noble ladies, Miss Vaneman and Miss Spencer, soon to be
their Karfediro.

"Guests from Earth, allow me to present to you the Kofedir Sitar, the
only one of my wives who accompanied me upon our ill-fated hunting
expedition."

Then, still ignoring DuQuesne as a captive, he introduced the other
Kondolians in turn as his brothers, sisters, cousins, nieces, and
nephews--all members of the great ruling house of Kondal.

"Now," he concluded, "after I have a word with you in private, Doctor
Seaton, I will be glad to give the others all the information in my
power."

He led Seaton out of earshot of the others and said in a low voice:

"It is no part of Nalboon's plan to kill the two women. They are so
beautiful, so different from our Osnomian women, that he intends to keep
them--alive. Understand?"

"Yes," returned Seaton grimly, his eyes turning hard, "I get you all
right--but what he'll do and what he thinks he'll do are two entirely
different breeds of cats."

Returning to the others, they found Dorothy and Sitar deep in
conversation.

"So a man has half a dozen or so wives?" Dorothy was asking in surprise.
"How do you get along together? I'd fight like a wildcat if my husband
tried to have other wives!"

"We get along splendidly, of course," returned the Osnomian princess in
equal surprise. "I would not think of being a man's only wife. I
wouldn't consider marrying a man who could win only one wife--think what
a disgrace it would be! And think how lonely one would be while her
husband is away at war--we would go insane if we did not have the
company of the other wives. There are six of us, and we could not get
along at all without each other."

"I've got a compliment for you and Peggy, Dottie," said Seaton. "Dunark
here thinks that you two girls look good enough to eat--or words to that
effect." Both girls flushed slightly, the purplish-black color suffusing
their faces. They glanced at each other and Dorothy voiced the thought
of both as she said:

"How can you, Kofedix Dunark? In this horrible light we both look
perfectly dreadful. These other girls would be beautiful, if we were
used to the colors, but we two look simply hideous."

"Oh, no," interrupted Sitar. "You have a wonderfully rich coloring. It
