There were people around her. They were doing things swiftly. She was
turned over on her back and, for a few moments then, she saw her own
face smiling down at her from just a few feet away.




21


She was, suddenly, in a large room, well lit, with elaborate
furnishings--sitting leaned back in a soft chair before a highly
polished little table. On the opposite side of the table two people sat
looking at her with expressions of mild surprise. One of them was Lyad
Ermetyne. The other was a man she didn't know.

The man glanced aside at Lyad. "Very fast snap-back!" he said. He looked
again at Trigger. He was a small man with salt-and-pepper hair, a deeply
lined face, beautiful liquid-black eyes.

"Very!" Lyad said. "We must remember that. Hello, Trigger!"

"Hello," Trigger said. Her glance went once around the room and came
back to Lyad's amiably observant face. Repulsive's container was nowhere
around. There seemed to be nobody else in the room. An ornamental
ComWeb stood against one wall. Two of the walls were covered with heavy
hangings, and a great gold-brocaded canopy bellied from the ceiling. No
doors or portals in sight; they might be camouflaged, or behind those
hangings. Any number of people could be in call range--and a few
certainly must be watching her right now, because that small man was no
rough-and-tumble type.

The small man was regarding her with something like restrained
amusement.

"A cool one," he murmured. "Very cool!"

Trigger looked at him a moment, then turned her eyes back to Lyad. She
didn't feel cool. She felt tense and scared cold. This was probably very
bad!

"What did you want to see me about?" she asked.

Lyad smiled. "A business matter. Do you know where you are?"

"Not on your ship, First Lady."

The light-amber eyes barely narrowed. But Lyad had become, at that
moment, very alert.

"Why do you think so?" she asked pleasantly.

"This room," said Trigger. "You don't gush, I think. What was the
business matter?"

"In a moment," Lyad said. She smiled again. "Where else might you be?"

Trigger thought she could guess. But she didn't intend to. Not out loud.
She shrugged. "It's no place I want to be." She settled back a little in
her chair. Her right hand brushed the porgee pouch.

The porgee pouch.

It would have been like the Ermetyne to investigate the pouch carefully,
take out the gun and put the pouch back. But they might not have.

Somebody was bound to be watching. She couldn't find out--not until the
instant after she decided to try the Denton.

"I can believe that," Lyad said. "Forgive me the discourtesy of so
urgent an invitation, Trigger. A quite recent event made it seem
necessary. As to the business--as a start, this gentleman is Doctor
Veetonia. He is an investigator of extraordinary talents along his line.
At the moment, he is a trifle tired because of the very long hours he
worked last night."

Doctor Veetonia turned his head to look at her. "I did, First Lady?
Well, that does explain this odd weariness. Did I work well?"

"Splendidly," Lyad assured him. "You were never better, Doctor."

He nodded, smiled vaguely and looked back at Trigger. "This must go,
too, I suppose?"

"I'm afraid it must," Lyad said.

"A great pity!" Doctor Veetonia said. "A great pity. It would have been
a pleasant memory. This very cool one!" The vague smile shifted in the
lined face again. "You are so beautiful, child," he told Trigger, "in
your anger and terror and despair. And above it still the gauging
purpose, the strong, quick thinking. You will not give in easily. Oh,
no! Not easily at all. First Lady," Doctor Veetonia said plaintively, "I
should like to remember this one! It should be possible, I think."

Small, icy fingers were working up and down Trigger's spine. The
Ermetyne gave her a light wink.

"I'm afraid it isn't, Doctor," she said. "There are such very important
matters to be discussed. Besides, Trigger Argee and I will come to an
amicable agreement very quickly."

"No." Doctor Veetonia's face had turned very sullen.

"No?" said Lyad.

"She will agree to nothing. Any fool can see that. I recommend, then, a
simple chemical approach. Your creatures can handle it. Drain her. Throw
her away. I will have nothing to do with the matter."

"Oh, but Doctor!" the Ermetyne protested. "That would be so crude. And
so very uncertain. Why, we might be here for hours still!"

He shook his head.

Lyad smiled. She stroked the lined cheek with light finger tips. "Have
you forgotten the palace at Hamal Lake?" she asked. "The great library?
The laboratories? Haven't I been very generous?"

Doctor Veetonia turned his face toward her. He smiled thoughtfully.

"Now that is true!" he admitted. "For the moment I did forget." He
looked back at Trigger. "The First Lady gives," he told her, "and the
First Lady takes away. She has given me wealth and much leisure. She
takes from me now and then a memory. Very skillfully, since she was my
pupil. But still the mind must be dim by a little each time it is
done."

His face suddenly grew concerned. He looked at Lyad again. "Two more
years only!" he said. "In two years I shall be free to retire, Lyad?"

Lyad nodded. "That was our bargain, Doctor. You know I keep bargains."

Doctor Veetonia said, "Yes. You do. It is strange in an Ermetyne. Very
well! I shall do it." He looked at Trigger's face. The black-liquid eyes
blinked once or twice. "She is almost certain she is being watched," he
said, "but she has been thinking of using the ComWeb. The child, I
believe, is prepared to attack us at any opportune moment." He smiled.
"Show her first why her position is hopeless. Then we shall see."

"Why, it's not in the least hopeless," Lyad said. "And please feel no
concern about the Doctor, Trigger. His methods are quite painless and
involve none of the indignities of a chemical investigation. If you are
at all reasonable, we'll just sit here and talk for twenty minutes or
so. Then you will tell me what sum you wish to have deposited for you in
what bank, and you will be free to go."

"What will we talk about?" Trigger said.

"Well, for one," said the Ermetyne, "there is that rather handsome
little purse you've been carrying about lately. My technicians inform me
there may be some risk of damaging its contents if they attempt to force
it open. We don't want that. So we'll talk a bit about the proper way of
opening it." She gave Trigger her little smile. "And Doctor Veetonia
will verify the accuracy of any statements made on the matter."

She considered. "Oh, and then I shall ask a few questions. Not many. And
you will answer them. It really will be quite simple. But now let me
tell you why I so very much wanted to see you today. We had a guest here
last night. A gentleman whom you've met--Balmordan. He was mind-blocked
on some quite important subjects, and so--though the doctor and I were
very patient and careful--he died in the end. But before he died, he had
told me as much as I really needed to know from him.

"Now with that information," she went on, "and with the contents of your
purse and with another little piece of information, which you possess, I
shall presently go away. On Orado, a few hours later, Tranest's
ambassador will have a quiet talk with some members of the Federation
Council. And that will be all, really." She smiled. "No dramatic
pursuit! No hue and cry! A few treaties will be considerably revised.
And the whole hubbub about the plasmoids will be over." She nodded.
"Because they can be made to work, you know. And very well!"

Doctor Veetonia hadn't looked away from Trigger while Lyad was speaking.
He said now, "My congratulations, First Lady! But the girl has not been
convinced in the least that she should cooperate. She may hope to be
rescued before the information you want can be forced from her."

The Ermetyne sighed. "Oh, really now, Trigger!" she very nearly pouted.
"Well, if I must explain about that to you, too, I shall."

She considered a moment.

"Did you see your facsimile?"

Trigger nodded. "Very briefly."

Lyad smiled. "How she and my other people passed in and out of that
dome, and how it happened that your room guards were found unconscious
and were very hurriedly taken to the medical department's contagious
ward, makes an amusing little story. But it would be too long in the
telling just now. Your facsimile is one of Tranest's finest actresses.
She's been studying and practicing being you for months. She knows where
to go and what to do in that dome to avoid contact with people who know
you too intimately. If it seems that discovery is imminent, she needs
only a minute by herself to turn into an entirely different personality.
So hours might pass without anyone even suspecting you were gone.

"But on the other hand," Lyad admitted fairly, "your double might be
caught immediately or within minutes. She would not be conscious then,
and I doubt your fierce little Commissioner would go to the unethical
limits of dead-braining a live woman. If he did, of course, he would
learn nothing from her.

"Let's assume, nevertheless, that for one reason and another your
friends suspect me immediately, and only me. At the time you were being
taken from the dome, I was observed leaving the Grand Commerce Center.
I'd shopped rather freely; a number of fairly large crates and so forth
were loaded into my speedboat. And we were observed returning to the
Aurora."

"Not bad," Trigger admitted. "Another facsimile, I suppose?"

"Of course." The Ermetyne glanced at a small jeweled wrist watch. "Now
the Aurora, if my orders were being followed, and they were, dived
approximately five minutes ago--unless somebody who might be your
wrathful rescuers approached her before that time, in which case she
dived then. In either case, the dive was seen by the Commissioner's
watchers; and the proper conclusions sooner or later will be drawn from
that."

"Supposing they dive after her and run her down?" Trigger said.

"They might! The Aurora is not an easy ship to run down in subspace; but
they might. After some hours. It would be of no consequence at all,
would it?" The amber eyes regarded Trigger with very little expression
for a moment. "How many hours or minutes do you think you could hold out
here, Trigger Argee, if it became necessary to put on real pressure?"

"I don't know," Trigger admitted. She moistened her lips.

"I could give you a rather close estimate, I think," the Ermetyne said.
"But forgive me for bringing up that matter. It was an unnecessary
discourtesy. Let's assume instead that the rather clever people with
whom you've been working are quite clever enough to see through all
these little maneuverings. Let's assume further that they are even able
to conclude immediately where you and I must be at the moment.

"We are, as it happens, on the Griffin, which is Belchik Pluly's outsize
yacht, and which is orbiting Manon at present. This room is on a sealed
level of the yacht, where Belchik's private life normally goes on
undisturbed. I persuaded him two days ago to clear out this section of
it for my own use. There is only one portal entry to the level, and that
entry is locked and heavily guarded at the moment. There are two portal
exits. One of them opens into a special lock in which there is a small
speedboat of mine, prepared to leave. It's a very fast boat. If there
have been faster ones built in the Hub, I haven't heard of them yet. And
it can dive directly from the lock."

She smiled at Trigger. "You have the picture now, haven't you? If your
friends decide to board the Griffin, they'll be able to do it without
too much argument. After all, we don't want to be blown up accidentally.
But they'll have quite a time working their way into this level. If a
boarding party is reported, we'll just all quietly go away together with
no fuss or hurry. I guarantee that no one is going to trace or overtake
that boat. You see?"

"Yes," Trigger said disconsolately, slumping back a little. Her right
hand dropped to her lap. Well, she thought, last chance!

Doctor Veetonia frowned. "First--" he began.

Trigger slapped the porgee pouch. And the Denton's soundless blast
slammed the talented investigator back and over in his chair.

"Gun," Trigger explained unnecessarily.

The Ermetyne's face had turned white with shock. She flicked a glance
down at the man, then looked back at Trigger.

"There're guns on me too, I imagine," Trigger said. "But this one goes
off very easily, First Lady! It would take hardly any jolt at all."

Lyad nodded slightly. "They're no fools! They won't risk shooting. Don't
worry." Her voice was careful but quite even. A tough cookie, as the
Commissioner had remarked.

"We won't bother about them at the moment," Trigger said. "Let's stand
up together."

They stood up.

"We'll stay about five feet apart," Trigger went on. "I don't know if
you're the gun-grabbing type."

The Ermetyne almost smiled. "I'm not!" she said.

"No point in taking chances," Trigger said. "Five feet." She gave Doctor
Veetonia a quick glance. He did look very unpleasantly dead.

"We'll go over to that ComWeb in a moment," she told Lyad. "I imagine
you wouldn't have left it on open circuit?"

Lyad shook her head. "Calls go through the ship's communication office."

"Your own people on duty there?"

"No. Pluly's."

"Will they take your orders?"

"Certainly!"

"Can they listen in?" Trigger asked.

"Not if we seal the set here."

Trigger nodded. "You'll do the talking," she said. "I'll give you
Commissioner Tate's personal number. Tell them to dial it. The Precol
transmitters pick up ComWeb circuits. Switch on the screen after the
call is in; he'll want to see me. When he comes on, just tell him what's
happened, where we are, what the layout is. He's to come over with a
squad to get us. I won't say much, if anything. I'll just keep the gun
on you. If there's any fumble, we both get it."

"There won't be any fumble, Trigger," Lyad said.

"All right. Let's set up the rest of it before we move. After the
Commissioner signs off, he'll be up here in three minutes flat. Or less.
How about this ship's officers--do they take your orders too?"

"With the obvious exception of yourself," Lyad said, "everyone on the
Griffin takes my orders at the moment."

"Then just tell whoever's in charge of the yacht to let the squad in
before there's any shooting. The Commissioner can get awfully
short-tempered. Then get the guards away from that entry portal. That's
for their own good."

The Ermetyne nodded. "Will do."

"All right. That covers it, I think."

They looked at each other for a moment.

"With the information you got from Balmordan," Trigger remarked, "you
should still be able to make a very good dicker with the Council, First
Lady. I understand they're very eager to get the plasmoid mess
straightened out quietly."

Lyad lifted one shoulder in a brief shrug. "Perhaps," she said.

"Let's move!" said Trigger.

They walked toward the ComWeb rather edgily, not very fast, not very
slow, Trigger four or five steps behind. There had been no sound from
the walls and no other sign of what must be very considerable excitement
nearby. Trigger's spine kept tingling. A needlebeam and a good marksman
could pluck away the Denton and her hand along with it, without much
real risk to Ermetyne. But probably even the smallest of risks was more
than the Tranest people would be willing to take when the First Lady's
person was involved.

Lyad reached the ComWeb and stopped. Trigger stopped too, five feet
away. "Go ahead," she said quietly.

Lyad turned to face her. "Let me make one last--well, call it an
appeal," she said. "Don't be an overethical fool, Trigger Argee! The
arrangement I've planned will do no harm to anybody. Come in with me,
and you can write your own ticket for the rest of your life."

"No ticket," Trigger said. She waggled the Denton slightly. "Go ahead!
You can talk to the Council later."

Lyad shrugged resignedly, turned again and reached toward the ComWeb.

Trigger might have relaxed just a trifle at that moment. Or perhaps
there was some other cue that Pilli could pick up. There came no sound
from the ceiling canopy. What she caught was a sense of something
moving above her. Then the great golden bulk landed with a terrifying
lightness on the thick carpet between Lyad and herself.
