the old file so as to obtain a perfectly fresh surface.  No one who
knows his business ever uses an iron that is not perfectly clean and
well tinned.

The iron may be cleaned from time to time by heating it red hot and
quenching it in water to get rid of the oxide, which scales off in the
process.

Sec. 95.  Soft Soldering.

In the laboratory the chief application of the process is to copper
soldering during the construction of electrical apparatus and to zinc
soldering for general purposes.

In ninety-nine cases out of every hundred where difficulties occur
their origin is to be traced to dirt.  There seems to be some
inexplicable kink in the human mind which renders it callous to
repeated proofs of the necessity for cleaning surfaces which it is
intended to solder.  The slightest trace of albuminous or gelatinous
matter or shellac will prevent solder adhering to most metals and the
same remark applies in a measure to the presence of oxides, although
these may be removed by chloride of zinc or prevented from forming by
resin or tallow.  A touch with an ordinarily dirty hand--I refer to a
solderer's hand--will often soil work sufficiently to make the
adherence of solder difficult.

The fluxes most generally employed are tallow for lead, resin or
Venice turpentine for copper, chloride of zinc for anything except
lead, which never requires it.  The latter flux has the property (also
possessed by borax at a red heat) of dissolving any traces of oxide
which may be formed, as well as acting as a protecting layer to the
metal.

We may now turn to the consideration of a simple case of soldering,
say the joining of two copper wires.  The wires are first cleaned
either by dipping in a bath of sulphuric and nitric acids--a thing no
laboratory should be without--or by any suitable mechanical means.
The cleaned wires are then twisted together--there is a regulation
way of doing this, but it presents no advantage in laboratory
practice--and the joint is sprinkled over with resin, or painted
with a solution of resin in alcohol.

The iron, being heated and floated with solder, is held against the
joint, the latter being supported on a brick, and the solder is
allowed to "sweat" into the joint.  Enough solder must be present to
penetrate right through the joint.  Nothing is gained by rubbing
violently with the iron.  If the copper is clean it will tin, and if
it is dirty it won't, and there the matter ends.

Beginners generally use too small or too cold a bit, and produce a
ragged, dirty joint in consequence.  If the saving of time be an
object, the joint may be twisted together on ordinarily dirty oxidised
wires and heated to, say, 200 deg. C.  It is then painted with chloride of
zinc and soldered with the bit.

There is a difference of opinion as to the relative merits of chloride
of zinc and of resin as a flux in soldering copper.  Thus the standing
German practice is, or was, to employ the former flux in every case
for soldering electric light wires, while in England the custom  used
to be to specify that soldering should be done by resin, and this
custom may still prevail;  it lingers in Australia at all events.

However, it is agreed on all hands that when chloride of zinc is used
it must be carefully washed off.  I have known of an electrical
engineer insisting on his workmen "licking" joints with their tongues
to ensure the total removal of chloride of zinc; it has a horrible
taste; and I have occasionally pursued the same plan myself when the
soldering of fine wires was in question.

In any case, it is very certain that chloride of zinc left in a joint
will ruin it sooner or later by loosening the contact between copper
and solder.

Very often it is requisite to solder together two extensive flat
surfaces--for instance, in "chucking" certain kinds of brass work.
The surfaces to be soldered must be carefully tinned, most
conveniently by the help of the blow-pipe and chloride of zinc.  After
tinning, the surfaces are laid together and heated so as to "sweat"
them together; the phrase, though inelegant, is expressive.

96.  Soldering Tin Plate.

If the plate be new and clean, a little resin or its solution in
alcohol is all that is necessary as a flux.  If the tin plate is rusty
the rust must be removed and the clean iron, or rather mild steel,
surface exposed.  The use of chloride of zinc is practically essential
in this case.  Tin plate is often spotted with rust long before it
becomes rusty as a whole, when, of course, it may be regarded as worn
out, and such rust spots are most conveniently removed by means of the
plumber's shave-hook.  The shave-hook is merely a peculiarly shaped
hard steel scraping knife on a handle (Fig.  79).

Fig.  79

With tin plate the soldering of long joints is often necessary.  The
plate must be temporarily held in position either by binding with iron
wire, fastening by clamps, or holding by an assistant.  The flux is
applied and the iron run slowly along the joint.  Enough solder is
used to completely float the tip of the iron.  By arranging the joint
so that it slopes downward slightly, and commencing at the upper end,
the solder may be caused to flow after the iron, and will leave a
joint with the minimum permissible amount of solder in it.  By
regulating the slope, heat of iron, etc, any desired quantity of
solder may be run into the joint.

Sec. 97.  Soldering Zinc.

Zinc alloys with soft solder very easily, and by so doing entirely
spoils it, making, it "crumbly," dirty, and preventing it running.
Consequently, in soldering up zinc great care must be taken to prevent
the solder becoming appreciably contaminated by the zinc.  To this end
the zinc surfaces are cleaned by means of a little hydrochloric acid,
which is painted on instead of chloride of zinc.  Plenty of solder is
melted on to the work, and is drawn along over the joint by a single
slow motion of the soldering bit.  The iron must be just hot enough to
make the solder flow freely, and it must never be rubbed violently on
the zinc or allowed to linger in one spot;  the result of the latter
action will be to melt a hole through the zinc, owing to the tendency
of this metal to form an easily fusible alloy with the solder.

The art of soldering zinc is a very useful one in the laboratory.  The
majority of physicists appear to overlook the advantages of zinc
considered as a material for apparatus construction.  It is light,
fairly strong, cheap, easily fusible, and yet hard and elastic when
cold.  It may be worked as easily as lead at a temperature of, say,
150 deg. to 200 deg. C, and slightly below the melting-point (423 deg. C.) it is
brittle and may & powdered.  The property of softening at a moderate
temperature is invaluable as a means of flattening zinc plate or
shaping it in any way.  During the work it may be held by means of an
old cloth.  Zinc sheet which has been heated between iron plates and
flattened by pressure retains its flatness very fairly well after
cooling.

Sec. 98.  Soldering other Metals.

Iron.

The iron must be filed clean and then brushed with chloride of zinc
solution.  Some people add a little sat ammoniac to the chloride of
zinc, but the improvement thus made is practically inappreciable.  If
the iron is clean it tins quite easily, and the process of soldering
it is perfectly easy and requires no special comment.

Brass.

The same method as described for iron succeeds perfectly.  The brass,
if not exceedingly dirty, may be cleaned by heating to the temperature
at which solder melts (below 200 deg. C.), and painting it over with
chloride of zinc, or dipping it in the liquor.  If now the brass be
heated again in the blow-pipe flame, it will be found to tin perfectly
well when rubbed over with solder.

German Silver, Platinoid, Silver, and Platinum are treated like iron.
With regard to silver and platinum the same precautions as recommended
in the case of zinc must be observed, for both these metals form
fusible alloys with solder.

Gold when pure requires no flux.  Standard gold, which contains copper,
solders better with a little chloride of zinc.

Lead must be pared absolutely clean and then soldered quickly with a
hot iron, using tallow as a flux.  Since solder if over hot will
adhere to lead almost anywhere, plumbers are in the habit of specially
soiling those parts to which it is not intended that solder shall
adhere. The "soiling" paint consists of very thin glue, called size,
mixed with lampblack; on an emergency a raw potato may be cut in half,
and the work to be soiled may be rubbed over with the cut surface of
the potato.

Hard Carbon or gas coke may be soldered after coating with copper by
an electrolytic process, as will be described.

Sec. 99.  Brazing.

Soldering at a red heat by means of spelter is called brazing.
Spelter is soft brass, and is generally made from zinc one part,
copper one part; an alloy easily granulated at a red heat;  it is
purchased in the granular form.

The art of brazing is applied to metals which will withstand a red
heat, and the joints so soldered have the strength of brass.

The pieces to be jointed by this method must be carefully cleaned and
held in their proper relative positions by means of iron wire.  It is
generally necessary to soften iron wire as purchased by heating it red
hot and allowing it to cool in the air;  if this is not done the wire
is usually too hard to be employed satisfactorily for binding.

Very thin wire--i.e. above No. 20 on the Birmingham wire gauge--does
not do, for it gets burned through, and perhaps allows the work
to fall apart at a critical moment.

The work being securely fastened, the next step is to cover the
cleaned parts with flux in order to prevent oxidation.  For this
purpose "glass borax" is employed. "Glass" borax is simply ordinary
borax which has been fused for the purpose of getting rid of water of
crystallisation.  The glass borax is reduced to powder in an iron
mortar, for it is very hard, and is then made up into a cream with a
little water.  This cream is painted on to the parts of the work which
are destined to receive the solder.

The next step is to prepare the spelter, and this is easily done by
mixing it with the cream, taking care to stir thoroughly with a
flattened iron wire till each particle of spelter is perfectly covered
with the borax.  The mixture should not be too wet to behave as a
granular mass, and may then be lifted on to the work by means of the
iron spatula.

Care must be taken to place the spelter on those parts only which are
intended to receive it, and when this is done, the joint may be
lightly powdered over with the dry borax, and will then be ready for
heating.

If the object is of considerable size it is most conveniently heated
on the forge;  if small the blowpipe is more convenient.  In the
latter case, place the work on a firebrick, and arrange two other
bricks on edge about it, so that it lies more or less in a corner.  A
few bits of coke may also be placed on and about the work to increase
the temperature by their combustion, and to concentrate the flame and
prevent radiation.  The temperature is gradually raised to a bright
red heat, when the spelter will be observed to fuse or "run," as it is
technically said to do.

If the cleaning and distribution of flux has been successful, the
spelter will "run" along the joint very freely, and the work should be
tapped gently to make sure that the spelter has really run into the
joint.  The heating may be interrupted when the spelter is observed to
have melted into a continuous mass.  As soon as the work has fallen
below a red heat it may be plunged into water, a process which has the
effect of cracking off the glass-like layer of borax.

There is, however, some risk of causing the work to buckle by this
violent treatment, which must of course be modified so as to suit the
circumstances of the case.  If the joint is in such a position that
the borax cannot be filed off, a very convenient instrument for its
removal by scraping is the watchmaker's graver, a square rod of hard
steel ground to a bevelled point (Fig.  80).

Fig.  80.

Several precautions require to be mentioned.  In the first place,
spelter is merely rather soft brass, and consequently it often cannot
be fused without endangering the rest of the work.  A good protection
is a layer of fireclay laid upon the more delicate parts, such for
instance as any screwed part.

Gun-metal and tap-metal do not lend themselves to brazing so readily
as iron or yellow brass, and are usually more conveniently treated by
means of silver solder.

Spelter tends to run very freely when it melts, and if the brass
surface in the neighbourhood of the joint is at all clean, may run
where it is not wanted.  Of course some control may be exercised by
"soiling" with fireclay or using an oxidising flame;  but the erratic
behaviour of spelter in this respect is the greatest drawback to its
use in apparatus construction.  The secret of success in brazing lies
in properly cleaning up the work to begin with, and in disposing the
borax so as to prevent subsequent oxidation.

Sec. 100.  Silver Soldering.

This process resembles that last described, but instead of spelter an
alloy of silver, copper, and zinc is employed.  The solder, as
prepared by jewellers to meet special cases, varies a good deal in
composition, but for the laboratory the usual proportions are:

For soft silver solder

Fine silver         2 parts
Brass wire        1 part

For hard silver solder

Sterling silver     3 parts
Brass wire      1 part

The latter is, perhaps, generally the more convenient.

Silver solders may, of course, be purchased at watchmakers' supply
shops, and as thus obtained, are generally in thin sheet.  This is
snipped fine with a pair of shears preparatory to use.

As odds and ends of silver (from old anodes and silver residues)
generally accumulate in the laboratory, it is often more convenient to
make the solder one's self.  In this case it must be remembered in
making hard solder by the second receipt that standard silver contains
about one-twelfth of its weight of copper--exactly 18 parts copper to
220 silver.

The silver is first melted in a plumbago crucible in a small furnace
together with a little borax; if any copper is required this is then
added, and finally the brass is introduced.  When fusion is complete,
the contents of the crucible are poured into any suitable mould.

The quickest and most convenient way of preparing the alloy for use is
to convert it into filings with the assistance of a coarse file, or by
milling it, if a milling machine is available.

Equal volumes of filings and powdered glass borax are made into a thin
paste with water, and applied in an exactly similar manner to that
described under the head of "brazing."  In fact all the processes
there described may be applied equally to the case under discussion,
the substitution of silver for spelter being the only variation.

The silver solder is more manageable than spelter, and does not tend
to run wild over the work:  a property which makes it much more
convenient both for delicate joints and in cases where it is desired
to restrict the solder to a single point or line.  Small objects are
almost invariably soldered with silver solder, and are held by forceps
or on charcoal in the pointed flame of an ordinary blow-pipe.

Sec. 101.  On the Construction of Electrical Apparatus: Insulators.

It is not intended to deal in any way with the design of special
examples of electrical apparatus, but merely to describe a rather
miscellaneous set of materials and processes constantly required in
its construction.

It is not known whether there is such a thing as a perfect insulator,
even if we presuppose ideal circumstances.  Materials as they exist
must be regarded merely as of high specific resistance, that is if we
allow ourselves to use such a term in connection with substances,
conduction through which is neither independent of electromotive force
per unit length, nor of previous history.

Even the best of these substances generally get coated with a layer of
moisture when exposed to the air, and this as a rule conducts fairly
well.  Very pure crystalline sulphur and fused quartz suffer from this
defect less than any other substances with which the writer is
acquainted, but even with them the surface conductivity soon grows to
such an extent as totally to mask the internal conduction.

It is proposed to give a brief account of the properties of some
insulating substances and their application in electrical
construction, and at the same time to indicate the appliances and
methods requisite for working them.

With regard to the specific resistances which will be quoted, the
numbers must not be taken to mean too much, partly for the reason
already given.  It is also in general doubtful whether sufficient care
has been taken to distinguish the body from the surface conductivity,
and consequently numerical estimates are to be regarded with
suspicion.  The question of "sampling" also arises, for it must be
remembered that a change in composition amounting to, say, 1/10000 per
cent may be accompanied  by a million-fold change in specific
resistance.

Sec. 102.  Sulphur.

This element exists in several allotropic forms, which have very
different electric properties.  After melting at about 125 deg. C, and
