applied to the inflamed part, might be employed with success. This is
strictly agreeable to experience, but at first sight seems so very
contrary to the principles that have been advanced, that I shall
endeavour to explain the phenomena of inflammation, which do not seem
to be in general well understood.

All kinds of inflammation agree, in being attended with redness,
increased temperature, pain, and swelling; but they vary according to
the situation and texture of the part affected. All parts of the
body, excepting the cuticle, nails, hardest part of the teeth, and
hair, are subject to inflammation.

Among the causes of these complaints, may be enumerated too full a
diet, particularly too free a use of fermented liquors, and whatever
increases the impetus of the blood towards the part, as mechanical
and chemical irritation, and sudden changes of temperature,
particularly from cold to heat.

To explain the nature of inflammation, it may be observed, that such
is the wise constitution of the animal body, that whatever injures
it, excites motions calculated to correct or expel the offending
cause. Thus if an irritating substance is received into the stomach,
it excites vomiting; if into the lungs, a violent fit of coughing is
excited, and if into the nostrils, sneezing is the consequence. In
such cases we can readily trace the motions excited, and the manner
in which they act; but cannot trace the manner in which the offending
cause excites these motions.

Now if it can be shown that inflammation, like vomiting and coughing,
is an effort of the system to remove an offending cause, and if we
can trace every step of this operation, with the exception of the
changes induced on the nervous system, we shall understand the nature
of inflammation as completely as that of any function of the body.

The circumstance the most difficult to explain, is the increased
redness of the part affected, which can only depend on an increased
quantity of blood in the vessels. This has been supposed to depend
upon an increased action of the vessels of the part; but that this is
not the case, must be evident from what was said when we were
speaking of the circulation of the blood. It was shown, that the
circulation could not be carried on by the mere force of elasticity
alone; this force, were it perfect, would produce no effect; but as
there is no body with which we are acquainted that is perfectly
elastic; so the coats of the arteries are very far from being so,
hence their effect as elastic tubes will be to diminish the force of
the heart, instead of adding to it; for a certain quantity of this
force will be spent in distending the vessels, which, were they
perfectly elastic, would be restored to them, but as this is not the
case, this force is by no means restored. Indeed a variety of
considerations, observations, and experiments, tend to prove, that
the vessels are endowed with a power very different from elasticity,
which differs only in degree from that of the heart; in short, they
are possessed of muscular power.

After each contraction of the muscular coat, the elastic will act as
its antagonist, and enlarge the diameter, till the vessel arrive at a
mean degree of dilatation, but after this there is no further power
of distention inherent in the vessel. The action of the elastic coat
ceases; and no one will assert that a muscular fibre has power to
distend itself.

The only power by which the vessel can be further distended, is the
vis a tergo: after the vessel arrives at its mean degree of
dilatation, both the elastic and muscular coats act as antagonists to
the vis a tergo, or force which propels the blood into, and thus
tends further to dilate the vessel. If then the vis a tergo become
greater than in health, the powers of resistance inherent in the
vessels remaining the same; or if the latter be weakened, the vis a
tergo, or propelling force, remaining the same, the vessel must
suffer a morbid degree of dilatation. These appear to be the only
circumstances under which a vessel can suffer such dilatation.

But if, while the powers of the vessels remain the same, the vis a
tergo, or propelling force, be diminished, or the propelling force
remaining the same, the power of the vessels become increased; then
an opposite condition or state of the vessels, viz. a preternatural
diminution of their area, will take place.

In the one case the distending force bears too great a proportion to
the resisting force; and preternatural distention is the consequence.
In the other the resisting force bears too great a proportion to the
distending force, and preternatural contraction is the consequence.

It is not necessary that the vessels should be in a state of greater
debility than in health, in order that an inflammation or distention
may take place: it is only necessary that the proportion which their
action bears to the propelling force be less than in health. If the
propelling force remain the same, the vessels must be in a state of
debility before an inflammation can take place; but if the propelling
force be increased by a fullness of the vessels and sthenic
diathesis, inflammation may take place, although the vessels of the
part act as powerfully as in health, or more so. But after
inflammation has taken place, as the vessels are preternaturally
distended, they must also be debilitated.

The degree of inflammation is not however proportioned to the
debility of the minute vessels of an inflamed part, but to the
diminished proportion of their power to the propelling force.

When, therefore, inflammation arises from an increased action of the
arterial system, or an increased propelling force, while the force of
the capillaries or minute vessels remains the same, it constitutes
what is called an active inflammation, and is to be cured by general
bleedings, and then by gentle applications of tonics to the part, to
increase its action; but when it arises from a debility of the minute
vessels, without any increase of the propelling force, it forms what
is known by the name of passive inflammation; in which general
bleeding is not required, but the application of stimulants and
tonics to the inflamed part to enable the vessels to recover their
lost tone, and restore the balance between their action and the vis a
tergo. From what has been said, it must be evident, that if
inflammation depend on the diminished proportion of the power of the
capillaries to the propelling force, it will be more apt to supervene
under the three following circumstances.

1. In a state of plethora, because then all the vessels are over
distended, and consequently any cause tending further to distend
them, whether it be a cause which debilitates them, or increases the
propelling force, will be more felt than in health.

2. In a state of general debility, because the vital powers in any
part are more readily destroyed than in health.

3. In a state of general excitement, because then the propelling
force is every where strong, and consequently apt to occasion
distention of the vessels, wherever any degree of debility occurs.
These are the states of the system which are found to predispose to
inflammation. In the first and last, the inflammation is generally of
that kind, which is termed active: the propelling force is
considerable, and the larger arteries are readily excited to
increased action. In the second state the inflammation is of the
passive kind.

This is not merely a useless physiological disquisition; it is of the
greatest use in directing our practice; and teaches us that, in
passive inflammation, which has all the symptoms of active, and
therefore shows in a striking point of view the fallacy of symptoms,
we shall not succeed by applying leeches, and other debilitating
means, to the inflamed part; on the contrary, we shall aggravate the
complaint; and the cure must be effected by stimulants applied to the
part.

As an instance of this kind of inflammation, I may mention that kind
of ophthalmia or inflammation of the eyes, which is of long standing,
and which not only resists the powers of leeches and blisters, but is
increased by them. I have frequently been consulted by patients, who
had for months been under the debilitating plan, without any benefit;
and who have been relieved almost instantly by the application of
electricity and a stimulating lotion, which restored the tone of the
debilitated vessels of the sclerotic coat, and enabled them to expel
their overcharged contents; and the balance between their action and
the propelling force being restored, the inflammation disappeared.

Indeed the effects of electricity in these kinds of inflammations are
wonderful: it seems to act almost by a charm, so quickly does the
inflammation subside; but when we understand the nature of this kind
of inflammation, it is nothing but what we might expect from its
action.

I have been thus minute on the subject of inflammation, because the
theory of it, which I have attempted to defend, differs considerably
from the commonly received opinions. I shall now proceed to consider
the nature of asthenic diseases.

From what has been already said, it must be evident that the causes
of diseases which we have assigned, are very different from those
delivered by physicians who preceded Dr. Brown. Some physicians
imagined that diseases were caused by a change in the qualities of
the fluids, which became sometimes acid, and sometimes alkaline; or
on a change of figure of the particles of the blood: some imagined
diseases to be owing to a rational principle, which they called the
vis medicatrix naturae, which governed the actions of the body, and
excited fever or commotion in the system to remove any hurtful cause,
or expel any morbid matter, which might have insinuated itself into
the body. Others supposed many diseases to arise from a constriction
of the extreme vessels by cold; or from a spasm of them, which was a
contrivance of the vis medicatrix, to rouse the action of the heart
and arteries to remove the debility induced.

We have seen, however, that health and diseases are the same state,
and depending upon the same cause; viz. excitement, but differing in
degree; and that the powers producing both are the same, sometimes
acting with a proper degree of force: at other times either with too
much, or too little.

We shall now examine how the diminished actions of the different
exciting powers produce asthenic disease; and we shall take them in
the same order as when we were speaking of sthenic diseases. It must
be recollected however that an asthenic state, or a state of
debility, may be produced in two ways. First, by directly diminishing
the action of the exciting powers. Secondly, by exhausting the
excitability, by a strong or long continued stimulant action. The
former state is called direct debility, and the latter indirect
debility. This is not merely a distinction without a difference, the
body is in very different states, under these two different forms of
disease. In the former case, the excitability is abundant, and highly
susceptible of the action of stimulants. In the latter, it is
exhausted, and the body has very little susceptibility.

Cold, or a diminution of heat, carried beyond a certain degree, is
unfriendly to all animals. Dr. Beddoes has shown very clearly in his
Hygeia, that it is the cause of a great many diseases which take
place at boarding schools, and that it there gives origin to a great
number of diseases that afterwards arise, and, indeed, not
unfrequently ruins the constitution. It produces relaxation of the
vessels, asthenic or passive inflammation, and even gangrene. He has
shown that in most schools children are afflicted with chilblains
from this cause; this is a case of passive inflammation, but is only
a symptom of the general debility induced, which shows itself
afterwards by the production of other symptoms. Hence it is necessary
for the preservation of health, that the temperature of school rooms
should always be kept equable, and regulated by means of a
thermometer. It should not exceed 50 degrees, nor should it be
allowed to fall much below it. If precautions of this kind are
thought to be necessary, and practised with uncommon attention, in
places where vegetables are reared, surely they ought not to be
neglected in those seminaries where the human species are to be
brought to maturity, and a good constitution established.

But though I have no doubt whatever, that this equable temperature
would prevent a number of diseases, which originate in too low a
temperature, yet I am far from wishing to have it thought that I
would not induce a hardy state of the constitution, which would
enable it to bear the vicissitudes to which it must be exposed in its
journey through life, by every means in my power. Hardiness is the
most enviable of all the attributes of animal nature, and can neither
be acquired, nor recovered when it is lost, but upon certain terms,
to which many people submit with reluctance, because they must give
up many indulgences and gratifications with which it is utterly
inconsistent.

One of the causes that chiefly contributes to reduce persons living
in affluence below the standard of hardiness, is the dependence they
place on a considerable degree of external warmth, for preserving a
comfortable state of sensation. From what has been said again and
again in some of the latest of these lectures, it must be evident
that continued warmth renders the living system less capable of being
excited to strong, healthy, and pleasant action: heat in excess,
whether it may be excess of duration or intensity, constantly
debilitates, by exhausting the excitability of the system, and thus
producing a state of indirect debility. Every muscle steeped in a
heated medium, whether of air or water, loses much of its
contractibility. A heart kept in heated air, or put in hot water,
will not contract on the application of a stimulus; even the limb of
a frog, when heated in this manner, ceases to move on the application
of the galvanic exciters. Every nerve grows languid, and when it does
become excited, it acquires a disposition to throw the moving fibres,
with which it is connected, into starts, twitchings, and other
irregular convulsive motions. Though therefore nothing can more
contribute to the health of the body than a moderate and well
regulated temperature, about 48 or 50 degrees, sometimes for a short
interval a little lower, when exercise is taken at the same time, yet
when we consider the life led by persons of fashion, we should hope
that it proceeded from ignorance of these consequences; so
diametrically opposite is it to the dictates of nature and reason.

Instead of rising from table after dinner, and availing themselves of
the cooling and refreshing qualities of the air, even in the finest
seasons, when every thing which pure and simple nature can offer,
invites them abroad, they do every thing they can, as Dr. Beddoes
observes, to add to the overstimulating operation of a full and
hearty dinner. After taking strong wine with their food, they sit in
rooms rendered progressively warmer, all the afternoon, by the
presence of company, by the increase of fires, and for more than half
the year, by the early closing of the shutters, and letting down of
the window curtains. After a short interval, tea and coffee succeed;
liquors stimulating both by their inherent qualities, and by virtue
of the temperature at which they are often drank. And that nothing
may be wanting to their pernicious effect, they are frequently taken
in the very stew and squeeze of a fashionable mob. The season of
sleep succeeds, and to crown the adventures of the evening, the bed
room is fastened close, and made stifling by a fire: and though the
robust may not quickly feel the effects of this mode of life, with
the feeble it is quite otherwise. These, as they usually manage,
rarely pass a few hours of sleep without feverishness and uneasy
dreams; both of which contribute to their finding themselves by far
more spent and spiritless in the morning, than after their evening
fit of forced excitement, instead of having their spirits and
strength recruited by the "chief nourisher in life's feast," Perhaps
they drink tea before rising, and indulge in a morning nap; this
weakens much more than the greatest muscular exertion they would be
capable of supporting for an equal time. For the sleep at this time
is almost invariably disturbed, and attended by a heat of the skin.
The reason of this must be evident to every one who has attended
these lectures.

The effect of sleep is to accumulate the excitability, or render it
more sensible to the effects of any stimulants applied. This takes
place in every constitution, and much more in the more delicate:
hence the heat of the bed, and of the tea, acts so powerfully on the
surface, as, in general, to produce great perspiration, or, at any
rate, great languor and debility.

Let me ask, can any one, who lives in this manner, expect to enjoy
good health? With as great probability might we expect, that when we
plunged a thermometer into hot water, the mercury would not rise, or
when we applied a lighted match to gunpowder, it would not explode.
The laws of nature are constant and uniform, and the same, or similar
causes, both in the animate and inanimate world, are always
productive of the same, or similar effects.

The cure of these complaints is at least obvious, if not easy. It
consists in deserting crowded and heated rooms, at least for part of
the time they have been usually occupied; in abstaining from strong
wines; in keeping the bed rooms moderately cool; and retiring to rest
at a proper hour.

With respect to the effects of nutriment, in producing asthenic
diseases, we may observe, that all watery vegetable food, too sparing
a use of animal food, as also meat which is too salt, and deprived of
its nutritious juices by keeping, when more nutritious matter is at
the same time withheld, constantly weaken, and thereby tend to
produce asthenic diseases. Hence would appear to arise that
remarkable imbecility of body and mind which distinguishes the
Gentoos. Hence arise the diseases with which the poor are every where
afflicted; hence scrofula, epilepsy, and the whole band of asthenic
diseases.

But intemperance in eating and drinking, or taking nutritious and
highly stimulant substances too freely, will, infallibly, bring on
asthenic disease, or a state of indirect debility, by exhausting the
excitability; and it must be observed, that this species of debility
is much worse to cure than the direct kind; for in the latter we have
abundance of excitability, and a variety of stimuli, by which we can
exhaust it to the proper degree, and thus bring about the healthy
state; whereas, in indirect debility, the vital principle or
excitability is deficient; and we have not the means of reproducing
it, at pleasure, absolutely under our command. Besides, the
subtraction of stimulants, which is one of the most certain means we
have of accumulating excitability, if carried to a great extent, in
diseases of indirect debility, would produce death, before the system
had power to reproduce the lost or exhausted excitability. Hence the
cure, in these two kinds of debility, must be very different: in
cases of direct debility, as in epilepsy, we must begin with gentle
stimulants, and increase them with the greatest caution, till the
healthy state is established: we must, however, guard most carefully
against over doing it; for, if we should once overstep the bounds of
excitement, and convert the direct into indirect debility, we shall
have a disease to combat, in which we have both a want of excitement
and of exciting power.

In cases of violent indirect debility, as, for instance, in gout,
when it affects the stomach: it would be wrong to withdraw the
stimulus, for the excitability is in such an exhausted state as to
produce no action, or very imperfect and diseased, from the effect of
the common exciting powers; we must, therefore, here apply a stimulus
greater than natural, to bring on a vigorous and healthy action, and
this stimulus we should gradually diminish, in order to allow the
excitability to accumulate, by which the healthy state will be
gradually restored.

This method was very judiciously recommended, by a very eminent
physician, in the case of a Highland chieftain, who had brought on
dreadful symptoms of indigestion by the use of whisky, of which he
drank a large silver cup full five or six times in the day. The
doctor did not merely say, diminish the quantity of spirits
gradually, for that simple advice would not have been followed; but
he advised him to drink the cup the same number of times full, but
each morning to melt into it as much wax as would receive the
impression of the family seal. This direction, which had something
magical in it in the mind of the chieftain, was punctually obeyed. In
a few months the cup was filled with wax, and would hold no more
spirits; but it had thus been gradually diminished, and the patient
was cured.

This reminds me of a number of cases, which had been brought on by
drinking porter, and other stimulant liquors, without knowing the
taste of water. In many of these cases if a moderate quantity of
water were drank every day they would be cured; but you would find
few who would follow such plain and simple directions. How then must
a physician proceed? Why, as is generally done by the most judicious:
they direct their patients to Bath or Buxton, and there advise them
