identity. The "Great September Comet" of 1882 was in no hurry to
withdraw itself from curious terrestrial scrutiny. It was discerned with
the naked eye at Cordoba as late as March 7, 1883, and still showed in
the field of the great equatoreal on June 1 as an "excessively faint
whiteness."[1319] It was then about 480 millions of miles from the
earth--a distance to which no other comet--not even excepting the
peculiar one of 1729--had been pursued.[1320] Moreover, an arc of 340
out of the entire 360 degrees of its circuit had been described under
the eyes of astronomers; so that its course came to be very well known.
That its movement is in a very eccentric ellipse, traversed in several
hundred years, was ascertained.[1321] The later inquiries of Dr.
Kreutz,[1322] completed in a volume published in 1901,[1323]
demonstrated the period to be of about 800 years, while that of its
predecessor in 1843 might possibly agree with it, but is much more
probably estimated at 512 years. The hypothesis that they, or any of the
comets associated with them, were returns of an individual body is
peremptorily excluded. They may all, however, have been separated from
one original mass by the divellent action of the sun at close quarters.
Each has doubtless its own period, since each has most likely suffered
retardations or accelerations special to itself, which, though trifling
in amount, would avail materially to alter the length of the major axis,
while leaving the remaining elements of the common orbit virtually
unchanged.[1324]

A fifth member was added to the family in 1887. On the 18th of January
in that year, M. Thome discovered at Cordoba a comet reproducing with
curious fidelity the lineaments of that observed in the same latitudes
seven years previously. The narrow ribbon of light, contracting towards
the sun, and running outward from it to a distance of thirty-five
degrees; the unsubstantial head--a veiled nothingness, as it appeared,
since no distinct nucleus could be made out; the quick fading into
invisibility, were all accordant peculiarities, and they were confirmed
by some rough calculations of its orbit, showing geometrical affinity to
be no less unmistakable than physical likeness. The observations secured
were indeed, from the nature of the apparition, neither numerous nor
over-reliable; and the earliest of them dated from a week after
perihelion, passed, almost by a touch-and-go escape, January 11. On
January 27, this mysterious object could barely be discerned
telescopically at Cordoba.[1325] That it belonged to the series of
"southern comets" can scarcely be doubted; but the inference that it was
an actual return of the comet of 1880, improbable in itself, was
negatived by its non-appearance in 1894. Meyer's incorporation with this
extraordinary group of the "eclipse-comet" of 1882[1326] has been
approved by Kreutz, after searching examination.

The idea of cometary systems was first suggested by Thomas Clausen in
1831.[1327] It was developed by the late M. Hoek, director of the
Utrecht Observatory, in 1865 and some following years.[1328] He found
that in quite a considerable number of cases, the paths of two or three
comets had a common point of intersection far out in space, indicating
with much likelihood a community of origin. This consisted, according to
his surmise, in the disruption of a parent mass during its sweep round
the star latest visited. Be this as it may, the fact is undoubted that
numerous comets fall into groups, in which similar conditions of motion
betray a pre-existent physical connection. Never before, however, had
geometrical relationship been so notorious as between the comets now
under consideration; and never before, in a comet still, it might be
said, in the prime of life, had physical peculiarities tending to
account for that affinity been so obvious as in the chief member of the
group.

Observation of a granular structure in cometary nuclei dates far back
into the seventeenth century, when Cysatus and Hevelius described the
central parts of the comets of 1618 and 1652 respectively as made up of
a congeries of minute stars. Analogous symptoms of a loose state of
aggregation have of late been not unfrequently detected in telescopic
comets, besides the instances of actual division offered by those
connected with the names of Biela and Liais. The forces concerned in
producing these effects seem to have been peculiarly energetic in the
great comet of 1882.

The segmentation of the nucleus was first noticed in the United States
and at the Cape of Good Hope, September 30. It proceeded rapidly. At
Kiel, on October 5 and 7, Professor Krueger perceived two centres of
condensation. A definite and progressive separation into _three_ masses
was observed by Professor Holden, October 13 and 17.[1329] A few days
later, M. Tempel found the head to consist of _four_ lucid aggregations,
ranged nearly along the prolongation of the caudal axis;[1330] and Dr.
Common, January 27, 1883, saw _five_ nuclei in a line "like pearls on a
string."[1331] This remarkable character was preserved to the last
moment of the comet's distinct visibility. It was a consequence,
according to Dr. Kreutz, of violent interior action in the comet itself
While close to the sun.

There were, however, other curious proofs of a disaggregative tendency
in this body. On October 9, Schmidt discovered at Athens a nebulous
object 4 deg. south-west of the great comet, and travelling in the same
direction. It remained visible for a few days, and, from Oppenheim's and
Hind's calculations, there can be little doubt that it was really the
offspring by fission of the body it accompanied.[1332] This is rendered
more probable by the unexampled spectacle offered, October 14, to
Professor Barnard, then of Nashville, Tennessee, of _six or eight_
distinct cometary masses within 6 deg. south by west of the comet's head,
none of which reappeared on the next opportunity for a search.[1333] A
week later, however, one similar object was discerned by Mr. W. R.
Brooks, in the opposite direction from the comet. Thus space appeared to
be strewn with the filmy debris of this beautiful but fragile structure
all along the track of its retreat from the sun.

Its tail was only equalled (if it were equalled) in length by that of
the comet of 1843. It extended in space to the vast distance of 200
millions of miles from the head; but, so imperfectly were its
proportions displayed to terrestrial observers, that it at no time
covered an arc of the sky of more than 30 deg. This apparent extent was
attained, during a few days previous to September 25, by a faint, thin,
rigid streak, noticed only by a few observers--by Elkin at the Cape
Observatory, Eddie at Grahamstown, and Cruls at Rio Janeiro. It diverged
at a low angle from the denser curved train, and was produced, according
to Bredikhine,[1334] by the action of a repulsive force twelve times as
strong as the counter-pull of gravity. It belonged, that is, to type 1;
while the great bifurcate appendage, obvious to all eyes, corresponded
to the lower rate of emission characteristic of type 2. This was
remarkable for the perfect definiteness of its termination, for its
strongly-forked shape, and for its unusual permanence. Down to the end
of January, 1883, its length, according to Schmidt's observations, was
still 93 million miles; and a week later it remained visible to the
naked eye, without notable abridgment.

Most singular of all was an anomalous extension of the appendage
_towards_ the sun. During the greater part of October and November, a
luminous "tube" or "sheath," of prodigious dimensions, seemed to
surround the head, and project in a direction nearly opposite to that of
the usual outpourings of attentuated matter. (See Plate III.) Its
diameter was computed by Schmidt to be, October 15, no less than four
million miles, and it was described by Cruls as a "truncated cone of
nebulosity," stretching 3 deg. or 4 deg. sunwards.[1335] This, and the
entire anterior part of the comet, were again surrounded by a thin, but
enormously voluminous paraboloidal envelope, observed by Schiaparelli
for a full month from October 19.[1336] There can be little doubt that
these abnormal effluxes were a consequence of the tremendous physical
disturbance suffered at perihelion; and it is worth remembering that
something analogous was observed in the comet of 1680 (Newton's), also
noted for its excessively close approach to the sun, and possibly moving
in a related orbit. The only plausible hypothesis as to the mode of
their production is that of an opposite state of electrification in the
particles composing the ordinary and extraordinary appendages.

The spectrum of the great comet of 1882 was, in part, a repetition of
that of its immediate predecessor, thus confirming the inference that
the previously unexampled sodium-blaze was in both a direct result of
the intense solar action to which they were exposed. But the D line was,
this time, not seen alone. At Dunecht, on the morning of September 18,
Drs. Copeland and J. G. Lohse succeeded in identifying six brilliant
rays in the green and yellow with as many prominent iron-lines;[1337] a
very significant addition to our knowledge of cometary constitution, and
one which lent countenance to Bredikhine's assumption of various kinds
of matter issuing from the nucleus with velocities inversely as their
atomic weights. All the lines equally showed a slight displacement,
indicating a recession from the earth of the radiating body at the rate
of 37 to 46 miles a second. A similar observation, made by M. Thollon at
Nice on the same day, gave emphatic sanction to the spectroscopic method
of estimating movement in the line of sight. Before anything was as yet
known of the comet's path or velocity, he announced, from the position
of the double sodium-line alone, that at 3 p.m. on September 18 it was
increasing its distance from our planet by from 61 to 76 kilometres per
second.[1338] M. Bigourdan's subsequent calculations showed that its
actual swiftness of recession was at that moment 73 kilometres.

Changes in the inverse order to those seen in the spectrum of comet
Wells soon became apparent. In the earlier body, carbon bands had died
out with _approach_ to perihelion, and had been replaced by sodium
emissions; in its successor, sodium emissions became weakened and
disappeared with _retreat_ from perihelion, and found their substitute
in carbon bands. Professor Ricco was, in fact, able to infer, from the
sequence of prismatic phenomena, that the comet had already passed the
sun; thus establishing a novel criterion for determining the position of
a comet in its orbit by the varying quality of its radiations.

Recapitulating what was learnt from the five conspicuous comets of
1880-82, we find that the leading facts acquired to science were these
three. First, that comets may be met with pursuing each other, after
intervals of many years, in the same, or nearly the same, track; so that
identity of orbit can no longer be regarded as a sure test of individual
identity. Secondly, that at least the outer corona may be traversed by
such bodies with perfect apparent impunity. Finally, that their chemical
constitution is highly complex, and that they possess, in some cases at
least, a metallic core resembling the meteoric masses which occasionally
reach the earth from planetary space.

A group of five comets, including Halley's, own a sort of cliental
dependence upon the planet Neptune. They travel out from the sun just to
about his distance from it, as if to pay homage to a powerful protector,
who gets the credit of their establishment as periodical visitors to the
solar system. The second of these bodies to affect a looked-for return
was a comet--the sixteenth within ten years--discovered by Pons, July
20, 1812, and found by Encke to revolve in an elliptic orbit, with a
period of nearly 71 years. It was not, however, until September 1, 1883,
that Mr. Brooks caught its reappearance; it passed perihelion January
25, and was last seen June 2, 1884. At its brightest, it had the
appearance of a second magnitude star, furnished with a poorly developed
double tail, and was fairly conspicuous to the naked eye in Southern
Europe, from December to March. One exceptional feature distinguished
it. Its fluctuations in form and luminosity were unprecedented in
rapidity and extent. On September 21, Dr. Chandler[1339] observed it at
Harvard as a very faint, diffused nebulosity, with slight central
condensation. On the next night, there was found in its place a bright
star of the eighth magnitude, scarcely marked out, by a bare trace of
environing haze, from the genuine stars it counterfeited. The change was
attended by an eight-fold augmentation of light, and was proved by
Schiaparelli's confirmatory observations[1340] to have been accomplished
within a few hours. The stellar disguise was quickly cast aside. The
comet appeared on September 23 as a wide nebulous disc, and soon after
faded down to its original dimness. Its distance from the sun was then
no less than 200 million miles, and its spectrum showed nothing unusual.
These strange variations recurred slightly on October 15, and with
marked emphasis on January 1, when they were witnessed with amazement,
and photometrically studied by Mueller of Potsdam.[1341] The entire cycle
this time was run through in less than four hours--the comet having, in
that brief space, condensed, with a vivid outburst of light, into a
seeming star, and the seeming star having expanded back again into a
comet. Scarcely less transient, though not altogether similar, changes
of aspect were noted by M. Perrotin,[1342] January 13 and 19, 1884. On
the latter date, the continuous spectrum given by a reddish-yellow disc
surrounding the true nucleus seemed intensified by bright knots
corresponding to the rays of sodium.

A comet discovered by Mr. Sawerthal at the Royal Observatory, Cape of
Good Hope, February 19, 1888, distinguished itself by blazing up, on May
19, to four or five times its normal brilliancy, at the same time
throwing out from the head two lustrous lateral branches.[1343] These
had, on June 1, spread backward so as to join the tail, with an effect
like the playing of a fountain; ten or eleven days later, they had
completely disappeared, leaving the comet in its former shape and
insignificance. Its abrupt display of vitality occurred two full months
after perihelion.

On the morning of July 7, 1889, Mr. W. R. Brooks, of Geneva, New York,
eminent as a successful comet-hunter, secured one of his customary
trophies. The faint object in question was moving through the
constellation Cetus, and turned out to be a member of Jupiter's numerous
family of comets, revolving round the sun in a period of seven years.
Its past history came then, to a certain extent, within the scope of
investigation, and proved to have been singularly eventful; nor had the
body escaped scatheless from the vicissitudes to which it had been
exposed. Observing from Mount Hamilton, August 2 and 5, Professor
Barnard noticed this comet (1889, v.) to be attended in its progress
through space by four _outriders_, "The two brighter companions" (the
fainter pair survived a very short time) "were perfect miniatures,"
Professor Barnard tells us,[1344] "of the larger comet, each having a
small, fairly defined head and nucleus, with a faint, hazy tail, the
more distant one being the larger and less developed. The three comets
were in a straight line, nearly east and west, their tails lying along
this line. There was no connecting nebulosity between these objects, the
tails of the two smaller not reaching each other, or the large comet. To
all appearance they were absolutely independent comets." Nevertheless,
Spitaler, at Vienna, in the early days of August, perceived, as it were,
a thin cocoon of nebulosity woven round the entire trio.[1345] One of
them faded from view September 5; the other actually outshone the
original comet on August 31, but was plainly of inferior vitality. It
was last seen by Barnard on November 25, with the thirty-six inch
refractor, while its primary afforded an observation for position with
the twelve-inch, March 20, 1890.[1346] A cause for the disruption it had
presumably undergone had, before then, been plausibly assigned.

The adventures of Lexell's comet have long served to exemplify the
effects of Jupiter's despotic sway over such bodies. Although bright
enough in 1770 to be seen with the naked eye, and ascertained to be
circulating in five and a half years, it had never previously been seen,
and failed subsequently to present itself. The explanation of this
anomaly, suggested by Lexell, and fully confirmed by the analytical
inquiries both of Laplace and Leverrier,[1347] was that a very close
approach to Jupiter in 1767 had completely changed the character of its
orbit, and brought it within the range of terrestrial observation; while
in 1779, after having only twice traversed its new path (at its second
return it was so circumstanced as to be invisible from the earth), it
was, by a fresh encounter, diverted into one entirely different. Yet the
possibility was not lost sight of that the great planet, by inverting
its mode of action, might undo its own work, and fling the comet once
more into the inner part of the solar system. This possibility seemed to
be realized by Chandler's identification of Brooks's and Lexell's
comet.[1348] An exceedingly close approach to Jupiter in 1886 had, he
found reason to believe, produced such extensive alterations in the
elements of its motion as to bring the errant body back to our
neighbourhood in 1889. But his inference, though ratified by Mr. Charles
Lane Poor's preliminary calculations, proved dubious on closer inquiry,
and was rendered wholly inadmissible by the circumstances attending the
return of Brooks's comet in 1896.[1349] The companion-objects watched by
Barnard in 1889 had by that time, perhaps, become dissipated in space,
for they were not redetected. They represented, in all likelihood,
wreckage from a collision with Jupiter, dating, perhaps, so far back as
1791, when Mr. Lane Poor found that one of the fateful meetings to which
short-period comets are especially subject had taken place.

The Lexell-Brooks case was almost duplicated by the resemblance to De
Vico's lost comet of 1844[1350] of one detected November 20, 1894, by
Edward, son of Lewis Swift. Schulhof[1351] announced the identity, and
Chandler,[1352] under reserve, vouched for it. Had the comet continued
to pursue the track laboriously laid down for it at Boston, and shown
itself at the due epoch in 1900, its individuality might have been
considered assured; but the formidable vicegerent of the sun once more
interposed, and, in 1897, swept it out of the terrestrial range of view.
Hence the recognition remains ambiguous.

On the morning of March 7, 1892, Professor Lewis Swift discovered the
brightest comet that had been seen by northern observers since 1882.
About the time of perihelion, which occurred on April 6, it was
conspicuous, as it crossed the celestial equator from Aquarius towards
Pegasus, with a nucleus equal to a third magnitude star, and a tail
twenty degrees long. This tail was multiple, and multiple in a most
curiously variable manner. It divided up into many thin nebulous
streaks, the number and relative lustre of which underwent rapid and
marked changes. Their permanent record on Barnard's and W. H.
Pickering's plates marked a noteworthy advance in cometary photography.
Plate IV. reproduces two of the Lick pictures, taken with a six-inch
camera, on April 5 and 7 respectively, with, in each case, an exposure
of about one hour. The tail is in the first composed of three main
branches, the middle one having sprung out since the previous morning,
and the branches are, in their turn, split up into finer rays, to the
number of perhaps a dozen in all. In the second a very different state
of things is exhibited. "The southern component," Professor Barnard
remarked, "which was the brightest on the 5th, had become diffused and
fainter, while the middle tail was very bright and broad. Its southern
side, which was the best defined, was wavy in numerous places, the tail
appearing as if disturbing currents were flowing at right angles to it.
At 42 deg. from the head the tail made an abrupt bend towards the south,
as if its current was deflected by some obstacle. In the densest portion
of the tail, at the point of deflection, are a couple of dark holes,
similar to those seen in some of the nebulae. The middle portion of the
tail is brighter, and looks like crumpled silk in places."[1353] Next
morning the southern was the prominent branch, and it was loaded, at
1 deg. 42' from the head, with a strange excrescence, suggesting the
budding-out of a fresh comet in that incongruous situation.[1354] Some
of these changes, Professor Barnard thought, might possibly be explained
by a rotation of the tail on an axis passing through the nucleus, and
Pickering, who formed a similar opinion on independent grounds, assigned
about 94 hours as the period of the gyrating movement.[1355] He,
moreover, determined accelerative velocities outward from the sun of
definite condensations in the tail, indicating for its materials, on
Bredikhine's theory, a density less than one half that of
hydrogen.[1356] This conclusion applied also to Rordame's comet, which
exhibited a year later phenomena analogous to those remarked in Swift's.
Their photographic study led Professor Hussey[1357] to significant
inferences as to the structure and rapid changes of cometary appendages.


PLATE IV.

[Illustration:
Photographs of Swift's Comet.
By Professor E. E. Barnard.
No. 1. Taken April 4, 1892; exposure 1 h.
No. 2. Taken April 6, 1892; exposure 1 h. 5 m ]


Seven comets were detected in 1892, and all, strange to say, were
visible together towards the close of the year.[1358] Among them was a
faint object, which unexpectedly left a trail on a plate exposed by
Professor Barnard to the stars in Aquila[1359] on October 12. This was
the first comet actually discovered by photography, the Sohag comet
having been simultaneously seen and pictured. It has a period of about
six years. Holmes's comet is likewise periodical, in rather less than
seven years. Its path, which is wholly comprised between the orbits of
Mars and Jupiter, is less eccentric than that of any other known comet.
Subsequently to its discovery, on November 6, it underwent some curious
vicissitudes. At first bright and condensed, it expanded rapidly with
increasing distance from the sun (to which it had made its nearest
approach on June 13), until, by the middle of December, it was barely
discernible with powerful telescopes as "a feebly luminous mist on the
face of the sky."[1360] But on January 16, 1893, observers in Europe and
America were bewildered to find, as if substituted for it, a yellow star
of the seventh magnitude, enveloped in a thin nebulous husk, which
enclosed a faint miniature tail.[1361] This condensation and recovery of
light lasted in its full intensity only a couple of days. The almost
evanescent faintness of Holmes's comet at its next return accounted for
its invisibility previous to 1892, when it was evidently in a state of
peculiar excitement. Mr. Perrine was barely able, with the Lick 36-inch,
to find the vague nebulous patch which occupied its predicted place on
June 10, 1899.

The origin of comets has been long and eagerly inquired into, not
altogether apart from the cheering guidance of ascertained facts. Sir
William Herschel regarded them as fragments of nebulae[1362]--scattered
debris of embryo worlds; and Laplace approved of and adopted the
idea.[1363] But there was a difficulty. No comet has yet been observed
to travel in a decided hyperbola. The typical cometary orbit, apart from
disturbance, is parabolic--that is to say, it is indistinguishable from
an enormously long ellipse. But this circumstance could only be
reconciled with the view that the bodies thus moving were casual
visitors from outer space, by making, as Laplace did, the tacit
assumption that the solar system was at rest. His reasoning was, indeed,
thereby completely vitiated, as Gauss pointed out in 1815;[1364] and the
objections then urged were reiterated by Schiaparelli,[1365] who
demonstrated in 1871 that a large preponderance of well-marked
hyperbolic orbits should result if comets were picked up _en route_ by a
swiftly-advancing sun. The fact that their native movement is
practically parabolic shows it to have been wholly imparted from
without. They passively obeyed the pull exerted upon them. In other
words, their condition previous to being attracted by the sun was one
very nearly of relative repose.[1366] They shared, accordingly, the
movement of translation through space of the solar system.

This significant conclusion had been indicated, on other grounds, as the
upshot of researches undertaken independently by Carrington[1367] and
Mohn[1368] in 1860, with a view to ascertaining the anticipated
existence of a relationship between the general _lie_ of the paths of
comets and the direction of the sun's journey. It is tolerably obvious
that if they wander at haphazard through interstellar regions their
apparitions should markedly aggregate towards the vicinity of the
constellation Lyra; that is to say, we should meet considerably more
comets than would overtake us, for the very same reason that falling
stars are more numerous after than before midnight. Moreover, the comets
met by us should be, apparently, swifter-moving objects than those
coming up with us from behind; because, in the one case, our own real
movement would be added to, in the other subtracted from, theirs. But
nothing of all this can be detected. Comets approach the sun
indifferently from all quarters, and with velocities quite independent
of direction.

We conclude, then, that the "cosmical current" which bears the solar
system towards its unknown goal carries also with it nebulous masses of
undefined extent, and at an undefined remoteness, fragments detached
from which, continually entering the sphere of the sun's attraction,
flit across our skies under the form of comets. These are, however,
almost certainly so far strangers to our system that they had no part in
the long processes of development by which its present condition was
attained. They are, perhaps, survivals of an earlier, and by us scarcely
and dimly conceivable state of things, when the swirling chaos from
which sun and planets were, by a supreme edict, to emerge, had not as
yet separately begun to be.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1267: _Astr. Nach._, Nos. 1,172-4.]

[Footnote 1268: _Berichte Saechs. Ges._, 1871, p. 174.]

[Footnote 1269: _Natur der Cometen_, p. 124; _Astr. Nach._, No. 2,086.]

[Footnote 1270: _Annales de l'Obs. de Moscou_, t. iii., pt. i., p. 37.]

[Footnote 1271: _Bull. Astr._, t. iii., p. 598. The value of the
repellent force for the comet of 1811 (which offered peculiar facilities
for its determination) was found = 17.5.]

[Footnote 1272: Faye, _Comptes Rendus_, t. xciii., p. 13.]

[Footnote 1273: _Annales_, t. v., pt. ii., p. 137.]

[Footnote 1274: _Am. Jour. of Sc._, vol. xxxii. (2nd ser.), p. 57.]

[Footnote 1275: _Astr. Nach._, No. 2,082.]

[Footnote 1276: _Annales de l'Obs. de Moscou_, t. vi., pt. i., p. 60.]

[Footnote 1277: _Astr. Register_, March, 1883.]

[Footnote 1278: _Astr. Nach._, No. 3,018.]

[Footnote 1279: _Ibid._, No. 3,093.]

[Footnote 1280: _Constitution de l'Espace Celeste_, p. 224.]

[Footnote 1281: _Astroph. Jour._, vol. iii., p. 36.]

[Footnote 1282: _Physikalische Zeitschrift_, November 10 and 17, 1900;
_Astroph. Jour._, vol. xiii., p. 344. _Cf._ Schwarzschild, _Sitzungsb._,
Muenchen, 1901, Heft iii.; J. Hahn, _Nature_, vols. lxv., p. 415; lxvi.,
p. 55.]

[Footnote 1283: _Astr. Nach._, No. 2,307.]

[Footnote 1284: _Ibid._, No. 2,304.]

[Footnote 1285: _Observatory_, vol. iii., p. 390.]

[Footnote 1286: _Astr. Nach._, No. 2,319.]

[Footnote 1287: _Ueber die Kometen von 371 v. Chr._, 1668, 1843, I. und
1880 I. Gottingen, 1880.]

[Footnote 1288: _Meteor._, lib. i., cap. 6.]

[Footnote 1289: _Mem. Soc. Phys. de Geneve_, t. xxviii., p. 23.]

[Footnote 1290: _Annales de l'Obs. de Moscou_, t. vii., pt. i., p. 60.]

[Footnote 1291: Bredikhine, _Annales_, t. viii., p. 68.]

[Footnote 1292: _Am. Jour. of Sc._, vol. xxii., p. 305.]

[Footnote 1293: Messrs. Burton and Green observed a dilatation of the
stellar image into a nebulous patch by the transmission of its rays
through a nuclear jet of the comet. _Am. Jour. of Sc._, vol. xxii., p.
163.]

[Footnote 1294: _Archives des Sciences_, t. viii., p. 535. _Cf._
Perrine's negative results for Swift's comet in 1899, _Astr. Nach._, No.
3,602.]

[Footnote 1295: Riem concluded in 1896 for a definitive period of 2,429
years; _Observatory_, vol. xix., p. 282.]

[Footnote 1296: Holden, _Publ. Astr. Pac. Soc._, vol. ix., p. 89.]

[Footnote 1297: _Annuaire_, Paris, 1882, p. 781.]

[Footnote 1298: _Annuaire_, 1882, p. 766.]

[Footnote 1299: _Am. Jour. of Sc._, vol. xxii., p. 134.]

[Footnote 1300: _Report Brit. Assoc._, 1881, p. 520.]

[Footnote 1301: _Month. Not._, vol. xlii., p. 14; _Am. Jour. of Sc._,
vol. xxii., p. 136.]

[Footnote 1302: Piazzi Smyth, _Nature_, vol. xxiv., p. 430.]

[Footnote 1303: _Astr. Nach._, No. 2,395.]

[Footnote 1304: _Ibid._]

[Footnote 1305: _Astr. Nach._, No. 2,411.]

[Footnote 1306: _Month. Not._, vol. xlii., p. 49.]

[Footnote 1307: _Astr. Nach._, No. 2,414.]

[Footnote 1308: _Copernicus_, vol. ii., p. 229.]

[Footnote 1309: _Astr. Nach._, Nos. 2,434, 2,437.]

[Footnote 1310: _Ibid._, No. 2,441.]

[Footnote 1311: _Report Brit. Assoc._, 1882, p. 442.]

[Footnote 1312: J. J. Parsons, _Am. Jour. of Science_, vol. xxvii., p.
34.]

[Footnote 1313: _Astr. Nach._, No. 2,441.]

[Footnote 1314: _Observatory_, vol. v., p. 355. The transit had been
foreseen by Mr. Tebbutt, but it occurred after sunset in New South
Wales.]

[Footnote 1315: _Observatory_, vol. v., p. 354.]

[Footnote 1316: Gould, _Astr. Nach._, No. 2,481.]

[Footnote 1317: Flammarion, _Comptes Rendus_, t. xcv., p. 558.]

[Footnote 1318: Captain Ray's sextant observation of the comet of 1843,
a few hours before perihelion, was too rough to be of use.]

[Footnote 1319: _Astr. Nach._, No. 2,538.]

[Footnote 1320: _Nature_, vol. xxix., p. 135.]

[Footnote 1321: _Astr. Nach._, No. 2,482.]

[Footnote 1322: _Vierteljahrsschrift Astr. Ges._, Jahrg. xxiv., p. 308;
_Bull. Astr._, t. vii., p. 513.]

[Footnote 1323: _Observatory_, vol. xxiv., p. 167.]

[Footnote 1324: The attention of the author was kindly directed to this
point by Professor Young of Princeton (N. J.). _Cf._ Rebeur-Paschwitz,
_Sirius_, Bd. xvi., p. 233.]

[Footnote 1325: Oppenheim, _Astr. Nach._, No. 2,902.]

[Footnote 1326: _Astr. Nach._, No. 2,717.]

[Footnote 1327: Gruithuisen's _Analekten_, Heft 7, p. 48.]

[Footnote 1328: _Month. Not._, vols. xxv., xxvi., xxviii. _Cf._ Plummer,
_Observatory_, vol. xiii., p. 263.]

[Footnote 1329: _Nature_, vol. xxvii., p. 246.]

[Footnote 1330: _Astr. Nach._, No. 2,468.]

[Footnote 1331: _Athenaeum_, February 3, 1883.]

[Footnote 1332: _Astr. Nach._, Nos. 2,462, 2,466.]

[Footnote 1333: _Ibid._, No. 2,489.]

[Footnote 1334: _Annales_, Moscow, t. ix., pt. ii., p. 52.]

[Footnote 1335: _Comptes Rendus_, t. xcvii., p. 797.]

[Footnote 1336: _Astr. Nach._, No. 2,966.]

[Footnote 1337: _Copernicus_, vol. ii., p. 235.]

[Footnote 1338: _Comptes Rendus_, t. xcvi., p. 371.]

[Footnote 1339: _Astr. Nach._, No. 2,553.]

[Footnote 1340: _Ibid._]

[Footnote 1341: _Astr. Nach._, No. 2,568.]

[Footnote 1342: _Annales de l'Observatoire de Nice_, t. ii., c. 53.]

[Footnote 1343: Fenyi, _Astr. Nach._, No. 2,844; Kammermann, _Ibid._,
No. 2,849.]

[Footnote 1344: _Publ. Astr. Pac. Soc._, vol. i., p. 72.]

[Footnote 1345: _Annuaire_, Paris, 1891, p. 301.]

[Footnote 1346: _Astr. Nach._, No. 2,989.]

[Footnote 1347: _Comptes Rendus_, t. xxv., p. 564.]

[Footnote 1348: _Astr. Journ._, Nos. 205, 231.]

[Footnote 1349: _Ibid._, Nos. 228, 244, 380.]

[Footnote 1350: _Observatory_, vol. xviii., pp. 60, 163 (Denning and
Lynn).]

[Footnote 1351: _Astr. Nach._, No. 3,267; Plummer, _Knowledge_, vol.
xix., p. 156.]

[Footnote 1352: _Astr. Jour._, Nos. 333, 338.]

[Footnote 1353: _Astr. and Astroph._, vol. xi., p. 387.]

[Footnote 1354: _Knowledge_, vol. xv., p. 299.]

[Footnote 1355: _Harvard Annals_, vol. xxxii., pt. ii., p. 272.]

[Footnote 1356: _Ibid._, p. 287.]

[Footnote 1357: _Publ. Astr. Pac. Soc._, vol. vii., p. 161.]

[Footnote 1358: H. C. Wilson, _Astr. and Astroph._, vol. xii., p. 121.]

[Footnote 1359: _Observatory_, vol. xvi., p. 92.]

[Footnote 1360: Barnard, _Astr. and Astroph._, vol. xii., p. 180;
_Astroph. Jour._, vol. iii., p. 41.]

[Footnote 1361: Palisa, _Astr. Nach._, No. 3,147; Denning,
_Observatory_, vol. xvi., p. 142.]

[Footnote 1362: _Phil. Trans._, vol. ci., p. 306.]

[Footnote 1363: _Conn. des Temps_, 1816, p. 213.]

[Footnote 1364: _OEuvres_, t. vi., p. 581.]

[Footnote 1365: _Mem. dell' Istit. Lombardo_, t. xii., p. 164;
_Rendiconti_, t. vii., p. 77, 1874.]

[Footnote 1366: W. Foerster, _Pop. Mitth._, 1879, p. 7; Fabry, _Etude sur
la Probabilite des Cometes Hyperboliques_, Marseille, 1893, p. 158.]

[Footnote 1367: _Mem. R. A. Soc._, vol. xxix., p. 335.]

[Footnote 1368: _Month. Not._, vol. xxiii., p. 203.]




                                CHAPTER XII

                            _STARS AND NEBULAE_


That a science of stellar chemistry should not only have become
possible, but should already have made material advances, is assuredly
one of the most amazing features in the swift progress of knowledge our
age has witnessed. Custom can never blunt the wonder with which we must
regard the achievement of compelling rays emanating from a source devoid
of sensible magnitude through immeasurable distance, to reveal, by its
distinctive qualities, the composition of that source. The discovery of
revolving double stars assured us that the great governing force of the
planetary movements, and of our own material existence, sways equally
the courses of the farthest suns in space; the application of prismatic
analysis certified to the presence in the stars of the familiar
materials, no less of the earth we tread, than of the human bodies built
up out of its dust and circumambient vapours.

We have seen that, as early as 1823, Fraunhofer ascertained the generic
participation of stellar light in the peculiarity by which sunlight,
spread out by transmission through a prism, shows numerous transverse
rulings of interrupting darkness. No sooner had Kirchhoff supplied the
key to the hidden meaning of those ciphered characters than it was
eagerly turned to the interpretation of the dim scrolls unfolded in the
spectra of the stars. Donati made at Florence in 1860 the first efforts
in this direction; but with little result, owing to the imperfections of
the instrumental means at his command. His comparative failure, however,
was a prelude to others' success. Almost simultaneously, in 1862, the
novel line of investigation was entered upon by Huggins near London, by
Father Secchi at Rome, and by Lewis M. Rutherfurd in New York.
Fraunhofer's device of using a cylindrical lens for the purpose of
giving a second dimension to stellar spectra was adopted by all, and
was, indeed, indispensable. For a luminous point, such as a star
appears, becomes, when viewed through a prism, a variegated line, which,
until broadened into a band by the intervention of a cylindrical lens,
is all but useless for purposes of research. This process of _rolling
out_ involves, it is true, much loss of light--a scanty and precious
commodity, as coming from the stars; but the loss is an inevitable one.
And so fully is it compensated by the great light-grasping power of
modern telescopes that important information can now be gained from the
spectroscopic examination of stars far below the range of the unarmed
eye.

The effective founders of stellar spectroscopy, then (since Rutherfurd
shortly turned his efforts elsewhither), were Father Secchi, the eminent
Jesuit astronomer of the Collegio Romano, where he died, February 26,
1878, and Sir William Huggins, with whom the late Professor W. A. Miller
was associated. The work of each was happily directed so as to
supplement that of the other. With less perfect appliances, the Roman
astronomer sought to render his extensive rather than precise; at Tulse
Hill searching accuracy over a narrow range was aimed at and attained.
To Father Secchi is due the merit of having executed the first
spectroscopic survey of the heavens. Above 4,000 stars were passed in
review by him, and classified according to the varying qualities of
their light. His provisional establishment (1863-67) of four types of
stellar spectra[1369] has proved a genuine aid to knowledge through the
facilities afforded by it for the arrangement and comparison of rapidly
accumulating facts. Moreover, it is scarcely doubtful that these
spectral distinctions correspond to differences in physical condition of
a marked kind.

The first order comprises more than half the visible and probably an
overwhelming proportion of the faintest stars. Sirius, Vega, Regulus,
Altair, are amongst its leading members. Their spectra are distinguished
by the breadth and intensity of the four dark bars due to the absorption
of hydrogen, and by the extreme faintness of the metallic lines, of
which, nevertheless, hundreds are disclosed by careful examination. The
light of these "Sirian" orbs is white or bluish; and it is found to be
rich in ultra-violet rays.

Capella and Arcturus belong to the second, or solar type of stars, which
is about one-sixth less numerously represented than the first. Their
spectra are quite closely similar to that of sunlight, in being ruled
throughout by innumerable fine dark lines; and they share its yellowish
tinge.

The third class includes most red and variable stars (commonly
synonymous), of which Betelgeux in the shoulder of Orion, and "Mira" in
the Whale, are noted examples. Their characteristic spectrum is of the
"fluted" description. It shows like a strongly illuminated range of
seven or eight variously tinted columns seen in perspective, the light
falling from the red end towards the violet. This _kind_ of absorption
is produced by the vapours of metalloids or of compound substances.

To the fourth order of stars belongs also a colonnaded spectrum, but
_reversed_; the light is thrown the other way. The three broad zones of
absorption which interrupt it are sharp towards the red, insensibly
gradated towards the violet end. The individuals composing Class IV. are
few and apparently insignificant, the brightest of them not exceeding
the fifth magnitude. They are commonly distinguished by a deep red tint,
and gleam like rubies in the field of the telescope. Father Secchi, who
in 1867 detected the peculiarity of their analyzed light, ascribed it to
the presence of carbon in some form in their atmospheres; and this was
confirmed by the researches of H. C. Vogel,[1370] director of the
Astro-physical Observatory at Potsdam. The hydro-carbon bands, in fact,
seen bright in comets, are dark in these singular objects--the only ones
in the heavens (save one bright-line star and a rare meteor)[1371] which
display a cometary analogy of the fundamental sort revealed by the
spectroscope.

The members of all four orders are, however, emphatically suns. They
possess, it would appear, photospheres radiating all kinds of light, and
differ from each other mainly in the varying qualities of their
absorptive atmospheres. The principle that the colours of stars depend,
not on the intrinsic nature of their light, but on the kinds of vapours
surrounding them, and stopping out certain portions of that light, was
laid down by Huggins in 1864.[1372] The phenomena of double stars seem
to indicate a connection between the state of the investing atmospheres,
by the action of which their often brilliantly contrasted tints are
produced, and their mutual physical relations. A tabular statement put
forward by Professor Holden in June, 1880,[1373] made it, at any rate,
clear that inequality of magnitude between the components of binary
systems accompanies unlikeness in colour, and that stars more equally
matched in one respect are pretty sure to be so in the other. Besides,
blue and green stars of a decided tinge are never solitary; they
invariably form part of systems. So that association has undoubtedly a
predominant influence upon colour.

Nevertheless, the crude notion thrown out by Zoellner in 1865,[1374] that
yellow and red stars are simply white stars in various stages of
cooling, obtained for a time undeserved currency. D'Arrest, indeed,
protested against it, and Angstrom, in 1868,[1375] substituted
atmospheric quality for mere colour[1376] as a criterion of age and
temperature. His lead was followed by Lockyer in 1873,[1377] and by
Vogel in 1874.[1378] The scheme of classification due to the Potsdam
astro-physicist differed from Father Secchi's only in presenting his
third and fourth types as subdivisions of the same order, and in
inserting three subordinate categories; but their variety was
"rationalised" by the addition of the seductive idea of progressive
development. Thus, the white Sirian stars were represented as the
_youngest_ because the hottest of the sidereal family; those of the
solar pattern as having already wasted much of their store by radiation,
and being well advanced in middle life; while the red stars with banded
spectra figured as effete suns, hastening rapidly down the road to final
extinction.

Vogel's scheme is, however, incomplete. It traces the downward curve of
decay, but gives no account of the slow ascent to maturity. The present
splendour of Vega, for instance, was prepared, according to all creative
analogy, by almost endless processes of gradual change. What was its
antecedent condition? The question has been variously answered. Dr.
Johnstone Stoney advocated, in 1867, the comparative youth of red
stars;[1379] A. Ritter, of Aix-la-Chapelle, divided them, in 1883,[1380]
into two squadrons, posted, the one on the ascending, the other on the
descending branch of the temperature-curve, and corresponding,
presumably, with Secchi's third and fourth orders of stars with banded
spectra. Whether, in the interim, they should display spectra of the
Sirian or of the solar type was made to depend on their greater or less
massiveness.[1381] But the relation actually existing perhaps inverts
that contemplated by Ritter. Certainly, the evidence collected by Mr.
Maunder in 1891 strongly supports the opinion that the average solar
star is a weightier body than the average Sirian star.[1382]

On November 17, 1887, Sir Norman Lockyer communicated to the Royal
Society the first of a series of papers embodying his "Meteoritic
Hypothesis" of cosmical constitution, stated and supported more at large
in a separate work bearing that name, published in 1890. The fundamental
proposition wrought out in it was that "all self-luminous bodies in the
celestial space are composed either of swarms of meteorites or of masses
of meteoric vapour produced by heat."[1383] On the basis of this
supposed community of origin, sidereal objects were distributed in seven
groups along a temperature-curve ascending from nebulae and gaseous, or
bright-line stars, through red stars of the third type, and a younger
division of solar stars, to the high Sirian level; then descending
through the more strictly solar stars to red stars of the fourth type
("carbon-stars"), below which lay only the _caput mortuum_ entitled
Group vii. The ground-work of this classification was, however,
insecure, and has given way. Certain spectroscopic coincidences,
avowedly only approximate, suggesting that stars and nebulae of every
species might be formed out of variously aggregated meteorites, failed
of verification by exact inquiry. And spectroscopic coincidences admit
of no compromise. Those that are merely approximate are, as a rule,
unmeaning.

In his Presidential Address at the Cardiff Meeting of the British
Association in 1891, Dr. Huggins adhered in the main to the line of
advance traced by Vogel. The inconspicuousness of metallic lines in the
spectra of the white stars he attributed, not to the paucity, but to the
high temperature of the vapours producing them, and the consequent
deficiency of contrast between their absorption-rays and the continuous
light of the photospheric background. "Such a state of things would more
probably," in his opinion, "be found in conditions anterior to the solar
stage," while "a considerable cooling of the sun would probably give
rise to banded spectra due to compounds." He adverted also to the
influential effects upon stellar types of varying surface gravity, which
being a function of both mass and bulk necessarily gains strength with
wasting heat and consequent shrinkage. The same leading ideas were more
fully worked out in "An Atlas of Representative Stellar Spectra,"
published by Sir William and Lady Huggins in 1899. They were, moreover,
splendidly illustrated by a set of original spectrographic plates, while
precision was added to the adopted classification by the separation of
helium from hydrogen stars. The spectrum of the exotic substance
terrestrially captured in 1895 is conspicuous by absorption, as Vogel,
Lockyer, and Deslandres promptly recognised in a considerable number of
white stars, among them the Pleiades and most of the brilliants in
Orion. Mr. McClean, whose valuable spectrographic survey of the heavens
was completed at the Cape in 1897, found reason to conclude that they
are in the first stage of development from gaseous nebulae;[1384] and in
this the Tulse Hill investigators unhesitatingly concur.

The strongest evidence for the primitive state of white stars is found
in their nebular relations. The components of groups, still involved and
entangled with "silver braids" of cosmic mist, show, perhaps invariably,
spectra of the helium type, occasionally crossed by bright rays.
Possibly all such stars have passed through a bright-line stage; but
further evidence on the point is needed. Relative density furnishes
another important test of comparative age, and Sirian stars are, on the
whole, undoubtedly more bulky proportionately to their mass than solar
stars. The rule, however, seems to admit of exceptions; hence the change
from one kind of spectrum to the other is not inevitably connected with
the attainment of a particular degree of condensation. There is reason
to believe that it is anticipated in the more massive globes, despite
their comparatively slow cooling, as a consequence of the greater power
of gravity over their investing vaporous envelopes. This conclusion is
enforced by the relations of double-star spectra. The fact that, in
unequal pairs, the chief star most frequently shows a solar, its
companion a Sirian, spectrum can scarcely be otherwise explained than by
admitting that, while the sequence of types is pursued in an invariable
order, it is pursued much more rapidly in larger than in small orbs. It
need not, indeed, be supposed that all stars are identical in
constitution, and present identical life-histories.[1385]
Individualities in the one, and divergencies in the other, must be
allowed for. Yet the main track is plainly continuous, and leads by
insensible gradations from nebulae through helium stars to the Sirian,
and onward to the solar type, whence, by an inevitable transition,
fluted, or "Antarian,"[1386] spectra develop.

The first-known examples of the class of gaseous stars--Beta Lyrae
and Gamma Cassiopeiae--were noticed by Father Secchi at the outset
of his spectroscopic inquiries. Both show _bright_ lines of hydrogen and
helium, so that the peculiarity of their condition probably consists in
the intense ignition of their chromospheric surroundings. Their entire
radiating surfaces might be described as _faculous_. That is to say,
brilliant formations, such as have been photographed by Professor Hale
on the sun's disc,[1387] cover, perhaps, the whole, instead of being
