in his mind a boy's warbling battle cry, and felt a deep pang of
sadness.

"Why do you call them the Sons of the Falcon, Daoud?" Manfred asked.

"Because I know the falcon is the favorite bird of your family, Sire,"
Daoud said. Manfred grinned and nodded.

He thought, _And because the falcon does not hesitate_.

Daoud admired Manfred. He was said to be the image of his father, and
that made it easy to see why Emperor Frederic had been known as "the
Wonder of the World."

_Easy to see why Sophia loved Manfred for a time._

But as a war leader, Manfred was frustrating to work with. He seemed to
have no plan for fighting Charles d'Anjou. All over southern Italy and
Sicily, knights and men-at-arms were in training and on the alert, but
days, months, seasons, followed one another and Manfred ordered no
action.

Daoud's own goal remained the same he had set for himself a year ago in
Orvieto: To spur Manfred on to make war and to help him win a victory.

And when the war gave an opportunity, Daoud would once again try to kill
the Tartar ambassadors. They were now, Manfred's agents in the north
reported, in Rome under Charles's protection. Perhaps he could even
rescue poor Rachel.

Daoud smiled with pleasure as the riders below formed a huge circle, one
man behind the other. He was able to recognize individual men he had
come to know over the past months--Muslims from Manfred's army whom he
had picked and trained himself--Abdulhak, Mujtaba, Nuwaihi, Tabari,
Ahmad, Said, and many others. They were as eager for this war to begin
as he was.

At a shouted command from Omar, who sat on his horse in the center, the
circle began to rotate, the horses running faster and faster. Each man
balanced a lance in his right hand, and as he rode past the swinging
target ring, he hurled it. The ring was pulled from side to side with
long ropes by attendants, just as when Daoud had trained as a Mameluke.

As lance after lance flew through the moving target, Manfred gave a low
whistle of appreciation. Daoud had ordered the ring to be a yard wide
and the distance from horseman to target fifty feet. It was easier than
it looked for men who had practiced for months, but the rapidity of it
made a beautiful spectacle. Daoud's eye caught a few misses, but he
doubted that Manfred noticed.

"Like falcons, swift and fierce and sure," said Manfred. "But a bird is
just bone and muscle and feathers, Daoud. These men are lightly armed
and armored compared to Christian soldiers. These two hundred of yours
could never stop a charge of Frankish knights."

Daoud tensed. This was an opening.

"True, Sire, when Frankish knights in all their mail get those huge
armored war-horses going at a gallop, nothing can withstand them. But we
Mamelukes have defeated the Franks over and over again by not letting
them use their weight and power to advantage. They must close with their
enemy. We fight from a distance, raining arrows down upon them. If the
enemy pursues you, flee until he wearies himself and spreads his lines
out. Then rush in and cut him to pieces. Attack the enemy when he is not
expecting it."

"That might do well enough in the deserts of Outremer," said Manfred,
"but European warfare is different. There are mountains and rivers and
forests. We cannot spread out all over the landscape."

Daoud threw an exasperated look at Lorenzo, whose dark eyes were
sympathetic, but who shook his head slightly, as if to warn Daoud to be
politic in his argument with the king.

"There is one principle that you can adopt from Mameluke warfare," said
Daoud, choosing not to contradict Manfred, "and that is speed."

"Our Swabian knights and our Saracen warriors ride as swiftly as any in
Europe," Barth growled.

"Once they get moving," said Lorenzo sharply.

_He isn't always politic himself_, thought Daoud.

"Forgive me for speaking boldly, Sire," said Daoud, "but a whole summer
has gone by since Pope Clement proclaimed a crusade against you and
declared that your crown belongs to Charles d'Anjou. And there has been
no fighting. Is this what you mean by European warfare? In the time it
takes Europeans to get ready for one war, we Mamelukes would have fought
five wars."

As he spoke he proudly recalled what an Arab poet had written of the
Mamelukes: _They charge like lightning and arrive like thunder._

Manfred turned to watch the riders. A royal privilege, Daoud thought, to
conduct an argument at one's chosen pace. He pushed down the urge to say
more, forced himself to be patient, waited tensely for Manfred to reply
in his own time.

He felt a movement beside him and turned to see that Lorenzo had moved
closer to him. He gave Lorenzo a pleading look, trying to ask him to
join the discussion. Manfred respected Lorenzo and listened to him.

Lorenzo replied with a frown and a nod. He seemed to be saying he would
speak up when he judged the moment right.

When the men who had cast came around to the opposite side of the
circle, fresh lances thrust upright in the ground by their servants were
waiting for them. Each warrior leaned out of the saddle, seized a lance,
and rode back around at top speed to throw at the target again.

After a moment, Manfred turned back to Daoud and said, "Charles d'Anjou
has been hanging about in Rome all through the spring and summer
claiming to be king of Sicily. This morning I asked to see my crown, and
my steward brought it to me from the vault. The pope's words had not
made it disappear. Rome is not Sicily. Anjou is welcome to stay in that
decaying pesthole until he takes one of those famous Roman fevers and
dies."

No doubt, thought Daoud, Manfred's gesture in calling for his crown had
amused his whole court. And put heart into any who feared Charles's
growing strength. Manfred was charming, no question. But meanwhile
Charles d'Anjou, who by all accounts had not a bit of charm, _was_ in
fact growing stronger day by day. Those of Manfred's supporters who were
afraid had good reason, and Daoud was one of them.

It was agony to think how the opportunity to beat Charles now was
slipping away.

"So, you will wait for Charles to come to you," said Daoud.

Manfred smiled. "And he, I suspect, hopes that I will come to him.
Charles has to pay his army to stay in Italy. The longer he puts off
attacking me, the more his treasury is depleted. My army waits at home,
sustaining itself."

Daoud said, "Now that Charles's war is called a crusade, barons and
knights are joining him from all over Christendom. Many of them are
paying their own way. Sire, when Charles decides he is ready to move
against you, his strength will be overwhelming."

Lorenzo spoke up. "And meanwhile the pope has placed your whole kingdom
under interdict. No sacraments. No Masses. Couples cannot marry in
church. Can we weigh the pain of mothers and fathers who think their
babies that die unbaptized will never see God? And what about the terror
of sinners unable to confess, and the dying who cannot have the last
sacraments? And the grief of those who had to bury their loved ones
without funerals? Sire, your people have not heard a church bell since
last May. They grow more restless and unhappy every day. And it does not
help your cause when they see your Muslim and Jewish subjects freely
practicing _their_ religions."

"I am surprised to hear _you_ pay such tribute to the power of religion,
Lorenzo," said Manfred with that bright grin of his.

The grim lines of Lorenzo's face were accentuated by the droop of his
black and white mustache. "I have never in my life doubted the _power_
of religion, Sire."

Having used up all their lances, the Sons of the Falcon were now
shooting arrows from horseback, riding toward lines of stationary
targets that had been set up at the far end of the valley.

"Do you have a proposal, Daoud?" said Manfred with a sour look. "Let me
hear it."

Daoud felt an overwhelming sense of relief. This was the moment he had
been hoping for all day.

"Sire, do not wait for Charles to come out of Rome," he said. "In
January, February at the latest, assemble your army and march north."

There, he had made his cast. Would it pierce the target?

"I could go all the way to the Papal States only to find Charles lurking
behind the walls of Rome. I cannot besiege Rome. That would take ten
times as many men as I have."

"No," said Daoud. "His army will not let him stay in Rome. By the end of
winter they will have stolen everything in Rome that can be stolen.
Charles will have to promise them more spoils and lead them to battle,
or they will desert him."

Manfred nodded thoughtfully. "In truth, greed is what drives them."

Daoud added, "And call on your allies in Florence and Siena and the
other Ghibellino cities to stop any more of Charles's allies coming into
Italy. They cannot all come by sea as he did. Many times I have heard
people in your court say that Charles has cut Italy in half. Nonsense.
He has put himself between two millstones."

Manfred's eyes lit up. "Yes, I like that way of looking at it."

The Sons of the Falcon had ridden to the far end of the valley and were
now roaring back, standing in the saddle and firing arrows over the
tails of their horses.

"Sire," said Daoud. "Not to act is to act." He felt urgency building in
him as he sensed that he was persuading Manfred.

"I remember my father saying something like that," said Manfred. "What
do you think, Erhard?"

Daoud's heart sank. The beefy Swabian would undoubtedly counsel more
waiting.

In thought, Landgrave Barth sucked in his upper lip and pushed out the
pendulous lower one until it seemed he was trying to pull his nose into
his mouth.

"Anjou will have to campaign against you soon, Sire, for the reason Herr
Daoud has just given," he said slowly. "His men will not allow him to
stay in Rome and endure the privation of a siege. When they learn you
are coming, they will demand that he march out to meet you. He is
probably planning an attack for next April or May, when the weather is
best. He must expect reinforcements--but, so he does not have to pay
them for long, he will not want them to come until the very moment he is
ready to invade. So, if you attack him in January or February, you catch
him unready." He finished with a vigorous nod of his head. "I recommend
it."

Daoud felt a new and unexpected warmth toward Barth. The landgrave was
not such a dull-witted old soldier after all.

The Sons of the Falcon had finished their archery exercise. In four
ranks, fifty mounted men abreast, they drew up at the base of the hill
and saluted Manfred, two hundred scimitars flashing in the afternoon
sun.

Manfred stepped forward to the crest of the hill and raised his hands
above his head. "_May God bless your arms!_" he shouted in Arabic.

The wild, high-pitched ululations of his Muslim warriors echoed against
the surrounding hills as Manfred, smiling, returned to his companions.

He said, "In three months' time, then. No more than four. The weather
will decide. I will call in my barons one by one and tell them to
prepare. We must keep this a secret for as long as possible."

Daoud, Lorenzo, and Barth all bowed in assent. Daoud felt a surge of
joy. He had succeeded in persuading Manfred to strike at Charles.
Manfred's reasons for not wanting to move were sound ones, he knew. He
had spent long hours considering them himself, but he was certain that
if Manfred did nothing, he was surely doomed. At this moment Manfred and
Charles were nearly evenly matched, Manfred a little stronger, Charles
growing in strength. To a great extent it would be luck--or the will of
God--that determined the outcome. Daoud could not control luck or God.
But he could make the best possible plan and give his all to it.

Suddenly, he badly wanted to get back to Sophia in Lucera. Usually he
enjoyed being out with the troops, overseeing their training. Today he
begrudged the time. Every moment seemed precious. Three months would be
gone before he and Sophia realized it. Then he would be riding with
Manfred's army, perhaps never to see her again.

He must make sure she would be safe no matter what happened. Perhaps
Ugolini or Tilia could help. Sophia would want to travel with the
army--with him--north. She was not a woman to pine at home while men
marched away. He must discourage her; it was too dangerous.

But to discourage her would probably be impossible.

       *       *       *       *       *

Simon listened to the drumming hooves behind him on the dirt road and
thought, _I will be hearing this sound all day long every day for
months_. He supposed that after a while he would no longer notice it,
but today, the day after his departure from Chateau Gobignon, his ears
seemed to ache from the incessant pounding.

And the hoofbeats were a constant reminder that he was really leading
the Gobignon host to war.

All summer long the conviction had been growing upon him that this was a
bad war, and all the suffering it caused, all the deaths and
mutilations, would be on his conscience forever. No matter that the pope
had proclaimed it a holy crusade against the blasphemer Manfred. Popes
could be wrong about wars.

Simon's father, Roland, had vividly described for him the horrors of the
Albigensian crusade of a generation ago, when knights of northern France
had fallen upon Languedoc like a pack of wolves--like Tartars, in
fact--reducing it to ruins. And that crusade had been proclaimed by a
pope.

In days to come the rumbling in his ears would be louder, the feeling
that he was guilty of great wrongdoing harder to bear. He looked over
his shoulder and saw thirty knights mounted on their palfreys, another
twenty equerries and servants on smaller horses, two priests on mules,
five supply wagons, two of them full of weapons and armor, one hundred
foot soldiers and sixty great war-horses in strings, a page boy riding
the lead horse in each string. This was the Gobignon household
contingent. At today's end he would have three times that many of every
category, and by the end of the week his army would have swollen to its
full size of four hundred knights, fifteen hundred foot soldiers, and
all the equerries, attendants, horses, and baggage they needed.

And, a year or more from now, how many of them would come back from this
war? He thought of Alain de Pirenne, lying on a street in Orvieto. He
thought of Teodoro at the Monaldeschi palace, his chest crushed by a
stone, his warm blood pouring out of his mouth over Simon's hand. How
many of these men would die miserably like that?

Thierry d'Hauteville and Valery de Pirenne--Alain's younger brother--the
two young men who rode behind him, caught his eye and grinned
delightedly. He managed a smile in return, but feared it must look
awfully weak. The bright red silk crosses sewn on their chests caught
his eye. He wore one, too, on the breast of his purple and gold surcoat.
His oldest sister, Isabelle, a fine seamstress, had sewn it there and
embroidered the edges with gold thread.

All three of his sisters, Isabelle, Alix, and Blanche, had worked on the
crusaders' banner, red cross on white silk, that rippled above Simon.
Equerries took turns riding with the banner according to a roster Simon
himself had written. Beside the crusading flag, another equerry carried
the banner of the house of Gobignon, three gold crowns, two side by side
and one below them, on a purple background.

His sisters' three husbands rode to war behind him today. Since he was
unmarried and had no heir, one of them would be Count de Gobignon if he
should fall.

_And with more right to the title, perhaps, than I have_, he thought
unhappily. And he felt as if icy fingers stroked the back of his neck
when he thought how much one of those three knights back there stood to
gain by his death.

His little troop raised no dust; the road was damp and covered with
puddles from yesterday's rain. Thank God it had not rained hard enough
to turn the road into mud. As it was, the weather made his leave-taking
gloomier than it need have been. The empty fields, littered with yellow
stubble, lay flat under the vast gray bowl of a cloudy November sky. The
only feature in that landscape was a darker gray, the bulk of Chateau
Gobignon with its round towers rising on its great solitary hill. The
road they traveled ran back to it as straight as if it had been drawn
with a mason's rule.

_I should stop this enterprise now_, Simon thought. _I should turn back
before it is too late._

The longer they were on the road, the harder it would be to declare
suddenly that Gobignon was _not_ going to war in Italy, to tell his
barons and knights to return to their homes and hang up their arms. If
he did so at this moment, he would provoke great anger in these men of
his own household. Today and tomorrow great barons would be joining him,
mature men--his vassals--but men of weight and power in their own right.
Their scorn at his change of heart would be almost unbearable.

But did he want to be another Amalric de Gobignon, leading the flower of
his domain's manhood, hundreds of knights and thousands of men-at-arms,
to war, with only a handful coming back? If this was a bad war, God
might well punish Charles d'Anjou with defeat. And Simon would share,
not in the glory as Charles had promised him, but in disaster and death.

_And I am not rightfully the Count de Gobignon._

He knew, though these men did not, that he had no right to call them out
to war. If Simon de Gobignon, a bastard and an impostor, led this army
to its destruction, what name was there for such a crime?

The voice of Valery de Pirenne, Simon's new equerry, broke in on Simon's
tormented thoughts.

"I am not sorry to be leaving home this time of year. What better place
to spend the winter than sunny Italy?"

_I have already caused the death of this young man's brother. Will I
kill Valery too?_

"It rains much in Italy in January," said Thierry, now Sire Thierry
d'Hauteville, having been knighted by Simon at the beginning of November
on the Feast of All Saints. His tone was lofty with experience.

"Bad weather for war," said Henri de Puys, whose experience was ten
times Thierry's--or Simon's, for that matter. "But the rains should be
over by the time we reach that infidel Manfred's kingdom."

"Look there," said Thierry. "More knights coming to meet us."

Simon saw a line of about a dozen men on horseback, three canvas-covered
wagons and a straggling column of men on foot with spears over their
shoulders. The oncoming knights and men were tiny in the distance,
marching along a road that would meet Simon's route.

_Oh, God, now it will be harder to turn them back._

"That will be the party from Chateau la Durie," Thierry said, pointing
to the horizon where the four towers of a small castle were just barely
visible.

A distant bell was ringing out the noon hour as Simon's troop met those
from la Durie. All of the new knights wore red crosses on their tunics.
Sire Antoine de la Durie was a stout man about de Puys's age with a huge
mustache called an algernon, whose ends grew into his sideburns. Simon
and de la Durie brought their horses together and embraced. The knight
smelled like a barn.

"How was your harvest, Sire Antoine?"

Large white teeth flashed under the algernon. "Ample, Monseigneur. But
not so ample, I trust, as what we shall gather in Sicily."

They all wanted this so much.

How his chief barons had cheered and roared and stamped when he
announced this war to them at his Midsummer's Eve feast in the great
hall at Chateau Gobignon! It was at that very moment, when he had seen
the ferocious eagerness of his barons for war, that he had begun again
to doubt.

Antoine de la Durie gestured with a callused, bare hand to three young
men on horseback whose russet cloaks were patched, but whose longswords
proclaimed their knighthood. They grinned shyly at Simon.

"These are the Pilchard brothers, Monseigneur. They are not Gobignon
vassals, but they are Madame de la Durie's cousin's sons, and I vouch
for them. They beg to go crusading under your leadership."

_Under my leadership! God help them!_

"You are right welcome, Messires. When we stop for the night, see my
clerk, Friar Amos, and have him add your names to our roll."

The young men dismounted, rushed to him, and kissed his hands.

Why did he not send them away, send all these knights away, tell them
there would be no war in Italy? Because he was afraid of his own barons
and knights, the men he was supposed to lead. Because he felt he had set
something in motion that could not be stopped, like one of those
horrendous avalanches in the Alps.

If they were to keep going, he must--without mishap--cover ten leagues a
day to reach Rome by February. He must study again the maps Valery was
carrying in his saddlebags, especially the one he had just received,
along with a letter, from Count Charles--King Charles.

The infidel Manfred, Charles had written, had stirred up the Ghibellino
cities of northern Italy. They were lying in wait for allies of Anjou,
who might come down from France or the Holy Roman Empire. Simon must not
waste troops fighting the Sienese or Florentine militia. So he should
enter Italy by way of Provence and Liguria, then cut across eastward to
Ravenna and thence down to Spoleto and Viterbo, and finally to Rome. The
roundabout route would take longer, but Charles would expect Simon in
Rome by the first of February. Charles intended to march against Manfred
at the beginning of April.

Two months to reach Provence, march along the Ligurian coast, perhaps as
far as Genoa, which was safely Guelfo, and then pick his way around the
nests of northern Ghibellini to Rome. It could be done, but only if his
army met with no unexpected obstacles--a Ghibellino army, for instance,
or a bad winter storm.

And then, beyond Rome, what would they find?

Once they were there, at least he would not have to make the decisions
that determined the fate of these men. The responsibility--and the blame
if they failed--would be Charles's.

_The greatest war since you were a child_, Charles had promised.

And none of the Gobignon men would ever know that they were fighting
because he had fallen in love with a woman named Sophia--if that was
truly her name--and she had let him taste her love and then had
disappeared.

He remembered a trouvere at a feast singing of how the Greeks went to
war because Helen, wife of one of their kings, ran off with Paris,
prince of Troy. But that was just a story.

Sophia--her face and form arose in his memory, and there was a strange
happiness mixed with the pain, as if he were glad of his suffering. He
had heard songs about the sweet pain of love, but he had never before
now understood them.

And even now he could not think of Sophia as an enemy. His heartbeat
quickened at the thought that there was a chance, very small but still a
chance, that Sophia might truly be someone he could love, and that he
could free her from whatever entanglement had dragged her into Manfred's
power.

By the end of the day the sound of hoofbeats around him was no longer a
drumming, but a thundering. And all around and above him was a
fluttering of banners. Each of the larger contingents that joined him
had brought the standard of its seigneur.

The road south was climbing into forested hills. At the crest of the
first hill Simon tugged on the reins to slow his palfrey, and turned to
look back. In the fading light of the overcast day, Chateau Gobignon was
a violet outcropping on the flat horizon, its towers indistinct. This
would be his last sight of it, perhaps for years. And tomorrow he would
cross the boundary of his domain. That was a point past which there was
no return. Once the host was assembled, once they had crossed the
Gobignon border, it would not matter what he told them. If he refused to
lead them, they would find another leader.

He saw two more banners rising above the crest of a bare ridge to the
west. Then the heads and shoulders of men, then the horses they rode.
They waved and halloed. More followed them. And still more.

Simon met the newcomers by a stream that trickled through a small valley
lined with birch trees. Seigneur Claudius de Marion, the leader of the
large new party, lifted his square chin as he reached over and clapped
Simon heartily on the shoulder.

"The valley widens out up ahead," he said. "I propose that we camp
there. The forest beyond is thick and not a good place to ride through
at night. And, Monseigneur, to be frank, I do not want to send my
daughter home after dark."

"I will be quite safe, Father, if Monseigneur the Count wishes to press
on for the night."

The young woman riding a tall gray and white stallion beside Claudius de
Marion had humorous blue eyes and a wide mouth. Her upper lip protruded
slightly, an irregularity Simon thought quite pretty in her. She had not
inherited her father's nose, which was shaped like an axe blade; hers
was small and turned up at the end. Her single yellow-gold braid, which
circled round from under her blue hood and hung down between her high
breasts, seemed to glow in the gathering dusk.

Simon remembered dancing in a ring that included her at last Midsummer's
Eve feast. She had worn a woven wreath of white daisies in her hair.

"Barbara insisted on accompanying me to our meeting," said de Marion
with an indulgent grin. "I could not persuade her to bid me farewell
from our castle."

Barbara's smile was wide and frank, like her father's. "In truth,
Monseigneur, I had to see all the knights and men you have gathered. I
knew it would be a brave sight, such as I have never seen the like of.
God grant you a glorious victory. Will you take wine?"

She held up an oval wineskin, and at Simon's nod and murmur of thanks
she worked her horse over to his with a click of her tongue and a pat on
the neck. She rode like one born to it, thought Simon. Which she was.

She squirted the wine into his open mouth. It was red and strong, and it
lit a welcome little fire in his belly.

As they rode deeper into the valley, Simon asked himself, where had
Barbara de Marion been when he had been earnestly searching for a wife?
She had been a child, and his eyes had passed right over her. How
different his life might have been if she had been a little older two
years ago. Seigneur Claudius was one of his chief vassals and a good
friend, and would doubtless have had no objection to a marriage. Simon
might never have gone to Italy.

But there was room in this heart for only one love. And there was only
one course his life could take now.

Somehow, with the sight of this maiden and the realization that he might
have fallen in love with her once but never could now, a door closed in
Simon's mind. His destiny lay in Italy. He could no more forget Sophia
and return to Chateau Gobignon like a snail crawling into its shell than
he could spit himself on his own sword.

As for these men, they were going to Italy for their own gain, not to
help Simon find Sophia, nor yet to help Charles d'Anjou become King of
Sicily. Or even to protect the pope from his Hohenstaufen enemies. He
had not had to appeal to their feudal obligations in summoning them to
war. As Count Charles had predicted, they all _wanted_ to come. All they
cared about was a chance for riches and land and glory after years of
doing nothing but managing their domains. They marched of their own free
will. He only pointed the way.

He remembered something Roland had said to him: _Once you have made your
choice, put your whole heart and soul into it. Never divide yourself._

Which, Simon thought, was exactly why, even though he would pass near
Nicolette and Roland's home in Provence, he would not visit them. He
knew well their feelings about crusades, and he could be quite sure of
the loathing with which they would view this war. Roland had even spent
a good part of his youth at the court of Emperor Frederic, Manfred's
father. No, he had enough doubts of his own without letting his parents
add more.

Even so, from his belt hung Roland's gift to him, the jeweled Damascus
scimitar. He did not like to admit to himself that he was superstitious,
but with this scimitar Roland had gotten out of Egypt alive in the face
of the most terrible dangers. Somehow, Simon saw the scimitar as a
talisman that might also get him through this war.

He glanced over at the beautiful Barbara de Marion and felt a rush of
gratitude. Knowing that, lovely as she was, she could never make him
forget Sophia, had helped him make his decision.




LXVI


"It has been four years since I mounted a horse and drew my bow in
battle," said John Chagan with a grin. "A man grows old if he does not
fight."

Rachel paused in her work of setting up their tent for the night to
stare at him, wondering if he knew how unready for fighting he looked.
The pouches under his eyes were as prominent as his cheekbones, and the
cheekbones themselves were criss-crossed with tiny red lines.

It had been nearly a month since he had taken his pleasure with her in
bed. She was glad enough of that, but she felt sorry for him, even
knowing that his death in battle would free her. The way his hands
trembled, he would be lucky to get an arrow nocked, much less shoot it
at an enemy.

The tent flap was pushed aside, and a Venetian crossbowman backed in
holding one end of Rachel's traveling chest. Another man followed at the
other end.

"What have you got in here--marble blocks?" the first archer grumbled as
he set the box down on the carpeted tent floor beside the bed.

"My helmet and sword and coat of mail," said Rachel with a smile. "I
would not want to miss the battle."

Fear whispered to her that the armed men who traveled with the Tartars
must be aware that she had valuables in that chest. If any of them ever
got an opportunity, they would not hesitate to steal it from her. And
stab her to death to get at it, if they had to. She hated carrying the
heavy box everywhere. But even if she could have found a safe place for
it in Rome, she had no way of knowing whether she could ever get back
there to claim it. The chest held her prisoner as much as John did.

She had thought that while she and John traveled with Charles d'Anjou's
army, she might be able to slip away. Perhaps if there was a battle, she
might escape in the confusion. But she could not do it alone, not if she
wanted to take the chest.

"You can take my place if you are so eager," the second Venetian
