
Certain objections to the theory have been put forward, one of which is
that the parallelism noticed between the opposite shores of the Atlantic
is almost too perfect to have remained through some sixty millions of
years down to our own day, in the face of all those geological movements
of upheaval and submergence, which are perpetually at work upon our
globe. Professor Pickering, however, replies to this objection by
stating that many geologists believe that the main divisions of land and
water on the earth are permanent, and that the geological alterations
which have taken place since these were formed have been merely of a
temporary and superficial nature.




CHAPTER XXVIII

THE END OF THINGS


We have been trying to picture the beginning of things. We will now try
to picture the end.

In attempting this, we find that our theories must of necessity be
limited to the earth, or at most to the solar system. The time-honoured
expression "End of the World" really applies to very little beyond the
end of our own earth. To the people of past ages it, of course, meant
very much more. For them, as we have seen, the earth was the centre of
everything; and the heavens and all around were merely a kind of minor
accompaniment, created, as they no doubt thought, for their especial
benefit. In the ancient view, therefore, the beginning of the earth
meant the beginning of the universe, and the end of the earth the
extinction of all things. The belief, too, was general that this end
would be accomplished through fire. In the modern view, however, the
birth and death of the earth, or indeed of the solar system, might pass
as incidents almost unnoticed in space. They would be but mere links in
the chain of cosmic happenings.

A number of theories have been forward from time to time prognosticating
the end of the earth, and consequently of human life. We will conclude
with a recital of a few of them, though which, if any, is the true one,
the Last Men alone can know.

Just as a living creature may at any moment die in the fulness of
strength through sudden malady or accident, or, on the other hand, may
meet with death as a mere consequence of old age, so may our globe be
destroyed by some sudden cataclysm, or end in slow processes of decay.
Barring accidents, therefore, it would seem probable that the growing
cold of the earth, or the gradual extinction of the sun, should after
many millions of years close the chapter of life, as we know it. On the
former of these suppositions, the decrease of temperature on our globe
might perhaps be accelerated by the thinning of the atmosphere, through
the slow escape into space of its constituent gases, or their gradual
chemical combination with the materials of the earth. The subterranean
heat entirely radiated away, there would no longer remain any of those
volcanic elevating forces which so far have counteracted the slow
wearing down of the land surface of our planet, and thus what water
remained would in time wash over all. If this preceded the growing cold
of the sun, certain strange evolutions of marine forms of life would be
the last to endure, but these, too, would have to go in the end.

Should, however, the actual process be the reverse of this, and the sun
cool down the quicker, then man would, as a consequence of his
scientific knowledge, tend in all probability to outlive the other forms
of terrestrial life. In such a vista we can picture the regions of the
earth towards the north and south becoming gradually more and more
uninhabitable through cold, and human beings withdrawing before the
slow march of the icy boundary, until the only regions capable of
habitation would lie within the tropics. In such a struggle between man
and destiny science would be pressed to the uttermost, in the devising
of means to counteract the slow diminution of the solar heat and the
gradual disappearance of air and water. By that time the axial rotation
of our globe might possibly have been slowed down to such an extent that
one side alone of its surface would be turned ever towards the fast
dying sun. And the mind's eye can picture the last survivors of the
human race, huddled together for warmth in a glass-house somewhere on
the equator, waiting for the end to come.

The mere idea of the decay and death of the solar system almost brings
to one a cold shudder. All that sun's light and heat, which means so
much to us, entirely a thing of the past. A dark, cold ball rushing
along in space, accompanied by several dark, cold balls circling
ceaselessly around it. One of these a mere cemetery, in which there
would be no longer any recollection of the mighty empires, the loves and
hates, and all that teeming play of life which we call History.
Tombstones of men and of deeds, whirling along forgotten in the darkness
and silence. _Sic transit gloria mundi._

In that brilliant flight of scientific fancy, the _Time Machine_, Mr.
H.G. Wells has pictured the closing years of the earth in some such
long-drawn agony as this. He has given us a vision of a desolate beach
by a salt and almost motionless sea. Foul monsters of crab-like form
crawl slowly about, beneath a huge hull of sun, red and fixed in the
sky. The rocks around are partly coated with an intensely green
vegetation, like the lichen in caves, or the plants which grow in a
perpetual twilight. And the air is now of an exceeding thinness.

He dips still further into the future, and thus predicts the final form
of life:--

"I saw again the moving thing upon the shoal--there was no mistake now
that it was a moving thing--against the red water of the sea. It was a
round thing, the size of a football perhaps, or it may be bigger, and
tentacles trailed down from it; it seemed black against the weltering
blood-red water, and it was hopping fitfully about."

What a description of the "Heir of all the Ages!"

To picture the end of our world as the result of a cataclysm of some
kind, is, on the other hand, a form of speculation as intensely dramatic
as that with which we have just been dealing is unutterably sad.

It is not so many years ago, for instance, that men feared a sudden
catastrophe from the possible collision of a comet with our earth. The
unreasoning terror with which the ancients were wont to regard these
mysterious visitants to our skies had, indeed, been replaced by an
apprehension of quite another kind. For instance, as we have seen, the
announcement in 1832 that Biela's Comet, then visible, would cut through
the orbit of the earth on a certain date threw many persons into a
veritable panic. They did not stop to find out the real facts of the
case, namely, that, at the time mentioned, the earth would be nearly a
month's journey from the point indicated!

It is, indeed, very difficult to say what form of damage the earth
would suffer from such a collision. In 1861 it passed, as we have seen,
through the tail of the comet without any noticeable result. But the
head of a comet, on the other hand, may, for aught we know, contain
within it elements of peril for us. A collision with this part might,
for instance, result in a violent bombardment of meteors. But these
meteors could not be bodies of any great size, for the masses of comets
are so very minute that one can hardly suppose them to contain any large
or dense constituent portions.

The danger, however, from a comet's head might after all be a danger to
our atmosphere. It might precipitate, into the air, gases which would
asphyxiate us or cause a general conflagration. It is scarcely necessary
to point out that dire results would follow upon any interference with
the balance of our atmosphere. For instance, the well-known French
astronomer, M. Camille Flammarion,[39] has imagined the absorption of
the nitrogen of the air in this way; and has gone on to picture men and
animals reduced to breathing only oxygen, first becoming excited, then
mad, and finally ending in a perfect saturnalia of delirium.

Lastly, though we have no proof that stars eventually become dark and
cold, for human time has so far been all too short to give us even the
smallest evidence as to whether heat and light are diminishing in our
own sun, yet it seems natural to suppose that such bodies must at last
cease their functions, like everything else which we know of. We may,
therefore, reasonably presume that there are dark bodies scattered in
the depths of space. We have, indeed, a suspicion of at least one,
though perhaps it partakes rather of a planetary nature, namely, that
"dark" body which continually eclipses Algol, and so causes the
temporary diminution of its light. As the sun rushes towards the
constellation of Lyra such an extinguished sun may chance to find itself
in his path; just as a derelict hulk may loom up out of the darkness
right beneath the bows of a vessel sailing the great ocean.

Unfortunately a collision between the sun and a body of this kind could
not occur with such merciful suddenness. A tedious warning of its
approach would be given from that region of the heavens whither our
system is known to be tending. As the dark object would become visible
only when sufficiently near our sun to be in some degree illuminated by
his rays, it might run the chance at first of being mistaken for a new
planet. If such a body were as large, for instance, as our own sun, it
should, according to Mr. Gore's calculations, reveal itself to the
telescope some fifteen years before the great catastrophe. Steadily its
disc would appear to enlarge, so that, about nine years after its
discovery, it would become visible to the naked eye. At length the
doomed inhabitants of the earth, paralysed with terror, would see their
relentless enemy shining like a second moon in the northern skies.
Rapidly increasing in apparent size, as the gravitational attractions of
the solar orb and of itself interacted more powerfully with diminishing
distance, it would at last draw quickly in towards the sun and disappear
in the glare.

It is impossible for us to conceive anything more terrible than these
closing days, for no menace of catastrophe which we can picture could
bear within it such a certainty of fulfilment. It appears, therefore,
useless to speculate on the probable actions of men in their now
terrestrial prison. Hope, which so far had buoyed them up in the direst
calamities, would here have no place. Humanity, in the fulness of its
strength, would await a wholesale execution from which there could be no
chance at all of a reprieve. Observations of the approaching body would
have enabled astronomers to calculate its path with great exactness, and
to predict the instant and character of the impact. Eight minutes after
the moment allotted for the collision the resulting tide of flame would
surge across the earth's orbit, and our globe would quickly pass away in
vapour.

And what then?

A nebula, no doubt; and after untold ages the formation possibly from it
of a new system, rising phoenix-like from the vast crematorium and
filling the place of the old one. A new central sun, perhaps, with its
attendant retinue of planets and satellites. And teeming life,
perchance, appearing once more in the fulness of time, when temperature
in one or other of these bodies had fallen within certain limits, and
other predisposing conditions had supervened.

  "The world's great age begins anew,
      The golden years return,
  The earth doth like a snake renew
      Her winter weeds outworn:
  Heaven smiles, and faiths and empires gleam
  Like wrecks of a dissolving dream.

  A brighter Hellas rears its mountains
      From waves serener far;
  A new Peneus rolls his fountains
      Against the morning star;
  Where fairer Tempes bloom, there sleep
  Young Cyclads on a sunnier deep.

  A loftier Argo cleaves the main,
      Fraught with a later prize;
  Another Orpheus sings again,
      And loves, and weeps, and dies;
  A new Ulysses leaves once more
  Calypso for his native shore.

       *       *       *       *       *

Oh cease! must hate and death return?
    Cease! must men kill and die?
Cease! drain not to its dregs the urn
    Of bitter prophecy!
The world is weary of the past,--
Oh might it die or rest at last!"


[39] See his work, _La Fin du Monde_, wherein the various ways by which
our world may come to an end are dealt with at length, and in a
profoundly interesting manner.




INDEX


  Achromatic telescope, 115, 116

  Adams, 24, 236, 243

  Aerial telescopes, 110, 111

  Agathocles, Eclipse of, 85

  Agrippa, Camillus, 44

  Ahaz, dial of, 85

  Air, 166

  Airy, Sir G.B., 92

  Al gul, 307

  Al Sufi, 284, 290, 296, 315

  Alcor, 294

  Alcyone, 284

  Aldebaran, 103, 288, 290, 297

  Algol, 307, 309-310, 312, 323, 347

  Alpha, Centauri, 52-53, 280, 298-299, 304, 320

  Alpha Crucis, 298

  Alps, Lunar, 200

  Altair, 295

  Altitude of objects in sky, 196

  Aluminium, 145

  Amos viii. 9, 85

  Anderson, T.D., 311-312

  Andromeda (constellation), 279, 314;
    Great Nebula in, 314, 316

  Andromedid meteors, 272

  Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, 87-88

  Anighito meteorite, 277

  Annular eclipse, 65-68, 80, 92, 99

  Annular Nebula in Lyra, 315-316

  Annulus, 68

  Ansae, 242-243

  Anticipation in discovery, 236-237

  Apennines, Lunar, 200

  Aphelion, 274

  Apparent enlargement of celestial objects, 192-196

  Apparent size of celestial objects deceptive, 196, 294

  Apparent sizes of sun and moon, variations in, 67, 80, 178

  Aquila (constellation), 295

  Arabian astronomers, 107, 307

  Arago, 92, 257

  Arc, degrees minutes and seconds of, 60

  Arcturus, 280, 282, 290, 295

  Argelander, 290

  Argo (constellation), 298

  Aristarchus of Samos, 171

  Aristarchus (lunar crater), 205

  Aristophanes, 101

  Aristotle, 161, 173, 185

  Arrhenius 222, 253-254

  Assyrian tablet, 84

  Asteroidal zone, analogy of, to Saturn's rings, 238

  Asteroids (or minor planets), 30-31, 225-228, 336;
    discovery of the, 23, 244;
    Wolf's method of discovering, 226-227

  Astrology, 56

  _Astronomical Essays_, 63, 337

  Astronomical Society, Royal, 144

  _Astronomy, Manual of_, 166

  Atlantic Ocean, parallelism of opposite shores, 340-341

  Atlas, the Titan, 18

  Atmosphere, absorption by earth's, 129-130;
    ascertainment of, by spectroscope, 124-125, 212;
    height of earth's, 167, 267;
    of asteroids, 226;
    of earth, 129, 130, 166-169, 218, 222, 267, 346;
    of Mars, 156, 212, 216;
    of Mercury, 156;
    of moon, 70-71, 156, 201-203;
    of Jupiter, 231;
    of planets, 125;
    of Saturn's rings, 239

  "Atmosphere" of the stars, 331

  Atmospheric layer and "glass-house" compared, 167, 203

  August Meteors (Perseids), 270

  Auriga (constellation), 294-296, 306, 311;
    New Star in, 311

  Aurigae, [b] (Beta), 294, 297, 304

  Aurora Borealis, 141, 143, 259

  Australia, suggested origin of, 340

  Axis, 29-30;
    of earth, 163, 180;
    small movement of earth's, 180-181


  Babylonian tablet, 84

  Babylonian idea of the moon, 185

  Bacon, Roger, 108

  Bacubirito meteorite, 277

  Bagdad, 107

  Baily, Francis, 92

  "Baily's Beads," 69, 70, 91-92, 154

  Bailly (lunar crater), 199

  Ball, Sir Robert, 271

  Barnard, E.E., 31, 224, 232-234, 237, 258

  "Bay of Rainbows," 197

  Bayer's classification of stars, 289, 291-292

  Bayeux Tapestry, 263

  Bear, Great (constellation). _See_ Ursa Major;
    Little, _see_ Ursa Minor

  Beehive (Praesepe), 307

  Beer, 206

  Belopolsky, 304

  "Belt" of Orion, 297

  Belt theory of Milky Way, 321

  Belts of Jupiter, 230

  Bergstrand, 314

  Berlin star chart, 244

  Bessel, 173, 280, 305

  Beta ([b]) Lyrae, 307

  Beta ([b]) Persei. _See_ Algol

  Betelgeux, 297

  Bible, eclipses in, 85

  Biela's Comet, 256-257, 272-273, 345

  Bielids, 270, 272-273

  Billion, 51-52

  Binary stars, spectroscopic, 301-306, 309;
    visual, 300, 303-306
