"That accursed Hahn--" Miko, stricken with his lack of knowledge of
these controls, was wholly confused.

       *       *       *       *       *

A moment only had passed. My fancy that the Moon-disc was enlarged was
merely the horror of my imagination. We had not fallen far enough yet
for that.

But we were falling. Unless I could do something, we would crash upon
the Lunar surface.

Anita, killed in this _Planetara_ turret. The end of everything for us.

Action came to me. I gasped, "Miko, you stay here! The controls are
dead! You stay here--hold Anita."

I ignored Moa's weapon which she was still clutching mechanically. Snap
thrust her away.

"Sit back! Let us alone! We're falling! Don't you understand?"

This deadly danger, to level us all! No longer were we captors and
captured. Not brigands for this moment. No thought of Grantline's
treasure! Trapped humans only! Leveled by the common, instinct of
self-preservation. Trapped here together, fighting for our lives.

Miko gasped. "Can you--check us? What happened?"

"I don't know. I'll try."

I stood clinging. This dizzying whirl! From the audiphone grid
Coniston's voice sounded.

"I say, Haljan, something's wrong! Hahn doesn't signal."

The look-out in the forward tower was clinging to his window. On the
deck below our turret a member of the crew appeared, stood lurching for
a moment, then shouted, and turned and ran, swaying, aimless. From the
lower hull-corridors our grids sounded with the tramping of running
steps. Panic among the crew was spreading over the ship. A chaos below
decks.

       *       *       *       *       *

I pulled at the emergency switch again. Dead....

But down below there was the manual controls.

"Snap, we must get down. The signals."

"Yes."

Coniston's voice came like a scream from the grid. "Hahn is dead--the
controls are broken! Hahn is dead!"

We barely heard him. I shouted, "Miko--hold Anita! Come on, Snap!"

We clung to the ladders. Snap was behind me. "Careful, Gregg! Good God!"

This dizzying whirl. I tried not to look. The deck under me was now a
blurred kaleidoscope of swinging patches of moonlight and shadow.

We reached the deck. Ran, swaying, lurching.

It seemed that from the turret Anita's voice followed us. "Be careful!"

Within the ship our senses steadied. With the rotating, reeling, heavens
shut out, there were only the shouts and tramping steps of the
panic-stricken crew to mark that anything was amiss. That, and a
pseudo-sensation of lurching caused by the pulsing of gravity--a pull
when the Moon was beneath our hull to combine its force with our
magnetizers; a lightening when it was overhead. A throbbing, pendulum
lurch--that was all.

We ran down to the corridor incline. A white-faced member of the crew,
came running up.

"What's happened? Haljan, what's happened?"

"We're falling!" I gripped him. "Get below. Come on with us!"

But he jerked away from me. "Falling?"

A steward came running. "Falling? My God!"

Snap swung at them. "Get ahead of us! The manual controls--our only
chance--we need all you men at the compressor pumps!"

But it was an instinct to try and get on deck, as though here below we
were rats caught in a trap. The men tore away from me and ran. Their
shouts of panic resounded through the dim, blue-lit corridors.

       *       *       *       *       *

Coniston came lurching from the control room. "I say--falling! Haljan,
my God, look at him!"

Hahn was sprawled at the gravity-plate switchboard. Sprawled,
head-down. Dead. Killed by something? Or a suicide?

I bent over him. His hands gripped the main switch. He had ripped it
loose. And his left hand had reached and broken the fragile line of
tubes that intensified the current of the pneumatic plate-shifters. A
suicide? With his last frenzy determined to kill us all?

Then I saw that Hahn had been killed! Not a suicide! In his hand he
gripped a small segment of black fabric, a piece torn from an invisible
cloak? Was it?

The questions were swept away by the necessity for action. Snap was
rigging the hand-compressors. If he could get the pressure back in the
tanks....

I swung on Coniston. "You armed?"

"Yes." He was white-faced and confused, but not in a panic. He showed me
his heat-ray cylinder. "What do you want me to do?"

"Round up the crew. Get all you can. Bring them here to man these
pumps."

He dashed away. Snap shouted after him. "Kill them down if they argue!"

Miko's voice sounded from the turret call grid: "Falling! Haljan, you
can see it now! Check us!"

I did not answer that. I pumped with Snap.

Desperate moments. Or was it an hour? Coniston brought the men. He stood
over them with menacing weapon.

We had all the pumps going. The pressure rose a little in the tanks.
Enough to shift a bow-plate. I tried it. The plate slowly clicked into a
new combination. A gravity repulsion just in the bow-tip.

       *       *       *       *       *

I signaled Miko. "Have we stopped swinging?"

"No. But slower."

I could feel it, that lurch of the gravity. But not steady now. A limp.
The tendency of our bow was to stay up.

"More pressure, Snap."

"Yes."

One of the crew rebelled, tried to bolt from the room. "God, we'll
crash, caught in here!"

Coniston shot him down.

I shifted another bow-plate. Then two in the stern. The stern-plates
seemed to move more readily than the others.

"Run all the stern-plates," Snap advised.

I tried it. The lurching stopped. Miko called. "We're bow down.
Falling!"

But not falling free. The Moon-gravity pull upon us was more than half
neutralized.

"I'll go up, Snap, and try the engines. You don't mind staying down?
Executing my signals?"

"You idiot!" He gripped my shoulders. His eyes were gleaming, his face
haggard, but his pale lips twitched with a smile.

"Maybe it's good-by, Gregg. We'll fall--fighting."

"Yes. Fighting. Coniston, you keep the pressure up."

With the broken set-tubes it took nearly all the pressure to maintain
the few plates I had shifted. One slipped back to neutral. Then the
pumps gained on it, and it shifted again.

I dashed up to the deck. Ah, the Moon was so close now! So horribly
close! The deck shadows were still. Through the forward bow windows the
Moon surface glared up at us.

       *       *       *       *       *

I reached the turret. The _Planetara_ was steady. Pitched bow-down, half
falling, half sliding like a rocket downward. The scarred surface of the
Moon spread wide under us.

These last horrible minutes were a blur. And there was always Anita's
face. She left Miko. Faced with death, he sat clinging. Ignoring her,
Moa, too, sat apart. Staring--

And Anita crept to me. "Gregg, dear one. The end...."

I tried the electronic engines from the stern, setting them in the
reverse. The streams of their light glowed from the stern, forward
along our hull, and flared down from our bow toward the Lunar surface.
But no atmosphere was here to give resistance. Perhaps the electronic
streams checked our fall a little. The pumps gave us pressure, just in
the last minutes, to slide a few of the hull-plates. But our bow stayed
down. We slid, like a spent rocket falling.

I recall the horror of that expanding Lunar surface. The maw of
Archimedes yawning. A blob. Widening to a great pit. Then I saw it was
to one side. Rushing upward.

A phantasmagoria of uprushing crags. Black and gray. Spires tinged with
Earth-light.

"Gregg, dear one--good-by."

Her gentle arms around me. The end of everything for us. I recall
murmuring, "Not falling free, Anita. Some hull-plates are set."

My dials showed another plate shifting, checking us a little further.
Good old Snap.

I calculated the next best plate to shift. I tried it. Slid it over.
Good old Snap....

Then everything faded but the feeling of Anita's arms around me.

"Gregg, dear one--"

The end of everything for us....

There was an up-rush of gray-black rock.

An impact....




CHAPTER XXII

_The Hiss of Death_


I opened my eyes to a dark blur of confusion. My shoulder hurt--a pain
shooting through it. Something lay like a weight on me. I could not seem
to move my left arm. Very queer! Then I moved it, and it hurt. I was
lying twisted: I sat up. And with a rush, memory came. The crash was
over. I am not dead. Anita--

She was lying beside me. There was a little light here in this silent
blur--a soft, mellow Earth-light filtering in the window. The weight on
me was Anita. She lay sprawled, her head and shoulders half way across
my lap.

Not dead! Thank God, not dead! She moved. Her arms went around me, and I
lifted her. The Earth-light glowed on her pale face; but her eyes opened
and she faintly smiled.

"It's past, Anita! We've struck, and we're still alive."

I held her as though all life's turgid danger were powerless to touch
us.

But in the silence my floating senses were brought back to reality by a
faint sound forcing itself upon me. A little hiss. The faintest
murmuring breath like a hiss. Escaping air!

I cast off her clinging arms. "Anita, this is madness!"

       *       *       *       *       *

For minutes we must have been lying there in the heaven of our embrace.
But air was escaping! The _Planetara's_ dome was broken--or cracked--and
our precious air was hissing out.

Full reality came to me at last. I was not seriously injured. I found
that I could move freely. I could stand. A twisted shoulder, a limp left
arm, but they were better in a moment.

And Anita did not seem to be hurt. Blood was upon her. But not her
blood.

Beside Anita, stretched face down on the turret grid, was the giant
figure of Miko. The blood lay in a small pool against his face. A
widening pool.

Moa was here. I thought her body twitched; then was still. This
soundless wreckage! In the dim glow of the wrecked turret with its two
motionless, broken human figures, it seemed as though Anita and I were
ghouls prowling. I saw that the turret had fallen over to the
_Planetara's_ deck. It lay dashed against the dome-side.

The deck was aslant. A litter of wreckage. A broken human figure
showed--one of the crew, who at the last must have come running up. The
forward observation tower was down on the chart-room roof: in its metal
tangle I thought I could see the legs of the tower look-out.

So this was the end of the brigands' adventure! The _Planetara's_ last
voyage! How small and futile are human struggles! Miko's daring
enterprise--so villainous, inhuman--brought all in a few moments to this
silent tragedy. The _Planetara_ had fallen thirty thousand miles. But
why? What had happened to Hahn? And where was Coniston, down in this
broken hull?

And Snap. I thought suddenly of Snap.

       *       *       *       *       *

I clutched at my wandering wits. This inactivity was death. The escaping
air hissed in my ears. Our precious air, escaping away into the vacant
desolation of the Lunar emptiness. Through one of the twisted, slanting
dome-windows a rocky spire was visible. The _Planetara_ lay bow-down,
wedged in a jagged cradle of Lunar rock. A miracle that the hull and
dome had held together.

"Anita, we must get out of here!"

I thought I was fully alert now. I recalled that the brigands had spoken
of having partly assembled their Moon equipment. If only we could find
suits and helmets!

"We must get out," I repeated. "Get to Grantline's camp."

"Their helmets are in the forward storage room, Gregg. I saw them
there."

She was staring at the fallen Miko and Moa. She shuddered and turned
away and gripped me. "In the forward storage room, by the port of the
emergency lock-exit."

If only the exit locks would operate! We must get out of here, but find
Snap first. Good old Snap! Would we find him lying dead?

We climbed from the slanting, fallen turret, over the wreckage of the
littered deck. It was not difficult, a lightness was upon us. The
_Planetara's_ gravity-magnetizers were dead: this was only the light
Moon-gravity pulling us.

"Careful, Anita. Don't jump too freely."

We leaped along the deck. The hiss of the escaping pressure was like a
clanging gong of warning to tell us to hurry. The hiss of death so
