point, watching me intently, his dark eyes gleaming.

Carson entered, and Mercer gestured to him to wait. Very nice old chap,
Carson, impressive even in his bathing suit. Mercer was mighty lucky to
have a man like Carson....

       *       *       *       *       *

Something seemed to tick suddenly, somewhere deep in my consciousness.

"Yes, that's very true: Carson is a most decent sort of chap." The words
were not spoken. I did not _hear_ them, I _knew_ them. What--I glanced
at Mercer, and he laughed aloud with pleasure and excitement.

"It worked!" he cried. "I received your thought regarding Carson, and
then turned the switch so that you received my thought. And you did!"

Rather gingerly I removed the thing from my head and laid it on the
table.

"It's wizardry, Mercer! If it will work as well on _her_...."

"It will, I know it will!--if we can get her to wear one of these,"
replied Mercer confidently. "I have only three of them; I had planned
some three-cornered experiments with you, Carson, and myself. We'll
leave Carson out of to-night's experiment, however, for we'll need him
to operate this switch. You see, as it is now wired only one person
transmits thoughts at a time. The other two receive. When the switch is
on the first contact, Number One sends, and Numbers Two and Three
receive. When the switch is on Number Two, then he sends thoughts, and
Numbers One and Three receive them. And so on. I'll lengthen these leads
so that we can run them out into the pool, and then we'll be ready.
Somehow we must induce her to wear one of these things, even if we have
to use force. I'm sure the three of us can handle her."

"We should be able to," I smiled. She was such a slim, graceful, almost
delicate little thing; the thought that three strong men might not be
able to control her seemed almost amusing.

"You haven't seen her in action yet," said Mercer grimly, glancing up
from his work of lengthening the cords that led from the antennae to the
control panel. "And what's more, I hope you don't."

       *       *       *       *       *

I watched him in silence as he spliced and securely taped the last
connection.

"All set," he nodded. "Carson, will you operate the switch for us? I
believe everything is functioning properly." He surveyed the panel of
instruments hastily, assuring himself that every reading was correct.
Then, with all three of the devices he called antennae in his hand,
their leads plugged into the control panel, he led the way to the side
of the pool.

The girl was strolling around the edge of the pool, feeling the smooth
tile sides with her hands as we came into view, but as soon as she saw
us she shot through the water to where we were standing.

It was the first time I had seen her move in this fashion. She seemed to
propel herself with a sudden mighty thrust of her feet against the
bottom; she darted through the water with the speed of an arrow, yet
stopped as gently as though she had merely floated there.

As she looked up, her eyes unmistakably sought mine, and her smile
seemed warm and inviting. She made again that strange little gesture of
invitation.

With an effort I glanced at Mercer. There was something devilishly
fascinating about the girl's great, dark, searching eyes.

"I'm going in," I said hoarsely. "Hand me one of your head-set things
when I reach for it." Before he could protest, I dived into the pool.

       *       *       *       *       *

I headed directly towards the heavy bronze ladder that led to the bottom
of the pool. I had two reasons in mind. I would need something to keep
me under water, with my lungs full of air, and I could get out quickly
if it were necessary. I had not forgotten the livid, jagged furrows in
Mercer's side.

Quickly as I shot to the ladder she was there before me, a dim, wavering
white shape, waiting.

I paused, holding to a rung of the ladder with one hand. She came
closer, walking with the airy grace I had noted before, and my heart
pounded against my ribs as she raised one long, slim arm towards me.

The hand dropped gently on my shoulder, pressed it as though in token
of friendship. Perhaps, I thought quickly, this was, with her, a sign of
greeting. I lifted my own arm and returned the salutation, if salutation
it were, aware of a strange rising and falling sound, as of a distant
humming, in my ears.

The sound ceased suddenly, on a rising note, as though of inquiry, and
it dawned on me that I had heard the speech of this strange creature.
Before I could think of a course of action, my aching lungs reminded me
of the need of air, and I released my hold on the ladder and let my body
rise to the surface.

       *       *       *       *       *

As my head broke the water, a hand, cold and strong as steel, closed
around my ankle. I looked down. The girl was watching me, and there was
no smile on her face now.

"All right!" I shouted across the pool to Mercer, who was watching
anxiously. Then, filling my lungs with air again, I pulled myself, by
means of the ladder, to the bottom of the pool. The restraining hand was
removed instantly.

The strange creature thrust her face close to mine as my feet touched
bottom, and for the first time I saw her features distinctly.

She was beautiful, but in a weird, unearthly sort of way. As I had
already noticed, her eyes were of unusual size, and I saw now that they
were an intense shade of blue, with a pupil of extraordinary proportion.
Her nose was well shaped, but the nostrils were slightly flattened, and
the orifices were rather more elongated than I had ever seen before. The
mouth was utterly fascinating, and her teeth, revealed by her engaging
smile, were as perfect as it would be possible to imagine.

The great mane of hair which enveloped her was, as I have said, tawny in
hue, and almost translucent, like the stems of some seaweeds I have
seen. And as she raised one slim white hand to brush back some wisps
that floated by her face, I saw distinctly the webs between her
fingers. They were barely noticeable, for they were as transparent as
the fins of a fish, but they were there, extending nearly to the last
joint of each finger.

       *       *       *       *       *

As her face came close to my own, I became aware of the humming,
crooning sound I had heard before, louder this time. I could see, from
the movement of her throat, that I had been correct in assuming that she
was attempting to speak with me. I smiled back at her and shook my head.
She seemed to understand, for the sound ceased, and she studied me with
a little thoughtful frown, as though trying to figure out some other
method of communication.

I pointed upward, for I was feeling the need for fresh air again, and
slowly mounted the ladder. This time she did not grasp me, but watched
me intently, as though understanding what I did, and the reasons for
it.

"Bring one of your gadgets over here, Mercer," I called across the pool.
"I think I'm making progress."

"Good boy!" he cried, and came running with two of the antennae, the
long insulated cords trailing behind him. Through the water the girl
watched him, evident dislike in her eyes. She glanced at me with sudden
suspicion as Mercer handed me the two instruments, but made no hostile
move.

"You won't be able to stay in the water with her," explained Mercer
rapidly. "The salt water would short the antennae, you see. Try to get
her to wear one, and then you get your head out of water, and don yours.
And remember, she won't be able to communicate with us by words--we'll
have to get her to convey her thoughts by means of mental pictures. I'll
try to impress that on her. Understand?"

       *       *       *       *       *

I nodded, and picked up one of the instruments. "Fire when ready,
Gridley," I commented, and sank again to the bottom of the pool.

I touched the girl's head with one finger, and then pointed to my own
head, trying to convey to her that she could get her thoughts to me.
Then I held up the antennae and placed it on my own head to show that it
could not harm her.

My next move was to offer her the instrument, moving slowly, and smiling
reassuringly--no mean feat under water.

She hesitated a moment, and then, her eyes fixed on mine, she slowly
fixed the instrument over her own head as she had seen me adjust it upon
my own.

I smiled and nodded, and pressed her shoulder in token of friendly
greeting. Then, gesturing toward my own head again, and pointing upward.
I climbed the ladder.

"All right, Mercer," I shouted. "Start at once, before she grows
restless!"

"I've already started!" he called back, and I hurriedly donned my own
instrument.

Bearing in mind what Mercer had said, I descended the ladder but a few
rungs, so that my head remained out of water, and smiled down at the
girl, touching the instrument on my head, and then pointing to hers.

I could sense Mercer's thoughts now. He was picturing himself walking
long the shore, with the stormy ocean in the background. Ahead of him I
saw the white body lying face downward in the pool. I saw him run up to
the pool and lift the slim, pale figure in his arms.

       *       *       *       *       *

Let me make it clear, at this point, that when I say that I saw
these things, I mean only that mental images of them penetrated my
consciousness. I visualized them just as I could close my eyes and
visualize, for example, the fireplace in the living room of my own
home.

I looked down at the girl. She was frowning, and her eyes were very
wide. Her head was a little on one side, in the attitude of one who
listens intently.

Slowly and carefully Mercer thought out the whole story of his
experiences with the girl until she had plunged into the pool. Then I
saw again the beach, with the girl's figure in the pool. The picture
grew hazy; I realized Mercer was trying to picture the bottom of the
sea. Then he pictured again the girl lying in the pool, and once again
the sea. I was aware of the soft little tick in the center of my brain
that announced that the switch had been moved to another contact point.

I glanced down at her. She was staring up at me with her great, curious
eyes, and I sensed, through the medium of the instrument I wore, that
she was thinking of me. I saw my own features, idealized, glowing with a
strange beauty that was certainly none of my own. I realized that I saw
myself, in short, as she saw me. I smiled back at her, and shook my
head.

       *       *       *       *       *

A strange, dim whirl of pictures swept through my consciousness. I was
on the bottom of the ocean. Shadowy shapes swept by silently, and from
above, a dim bluish light filtered down on a scene such as mortal eyes
have never seen.

All around were strange structures of jagged coral, roughly circular as
to base, and rounded on top, resembling very much the igloos of the
Eskimos. The structures varied greatly in size, and seemed to be
arranged in some sort of regular order, like houses along a narrow
street. Around many of them grew clusters of strange and colorful
seaweeds that waved their banners gently, as though some imperceptible
current dallied with them in passing.

Here and there figures moved, slim white figures that strolled along the
narrow street, or at times shot overhead like veritable torpedoes.

There were both men and women moving there. The men were broader of
shoulder, and their hair, which they wore to their knees, was somewhat
darker in color than that of the women. Both sexes were slim, and there
was a remarkable uniformity of size and appearance.

None of the strange beings wore garments of any kind, nor were they
necessary. The clinging tresses were cinctured at the waist with a sort
of cord of twisted orange-colored material, and some of the younger
women wore bands of the same material around their brows.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nearest of all the figures was the girl who was visualizing all this for
us. She was walking slowly away from the cluster of coral structures.
Once or twice she paused, and seemed to hold conversation with others of
the strange people, but each time she moved on.

The coral structures grew smaller and poorer. Finally the girl trod
alone on the floor of the ocean, between great growths of kelp and
seaweeds, with dim, looming masses of faintly tinted coral everywhere.
Once she passed close to a tilted, ragged hulk of some ancient vessel,
its naked ribs packed with drifted sand.

Sauntering dreamily, she moved away from the ancient derelict. Suddenly
a dim shadow swept across the sand at her feet, and she arrowed from the
spot like a white, slim meteor. But behind her darted a black and
swifter shadow--a shark!

Like a flash she turned and faced the monster. Something she had drawn
from her girdle shone palely in her hand. It was a knife of whetted
stone or bone.

Darting swiftly downward her feet spurned the yellow sand, and she shot
at her enemy with amazing speed. The long blade swept in an arc, ripped
the pale belly of the monster just as he turned to dart away.

       *       *       *       *       *

A great cloud of blood dyed the water. The white figure of the girl shot
onward through the scarlet flood.

Blinded, she did not see that the jutting ribs of the ancient ship were
in her path. I seemed to see her crash, head on, into one of the
massive timbers, and I cried out involuntarily, and glanced down at the
girl in the water at my feet.

Her eyes were glowing. She knew that I had understood.

Hazily, then, I seemed to visualize her body floating limply in the
water. It was all very vague and indistinct, and I understood that this
was not what she had seen, but what she thought had happened. The
impressions grew wilder, swirled, grew gray and indistinct. Then I had a
view of Mercer's face, so terribly distorted it was barely recognizable.
Then a kaleidoscopic maze of inchoate scenes, shot through with flashes
of vivid, agonizing colors. The girl was thinking of her suffering,
taken out of her native element. In trying to save her, Mercer had
almost killed her. That, no doubt, was why she hated him.

My own face appeared next, almost godlike in its kindliness and its
imagined beauty, and I noticed now that she was thinking of me with my
yellow hair grown long, my nostrils elongated like her own--adjusted to
her own ideas of what a man should be.

       *       *       *       *       *

I flung the instrument from my head and dropped to the bottom of the
pool. I gripped both her shoulders, gently, to express my thanks and
friendship.

My heart was pounding. There was a strange fascination about this girl
from the depths of the sea, a subtle appeal that was answered from some
deep subterranean cavern of my being. I forgot, for the moment, who and
what I was. I remembered only that a note had been sounded that awoke an
echo of a long-forgotten instinct.

I think I kissed her. I know her arms were about me, and that I pressed
her close, so that our faces almost met. Her great, weirdly blue eyes
seemed to bore into my brain. I could feel them throbbing there....

I forgot time and space. I saw only that pale, smiling face and those
great dark eyes. Then, strangling, I tore myself from her embrace and
shot to the surface.

Coughing, I cleared my lungs of the water I had inhaled. I was weak and
shaking when I finished, but my head was clear. The grip of the strange
fantasy that had gripped me was shaken off.

Mercer was bending over me; speaking softly.

"I was watching, old man," he said gently. "I can imagine what happened.
A momentary, psychic fusing of an ancient, long since broken link. You,
together with all mankind, came up out of the sea. But there is no
retracing the way."

       *       *       *       *       *

