inches; or directly 28 : 28.5 :: 100 : x = 101.786--cubical inches, at
28 inches barometrical pressure; that is to say, the same gas or air
which at 28.5 inches of the barometer occupies 100 cubical inches of
volume, will occupy 101.786 cubical inches when the barometer is at 28
inches. It is equally easy to calculate the weight of this gas,
occupying 100 cubical inches, under 28.5 inches of barometrical
pressure; for, as it corresponds to 101.786 cubical inches at the
pressure of 28, and as, at this pressure, and at 10 deg. (54.5 deg.) of
temperature, each cubical inch of oxygen gas weighs half a grain, it
follows, that 100 cubical inches, under 28.5 barometrical pressure, must
weigh 50.893 grains. This conclusion might have been formed more
directly, as, since the volume of elastic fluids is in the inverse ratio
of their compression, their weights must be in the direct ratio of the
same compression: Hence, since 100 cubical inches weigh 50 grains, under
the pressure of 28 inches, we have the following statement to determine
the weight of 100 cubical inches of the same gas as 28.5 barometrical
pressure, 28 : 50 :: 28.5 : x, the unknown quantity, = 50.893.

The following case is more complicated: Suppose the jar A, Pl. XII. Fig.
18. to contain a quantity of gas in its upper part ACD, the rest of the
jar below CD being full of mercury, and the whole standing in the
mercurial bason or reservoir GHIK, filled with mercury up to EF, and
that the difference between the surface CD of the mercury in the jar,
and EF, that in the cistern, is six inches, while the barometer stands
at 27.5 inches. It is evident from these data, that the air contained in
ACD is pressed upon by the weight of the atmosphere, diminished by the
weight of the column of mercury CE, or by 27.5 - 6 = 21.5 inches of
barometrical pressure. This air is therefore less compressed than the
atmosphere at the mean height of the barometer, and consequently
occupies more space than it would occupy at the mean pressure, the
difference being exactly proportional to the difference between the
compressing weights. If, then, upon measuring the space ACD, it is found
to be 120 cubical inches, it must be reduced to the volume which it
would occupy under the mean pressure of 28 inches. This is done by the
following statement: 120 : x, the unknown volume, :: 21.5 : 28
inversely; this gives x = 120 x 21.5 / 28 = 92.143 cubical inches.

In these calculations we may either reduce the height of the mercury in
the barometer, and the difference of level in the jar and bason, into
lines or decimal fractions of the inch; but I prefer the latter, as it
is more readily calculated. As, in these operations, which frequently
recur, it is of great use to have means of abbreviation, I have given a
table in the appendix for reducing lines and fractions of lines into
decimal fractions of the inch.

In experiments performed in the water-apparatus, we must make similar
corrections to procure rigorously exact results, by taking into account,
and making allowances for the difference of height of the water within
the jar above the surface of the water in the cistern. But, as the
pressure of the atmosphere is expressed in inches and lines of the
mercurial barometer, and, as homogeneous quantities only can be
calculated together, we must reduce the observed inches and lines of
water into correspondent heights of the mercury. I have given a table in
the appendix for this conversion, upon the supposition that mercury is
13.5681 times heavier than water.


SECT. VI.

_Of Corrections relative to the Degrees of the Thermometer._

In ascertaining the weight of gasses, besides reducing them to a mean of
barometrical pressure, as directed in the preceding section, we must
likewise reduce them to a standard thermometrical temperature; because,
all elastic fluids being expanded by heat, and condensed by cold, their
weight in any determinate volume is thereby liable to considerable
alterations. As the temperature of 10 deg. (54.5 deg.) is a medium between
the heat of summer and the cold of winter, being the temperature of
subterraneous places, and that which is most easily approached to at all
seasons, I have chosen that degree as a mean to which I reduce air or
gas in this species of calculation.

Mr de Luc found that atmospheric air was increased 1/215 part of its
bulk, by each degree of a mercurial thermometer, divided into 81
degrees, between the freezing and boiling points; this gives 1/211 part
for each degree of Reaumur's thermometer, which is divided into 80
degrees between these two points. The experiments of Mr Monge seem to
make this dilatation less for hydrogen gas, which he thinks is only
dilated 1/180. We have not any exact experiments hitherto published
respecting the ratio of dilatation of the other gasses; but, from the
trials which have been made, their dilatation seems to differ little
from that of atmospheric air. Hence I may take for granted, till farther
experiments give us better information upon this subject, that
atmospherical air is dilated 1/210 part, and hydrogen gas 1/190 part for
each degree of the thermometer; but, as there is still great uncertainty
upon this point, we ought always to operate in a temperature as near as
possible to the standard of 10 deg., (54.5 deg.) by this means any errors
in correcting the weight or volume of gasses by reducing them to the
common standard, will become of little moment.

The calculation for this correction is extremely easy. Divide the
observed volume of air by 210, and multiply the quotient by the degrees
of temperature above or below 10 deg. (54.5 deg.). This correction is
negative when the actual temperature is above the standard, and positive
when below. By the use of logarithmical tables this calculation is much
facilitated[59].


SECT. VII.

_Example for calculating the Corrections relative to the Variations of
Pressure and Temperature._


CASE.

In the jar A, Pl. IV. Fig. 3. standing in a water apparatus, is
contained 353 cubical inches of air; the surface of the water within the
jar at EF is 4-1/2 inches above the water in the cistern, the barometer
is at 27 inches 9-1/2 lines, and the thermometer at 15 deg. (65.75 deg.).
Having burnt a quantity of phosphorus in the air, by which concrete
phosphoric acid is produced, the air after the combustion occupies 295
cubical inches, the water within the jar stands 7 inches above that in
the cistern, the barometer is at 27 inches 9-1/4 lines, and the
thermometer at 16 deg. (68 deg.). It is required from these data to
determine the actual volume of air before and after combustion, and
the quantity absorbed during the process.


_Calculation before Combustion._

The air in the jar before combustion was 353 cubical inches, but it was
only under a barometrical pressure of 27 inches 9-1/2 lines; which,
reduced to decimal fractions by Tab. I. of the Appendix, gives 27.79167
inches; and from this we must deduct the difference of 4-1/2 inches of
water, which, by Tab. II. corresponds to 0.33166 inches of the
barometer; hence the real pressure of the air in the jar is 27.46001. As
the volume of elastic fluids diminish in the inverse ratio of the
compressing weights, we have the following statement to reduce the 353
inches to the volume the air would occupy at 28 inches barometrical
pressure.

353 : x, the unknown volume, :: 27.46001 : 28. Hence, x = 353 x
27.46001 / 28 = 346.192 cubical inches, which is the volume the same
quantity of air would have occupied at 28 inches of the barometer.

The 210th part of this corrected volume is 1.65, which, for the five
degrees of temperature above the standard gives 8.255 cubical inches;
and, as this correction is subtractive, the real corrected volume of the
air before combustion is 337.942 inches.


_Calculation after Combustion._

By a similar calculation upon the volume of air after combustion, we
find its barometrical pressure 27.77083 - 0.51593 = 27.25490. Hence, to
have the volume of air under the pressure of 28 inches, 295 : x ::
27.77083 : 28 inversely; or, x = 295 x 27.25490 / 28 = 287.150. The
210th part of this corrected volume is 1.368, which, multiplied by 6
degrees of thermometrical difference, gives the subtractive correction
for temperature 8.208, leaving the actual corrected volume of air after
combustion 278.942 inches.


_Result._

The corrected volume before combustion          337.942

Ditto remaining after combustion                278.942
                                               --------
Volume absorbed during combustion                59.000.


SECT. VIII.

_Method of determining the Absolute Gravity of the different Gasses._

Take a large balloon A, Pl. V. Fig. 10. capable of holding 17 or 18
pints, or about half a cubical foot, having the brass cap bcde
strongly cemented to its neck, and to which the tube and stop-cock f g
is fixed by a tight screw. This apparatus is connected by the double
screw represented separately at Fig. 12. to the jar BCD, Fig. 10. which
must be some pints larger in dimensions than the balloon. This jar is
open at top, and is furnished with the brass cap h i, and stop-cock l
m. One of these slop-cocks is represented separately at Fig. 11.

We first determine the exact capacity of the balloon by filling it with
water, and weighing it both full and empty. When emptied of water, it is
dried with a cloth introduced through its neck d e, and the last
remains of moisture are removed by exhausting it once or twice in an
air-pump.

When the weight of any gas is to be ascertained, this apparatus is used
as follows: Fix the balloon A to the plate of an air-pump by means of
the screw of the stop-cock f g, which is left open; the balloon is to
be exhausted as completely as possible, observing carefully the degree
of exhaustion by means of the barometer attached to the air-pump. When
the vacuum is formed, the stop-cock f g is shut, and the weight of the
balloon determined with the most scrupulous exactitude. It is then fixed
to the jar BCD, which we suppose placed in water in the shelf of the
pneumato chemical apparatus Fig. 1.; the jar is to be filled with the
gas we mean to weigh, and then, by opening the stop-cocks f g and l
m, the gas ascends into the balloon, whilst the water of the cistern
rises at the same time into the jar. To avoid very troublesome
corrections, it is necessary, during this first part of the operation,
to sink the jar in the cistern till the surfaces of the water within the
jar and without exactly correspond. The stop-cocks are again shut, and
the balloon being unscrewed from its connection with the jar, is to be
carefully weighed; the difference between this weight and that of the
exhausted balloon is the precise weight of the air or gas contained in
the balloon. Multiply this weight by 1728, the number of cubical inches
in a cubical foot, and divide the product by the number of cubical
inches contained in the balloon, the quotient is the weight of a cubical
foot of the gas or air submitted to experiment.

Exact account must be kept of the barometrical height and temperature of
the thermometer during the above experiment; and from these the
resulting weight of a cubical foot is easily corrected to the standard
of 28 inches and 10 deg., as directed in the preceding section. The small
portion of air remaining in the balloon after forming the vacuum must
likewise be attended to, which is easily determined by the barometer
attached to the air-pump. If that barometer, for instance, remains at
the hundredth part of the height it stood at before the vacuum was
formed, we conclude that one hundredth part of the air originally
contained remained in the balloon, and consequently that only 99/100 of
gas was introduced from the jar into the balloon.

FOOTNOTES:

[58] According to the proportion of 114 to 107, given between the French
and English foot, 28 inches of the French barometer are equal to 29.83
inches of the English. Directions will be found in the appendix for
converting all the French weights and measures used in this work into
corresponding English denominations.--E.

[59] When Fahrenheit's thermometer is employed, the dilatation by each
degree must be smaller, in the proportion of 1 to 2.25, because each
degree of Reaumur's scale contains 2.25 degrees of Fahrenheit; hence we
must divide by 472.5, and finish the rest of the calculation as
above.--E.




CHAP. III.

_Description of the Calorimeter, or Apparatus for measuring Caloric._


The calorimeter, or apparatus for measuring the relative quantities of
heat contained in bodies, was described by Mr de la Place and me in the
Memoirs of the Academy for 1780, p. 355. and from that Essay the
materials of this chapter are extracted.

If, after having cooled any body to the freezing point, it be exposed in
an atmosphere of 25 deg. (88.25 deg.), the body will gradually become
heated, from the surface inwards, till at last it acquire the same
temperature with the surrounding air. But, if a piece of ice be placed
in the same situation, the circumstances are quite different; it does
not approach in the smallest degree towards the temperature of the
circumambient air, but remains constantly at Zero (32 deg.), or the
temperature of melting ice, till the last portion of ice be completely
melted.

This phenomenon is readily explained; as, to melt ice, or reduce it to
water, it requires to be combined with a certain portion of caloric;
the whole caloric attracted from the surrounding bodies, is arrested or
fixed at the surface or external layer of ice which it is employed to
dissolve, and combines with it to form water; the next quantity of
caloric combines with the second layer to dissolve it into water, and so
on successively till the whole ice be dissolved or converted into water
by combination with caloric, the very last atom still remaining at its
former temperature, because the caloric has never penetrated so far as
long as any intermediate ice remained to melt.

Upon these principles, if we conceive a hollow sphere of ice at the
temperature of Zero (32 deg.) placed in an atmosphere 10 deg. (54.5 deg.),
and containing a substance at any degree of temperature above freezing, it
follows, 1st, That the heat of the external atmosphere cannot penetrate
into the internal hollow of the sphere of ice; 2dly, That the heat of
the body placed in the hollow of the sphere cannot penetrate outwards
beyond it, but will be stopped at the internal surface, and continually
employed to melt successive layers of ice, until the temperature of the
body be reduced to Zero (32 deg.), by having all its superabundant caloric
above that temperature carried off by the ice. If the whole water,
formed within the sphere of ice during the reduction of the temperature
of the included body to Zero, be carefully collected, the weight of the
water will be exactly proportional to the quantity of caloric lost by
the body in passing from its original temperature to that of melting
ice; for it is evident that a double quantity of caloric would have
melted twice the quantity of ice; hence the quantity of ice melted is a
very exact measure of the quantity of caloric employed to produce that
effect, and consequently of the quantity lost by the only substance that
could possibly have supplied it.

I have made this supposition of what would take place in a hollow sphere
of ice, for the purpose of more readily explaining the method used in
this species of experiment, which was first conceived by Mr de la Place.
It would be difficult to procure such spheres of ices and inconvenient
to make use of them when got; but, by means of the following apparatus,
we have remedied that defect. I acknowledge the name of Calorimeter,
which I have given it, as derived partly from Greek and partly from
Latin, is in some degree open to criticism; but, in matters of science,
a slight deviation from strict etymology, for the sake of giving
distinctness of idea, is excusable; and I could not derive the name
entirely from Greek without approaching too near to the names of known
instruments employed for other purposes.

The calorimeter is represented in Pl. VI. It is shown in perspective at
Fig. 1. and its interior structure is engraved in Fig. 2. and 3.; the
former being a horizontal, and the latter a perpendicular section. Its
capacity or cavity is divided into three parts, which, for better
distinction, I shall name the interior, middle, and external cavities.
The interior cavity f f f f, Fig. 4. into which the substances
submitted to experiment are put, is composed of a grating or cage of
iron wire, supported by several iron bars; its opening or mouth LM, is
covered by the lid HG, of the same materials. The middle cavity b b b
b, Fig. 2. and 3. is intended to contain the ice which surrounds the
interior cavity, and which is to be melted by the caloric of the
substance employed in the experiment. The ice is supported by the grate
m m at the bottom of the cavity, under which is placed the sieve n
n. These two are represented separately in Fig. 5. and 6.

In proportion as the ice contained in the middle cavity is melted, by
the caloric disengaged from the body placed in the interior cavity, the
water runs through the grate and sieve, and falls through the conical
funnel c c d, Fig. 3. and tube x y, into the receiver F, Fig. 1.
This water may be retained or let out at pleasure, by means of the
stop-cock u. The external cavity a a a a, Fig. 2. and 3. is filled
with ice, to prevent any effect upon the ice in the middle cavity from
the heat of the surrounding air, and the water produced from it is
carried off through the pipe ST, which shuts by means of the stop-cock
r. The whole machine is covered by the lid FF, Fig. 7. made of tin
painted with oil colour, to prevent rust.

When this machine is to be employed, the middle cavity b b b b, Fig.
2. and 3., the lid GH, Fig. 4. of the interior cavity, the external
cavity a a a a, Fig. 2. and 3. and the general lid FF, Fig. 7. are all
filled with pounded ice, well rammed, so that no void spaces remain, and
the ice of the middle cavity is allowed to drain. The machine is then
opened, and the substance submitted to experiment being placed in the
interior cavity, it is instantly closed. After waiting till the included
body is completely cooled to the freezing point, and the whole melted
ice has drained from the middle cavity, the water collected in the
vessel F, Fig. 1. is accurately weighed. The weight of the water
produced during the experiment is an exact measure of the caloric
disengaged during the cooling of the included body, as this substance is
evidently in a similar situation with the one formerly mentioned as
included in a hollow sphere of ice; the whole caloric disengaged is
stopped by the ice in the middle cavity, and that ice is preserved from
being affected by any other heat by means of the ice contained in the
general lid, Fig. 7. and in the external cavity. Experiments of this
kind last from fifteen to twenty hours; they are sometimes accelerated
by covering up the substance in the interior cavity with well drained
ice, which hastens its cooling.

The substances to be operated upon are placed in the thin iron bucket,
Fig. 8. the cover of which has an opening fitted with a cork, into which
a small thermometer is fixed. When we use acids, or other fluids capable
of injuring the metal of the instruments, they are contained in the
matras, Fig. 10. which has a similar thermometer in a cork fitted to its
mouth, and which stands in the interior cavity upon the small
cylindrical support RS, Fig. 10.

It is absolutely requisite that there be no communication between the
external and middle cavities of the calorimeter, otherwise the ice
melted by the influence of the surrounding air, in the external cavity,
would mix with the water produced from the ice of the middle cavity,
which would no longer be a measure of the caloric lost by the substance
submitted to experiment.

When the temperature of the atmosphere is only a few degrees above the
freezing point, its heat can hardly reach the middle cavity, being
arrested by the ice of the cover, Fig. 7. and of the external cavity;
but, if the temperature of the air be under the degree of freezing, it
might cool the ice contained in the middle cavity, by causing the ice
in the external cavity to fall, in the first place, below zero (32 deg.).
It is therefore essential that this experiment be carried on in a
temperature somewhat above freezing: Hence, in time of frost, the
calorimeter must be kept in an apartment carefully heated. It is
likewise necessary that the ice employed be not under zero (32 deg.); for
which purpose it must be pounded, and spread out thin for some time, in
a place of a higher temperature.

The ice of the interior cavity always retains a certain quantity of
water adhering to its surface, which may be supposed to belong to the
result of the experiment; but as, at the beginning of each experiment,
the ice is already saturated with as much water as it can contain, if
any of the water produced by the caloric should remain attached to the
ice, it is evident, that very nearly an equal quantity of what adhered
to it before the experiment must have run down into the vessel F in its
stead; for the inner surface of the ice in the middle cavity is very
little changed during the experiment.

By any contrivance that could be devised, we could not prevent the
access of the external air into the interior cavity when the atmosphere
was 9 deg. or 10 deg. (52 deg. or 54 deg.) above zero. The air confined
in the cavity being in that case specifically heavier than the external
air, escapes downwards through the pipe x y, Fig. 3, and is replaced by
the warmer external air, which, giving out its caloric to the ice,
becomes heavier, and sinks in its turn; thus a current of air is formed
through the machine, which is the more rapid in proportion as the
external air exceeds the internal in temperature. This current of warm
air must melt a part of the ice, and injure the accuracy of the
experiment: We may, in a great degree, guard against this source of
error by keeping the stop-cock u continually shut; but it is better to
operate only when the temperature of the external air does not exceed
3 deg., or at most 4 deg., (39 deg. to 41 deg.); for we have observed,
that, in this case, the melting of the interior ice by the atmospheric
air is perfectly insensible; so that we may answer for the accuracy of
our experiments upon the specific heat of bodies to a fortieth part.

We have caused make two of the above described machines; one, which is
intended for such experiments as do not require the interior air to be
renewed, is precisely formed according to the description here given;
the other, which answers for experiments upon combustion, respiration,
&c. in which fresh quantities of air are indispensibly necessary,
differs from the former in having two small tubes in the two lids, by
which a current of atmospheric air may be blown into the interior cavity
of the machine.

It is extremely easy, with this apparatus, to determine the phenomena
which occur in operations where caloric is either disengaged or
absorbed. If we wish, for instance, to ascertain the quantity of caloric
which is disengaged from a solid body in cooling a certain number of
degrees, let its temperature be raised to 80 deg. (212 deg.); it is then
placed in the interior cavity f f f f, Fig. 2. and 3. of the calorimeter,
and allowed to remain till we are certain that its temperature is reduced
to zero (32 deg.); the water produced by melting the ice during its
cooling is collected, and carefully weighed; and this weight, divided
by the volume of the body submitted to experiment, multiplied into the
degrees of temperature which it had above zero at the commencement of the
experiment, gives the proportion of what the English philosophers call
specific heat.

Fluids are contained in proper vessels, whose specific heat has been
previously ascertained, and operated upon in the machine in the same
manner as directed for solids, taking care to deduct, from the quantity
of water melted during the experiment, the proportion which belongs to
the containing vessel.

If the quantity of caloric disengaged during the combination of
different substances is to be determined, these substances are to be
previously reduced to the freezing degree by keeping them a sufficient
time surrounded with pounded ice; the mixture is then to be made in the
inner cavity of the calorimeter, in a proper vessel likewise reduced to
zero (32 deg.); and they are kept inclosed till the temperature of the
combination has returned to the same degree: The quantity of water
produced is a measure of the caloric disengaged during the combination.

To determine the quantity of caloric disengaged during combustion, and
during animal respiration, the combustible bodies are burnt, or the
animals are made to breathe in the interior cavity, and the water
produced is carefully collected. Guinea pigs, which resist the effects
of cold extremely well, are well adapted for this experiment. As the
continual renewal of air is absolutely necessary in such experiments, we
blow fresh air into the interior cavity of the calorimeter by means of a
pipe destined for that purpose, and allow it to escape through another
pipe of the same kind; and that the heat of this air may not produce
errors in the results of the experiments, the tube which conveys it into
the machine is made to pass through pounded ice, that it may be reduced
