the Gods, herewith demand that the blasphemers perish on the War God's
altar! Else shall ye all die unbeloved of the Gods!"

"And we do your bidding, will ye give us back His Splendor?" demanded
Hero Giles.

"Nay--we priests do not bargain like hucksters."

Risking all, Nelson muttered a swift aside to Alden. "How big were
those pteranodons?"

"Some species had a wing spread of twenty-five feet."

The muscular pilot's mouth closed into a firm, colorless line as he
nodded and glanced at the vindictive old man who was by now white with
fury.

Up sprang a good three-quarters of the nobles present and turned on
the grim figure at the head of the board.

"Surrender the Wanderers!" they shouted. "We demand it!"

       *       *       *       *       *

In another instant the death sentence would have been forced on Hero
Giles, but Victor Nelson leaped forward, pistol menacing the raging
gray-bearded priest.

"Listen, all of you!" he shouted in deep tones that were strangely
authoritative. "Beware, foolish Princes, how you threaten us. Great is
our knowledge and power: you've seen that already. Even now, the other
Wanderer and I can save or ruin Atlans, as we wish! Have ye forgotten
the battle by Lake Copias?"

The Princes, furious at the American's defiance, half rose, hand on
sword hilt, but sank back at a swift, menacing gesture from Nelson's
pistol.

"What sayest thou, mad fellow?" screeched the arch-priest, his black
eyes bright as knife points. "Save Atlans--?" Fierce questioning was
in his sombre, sunken eyes.

"I said," repeated Nelson, "that, if we choose, we can yet save your
Altara and the Emperor from death."

"Impossible! He is mad!" shouted Paul, the one-eyed Hero. "Not the
Gods themselves could rescue Altara from the claws of the demon
Beelzebub!" The nearest nobles flung themselves back in their chairs
and snarled threats of all kinds as they gripped their sword hilts.

Sensing an inescapable climax, the khaki-clad American raised his
pistol, covering Hero Paul, the speaker. "Silence!" he rasped.
"You're a thick-headed idiot not to see the truth. Can this priest
save Altara? No! You know damned well he can't! And yet you'd have us
killed."

"Now, Herakles," he swung on the priest, "about this Altara matter--if
you'll restore Altorius unharmed, guarantee our safety, and punish
those liars who condemned us to death, the other Wanderer and I will
undertake to not only prevent the sacrifice of Altara, but to bring
the Princess back as well!"

       *       *       *       *       *

To all this Alden listened with increasing and indescribable dismay,
his blue eyes round as marbles. "My God!" he whispered in an
undertone. "What in the devil is Vic doing? _Undertake_ is _right_,
the crazy fool!"

"How will ye accomplish this mad boast?" demanded the arch-priest in
deep suspicion. "Know ye that the Sacred Virgin lies captive in the
dungeons of the great temple of Beelzebub? Know ye that this temple is
in the center of Jezreel, capitol of Jarmuth?"

"I had some idea that was the case."

"Know ye," continued, the graybeard priest, "that Altara is ever
guarded by two thousand picked priests and warriors? Know ye,
moreover, that this vile sacrifice will be made but two days hence?"

The aviator's lean, dark head inclined with a serenity he far from
felt.

At this point the scarred veteran officer who had spoken before broke
in, his face menacing. "Believe not this liar, oh Hero Giles! He
speaks with a tongue made bold by fear. He promises that which he
cannot accomplish!"

Had Victor Nelson had time to reflect upon the weirdness of the plan
he had evolved, he would probably have silently admitted that his
grizzled accuser was more than a little justified, but as it was he
smiled serenely.

From all sides rose a threatening shout. "Let the blasphemers be
sacrificed. Ares will protect us!"

       *       *       *       *       *

His yellow brows knit, Hero Giles wavered, but as he hesitated there
ran through a great circular window a distant yet menacing shout.
"Down with Altorius, the Unlucky! Down with the sons of Hudson! Give
back to the ancient Gods their Sacred Virgin. Hail to Ares! Death to
the Wanderers! Death! Death!"

Drowning out these ominous cries there came from below the window the
brazen clang of trumpets and the clank of many armored men hurrying
forward. Presently the mob's outcry grew fainter, but still the cries
of "Death" could be heard.

It was a tense moment. Would Hero Giles remain friendly? With poignant
anxiety, Nelson watched that dishevelled martial head sink forward in
perplexity.

"Hero Giles," he warned, in a low voice. "You'd better trust us.
You're risking nothing."

Slowly, the fierce blue eyes of the veteran rose, and, meeting the
level gray ones of the aviator, lingered there as though asking a
question. Suddenly reaching a determination, he rose to his feet and
addressed the triumphantly grinning arch-priest, who tightly clutched
his trident wand with thin, blue-veined fingers.

"Hearken, black crow of a priest, who has dared lay foul hands on His
Splendor, the Emperor. This is my reply: show me how ye will rescue
Altara; otherwise begone! My hand itches for the sword."

       *       *       *       *       *

A deep silence fell while Herakles glowered helplessly, then shrewdly
avoided the trap. "This is blasphemy!" he croaked and raised a
quivering forefinger in solemn warning. "Woe to thee, Hero Giles. Woe
to the people! Fear the wrath of the Gods!

"Jeer not, ye nobles!" Herakles stormed on. "Be not deceived by lies!
I bid thee deliver these magicians to Ares, God of War!"

A nasty moment; Nelson's heart drummed as he gazed down at the row of
uneasy, war-like faces, but Hero Giles proved the strength of his
heritage. Back went his patrician head; he drew himself up to full
height and stared coldly upon the black robed priest, who, nothing
daunted, gave back look for look.

"Nay! We keep them: they will bear out their promise. I give ye good
day, oh Holiness!"

Quivering with rage Herakles raised his withered hand in anathema.
"Then perish, blind spawn of Hudson! Verily shall ye all die under the
torture. Woe! Woe! Woe!"

Then, amid a strained silence, pregnant of distrust and disaster, the
old man wheeled and stalked out.

As he watched the departure, color drained from the Atlantean prince's
haggard features. "Ah," he observed bitterly, "ever have these black
crows feasted on our land, and ever as birds of ill omen." He turned
and, with a weary sigh, surveyed the group of loyal, but anxious
souls. "I thank ye. Will ye still do my bidding and help to save our
sovereign lord?"

Out flashed the swords of a dozen-odd nobles as they raised the
hoarse, ringing cry of "Altorius! Altorius! Supreme!"

       *       *       *       *       *

A little later Nelson, before a very mistrustful gathering composed of
Hero Giles, Hero John and two or three other veterans, traced the
barest outline of his plan.

"You understand? I'm to be taken to the border as a prisoner; then, in
plain sight of the enemy lines, the guards must maltreat me and turn
me loose."

The aviator searched one after another of the brutal, war-like faces,
while Hero Giles translated for the benefit of two Atlantean generals
who did not speak the royal language.

"Are you positive," Alden demanded of Hero John, "that this revolution
in Atlans will die out if Altara is returned?"

"Yes! A thousand times yes!" The prince's fine eyes gleamed with
savage enthusiasm. "With the Sacred Virgin restored to Atlans, new
courage will come into the phalanxes! The priests will cease their
outcries against them. Then, with the help of the blue maxima vapor,
we will rend the dog-begotten followers of Jereboam limb from limb!"

"All right." Nelson's wiry khaki-clad body bent far over the table.
"Remember, Hero Giles, that part of the fighting's up to you. When I'm
gone, you'll do exactly what Alden tells you. Now, one thing more:
what part of the border is still unquestionably loyal?"

Hero Giles frowned and shrugged his armor-clad shoulders a little
helplessly beneath the splendid cloak of imperial green. "The gods
alone know; but at the third division of this morning, Mayda and
Thebes still vowed their loyalty. 'Tis there are quartered the
phalanxes of the Imperial guards. They alone can I trust to the
death."

"All right." Bending over a huge parchment map of the valley, Nelson
nodded, and his keen black eyes became very serious. "I want you to
concentrate every man you can muster in each of those cities.
Meanwhile tell the populace,"--he drew a deep breath--"that Altara
will certainly be returned to them."

"Art thou sure?" broke in the scarred veteran in the dented breast
plate; then, his brow dark with doubt, he engaged Hero Giles and the
rest in a heated, low-voiced colloquy.

       *       *       *       *       *

Alden stepped near, an anxious frown on his unshaven features. "Think
this idea of yours is sure-fire?"

"No," Nelson's lean head shook. "I'm far from sure. It's a wild gamble
at best, but we can't be any worse off than we are now. If the priests
win out, we're sunk and no mistake about it; but there's a fighting
chance my idea could be brought off."

"Now look here," objected the younger pilot tensely. "What's this rot
about your going into Jarmuth alone? How d'you know they won't skin
you alive once you're over the border?"

"I don't," admitted his friend, shrugging slightly. "But I don't see
there's anything but to take the risk. If I don't go over there, sure
as shooting we're going to feed some damn unpleasant kind of beast
here in Atlans.

"Another thing," Nelson said, turning to the Hero who, surrounded by
the others, was bent in deep consultation over a map. "How am I to
know Altara if I see her? Is there a statue, a painting or
something--?"

The Hero's aquiline features lit in a slow smile. "Nay, we have better
than that. Come, thou shalt see the Sacred Virgin as she now is."

The members of the conference followed Hero Giles down a short
corridor, through a couple of doors and into a chamber where a huge
disc of crystal stood on edge fixed upon an axis above a bewildering
array of wires, pipes and gauges.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hero John, who seemed familiar with the mechanism, turned a lever,
whereupon the disc commenced to spin like a pie plate on a dance
floor. Faster and faster it spun, silently gathering speed each second
while a low humming sound filled the chamber. Gradually the outline of
the whirling disk commenced to brighten, tinting the scar-seamed,
craggy features of the Atlantean generals and picking glorious,
glowing lights from the jewels on Hero Giles' wonderfully engraved
breastplate.

"Ah." Hero John turned a small dial. "The crystal warms. Look, oh
Wanderers!"

Nelson rubbed his eyes incredulously, for in the heart of the
shimmering circle had materialized the outline of a room with walls of
yellow marble.

"Well, I'm damned!" gasped Alden. "See how it flickers!"

As the revolving disc of crystal gained top speed, the flickering
subsided and a picture, clearer than most photographs, could be seen
in the center. A wondrously slender, yellow-haired young girl clad in
Grecian robes of pale blue sat in deep despond upon a plain wooden
couch, with a black haired servant kneeling before her, apparently
lacing sandals on her tiny, pink-hued feet.

"Bring closer the face," snapped Hero Giles gruffly.

Gradually the focus changed, like the close-up of a movie camera,
until in the center of the madly whirling disc could be seen in minute
detail and living color the face of an indescribably lovely girl.

"Whew," muttered Nelson, staring in silent amazement. "No wonder they
want her back! She makes Ziegfeld's little girls look like Armenian
refugees." He cast a sidewise glance, but Alden had apparently not
heard him; the younger American stood gazing with rapturous joy at the
girl.

"Aye! Aye!" The two veteran generals uttered stifled groans and one of
them drew a hand across his eyes. "Poseidon save her! Aye! Preserve
the fair Altara."

"Wouldst thou not doubly save her, now?" demanded Hero John in a low
voice that bespoke his anguish. He seemed suddenly older than the
grim, helmeted veterans to either side.

"You bet! I guess a man sees a face like that only once is a lifetime.
And now," Nelson continued with an effort to return to the practical,
"there's no time to be lost--so I'd just like to take a look at those
pteranodons of yours."

       *       *       *       *       *

A few minutes later, the two aviators found themselves nearing a lofty
structure which adjoined the imperial palace. It was constructed along
the lines of an immense aviary. Between beautiful, glistening Ionic
columns of white marble, gleamed bronze bars, set at regular intervals
to prevent the escape of the most appalling creatures which could ever
have skimmed the air.

"What in the devil is your idea?" demanded Alden, taken aback. "God,
look at the loathsome brutes!"

Some of these huge, flying reptiles were hopping awkwardly over the
ground picking at bones and refuse littering the floor with long
pelican-like bills, which were, however, very much thicker than those
of pelicans, and set with sharp teeth at least six inches long.

"Not very pretty are they? Kind of look like huge bats," commented
Nelson thoughtfully. "Wonder if they could be handled?"

"Yes, their wings are leathery. Look at 'em up yonder." Alden pointed
to the roof of that immense aviary where, hanging head downwards like
gigantic bats, must have been hundreds upon hundreds of the
pteranodons. One of them, whistling oddly, fluttered up to the bars,
affording the Wanderers an excellent view of a loathsome head, the
back of which ended in a curious sort of horn, that, projecting
backwards, jutted far above its rear. Fierce, vermillion eyes with
green irises glared at the Americans through the bars, and great wings
of greasy-looking leather fanned a disgusting stench from the interior
of the aviary.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Sweet little things," was Alden's comment. "God! Imagine having one
of those great things swooping down on you. Hey, Alden, look at that
big devil over there! He must have a wing spread of thirty feet. Big
as a Moth plane, isn't he?"

For answer the pteranodon clattered its vast beak savagely. One of the
generals stooped and, catching up a huge slab of meat from a basket
nearby, hurled it through the bars into the gaping jaws.

"What would ye with these creature?" demanded Hero Giles with
undisguised curiosity.

"You'd be surprised." Nelson was not deliberately rude, but his mind
was wrapped up in the daring project he had evolved. "I want a couple
of the biggest of these caught and set aside in a courtyard where
there will be no one looking on. If your people can train and handle
podokos and allosauri--I guess a couple of Yanks ought to be able to
manage these flying nightmares. So don't you worry about us."

Hero Giles uttered grim, significant laugh. "Thou hadst best manage
them. I note yonder pteranodon is in need of nourishment."


CHAPTER X

With sharp anxiety, Victor Nelson kept watching the towers of Jezreel
rise ever clearer above the great, warm plain of Jarmuth, but, for all
that, he noted how distinctly Jezreel differed from Heliopolis. The
Jarmuthian capital was predominantly amber-yellow instead of white in
color; its towers were flat-topped, angular, hideous structures that
compared not at all favorably with the graceful Grecian architecture
of Atlantean public buildings.

The populace, he decided, as he strode along in the midst of half a
dozen silent guards, were as harsh and graceless as their
architecture. Whereas the Atlanteans had been white skinned and
uniformly red haired--save for those of Hudsonian blood--the
inhabitants of Jarmuth almost without exception were black haired and
had dark, olive-hued skins.
