820. What often manifests itself from the want of proper intervals of
rest? Why is moderation in mental action necessary in old age? What is
the effect if the mind is incessantly engaged in the contemplation of
the same object?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=




CHAPTER XL.

HYGIENE OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM, CONTINUED.


821. Having pointed out the evils arising both from inadequate and
from excessive mental exertion, it remains to direct the attention to
some of the rules which should guide us in the exercise of the brain.

822. _We should not enter upon continued mental exertion, or arouse
deep feeling, immediately before or after a full meal._ Such is the
connection between the mind and body, that even in a perfectly healthy
person, unwelcome news, sudden anxiety, or mental excitement,
occurring soon after eating, will impede digestion, and cause the
stomach to loathe the masticated food.

823. The worst forms of indigestion and nervous depression are those
which arise from excessive mental application, or depressed feeling,
conjoined with unrestrained indulgence in the pleasures of the table.
In such circumstances, the stomach and brain react upon and disturb
each other, till all the horrors of nervous disease make their
unwelcome appearance, and render life miserable. Too many literary men
and students know this from sad experience.

824. _We should engage in intense study in the early part of the day._
Nature has allotted the darkness of the night for repose, and for
restoration by sleep of the exhausted energies of mind and body. In
the early part of the evening, if study or composition be ardently
engaged in, the increased action of the brain, which always
accompanies activity of mind, requires a long time to subside. If the
individual possesses a nervous temperament, he will be sleepless for
hours after he has retired, or perhaps be tormented by unpleasant
dreams.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

822. Why should we not arouse deep feeling immediately before or after
eating a full meal? 823. How are the worst forms of indigestion and
nervous depression produced? What class of men know this from sad
experience? 824. What evils arise from studious application at night?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

825. It is, therefore, of great advantage to enter upon intense mental
application early in the day, and to devote several of the hours which
precede bedtime to entertaining conversation, music, and lighter
reading. The vascular excitement previously induced in the brain by
study, has then time to subside, and sound, refreshing sleep is much
more certainly obtained. This rule is of great consequence to those
who are obliged to undergo much mental labor.

_Observation._ The idea of gathering wisdom by burning the "midnight
oil," is more poetical than profitable. The best time to use the brain
is during the day.

826. _The close student and the growing child need more sleep than the
idler or the adult._ As steep is the natural repose of all organs, it
follows that the more the brain and other organs of the system are
employed, the more repose they require. The organs of the child,
beside sustaining their proper functions, are busy in promoting its
growth. This nutritive process is attended with a certain degree of
exhaustion. The impaired health of children often results from a
disregard of this principle. But, on the other hand, an excess of
sleep produces feebleness, by preventing the proper exercise of the
mind as well as the body.

827. _The length of time the brain may be advantageously used, is
modified by many circumstances._ The power of the brain in different
persons to endure action, is various. This is modified by its primary
character; by development and age; by habits of action; by the health
of the cerebral organ and general system; by the moral feelings and
other conditions.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

825. Why should we engage in intense study in the early part of the
day? 826. What persons require the most sleep? Why? 827. What is said
relative to the length of time that the brain can be advantageously
used? Give a condition that modifies the amount of mental labor.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

828. The primary physical organization of some individuals is such,
that they are enabled to endure with impunity an amount of mental
labor that would disorder, if not destroy functionally, the cerebral
organ of others differently constituted. Napoleon Bonaparte was of
this number. There can be no fixed period for mental labor, that may
be adopted as a rule for all persons whose systems are maturely
developed. Much less is there a proper definite period for study, that
is applicable to all children.

_Observation._ The practice of retaining pupils of all ages, from five
to twenty years, in the school-room the same period of time, for the
purpose of study, is not predicated upon any law of physiology. An
exercise of three hours, with one or two recesses of ten minutes each,
may profit the eldest class; two hours with a recess of ten minutes,
the middle class; while one hour, or one hour and a half, with one
recess, would be as long a period as the youngest pupils should be
retained in the study-room at one session.

829. A person who is accustomed to muscular exertion will endure a
longer period of physical toil than one who is not inured to it. So it
is with mental labor. If the brain has been habituated to mental
action and profound study, it will not be so soon fatigued as when not
accustomed to such exertions; consequently, an amount of mental labor
may be performed with impunity at one time, that would exhaust and
cause serious disease of the cerebral organ at another.

_Observation._ Persons that commence a course of study at a late
period in life, frequently evince their zeal at the commencement by
poring over their books twelve or more hours each day. The progress of
such students is soon arrested by physical and mental depression. In
such instances, it would be more judicious to commence with only three
or four hours' vigorous application each day, and gradually protract
the period of study five or more minutes every successive day, until
the brain may be called into vigorous action six or eight hours with
impunity.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

828. Why can there be no fixed period for mental labor? What is said
of the practice of retaining pupils of all ages the same period of
time in the school-room? 829. Show that the action of the brain is
influenced by habit, as well as the muscular system. What suggestion
to those persons that commence a course of study at a late period in
life?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

830. The amount of mental power is greatly influenced by the general
health. Such is the intimate connection of the different parts of the
system, particularly the digestive apparatus, with the cerebral
organs, that except there be vigor of constitution, and freedom from
disease, mental efforts will be feeble and of little avail.

_Observation._ The prevalent opinion, that individuals who are feeble
or diseased may acquire a collegiate education, and thus become useful
to themselves and the community, is very generally erroneous. Such
persons should enter upon a daily and systematic course of physical
training, and their labor should be in the open air, in order that the
system may be invigorated and freed from disease.

831. The moral feelings exert a controlling influence over the
functions of the muscular, digestive, and respiratory organs. They
also exert an influence, perhaps, more powerful upon the nervous
system. While fear and anxiety depress, hope and the enlivening
emotions, facilitate the functional activity of the brain, and
increase its power for mental exertion. By a proper and systematic
education of the moral feelings, they are not only a source of
happiness, and productive of right conduct, but aid in the culture of
the intellect. Consequently, we should cultivate a feeling of hopeful
trust in the future, and a firm reliance upon the laws which the
Creator has given us for our guidance.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

830. Show that the amount of mental power is modified by the general
health. What is said of feeble persons acquiring a collegiate
education? 831. Do the moral feelings exert a controlling influence
over the principal functions of the system? What is the effect of a
proper and systematic culture of the moral feelings?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

832. _Regularity is very important in exercising the moral and
intellectual powers._ Periodicity, or a tendency to resume the same
mode of action at stated times, is peculiarly the characteristic of
the nervous system. If we repeat any kind of mental effort every day
at the same hour, we at last find ourselves entering upon it without
premeditation when the time approaches. In like manner, if we arrange
our studies in accordance with this law, and take up each in the same
order, a natural aptitude is soon produced, which renders application
more easy than by resuming the subjects as accident may direct.

_Observation._ When engaged in abstruse studies, it may be found
advantageous to pursue others that are less difficult. The intense
application of the brain, which is requisite in the one instance, is
relieved by directing the attention to a study that requires less
thought. By this change, there is mental relaxation attended with
invigoration of the cerebral organ. Or, it may be explained by
assuming, that the brain is composed of an aggregate of distinct
organs, each of which is called into action in pursuing different
studies.

833. Effective study is impossible if the powers of the brain are
depressed. When the cerebral organ has been temporarily debilitated by
protracted intellectual efforts, it is ineffectual to attempt any
concentrated mental exercise. This condition of the nervous system is
indicated by confusion of thought and inability to attain results that
usually follow similar efforts. Mental rest in these cases is
required.

_Observation._ Students frequently fail in solving mathematical
problems when the mind is prostrated by continued and excessive effort
to obtain a solution. Not unfrequently after a night's rest the
problem is quickly solved, and the pupil thinks he "dreamed it out."
The true explanation is rest invigorated the exhausted brain, which
fitted it for vigorous and successful thought.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

832. Why is regularity of great importance in exercising the moral and
intellectual powers? What suggestion when pursuing abstruse studies?
How explained? 833. When is effective study impossible? How is this
condition of the nervous system indicated?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

834. _The intellect should not be cultivated to the neglect of the
moral and physical powers._ All the faculties require for their
development regular exercise, alternated with intervals of rest. This
is as necessary to the due development of the moral feelings of a
child as in physical training and mental culture. Consequently, those
schools are to be preferred in the education of youth, where the
physical, intellectual, and moral faculties receive each day a due
share of attention and culture.

835. The continuance of healthy and vigorous action in the matured
physical, mental, and moral powers, requires frequent and regular
action, alternated with rest, as much as in their development.
Consequently, those who cultivate one or two of these faculties, to
the neglect of the others, exhibit a marked deficiency of acuteness
and vigor in those not exercised. This defect reacts on the powers
that are vigorous, diminishing the energy and deteriorating all the
other faculties of man.

_Observations._ 1st. If the principles before mentioned are true, the
adult, as well as the child, should spend a part of each day in some
proper physical employment; another portion should be appropriated to
intellectual pursuits; while another should be sedulously devoted to
the cultivation of the moral feelings.

2d. Disease of the corporeal system more frequently occurs when only
one set of faculties is used than when all are equally employed. This
is particularly true of nervous and mental disease, which follows and
is caused by either high intellectual action, or intense moral
emotions, without a due amount of physical exercise.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

How is the "dreaming out" of problems explained? 834. What is said of
the culture of the intellect? What schools are preferable in the
education of youth? Why? 835. What is the effect of cultivating only
one faculty of the mind? Give observation 1st. Observation 2d.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

836. _The brain can exercise its full force upon only one object at a
time._ If its energies are directed to two or more operations, neither
will receive that full power of exertion that it would if only one
object had engaged the mind. Although the brain will direct several
operations at the same time when only slight mental effort is
required, yet when one operation becomes difficult, or demands special
attention of the mind, the other will be suspended. This is
illustrated in social conversation while walking. Let it become
necessary to concentrate the nervous power upon the motor organs, and
the conversation declines or ceases.

837. In acquiring an education, or in pursuing any profession or
trade, none of those influences that promote the proper functions of
the body, and tend to increase physical ease, should be neglected.
For, if the brain is occupied with disagreeable sensations, it cannot
concentrate its power as effectively in the various employments of
man.

_Observations._ 1st. The situation, ventilation, light, and warmth of
a school-room, together with the arrangement of the benches, do much
to influence the concentration or distraction of the operations of the
mind. Let there be attached to the school-house a spacious yard
planted with trees; let its architecture be attractive; let the
windows be arranged with regularity, and not with the elevation of a
convict's cell, and the benches, in every respect, be adapted to the
different scholars, so that the position of each may be comfortable,
and we mistake if there is not a greater improvement, in a given
time, in such a school, than where there is an apparent disregard to
the pleasure or comfort of the scholars.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

836. What is the effect if the brain concentrates its energies on more
than one object at a time? How illustrated? 837. What should be
regarded in pursuing any employment? Why? What is said in reference to
the arrangement of school-rooms?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

2d. Mechanics' shops should receive as much attention, relative to
their situation, light, warmth, &c., as school-rooms. If these are
duly observed, the nervous influence transmitted from the brain to the
muscles will be more stimulating, as well as more abundant;
consequently, labor will be performed with less exhaustion.

838. _Repetition is necessary to make a durable impression on the
mind._ "The necessity of judicious repetition in mental and moral
education, is, in fact, too little adverted to, because the principle
which renders it efficacious has not been understood. To induce
facility of action in the organs of the mind, practice is as essential
as it is in the organs of motion.

839. "In physical education we are aware of the advantages of
repetition. We know that if practice in dancing, fencing, skating, and
riding, is persevered in for a length of time sufficient to give the
muscles the requisite promptitude and harmony of action, the power
will be ever afterward retained, although little called into use;
whereas, if the muscles have not been duly trained, we may reiterate
practice at different intervals, without proportionate advancement.
The same principle applies equally to the moral and intellectual
powers, because these operate by means of material organs.

840. "According to this principle, it follows, that in learning a
language or science, six successive months of application will be more
effectual in fixing it in the mind and making it a part of its
furniture, than double or treble the time, if the lessons are
interrupted by long intervals. Hence it is a great error to begin and
study, and then break off, to finish at a later period. The fatigue
is thus doubled, and the success greatly diminished.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

Of mechanics' shops? 838. Is repetition necessary to make a durable
impression on the mind? Why? 839. How is it with physical education?
840. What follows, according to this principle?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

841. "The best way is to begin at the proper age, and to persevere
till the end is attained. This accustoms the mind to sound exertion,
and not to _fits_ of attention. Hence the evil arising from long
vacations; and also the evil of beginning studies before the age at
which they can be understood, as in teaching children the abstract
rules of grammar, to succeed in which, implies in them a power of
thinking, and an amount of general knowledge, which they do not
possess."

842. _The skull is susceptible of fractures from slight blows._ This
occurs most frequently when the blow is given on the side of the head
above and anterior to the ear. Here the bone is very thin, and often
quite brittle. For these reasons, no instructor, or any person, should
punish a child by striking upon any portion of the head.

_Observation._ A few years since, a teacher in one of the Middle
States gave a pupil a slight blow upon the head. It fractured the
skull and ruptured a blood-vessel of the brain, causing a loss of
consciousness, and finally death.

843. _Concussion of the brain may be produced by blows, or by
violently shaking a person._ As the brain is of pulpy consistence, the
atoms of which it is composed, and the circulation of blood in its
minute vessels, may be disturbed by the vibration from a blow on the
exterior of the skull-bones. This disturbance of the cerebral organ is
attended with unpleasant sensations, dizziness, loss of memory and
consciousness. These may be followed by headache and inflammation of
the brain. Concussion of the brain, and the results above mentioned,
may be produced by the sudden motion attendant on the violent shaking
of a scholar. Consequently, a child should never be seized by the arm
and shaken violently as a method of chastisement.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

841. What is the best way of learning the sciences? 842. Why should
not a child be struck upon any portion of the head? What observation
in this connection? 843. How may concussion of the brain be produced?
What is the effect of each upon the brain of the child?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

_Observation._ Most persons have experienced a disagreeable sensation
and dizziness, caused by falling from a slight elevation, or by
jumping from a carriage. This is the result of a moderate concussion
of the brain.

844. In injuries of the brain, from blows and falls, the symptoms
are usually alarming, and all should possess some information for
such contingencies. In general, such accidents are attended by
insensibility; the skin and extremities are pale and cold, the
pulse is very weak and feeble, and the circulation is less vigorous;
the respiration, also, is less frequent and full.

845. When these symptoms exist, the individual, in the first instance,
should be placed in pure air, and friction and dry warmth should be
applied to the pallid and cold skin. This should be assiduously
persevered in until heat and color are restored to the skin and limbs,
and due action of the heart and arteries has been established. Mild
stimulants may also be used internally, with much advantage. The
sympathizing friends should not be permitted to stand about the
patient, as they vitiate the air. There should be no bleeding until
the skin and extremities become warm. Send for a surgeon without
delay.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

Give an instance where moderate concussion of the brain is produced.
844. What are the symptoms when the brain is injured from blows and
falls? 845. What treatment should be adopted?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=




CHAPTER XLI.

THE SENSE OF TOUCH.


846. SENSATION is the perception of external objects by means of the
senses. There are five senses, namely, _Touch_, _Taste_, _Smell_,
_Hearing_, and _Vision_.

847. TOUCH is the sense by which the mind becomes acquainted with some
of the properties of bodies, and enables us determine whether their
surfaces are smooth or rough, their relative temperature, and, to a
certain degree, their form and weight.

848. Some physiologists make a distinction between the sense of touch
and tact. Tact, or feeling, is more general, extending over the whole
surface of the skin and mucous membranes, while touch exists chiefly
in the fingers of man and in the noses of certain quadrupeds.

849. "In the exercise of these functions, tact is considered passive;
as, when any part of the system comes into contact with another body,
a sensation of its presence is given, without the exercise of
volition. On the contrary, touch is active, and is exercised
voluntarily, for the purpose of conveying to the mind a knowledge of
the qualities or properties of the surfaces of bodies; as when we feel
of a piece of cloth to ascertain its qualities, or a polished surface,
to prove its smoothness."

850. In man, the hand is admirably adapted to the exercise of touch.
"The fineness of the skin, its great sensibility, the species of
cushion formed by the sub-cutaneous fat at the extremities of the
fingers, the length and flexibility of these organs, and the
capability of opposing the thumb to the fingers, like a pair of
forceps, are so many conditions essentially favorable to the delicacy
of this sense, and enable us to appreciate with exactitude the
qualities of the bodies we may feel."

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

846. Define sensation. How many senses have we? 847-851. _What is said
of the sense of touch?_ 847. Define touch. 848. What is the difference
between touch and tact? 849. In the exercise of these functions, which
is active, and which passive? 850. Why is the hand so admirably
adapted to the exercise of the sense of touch?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

851. The nerves that supply the sense of touch, proceed from the
anterior half of the spinal cord. Where this sense is most acute and
delicate, we find the greatest number of sensitive nervous filaments,
and those of the largest size.

_Observation._ In amputating limbs, and other surgical operations, the
division of the skin causes more pain than all the subsequent steps of
the operation, however protracted. The muscles, cellular membrane, and
fat have but little sensibility; while the bones, tendons, and
ligaments are insensible when not diseased, and may be cut without
causing pain.


HYGIENE OF THE SENSE OF TOUCH.

852. The sense of touch varies in different persons, and also in
individuals of different ages. Thus the sensibilities of the child are
more acute than those of the aged. Although there is an original
difference of sensibility from organization, still, the function of
the nerves of sensation is modified by certain influences.

853. _The healthy or unhealthy, active or inactive state of the brain,
influences the action of the sensitive nerves._ In sound and perfect
sleep, the brain is inactive. In this state, ordinary impressions made
upon the skin are not observed by the sleeping person. Thus the arm
may be blistered while sleeping, when exposed to the warm rays of the
sun, and the individual will not be aware of it at the time.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

851. From what do the nerves proceed that supply this sense? 852-864.
_Give the hygiene of the sense of touch._ 852. Does this sense vary in
different persons? 853. Mention a condition of the brain that
influences the nerves of sensation.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

854. If there is compression of the brain, as when the skull-bones are
depressed, or disease of this organ exists, as in severe typhus fever,
impressions made upon the nerves of the skin will not be noticed. The
same is true when the mind is engaged in intense thought or study;
heat or cold may be so intense as to disorganize the skin, and not to
be noticed.

855. The varying health or condition of the brain usually depresses or
increases the sensitiveness of the skin. This is seen in grief and
fear, which diminish, while hope and joy increase the impressibility
of this tissue. It is not uncommon to see the unfortunate insane
endure exposure to heat and cold with seeming impunity; whereas it
would induce almost insupportable suffering to the sane man. Diseases
of the heart, stomach, and lungs, alter the condition of the brain,
and modify, to a greater or less degree, the sensitiveness of the
skin.

856. _The state of the conducting nervous trunks influences the nerves
of sensation._ If a nervous trunk is compressed or divided, the parts
supplied by nervous filaments from this branch, will be insensible to
the impressions made upon them, and consequently such impressions are
not transmitted to the brain.

_Observation._ When the inside of the arm or lower extremities rests
upon a hard surface, the nerves may be compressed so as to deprive the
parts of sensibility. This condition is called "numbness."

857. _The quantity of blood supplied to the skin modifies its
sensitiveness._ If the quantity of blood is diminished, the
sensibility of the skin will be impaired. This is demonstrated by
noting the effects of cold upon the cutaneous tissue, the application
of which contracts the blood-vessels, and drives the circulating fluid
from this membrane, which is shown by the paleness, as well as by the
shrivelled appearance of the skin. And, if this tissue is wounded
while under the influence of cold, but little pain will be felt, and
this chilling influence may be carried so far as not only to deprive
the part of sensation, but of vitality.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

854. Mention other conditions that affect these nerves. 855. What is
the effect of the varying health or condition of the brain upon the
sensitiveness of the skin? Give instances of this effect. 856. What is
the result if a nervous trunk is divided or compressed? How may
"numbness" in the limbs be produced? 857. Does the quantity of blood
supplied to the skin affect its sensibility?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

858. The influence of the blood upon the sensibility of the skin, is
further demonstrated by the pain experienced when chilled extremities
are suddenly exposed to heat. The nerves, by the sudden dilatation of
the contracted blood-vessels, are put in vivid and rapid motion, which
causes the painful and tingling sensation that we experience. In every
part of the system, sudden changes produce unpleasant sensations, and
frequently a diseased condition of the organs.

_Observation._ When the hands, or other portions of the body, are
frozen, or severely chilled, safety and comfort demand that
circulation be restored to the parts by moderate exercise in a cool
room. Not unfrequently, the vitality of the limb is destroyed by
immersing it in hot water or holding it near the fire.

859. _The quality of the blood also influences sensation._ If the
brain and other parts of the nervous system receive impure blood,
their energy is depressed, and the sensibility of the skin rendered
more or less obtuse.

860. _The condition of the cuticle modifies the impression made upon
the cutaneous nerves._ 1st. When the cuticle has become thick and
hard, like horn, as on the inside of the mason's hand, it enables him
to ply his tools without much suffering, because the thickened cuticle
diminishes the impressions made upon the nerves.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

How is it demonstrated? 858. How is the influence of the blood upon
the skin further demonstrated? How should circulation be restored to
limbs frozen or severely chilled? What should be avoided? 859. Show
how the quality of the blood influences sensation. 860. Give the 1st
condition of the cuticle that influences the impressions made on the
cutaneous nerves.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

861. 2d. When the cuticle is very thin and delicate, as on the hand of
the lady who is unaccustomed to manual labor. Let her pursue some
manual employment for several hours, and the extreme tenuity, or
thinness of the cuticle, will not protect the nerves and parts below
from becoming irritated and inflamed.

862. 3d. When the cuticle is removed by blistering or abrasion, the
pain indicates that the naked nerves are too powerfully stimulated by
the contact of external bodies. 4th. When the cuticle is coated with
impurities, blended with the secretion from the oil-glands, the
sensibility of the skin is lessened.

863. _The sensibility of the cutaneous nerves is modified by being
habituated to impressions._ If, for example, an individual should
immerse his feet in moderately warm water, at first it might induce a
smarting sensation; in a short time, the nerves would not only become
habituated to the warm water, but its warmth night be considerably
increased. The same results follow, if an individual is exposed to a
cold element. The impressions at first are highly disagreeable; but as
soon as the nerves become accustomed to the surrounding atmosphere, it
may impart the most agreeable sensations.

_Illustration._ 1st. Let a person from the tropical regions go to a
colder climate, and the cool mornings of the latter will at first
affect him unpleasantly; but, after a few days' exposure to the cooler
air, the sensation will be far from disagreeable.

2d. Let a person enter a room moderately heated; gradually increase
the temperature, until it attains extreme summer heat; not only the
cutaneous nerves, but the whole system, become habituated to the high
temperature. From these facts we learn that the sensations, are not
always a correct index of the real temperature. A well-adjusted
thermometer will indicate it with unerring certainty.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

861. The 2d condition. 862. The 3d and 4th condition. 863. Show how
habit influences the sensibility of the cutaneous nerves. Give
illustration 1st. Illustration 2d.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

864. _Touch is modified, in a high degree, by education._ Thus the
blind, whose "windows of the soul" are closed to the beauties of the
external world, cultivate this sense to such a degree that they can
distinguish objects with great accuracy. And the rapidity with which
they read books prepared for their use, is a convincing proof of the
niceness and extent to which the cultivation of this sense can be
carried.

_Illustrations._ 1st. The cloth-dresser, by the aid of this sense,
distinguishes the quality, as well as the slightest difference of
texture, in the different pieces of cloth.

2d. The miller, from a similar education, quickly detects the quality
of flour or meal, by permitting it to pass between his fingers. The
difference in the texture of cloths, or the quality of the flour,
would not be distinguished by an individual whose tactile sense had
not been trained to make nice comparisons.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

864. Is this sense susceptible of improvement? What persons cultivate
it to a high degree? Give illustration 1st. Illustration 2d.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=




CHAPTER XLII.

SENSE OF TASTE.


865. The chief organ of TASTE is the upper surface of the tongue;
though the lips, the palate, the internal surface of the cheeks, and
the upper part of the oesophagus, participate in this function.
