from which in their hands grew that magnificent science to which
every Englishman is indebted for his first lessons in right
seeing and thinking.--GOW, JAMES.

                         _A Short History of Greek Mathematics
                         (Cambridge, 1884), p. 131._


=1833.=

        A figure and a step onward:
        Not a figure and a florin.
                     --MOTTO OF THE PYTHAGOREAN BROTHERHOOD.

                         _W. B. Frankland: Story of Euclid
                         (London, 1902), p. 33._


=1834.= The doctrine of proportion, as laid down in the fifth
book of Euclid, is, probably, still unsurpassed as a masterpiece
of exact reasoning; although the cumbrousness of the forms of
expression which were adopted in the old geometry has led to the
total exclusion of this part of the elements from the ordinary
course of geometrical education. A zealous defender of Euclid
might add with truth that the gap thus created in the elementary
teaching of mathematics has never been adequately supplied.

                                                --SMITH, H. J. S.

                         _Presidential Address British
                         Association for the Advancement of
                         Science (1873); Nature, Vol. 8, p. 451._


=1835.= The Definition in the Elements, according to Clavius, is
this: Magnitudes are said to be in the same Reason [ratio], a
first to a second, and a third to a fourth, when the Equimultiples
of the first and third according to any Multiplication whatsoever
are both together either short of, equal to, or exceed the
Equimultiples of the second and fourth, if those be taken,
which answer one another.... Such is Euclid's Definition of
Proportions; that _scare_-Crow at which the over modest or
slothful Dispositions of Men are generally affrighted: they are
modest, who distrust their own Ability, as soon as a Difficulty
appears, but they are slothful that will not give some Attention
for the learning of Sciences; as if while we are involved in
Obscurity we could clear ourselves without Labour. Both of which
Sorts of Persons are to be admonished, that the former be not
discouraged, nor the latter refuse a little Care and Diligence
when a Thing requires some Study.--BARROW, ISAAC.

                         _Mathematical Lectures (London, 1734),
                         p. 388._


=1836.= Of all branches of human knowledge, there is none which,
like it [geometry] has sprung a completely armed Minerva from the
head of Jupiter; none before whose death-dealing Aegis doubt
and inconsistency have so little dared to raise their eyes.
It escapes the tedious and troublesome task of collecting
experimental facts, which is the province of the natural sciences
in the strict sense of the word: the sole form of its scientific
method is deduction. Conclusion is deduced from conclusion, and
yet no one of common sense doubts but that these geometrical
principles must find their practical application in the real
world about us. Land surveying, as well as architecture, the
construction of machinery no less than mathematical physics, are
continually calculating relations of space of the most varied
kinds by geometrical principles; they expect that the success of
their constructions and experiments shall agree with their
calculations; and no case is known in which this expectation has
been falsified, provided the calculations were made correctly and
with sufficient data.--HELMHOLTZ, H.

                         _The Origin and Significance of
                         Geometrical Axioms; Popular Scientific
                         Lectures [Atkinson], Second Series (New
                         York, 1881), p. 27._


=1837.= The amazing triumphs of this branch of mathematics
[geometry] show how powerful a weapon that form of deduction is
which proceeds by an artificial reparation of facts, in
themselves inseparable.--BUCKLE, H. T.

                         _History of Civilization in England (New
                         York, 1891), Vol. 2, p. 343._


=1838.= Every theorem in geometry is a law of external nature,
and might have been ascertained by generalizing from observation
and experiment, which in this case resolve themselves into
comparisons and measurements. But it was found practicable, and
being practicable was desirable, to deduce these truths by
ratiocination from a small number of general laws of nature, the
certainty and universality of which was obvious to the most
careless observer, and which compose the first principles and
ultimate premises of the science.--MILL, J. S.

                         _System of Logic, Bk. 3, chap. 24, sect.
                         7._


=1839.= All such reasonings [natural philosophy, chemistry,
agriculture, political economy, etc.] are, in comparison with
mathematics, very complex; requiring so much _more_ than that
does, beyond the process of merely deducing the conclusion
logically from the premises: so that it is no wonder that the
longest mathematical demonstration should be much more easily
constructed and understood, than a much shorter train of just
reasoning concerning real facts. The former has been aptly
compared to a long and steep, but even and regular, flight of
steps, which tries the breath, and the strength, and the
perseverance only; while the latter resembles a short, but rugged
and uneven, ascent up a precipice, which requires a quick eye,
agile limbs, and a firm step; and in which we have to tread now
on this side, now on that--ever considering as we proceed,
whether this or that projection will afford room for our foot, or
whether some loose stone may not slide from under us. There are
probably as many steps of pure reasoning in one of the longer of
Euclid's demonstrations, as in the whole of an argumentative
treatise on some other subject, occupying perhaps a considerable
volume.--WHATELY, R.

                         _Elements of Logic, Bk. 4, chap. 2,
                         sect. 5._


=1840.=

        [Geometry] that held acquaintance with the stars,
        And wedded soul to soul in purest bond
        Of reason, undisturbed by space or time.
                                               --WORDSWORTH.

                         _The Prelude, Bk. 5._


=1841.= The statement that a given individual has received a
sound geometrical training implies that he has segregated from
the whole of his sense impressions a certain set of these
impressions, that he has eliminated from their consideration all
irrelevant impressions (in other words, acquired a subjective
command of these impressions), that he has developed on the basis
of these impressions an ordered and continuous system of logical
deduction, and finally that he is capable of expressing the
nature of these impressions and his deductions therefrom in terms
simple and free from ambiguity. Now the slightest consideration
will convince any one not already conversant with the idea, that
the same sequence of mental processes underlies the whole career
of any individual in any walk of life if only he is not concerned
entirely with manual labor; consequently a full training in the
performance of such sequences must be regarded as forming an
essential part of any education worthy of the name. Moreover the
full appreciation of such processes has a higher value than is
contained in the mental training involved, great though this be,
for it induces an appreciation of intellectual unity and beauty
which plays for the mind that part which the appreciation of
schemes of shape and color plays for the artistic faculties; or,
again, that part which the appreciation of a body of religious
doctrine plays for the ethical aspirations. Now geometry is not
the sole possible basis for inculcating this appreciation. Logic
is an alternative for adults, provided that the individual is
possessed of sufficient wide, though rough, experience on which
to base his reasoning. Geometry is, however, highly desirable in
that the objective bases are so simple and precise that they can
be grasped at an early age, that the amount of training for the
imagination is very large, that the deductive processes are not
beyond the scope of ordinary boys, and finally that it affords a
better basis for exercise in the art of simple and exact
expression than any other possible subject of a school course.

                                               --CARSON, G. W. L.

                         _The Functions of Geometry as a Subject
                         of Education (Tonbridge, 1910), p. 3._


=1842.= It seems to me that the thing that is wanting in the
education of women is not the acquaintance with any facts, but
accurate and scientific habits of thought, and the courage to
think that true which appears unlikely. And for supplying this
want there is a special advantage in geometry, namely that it
does not require study of a physically laborious kind, but rather
that rapid intuition which women certainly possess; so that it is
fit to become a scientific pursuit for them.--CLIFFORD, W. K.

                         _Quoted by Pollock in Clifford's
                         Lectures and Essays (London, 1901), Vol.
                         1, Introduction, p. 43._


=1843.=

              On the lecture slate
        The circle rounded under female hands
        With flawless demonstration.
                                                 --TENNYSON.

                         _The Princess, II, l. 493._


=1844.= It is plain that that part of geometry which bears upon
strategy does concern us. For in pitching camps, or in occupying
positions, or in closing or extending the lines of an army, and
in all the other manoeuvres of an army whether in battle or on
the march, it will make a great difference to a general, whether
he is a geometrician or not.--PLATO.

                         _Republic, Bk. 7, p. 526._


=1845.= Then nothing should be more effectually enacted, than
that the inhabitants of your fair city should learn geometry.
Moreover the science has indirect effects, which are not small.

Of what kind are they? he said.

There are the military advantages of which you spoke, I said; and
in all departments of study, as experience proves, any one who
has studied geometry is infinitely quicker of apprehension.--PLATO.

                         _Republic [Jowett], Bk. 7, p. 527._


=1846.= It is doubtful if we have any other subject that does so
much to bring to the front the danger of carelessness, of
slovenly reasoning, of inaccuracy, and of forgetfulness as this
science of geometry, which has been so polished and perfected as
the centuries have gone on.--SMITH, D. E.

                         _The Teaching of Geometry (Boston,
                         1911), p. 12._


=1847.= The culture of the geometric imagination, tending to
produce precision in remembrance and invention of visible forms
will, therefore, tend directly to increase the appreciation of
works of belles-letters.--HILL, THOMAS.

                         _The Uses of Mathesis; Bibliotheca
                         Sacra, Vol. 32, p. 504._


=1848.=

        Yet may we not entirely overlook
        The pleasures gathered from the rudiments
        Of geometric science. Though advanced
        In these inquiries, with regret I speak,
        No farther than the threshold, there I found
        Both elevation and composed delight:
        With Indian awe and wonder, ignorance pleased
        With its own struggles, did I meditate
        On the relations those abstractions bear
        To Nature's laws.

               *       *       *       *       *

        More frequently from the same source I drew
        A pleasure quiet and profound, a sense
        Of permanent and universal sway,
        And paramount belief; there, recognized
        A type, for finite natures, of the one
        Supreme Existence, the surpassing life
        Which to the boundaries of space and time,
        Of melancholy space and doleful time,
        Superior and incapable of change,
        Nor touched by welterings of passion--is,
        And hath the name of God. Transcendent peace
        And silence did wait upon these thoughts
        That were a frequent comfort to my youth.

               *       *       *       *       *

                   Mighty is the charm
        Of those abstractions to a mind beset
        With images and haunted by himself,
        And specially delightful unto me
        Was that clear synthesis built up aloft
        So gracefully; even then when it appeared
        Not more than a mere plaything, or a toy
        To sense embodied: not the thing it is
        In verity, an independent world,
        Created out of pure intelligence.
                                               --WORDSWORTH.

                         _The Prelude, Bk. 6._


=1849.=

        'Tis told by one whom stormy waters threw,
        With fellow-sufferers by the shipwreck spared,
        Upon a desert coast, that having brought
        To land a single volume, saved by chance,
        A treatise of Geometry, he wont,
        Although of food and clothing destitute,
        And beyond common wretchedness depressed,
        To part from company, and take this book
        (Then first a self taught pupil in its truths)
        To spots remote, and draw his diagrams
        With a long staff upon the sand, and thus
        Did oft beguile his sorrow, and almost
        Forget his feeling:
                                               --WORDSWORTH.

                         _The Prelude, Bk. 6._


=1850.= We study art because we receive pleasure from the great
works of the masters, and probably we appreciate them the more
because we have dabbled a little in pigments or in clay. We do
not expect to be composers, or poets, or sculptors, but we wish
to appreciate music and letters and the fine arts, and to derive
pleasure from them and be uplifted by them....

So it is with geometry. We study it because we derive pleasure
from contact with a great and ancient body of learning that has
occupied the attention of master minds during the thousands of
years in which it has been perfected, and we are uplifted by it.
To deny that our pupils derive this pleasure from the study is to
confess ourselves poor teachers, for most pupils do have positive
enjoyment in the pursuit of geometry, in spite of the tradition
that leads them to proclaim a general dislike for all study. This
enjoyment is partly that of the game,--the playing of a game that
can always be won, but that cannot be won too easily. It is
partly that of the aesthetic, the pleasure of symmetry of form,
the delight of fitting things together. But probably it lies
chiefly in the mental uplift that geometry brings, the contact
with absolute truth, and the approach that one makes to the
Infinite. We are not quite sure of any one thing in biology; our
knowledge of geology is relatively very slight, and the economic
laws of society are uncertain to every one except some individual
who attempts to set them forth; but before the world was
fashioned the square on the hypotenuse was equal to the sum of
the squares on the other two sides of a right triangle, and it
will be so after this world is dead; and the inhabitant of Mars,
if he exists, probably knows its truth as we know it. The uplift
of this contact with absolute truth, with truth eternal, gives
pleasure to humanity to a greater or less degree, depending upon
the mental equipment of the particular individual; but it
probably gives an appreciable amount of pleasure to every student
of geometry who has a teacher worthy of the name.--SMITH, D. E.

                         _The Teaching of Geometry (Boston,
                         1911), p. 16._


=1851.= No other person can judge better of either [the merits of
a writer and the merits of his works] than himself; for none have
had access to a closer or more deliberate examination of them. It
is for this reason, that in proportion that the value of a work
is intrinsic, and independent of opinion, the less eagerness will
the author feel to conciliate the suffrages of the public. Hence
that inward satisfaction, so pure and so complete, which the
study of geometry yields. The progress which an individual makes
in this science, the degree of eminence which he attains in it,
all this may be measured with the same rigorous accuracy as the
methods about which his thoughts are employed. It is only when we
entertain some doubts about the justness of our own standard,
that we become anxious to relieve ourselves from our uncertainty,
by comparing it with the standard of another. Now, in all matters
which fall under the cognizance of taste, this standard is
necessarily somewhat variable; depending on a sort of gross
estimate, always a little arbitrary, either in whole or in part;
and liable to continual alteration in its dimensions, from
negligence, temper, or caprice. In consequence of these
circumstances I have no doubt, that if men lived separate from
each other, and could in such a situation occupy themselves about
anything but self-preservation, they would prefer the study of
the exact sciences to the cultivation of the agreeable arts. It
is chiefly on account of others, that a man aims at excellence in
the latter, it is on his own account that he devotes himself to
the former. In a desert island, accordingly, I should think that
a poet could scarcely be vain; whereas a geometrician might still
enjoy the pride of discovery.--D'ALEMBERT.

                         _Essai sur les Gens Lettres; Melages
                         (Amsterdam 1764), t. 1, p. 334._


=1852.= If it were required to determine inclined planes of
varying inclinations of such lengths that a free rolling body
would descend on them in equal times, any one who understands the
mechanical laws involved would admit that this would necessitate
sundry preparations. But in the circle the proper arrangement
takes place of its own accord for an infinite variety of
positions yet with the greatest accuracy in each individual case.
For all chords which meet the vertical diameter whether at its
highest or lowest point, and whatever their inclinations, have
this in common: that the free descent along them takes place in
equal times. I remember, one bright pupil, who, after I had
stated and demonstrated this theorem to him, and he had caught
the full import of it, was moved as by a miracle. And, indeed,
there is just cause for astonishment and wonder when one beholds
such a strange union of manifold things in accordance with such
fruitful rules in so plain and simple an object as the circle.
Moreover, there is no miracle in nature, which because of its
pervading beauty or order, gives greater cause for astonishment,
unless it be, for the reason that its causes are not so clearly
comprehended, marvel being a daughter of ignorance.--KANT.

                         _Der einzig moegliche Beweisgrund zu
                         einer Demonstration des Daseins Gottes;
                         Werke (Hartenstein), Bd. 2, p. 137._


=1853.= These examples [taken from the geometry of the circle]
indicate what a countless number of other such harmonic relations
obtain in the properties of space, many of which are manifested
in the relations of the various classes of curves in higher
geometry, all of which, besides exercising the understanding
through intellectual insight, affect the emotion in a similar or
even greater degree than the occasional beauties of nature.--KANT.

                         _Der einzig moegliche Beweisgrund zu
                         einer Demonstration des Daseins Gottes;
                         Werke (Hartenstein), Bd. 2, p. 138._


=1854.= But neither thirty years, nor thirty centuries, affect
the clearness, or the charm, of Geometrical truths. Such a
theorem as "the square of the hypotenuse of a right-angled
triangle is equal to the sum of the squares of the sides" is as
dazzlingly beautiful now as it was in the day when Pythagoras
first discovered it, and celebrated its advent, it is said, by
sacrificing a hecatomb of oxen--a method of doing honor to
Science that has always seemed to me _slightly_ exaggerated and
uncalled-for. One can imagine oneself, even in these degenerate
days, marking the epoch of some brilliant scientific discovery by
inviting a convivial friend or two, to join one in a beefsteak
and a bottle of wine. But a _hecatomb_ of oxen! It would produce
a quite inconvenient supply of beef.--DODGSON, C. L.

                         _A New Theory of Parallels (London,
                         1895), Introduction, p. 16._


=1855.= After Pythagoras discovered his fundamental theorem he
sacrificed a hecatomb of oxen. Since that time all dunces[10]
[Ochsen] tremble whenever a new truth is discovered.--BOERNE.

                         _Quoted in Moszkowski: Die unsterbliche
                         Kiste (Berlin, 1908), p. 18._

    [10]  In the German vernacular a dunce or blockhead
          is called an ox.


=1856.=

              _Vom Pythagorieschen Lehrsatz._

          Die Wahrheit, sie besteht in Ewigkeit,
        Wenn erst die bloede Welt ihr Licht erkannt:
        Der Lehrsatz, nach Pythagoras benannt,
        Gilt heute, wie er galt in seiner Zeit.

          Ein Opfer hat Pythagoras geweiht
        Den Goettern, die den Lichtstrahl ihm gesandt;
        Es thaten kund, geschlachtet und verbrannt,
        Ein hundert Ochsen seine Dankbarkeit.

          Die Ochsen seit den Tage, wenn sie wittern,
        Dass eine neue Wahrheit sich enthuelle,
        Erheben ein unmenschliches Gebruelle;

          Pythagoras erfuellt sie mit Entsetzen;
        Und machtlos, sich dem Licht zu wiedersetzen,
        Verschiessen sie die Augen und erzittern.
                                   --CHAMISSO, ADELBERT VON.

                         _Gedichte, 1835 (Haushenbusch), (Berlin,
                         1889), p. 302._

          Truth lasts throughout eternity,
        When once the stupid world its light discerns:
        The theorem, coupled with Pythagoras' name,
        Holds true today, as't did in olden times.

          A splendid sacrifice Pythagoras brought
        The gods, who blessed him with this ray divine;
        A great burnt offering of a hundred kine,
        Proclaimed afar the sage's gratitude.

          Now since that day, all cattle [blockheads] when they
            scent
        New truth about to see the light of day,
        In frightful bellowings manifest their dismay;

          Pythagoras fills them all with terror;
        And powerless to shut out light by error,
        In sheer despair they shut their eyes and tremble.


=1857.= To the question "Which is the signally most beautiful of
geometrical truths?" Frankland replies: "One star excels another
in brightness, but the very sun will be, by common consent, a
property of the circle [Euclid, Book 3, Proposition 31] selected
for particular mention by Dante, that greatest of all exponents
of the beautiful."--FRANKLAND, W. B.

                         _The Story of Euclid (London, 1902), p.
                         70._


=1858.=

                                       As one
        Who vers'd in geometric lore, would fain
        Measure the circle; and, though pondering long
        And deeply, that beginning, which he needs,
        Finds not; e'en such was I, intent to scan
        The novel wonder, and trace out the form,
        How to the circle fitted, and therein
        How plac'd: but the flight was not for my wing;
                                                    --DANTE.

                         _Paradise [Carey] Canto 33, lines
                         122-129._


=1859.= If geometry were as much opposed to our passions and
present interests as is ethics, we should contest it and violate
it but little less, notwithstanding all the demonstrations of
Euclid and of Archimedes, which you would call dreams and believe
full of paralogisms; and Joseph Scaliger, Hobbes, and others, who
have written against Euclid and Archimedes, would not find
themselves in such a small company as at present.--LEIBNITZ.

                         _New Essays concerning Human
                         Understanding [Langley], Bk. 1, chap. 2,
                         sect. 12._


=1860.= I have no fault to find with those who teach geometry.
That science is the only one which has not produced sects; it is
founded on analysis and on synthesis and on the calculus; it does
not occupy itself with probable truth; moreover it has the same
method in every country.--FREDERICK THE GREAT.

                         _Oeuvres (Decker), t. 7, p. 100._


=1861.= There are, undoubtedly, the most ample reasons for
stating both the principles and theorems [of geometry] in their
general form, .... But, that an unpractised learner, even in
making use of one theorem to demonstrate another, reasons rather
from particular to particular than from the general proposition,
is manifest from the difficulty he finds in applying a theorem to
a case in which the configuration of the diagram is extremely
unlike that of the diagram by which the original theorem was
demonstrated. A difficulty which, except in cases of unusual
mental powers, long practice can alone remove, and removes
chiefly by rendering us familiar with all the configurations
consistent with the general conditions of the theorem.--MILL, J. S.

                         _System of Logic, Bk. 2, chap. 3, sect.
                         3._


=1862.= The reason why I impute any defect to geometry, is,
because its original and fundamental principles are deriv'd
merely from appearances; and it may perhaps be imagin'd, that
this defect must always attend it, and keep it from ever reaching
a greater exactness in the comparison of objects or ideas, than
what our eye or imagination alone is able to attain. I own that
this defect so far attends it, as to keep it from ever aspiring
to a full certainty. But since these fundamental principles
depend on the easiest and least deceitful appearances, they
bestow on their consequences a degree of exactness, of which
these consequences are singly incapable.--HUME, D.

                         _A Treatise of Human Nature, Part 3,
                         sect. 1._


=1863.= I have already observed, that geometry, or the art, by
which we fix the proportions of figures, tho' it much excels both
in universality and exactness, the loose judgments of the senses
and imagination; yet never attains a perfect precision and
exactness. Its first principles are still drawn from the general
appearance of the objects; and that appearance can never afford
us any security, when we examine the prodigious minuteness of
which nature is susceptible....

There remain, therefore, algebra and arithmetic as the only
sciences, in which we can carry on a chain of reasoning to any
degree of intricacy, and yet preserve a perfect exactness and
certainty.--HUME, D.

                         _A Treatise of Human Nature, Part 3,
                         sect. 1._


=1864.= All geometrical reasoning is, in the last resort,
circular: if we start by assuming points, they can only be
defined by the lines or planes which relate them; and if we start
by assuming lines or planes, they can only be defined by the
points through which they pass.--RUSSELL, BERTRAND.

                         _Foundations of Geometry (Cambridge,
                         1897), p. 120._


=1865.= The description of right lines and circles, upon which
Geometry is founded, belongs to Mechanics. Geometry does not
teach us to draw these lines, but requires them to be drawn....
it requires that the learner should first be taught to describe
these accurately, before he enters upon Geometry; then it shows
how by these operations problems may be solved. To describe right
lines and circles are problems, but not geometrical problems. The
solution of these problems is required from Mechanics; by
Geometry the use of them, when solved, is shown.... Therefore
Geometry is founded in mechanical practice, and is nothing but
that part of universal Mechanics which accurately proposes and
demonstrates the art of measuring. But since the manual arts are
chiefly conversant in the moving of bodies, it comes to pass
that Geometry is commonly referred to their magnitudes, and
Mechanics to their motion.--NEWTON.

                         _Philosophiae Naturalis Principia
                         Mathematica, Praefat._


=1866.= We must, then, admit ... that there is an independent
science of geometry just as there is an independent science of
physics, and that either of these may be treated by mathematical
methods. Thus geometry becomes the simplest of the natural
sciences, and its axioms are of the nature of physical laws, to
be tested by experience and to be regarded as true only within
the limits of error of observation--BOCHER, MAXIME.

                         _Bulletin American Mathematical Society,
                         Vol. 2 (1904), p. 124._


=1867.= Geometry is not an experimental science; experience forms
merely the occasion for our reflecting upon the geometrical ideas
which pre-exist in us. But the occasion is necessary, if it did
not exist we should not reflect, and if our experiences were
different, doubtless our reflections would also be different.
Space is not a form of sensibility; it is an instrument which
serves us not to represent things to ourselves, but to reason
upon things.--POINCARE, H.

                         _On the Foundations of Geometry; Monist,
                         Vol. 9 (1898-1899), p. 41._


=1868.= It has been said that geometry is an instrument. The
comparison may be admitted, provided it is granted at the same
time that this instrument, like Proteus in the fable, ought
constantly to change its form.--ARAGO.

                         _Oeuvres, t. 2 (1854), p. 694._


=1869.= It is essential that the treatment [of geometry] should
be rid of everything superfluous, for the superfluous is an
obstacle to the acquisition of knowledge; it should select
everything that embraces the subject and brings it to a focus,
for this is of the highest service to science; it must have great
regard both to clearness and to conciseness, for their opposites
trouble our understanding; it must aim to generalize its
theorems, for the division of knowledge into small elements
renders it difficult of comprehension.--PROCLUS.

                         _Quoted in D. E. Smith: The Teaching of
                         Geometry (Boston, 1911), p. 71._


=1870.= Many are acquainted with mathematics, but mathesis few
know. For it is one thing to know a number of propositions and to
make some obvious deductions from them, by accident rather than
by any sure method of procedure, another thing to know clearly
the nature and character of the science itself, to penetrate into
its inmost recesses, and to be instructed by its universal
principles, by which facility in working out countless problems
and their proofs is secured. For as the majority of artists, by
copying the same model again and again, gain certain technical
skill in painting, but no other knowledge of the art of painting
than what their eyes suggest, so many, having read the books of
Euclid and other geometricians, are wont to devise, in imitation
of them and to prove some propositions, but the most profound
method of solving more difficult demonstrations and problems they
are utterly ignorant of.--LAFAILLE, J. C.

                         _Theoremata de Centro Gravitatis
                         (Anvers, 1632), Praefat._


=1871.= The elements of plane geometry should precede algebra for
every reason known to sound educational theory. It is more
fundamental, more concrete, and it deals with things and their
relations rather than with symbols.--BUTLER, N. M.

                         _The Meaning of Education etc. (New
                         York, 1905), p. 171._


=1872.= The reason why geometry is not so difficult as algebra,
is to be found in the less general nature of the symbols
employed. In algebra a general proposition respecting numbers is
to be proved. Letters are taken which may represent any of the
numbers in question, and the course of the demonstration, far
from making use of a particular case, does not even allow that
any reasoning, however general in its nature, is conclusive,
unless the symbols are as general as the arguments.... In
geometry on the contrary, at least in the elementary parts, any
proposition may be safely demonstrated on reasonings on any one
particular example.... It also affords some facility that the
results of elementary geometry are in many cases sufficiently
evident of themselves to the eye; for instance, that two sides of
a triangle are greater than the third, whereas in algebra many
