filaments of a closed leaf are irritated, the normal electric current
is disturbed. Nevertheless, such irritation is by no means necessary,
for a dead insect, or a bit of meat, or of albumen, all act equally
well; proving that in these cases it is the absorption of animal matter
which excites the lobes slowly to press close together. We have seen
that the absorption of an extremely small quantity of such matter also
causes a fully expanded leaf to close slowly; and this movement is
clearly analogous to the slow pressing together of the concave lobes.
This latter action is of high functional importance to the plant, for
the glands on both sides are thus brought into contact with a captured
insect, and consequently secrete. The secretion with animal matter in
solution is then drawn by capillary attraction over the whole surface
of the leaf, causing all the glands to secrete and allowing them to
absorb the diffused animal matter. The movement, excited by the
absorption of such matter, though slow, suffices for its final purpose,
whilst the movement excited by one of the sensitive filaments being
touched is rapid, and this is indis- [page 309] pensable for the
capturing of insects. These two movements, excited by two such widely
different means, are thus both well adapted, like all the other
functions of the plant, for the purposes which they subserve.

There is another wide difference in the action of leaves which enclose
objects, such as bits of wood, cork, balls of paper, or which have had
their filaments merely touched, and those which enclose organic bodies
yielding soluble nitrogenous matter. In the former case the leaves, as
we have seen, open in under 24 hrs. and are then ready, even before
being fully-expanded, to shut again. But if they have closed over
nitrogen-yielding bodies, they remain closely shut for many days; and
after re-expanding are torpid, and never act again, or only after a
considerable interval of time. In four instances, leaves after catching
insects never reopened, but began to wither, remaining closed--in one
case for fifteen days over a fly; in a second, for twenty-four days,
though the fly was small; in a third for twenty-four days over a
woodlouse; and in a fourth, for thirty-five days over a large Tipula.
In two other cases leaves remained closed for at least nine days over
flies, and for how many more I do not know. It should, however, be
added that in two instances in which very small insects had been
naturally caught the leaf opened as quickly as if nothing had been
caught; and I suppose that this was due to such small insects not
having been crushed or not having excreted any animal matter, so that
the glands were not excited. Small angular bits of albumen and gelatine
were placed at both ends of three leaves, two of which remained closed
for thirteen and the other for twelve days. Two other leaves remained
closed over bits of [page 310] meat for eleven days, a third leaf for
eight days, and a fourth (but this had been cracked and injured) for
only six days. Bits of cheese, or casein, were placed at one end and
albumen at the other end of three leaves; and the ends with the former
opened after six, eight, and nine days, whilst the opposite ends opened
a little later. None of the above bits of meat, albumen, &c., exceeded
a cube of 1/10 of an inch (2.54 mm.) in size, and were sometimes
smaller; yet these small portions sufficed to keep the leaves closed
for many days. Dr. Canby informs me that leaves remain shut for a
longer time over insects than over meat; and from what I have seen, I
can well believe that this is the case, especially if the insects are
large.

In all the above cases, and in many others in which leaves remained
closed for a long but unknown period over insects naturally caught,
they were more or less torpid when they reopened. Generally they were
so torpid during many succeeding days that no excitement of the
filaments caused the least movement. In one instance, however, on the
day after a leaf opened which had clasped a fly, it closed with extreme
slowness when one of its filaments was touched; and although no object
was left enclosed, it was so torpid that it did not re-open for the
second time until 44 hrs. had elapsed. In a second case, a leaf which
had expanded after remaining closed for at least nine days over a fly,
when greatly irritated, moved one alone of its two lobes, and retained
this unusual position for the next two days. A third case offers the
strongest exception which I have observed; a leaf, after remaining
clasped for an unknown time over a fly, opened, and when one of its
filaments was touched, closed, though rather slowly. Dr. Canby, [page
311] who observed in the United States a large number of plants which,
although not in their native site, were probably more vigorous than my
plants, informs me that he has "several times known vigorous leaves to
devour their prey several times; but ordinarily twice, or, quite often,
once was enough to render them unserviceable." Mrs. Treat, who
cultivated many plants in New Jersey, also informs me that "several
leaves caught successively three insects each, but most of them were
not able to digest the third fly, but died in the attempt.  Five
leaves, however, digested each three flies, and closed over the fourth,
but died soon after the fourth capture. Many leaves did not digest even
one large insect." It thus appears that the power of digestion is
somewhat limited, and it is certain that leaves always remain clasped
for many days over an insect, and do not recover their power of closing
again for many subsequent days. In this respect Dionaea differs from
Drosera, which catches and digests many insects after shorter intervals
of time.

We are now prepared to understand the use of the marginal spikes, which
form so conspicuous a feature in the appearance of the plant (fig. 12,
p. 287), and which at first seemed to me in my ignorance useless
appendages. From the inward curvature of the lobes as they approach
each other, the tips of the marginal spikes first intercross, and
ultimately their bases. Until the edges of the lobes come into contact,
elongated spaces between the spikes, varying from the 1/15 to the 1/10
of an inch (1.693 to 2.54 mm.) in breadth, according to the size of the
leaf, are left open. Thus an insect, if its body is not thicker than
these measurements, can easily escape between the crossed spikes, when
disturbed by the closing lobes and in- [page 312] creasing darkness;
and one of my sons actually saw a small insect thus escaping. A
moderately large insect, on the other hand, if it tries to escape
between the bars will surely be pushed back again into its horrid
prison with closing walls, for the spikes continue to cross more and
more until the edges of the lobes come into contact. A very strong
insect, however, would be able to free itself, and Mrs. Treat saw this
effected by a rose-chafer (Macrodactylus subspinosus) in the United
States. Now it would manifestly be a great disadvantage to the plant to
waste many days in remaining clasped over a minute insect, and several
additional days or weeks in afterwards recovering its sensibility;
inasmuch as a minute insect would afford but little nutriment. It would
be far better for the plant to wait for a time until a moderately large
insect was captured, and to allow all the little ones to escape; and
this advantage is secured by the slowly intercrossing marginal spikes,
which act like the large meshes of a fishing-net, allowing the small
and useless fry to escape.

As I was anxious to know whether this view was correct--and as it seems
a good illustration of how cautious we ought to be in assuming, as I
had done with respect to the marginal spikes, that any fully developed
structure is useless--I applied to Dr. Canby. He visited the native
site of the plant, early in the season, before the leaves had grown to
their full size, and sent me fourteen leaves, containing naturally
captured insects. Four of these had caught rather small insects, viz.
three of them ants, and the fourth a rather small fly, but the other
ten had all caught large insects, namely, five elaters, two
chrysomelas, a curculio, a thick and broad spider, and a scolopendra.
Out of these ten insects, no less than eight [page 313] were beetles,*
and out of the whole fourteen there was only one, viz. a dipterous
insect, which could readily take flight. Drosera, on the other hand,
lives chiefly on insects which are good flyers, especially Diptera,
caught by the aid of its viscid secretion. But what most concerns us is
the size of the ten larger insects. Their average length from head to
tail was
.256 of an inch, the lobes of the leaves being on an average .53 of an inch in length, so that
the insects were very nearly half as long as the leaves within which
they were enclosed. Only a few of these leaves, therefore, had wasted
their powers by capturing small prey, though it is probable that many
small insects had crawled over them and been caught, but had then
escaped through the bars.

The Transmission of the Motor Impulse, and Means of Movement.--It is
sufficient to touch any one of the six filaments to cause both lobes to
close, these becoming at the same time incurved throughout their whole
breadth. The stimulus must therefore radiate in all directions from any
one filament. It must also be transmitted with much rapidity across the
leaf, for in all ordinary cases both lobes close simultaneously, as far
as the eye can judge. Most physiologists believe that in irritable
plants the excitement is transmitted along, or in close connection
with, the fibro-vascular bundles. In Dionaea, the course of these
vessels (composed of spiral and ordinary vascular

* Dr. Canby remarks ('Gardener's Monthly,' August 1868), "as a general
thing beetles and insects of that kind, though always killed, seem to
be too hard-shelled to serve as food, and after a short time are
rejected." I am surprised at this statement, at least with respect to
such beetles as elaters, for the five which I examined were in an
extremely fragile and empty condition, as if all their internal parts
had been partially digested. Mrs. Treat informs me that the plants
which she cultivated in New Jersey chiefly caught Diptera.  [page 314]

tissue) seems at first sight to favour this belief; for they run up the
midrib in a great bundle, sending off small bundles almost at right
angles on each side. These bifurcate occasionally as they extend
towards the margin, and close to the margin small branches from
adjoining vessels unite and enter the marginal spikes. At some of these
points of union the vessels form curious loops, like those described
under Drosera. A continuous zigzag line of vessels thus runs round the
whole circumference of the leaf, and in the midrib all the vessels are
in close contact; so that all parts of the leaf seem to be brought into
some degree of communication.  Nevertheless, the presence of vessels is
not necessary for the transmission of the motor impulse, for it is
transmitted from the tips of the sensitive filaments (these being about
the 1/20 of an inch in length), into which no vessels enter; and these
could not have been overlooked, as I made thin vertical sections of the
leaf at the bases of the filaments.

On several occasions, slits about the 1/10 of an inch in length were
made with a lancet, close to the bases of the filaments, parallel to
the midrib, and, therefore, directly across the course of the vessels.
These were made sometimes on the inner and sometimes on the outer sides
of the filaments; and after several days, when the leaves had reopened,
these filaments were touched roughly (for they were always rendered in
some degree torpid by the operation), and the lobes then closed in the
ordinary manner, though slowly, and sometimes not until after a
considerable interval of time. These cases show that the motor impulse
is not transmitted along the vessels, and they further show that there
is no necessity for a direct line of communication from the filament
which is [page 315] touched towards the midrib and opposite lobe, or
towards the outer parts of the same lobe.

Two slits near each other, both parallel to the midrib, were next made
in the same manner as before, one on each side of the base of a
filament, on five distinct leaves, so that a little slip bearing a
filament was connected with the rest of the leaf only at its two ends.
These slips were nearly of the same size; one was carefully measured;
it was .12 of an inch (3.048 mm.) in length, and .08 of an inch (2.032
mm.) in breadth; and in the middle stood the filament.  Only one of
these slips withered and perished. After the leaf had recovered from
the operation, though the slits were still open, the filaments thus
circumstanced were roughly touched, and both lobes, or one alone,
slowly closed. In two instances touching the filament produced no
effect; but when the point of a needle was driven into the slip at the
base of the filament, the lobes slowly closed. Now in these cases the
impulse must have proceeded along the slip in a line parallel to the
midrib, and then have radiated forth, either from both ends or from one
end alone of the slip, over the whole surface of the two lobes.

Again, two parallel slits, like the former ones, were made, one on each
side of the base of a filament, at right angles to the midrib. After
the leaves (two in number) had recovered, the filaments were roughly
touched, and the lobes slowly closed; and here the impulse must have
travelled for a short distance in a line at right angles to the midrib,
and then have radiated forth on all sides over both lobes. These
several cases prove that the motor impulse travels in all directions
through the cellular tissue, independently of the course of the
vessels.

With Drosera we have seen that the motor impulse [page 316] is
transmitted in like manner in all directions through the cellular
tissue; but that its rate is largely governed by the length of the
cells and the direction of their longer axes. Thin sections of a leaf
of Dionaea were made by my son, and the cells, both those of the
central and of the more superficial layers, were found much elongated,
with their longer axes directed towards the midrib; and it is in this
direction that the motor impulse must be sent with great rapidity from
one lobe to the other, as both close simultaneously. The central
parenchymatous cells are larger, more loosely attached together, and
have more delicate walls than the more superficial cells. A thick mass
of cellular tissue forms the upper surface of the midrib over the great
central bundle of vessels.

When the filaments were roughly touched, at the bases of which slits
had been made, either on both sides or on one side, parallel to the
midrib or at right angles to it, the two lobes, or only one, moved. In
one of these cases, the lobe on the side which bore the filament that
was touched moved, but in three other cases the opposite lobe alone
moved; so that an injury which was sufficient to prevent a lobe moving
did not prevent the transmission from it of a stimulus which excited
the opposite lobe to move. We thus also learn that, although normally
both lobes move together, each has the power of independent movement. A
case, indeed, has already been given of a torpid leaf that had lately
re-opened after catching an insect, of which one lobe alone moved when
irritated. Moreover, one end of the same lobe can close and re- expand,
independently of the other end, as was seen in some of the foregoing
experiments.

When the lobes, which are rather thick, close, no trace of wrinkling
can be seen on any part of their upper [page 317] surfaces, It appears
therefore that the cells must contract. The chief seat of the movement
is evidently in the thick mass of cells which overlies the central
bundle of vessels in the midrib.  To ascertain whether this part
contracts, a leaf was fastened on the stage of the microscope in such a
manner that the two lobes could not become quite shut, and having made
two minute black dots on the midrib, in a transverse line and a little
towards one side, they were found by the micrometer to be 17/1000 of an
inch apart. One of the filaments was then touched and the lobes closed;
but as they were prevented from meeting, I could still see the two
dots, which now were 15/1000 of an inch apart, so that a small portion
of the upper surface of the midrib had contracted in a transverse line
2/1000 of an inch (.0508 mm.).

We know that the lobes, whilst closing, become slightly incurved
throughout their whole breadth. This movement appears to be due to the
contraction of the superficial layers of cells over the whole upper
surface. In order to observe their contraction, a narrow strip was cut
out of one lobe at right angles to the midrib, so that the surface of
the opposite lobe could be seen in this part when the leaf was shut.
After the leaf had recovered from the operation and had re-expanded,
three minute black dots were made on the surface opposite to the slit
or window, in a line at right angles to the midrib. The distance
between the dots was found to be 40/1000 of an inch, so that the two
extreme dots were 80/1000 of an inch apart. One of the filaments was
now touched and the leaf closed. On again measuring the distances
between the dots, the two next to the midrib were nearer together by 1
to 2/1000 of an inch, and the two further dots by 3 to 4/1000 of an
inch, than they were before; so that the two extreme [page 318] dots
now stood about 5/1000 of an inch (.127 mm.) nearer together than
before. If we suppose the whole upper surface of the lobe, which was
400/1000 of an inch in breadth, to have contracted in the same
proportion, the total contraction will have amounted to about 25/1000
or 1/40 of an inch (.635 mm.); but whether this is sufficient to
account for the slight inward curvature of the whole lobe, I am unable
to say.

Finally, with respect to the movement of the leaves, the wonderful
discovery made by Dr.  Burdon Sanderson* is now universally known;
namely that there exists a normal electrical current in the blade and
footstalk; and that when the leaves are irritated, the current is
disturbed in the same manner as takes place during the contraction of
the muscle of an animal.

The Re-expansion of the Leaves.--This is effected at an insensibly slow
rate, whether or not any object is enclosed.  One lobe can re-expand by
itself, as occurred with the torpid leaf of which one lobe alone had
closed. We have also seen in the experiments with cheese and albumen
that the two ends of the same lobe can re-expand to a certain extent
independently of each other. But in all ordinary cases both lobes open
at the same time. The re-expansion is not determined by the sensitive
filaments; all three filaments on one lobe were cut off close to their
bases; and the three

* Proc. Royal Soc.' vol. xxi. p. 495; and lecture at the Royal
Institution, June 5, 1874, given in 'Nature,' 1874, pp. 105 and 127.

  Nuttall, in his 'Gen. American Plants,' p. 277 (note), says that,
  whilst collecting this plant in its native home, "I had occasion to
observe that a detached leaf would make repeated efforts towards
disclosing itself to the influence of the sun; these attempts consisted
in an undulatory motion of the marginal ciliae, accompanied by a
partial opening and succeeding collapse of the lamina, which at length
terminated in a complete expansion and in the destruction of
sensibility." I am indebted to Prof. Oliver for this reference; but I
do not understand what took place.  [page 319]

leaves thus treated re-expanded,--one to a partial extent in 24
hrs.,--a second to the same extent in 48 hrs., and the third, which had
been previously injured, not until the sixth day.  These leaves after
their re-expansion closed quickly when the filaments on the other lobe
were irritated. These were then cut off one of the leaves, so that none
were left. This mutilated leaf, notwithstanding the loss of all its
filaments, re-expanded in two days in the usual manner. When the
filaments have been excited by immersion in a solution of sugar, the
lobes do not expand so soon as when the filaments have been merely
touched; and this, I presume, is due to their having been strongly
affected through exosmose, so that they continue for some time to
transmit a motor impulse to the upper surface of the leaf.

The following facts make me believe that the several layers of cells
forming the lower surface of the leaf are always in a state of tension;
and that it is owing to this mechanical state, aided probably by fresh
fluid being attracted into the cells, that the lobes begin to separate
or expand as soon as the contraction of the upper surface diminishes. A
leaf was cut off and suddenly plunged perpendicularly into boiling
water: I expected that the lobes would have closed, but instead of
doing so, they diverged a little. I then took another fine leaf, with
the lobes standing at an angle of nearly 80o to each other; and on
immersing it as before, the angle suddenly increased to 90o. A third
leaf was torpid from having recently re-expanded after having caught a
fly, so that repeated touches of the filaments caused not the least
movement; nevertheless, when similarly immersed, the lobes separated a
little. As these leaves were inserted perpendicularly into the boiling
water, both surfaces and the filaments [page 320] must have been
equally affected; and I can understand the divergence of the lobes only
by supposing that the cells on the lower side, owing to their state of
tension, acted mechanically and thus suddenly drew the lobes a little
apart, as soon as the cells on the upper surface were killed and lost
their contractile power. We have seen that boiling water in like manner
causes the tentacles of Drosera to curve backwards; and this is an
analogous movement to the divergence of the lobes of Dionaea.

In some concluding remarks in the fifteenth chapter on the Droseraceae,
the different kinds of irritability possessed by the several genera,
and the different manner in which they capture insects, will be
compared.  [page 321]



                          CHAPTER XIV.

                     ALDROVANDA VESICULOSA.

Captures crustaceans--Structure of the leaves in comparison with those
of Dionaea-- Absorption by the glands, by the quadrifid processes, and
points on the infolded margins-- Aldrovanda vesiculosa, var.
australis--Captures prey--Absorption of animal matter-- Aldrovanda
vesiculosa, var. verticillata--Concluding remarks.

THIS plant may be called a miniature aquatic Dionaea. Stein discovered
in 1873 that the bilobed leaves, which are generally found closed in
Europe, open under a sufficiently high temperature, and, when touched,
suddenly close.* They re-expand in from 24 to 36 hours, but only, as it
appears, when inorganic objects are enclosed. The leaves sometimes
contain bubbles of air, and were formerly supposed to be bladders;
hence the specific name of vesiculosa. Stein observed that
water-insects were sometimes caught, and Prof. Cohn has recently found
within the leaves of naturally growing plants many kinds of crustaceans
and larvae.  Plants which had been kept in filtered water were placed
by him in a vessel con-

* Since his original publication, Stein has found out that the
irritability of the leaves was observed by De Sassus, as recorded in
'Bull. Bot. Soc. de France,' in 1861. Delpino states in a paper
published in 1871 ('Nuovo Giornale Bot. Ital.' vol. iii. p. 174) that
"una quantit di chioccioline e di altri animalcoli acquatici" are
caught and suffocated by the leaves. I presume that chioccioline are
fresh-water molluscs. It would be interesting to know whether their
shells are at all corroded by the acid of the digestive secretion.

  I am greatly indebted to this distinguished naturalist for having
  sent me a copy of his memoir on Aldrovanda, before its publication in
his 'Beitrge zur Biologie der Pflanzen,' drittes Heft, 1875, page 71.
[page 322]

taining numerous crustaceans of the genus Cypris, and next morning many
were found imprisoned and alive, still swimming about within the closed
leaves, but doomed to certain death.

Directly after reading Prof. Cohn's memoir, I received through the
kindness of Dr. Hooker living plants from Germany. As I can add nothing
to Prof. Cohn's excellent description, I will give only two
illustrations, one of a whorl of leaves copied from his work, and the
other of a leaf pressed flat open, drawn by my son Francis. I will,
however, append a few remarks on the differences between this plant and
Dionaea.

Aldrovanda is destitute of roots and floats freely in the water. The
leaves are arranged in whorls round the stem. Their broad petioles
terminate in from four to six rigid projections,* each tipped with a
stiff, short bristle. The bilobed leaf, with the midrib likewise tipped
with a bristle, stands in the midst of these projections, and is
evidently defended by them. The lobes are formed of very delicate
tissue, so as to be translucent; they open, according to Cohn, about as
much as the two valves of a living mussel-shell, therefore even less
than the lobes of Dionaea; and this must make the capture of aquatic
animals more easy. The outside of the leaves and the petioles are
covered with minute two-armed papillae, evidently answering to the
eight-rayed papillae of Dionaea.

Each lobe rather exceeds a semi-circle in convexity, and consists of
two very different concentric portions; the inner and lesser portion,
or that next to the midrib,

*There has been much discussion by botanists on the homological nature
of these projections. Dr. Nitschke ('Bot. Zeitung,' 1861, p. 146)
believes that they correspond with the fimbriated scale-like bodies
found at the bases of the petioles of Drosera.  [page 323]

is slightly concave, and is formed, according to Cohn, of three layers
of cells. Its upper surface is studded with colourless glands like, but
more simple than, those of Dionaea; they are supported on distinct
footstalks, consisting of two rows of cells. The outer

FIG. 13.  (Aldrovanda vesiculosa.) Upper figure, whorl of leaves (from
Prof. Cohn).  Lower figure, leaf pressed flat open and greatly
enlarged.

and broader portion of the lobe is flat and very thin, being formed of
only two layers of cells.  Its upper surface does not bear any glands,
but, in their place, small quadrifid processes, each consisting of four
tapering projections, which rise from a common [page 324] prominence.
These processes are formed of very delicate membrane lined with a layer
of protoplasm; and they sometimes contain aggregated globules of
hyaline matter. Two of the slightly diverging arms are directed towards
the circumference, and two towards the midrib, forming together a sort
of Greek cross. Occasionally two of the arms are replaced by one, and
then the projection is trifid. We shall see in a future chapter that
these projections curiously resemble those found within the bladders of
Utricularia, more especially of Utricularia montana, although this
genus is not related to Aldrovanda.

A narrow rim of the broad flat exterior part of each lobe is turned
inwards, so that, when the lobes are closed, the exterior surfaces of
the infolded portions come into contact. The edge itself bears a row of
conical, flattened, transparent points with broad bases, like the
prickles on the stem of a bramble or Rubus. As the rim is infolded,
these points are directed towards the midrib, and they appear at first
as if they were adapted to prevent the escape of prey; but this can
hardly be their chief function, for they are composed of very delicate
and highly flexible membrane, which can be easily bent or quite doubled
back without being cracked.  Nevertheless, the infolded rims, together
with the points, must somewhat interfere with the retrograde movement
of any small creature, as soon as the lobes begin to close. The
circumferential part of the leaf of Aldrovanda thus differs greatly
from that of Dionaea; nor can the points on the rim be considered as
homologous with the spikes round the leaves of Dionaea, as these latter
are prolongations of the blade, and not mere epidermic productions.
They appear also to serve for a widely different purpose.  [page 325]

On the concave gland-bearing portion of the lobes, and especially on
the midrib, there are numerous, long, finely pointed hairs, which, as
Prof. Cohn remarks, there can be little doubt are sensitive to a touch,
and, when touched, cause the leaf to close. They are formed of two rows
of cells, or, according to Cohn, sometimes of four, and do not include
any vascular tissue. They differ also from the six sensitive filaments
of Dionaea in being colourless, and in having a medial as well as a
basal articulation. No doubt it is owing to these two articulations
that, notwithstanding their length, they escape being broken when the
lobes close.

The plants which I received during the early part of October from Kew
never opened their leaves, though subjected to a high temperature.
After examining the structure of some of them, I experimented on only
two, as I hoped that the plants would grow; and I now regret that I did
not sacrifice a greater number.

A leaf was cut open along the midrib, and the glands examined under a
high power. It was then placed in a few drops of an infusion of raw
meat. After 3 hrs. 20 m. there was no change, but when next examined
after 23 hrs. 20 m., the outer cells of the glands contained, instead
of limpid fluid, spherical masses of a granular substance, showing that
matter had been absorbed from the infusion. That these glands secrete a
fluid which dissolves or digests animal matter out of the bodies of the
creatures which the leaves capture, is also highly probable from the
analogy of Dionaea. If we may trust to the same analogy, the concave
and inner portions of the two lobes probably close together by a slow
movement, as soon as the glands have absorbed a slight amount of [page
326] already soluble animal matter. The included water would thus be
pressed out, and the secretion consequently not be too much diluted to
act. With respect to the quadrifid processes on the outer parts of the
lobes, I was not able to decide whether they had been acted on by the
infusion; for the lining of protoplasm was somewhat shrunk before they
were immersed.  Many of the points on the infolded rims also had their
lining of protoplasm similarly shrunk, and contained spherical granules
of hyaline matter.

A solution of urea was next employed. This substance was chosen partly
because it is absorbed by the quadrifid processes and more especially
by the glands of Utricularia--a plant which, as we shall hereafter see,
feeds on decayed animal matter. As urea is one of the last products of
the chemical changes going on in the living body, it seems fitted to
represent the early stages of the decay of the dead body. I was also
led to try urea from a curious little fact mentioned by Prof. Cohn,
namely that when rather large crustaceans are caught between the
closing lobes, they are pressed so hard whilst making their escape that
they often void their sausage-shaped masses of excrement, which were
found within most of the leaves. These masses, no doubt, contain urea.
They would be left either on the broad outer surfaces of the lobes
where the quadrifids are situated, or within the closed concavity. In
the latter case, water charged with excrementitious and decaying matter
would be slowly forced outwards, and would bathe the quadrifids, if I
am right in believing that the concave lobes contract after a time like
those of Dionaea. Foul water would also be apt to ooze out at all
times, especially when bubbles of air were generated within the
concavity.

A leaf was cut open and examined, and the outer [page 327] cells of the
glands were found to contain only limpid fluid. Some of the quadrifids
included a few spherical granules, but several were transparent and
empty, and their positions were marked. This leaf was now immersed in a
little solution of one part of urea to 146 of water, or three grains to
the ounce. After 3 hrs. 40 m. there was no change either in the glands
or quadrifids; nor was there any certain change in the glands after 24
hrs.; so that, as far as one trial goes, urea does not act on them in
the same manner as an infusion of raw meat. It was different with the
quadrifids; for the lining of protoplasm, instead of presenting a
uniform texture, was now slightly shrunk, and exhibited in many places
minute, thickened, irregular, yellowish specks and ridges, exactly like
those which appear within the quadrifids of Utricularia when treated
with this same solution. Moreover, several of the quadrifids, which
were before empty, now contained moderately sized or very small, more
or less aggregated, globules of yellowish matter, as likewise occurs
under the same circumstances with Utricularia. Some of the points on
the infolded margins of the lobes were similarly affected; for their
