_Veronica officinalis_

_Flowers_--Pale blue, very small, crowded on spike-like racemes from
axils of leaves, often from alternate axils. Calyx 4-parted; corolla of
4 lobes, lower lobe commonly narrowest; 2 divergent stamens inserted at
base and on either side of upper corolla lobe; a knob-like stigma on
solitary pistil. _Stem:_ From 3 to 10 in. long, hairy, often prostrate,
and rooting at joints. _Leaves:_ Opposite, oblong, obtuse, saw-edged,
narrowed at base. _Fruit:_ Compressed heart-shaped capsule, containing
numerous flat seeds.

_Preferred Habitat_--Dry fields, uplands, open woods.

_Flowering Season_--May-August.

_Distribution_--From Michigan and Tennessee eastward, also from Ontario
to Nova Scotia. Probably an immigrant from Europe and Asia.

An ancient tradition of the Roman Church relates that when Jesus was on
His way to Calvary, He passed the home of a certain Jewish maiden, who,
when she saw drops of agony on His brow, ran after Him along the road to
wipe His face with her kerchief. This linen, the monks declared, ever
after bore the impress of the sacred features--_vera iconica_, the true
likeness. When the Church wished to canonize the pitying maiden, an
abbreviated form of the Latin words was given her, St. Veronica, and her
kerchief became one of the most precious relics at St. Peter's, where it
is said to be still preserved. Medieval flower lovers, whose piety
seems to have been eclipsed only by their imaginations, named this
little flower from a fancied resemblance to the relic. Of course,
special healing virtue was attributed to the square of pictured linen,
and since all could not go to Rome to be cured by it, naturally the next
step was to employ the common, wayside plant that bore the saint's name.
Mental healers will not be surprised to learn that because of the strong
popular belief in its efficacy to cure all fleshly ills, it actually
seemed to possess miraculous powers. For scrofula it was said to be the
infallible remedy, and presently we find Linnaeus grouping this flower,
and all its relatives, under the family name of _Scrofulariaceae_.


American Brooklime

_Veronica americana_

_Flowers_--Light blue to white, usually striped with deep blue or
purple; structure of flower similar to that of _V. officinalis_, but
borne in long, loose racemes branching outward on stems that spring from
axils of most of the leaves. _Stem:_ Without hairs, usually branched, 6
in. to 3 ft. long, lying partly on ground and rooting from lower joints.
_Leaves:_ Oblong, lance-shaped, saw-edged, opposite, petioled, and
lacking hairs; 1 to 3 in. long, 1/4 to 1 in. wide. _Fruit:_ A nearly
round, compressed, but not flat, capsule with flat seeds in 2 cells.

_Preferred Habitat_--In brooks, ponds, ditches, swamps.

_Flowering Season_--April-September.

_Distribution_--From Atlantic to Pacific, Alaska to California and New
Mexico, Quebec to Pennsylvania.

This, the perhaps most beautiful native speedwell, whose sheets of blue
along the brookside are so frequently mistaken for masses of
forget-me-nots by the hasty observer, of course shows marked differences
on closer investigation; its tiny blue flowers are marked with purple
pathfinders, and the plant is not hairy, to mention only two. But the
poets of England are responsible for most of whatever confusion still
lurks in the popular mind concerning these two flowers. Speedwell, a
common medieval benediction from a friend, equivalent to our farewell or
adieu, and forget-me-not of similar intent, have been used
interchangeably by some writers in connection with parting gifts of
small blue flowers. It was the germander speedwell that in literature
and botanies alike was most commonly known as the forget-me-not for more
than two hundred years, or until only fifty years ago. When the
_Mayflower_ and her sister ships were launched, "Speedwell" was
considered a happier name for a vessel than it proved to be.


Culver's-root; Culver's Physic

_Veronica virginica (Leplandra virginica)_

_Flowers_--Small, white or rarely bluish, crowded in dense spike-like
racemes 3 to 9 in. long, usually several spikes at top of stem or from
upper axils. Calyx 4-parted, very small; corolla tubular, 4-lobed; 2
stamens protruding; 1 pistil. _Stem:_ Straight, erect, usually
unbranched, 2 to 7 ft. tall. _Leaves:_ Whorled, from 3 to 9 in a
cluster, lance-shaped or oblong, and long-tapering, sharply saw-edged.

_Preferred Habitat_--Rich, moist woods, thickets, meadows.

_Flowering Season_--June-September.

_Distribution_--Nova Scotia to Alabama, west to Nebraska.

"The leaves of the herbage at our feet," says Ruskin, "take all kinds
of strange shapes, as if to invite us to examine them. Star-shaped,
heart-shaped, spear-shaped, arrow-shaped, fretted, fringed, cleft,
furrowed, serrated, in whorls, in tufts, in wreaths, in spires,
endlessly expressive, deceptive, fantastic, never the same from
footstalks to blossom, they seem perpetually to tempt our watchfulness,
and take delight in outstripping our wonder." Doubtless light is the
factor with the greatest effect in determining the position of the
leaves on the stem, if not their shape. After plenty of light has been
secured, any aid they may render the flowers in increasing their
attractiveness is gladly rendered. Who shall deny that the brilliant
foliage of the sumacs, the dogwood, and the pokeweed in autumn does not
greatly help them in attracting the attention of migrating birds to
their fruit, whose seeds they wish distributed? Or that the clustered
leaves of the Dwarf Cornel and Culver's-root, among others, do not set
off to great advantage their white flowers which, when seen by an insect
flying overhead, are made doubly conspicuous by the leafy background
formed by the whorl?


Downy False Foxglove

_Gerardia flava (Dasystoma flava)_

_Flowers_--Pale yellow, 1-1/2 to 2 in. long; in showy, terminal, leafy
bracted racemes. Calyx bell-shaped, 5-toothed; corolla funnel form, the
5 lobes spreading, smooth outside, woolly within; 4 stamens in pairs,
woolly; 1 pistil. _Stem:_ Grayish, downy, erect, usually simple, 2 to 4
ft. tall. _Leaves:_ Opposite, lower ones oblong in outline, more or
less irregularly lobed and toothed; upper ones small, entire.

_Preferred Habitat_--Gravelly or sandy soil, dry thickets, open woods.

_Flowering Season_--July-August.

_Distribution_--"Eastern Massachusetts to Ontario and Wisconsin, south
to southern New York, Georgia, and Mississippi" (Britton and Brown).

In the vegetable kingdom, as in the spiritual, all degree of backsliding
sinners may be found, each branded with a mark of infamy according to
its deserts. We see how the dodder vine lost both leaf and roots after
it consented to live wholly by theft of its hard-working host's juices
through suckers that penetrate to the vitals; how the Indian Pipe's
blanched face tells the story of guilt perpetrated under cover of
darkness in the soil below; how the broom-rape and beech-drops lost
their honest green color; and, finally, the foxgloves show us plants
with their faces so newly turned toward the path of perdition, their
larceny so petty, that only the expert in criminal botany cases condemns
them. Like its cousins the gerardias, the Downy False Foxglove is only a
partial parasite, attaching its roots by disks or suckers to the roots
of white oak or witch hazel; not only that, but, quite as frequently,
groping blindly in the dark, it fastens suckers on its own roots,
actually thieving from itself! It is this piratical tendency which makes
transplanting of foxgloves into our gardens so very difficult, even when
lifted with plenty of their beloved vegetable mould. The term false
foxglove, it should be explained, is by no means one of reproach for
dishonesty; it was applied simply to distinguish this group of plants
from the true foxgloves cultivated, not wild, here, which yield
digitalis to the doctors.


Large Purple Gerardia

_Gerardia purpurea_

_Flowers_--Bright purplish pink, deep magenta, or pale to whitish, about
1 in. long and broad, growing along the rigid, spreading branches. Calyx
5-toothed; corolla funnel form, the tube much inflated above and
spreading into 5 unequal, rounded lobes, spotted within, or sometimes
downy; 4 stamens in pairs, the filaments hairy; 1 pistil. _Stem:_ 1 to
2-1/2 ft. high, slender, branches erect or spreading. _Leaves:_
Opposite, very narrow, 1 to 1-1/2 in. long.

_Preferred Habitat_--Low fields and meadows; moist, sandy soil.

_Flowering Season_--August-October.

_Distribution_--Northern United States to Florida, chiefly along
Atlantic Coast.

It is a special pity to gather the gerardias, which, as they grow, seem
to enjoy life to the full, and when picked, to be so miserable they turn
black as they dry. Like their relatives the foxgloves, they are
difficult to transplant except with a large ball of soil, because it is
said they are more or less parasitic, fastening their roots on those of
other plants. When robbery becomes flagrant, Nature brands sinners in
the vegetable kingdom by taking away their color, and perhaps their
leaves, as in the case of the broom-rape and Indian Pipe; but the fair
faces of the gerardias and foxgloves give no hint of the petty thefts
committed under cover of darkness in the soil below.


Scarlet Painted Cup; Indian Paint-brush

_Castilleja coccinea_

_Flowers_--Greenish yellow, enclosed by broad, vermilion, 3-cleft floral
bracts; borne in a terminal spike. Calyx flattened, tubular, cleft above
and below into 2 lobes; usually green, sometimes scarlet; corolla very
irregular, the upper lip long and arched, the short lower lip 3-lobed; 4
unequal stamens; 1 pistil. _Stem:_ 1 to 2 ft. high, usually unbranched,
hairy. _Leaves:_ Lower ones tufted, oblong, mostly uncut; stem leaves
deeply cleft into 3 to 5 segments, sessile.

_Preferred Habitat_--Meadows, prairies, mountains, moist, sandy soil.

_Flowering Season_--May-July.

_Distribution_--Maine to Manitoba, south to Virginia, Kansas, and Texas.

Here and there the meadows show a touch of as vivid a red as that in
which Vibert delighted to dip his brush.

                               "Scarlet tufts
  Are glowing in the green like flakes of fire;
  The wanderers of the prairie know them well,
  And call that brilliant flower the 'painted cup.'"

Thoreau, who objected to this name, thought flame flower a better one,
the name the Indians gave to Oswego Tea; but here the floral bracts, not
the flowers themselves, are on fire. Whole mountainsides in the
Canadian Rockies are ablaze with the Indian Paint-brushes that range in
color there from ivory white and pale salmon through every shade of red
to deep maroon--a gorgeous conflagration of color. Lacking good, honest,
deep green, one suspects from the yellowish tone of calices, stem, and
leaves that this plant is something of a thief. That it still possesses
foliage, proves only petty larceny against it, similar to the
foxglove's. The roots of our painted cup occasionally break in and steal
from the roots of its neighbors such juices as the plant must work over
into vegetable tissue. Therefore it still needs leaves, indispensable
parts of a digestive apparatus. Were it wholly given up to piracy, like
the dodder, or as parasitic as the Indian Pipe, even the green and the
leaf that it hath would be taken away.


Wood Betony; Lousewort; Beefsteak Plant; High Heal-all

_Pedicularis canadensis_

_Flowers_--Greenish yellow and purplish red, in a short, dense spike.
Calyx oblique, tubular, cleft on lower side, and with 2 or 3 scallops on
upper; corolla about 3/4 in. long, 2-lipped, the upper lip arched,
concave, the lower 3-lobed; 4 stamens in pairs; 1 pistil. _Stems:_
Clustered, simple, hairy, 6 to 18 in. high. _Leaves:_ Mostly tufted,
oblong lance-shaped in outline, and pinnately lobed.

_Preferred Habitat_--Dry, open woods and thickets.

_Flowering Season_--April-June.

_Distribution_--Nova Scotia to Florida, westward to Manitoba, Colorado,
and Kansas.

When the Italians wish to extol some one they say, "He has more virtues
than betony," alluding, of course, to the European species, _Betonica
officinalis_, a plant that was worn about the neck and cultivated in
cemeteries during the Middle Ages as a charm against evil spirits; and
prepared into plasters, ointments, syrups, and oils, was supposed to
cure every ill that flesh is heir to. Our commonest American species
fulfils its mission in beautifying roadside banks, and dry open woods
and copses with thick, short spikes of bright flowers, that rise above
large rosettes of coarse, hairy, fern-like foliage. At first, these
flowers, beloved of bumblebees, are all greenish yellow; but as the
spike lengthens with increased bloom, the arched, upper lip of the
blossom becomes dark purplish red, the lower one remains pale yellow,
and the throat turns reddish, while some of the beefsteak color often
creeps into stems and leaves as well.

Farmers once believed that after their sheep fed on the foliage of
this group of plants a skin disease, produced by a certain tiny louse
(_pediculus_), would attack them--hence our innocent betony's
repellent name.




BROOM-RAPE FAMILY (_Orobanchaceae_)


Beech-drops

_Epifagus virginiana_

_Flowers_--Small, dull purple and white, tawny, or brownish striped;
scattered along loose, tiny bracted, ascending branches. _Stem:_
Brownish or reddish tinged, slender, tough, branching above, 6 in. to 2
ft. tall, from brittle, fibrous roots.

_Preferred Habitat_--Under beech, oak, and chestnut trees.

_Flowering Season_--August-October.

_Distribution_--New Brunswick, westward to Ontario and Missouri, south
to the Gulf states.

Nearly related to the broom-rape is this less attractive pirate, a
taller, brownish-purple plant, with a disagreeable odor, whose erect,
branching stem without leaves is still furnished with brownish scales,
the remains of what were once green leaves in virtuous ancestors, no
doubt. But perhaps even these relics of honesty may one day disappear.
Nature brands every sinner somehow; and the loss of green from a plant's
leaves may be taken as a certain indication that theft of another's food
stamps it with this outward and visible sign of guilt. The grains of
green to which foliage owes its color are among the most essential of
products to honest vegetables that have to grub in the soil for a
living, since it is only in such cells as contain it that assimilation
of food can take place. As chlorophyll, or leaf-green, acts only under
the influence of light and air, most plants expose all the leaf surface
possible; but a parasite, which absorbs from others juices already
assimilated, certainly has no use for chlorophyll, nor for leaves
either; and in the broom-rape, beech-drops, and Indian Pipe, among other
thieves, we see leaves degenerated into bracts more or less without
color, according to the extent of their crime. Now they cannot
manufacture carbo-hydrates, even if they would, any more than fungi can.
The beech-drop bears cleistogamous or blind flowers in addition to the
few showy ones needed to attract insects.




MADDER FAMILY (_Rubiaceae_)


Partridge Vine, Twin-berry; Mitchella Vine; Squaw-berry

_Mitchella repens_

_Flowers_--Waxy, white (pink in bud), fragrant, growing in pairs at ends
of the branches. Calyx usually 4-lobed; corolla funnel form, about 1/2
in. long, the 4 spreading lobes bearded within; 4 stamens inserted on
corolla throat; 1 style with 4 stigmas; the ovaries of the twin flowers
united (The style is long when the stamens are short, or _vice versa_.)
_Stem:_ Slender, trailing, rooting at joints, 6 to 12 in. long, with
numerous erect branches. _Leaves:_ Opposite, entire, short petioled,
oval or rounded, evergreen, dark, sometimes white veined. _Fruit:_ A
small, red, edible, double berry-like drupe.

_Preferred Habitat_--Woods; usually, but not always, dry ones.

_Flowering Season_--April-June. Sometimes again in autumn.

_Distribution_--Nova Scotia to the Gulf states, westward to Minnesota
and Texas.
