
                          4. SAND OF THE SEA.

The great abundance of siliceous sand at the bottom of the ocean may in
part be washed down from the siliceous rocks above described, but in
general I suppose it derives its acid only from the vegetable and animal
matter of morasses, which is carried down by floods or by the
atmosphere, and becomes united in the sea with its calcareous base from
shells and coralloids, and thus assumes its crystalline form at the
bottom of the ocean, and is there intermixed with gravel or other
matters washed from the mountains in its vicinity.


                        5. CHERT, OR PETROSILEX.

The rocks of marble are often alternately intermixed with strata of
chert, or coarse flint, and this in beds from one to three feet thick,
as at Ham and Matlock, or of less than the tenth of an inch in
thickness, as a mile or two from Bakewell in the road to Buxton. It is
difficult to conceive in what manner ten or twenty strata of either
limestone or flint, of different shades of white and black, could be
laid quite regularly over each other from sediments or precipitations
from the sea; it appears to me much easier to comprehend, by supposing
with Dr. Hutton, that both the solid rocks of marble and the flint had
been fused by great heat, (or by heat and water,) under immense
pressure; by its cooling or congealing the colouring matter might be
detruded, and form parallel or curvilinean strata, as above explained.

The colouring matter both of limestone and flint was probably owing to
the flesh of peculiar animals, as well as the siliceous acid, which
converted some of the limestone into flint; or to some strata of shell-
fish having been overwhelmed when alive with new materials, while others
dying in their natural situations would lose their fleshy parts, either
by its putrid solution in the water or by its being eaten by other sea-
insects. I have some calcareous fossil shells which contain a black
coaly matter in them, which was evidently the body of the animal, and
others of the same kind filled with spar instead of it. The Labradore
stone has I suppose its colours from the nacre or mother-pearl shells,
from which it was probably produced. And there is a stratum of
calcareous matter about six or eight inches thick at Wingerworth in
Derbyshire over the iron-beds, which is replete with shells of fresh-
water muscles, and evidently obtains its dark colour from them, as
mentioned in note XVI. Many nodules of flint resemble in colour as well
as in form the shell of the echinus or sea-urchin; others resemble some
coralloids both in form and colour; and M. Arduini found in the Monte de
Pancrasio, red flints branching like corals, from whence they seem to
have obtained both their form and their colour. Ferber's Travels in
Italy, p. 42.


                   6. NODULES OF FLINT IN CHALK-BEDS.

As the nodules of flint found in chalk-beds possess no marks of having
been rounded by attrition or solution, I conclude that they have gained
their form as well as their dark colour from the flesh of the shell-fish
from which they had their origin; but which have been so compleatly
fused by heat, or heat and water, as to obliterate all vestiges of the
shell, in the same manner as the nodules of agate and onyx were produced
from parts of vegetables, but which had been so completely fused as to
obliterate all marks of their organization, or as many iron-nodules have
obtained their form and origin from peculiar vegetables.

Some nodules in chalk-beds consist of shells of echini filled up with
chalk, the animal having been dissolved away by putrescence in water, or
eaten by other sea-insects; other shells of echini, in which I suppose
the animal's body remained, are converted into flint but still retain
the form of the shell. Others, I suppose as above, being more completely
fused, have become flint coloured by the animal flesh, but without the
exact form either of the flesh or shell of the animal. Many of these are
hollow within and lined with crystals, like the Scot's-pebbles above
described; but as the colouring matter of animal bodies differs but
little from each other compared with those of vegetables, these flints
vary less in their colours than those above mentioned. At the same time
as they cooled in concentric spheres like the Scot's-pebbles, they often
possess faint rings of colours, and always break in conchoide forms
like them.

This idea of the production of nodules of flint in chalk-beds is
countenanced from the iron which generally appears as these flints
become decomposed by the air; which by uniting with the iron in their
composition reduces it from a vitrescent state to that of calx, and thus
renders it visible. And secondly, by there being no appearance in chalk-
beds of a string or pipe of siliceous matter connecting one nodule with
another, which must have happened if the siliceous matter, or its acid,
had been injected from without according to the idea of Dr. Hutton. And
thirdly, because many of them have very large cavities at their centres,
which should not have happened had they been formed by the injection of
a material from without.

When shells or chalk are thus converted from calcareous to siliceous
matter by the flesh of the animal, the new flint being heavier than the
shell or chalk occupies less space than the materials it was produced
from; this is the cause of frequent cavities within them, where the
whole mass has not been completely fused and pressed together. In
Derbyshire there are masses of coralloid and other shells which have
become siliceous, and are thus left with large vacuities sometimes
within and sometimes on the outside of the remaining form of the shell,
like the French millstones, and I suppose might serve the same purpose;
the gravel of the Derwent is full of specimens of this kind.

Since writing the above I have received a very ingenious account of
chalk-beds from Dr. MENISH of Chelmsford. He distinguishes chalk-beds
into three kinds; such as have been raised from the sea with little
disturbance of their strata, as the cliffs of Dover and Margate, which
he terms _intire_ chalk. Another state of chalk is where it has suffered
much derangement, as the banks of the Thames at Gravesend and Dartford.
And a third state where fragments of chalk have been rounded by water,
which he terms _alluvial_ chalk. In the first of these situations of
chalk he observes, that the flint lies in strata horizontally, generally
in distinct nodules, but that he has observed two instances of solid
plates or strata of flint, from an inch to two inches in thickness,
interposed between the chalk-beds; one of these is in a chalk-bank by
the road side at Berkhamstead, the other in a bank on the road from
Chatham leading to Canterbury. Dr. Menish has further observed, that
many of the echini are crushed in their form, and yet filled with flint,
which has taken the form of the crushed shell, and that though many
flint nodules are hollow, yet that in some echini the siliceum seems to
have enlarged, as it passed from a fluid to a solid state, as it swells
out in a protuberance at the mouth and anus of the shell, and that
though these shells are so filled with flint yet that in many places the
shell itself remains calcareous. These strata of nodules and plates of
flint seem to countenance their origin from the flesh of a stratum of
animals which perished by some natural violence, and were buried in
their shells.


                      7. ANGLES OF SILICEOUS SAND.

In many rocks of siliceous sand the particles retain their angular form,
and in some beds of loose sand, of which there is one of considerable
purity a few yards beneath the marl at Normington about a mile south of
Derby. Other siliceous sands have had their angles rounded off, like the
pebbles in gravel-beds. These seem to owe their globular form to two
causes; one to their attrition against each other, when they may for
centuries have lain at the bottom of the sea, or of rivers; where they
may have been progressively accumulated, and thus progressively at the
same time rubbed upon each other by the dashing of the water, and where
they would be more easily rolled over each other by their gravity being
so much less than in air. This is evidently now going on in the river
Derwent, for though there are no limestone rocks for ten or fifteen
miles above Derby, yet a great part of the river-gravel at Derby
consists of limestone nodules, whose angles are quite worn off in their
descent down the stream.

There is however another cause which must have contributed to round the
angles both of calcareous and siliceous fragments; and that is, their
solubility in water; calcareous earth is perpetually found suspended in
the waters which pass over it; and the earth of flints was observed by
Bergman to be contained in water in the proportion of one grain to a
gallon. Kirwan's Mineralogy, p. 107. In boiling water, however, it is
soluble in much greater proportion, as appears from the siliceous earth
sublimed in the distillation of fluor acid in glass vessels; and from
the basons of calcedony which surrounded the jets of hot water near
mount Heccla in Iceland. Troil on Iceland. It is probable most siliceous
sands or pebbles have at some ages of the world been long exposed to
aqueous steams raised by subterranean fires. And if fragments of stone
were long immersed in a fluid menstrum, their angular parts would be
first dissolved, on account of their greater surface.

Many beds of siliceous gravel are cemented together by a siliceous
cement, and are called breccia; as the plumb-pudding stones of
Hartfordshire, and the walls of a subterraneous temple excavated by Mr.
Curzon, at Hagley near Rugely in Staffordfshire; these may have been
exposed to great heat as they were immersed in water; which water under
great pressure of superincumbent materials may have been rendered red-
hot, as in Papin's digester; and have thus possessed powers of solution
with which we are unacquainted.


                       8. BASALTES AND GRANITES.

Another source of siliceous stones is from the granite, or basaltes, or
porphyries, which are of different hardnesses according to the materials
of their composition, or to the fire they have undergone; such are the
stones of Arthur's-hill near Edinburgh, of the Giant's Causway in
Ireland, and of Charnwood Forest in Leicestershire; the uppermost
stratum of which last seems to have been cracked either by its
elevation, or by its hastily cooling after ignition by the contact of
dews or snows, and thus breaks into angular fragments, such as the
streets of London are paved with; or have had their angles rounded by
attrition or by partial solution; and have thus formed the common paving
stones or bowlers; as well as the gravel, which is often rolled into
strata amid the siliceous sand-beds, which are either formed or
collected in the sea.

In what manner such a mass of crystallized matter as the Giant's Causway
and similar columns of basaltes, could have been raised without other
volcanic appearances, may be a matter not easy to comprehend; but there
is another power in nature besides that of expansile vapour which may
have raised some materials which have previously been in igneous or
aqueous solution; and that is the act of congelation. When the water in
the experiments above related of Major Williams had by congelation
thrown out the plugs from the bomb-shells, a column of ice rose from the
hole of the bomb six or eight inches high. Other bodies I suspect
increase in bulk which crystallize in cooling, as iron and type-metal. I
remember pouring eight or ten pounds of melted brimstone into a pot to
cool and was surprized to see after a little time a part of the fluid
beneath break a hole in the congealed crust above it, and gradually rise
into a promontory several inches high; the basaltes has many marks of
fusion and of crystallization and may thence, as well as many other
kinds of rocks, as of spar, marble, petrosilex, jasper, &c. have been
raised by the power of congelation, a power whose quantity has not yet
been ascertained, and perhaps greater and more universal than that of
vapours expanded by heat. These basaltic columns rise sometimes out of
mountains of granite itself, as mentioned by Dr. Beddoes, (Phil.
Transact. Vol. LXXX.) and as they seem to consist of similar materials
more completely fused, there is still greater reason to believe them to
have been elevated in the cooling or crystallization of the mass. See
note XXIV.




                            NOTE XX.--CLAY.


     _Whence ductile Clays in wide expansion spread,
     Soft as the Cygnet's down, their snow-white bed._

                                            CANTO II. l. 277.


The philosophers, who have attended to the formation of the earth, have
acknowledged two great agents in producing the various changes which the
terraqueous globe has undergone, and these are water and fire. Some of
them have perhaps ascribed too much to one of these great agents of
nature, and some to the other. They have generally agreed that the
stratification of materials could only be produced from sediments or
precipitations, which were previously mixed or dissolved in the sea; and
that whatever effects were produced by fire were performed afterwards.

There is however great difficulty in accounting for the universal
stratification of the solid globe of the earth in this manner, since
many of the materials, which appear in strata, could not have been
suspended in water; as the nodules of flint in chalk-beds, the extensive
beds of shells, and lastly the strata of coal, clay, sand, and iron-ore,
which in most coal-countries lie from five to seven times alternately
stratified over each other, and none of them are soluble in water. Add
to this if a solution of them or a mixture of them in water could be
supposed, the cause of that solution must cease before a precipitation
could commence.

1. The great masses of lava, under the various names of granite,
porphyry, toadstone, moor-stone, rag, and slate, which constitute the
old world, may have acquired the stratification, which some of them
appear to possess, by their having been formed by successive eruptions
of a fluid mass, which at different periods of antient time arose from
volcanic shafts and covered each other, the surface of the interior mass
of lava would cool and become solid before the superincumbent stratum
was poured over it; to the same cause may be ascribed their different
compositions and textures, which are scarcely the same in any two parts
of the world.

2. The stratifications of the great masses of limestone, which were
produced from sea-shells, seem to have been formed by the different
times at which the innumerable shells were produced and deposited. A
colony of echini, or madrepores, or cornua ammonis, lived and perished
in one period of time; in another a new colony of either similar or
different shells lived and died over the former ones, producing a
stratum of more recent shell over a stratum of others which had began to
petrify or to become marble; and thus from unknown depths to what are
now the summits of mountains the limestone is disposed in strata of
varying solidity and colour. These have afterwards undergone variety of
changes by their solution and deposition from the water in which they
were immersed, or from having been exposed to great heat under great
pressure, according to the ingenious theory of Dr. Hutton. Edinb.
Transact. Vol. I. See Note XVI.

3. In most of the coal-countries of this island there are from five to
seven beds of coal stratified with an equal number of beds, though of
much greater thickness, of clay and sandstone, and occasionally of iron-
ores. In what manner to account for the stratification of these
materials seems to be a problem of greater difficulty. Philosophers have
generally supposed that they have been arranged by the currents of the
sea; but considering their insolubility in water, and their almost
similar specific gravity, an accumulation of them in such distinct beds
from this cause is altogether inconceiveable, though some coal-countries
bear marks of having been at some time immersed beneath the waves and
raised again by subterranean fires.

The higher and lower parts of morasses were necessarily produced at
different periods of time, see Note XVII. and would thus originally be
formed in strata of different ages. For when an old wood perished, and
produced a morass, many centuries would elapse before another wood could
grow and perish again upon the same ground, which would thus produce a
new stratum of morass over the other, differing indeed principally in
its age, and perhaps, as the timber might be different, in the
proportions of its component parts.

Now if we suppose the lowermost stratum of a morass become ignited, like
fermenting hay, (after whatever could be carried away by solution in
water was gone,) what would happen? Certainly the inflammable part, the
oil, sulphur, or bitumen, would burn away, and be evaporated in air; and
the fixed parts would be left, as clay, lime, and iron; while some of
the calcareous earth would join with the siliceous acid, and produce
sand, or with the argillaceous earth, and produce marl. Thence after
many centuries another bed would take fire, but with less degree of
ignition, and with a greater body of morass over it, what then would
happen? The bitumen and sulphur would rise and might become condensed
under an impervious stratum, which might not be ignited, and there form
coal of different purities according to its degree of fluidity, which
would permit some of the clay to subside through it into the place from
which it was sublimed.

Some centuries afterwards another similar process might take place, and
either thicken the coal-bed, or produce a new clay-bed, or marl, or
sand, or deposit iron upon it, according to the concomitant
circumstances above mentioned.

I do not mean to contend that a few masses of some materials may not
have been rolled together by currents, when the mountains were much more
elevated than at present, and in consequence the rivers broader and more
rapid, and the storms of rain and wind greater both in quantity and
force. Some gravel-beds may have been thus washed from the mountains;
and some white clay washed from morasses into valleys beneath them; and
some ochres of iron dissolved and again deposited by water; and some
calcareous depositions from water, (as the bank for instance on which
stand the houses at Matlock-bath;) but these are of small extent or
consequence compared to the primitive rocks of granite or porpyhry which
form the nucleus of the earth, or to the immense strata of limestone
which crust over the greatest part of this granite or porphyry; or
lastly to the very extensive beds of clay, marl, sandstone, coal, and
iron, which were probably for many millions of years the only parts of
our continents and islands, which were then elevated above the level of
the sea, and which on that account became covered with vegetation, and
thence acquired their later or superincumbent strata, which constitute,
what some have termed, the new world.

There is another source of clay, and that of the finest kind, from
decomposed granite, this is of a snowy white and mixed with mining
particles of mica, of this kind is an earth from the country of
Cherokees. Other kinds are from less pure lavas; Mr. Ferber asserts that
the sulphurous steams from Mount Vesuvius convert the lava into clay.

"The lavas of the antient Solfatara volcano have been undoubtedly of a
vitreous nature, and these appear at present argillaceous. Some
fragments of this lava are but half or at one side changed into clay,
which either is viscid or ductile, or hard and stoney. Clays by fire are
deprived of their coherent quality, which cannot be restored to them by
pulverization, nor by humectation. But the sulphureous Solfatara steams
restore it, as may be easily observed on the broken pots wherein they
gather the sal ammoniac; though very well baked and burnt at Naples they
are mollified again by the acid steams into a viscid clay which keeps
the former fire-burnt colour." Travels in Italy, p. 156.




                          NOTE XXI.--ENAMELS.


     _Smear'd her huge dragons with metallic hues,
     With golden purples, and cobaltic blues;_

                                            CANTO II. l. 287.


The fine bright purples or rose colours which we see on china cups are
not producible with any other material except gold, manganese indeed
gives a purple but of a very different kind.

In Europe the application of gold to these purposes appears to be of
modern invention. Cassius's discovery of the precipitate of gold by tin,
and the use of that precipitate for colouring glass and enamels, are now
generally known, but though the precipitate with tin be more successful
in producing the ruby glass, or the colourless glass which becomes red
by subsequent ignition, the tin probably contributing to prevent the
gold from separating, (which it is very liable to do during the fusion;
yet, for enamels, the precipitates made by alcaline salts answer equally
well, and give a finer red, the colour produced by the tin precipitate
being a bluish purple, but with the others a rose red. I am informed
that some of our best artists prefer aurum fulminans, mixing it, before
it has become dry, with the white composition or enamel flux; when once
it is divided by the other matter, it is ground with great safety, and
without the least danger of explosion, whether moist or dry. The colour
is remarkably improved and brought forth by long grinding, which
accordingly makes an essential circumstance in the process.

The precipitates of gold, and the colcothar or other red preparations of
iron, are called _tender_ colours. The heat must be no greater than is
just sufficient to make the enamel run upon the piece, for if greater,
the colours will be destroyed or changed to a different kind. When the
vitreous matter has just become fluid it seems as if the coloured
metallic calx remained barely _intermixed_ with it, like a coloured
powder of exquisite tenuity suspended in water: but by stronger fire the
calx is _dissolved_, and metallic colours are altered by _solution_ in
glass as well as in acids or alcalies.

The Saxon mines have till very lately almost exclusively supplied the
rest of Europe with cobalt, or rather with its preparations, zaffre and
smalt, for the exportation of the ore itself is there a capital crime.
Hungary, Spain, Sweden, and some other parts of the continent, are now
said to afford cobalts equal to the Saxon, and specimens have been
discovered in our own island, both in Cornwall and in Scotland; but
hitherto in no great quantity.

Calces of cobalt and of copper differ very materially from those above
mentioned in their application for colouring enamels. In those the calx
has previously acquired the intended colour, a colour which bears a red
heat without injury, and all that remains is to fix it on the piece by a
vitreous flux. But the blue colour of cobalt, and the green or bluish
green of copper, are _produced_ by vitrification, that is, by _solution_
in the glass, and a strong fire is necessary for their perfection. These
calces therefore, when mixed with the enamel flux, are melted in
crucibles, once or oftener, and the deep coloured opake glass, thence
resulting, is ground into unpalpable powder, and used for enamel. One
part of either of these calces is put to ten, sixteen, or twenty parts
of the flux, according to the depth of colour required. The heat of the
enamel kiln is only a full red, such as is marked on Mr. Wedgwood's
thermometer 6 degrees. It is therefore necessary that the flux be so
adjusted as to melt in that low heat. The usual materials are flint, or
flint-glass, with a due proportion of red-led, or borax, or both, and
sometimes a little tin calx to give opacity.

_Ka-o-lin_ is the name given by the Chinese to their porcelain clay, and
_pe-tun-tse_ to the other ingredient in their China ware. Specimens of
both these have been brought into England, and found to agree in quality
with some of our own materials. Kaolin is the very same with the clay
called in Cornwall [Transcriber's note: word missing] and the petuntse
is a granite similar to the Cornish moorstone. There are differences,
both in the Chinese petuntses, and the English moorstones; all of them
contain micaceous and quartzy particles, in greater or less quantity,
along with feltspat, which last is the essential ingredient for the
porcelain manufactory. The only injurious material commonly found in
them is iron, which discolours the ware in proportion to its quantity,
and which our moorstones are perhaps more frequently tainted with than
the Chinese. Very fine porcelain has been made from English materials
but the nature of the manufacture renders the process precarious and the
profit hazardous; for the semivitrification, which constitutes
porcelain, is necessarily accompanied with a degree of softness, or
semifusion, so that the vessels are liable to have their forms altered
in the kiln, or to run together with any accidental augmentations of the
fire.




                       NOTE XXII.--PORTLAND VASE.


     _Or bid Mortality rejoice or mourn
     O'er the fine forms of Portland's mystic urn._

                                            CANTO II. l. 319.


The celebrated funereal vase, long in possession of the Barberini
family, and lately purchased by the Duke of Portland for a thousand
guineas, is about ten inches high and six in diameter in the broadest
part. The figures are of most exquisite workmanship in bas relief of
white opake glass, raised on a ground of deep blue glass, which appears
black except when held against the light. Mr. Wedgwood is of opinion
from many circumstances that the figures have been made by cutting away
the external crust of white opake glass, in the manner the finest
