especially suitable for blocking narrow rocky valleys, and as such
situations must, from the character of the ground, be liable to sudden
and high floods, great care is necessary to make sufficient provision for
overflow.

When of masonry, the stones should be bonded, not merely as they would be
in an ordinary vertical wall, where the direction of the stress is
perpendicular, but each course should be knit in with that above and
below it in a somewhat similar manner to what is termed "random" work.
And lastly, if hydraulic mortar be used, a sufficient time should elapse
after construction before being subjected to strain, or in other words,
before water is allowed to rise in the reservoir. For this latter reason,
and also the liability to damage by sudden floods during the progress of
the works, dams of Portland cement concrete, on account of their quick
consolidation, possess advantages over those of hydraulic masonry apart
from the necessity in the latter instance of constant supervision to
prevent "scamping" by leaving chinks and spaces vacant, especially where
large masses of stone or Cyclopean rubble are used.

Again, should the dam be drowned by flood during its erection, no harm
would accrue were it composed of Portland cement concrete, whereas should
it be of hydraulic mortar masonry, the wall would probably be destroyed
or, at all events, considerably injured by the mortar being washed out of
the joints. Portland cement, however, is only suitable for situations
where the foundation is absolutely firm, as, should there be the
slightest settlement, fissures would certainly be produced.

As regards foundations, the dam of the Puentes reservoir in Spain is
somewhat remarkable--see Fig. 12. Its height is 164 ft., and the profile
or cross section is of precisely the same character as that of the
Alicante dam, the latter being 135 ft. in height, 65 ft. wide at the
crest, and 65 ft. at the base, and erected about 300 years ago. At the
Puentes dam the flanks of the valley were reliable, but, as must be
frequently the case in such situations, the bed of the valley was
composed to a great depth of gravel, _debris_, and shaky strata. The
difficulty was overcome by throwing an arch, or arches, across the
valley, the abutments being formed by the solid rock on each side, and
building the dam upon this arching and filling in below the latter down
to a sufficient depth with walling.

Bearing in mind the sudden and great floods to which dams constructed in
such situations must be subjected, and, if the valley be very narrow, the
probability that sufficient space at the side for a by-wash will be
difficult to obtain, it would seem reasonable that in the calculation for
their section allowance should be made for the possible condition of the
whole length of the dam being converted into a weir, over which the
waters may flow without risk of injury to the dam, to a depth of, say, at
least twice that ever probable.

The topping of dams by floods is not uncommon, and if the extra strain
thus induced has not been allowed for, their destruction is nearly
certain, as instanced in more than one case in Algeria, where, although
the average rainfall is only 15 in. yearly, a depth of 61/4 in., or more
than one-third of the annual total, has been known to fall in twenty-four
hours.

The Habra dam--see Fig. No. 13--completed in 1871, was destroyed by a
sudden flood of this kind in December, 1881. This reservoir, with a
storage capacity of 6,600,000,000 gallons, was intended for the
irrigation of a cultivated bordering on the Mediterranean and the storage
of floods. The height of the dam was 116.7 ft. and was provided with a
by-wash of 394 ft. in length, and outlets for irrigation formed by four
cast iron pipes of 311/2 in. diameter through the dam. It was composed of
rubble set in hydraulic mortar, the latter composed of two parts of sand
to one of hydraulic lime.

For getting rid of the large deposits of sand to which all reservoirs in
that country are liable, two scouring outlets were provided of the same
description as those in the old Moorish dams. The profile was calculated
from Delocre's formula, and was correct in this respect, supposing the
by-wash to have been sufficient. But as it was otherwise, and the flood
swept over the crest to the depth of about 3 ft., the enormous extra
strain thus induced overthrew the dam and caused the destruction of
several villages and the death of 209 persons. It must be mentioned that
when the reservoir was filling, the water percolated through the masonry,
giving the face wall the appearance of a huge filter, which at the time
was attributed to the porous nature of the sandstone used in
construction, but which more probably was due to the washing of the green
mortar out of the joints.

At the Hamiz dam, also in Algeria, the water was admitted in 1884, but it
showed immediately signs of weakness, so that the water had to be run out
and an immense retaining wall erected to strengthen the main dam. Algeria
seems to have been singularly unfortunate as regards the success of works
of this description. Water was admitted to the Cheurfas reservoir in
January, 1885, and it at once began to make its way through permeable
ground at one end of the dam. The flushing sluice in the deepest part of
the dam had become jammed, so that the pressure could not be relieved,
and in February 30 ft. length of the dam was carried away, causing a
flood in the river below. At some distance down stream was the Sig
reservoir. The flood rushing down, topped this dam by 18 ft. and
overthrew it also.

Allusion has been made to provision for scouring out sand and deposit,
especially in the dams of Algeria and of Spain. The amount of sand, etc.,
brought down by the floods is something enormous, and the question of the
best means of getting rid of it has occupied much attention. In the old
Moorish reservoirs the flushing gallery, piercing the lower part of the
dam, was closed by iron doors on the down stream face and blocked with
timber at the upper end. When required to be flushed out, laborers passed
through the gallery and broke down the timber barrier, the silt forming a
wall sufficiently thick to resist the pressure of the water for the time
being, and allow of the retreat of the Forlorn Hope--if the latter had
luck--before giving way.

One method adopted in Algeria, which has the advantage of permitting the
sediment to be utilized together with the irrigation, this sediment being
very fertilizing, is to pump air down through hose extending to the
bottom of the reservoir, the pumps being actuated by steam power or
turbine, and the sediment thus stirred up and run off with the water
through the irrigation pipes. As an example of one of the early types of
masonry dams in France, reference may be made to Fig. 13, on which is
shown an elevation and cross section of the Lampy dam, forming a large
reservoir for feeding the Languedoc canal.

I will now refer to some of the most notable masonry dams in existence,
commencing with France, where perhaps the finest is that known as the
Furens, in connection with the St. Etienne Water Works, constructed
between the years 1859-66, and designed by the engineers Graiff and
Grandchamps. It is curved in plan, struck with a radius of 828 ft. from a
center on the down stream side, and founded upon compact granite, the
footings being carried down to a depth of 3 ft. 3 in. below the surface
of the rock. It is of rubble masonry, in hydraulic mortar, carried up in
courses of 5 ft. in depth.

The height is 170 ft. on the up stream side and 184 ft. high on the lower
side, with a breadth of 9 ft. 8 in. at the crest and 110 ft. at the base,
and the cross section is so designed that the pressure is nearly constant
in all parts, and nowhere exceeds 93 lb. to the square inch--13,392 lb.
to the square foot. The contents is equal to 52,000 cubic yards of
masonry, and the cost of erection was L36,080. The capacity of the
reservoir is equal to 352,000,000 gallons.

The reservoir discharges into two tunnels (see Fig. 11), driven one above
the other through a hill into an adjacent valley. The lower tunnel
contains three cast iron pipes, with a masonry stopping of 36 ft. long.
Two of these pipes are 16 in. diameter, with regulating valves, and
discharge into a well, from whence the water can be directed for the town
supply or into the river. The third pipe, of 81/2 in. diameter, is always
open, and serves to remove any deposit in the reservoir, and to furnish a
constant supply for the use of manufacturers.

The author drew attention to the difference in the section of the Furens
dam, Fig. 11, as compared with that of Alicante, and of Puentes, which is
similar to the latter. These two last illustrate the ancient Moorish
type, and the former that of the present day. The Gileppe dam at
Verviers, in Belgium, Fig. 14, although quite recently erected, viz.,
between the years 1869 and 1875, differs very much from the Furens type,
in so far as it is of very much larger sectional area in proportion to
its height, but this is accounted for by the desire of the engineer, M.
Bodson, to overcome the opposition to its construction, and meet the
objections and combat the fears of those whose interests--and those
serious ones, no doubt--would be affected in the event of its rupture,
the body of water stored being 2,701,687,000 gallons, or about eight
times as much as the capacity of the Furens reservoir.

In addition to this, there was another reason, which was quite sufficient
in itself to account for the extra substantiality of the dam. This
reservoir is for supplying water to the cloth factories of Verviers, on
the Belgian-German frontier. It is curved in plan to a radius of 1,640
ft., with a length of 771 ft., and the additional strength of the
structure due to so flat a curve is probably slight.

It is built of rubble masonry, with ashlar facework, laid in hydraulic
mortar. The total amount of masonry is 325,000 cubic yards. There are two
weirs, at a level of 6 ft. below the crest, each 82 ft. wide. The total
height, including the foundations, which are carried down from 3 ft. to 5
ft. into the rock, is 154 ft., and the breadth of the crest, which
carries a road, is 49 ft. 3 in., and at the base 216 ft. The outlet pipes
are carried through tunnels, which are driven on the curve into the hill
side a considerable distance clear of each end of the dam.

Another very important structure is the Villar dam, Fig. 15, in
connection with the water supply of Madrid, and situated on the river
Lozoya. The storage capacity of this reservoir is very considerable,
viz., 4,400,000,000, or nearly thirteen times as great as that of Furens.
The height of the dam is 162 ft., with a breadth of 14 ft. 9 in. at the
crest. It is built on the curve to a radius of 440 ft., and the length of
the dam measured along the crest is 546 ft., of which 197 ft. is by-wash,
thus describing nearly one-fifth of a circle, and consequently well
designed to resist pressure. The dam is built of rubble masonry in
hydraulic mortar, and cost L80,556.

The Stony Creek lower reservoir dam of the Geelong water supply, Fig. 16,
colony of Victoria, is interesting as being constructed of concrete, in
the proportion of 1 to 81/2. Its erection occupied eighteen months, and
cost about L18,000. It is curved in plan to a radius of 300 ft., and the
greatest depth or head of water is 52 ft. 4 in. The width at the crest is
only 2 ft. 8 in., although surmounted by a heavy coping of bluestone 3
ft. 3 in. broad and 1 ft. 9 in. deep. There being no facility for making
a by-wash at the side, the center of the dam is dished to form a weir 30
ft. long. There are both outlet and scour pipes, and valves of 2 ft.
diameter, and the capacity of the reservoir is 143,145,834 gallons.

The Paramatta dam, in New South Wales, built of masonry in hydraulic
mortar, is another instance of a dam built on the curve, and which has
resisted a flood of water 4 ft. in depth over the crest; and in the case
of a dam of about 40 ft. high across the river Wyre, in connection with
the Lancaster Water Works, made of cement concrete in proportion of 4 to
1, there has, according to Mr. Mansergh, frequently been a depth of 5 ft.
of flow over it. This dam is built to a radius of 80 ft. only, and as it
measures 100 ft. along the crest, must include about the fifth of a
circle.

There now remain only two other examples of masonry dams, the first being
that in connection with the Liverpool water supply, and known as the
Vyrnwy dam, Fig. 17, this being thrown across a stream of that name in
North Wales. It is now under construction, and when completed will
impound an area of 1,115 acres.

The dam will be 1,255 ft. long, and formed of Cyclopean rubble set in
cement mortar, and the interstices or spaces between the large masses of
stone, which are rough hewn and not squared, are filled with cement
concrete. The proportion of the cement mortar is 21/2 to 1. These masses of
stone weigh from two to eight tons each, and it is expected that the wall
will be of a most solid description, as great care is being taken to fill
up all spaces. The face next to the water is cemented. The area of the
cross section shown on the diagram, which is at one of the deepest
points, is 8,972 square feet, and the height from foundation to flood
level is 129 ft., the breadth at the base being 117 ft. 9 in.

The existing dam of the New York water supply, Fig. 18, known as the
Croton reservoir, is shown on the diagram. Its capacity is 364,000,000
gallons and the area 279 acres. The height is 78 ft. and width at crest 8
ft. 6 in., and is built of masonry in hydraulic mortar. The face walls
are of stone laid in courses of 14 in. to 26 in., and are vertical on the
up stream side, and with a batter of 1 in 21/2 on the down. The hearting is
of concrete for a depth of 45 ft. from the top, and the remaining depth
is in Cyclopean rubble.

At Fig. 19 is shown the section of the Quaker Bridge dam, which when
completed will be the largest structure of the kind in existence. It is
situated on the Croton River, which is a tributary of the Hudson, about
four miles below the present Croton dam. The length will be 1,300 ft. and
the height 170 ft. above the river bed, or 277 ft. above the foundation.
The water by-wash is 7 ft. below the crest, and the dam is 26 ft. broad
at the crest and 216 ft. at the base. The capacity of the reservoir will
be 32,000,000,000 gallons, or nearly a hundred times as great as that of
Furens. The geological formation at the site is sienitic gneiss. The cost
of the dam is estimated at L500,000.

[Illustration: TYPICAL MASONRY AND EARTHWORK DAMS OF THE WORLD.]

The accompanying table gives the pressures to which various dams are
subjected, and it may be noted with regard to the weight of water,
generally assumed as 62.4 lb. per cubic foot, that it will, in some
districts, in time of flood, carry so much matter in suspension as to be
increased to as much as 75 lb. weight, or an addition of 20 per cent.,
which, it may be easily imagined, will affect the conditions of stability
very seriously.

TABLE OF MAXIMUM PRESSURES.

                      Lb. per sq. in.
Gileppe (Verviers).          88
Furens (St. Etienne).        93
Puentes.                    112
De Ban.                     113
St. Chamond.                114
Alicante.                   154
Hamiz (Algeria)--failed.    157
Habra (Algeria)--failed.    185

A diagram comparing the section derived from Molesworth's formula and
those of Furens, Gileppe, Vyrnwy, and Quaker Bridge, is given at Fig. 20,
the limit of pressure assumed for the masonry being 93 lb. per square
inch, which is that of the Furens, the Gileppe being 88.

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW DREDGING MACHINERY.


We illustrate the new dredger Ajax, recently built for Mr. Geo. F. Smith,
of Stockton, Cal.

The dredger has now been working for two weeks at Wakefield, and, we are
informed, is giving entire satisfaction; having been repeatedly timed to
be discharging clay at the rate of 220 cubic yards per hour.

[Illustration: THE NEW DREDGER AJAX.]

The Ajax is almost a duplicate of the last dredger designed by Mr. Ferris
for levee building on Roberts Island, with such modifications and
improvements as have suggested themselves in the two years it has been
working.

The hull, oval in plan, is 36 ft. 10 in. by 60 ft. over all; it has four
solid fore and aft bulkheads, and a well hole 5 x 12 ft. at one end for
the bucket ladder.

The main engine is 10 x 24, operating, by bevel gearing and a 31/2 in.
vertical shaft, a 4 sided upper tumbler with 21 in. sides. This engine
works also a gypsy shaft for swinging, and the conveyer that carries the
mud ashore. A steam hoist with 6 x 11 engines raises and lowers the
bucket ladder. The buckets, at 4 foot centers, have a struck capacity of
5 cubic feet, and are speeded to deliver from 18 to 20 a minute,
according to the character of the material being handled. They are of
boiler iron, with a 5 in. steel nosing. The links are of wrought iron,
with cast bushings. The lower tumbler is hexagonal, on a 4 in. shaft.

The conveyer, projecting 72 ft. from the center of the boat, consists of
a 5 ply rubber belt 36 in. wide; running over iron drums at each end and
intermediate iron friction rollers at 3 foot centers. Ratchet and pinion
on each side of conveyer ladder give means for taking up the slack of the
belt and adjusting the drums to maintain them parallel.

This conveyer is the important feature of the dredge. It is entirely
satisfactory in its working and delivers its material, as nearly as may
be, in a dry state upon the levee. It was feared the rubber belt would be
shortlived, but a 4 ply belt ran continuously for over two years on the
Roberts Island dredge before it needed replacing.

The boiler is of the marine type, 52 in. by 10 ft. 6 in., with 3 in.
tubes and 14 in. flues; and burns about 1,400 lb. of steam coal in a day
of 12 hours. There are three pumps aboard--a hand force pump for washing
boiler, a plunger pump for boiler feed, and an Evans steam pump to throw
a jet of water into the delivery hopper when digging in any very
tenacious material. All three are connected with the boiler.

Water tanks below deck serve to trim the boat and furnish a supply for
the boiler. The dredger cuts by swinging on a center spud 16 in. in
diameter, and moves forward from 8 to 10 ft. at each fleet.

The Roberts Island dredger, of which the Ajax is an improved copy,
handles steadily 700 yards per day of 12 hours, in the stiffest and most
tenacious clay in which it has been worked; and ranges from that average
to 1,500 yards per day in soft, peaty mud.

The Ajax was built by Farrington, Hyatt & Co., of the Stockton Iron
Works.

This type of dredger can be built for about $12,500, and we are informed
can be relied on for a monthly average of 26,000 yards in any material
met with in the overflowed lands near Stockton, delivered 50 ft. ashore,
at a height of 10 or 12 ft. above the ground line.--_Min. and Sci.
Press_.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FLEXIBLE GIRDER TRAMWAY.


This is an ingenious proposition for utilizing a modification of the wire
tramway system for overcoming obstacles (while retaining the ordinary
wire tramway or any light railway on other parts of the line), made by
Mr. Charles Ball, of London.

The flexible girder tramway is an improved system of constructing a
modification of the well known and extensively used rope or wire tramway,
and it is claimed that it will revolutionize the transport of the
products of industrial operations from the place of production to the
works or manufactory, railway station, shipping ports, or place of
consumption; and that in the result the introduction of the flexible
girder tramway will in many cases enable profits to be earned in
businesses which have hitherto been unremunerative. It is declared to be
at once simple, cheap, durable, and efficient. The improvement consists
in the employment, in addition to the usual tram wire (a hempen rope, a
wire rope, or a metallic or other rod), along which the load is
transported, of a second or suspension wire or rope to which the tram
wire is connected by tension rods or their equivalent at intervals
between the rigid supports or piers, the object being to diminish or
distribute the sagging or deflection of the tram wire, and thus lessen
the steepness of the gradients over which the load has to be transported.
The combined tram wire, tension rods, suspension wire, and accessories
are, for convenience, designated a "flexible girder."

Another improvement consists in using, when a double line is employed,
stretchers or crossheads to keep the flexible girders nearly parallel to
each other, so that when necessary the load to be transported may be
suspended from or borne by both tram wires jointly or simultaneously,
thus permitting a load of greater weight than that for which each single
tram wire is intended to be carried over the system. One indisputable
claim for confidence in the flexible girder principle is said to be that,
although the peculiar combination of parts constitutes a striking and
valuable novelty, it contains nothing that has not been proved by the
experience of years--nay, generations--to be useful, economic, and
reliable. The usual practice followed in erecting suspension bridges is
applicable in mounting the line, and the carriers, supports, and
carriages may be of any of the usual forms. For the rapid removal of
limited loads wire tramways are in universal favor, and are recognized
not only as very economic and quickly constructed, but also as being in
many cases the only means of transport available except by the adoption
of elaborate and costly engineering works.

It has, it seems, been suggested by some who have examined the
construction of the flexible girder tramway for mineral and produce
traffic that it would be an additional advantage if arrangements were
made for the carriage of small loads--half a dozen or so--of passengers,
the primary intention being to carry the workpeople backward and forward
between comparatively inaccessible mines, works, or plantations and a
neighboring village or town. Compared with every other system where the
line over which the load travels is elevated, the flexible girder tramway
is claimed to possess many advantages--the center of gravity is kept well
down, the liability of the wheels leaving the line is reduced to the
minimum, the gradients are the easiest that can be obtained, there is an
entire absence of jolting and extremely little vibration, and the motion
is altogether smooth and regular; yet it is very questionable whether,
when human life is at stake, any but an ordinary ground line should be
relied upon. A living freight is far more liable than a dead freight to
move during the journey; and as the safety of all overhead lines depends
upon what is scientifically designated "unstable equilibrium," the
flexible girder tramway is not recommendable for passenger lines,
although it can, of course, be fitted for passenger traffic, a suitable
vehicle and ten or a dozen good stout workmen coming well within a
two-ton load, which can be readily carried.

[Illustration: BALL'S FLEXIBLE WIRE TRAMWAY.]

Rope traction or animal traction--practically speaking--is alone
available for wire tramways (that is to say, if the trains are each to be
propelled by its own locomotive--whether steam, springs, or
electricity--the cost of construction and maintenance becomes so serious
that overhead lines, however well designed, are no longer economic); and
experience gained with rope traction in numerous collieries in the North
of England and Lancashire districts--where it is highly appreciated--has
shown that, all circumstances considered, the endless rope is preferable.
The chief objection urged against wire tramways as hitherto constructed
has been that the "sag" of the rope has sometimes caused annoyance to
those using the property passed over, and has always added much to the
cost of traction, owing to the increased power required for moving the
load; this has also resulted in vastly increased wear and tear and the
rapid deterioration and destruction of the wire rope. The flexible girder
system so reduces the "sag" that the maximum economy and durability are
obtained, and the gradients over which the load has to travel can be made
as easy and regular as those upon an ordinary railway. This advantage
will be the more readily appreciated when it is considered that with a
given load on a gradient of 1 in 30 the resistance due to gravity alone
is 200 per cent. greater than on a gradient of 1 in 150, and that the
retardation and wear and tear due to friction, greater curves, and
imperfections increase still more rapidly with increase of gradient, soon
rendering the old sagging wire line practically worthless.

To construct an entire line of flexible girders would be not only
unnecessary, but so costly as to neutralize any advantage which it may
possess, yet for surmounting occasional obstacles the claim made for
it--that it will sometimes permit of a line otherwise impracticable being
cheaply made--seems justified. One can readily imagine a light narrow
gauge line costing L1,000 per mile being laid, for example, between a
