life twenty times before reaching it is but the truth; but he managed
so well that the creature joined the honey-cakes in his bag.  We were
now obliged to descend toward the shore, the crest becoming
impracticable.  Above us the crater seemed to gape like the mouth of a
well.  From this place the sky could be clearly seen, and clouds,
dissipated by the west wind, leaving behind them, even on the summit of
the mountain, their misty remnants--certain proof that they were only
moderately high, for the volcano did not rise more than eight hundred
feet above the level of the ocean.  Half an hour after the Canadian's
last exploit we had regained the inner shore.  Here the flora was
represented by large carpets of marine crystal, a little umbelliferous
plant very good to pickle, which also bears the name of pierce-stone
and sea-fennel. Conseil gathered some bundles of it.  As to the fauna,
it might be counted by thousands of crustacea of all sorts, lobsters,
crabs, spider-crabs, chameleon shrimps, and a large number of shells,
rockfish, and limpets.  Three-quarters of an hour later we had finished
our circuitous walk and were on board.  The crew had just finished
loading the sodium, and the Nautilus could have left that instant.  But
Captain Nemo gave no order.  Did he wish to wait until night, and leave
the submarine passage secretly?  Perhaps so.  Whatever it might be, the
next day, the Nautilus, having left its port, steered clear of all land
at a few yards beneath the waves of the Atlantic.



CHAPTER XI

THE SARGASSO SEA

That day the Nautilus crossed a singular part of the Atlantic Ocean.
No one can be ignorant of the existence of a current of warm water
known by the name of the Gulf Stream.  After leaving the Gulf of
Florida, we went in the direction of Spitzbergen.  But before entering
the Gulf of Mexico, about 45 deg. of N. lat., this current divides into
two arms, the principal one going towards the coast of Ireland and
Norway, whilst the second bends to the south about the height of the
Azores; then, touching the African shore, and describing a lengthened
oval, returns to the Antilles.  This second arm--it is rather a collar
than an arm--surrounds with its circles of warm water that portion of
the cold, quiet, immovable ocean called the Sargasso Sea, a perfect
lake in the open Atlantic: it takes no less than three years for the
great current to pass round it.  Such was the region the Nautilus was
now visiting, a perfect meadow, a close carpet of seaweed, fucus, and
tropical berries, so thick and so compact that the stem of a vessel
could hardly tear its way through it.  And Captain Nemo, not wishing to
entangle his screw in this herbaceous mass, kept some yards beneath the
surface of the waves.  The name Sargasso comes from the Spanish word
"sargazzo" which signifies kelp.  This kelp, or berry-plant, is the
principal formation of this immense bank.  And this is the reason why
these plants unite in the peaceful basin of the Atlantic.  The only
explanation which can be given, he says, seems to me to result from the
experience known to all the world.  Place in a vase some fragments of
cork or other floating body, and give to the water in the vase a
circular movement, the scattered fragments will unite in a group in the
centre of the liquid surface, that is to say, in the part least
agitated.  In the phenomenon we are considering, the Atlantic is the
vase, the Gulf Stream the circular current, and the Sargasso Sea the
central point at which the floating bodies unite.

I share Maury's opinion, and I was able to study the phenomenon in the
very midst, where vessels rarely penetrate.  Above us floated products
of all kinds, heaped up among these brownish plants; trunks of trees
torn from the Andes or the Rocky Mountains, and floated by the Amazon
or the Mississippi; numerous wrecks, remains of keels, or ships'
bottoms, side-planks stove in, and so weighted with shells and
barnacles that they could not again rise to the surface.  And time will
one day justify Maury's other opinion, that these substances thus
accumulated for ages will become petrified by the action of the water
and will then form inexhaustible coal-mines--a precious reserve
prepared by far-seeing Nature for the moment when men shall have
exhausted the mines of continents.

In the midst of this inextricable mass of plants and sea weed, I
noticed some charming pink halcyons and actiniae, with their long
tentacles trailing after them, and medusae, green, red, and blue.

All the day of the 22nd of February we passed in the Sargasso Sea,
where such fish as are partial to marine plants find abundant
nourishment.  The next, the ocean had returned to its accustomed
aspect.  From this time for nineteen days, from the 23rd of February to
the 12th of March, the Nautilus kept in the middle of the Atlantic,
carrying us at a constant speed of a hundred leagues in twenty-four
hours.  Captain Nemo evidently intended accomplishing his submarine
programme, and I imagined that he intended, after doubling Cape Horn,
to return to the Australian seas of the Pacific.  Ned Land had cause
for fear.  In these large seas, void of islands, we could not attempt
to leave the boat.  Nor had we any means of opposing Captain Nemo's
will.  Our only course was to submit; but what we could neither gain by
force nor cunning, I liked to think might be obtained by persuasion.
This voyage ended, would he not consent to restore our liberty, under
an oath never to reveal his existence?--an oath of honour which we
should have religiously kept.  But we must consider that delicate
question with the Captain.  But was I free to claim this liberty?  Had
he not himself said from the beginning, in the firmest manner, that the
secret of his life exacted from him our lasting imprisonment on board
the Nautilus?  And would not my four months' silence appear to him a
tacit acceptance of our situation?  And would not a return to the
subject result in raising suspicions which might be hurtful to our
projects, if at some future time a favourable opportunity offered to
return to them?

During the nineteen days mentioned above, no incident of any kind
happened to signalise our voyage.  I saw little of the Captain; he was
at work.  In the library I often found his books left open, especially
those on natural history.  My work on submarine depths, conned over by
him, was covered with marginal notes, often contradicting my theories
and systems; but the Captain contented himself with thus purging my
work; it was very rare for him to discuss it with me.  Sometimes I
heard the melancholy tones of his organ; but only at night, in the
midst of the deepest obscurity, when the Nautilus slept upon the
deserted ocean.  During this part of our voyage we sailed whole days on
the surface of the waves.  The sea seemed abandoned.  A few
sailing-vessels, on the road to India, were making for the Cape of Good
Hope.  One day we were followed by the boats of a whaler, who, no
doubt, took us for some enormous whale of great price; but Captain Nemo
did not wish the worthy fellows to lose their time and trouble, so
ended the chase by plunging under the water.  Our navigation continued
until the 13th of March; that day the Nautilus was employed in taking
soundings, which greatly interested me.  We had then made about 13,000
leagues since our departure from the high seas of the Pacific.  The
bearings gave us 45 deg. 37' S. lat., and 37 deg. 53' W. long.  It was
the same water in which Captain Denham of the Herald sounded 7,000
fathoms without finding the bottom.  There, too, Lieutenant Parker, of
the American frigate Congress, could not touch the bottom with 15,140
fathoms.  Captain Nemo intended seeking the bottom of the ocean by a
diagonal sufficiently lengthened by means of lateral planes placed at
an angle of 45 deg. with the water-line of the Nautilus.  Then the
screw set to work at its maximum speed, its four blades beating the
waves with in describable force.  Under this powerful pressure, the
hull of the Nautilus quivered like a sonorous chord and sank regularly
under the water.

At 7,000 fathoms I saw some blackish tops rising from the midst of the
waters; but these summits might belong to high mountains like the
Himalayas or Mont Blanc, even higher; and the depth of the abyss
remained incalculable.  The Nautilus descended still lower, in spite of
the great pressure.  I felt the steel plates tremble at the fastenings
of the bolts; its bars bent, its partitions groaned; the windows of the
saloon seemed to curve under the pressure of the waters.  And this firm
structure would doubtless have yielded, if, as its Captain had said, it
had not been capable of resistance like a solid block.  We had attained
a depth of 16,000 yards (four leagues), and the sides of the Nautilus
then bore a pressure of 1,600 atmospheres, that is to say, 3,200 lb.
to each square two-fifths of an inch of its surface.

"What a situation to be in!"  I exclaimed.  "To overrun these deep
regions where man has never trod!  Look, Captain, look at these
magnificent rocks, these uninhabited grottoes, these lowest receptacles
of the globe, where life is no longer possible!  What unknown sights
are here!  Why should we be unable to preserve a remembrance of them?"

"Would you like to carry away more than the remembrance?" said Captain
Nemo.

"What do you mean by those words?"

"I mean to say that nothing is easier than to make a photographic view
of this submarine region."

I had not time to express my surprise at this new proposition, when, at
Captain Nemo's call, an objective was brought into the saloon.  Through
the widely-opened panel, the liquid mass was bright with electricity,
which was distributed with such uniformity that not a shadow, not a
gradation, was to be seen in our manufactured light.  The Nautilus
remained motionless, the force of its screw subdued by the inclination
of its planes: the instrument was propped on the bottom of the oceanic
site, and in a few seconds we had obtained a perfect negative.

But, the operation being over, Captain Nemo said, "Let us go up; we
must not abuse our position, nor expose the Nautilus too long to such
great pressure."

"Go up again!"  I exclaimed.

"Hold well on."

I had not time to understand why the Captain cautioned me thus, when I
was thrown forward on to the carpet.  At a signal from the Captain, its
screw was shipped, and its blades raised vertically; the Nautilus shot
into the air like a balloon, rising with stunning rapidity, and cutting
the mass of waters with a sonorous agitation.  Nothing was visible; and
in four minutes it had shot through the four leagues which separated it
from the ocean, and, after emerging like a flying-fish, fell, making
the waves rebound to an enormous height.



CHAPTER XII

CACHALOTS AND WHALES

During the nights of the 13th and 14th of March, the Nautilus returned
to its southerly course.  I fancied that, when on a level with Cape
Horn, he would turn the helm westward, in order to beat the Pacific
seas, and so complete the tour of the world.  He did nothing of the
kind, but continued on his way to the southern regions.  Where was he
going to?  To the pole?  It was madness!  I began to think that the
Captain's temerity justified Ned Land's fears.  For some time past the
Canadian had not spoken to me of his projects of flight; he was less
communicative, almost silent.  I could see that this lengthened
imprisonment was weighing upon him, and I felt that rage was burning
within him.  When he met the Captain, his eyes lit up with suppressed
anger; and I feared that his natural violence would lead him into some
extreme.  That day, the 14th of March, Conseil and he came to me in my
room.  I inquired the cause of their visit.

"A simple question to ask you, sir," replied the Canadian.

"Speak, Ned."

"How many men are there on board the Nautilus, do you think?"

"I cannot tell, my friend."

"I should say that its working does not require a large crew."

"Certainly, under existing conditions, ten men, at the most, ought to
be enough."

"Well, why should there be any more?"

"Why?"  I replied, looking fixedly at Ned Land, whose meaning was easy
to guess.  "Because," I added, "if my surmises are correct, and if I
have well understood the Captain's existence, the Nautilus is not only
a vessel: it is also a place of refuge for those who, like its
commander, have broken every tie upon earth."

"Perhaps so," said Conseil; "but, in any case, the Nautilus can only
contain a certain number of men.  Could not you, sir, estimate their
maximum?"

"How, Conseil?"

"By calculation; given the size of the vessel, which you know, sir, and
consequently the quantity of air it contains, knowing also how much
each man expends at a breath, and comparing these results with the fact
that the Nautilus is obliged to go to the surface every twenty-four
hours."

Conseil had not finished the sentence before I saw what he was driving
at.

"I understand," said I; "but that calculation, though simple enough,
can give but a very uncertain result."

"Never mind," said Ned Land urgently.

"Here it is, then," said I. "In one hour each man consumes the oxygen
contained in twenty gallons of air; and in twenty-four, that contained
in 480 gallons.  We must, therefore find how many times 480 gallons of
air the Nautilus contains."

"Just so," said Conseil.

"Or," I continued, "the size of the Nautilus being 1,500 tons; and one
ton holding 200 gallons, it contains 300,000 gallons of air, which,
divided by 480, gives a quotient of 625.  Which means to say, strictly
speaking, that the air contained in the Nautilus would suffice for 625
men for twenty-four hours."

"Six hundred and twenty-five!" repeated Ned.

"But remember that all of us, passengers, sailors, and officers
included, would not form a tenth part of that number."

"Still too many for three men," murmured Conseil.

The Canadian shook his head, passed his hand across his forehead, and
left the room without answering.

"Will you allow me to make one observation, sir?" said Conseil.  "Poor
Ned is longing for everything that he can not have.  His past life is
always present to him; everything that we are forbidden he regrets.
His head is full of old recollections.  And we must understand him.
What has he to do here?  Nothing; he is not learned like you, sir; and
has not the same taste for the beauties of the sea that we have.  He
would risk everything to be able to go once more into a tavern in his
own country."

Certainly the monotony on board must seem intolerable to the Canadian,
accustomed as he was to a life of liberty and activity.  Events were
rare which could rouse him to any show of spirit; but that day an event
did happen which recalled the bright days of the harpooner.  About
eleven in the morning, being on the surface of the ocean, the Nautilus
fell in with a troop of whales--an encounter which did not astonish me,
knowing that these creatures, hunted to death, had taken refuge in high
latitudes.

We were seated on the platform, with a quiet sea.  The month of October
in those latitudes gave us some lovely autumnal days.  It was the
Canadian--he could not be mistaken--who signalled a whale on the
eastern horizon.  Looking attentively, one might see its black back
rise and fall with the waves five miles from the Nautilus.

"Ah!" exclaimed Ned Land, "if I was on board a whaler, now such a
meeting would give me pleasure.  It is one of large size.  See with
what strength its blow-holes throw up columns of air an steam!
Confound it, why am I bound to these steel plates?"

"What, Ned," said I, "you have not forgotten your old ideas of fishing?"

"Can a whale-fisher ever forget his old trade, sir?  Can he ever tire
of the emotions caused by such a chase?"

"You have never fished in these seas, Ned?"

"Never, sir; in the northern only, and as much in Behring as in Davis
Straits."

"Then the southern whale is still unknown to you.  It is the Greenland
whale you have hunted up to this time, and that would not risk passing
through the warm waters of the equator.  Whales are localised,
according to their kinds, in certain seas which they never leave.  And
if one of these creatures went from Behring to Davis Straits, it must
be simply because there is a passage from one sea to the other, either
on the American or the Asiatic side."

"In that case, as I have never fished in these seas, I do not know the
kind of whale frequenting them!"

"I have told you, Ned."

"A greater reason for making their acquaintance," said Conseil.

"Look! look!" exclaimed the Canadian, "they approach: they aggravate
me; they know that I cannot get at them!"

Ned stamped his feet.  His hand trembled, as he grasped an imaginary
harpoon.

"Are these cetaceans as large as those of the northern seas?" asked he.

"Very nearly, Ned."

"Because I have seen large whales, sir, whales measuring a hundred
feet.  I have even been told that those of Hullamoch and Umgallick, of
the Aleutian Islands, are sometimes a hundred and fifty feet long."

"That seems to me exaggeration. These creatures are only
balaeaopterons, provided with dorsal fins; and, like the cachalots, are
generally much smaller than the Greenland whale."

"Ah!" exclaimed the Canadian, whose eyes had never left the ocean,
"they are coming nearer; they are in the same water as the Nautilus."

Then, returning to the conversation, he said:

"You spoke of the cachalot as a small creature.  I have heard of
gigantic ones.  They are intelligent cetacea.  It is said of some that
they cover themselves with seaweed and fucus, and then are taken for
islands.  People encamp upon them, and settle there; lights a fire----"

"And build houses," said Conseil.

"Yes, joker," said Ned Land.  "And one fine day the creature plunges,
carrying with it all the inhabitants to the bottom of the sea."

"Something like the travels of Sinbad the Sailor," I replied, laughing.

"Ah!" suddenly exclaimed Ned Land, "it is not one whale; there are
ten--there are twenty--it is a whole troop!  And I not able to do
anything! hands and feet tied!"

"But, friend Ned," said Conseil, "why do you not ask Captain Nemo's
permission to chase them?"

Conseil had not finished his sentence when Ned Land had lowered himself
through the panel to seek the Captain.  A few minutes afterwards the
two appeared together on the platform.

Captain Nemo watched the troop of cetacea playing on the waters about a
mile from the Nautilus.

"They are southern whales," said he; "there goes the fortune of a whole
fleet of whalers."

"Well, sir," asked the Canadian, "can I not chase them, if only to
remind me of my old trade of harpooner?"

"And to what purpose?" replied Captain Nemo; "only to destroy!  We have
nothing to do with the whale-oil on board."

"But, sir," continued the Canadian, "in the Red Sea you allowed us to
follow the dugong."

"Then it was to procure fresh meat for my crew.  Here it would be
killing for killing's sake.  I know that is a privilege reserved for
man, but I do not approve of such murderous pastime.  In destroying the
southern whale (like the Greenland whale, an inoffensive creature),
your traders do a culpable action, Master Land.  They have already
depopulated the whole of Baffin's Bay, and are annihilating a class of
useful animals.  Leave the unfortunate cetacea alone.  They have plenty
of natural enemies--cachalots, swordfish, and sawfish--without you
troubling them."

The Captain was right.  The barbarous and inconsiderate greed of these
fishermen will one day cause the disappearance of the last whale in the
ocean.  Ned Land whistled "Yankee-doodle" between his teeth, thrust his
hands into his pockets, and turned his back upon us.  But Captain Nemo
watched the troop of cetacea, and, addressing me, said:

"I was right in saying that whales had natural enemies enough, without
counting man.  These will have plenty to do before long.  Do you see,
M. Aronnax, about eight miles to leeward, those blackish moving points?"

"Yes, Captain," I replied.

"Those are cachalots--terrible animals, which I have met in troops of
two or three hundred.  As to those, they are cruel, mischievous
creatures; they would be right in exterminating them."

The Canadian turned quickly at the last words.

"Well, Captain," said he, "it is still time, in the interest of the
whales."

"It is useless to expose one's self, Professor.  The Nautilus will
disperse them.  It is armed with a steel spur as good as Master Land's
