discovered and reconstructed by papa?'

"'Yes,' said I. There was no use in saying no.

"'I am glad you do. Now, papa has proved that this creature lived
entirely in the Gulf Stream, emerging for occasional flights across an
ocean or two. Can you imagine how he proved it?'

"'No,' said I, resolutely pointing my nose at the ocean.

"'He proved it by a minute examination of the microscopical shells
found among the ribs of the thermosaurus. These shells contained
little creatures that live only in the warm waters of the Gulf Stream.
They were the food of the thermosaurus.'

"'It was rather slender rations for a thing like that, wasn't it? Did
he ever swallow bigger food--er--men?'

"'Oh yes. Tons of fossil bones from prehistoric men are also found in
the interior of the thermosaurus.'

"'Then,' said I, 'you, at least, had better go back to Captain
McPeek's--'

"'Please turn around; don't be so foolish. I didn't say there was a
live thermosaurus in the water, did I?'

"'Isn't there?'

"'Why, no!'

"My relief was genuine, but I thought of the rifle and looked
suspiciously out to sea.

"'What's the Winchester for?' I asked.

"'Listen, and I will explain. Papa has found out--how, I do not
exactly understand--that there is in the waters of the Gulf Stream the
body of a thermosaurus. The creature must have been alive within a
year or so. The impenetrable scale-armor that covers its body has, as
far as papa knows, prevented its disintegration. We know that it is
there still, or was there within a few months. Papa has reports and
sworn depositions from steamer captains and seamen from a dozen
different vessels, all corroborating one another in essential details.
These stories, of course, get into the newspapers--sea-serpent
stories--but papa knows that they confirm his theory that the huge
body of this reptile is swinging along somewhere in the Gulf Stream.'

"She opened her sunshade and held it over her. I noticed that she
deigned to give me the benefit of about one-eighth of it.

"'Your duty with that rifle is this: if we are fortunate enough to see
the body of the thermosaurus come floating by, you are to take good
aim and fire--fire rapidly every bullet in the magazine; then reload
and fire again, and reload and fire as long as you have any cartridges
left.'

"'A self-feeding Maxim is what I should have,' I said, with gentle
sarcasm. 'Well, and suppose I make a sieve of this big lizard?'

"'Do you see these rings in the sand?' she asked.

"Sure enough, somebody had driven heavy piles deep into the sand all
around us, and to the tops of these piles were attached steel rings,
half buried under the spear-grass. We sat almost exactly in the centre
of a circle of these rings.

"'The reason is this,' said Daisy; 'every bullet in your cartridges is
steel-tipped and armor-piercing. To the base of each bullet is
attached a thin wire of pallium. Pallium is that new metal, a thread
of which, drawn out into finest wire, will hold a ton of iron
suspended. Every bullet is fitted with minute coils of miles of this
wire. When the bullet leaves the rifle it spins out this wire as a
shot from a life-saver's mortar spins out and carries the life-line to
a wrecked ship. The end of each coil of wire is attached to that
cylinder under the magazine of your rifle. As soon as the shell is
automatically ejected this wire flies out also. A bit of scarlet tape
is fixed to the end, so that it will be easy to pick up. There is also
a snap-clasp on the end, and this clasp fits those rings that you see
in the sand. Now, when you begin firing, it is my duty to run and pick
up the wire ends and attach them to the rings. Then, you see, we have
the body of the thermosaurus full of bullets, every bullet anchored to
the shore by tiny wires, each of which could easily hold a ton's
strain.'

"I looked at her in amazement.

"'Then,' she added, calmly, 'we have captured the thermosaurus.'

"'Your father,' said I, at length, 'must have spent years of labor
over this preparation.'

"'It is the work of a lifetime,' she said, simply.

"My face, I suppose, showed my misgivings.

"'It must not fail,' she added.

"'But--but we are nowhere near the Gulf Stream,' I ventured.

"Her face brightened, and she frankly held the sunshade over us both.

"'Ah, you don't know,' she said, 'what else papa has discovered. Would
you believe that he has found a loop in the Gulf Stream--a genuine
loop--that swings in here just outside of the breakers below? It is
true! Everybody on Long Island knows that there is a warm current off
the coast, but nobody imagined it was merely a sort of backwater from
the Gulf Stream that formed a great circular mill-race around the cone
of a subterranean volcano, and rejoined the Gulf Stream off Cape
Albatross. But it is! That is why papa bought a yacht three years ago
and sailed about for two years so mysteriously. Oh, I did want to go
with him so much!'

"'This,' said I, 'is most astonishing.'

"She leaned enthusiastically towards me, her lovely face aglow.

"'Isn't it?' she said; 'and to think that you and papa and I are the
only people in the whole world who know this!'

"To be included in such a triology was very delightful.

"'Papa is writing the whole thing--I mean about the currents. He also
has in preparation sixteen volumes on the thermosaurus. He said this
morning that he was going to ask you to write the story first for some
scientific magazine. He is certain that Professor Bruce Stoddard, of
Columbia, will write the pamphlets necessary. This will give papa time
to attend to the sixteen-volume work, which he expects to finish in
three years.'

"'Let us first,' said I, laughing, 'catch our thermosaurus.'

"'We must not fail,' she said, wistfully.

"'We shall not fail,' I said, 'for I promise to sit on this sand-hill
as long as I live--until a thermosaurus appears--if that is your wish,
Miss Holroyd.'

"Our eyes met for an instant. She did not chide me, either, for not
looking at the ocean. Her eyes were bluer, anyway.

"'I suppose,' she said, bending her head and absently pouring sand
between her fingers--'I suppose you think me a blue-stocking, or
something odious?'

"'Not exactly,' I said. There was an emphasis in my voice that made
her color. After a moment she laid the sunshade down, still open.

"'May I hold it?' I asked.

"She nodded almost imperceptibly.

"The ocean had turned a deep marine blue, verging on purple, that
heralded a scorching afternoon. The wind died away; the odor of cedar
and sweet-bay hung heavy in the air.

"In the sand at our feet an iridescent flower-beetle crawled, its
metallic green-and-blue wings burning like a spark. Great gnats, with
filmy, glittering wings, danced aimlessly above the young golden-rod;
burnished crickets, inquisitive, timid, ran from under chips of
driftwood, waved their antennae at us, and ran back again. One by one
the marbled tiger-beetles tumbled at our feet, dazed from the exertion
of an aerial flight, then scrambled and ran a little way, or darted
into the wire grass, where great, brilliant spiders eyed them askance
from their gossamer hammocks.

"Far out at sea the white gulls floated and drifted on the water, or
sailed up into the air to flap lazily for a moment and settle back
among the waves. Strings of black surf-ducks passed, their strong
wings tipping the surface of the water; single wandering coots whirled
from the breakers into lonely flight towards the horizon.

"We lay and watched the little ring-necks running along the water's
edge, now backing away from the incoming tide, now boldly wading after
the undertow. The harmony of silence, the deep perfume, the mystery of
waiting for that something that all await--what is it? love? death? or
only the miracle of another morrow?--troubled me with vague
restlessness. As sunlight casts shadows, happiness, too, throws a
shadow, an the shadow is sadness.

"And so the morning wore away until Freda came with a cool-looking
hamper. Then delicious cold fowl and lettuce sandwiches and champagne
cup set our tongues wagging as only very young tongues can wag. Daisy
went back with Freda after luncheon, leaving me a case of cigars, with
a bantering smile. I dozed, half awake, keeping a partly closed eye on
the ocean, where a faint gray streak showed plainly amid the azure
water all around. That was the Gulf Stream loop.

"About four o'clock Frisby appeared with a bamboo shelter-tent, for
which I was unaffectedly grateful.

"After he had erected it over me he stopped to chat a bit, but the
conversation bored me, for he could talk of nothing but bill-posting.

"'You wouldn't ruin the landscape here, would you?' I asked.

"'Ruin it!' repeated Frisby, nervously. 'It's ruined now; there ain't
a place to stick a bill.'

"'The snipe stick bills--in the sand,' I said, flippantly.

"There was no humor about Frisby. 'Do they?' he asked.

"I moved with a certain impatience.

"'Bills,' said Frisby, 'give spice an' variety to nature. They break
the monotony of the everlastin' green and what-you-may-call-its.'

"I glared at him.

"'Bills,' he continued, 'are not easy to stick, lemme tell you, sir.
Sign-paintin's a soft snap when it comes to bill-stickin'. Now, I
guess I've stuck more bills onto New York State than ennybody.'

"'Have you?' I said, angrily.

"'Yes, siree! I always pick out the purtiest spots--kinder filled
chuck full of woods and brooks and things; then I h'ist my paste-pot
onto a rock, and I slather that rock with gum, and whoop she goes!'

"'Whoop what goes?'

"'The bill. I paste her onto the rock, with one swipe of the brush for
the edges and a back-handed swipe for the finish--except when a bill
is folded in two halves.'

"'And what do you do then?' I asked, disgusted.

"'Swipe twice,' said Frisby, with enthusiasm.

"'And you don't think it injures the landscape?'

"'Injures it!' he exclaimed, convinced that I was attempting to joke.

"I looked wearily out to sea. He also looked at the water and sighed
sentimentally.

"'Floatin' buoys with bills onto 'em is a idea of mine,' he observed.
'That damn ocean is monotonous, ain't it?'

"I don't know what I might have done to Frisby--the rifle was so
convenient--if his mean yellow dog had not waddled up at this
juncture.

"'Hi, Davy, sic 'em!' said Frisby, expectorating upon a clam-shell and
hurling it seaward. The cur watched the flight of the shell
apathetically, then squatted in the sand and looked at his master.

"'Kinder lost his spirit,' said Frisby, 'ain't he? I once stuck a bill
onto Davy, an' it come off, an' the paste sorter sickened him. He was
hell on rats--once!'

"After a moment or two Frisby took himself off, whistling cheerfully
to Davy, who followed him when he was ready. The rifle burned in my
fingers.

"It was nearly six o'clock when the professor appeared, spade on
shoulder, boots smeared with mud.

"'Well,' he said, 'nothing to report, Dick, my boy?'

"'Nothing, professor.'

"He wiped his shining face with his handkerchief and stared at the
water.

"'My calculations lead me to believe,' he said, 'that our prize may be
due any day now. This theory I base upon the result of the report from
the last sea-captain I saw. I cannot understand why some of these
captains did not take the carcass in tow. They all say that they
tried, but that the body sank before they could come within half a
mile. The truth is, probably, that they did not stir a foot from their
course to examine the thing.'

"'Have you ever cruised about for it?' I ventured.

"'For two years,' he said, grimly. 'It's no use; it's accident when a
ship falls in with it. One captain reports it a thousand miles from
where the last skipper spoke it, and always in the Gulf Stream. They
think it is a different specimen every time, and the papers are
teeming with sea-serpent fol-de-rol.'

"'Are you sure,' I asked, 'that it will swing into the coast on this
Gulf Stream loop?'

"'I think I may say that it is certain to do so. I experimented with a
dead right-whale. You may have heard of its coming ashore here last
summer.'

"'I think I did,' said I, with a faint smile. The thing had poisoned
the air for miles around.

"'But,' I continued, 'suppose it comes in the night?'

"He laughed.

"'There I am lucky. Every night this month, and every day, too, the
current of the loop runs inland so far that even a porpoise would
strand for at least twelve hours. Longer than that I have not
experimented with, but I know that the shore trend of the loop runs
across a long spur of the submerged volcanic mountain, and that
anything heavier than a porpoise would scrape the bottom and be
carried so slowly that at least twelve hours must elapse before the
carcass could float again into deep water. There are chances of its
stranding indefinitely, too, but I don't care to take those chances.
That is why I have stationed you here, Dick.'

"He glanced again at the water, smiling to himself.

"'There is another question I want to ask,' I said, 'if you don't
mind.'

"'Of course not!' he said, warmly.

"'What are you digging for?'

"'Why, simply for exercise. The doctor told me I was killing myself
with my sedentary habits, so I decided to dig. I don't know a better
exercise. Do you?'

"'I suppose not,' I murmured, rather red in the face. I wondered
whether he'd mention fossils.

"'Did Daisy tell you why we are making our papier-mache thermosaurus?'
he asked.

"I shook my head.

"'We constructed that from measurements I took from the fossil remains
of the thermosaurus in the Metropolitan Museum. Professor Bruce
Stoddard made the drawings. We set it up here, all ready to receive
the skin of the carcass that I am expecting.'

"We had started towards home, walking slowly across the darkening
dunes, shoulder to shoulder. The sand was deep, and walking was not
easy.

"'I wish,' said I at last, 'that I knew why Miss Holroyd asked me not
to walk on the beach. It's much less fatiguing.'

"'That,' said the professor, 'is a matter that I intend to discuss
