
"You're tired, Anita. We'd better stay here."

"No. If we could only get to the top--the ship may land on the other
side--they would see us."

There was as yet no sign of the brigand ship. With every stop for
rest we searched the starry vault. The Earth hung over us, flattened
beyond the full. The stars blazed to mingle with the Earthlight and
illumine these massive crags of the Archimedes walls. But no speck
appeared to tell us that the ship was up there.

We were on the curving side of the Archimedes wall which fronted the
Mare Imbrium to the north. The plains lay Like a great frozen sea,
congealed ripples shining in the light of the Earth, with dark patches
to mark the hollows. Somewhere down there--six or eight thousand feet
below us now--Miko's encampment lay concealed. We searched for lights
of it, but could see none.

Had Miko rejoined his party, left his camp and come here like
ourselves to climb Archimedes? Or was our assumption wholly wrong:
perhaps the brigand ship would not land near here at all!

Sweeping around from the Mare Imbrium, the plains were less smooth.
The little crater which concealed the Grantline camp was off in the
crater-scarred region beyond which the distant Apennines raised their
terraced walls. There was nothing to mark it from here.

"Gregg, do you see anything up there?" She added, "There seems to be a
blur."

Her sight, sharper than mine, had picked it out. The descending
brigand ship! A faintest, tiny blur against the stars, a few of them
occulted as though an invisible shadow were upon them. A growing
shadow, materializing into a blur--a blob, a shape faintly defined.
Then sharper until we were sure of what we saw. It was the brigand
ship. It was dropping slowly, silently down.

We crouched on the little ledge. A cave mouth was behind us. A gully
was beside us, a break in the ledge; and at our feet the sheer wall
dropped.

We had extinguished our lights. We crouched, silently gazing up into
the stars.

The ship, when we first distinguished it, was centered over
Archimedes. We thought for a while that it might descend into the
crater. But it did not; it came sailing forward.

I whispered into the audiphone, "It's coming over the crater."

Her hand pressed my arm in answer.

I recalled that when, from the _Planetara_, Miko had forced Snap to
signal this brigand band on Mars, Miko's only information as to the
whereabouts of the Grantline camp was that it lay between Archimedes
and the Apennines. The brigands now were following that information.

A tense interval passed. We could see the ship plainly above us now, a
gray-black shape among the stars up beyond the shaggy, towering crater
rim. The vessel came upon a level keel, hull down. Slowly circling,
looking for Miko's signal, no doubt, or for possible lights from
Grantline's camp. They might also be picking a landing place.

We saw it soon as a cylindrical, cigarlike shape, rather smaller than
the _Planetara_, but similar of design. It bore lights now. The ports
of its hull were tiny rows of illumination, and the glow of light
under its rounding upper dome was faintly visible.

A bandit ship, no doubt of that. Its identification keel plate was
empty of official pass code lights. These brigands had not attempted
to secure official sailing lights when leaving Ferrok-Shahn. It was
unmistakably an outlaw ship. And here upon the deserted Moon there was
no need for secrecy. Its lights were openly displayed, that Miko might
see it and join it.

It went slowly past us, only a few thousand feet higher than our
level. We could see the whole outline of its pointed cylinder hull,
with the rounded dome on top. And under the dome was its open deck
with a little cabin superstructure in the center.

I thought for a moment that by some unfortunate chance it might land
quite near us. But it went past. And then I saw that it was heading
for a level, plateaulike surface a few miles further on. It dropped,
cautiously floating down.

There was still no sign of Miko. But I realized that haste was
necessary. We must be the first to join the brigand ship.

I lifted Anita to her feet. "I don't think we should signal from
here."

"No. Miko might see it."

We could not tell where he was. Down on the plains, perhaps? Or up
here, somewhere in these miles of towering rocks?

"Are you ready, Anita?"

"Yes, Gregg."

I stared through the visors at her white solemn face.

"Yes, I'm ready," she repeated.

Her hand pressure seemed to me suddenly like a farewell. We were
plunging rashly into what was destined to mean our death? Was this a
farewell?

An instinct told me not to do this thing. Why, in a few hours I could
have Anita back to the comparative safety of the Grantline camp. The
exit ports would doubtless be repaired by now. I could get her inside.

She had bounded away from me, leaped down some thirty feet into the
broken gully, to cross it and then up on the other side. I stood for
an instant watching her fantastic shape, with the great rounded,
goggled, trunked helmet and the lump on her shoulders which held the
little Erentz motors. Then I hurried after her.

It did not take us long--two or three miles of circling along the
giant wall. The ship lay only a few hundred feet above our level.

We stood at last on a buttelike pinnacle. The lights of the ship were
close over us. And there were moving lights up there, tiny moving
spots on the adjacent rocks. The brigands had come out, prowling about
to investigate their location.

No signal yet from Miko. But it might come at any moment.

"I'll flash now," I whispered.

"Yes."

The brigands had probably not yet seen us. I took the lamp from my
helmet. My hand was trembling. Suppose my signal were answered by a
shot? A flash from some giant projector mounted on the ship?

Anita crouched behind a rock, as she had promised. I stood with my
torch and flung its switch. My puny light beam shot up. I waved it,
touched the ship with its faint glowing circle of illumination.

They saw me. There was a sudden movement among the lights up there.

I semaphored:

_I am from Miko. Do not fire._

I used open universal code. In Martian first, and then in English.

There was no answer, but no attack. I tried again.

_This is Haljan, one of the_ Planetara. _George Prince's sister is
with me. There has been disaster to Miko._

A small light beam came down from the brink of the overhead cliff
beside the ship.

_Continue._

I went steadily on: _Disaster--the_ Planetara _is wrecked. All killed
but me and Prince's sister. We want to join you._

I flashed off my light. The answer came:

_Where is the Grantline Camp?_

_Near here. The Mare Imbrium._

As though to answer my lie, from down on the Earthlit plains, some ten
miles or so from the crater base, a tiny signal light shot up. Anita
saw it and gripped me.

"There is Miko's light!"

It spelled in Martian, _Come down. Land Mare Imbrium._

Miko had seen the signaling up here and had joined it! He repeated,
_Land Mare Imbrium._

I flashed a protest up to the ship: _Beware. That is Grantline!
Trickery._

From the ship the summons came, _Come up._

We had won this first encounter! Miko must have realized his
disadvantage. His distant light went out.

"Come, Anita."

There was no retreat now. But again I seemed to feel in the pressure
of her hand that vague farewell. Her voice whispered, "We must do our
best, act our best to be convincing."

In the white glow of a searchbeam we climbed the crags, reached the
broad upper ledge. Helmeted figures rushed at us, searched us for
weapons, seized our helmet lights. The evil face of a giant Martian
peered at me through the visors. Two other monstrous, towering figures
seized Anita.

We were shoved toward the port locks at the base of the ship's hull.
Above the hull bulge I could see the grids of projectors mounted on
the dome side, and the figures of men standing on the deck, peering
down at us.

We went through the admission locks into a hull corridor, up an
incline passage, and reached the lighted deck. The Martian brigands
crowded around us.




XXIX


Anita's words echoed in my memory: "We must do our best to be
convincing." It was not her ability that I doubted, as much as my own.
She had played the part of George Prince cleverly, unmasked only by an
evil chance.

I steeled myself to face the searching glances of the brigands as they
shoved around us. This was a desperate game into which we had plunged.
For all our acting, how easy it would be for some small chance thing
abruptly to undo us! I realized it, and now, as I gazed into the
peering faces of these men from Mars, I cursed myself for the witless
rashness which had brought Anita into this!

The brigands--some ten or fifteen of them here on deck--stood in a
ring around us. They were all big men, nearly of a seven-foot average,
dressed in leather jerkins and short leather breeches, with bare knees
and flaring leather boots. Piratical swaggering fellows, knife-blades
mingled with small hand projectors fastened to their belts. Gray,
heavy faces, some with scraggly, unshaven beards. They plucked at us,
jabbering in Martian.

One of them seemed the leader. I said sharply, "Are you the commander
here? You speak the Earth English?"

"Yes," he said readily. "I am commander here." He spoke English with
the same freedom and accent as Miko. "Is this George Prince's sister?"

"Yes. Her name is Anita Prince. Tell your men to take their hands off
her."

He waved his men away. They all seemed more interested in Anita than
in me. He added:

"I am _Set_ Potan." He addressed Anita. "George Prince's sister? You
are called Anita? I have heard of you. I knew your brother--indeed,
you look very much like him."

He swept his plumed hat to the grid with a swaggering gesture of
homage. A courtierlike fellow this, debonair as a Venus cavalier!

He accepted us. I realized that Anita's presence was extremely
valuable in making us convincing. Yet there was about this Potan--as
with Miko--a disturbing suggestion of irony. I could not make him out.
I decided that we had fooled him. Then I remarked the steely glitter
of his eyes as he turned to me.

"You were an officer of the _Planetara_?"

The insignia of my rank was visible on my white jacket collar which
showed beneath the Erentz suit now that my helmet was off.

"Yes. I was supposed to be. But a year ago I embarked upon this
adventure with Miko."

He was leading us to his cabin. "The _Planetara_ wrecked? Miko dead?"

"And Hahn and Coniston. George Prince too. We are the only survivors."

While we divested ourselves of the Erentz suits, at his command, I
told him briefly of the _Planetara's_ fall. All had been killed on
board, save Anita and me. We had escaped, awaited his coming. The
treasure was here; we had located the Grantline camp, and were ready
to lead him to it.

Did he believe me? He listened quietly. He seemed not shocked at the
death of his comrades. Nor yet pleased: merely imperturbable.

I added with a sly, sidelong glance, "There were too many of us on the
_Planetara_. The purser had joined us and many of the crew. And there
was Miko's sister, the _Setta_ Moa--too many. The treasure divides
better among less."

An amused smile played on his thin gray lips. But he nodded. The fear
which had leaped at me was allayed by his next words.

"True enough, Haljan. He was a domineering fellow, Miko. A third of it
all was for him alone. But now...."

The third would go to this sub-leader, Potan! The implication was
obvious.

I said, "Before we go any further, I can trust you for my share?"

"Of course."

I figured that my very boldness in bargaining so prematurely would
convince him. I insisted, "Miss Prince will have her brother's share?"

Clever Anita! She put in swiftly, "Oh, I give no information until you
promise! We know the location of the Grantline camp, its weapons, its
defences, the amount and location of the treasure. I warn you, if you
do not play us fair...."

He laughed heartily. He seemed to like us. He spread his huge legs as
he lounged in his settle, and drank of the bowl which one of his men
set before him.

"Little tigress! Fear me not--I play fair!" He pushed two of the bowls
across the table. "Drink, Haljan. All is well with us and I am glad to
know it. Miss Prince, drink my health as your leader."

I waved it away from Anita. "We need all our wits; your strong Martian
drinks are dangerous. Look here, I'll tell you just how the situation
stands--"

I plunged into a glib account of our supposed wanderings to find the
Grantline camp: its location off the Mare Imbrium--hidden in a
cavern there. Potan, with the drink, and under the gaze of Anita's
eyes, was in high good humor. He laughed when I told him that we had
dared to invade the Grantline camp, had smashed its exit ports, had
even gotten up to have a look where the treasure was piled.

"Well done, Haljan. You're a fellow to my liking!" But his gaze was on
Anita. "You dress like a man or a charming boy."

She still wore the dark clothes of her brother. She said, "I am used
to action. Man's garb pleases me. You shall treat me like a man and
give me my share of gold leaf."

He had already demanded the reason for the signal from the Mare
Imbrium. Miko's signal! It had not come again, though any moment I
feared it. I told him that Grantline doubtless had repaired his
damaged ports and sallied out to assail me in reprisal. And, seeing
the brigand ship landing on Archimedes, had tried to lure him into a
trap.

I wondered if my explanation was convincing: it did not sound so. But
