So land the ship anywhere out there and I'll send a jeep out after you."

"Thanks, but no jeep. Nobody but you knows that we've really got control
of the _Pleiades_, and I want everybody else to keep on thinking it's
strictly for the birds. We'll 'port in to your office whenever you say."

"I say now."

In no time at all the two Primes were seated in the private office of
Eugene Evans, Head of the Legal Department of the newly re-incorporated
Galaxian Society of Sol, Inc. Evans was a tall man, slightly thin,
slightly stooped, whose thick tri-focals did nothing whatever to hide
the keenness of his steel-gray eyes.

"The first thing, Gene," Garlock said, "is this employment contract
thing. Have you figured out a way to break it?"

"It can't be broken." The lawyer shook his head.

"Huh? I thought you top-bracket legal eagles could break anything, if
you really tried."

"A good many things, yes, especially if they're long and complicated.
The Standard Employment Contract, however, is short, explicit, and
iron-clad. The employer can discharge the employee for any one of a
number of offenses, including insubordination; which, as a matter of
fact, the employer himself is allowed to define. On the other hand, the
employee cannot quit except for some such fantastic reason as the
non-tendering--not non-payment, mind you, but non-_tendering_--of
salary."

"I didn't expect that--it kicks us in the teeth before we get started."
Garlock got up, lighted a cigarette, and prowled about the big room.
"Okay. Jim and I will have to get ourselves fired, then."

"Fired!" Belle snorted. "Clee, you talk like a man with a paper nose!
Who else could run the Project? That is," her whole manner changed; "he
doesn't know I can run it as well as you can--or better--but I could
tell him--and maybe you think I wouldn't!"

"You won't have to. Gene, you can start spreading the news that Belle
Bellamy is a real, honest-to-God Prime Operator in every respect. That
she knows more about Project Gunther than I do and could run it better.
Ferber undoubtedly knows that Belle and I have been at loggerheads ever
since we first met--spread it thick that we're fighting worse than ever.
Which, by the way, is the truth."

"Fighting? Why, you seemed friendly enough...."

"Yeah, we can be friendly for about fifteen minutes if we try real hard,
as now. The cold fact is, though, that she's just as much three-quarters
hellcat and one-quarter potassium cyanide as she...."

"I like _that!_" Belle stormed. She leaped to her feet, her eyes
shooting sparks. "All _my_ fault! Why, you self-centered, egotistical,
domineering jerk, I could write a book...."

"That's enough--let it go--_please!_" Evans pleaded. He jumped up, took
each of the combatants by a shoulder, sat them down into the chairs they
had vacated, and resumed his own seat. "The demonstration was eminently
successful. I will spread the word, through several channels. Chancellor
Ferber will get it all, rest assured."

"And _I'll_ get the job!" Belle snapped. "And maybe you think I won't
take it!"

"Yeah?" came Garlock's searing thought. "You'd do anything to get it and
to keep it. Yeah. I _do_ think."

"Oh?" Belle's body stiffened, her face hardened. "I've heard stories, of
course, but I couldn't quite ... but surely, he can't be _that_
stupid--to think he can buy me like so many pounds of calf-liver?"

"He surely is. He does. And it works. That is, if he's ever missed,
nobody ever heard of it."

"But how could a man in such a big job _possibly_ get away with such
foul stuff as that?"

"Because all the SSE is interested in is money, and Alonzo P. Ferber is
a tremendously able top executive. In the big black-and-red money books
he's always 'way, 'way up in the black, and nobody cares about his
conduct."

        *           *           *

Belle, even though she was already convinced, glanced questioningly at
Evans.

"That's it, Miss Bellamy. That's it, in a precise, if somewhat crude,
nutshell."

"That's that, then. But just how, Clee--if he's as smart as you say he
is--do you think you can make him fire you?"

"I don't know--haven't thought about it yet. But I could be pretty
insubordinate if I really tried."

"That's the understatement of the century."

"I'll devote the imponderable force of the intellect to the problem and
check with you later. Now, Gene, about the proposed Galactic Service,
the Council, and so on. What is the reaction? Yours, personally, and
others?"

"My personal reaction is immensely favorable; I think it the greatest
advance that humanity has ever made. I have been very cautious, of
course, in discussing, or even mentioning the matter, but the reaction
of everyone I have sounded--good men; big men in their respective
fields--has been as enthusiastic as my own."

"Good. It won't surprise you, probably, to be told that you are to be
this system's councillor and--if we can swing it and I think we can--the
first President of the Galactic Council?"

Evans was so surprised that it was almost a minute before he could reply
coherently. Then: "I _am_ surprised--very much so. I thought, of course,
that you yourself would...."

"Far from it!" Garlock said, positively. "I'm not the type. You are.
You're better than anyone else of the Galaxians--which means than anyone
else period. With the possible exception of Lola, and she fits better on
our exploration team. Check, Belle?"

"Check. For once, I agree with you without reservation. _That's_ a job
we can work at all the rest of our lives, and scarcely start it."

"True--indubitably true. I appreciate your confidence in me, and if the
vote so falls I will do whatever I can."

"We know you will, and thank _you_. How long will it take to organize? A
couple of weeks? And is there anything else we have to cover now?"

"A couple of _weeks!_" Evans was shocked. "You are naive indeed, young
man, to think anything of this magnitude can even be started in such a
short time as that. And yes, there are dozens of matters--hundreds--that
should be discussed before I can even start to work intelligently."

Hence discussions went on and on and on. It was three days before
Garlock and Belle 'ported themselves up into the _Pleiades_ and the
starship displaced itself instantaneously to Margonia.

        *           *           *

Meanwhile, on Margonia, James James James the Ninth went directly to the
heart of his job by leading Lola and Fao into Delcamp's office and
setting up its Gunther blocks.

"You said you want me to build your starship. Okay, but I want you
both--Fao especially--to realize exactly what that means. I know what to
do and how to do it. I can handle your Operators and get the job done.
However, I can't handle either of you, since you both out-Gunther me,
and I'm not going to try to. But there can't be two bosses on any one
job, to say nothing of three or seventeen. So either I run the job or I
don't. If either of you steps in, I step out and don't come back in. And
remember that you're not doing us any favors--it's strictly vice versa."

"Jim!" Lola protested. Fao's hackles were very evidently on the rise;
Delcamp's face was hardening. "Don't be so rough, Jim, _please_. That's
no way to...."

"If you can pretty this up, pet, I'll be glad to have you say it for me.
Here's what you have to work on. If I do the job they'll have their
starship in a few weeks. The way they've been going, they won't have it
in twenty-five years. And the only way to get that bunch out there to
really work is to tell each one of them to cooperate or else--and
enforce the 'or else.'"

"But they'd quit!" Delcamp protested. "They'll _all_ quit!"

"With suspension or expulsion from the Society the consequences?
Hardly." James said.

"But you wouldn't do that--you couldn't."

"I wouldn't?"

"Of course he wouldn't," Lola put in, soothingly, "except as a very last
resort. And, even at worst, Jim could build it almost as easily with
common labor. You Primes don't really _have_ to have any Operators at
all, you know; but all your Operators together would be perfectly
helpless without at least one Prime."

"How come?" and "In what way?" Delcamp and Fao demanded together.

"Oh, didn't you know? After the ship is built and the fields are charged
and so on, everything has to be activated--the hundred and one things
that make it so nearly alive--and that is strictly a Prime's job. Even
Jim can't do it."

"I see ... or, rather, I don't see at all," Fao said, thoughtfully. She
was no longer either excited or angry. "A few weeks against twenty-five
years ... what do you think of his time estimate, Deg my dear?"

"I hadn't thought it would take nearly that long; but this 'activation'
thing scares me. Nothing in my theory even hints at any such thing.
So--if there's so much I don't know yet, even in theory, it would take a
long time. Maybe I'd never get it."

"Well, anyway, I want our _Celestial Queen_ done in weeks, not years,"
Fao said, extending her hand to James and shaking his vigorously. "So I
promise not to interfere a bit. If I feel any such urge coming on, I'll
dash home and lock myself up in a closet until it dies. Fair enough?"

Since Fao really meant it, that was fair enough.

        *           *           *

For a whole day James did nothing except study blueprints; going over in
detail and practically memorizing every drawing that had been made. He
then went over the ship, studying minutely every part, plate, member,
machine and instrument that had been installed. He noted what each man
and woman was doing and what they intended to do. He went over material
on hand and material on order, paying particular attention to times of
delivery. He then sent a few--surprisingly few--telegrams.

Finally he called all fourteen Operators together. He told them exactly
what the revised situation was and exactly what he was going to do about
it. He invited comments.

There was of course a riot of protest; but--in view of what James had
said anent suspensions and expulsions from the Galaxian Society--not one
of them actually did quit. Four of them, however, did appeal to Delcamp,
considerably to his surprise, to oust the interloper and to put things
back where they had been; but they did not get much satisfaction.

"James says that he can finish building this starship in a few weeks,"
Delcamp told them, flatly. "Specifically, three weeks, if we can get the
special stuff made fast enough. Fao and I believe him. Therefore, we
have put him in full charge. He will remain in charge unless and until
he fails in performance. You are all good friends of Fao's and mine, and
we hope that all of you will stay with the project. If, however, we must
choose now between you--any one of you or all of you--and James, there
is no need to tell you what the choice will be."

Wherefore all fourteen went back to work; grudgingly at first and
dragging their feet. In a very few hours, however, it became evident to
all that James did in fact know what he was doing and that the work was
going faster and smoother than ever before; whereupon all opposition and
all malingering disappeared. They were Operators, and they were all
intensely interested in their ship. Morale was at a high.

Thus, when the _Pleiades_ landed beside the now seething _Celestial
Queen_, Garlock found James with feet on desk, hands in pockets, and
scanner on head; doing--apparently--nothing at all. Nevertheless, he was
a very busy man.

"Hey, Jim!" A soprano shriek of thought emanated from a gorgeous
seventeen-year-old blonde. "I can't read this funny-picture, it's been
folded too many times. Where does this lead go to?"

"Data insufficient. Careful, Vingie; I'd hate to have to send you back
to school."

"'Scuse, please, Junior. Unit Six, Sub-Assembly Tee Dash Ni-yun.
Terminal Fo-wer. From said terminal, there's a lead--Bee Sub
something-or-other--goes somewhere. Where?"

"B sub Four. It goes to Unit Seven, Sub-Assembly Q dash Three, Terminal
Two. And watch your insulation--that's a mighty hot lead."

"Uh-huh, I got that. Double Sink Mill Mill; Class Albert Dog Kittens.
Thanks, boss!"

        *           *           *

"Hi, Jim," Garlock said. Then, to Delcamp. "I see you're rolling."

"_He's_ rolling, you mean." Delcamp had not yet recovered fully from a
state of near-shock. "So _that's_ what an eidetic memory is? He knows
every nut, bolt, lead, and coil in the ship!"

"More than that. He's checking every move everybody makes. When they're
done, you won't have to just hope everything was put together
right--you'll _know_ it was."

Jim was their man.

        *           *           *

And Fao sidled over toward Belle. There was something new about the
silver-haired girl, Belle decided instantly. The difference was
slight--Belle couldn't put her finger on it at first. She
seemed--quieter? Softer? More subdued? No, definitely. More feminine?
No; that would be impossible. More ... more adult? Belle hated to admit
it, even to herself, but that was what it was.

"Deg and I got married day before yesterday," Fao confided, via tight
beam.

"Oh--so you're _pregnant!_"

"Of course. I saw to that the first thing. I knew you'd want to be the
first one to know. Oh, isn't it _wonderful_?" She seized Belle's arm and
hugged it ecstatically against her side. "Just too perfectly marvelous
for _anything_?"

"Oh, I'm sure it is; and I'm so happy for you, Fao!" And it would have
taken the mind of a Garlock to perceive anything either false or forced
in thought or bearing.

Nevertheless, when Belle went into Garlock's room that night, storm
signals were flying high in her almost-topaz eyes.

"Fao Talaho-Delcamp is _pregnant_!" she stormed, "and it's all _your_
fault!"

"Uh-huh," he demurred, trying to snap her out of her obviously savage
mood. "Not me, ace. Not a chance in the world. It was Deggi."

"You ... you _weasel_! You know very well, Clee Garlock, what I meant.
If you hadn't given her that treatment she'd have kept on fighting with
