     South to the Gulf states; west to Dakota, Nebraska, Kansas, and
     Indian territory; attaining its maximum size in the basins of the
     Ohio and its tributaries; rare towards the seacoast throughout the
     whole range.

=Habit.=--A handsome tree, 50-60 feet in height; trunk 2-5 feet in
diameter, separating a few feet from the ground into several large,
slightly diverging branches. These, naked for some distance, repeatedly
subdivide at wider angles, forming a very wide head, much broader near
the top. The ultimate branches are long and slender, often forming on
the lower limbs a pendulous fringe sometimes reaching to the ground.
Distinguished in winter by its characteristic graceful outlines, and by
its flower-buds conspicuously scattered along the tips of the
branchlets; in summer by the silvery-white under-surface of its deeply
cut leaves. It is among the first of the New England trees to blossom,
preceding the red maple by one to three weeks.

=Bark.=--Bark of trunk smooth and gray in young trees, becoming with age
rougher and darker, more or less ridged, separating into thin, loose
scales; young shoots chestnut-colored in autumn, smooth, polished,
profusely marked with light dots.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Flower-buds clustered near the ends of the
branchlets, conspicuous in winter; scales imbricated, convex, polished,
reddish, with ciliate margins; leaf-buds more slender, about 1/8 inch
long, with similar scales, the inner lengthening, falling as the leaf
expands. Leaves simple, opposite, 3-5 inches long, of varying width,
light green above, silvery-white beneath, turning yellow in autumn;
lobes 3, or more usually 5, deeply cut, sharp-toothed, sharp-pointed,
more or less sublobed; sinuses deep, narrow, with concave sides; base
sub-heart-shaped or truncate; stems long.

=Inflorescence.=--March to April. Much preceding the leaves; from short
branchlets of the previous year, in simple, crowded umbels; flowers
rarely perfect, the sterile and fertile sometimes on the same tree and
sometimes on different trees, generally in separate clusters,
yellowish-green or sometimes pinkish; calyx 5-notched, wholly included
in bud-scales; petals none; sterile flowers long, stamens 3-7 much
exserted, filaments slender, ovary abortive or none: fertile flowers
broad, stamens about the length of calyx-tube, ovary woolly, with two
styles scarcely united at the base.

=Fruit.=--Fruit ripens in June, earliest of the New England maples. Keys
large, woolly when young, at length smooth, widely divergent,
scythe-shaped or straight, yellowish-green, one key often aborted.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy in cultivation throughout New England. The
grace of its branches, the beauty of its foliage, and its rapid growth
make it a favorite ornamental tree. It attains its finest development
when planted by the margin of pond or stream where its roots can reach
water, but it grows well in any good soil. Easily transplanted, and more
readily obtainable at a low price than any other tree in general use for
street or ornamental purposes. The branches are easily broken by wind
and ice, and the roots fill the ground for a long distance and exhaust
its fertility.

[Illustration: PLATE LXXII.--Acer saccharinum.]

  1. Leaf-buds.
  2. Flower-buds.
  3. Branch with sterile flowers.
  4. Branch with fertile flowers.
  5. Branch with sterile and fertile flowers.
  6. Sterile flower.
  7. Fertile flower.
  8. Perfect flower.
  9. Fruiting branch.


=Acer Saccharum, Marsh.=

_Acer saccharinum, Wang._ _Acer barbatum, Michx._

ROCK MAPLE. SUGAR MAPLE. HARD MAPLE. SUGAR TREE.

=Habitat and Range.=--Rich woods and cool, rocky slopes.

     Nova Scotia and Newfoundland, westward to Lake of the Woods.

New England,--abundant, distributed throughout the woods, often forming
in the northern portions extensive upland forests; attaining great size
in the mountainous portions of New Hampshire and Vermont, and in the
Connecticut river valley; less frequent toward the seacoast.

     South to the Gulf states; west to Minnesota, Nebraska, Kansas, and
     Texas.

=Habit.=--A noble tree, 50-90 feet in height; trunk 2-5 feet in
diameter, stout, erect, throwing out its primary branches at acute
angles; secondary branches straight, slender, nearly horizontal or
declining at the base, leaving the stem higher up at sharper and sharper
angles, repeatedly subdividing, forming a dense and rather stiff spray
of nearly uniform length; head symmetrical, varying greatly in shape; in
young trees often narrowly cylindrical, becoming pyramidal or broadly
egg-shaped with age; clothed with dense masses of foliage, purple-tinged
in spring, light green in summer, and gorgeous beyond all other trees of
the forest, with the possible exception of the red maple, in its
autumnal oranges, yellows, and reds.

=Bark.=--Bark of trunk and principal branches gray, very smooth, close
and firm in young trees, in old trees becoming deeply furrowed, often
cleaving up at one edge in long, thick, irregular plates; season's
shoots at length of a shining reddish-brown, smooth, numerously
pale-dotted, turning gray the third year.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds sharp-pointed, reddish-brown, minutely
pubescent, terminal 1/4 inch long, lateral 1/8 inch, appressed, the
inner scales lengthening with the growth of the shoot. Leaves simple,
opposite, 3-5 inches long, with a somewhat greater breadth, purplish and
more or less pubescent when opening, at maturity dark green above,
paler, with or without pubescence beneath, changing to brilliant reds
and yellows in autumn; lobes sometimes 3, usually 5, acuminate,
sparingly sinuate-toothed, with shallow, rounded sinuses; base
subcordate, truncate, or wedge-shaped; veins and veinlets conspicuous
beneath; leafstalks long, slender.

=Inflorescence.=--April 1-15. Appearing with the leaves in nearly
sessile clusters, from terminal and lateral buds; flowers
greenish-yellow, pendent on long thread-like, hairy stems; sterile and
fertile on the same or on different trees, usually in separate, but not
infrequently in the same cluster; the 5-lobed calyx cylindrical or
bell-shaped, hairy; petals none; stamens 6-8, in sterile flowers much
longer than the calyx, in fertile scarcely exserted; ovary smooth,
abortive in sterile flowers, in fertile surmounted by a single style
with two divergent, thread-like, stigmatic lobes.

=Fruit.=--Keys usually an inch or more in length, glabrous, wings broad,
mostly divergent, falling late in autumn.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy throughout New England. Its long life,
noble proportions, beautiful foliage, dense shade, moderately rapid
growth, usual freedom from disease or insect disfigurement, and
adaptability to almost any soil not saturated with water make it a
favorite in cultivation; readily obtainable in nurseries, transplants
easily, recovers its vigor quickly, and has a nearly uniform habit of
growth.

=Note.=--Not liable to be taken for any other native maple, but
sometimes confounded with the cultivated Norway maple, _Acer
platanoides_, from which it is easily distinguished by the milky juice
which exudes from the broken petiole of the latter.

The leaves of the Norway maple are thinner, bright green and glabrous
beneath, and its keys diverge in a straight line.

[Illustration: PLATE LXXIII.--Acer saccharum.]

  1. Winter buds.
  2. Flowering branch.
  3. Sterile flower.
  4. Fertile flower, part of perianth and stamens removed.
  5. Fruiting branch.


=Acer saccharum, Marsh., var. nigrum, Britton.=

_Acer nigrum, Michx. Acer saccharinum,_ var. _nigrum, T. & G. Acer
barbatum,_ var. _nigrum, Sarg._

BLACK MAPLE.

=Habitat and Range.=--Low, damp ground on which, in New England at
least, the sugar maple is rarely if ever seen, or upon moist, rocky
slopes.

     Apparently a common tree from Ottawa westward throughout Ontario.

The New England specimens, with the exception of those from the
Champlain valley, appear to be dubious intermediates between the type
and the variety.

Maine,--the Rangeley lake region; New Hampshire,--occasional near the
Connecticut river; Vermont,--frequent in the western part in the
Champlain valley, occasional in all other sections, especially in the
vicinity of the Connecticut; Massachusetts,--occasional in the
Connecticut river valley and westward, doubtfully reported from eastern
sections; Rhode Island,--doubtful, resting on the authority of Colonel
Olney's list; Connecticut,--doubtfully reported.

     South along the Alleghanies to the Gulf states; west to the 95th
     meridian.

The extreme forms of _nigrum_ show well-marked varietal differences; but
there are few, if any, constant characters. Further research in the
field is necessary to determine the status of these interesting plants.

=Habit.=--The black maple is somewhat smaller than the sugar maple, the
bark is darker and the foliage more sombre. It generally has a
symmetrical outline, which it retains to old age.

=Leaves.=--The fully grown leaves are often larger than those of the
type, darker green above, edges sometimes drooping, width equal to or
exceeding the length, 5-lobed, margin blunt-toothed, wavy-toothed, or
entire, the two lower lobes small, often reduced to a curve in the
outline, broad at the base, which is usually heart-shaped; texture firm;
the lengthening scales of the opening leaves, the young shoots, the
petioles, and the leaves themselves are covered with a downy to a
densely woolly pubescence. As the parts mature, the woolliness usually
disappears, except along the midrib and principal veins, which become
almost glabrous.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy throughout New England, preferring a
moist, fertile, gravelly loam; young trees are rather more vigorous than
those of the sugar maple, and easily transplanted. Difficult to secure,
for it is seldom offered for sale or recognized by nurseries, although
occasionally found mixed with the sugar maple in nursery rows.

[Illustration: PLATE LXXIV.--Acer Saccharum, var. nigrum.]

  1. Fruiting branch.


=Acer spicatum, Lam.=

MOUNTAIN MAPLE.

=Habitat and Range.=--In damp forests, rocky highland woods, along the
sides of mountain brooks at altitudes of 500-1000 feet.

     From Nova Scotia and Newfoundland to Saskatchewan.

Maine,--common, especially northward in the forests; New Hampshire and
Vermont,--common; Massachusetts,--rather common in western and central
sections, occasional eastward; Rhode Island,--occasional northward;
Connecticut,--occasional in northern and central sections; reported as
far south as North Branford (New Haven county).

     Along mountain ranges to Georgia.

=Habit.=--Mostly a shrub, but occasionally attaining a height of 25
feet, with a diameter, near the ground, of 6-8 inches; characterized by
a short, straight trunk and slender branches; bright green foliage
turning a rich red in autumn, and long-stemmed, erect racemes of
delicate flowers, drooping at length beneath the weight of the maturing
keys.

=Bark.=--Bark of trunk thin, smoothish, grayish-brown; primary branches
gray; branchlets reddish-brown streaked with green, retaining in the
second year traces of pubescence; season's shoots yellowish-green,
reddish on the upper side when exposed to the sun, minutely pubescent.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds small, flattish, acute, slightly
divergent from the stem. Leaves simple, opposite, 4-5 inches long,
two-thirds as wide, pubescent on both sides when unfolding, at length
glabrous on the upper surface, 3-lobed above the center, often with two
small additional lobes at the base, coarsely or finely serrate, lobes
acuminate; base more or less heart-shaped; veining 3-5-nerved,
prominent, especially on the lower side, furrowed above; leafstalks
long, enlarged at the base.

=Inflorescence.=--June. Appearing after the expansion of the leaves, in
long-stemmed, terminal, more or less panicled, erect or slightly
drooping racemes; flowers small and numerous, both kinds in the same
raceme, the fertile near the base; all upon very slender pedicels; lobes
of calyx 5, greenish, downy, about half as long as the alternating
linear petals; stamens usually 8, in the sterile flower nearly as long
as the petals, in the fertile much shorter; pistil rudimentary, hairy in
the sterile flower; in the fertile the ovary is surmounted by an erect
style with short-lobed stigma.

=Fruit.=--In long racemes, drooping or pendent; the keys, which are
smaller than those of any other American maple, set on hair-like
pedicels, and at a wide but not constant angle; at length reddish, with
a small cavity upon one side.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy in cultivation throughout New England;
prefers moist, well-drained, gravelly loam in partial shade, but grows
well in any good soil; easily transplanted, but recovers its vigor
rather slowly; foliage free from disease.

Seldom grown in nurseries, but readily obtainable from northern
collectors of native plants.

[Illustration: PLATE LXXV.--Acer spicatum.]

  1. Winter buds.
  2. Flowering branch.
  3. Sterile flower.
  4. Abortive ovary in sterile flower.
  5. Fertile flower with part of the perianth and stamens removed.
  6. Fruiting branch.


=Acer Pennsylvanicum, L.=

STRIPED MAPLE. MOOSEWOOD. WHISTLEWOOD.

=Habitat and Range.=--Cool, rocky or sandy woods.

     Nova Scotia to Lake Superior.

Maine,--abundant, especially northward in the forests; New Hampshire and
Vermont,--common in highland woods; Massachusetts,--common in the
western and central sections, rare towards the coast; Rhode
Island,--frequent northward; Connecticut,--frequent, reported as far
south as Cheshire (New Haven county).

     South on shaded mountain slopes and in deep ravines to Georgia;
     west to Minnesota.

=Habit.=--Shrub or small tree, 15-25 feet high, with a diameter at the
ground of 5-8 inches; characterized by a slender, beautifully striate
trunk and straight branches; by the roseate flush of the opening
foliage, deepening later to a yellowish-green; and by the long,
graceful, pendent racemes of yellowish flowers, succeeded by the
abundant, drooping fruit.

=Bark.=--Bark of trunk and branches deep reddish-brown or dark green,
conspicuously striped longitudinally with pale and blackish bands;
roughish with light buff, irregular dots; the younger branches marked
with oval leaf-scars and the linear scars of the leaf-scales; the
season's shoots smooth, light green, mottled with black.

In spring the bark of the small branches is easily separable, giving
