is a shame to hide so much of yourselves with robes."

"Their eyes interpret colors differently than ours do," explained
Seaton. "What to us are harsh and discordant colors are light and
pleasing to their eyes. What looks like a kind of sloppy greenish black
to us may--in fact, does--look a pale pink to them."

"Are Kondal and Mardonale the only two nations upon Osnome?" asked
Crane.

"The only civilized nations, yes. Osnome is divided into two great and
almost equal continents, separated by a wide ocean which encircles the
globe. One is Kondal, the other Mardonale. Each nation has several
nations or tribes of savages, which inhabit various waste places."

       *       *       *       *       *

"You are the light race, Mardonale the dark," continued Crane. "What are
the servants, who seem half-way between?"

"They are slaves...."

"Captured savages?" interrupted Dorothy.

"No. They are a separate race. They are a race so low in intelligence
that they cannot exist except as slaves, but they can be trained to
understand language and to do certain kinds of work. They are harmless
and mild, making excellent servants, otherwise they would have perished
ages ago. All menial work and most of the manual labor is done by the
slave race. Formerly criminals were sterilized and reduced to unwilling
slavery, but there have been no unwilling slaves in Kondal for hundreds
of karkamo."

"Why? Are there no criminals any more?"

"No. With the invention of the thought recorder an absolutely fair trial
was assured and the guilty were all convicted. They could not reproduce
themselves, and as a natural result crime died out."

"That is," he added hastily, "what we regard as crime. Duelling, for
instance, is a crime upon Earth; here it is a regular custom. In Kondal
duels are rather rare and are held only when honor is involved, but here
in Mardonale they are an every-day affair, as you saw when you landed."

"What makes the difference?" asked Dorothy curiously.

"As you know, with us every man is a soldier. In Kondal we train our
youth in courage, valor, and high honor--in Mardonale they train them in
savage blood-thirstiness alone. Each nation fixed its policy in bygone
ages to produce the type of soldier it thought most efficient."

"I notice that everyone here wears those heavy collars," said Margaret.
"What are they for?"

"They are identification marks. When a child is nearly grown, a collar
bearing his name and the device of his house is cast about his neck.
This collar is made of 'arenak,' a synthetic metal which, once formed,
cannot be altered by any usual means. It cannot be scratched, cut, bent,
broken, or worked in any way except at such a high temperature that
death would result, if such heat were applied to the collar. Once the
arenak collar is cast about a person's neck he is identified for life,
and any adult Osnomian not wearing a collar is put to death."

"That must be an interesting metal," remarked Crane. "Is your belt a
similar mark?"

"This belt is an idea of my own," and Dunark smiled broadly. "It looks
like opaque arenak, but isn't. It is merely a pouch in which I carry
anything I am particularly interested in. Even Nalboon thought it was
arenak, so he didn't trouble to try to open it. If he had opened it and
taken my tools and instruments, I couldn't have built the educator."

"Is that transparent armor arenak?"

"Yes, the only difference being that nothing is added to the matrix to
color or make opaque the finished metal. It is in the preparation of
this metal that salt is indispensable. It acts only as a catalyst, being
recovered afterward, but neither nation has ever had enough salt to make
all the armor they want."

"Aren't those monsters--karlono, I think you called them--covered by the
same thing? And what are those animals, anyway?" Dorothy asked.

"Yes, they are armored with arenak, and it is thought that the beasts
grow it, the same as fishes grow scales. The karlono are the most
frightful scourge of Osnome. Very little is known of them, though every
scientist has theorized upon them since time immemorial. It is very
seldom that one is ever killed, as they easily outfly our swiftest
battleships, and only fight when they can be victorious. To kill one
requires a succession of the heaviest high-explosive shells in the same
spot, a joint in the armor; and after the armor is once penetrated, the
animal is blown into such small fragments that reconstruction is
impossible. From such remains it has been variously described as a bird,
a beast, a fish, and a vegetable; sexual, asexual, and hermaphroditic.
Its habitat is unknown, it being variously supposed to live high in the
air, deep in the ocean, and buried in the swamps. Another theory is that
they live upon one of our satellites, which encounters our belt of
atmosphere every karkam. Nothing is certainly known about the monsters
except their terrible destructiveness and their insatiable appetites.
One of them will devour five or six airships at one time, absorbing the
crews and devouring the cargo and all of the vessels except the very
hardest of the metal parts."

"Do they usually go in groups?" asked Crane. "If they do, I should think
that a fleet of warships would be necessary for every party."

"No, they are almost always found alone. Only very rarely are two found
together. This is the first time in history that more than two have ever
been seen together. Two battleships can always defeat one karlon, so
they are never attacked. With four battleships Nalboon considered his
expedition perfectly safe, especially as they are now rare. The navies
hunted down and killed what was supposed to be the last one upon Osnome
more than a karkam ago, and none have been seen since, until we were
attacked...."

       *       *       *       *       *

The gong over the door sounded and the Kondalians leaped to their
positions back of the Earthly visitors. The Kofedix went to the door.
Nalboon brushed him aside and entered, escorted by a full company of
heavily-armed soldiery. A scowl of anger was upon his face and he was
plainly in an ugly mood.

"Stop, Nalboon of Mardonale!" thundered Seaton in the Mardonalian tongue
and with the full power of his mighty voice. "Dare you invade my privacy
unannounced and without invitation?"

The escort shrank back, but the Domak stood his ground, although he was
plainly taken aback. With an apparent effort he smoothed his face into
lines of cordiality.

"I merely came to inquire why my guards are slain and my palace
destroyed by my honored guest?"

"As for slaying your guards, they sought to invade my privacy. I warned
them away, but one of them was foolish enough to try to kill me. Then
the others attempted to raise their childish rifles against me, and I
was obliged to destroy them. As for the wall, it happened to be in the
way of the thought-waves I hurled against your guards--consequently it
was demolished. An honored guest! Bah! Are honored guests put to the
indignity of being touched by the filthy hands of a mere ladex?"

"You do not object to the touch of slaves!" with a wave of his hand
toward the Kondalians.

"That is what slaves are for," coldly. "Is a Domak to wait upon himself
in the court of Mardonale? But to return to the issue. Were I an honored
guest this would never have happened. Know, Nalboon, that when you
attempt to treat a visiting Domak of MY race as a low-born captive, you
must be prepared to suffer the consequences of your rashness!"

"May I ask how you, so recently ignorant, know our language?"

"You question me? That is bold! Know that I, the Boss of the Road, show
ignorance or knowledge, when and where I please. You may go."




CHAPTER XV

The Escape from Mardonale


"That was a wonderful bluff, Dick!" exclaimed the Kofedix in English as
soon as Nalboon and his guards had disappeared. "That was exactly the
tone to take with him, too--you've sure got him guessing!"

"It seemed to get him, all right, but I'm wondering how long it'll hold
him. I think we'd better make a dash for the Skylark right now, before
he has time to think it over, don't you?"

"That is undoubtedly the best way," Dunark replied, lapsing into his own
tongue. "Nalboon is plainly in awe of you now, but if I understand him
at all, he is more than ever determined to seize your vessel, and every
darkam's delay is dangerous."

The Earth-people quickly secured the few personal belongings they had
brought with them. Stepping out into the hall and waving away the
guards, Seaton motioned Dunark to lead the way. The other captives fell
in behind, as they had done before, and the party walked boldly toward
the door of the palace. The guards offered no opposition, but stood at
attention and saluted as they passed. As they approached the entrance,
however, Seaton saw the major-domo hurrying away and surmised that he
was carrying the news to Nalboon. Outside the door, walking directly
toward the landing dock, Dunark spoke in a low voice to Seaton, without
turning.

"Nalboon knows by this time that we are making our escape, and it will
be war to the death from here to the Skylark. I do not think there will
be any pursuit from the palace, but he has warned the officers in charge
of the dock and they will try to kill us as soon as we step out of the
elevator, perhaps sooner. Nalboon intended to wait, but we have forced
his hand and the dock is undoubtedly swarming with soldiers now. Shoot
first and oftenest. Shoot first and think afterward. Show no mercy, as
you will receive none--remember that the quality you call 'mercy' does
not exist upon Osnome."

Rounding a great metal statue about fifty feet from the base of the
towering dock, they saw that the door leading into one of the elevators
was wide open and that two guards stood just inside it. As they caught
sight of the approaching party, the guards raised their rifles; but,
quick as they were, Seaton was quicker. At the first sight of the open
door he had made two quick steps and had hurled himself across the
intervening forty feet in a long football plunge. Before the two guards
could straighten, he crashed into them, his great momentum hurling them
across the elevator cage and crushing them into unconsciousness against
its metal wall.

"Good work!" said Dunark, as he preceded the others into the elevator,
and, after receiving Seaton's permission, distributed the weapons of the
two guards among the men of his party. "Now we can surprise those upon
the roof. That was why you didn't shoot?"

"Yes, I was afraid to risk a shot--it would give the whole thing away,"
Seaton replied, as he threw the unconscious guards out into the grounds
and closed the massive door.

"Aren't you going to kill them?" asked Sitar, amazement in every feature
and a puzzled expression in her splendid eyes. A murmur arose from the
other Kondalians, which was quickly silenced by the Kofedix.

"It is dishonorable for a soldier of Earth to kill a helpless prisoner,"
he said briefly. "We cannot understand it, but we must not attempt to
sway him in any point of honor."

Dunark stepped to the controls and the elevator shot upward, stopping at
a landing several stories below the top of the dock. He took a peculiar
device from his belt and fitted it over the muzzle of his strange
pistol.

"We will get out here," he instructed the others, "and go up the rest of
the way by a little-used flight of stairs. We will probably encounter
some few guards, but I can dispose of them without raising an alarm. You
will all stay behind me, please."

Seaton remonstrated, and Dunark went on:

"No, Seaton, you have done your share, and more. I am upon familiar
ground now, and can do the work alone better than if you were to help
me. I will call upon you, however, before we reach the dock."

The Kofedix led the way, his pistol resting lightly against his hip, and
at the first turn of the corridor they came full upon four guards. The
pistol did not move from its place at the side of the leader, but there
were four subdued clicks and the four guards dropped dead, with bullets
through their brains.

"Seaton, that is _some_ silencer," whispered DuQuesne. "I didn't suppose
a silencer could work that fast."

"They don't use powder," Seaton replied absently, all his faculties
directed toward the next corner. "The bullets are propelled by an
electrical charge."

In the same manner Dunark disposed of several more guards before the
last stairway was reached.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Seaton," he whispered in English, "now is the time we need your rapid
pistol-work and your high-explosive shells. There must be hundreds of
soldiers on the other side of that door, armed with machine-cannon
shooting high-explosive shells at the rate of a thousand per minute. Our
chance is this--their guns are probably trained upon the elevators and
main stairways, since this passage is unused and none of us would be
expected to know of it. Most of them don't know of it themselves. It
will take them a second or two to bring their guns to bear upon us. We
must do all the damage we can--kill them all, if possible--in that
second or two. If Crane will lend me a pistol, we'll make the rush
together."

"I've a better scheme than that," interrupted DuQuesne. "Next to you,
Seaton, I'm the fastest man with a gun here. Also, like you, I can use
both hands at once. Give me a couple of clips of those special
cartridges and you and I will blow that bunch into the air before they
know we're here."

It was decided that the two pistol experts should take the lead, closely
followed by Crane and Dunark. The weapons were loaded to capacity and
put in readiness for instant use.

"Let's go, bunch!" said Seaton. "The quicker we start the quicker we'll
get back. Get ready to run out there, all the rest of you, as soon as
the battle's over. Ready? On your marks--get set--go!"

He kicked the door open and there was a stuttering crash as the four
automatic pistols simultaneously burst into practically continuous
flame--a crash obliterated by an overwhelming concussion of sound as the
X-plosive shells, sweeping the entire roof with a rapidly-opening fan of
death, struck their marks and exploded. Well it was for the little group
of wanderers that the two men in the door were past masters in the art
of handling their weapons; well it was that they had in their tiny
pistol-bullets the explosive force of hundreds of giant shells! For rank
upon rank of soldiery were massed upon the roof; rapid-fire cannon,
terrible engines of destruction, were pointing toward the elevators and
toward the main stairways and approaches. But so rapid and fierce was
the attack, that even those trained gunners had no time to point their
guns. The battle lasted little more than a second, being over before
either Crane or Dunark could fire a shot, and silence again reigned even
while broken and shattered remnants of the guns and fragments of the
metal and stone of the dock were still falling to the ground through a
fine mist of what had once been men.

Assured by a rapid glance that not a single Mardonalian remained upon
the dock, Seaton turned back to the others.

"Make it snappy, bunch! This is going to be a mighty unhealthy spot for
us in a few minutes."

Dorothy threw her arms around his neck in relief. With one arm about
her, he hastily led the way across the dock toward the Skylark, choosing
the path with care because of the yawning holes blown into the structure
by the terrific force of the explosions. The Skylark was still in place,
held immovable by the attractor, but what a sight she was! Her crystal
windows were shattered; her mighty plates of four-foot Norwegian armor
were bent and cracked and twisted; two of her doors, warped and
battered, hung awry from their broken hinges. Not a shell had struck
her: all this damage had been done by flying fragments of the guns and
of the dock itself; and Seaton and Crane, who had developed the new
explosive, stood aghast at its awful power.

They hastily climbed into the vessel, and Seaton assured himself that
the controls were uninjured.

"I hear battleships," Dunark said. "Is it permitted that I operate one
of your machine guns?"

"Go as far as you like," responded Seaton, as he placed the women
beneath the copper bar--the safest place in the vessel--and leaped to
the instrument board. Before he reached it, and while DuQuesne, Crane,
and Dunark were hastening to the guns, the whine of giant
helicopter-screws was plainly heard. A ranging shell from the first
warship, sighted a little low, exploded against the side of the dock
beneath them. He reached the levers just as the second shell screamed
through the air a bare four feet above them. As he shot the Skylark into
the air under five notches of power, a steady stream of the huge bombs
poured through the spot where, an instant before, the vessel had been.
Crane and DuQuesne aimed several shots at the battleships, which were
approaching from all sides, but the range was so extreme that no damage
was done.

They heard the continuous chattering of the machine gun operated by the
Kofedix, however, and turned toward him. He was shooting, not at the
warships, but at the city rapidly growing smaller beneath them; moving
