carbon remains in chemical combination with the iron, and the product is
called white cast iron. If the cooling goes on slowly, the carbon
partially separates as flakes of graphite which remain scattered through
the metal. This product is softer and darker in color and is called gray
cast iron.

~Properties of cast iron.~ Cast iron is hard, brittle, and rather easily
melted (melting point about 1100 deg.). It cannot be welded or forged into
shape, but is easily cast in sand molds. It is strong and rigid but not
elastic. It is used for making castings and in the manufacture of other
kinds of iron. Cast iron, which contains the metal manganese up to the
extent of 20%, together with about 3% carbon, is called spiegel iron;
when more than this amount of manganese is present the product is called
ferromanganese. The ferromanganese may contain as much as 80% manganese.
These varieties of cast iron are much used in the manufacture of steel.

~Wrought iron.~ Wrought iron is made by burning out from cast iron most of
the carbon, silicon, phosphorus, and sulphur which it contains. The
process is called _puddling_, and is carried out in a furnace
constructed as represented in Fig. 86. The floor of the furnace F is
somewhat concave and is made of iron covered with a layer of iron oxide.
A long flame produced by burning fuel upon the grate G is directed
downward upon the materials placed upon the floor, and the draught is
maintained by the stack S. A is the ash box and T a trap to catch
the solid particles carried into the stack by the draught. Upon the
floor of the furnace is placed the charge of cast iron, together with a
small amount of material to make a slag. The iron is soon melted by the
flame directed upon it, and the sulphur, phosphorus, and silicon are
oxidized by the iron oxide, forming oxides which are anhydrides of
acids. These combine with the flux, which is basic in character, or with
the iron oxide, to form a slag. The carbon is also oxidized and escapes
as carbon dioxide. As the iron is freed from other elements it becomes
pasty, owing to the higher melting point of the purer iron, and in this
condition forms small lumps which are raked together into a larger one.
The large lump is then removed from the furnace and rolled or hammered
into bars, the slag; being squeezed out in this process. The product has
a stranded or fibrous structure. _The product of a puddling furnace is
called wrought iron._

[Illustration: Fig. 86]

~Properties of wrought iron.~ Wrought iron is nearly pure iron, usually
containing about 0.3% of other substances, chiefly carbon. It is tough,
malleable, and fibrous in structure. It is easily bent and is not
elastic, so it will not sustain pressure as well as cast iron. It can be
drawn out into wire of great tensile strength, and can also be rolled
into thin sheets (sheet iron). It melts at a high temperature (about
1600 deg.) and is therefore forged into shape rather than cast. If melted,
it would lose its fibrous structure and be changed into a low carbon
steel.

~Steel.~ Steel, like wrought iron, is made by burning out from cast iron a
part of the carbon, silicon, phosphorus, and sulphur which it contains;
but the process is carried out in a very different way, and usually,
though not always, more carbon is found in steel than in wrought iron. A
number of processes are in use, but nearly all the steel of commerce is
made by one of the two following methods.

[Illustration: Fig. 87]

1. _Bessemer process._ This process, invented about 1860, is by far the
most important. It is carried out in great egg-shaped crucibles called
converters (Fig. 87), each one of which will hold as much as 15 tons of
steel. The converter is built of steel and lined with silica. It is
mounted on trunnions T, so that it can be tipped over on its side for
filling and emptying. One of the trunnions is hollow and a pipe P
connects it with an air chamber A, which forms a false bottom to the
converter. The true bottom is perforated, so that air can be forced in
by an air blast admitted through the trunnion and the air chamber.

White-hot, liquid cast iron from a blast furnace is run into the
converter through its open necklike top O, the converter being tipped
over to receive it; the air blast is then turned on and the converter
rotated to a nearly vertical position. The elements in the iron are
rapidly oxidized, the silicon first and then the carbon. The heat
liberated in the oxidation, largely due to the combustion of silicon,
keeps the iron in a molten condition. When the carbon is practically all
burned out cast iron or spiegel iron, containing a known percentage of
carbon, is added and allowed to mix thoroughly with the fluid. The steel
is then run into molds, and the ingots so formed are hammered or rolled
into rails or other forms. By this process any desired percentage of
carbon can be added to the steel. Low carbon steel, which does not
differ much from wrought iron in composition, is now made in this way
and is replacing the more expensive wrought iron for many purposes.

     ~The basic lining process.~ When the cast iron contains
     phosphorus and sulphur in appreciable quantities, the lining of
     the converter is made of dolomite. The silicon and carbon burn,
     followed by the phosphorus and sulphur, and the anhydrides of
     acids so formed combine with the basic oxides of the lining,
     forming a slag. This is known as the basic lining process.

2. _Open-hearth process._ In this process a furnace very similar to a
puddling furnace is used, but it is lined with silica or dolomite
instead of iron oxide. A charge consisting in part of old scrap iron of
any kind and in part of cast iron is melted in the furnace by a gas
flame. The silicon and carbon are slowly burned away, and when a test
shows that the desired percentage of carbon is present the steel is run
out of the furnace. _Steel may therefore be defined as the product of
the Bessemer or open-hearth processes._

~Properties of steel.~ Bessemer and open-hearth steel usually contain only
a few tenths of a per cent of carbon, less than 0.1% silicon, and a very
much smaller quantity of phosphorus and sulphur. Any considerable amount
of the latter elements makes the steel brittle, the sulphur affecting it
when hot, and the phosphorus when cold. This kind of steel is used for
structural purposes, for rails, and for nearly all large steel articles.
It is hard, malleable, ductile, and melts at a lower temperature than
wrought iron. It can be forged into shape, rolled into sheets, or cast
in molds.

~Relation of the three varieties of iron.~ It will be seen that wrought
iron is usually very nearly pure iron, while steel contains an
appreciable amount of alloy material, chiefly carbon, and cast iron
still more of the same substances. It is impossible, however, to assign
a given sample of iron to one of these three classes on the basis of its
chemical composition alone. A low carbon steel, for example, may contain
less carbon than a given sample of wrought iron. The real distinction
between the three is the process by which they are made. The product of
the blast furnace is cast iron; that of the puddling furnace is wrought
iron; that of the Bessemer and open-hearth methods is steel.

~Tool steel.~ Steel designed for use in the manufacture of edged tools and
similar articles should be relatively free from silicon and phosphorus,
but should contain from 0.5 to 1.5% carbon. The percentage of carbon
should be regulated by the exact use to which the steel is to be put.
Steel of this character is usually made in small lots from either
Bessemer or open-hearth steel in the following way.

A charge of melted steel is placed in a large crucible and the
calculated quantity of pure carbon is added. The carbon dissolves in the
steel, and when the solution is complete the metal is poured out of the
crucible. This is sometimes called crucible steel.

~Tempering of steel.~ Steel containing from 0.5 to 1.5% carbon is
characterized by the property of "taking temper." When the hot steel is
suddenly cooled by plunging it into water or oil it becomes very hard
and brittle. On carefully reheating this hard form it gradually becomes
less brittle and softer, so that by regulating the temperature to which
steel is reheated in tempering almost any condition of temper demanded
for a given purpose, such as for making springs or cutting tools, can be
obtained.

~Steel alloys.~ It has been found that small quantities of a number of
different elements when alloyed with steel very much improve its quality
for certain purposes, each element having a somewhat different effect.
Among the elements most used in this connection are manganese, silicon,
chromium, nickel, tungsten, and molybdenum.

The usual method for adding these elements to the steel is to first
prepare a very rich alloy of iron with the element to be added, and then
add enough of this alloy to a large quantity of the steel to bring it to
the desired composition. A rich alloy of iron with manganese or silicon
can be prepared directly in a blast furnace, and is called
ferromanganese or ferrosilicon. Similar alloys of iron with the other
elements mentioned are made in an electric furnace by reducing the mixed
oxides with carbon.

~Pure iron.~ Perfectly pure iron is rarely prepared and is not adapted to
commercial uses. It can be made by reducing pure oxide of iron in a
current of hydrogen at a high temperature. Prepared in this way it
forms a black powder; when melted it forms a tin-white metal which is
less fusible and more malleable than wrought iron. It is easily acted
upon by moist air.

~Compounds of iron.~ Iron differs from the metals so far studied in that
it is able to form two series of compounds in which the iron has two
different valences. In the one series the iron is divalent and forms
compounds which in formulas and many chemical properties are similar to
the corresponding zinc compounds. It can also act as a trivalent metal,
and in this condition forms salts similar to those of aluminium. Those
compounds in which the iron is divalent are known as _ferrous_
compounds, while those in which it is trivalent are known as _ferric_.

~Oxides of iron.~ Iron forms several oxides. Ferrous oxide (FeO) is not
found in nature, but can be prepared artificially in the form of a black
powder which easily takes up oxygen, forming ferric oxide:

    2FeO + O = Fe_{2}O_{3}.

Ferric oxide is the most abundant ore of iron and occurs in great
deposits, especially in the Lake Superior region. It is found in many
mineral varieties which vary in density and color, the most abundant
being hematite, which ranges in color from red to nearly black. When
prepared by chemical processes it forms a red powder which is used as a
paint pigment (Venetian red) and as a polishing powder (rouge).

Magnetite has the formula Fe_{3}O_{4} and is a combination of FeO and
Fe_{2}O_{3}. It is a very valuable ore, but is less abundant than
hematite. It is sometimes called magnetic oxide of iron, or lodestone,
since it is a natural magnet.

~Ferrous salts.~ These salts are obtained by dissolving iron in the
appropriate acid, or, when insoluble, by precipitation. They are usually
light green in color and crystallize well. In chemical reactions they
are quite similar to the salts of magnesium and zinc, but differ from
them in one important respect, namely, that they are easily changed into
compounds in which the metal is trivalent. Thus ferrous chloride treated
with chlorine or aqua regia is changed into ferric chloride:

    FeCl_{2} + Cl = FeCl_{3}.

Ferrous hydroxide exposed to moist air is rapidly changed into ferric
hydroxide:

    2Fe(OH)_{2} + H_{2}O + O = 2Fe(OH)_{3}.

~Ferrous sulphate~ _(copperas, green vitriol)_ (FeSO_{4}.7H_{2}O). Ferrous
sulphate is the most familiar ferrous compound. It is prepared
commercially as a by-product in the steel-plate mills. Steel plates are
cleaned by the action of dilute sulphuric acid upon them, and in the
process some of the iron dissolves. The liquors are concentrated and the
green vitriol separates from them.

~Ferrous sulphide~ (FeS). Ferrous sulphide is sometimes found in nature as
a golden-yellow crystalline mineral. It is formed as a black precipitate
when a soluble sulphide and an iron salt are brought together in
solution:

    FeSO_{4} + Na_{2}S = FeS + Na_{2}SO_{4}.

It can also be made as a heavy dark-brown solid by fusing together the
requisite quantities of sulphur and iron. It is obtained as a by-product
in the metallurgy of lead:

    PbS + Fe = FeS + Pb.

It is used in the laboratory in the preparation of hydrosulphuric acid:

    FeS + 2HCl = FeCl_{2} + H_{2}S.

~Iron disulphide~ _(pyrites)_ (FeS_{2}). This substance bears the same
relation to ferrous sulphide that hydrogen dioxide does to water. It
occurs abundantly in nature in the form of brass-yellow cubical crystals
and in compact masses. Sometimes the name "fool's gold" is applied to it
from its superficial resemblance to the precious metal. It is used in
very large quantities as a source of sulphur dioxide in the manufacture
of sulphuric acid, since it burns readily in the air, forming ferric
oxide and sulphur dioxide:

    2FeS_{2} + 11O = Fe_{2}O_{3} + 4SO_{2}.

~Ferrous carbonate~ (FeCO_{3}). This compound occurs in nature as
siderite, and is a valuable ore. It will dissolve to some extent in
water containing carbon dioxide, just as will calcium carbonate, and
waters containing it are called chalybeate waters. These chalybeate
waters are supposed to possess certain medicinal virtues and form an
important class of mineral waters.

~Ferric salts.~ Ferric salts are usually obtained by treating an acidified
solution of a ferrous salt with an oxidizing agent:

    2FeCl_{2} + 2HCl + O = 2FeCl_{3} + H_{2}O,

    2FeSO_{4} + H_{2}SO_{4} + O = Fe_{2}(SO_{4})_{3} + H_{2}O.

They are usually yellow or violet in color, are quite soluble, and as a
rule do not crystallize well. Heated with water in the absence of free
acid, they hydrolyze even more readily than the salts of aluminium. The
most familiar ferric salts are the chloride and the sulphate.

~Ferric chloride~ (FeCl_{3}). This salt can be obtained most conveniently
by dissolving iron in hydrochloric acid and then passing chlorine into
the solution:

    Fe + 2HCl = FeCl_{2} + 2H,

    FeCl_{2} + Cl = FeCl_{3}.

When the pure salt is heated with water it is partly hydrolyzed:

    FeCl_{3} + 3 H_{2}O <--> Fe(OH)_{3} + 3HCl.

This is a reversible reaction, however, and hydrolysis can therefore be
prevented by first adding a considerable amount of the soluble product
of the reaction, namely, hydrochloric acid.

~Ferric sulphate~ (Fe_{2}(SO_{4})_{3}). This compound can be made by
treating an acid solution of green vitriol with an oxidizing agent. It
is difficult to crystallize and hard to obtain in pure condition. When
an alkali sulphate in proper quantity is added to ferric sulphate in
solution an iron alum is formed, and is easily obtained in
large crystals. The best known iron alums have the formulas
KFe(SO_{4})_{2}.12H_{2}O and NH_{4}Fe(SO_{4})_{2}.12H_{2}O. They are
commonly used when a pure ferric salt is required.

~Ferric hydroxide~ (Fe(OH)_{3}). When solutions of ferric salts are
treated with ammonium hydroxide, ferric hydroxide is formed as a
rusty-red precipitate, insoluble in water.

~Iron cyanides.~ A large number of complex cyanides containing iron are
known, the most important being potassium ferrocyanide, or yellow
prussiate of potash (K_{4}FeC_{6}N_{6}), and potassium ferricyanide, or
red prussiate of potash (K_{3}FeC_{6}N_{6}). These compounds are the
potassium salts of the complex acids of the formulas H_{4}FeC_{6}N_{6}
and H_{3}FeC_{6}N_{6}.

~Oxidation of ferrous salts.~ It has just been seen that when a ferrous
salt is treated with an oxidizing agent in the presence of a free acid a
ferric salt is formed:

    2FeSO_{4} + H_{2}SO_{4} + O = Fe_{2}(SO_{4})_{3} + H_{2}O.

In this reaction oxygen is used up, and the valence of the iron is
changed from 2 to 3. The same equation may be written

    2Fe^{++}, 2SO_{4}^{--} + 2H^{+}, SO_{4}^{--} + O
      = 2Fe^{+++}, 3SO_{4}^{--} + H_{2}O.

Hydrogen ions have been oxidized to water, while the charge of each iron
ion has been increased from 2 to 3.

In a similar way the conversion of ferrous chloride into ferric chloride
may be written

    Fe^{++}, 2Cl^{-} + Cl = Fe^{+++}, + 3Cl^{-}.

Here again the valence of the iron and the charge on the iron ion has
been increased from 2 to 3, though no oxygen has entered into the
reaction. As a rule, however, changes of this kind are brought about by
the use of an oxidizing agent, and are called oxidations.

The term "oxidation" is applied to all reactions in which the valence of
the metal of a compound is increased, or, in other words, to all
reactions in which the charge of a cation is increased.

~Reduction of ferric salts.~ The changes which take place when a ferric
salt is converted into a ferrous salt are the reverse of the ones just
described. This is seen in the equation

    FeCl_{3} + H = FeCl_{2} + HCl

In this reaction the valence of the iron has been changed from 3 to 2.
The same equation may be written

    Fe^{+++}, 3Cl_{-} + H = Fe^{++}, + H^{+} + 3Cl_{-}

It will be seen that the charge of the iron ions has been diminished
from 3 to 2. Since these changes are the reverse of the oxidation
changes just considered, they are called reduction reactions. The term
"reduction" is applied to all processes in which the valence of the
metal of a compound is diminished, or, in other words, to all processes
in which the charge on the cations is diminished.


NICKEL AND COBALT

These elements occur sparingly in nature, usually combined with arsenic
or with arsenic and sulphur. Both elements have been found in the free
state in meteorites. Like iron they form two series of compounds, but
the salts corresponding to the ferrous salts are the most common, the
ones corresponding to the ferric salts being difficult to obtain. Thus
we have the chlorides NiCl_{2}.6H_{2}O and CoCl_{2}.6H_{2}O; the
sulphates NiSO_{4}.7H_{2}O and CoSO_{4}.7H_{2}O; the nitrates
Ni(NO_{3})_{2}.6H_{2}O and Co(NO_{3})_{2}.6H_{2}O.

Nickel is largely used as an alloy with other metals. Alloyed with
copper it forms coin metal from which five-cent pieces are made, with
copper and zinc it forms German silver, and when added to steel in small
quantities nickel steel is formed which is much superior to common steel
for certain purposes. When deposited by electrolysis upon the surface of
other metals such as iron, it forms a covering which will take a high
polish and protects the metal from rust, nickel not being acted upon by
moist air. Salts of nickel are usually green.

Compounds of cobalt fused with glass give it an intensely blue color. In
powdered form such glass is sometimes used as a pigment called smalt.
Cobalt salts, which contain water of crystallization, are usually cherry
red in color; when dehydrated they become blue.


EXERCISES

1. In the manufacture of cast iron, why is the air heated before being
forced into the furnace?

2. Write the equations showing how each of the following compounds of
iron could be obtained from the metal itself: ferrous chloride, ferrous
hydroxide, ferrous sulphate, ferrous sulphide, ferrous carbonate, ferric
chloride, ferric sulphate, ferric hydroxide.

3. Account for the fact that a solution of sodium carbonate, when added
to a solution of a ferric salt, precipitates an hydroxide and not a
carbonate.

4. Calculate the percentage of iron in each of the common iron ores.

5. One ton of steel prepared by the Bessemer process is found by
analysis to contain 0.2% carbon. What is the minimum weight of carbon
which must be added in order that the steel may be made to take a
temper?




CHAPTER XXVIII

COPPER, MERCURY, AND SILVER


==================================================================
        |        |        |         |         |
        |        |        |         |         | FORMULAS OF OXIDES
        | SYMBOL | ATOMIC | DENSITY | MELTING |___________________
        |        | WEIGHT |         |  POINT  |          |
        |        |        |         |         |  "ous"   |  "ic"
________|________|________|_________|_________|__________|________
        |        |        |         |         |          |
Copper  |   Cu   |  63.6  |   8.89  | 1084 deg.   |  Cu_{2}O |  CuO
Mercury |   Hg   | 200.00 |  13.596 |  -39.5 deg. |  Hg_{2}O |  HgO
Silver  |   Ag   | 107.93 |  10.5   |  960 deg.   |  Ag_{2}O |  AgO
==================================================================

~The family.~ By referring to the periodic arrangement of the elements
(page 168), it will be seen that mercury is not included in the same
family with copper and silver. Since the metallurgy of the three
elements is so similar, however, and since they resemble each other so
closely in chemical properties, it is convenient to class them together
for study.

1. _Occurrence._ The three elements occur in nature to some extent in
the free state, but are usually found as sulphides. Their ores are easy
to reduce.

2. _Properties._ They are heavy metals of high luster and are especially
good conductors of heat and electricity. They are not very active
chemically. Neither hydrochloric nor dilute sulphuric acid has any
appreciable action upon them. Concentrated sulphuric acid attacks all
three, forming metallic sulphates and evolving sulphur dioxide, while
nitric acid, both dilute and concentrated, converts them into nitrates
with the evolution of oxides of nitrogen.

3. _Two series of salts._ Copper and mercury form oxides of the types
M_{2}O and MO, as well as two series of salts. In one series the metals
are univalent and the salts have formulas like those of the sodium
salts. They are called cuprous and mercurous salts. In the other series
the metals are divalent and resemble magnesium salts in formulas. These
are called cupric and mercuric salts. Silver forms only one series of
salts, being always a univalent metal.


COPPER

~Occurrence.~ The element copper has been used for various purposes since
the earliest days of history. It is often found in the metallic state in
nature, large masses of it occurring pure in the Lake Superior region
and in other places to a smaller extent. The most valuable ores are the
following:

    Cuprite         Cu_{2}O.
    Chalcocite      Cu_{2}S.
    Chalcopyrite    CuFeS_{2}.
    Bornite         Cu_{3}FeS_{3}.
    Malachite       CuCO_{3}.Cu(OH)_{2}.
    Azurite         2CuCO_{3}.Cu(OH)_{2}.

~Metallurgy of copper.~ Ores containing little or no sulphur are easy to
reduce. They are first crushed and the earthy impurities washed away.
The concentrated ore is then mixed with carbon and heated in a furnace,
metallic copper resulting from the reduction of the copper oxide by the
hot carbon.

     ~Metallurgy of sulphide ores.~ Much of the copper of commerce is
     made from chalcopyrite and bornite, and these ores are more
     difficult to work. They are first roasted in the air, by which
     treatment much of the sulphur is burned to sulphur dioxide. The
     roasted ore is then melted in a small blast furnace or in an
     open one like a puddling furnace. In melting, part of the iron
     combines with silica to form a slag of iron silicate. The
     product, called crude matte, contains about 50% copper together
     with sulphur and iron. Further purification is commonly carried
     on by a process very similar to the Bessemer process for steel.
     The converter is lined with silica, and a charge of matte from
     the melting furnace, together with sand, is introduced, and air
     is blown into the mass. By this means the sulphur is
     practically all burned out by the air, and the remaining iron
     combines with silica and goes off as slag. The copper is poured
     out of the converter and molded into anode plates for refining.

~Refining of copper.~ Impure copper is purified by electrolysis. A large
plate of it, serving as an anode, is suspended in a tank facing a thin
plate of pure copper, which is the cathode. The tank is filled with a
solution of copper sulphate and sulphuric acid to serve as the
electrolyte. A current from a dynamo passes from the anode to the
cathode, and the copper, dissolving from the anode, is deposited upon
the cathode in pure form, while the impurities collect on the bottom of
the tank. Electrolytic copper is one of the purest of commercial metals
and is very nearly pure copper.

     ~Recovery of gold and silver.~ Gold and silver are often present
     in small quantities in copper ores, and in electrolytic
     refining these metals collect in the muddy deposit on the
     bottom of the tank. The mud is carefully worked over from time
     to time and the precious metals extracted from it. A surprising
     amount of gold and silver is obtained in this way.

~Properties of copper.~ Copper is a rather heavy metal of density 8.9, and
has a characteristic reddish color. It is rather soft and is very
malleable, ductile, and flexible, yet tough and strong; it melts at
1084 deg.. As a conductor of heat and electrical energy it is second only to
silver.

Hydrochloric acid, dilute sulphuric acid, and fused alkalis are almost
without action upon it; nitric acid and hot, concentrated sulphuric
acid, however, readily dissolve it. In moist air it slowly becomes
covered with a thin layer of green basic carbonate; heated in the air it
is easily oxidized to black copper oxide (CuO).

~Uses.~ Copper is extensively used for electrical purposes, for roofs and
cornices, for sheathing the bottom of ships, and for making alloys. In
the following table the composition of some of these alloys is
indicated:

COMPOSITION OF ALLOYS OF COPPER IN PERCENTAGES

    Aluminium bronze copper (90 to 97%), aluminium (3 to 10%).
    Brass copper (63 to 73%), zinc (27 to 37%).
    Bronze copper (70 to 95%), zinc (1 to 25%), tin (1 to 18%).
    German silver copper (56 to 60%), zinc (20%), nickel (20 to 25%).
    Gold coin copper (10%), gold (90%).
    Gun metal copper (90%), tin (10%).
    Nickel coin copper (75%), nickel (25%)
    Silver coin copper (10%), silver (90%).

     ~Electrotyping.~ Matter is often printed from electrotype plates
     which are prepared as follows. The matter is set up in type and
     wax is firmly pressed down upon the face of it until a clear
     impression is obtained. The impressed side of the wax is coated
     with graphite and the impression is made the cathode in an
     electrolytic cell containing a copper salt in solution. When
     connected with a current the copper is deposited as a thin
     sheet upon the letters in wax, and when detached is a perfect
     copy of the type, the under part of the letters being hollow.
     The sheet is strengthened by pouring on the under surface a
     suitable amount of molten metal (commercial lead is used). The
     sheet so strengthened is then used in printing.

~Two series of copper compounds.~ Copper, like iron, forms two series of
compounds: in the cuprous compounds it is univalent; in the cupric it is
divalent. The cupric salts are much the more common of the two, since
the cuprous salts pass readily into cupric by oxidation.

~Cuprous compounds.~ The most important cuprous compound is the oxide
(Cu_{2}O), which occurs in nature as ruby copper or cuprite. It is a
bright red substance and can easily be prepared by heating copper to a
high temperature in a limited supply of air. It is used for imparting a
ruby color to glass.

By treating cuprous oxide with different acids a number of cuprous salts
can be made. Many of these are insoluble in water, the chloride (CuCl)
being the best known. When suspended in dilute hydrochloric acid it is
changed into cupric chloride, the oxygen taking part in the reaction
being absorbed from the air:

    2CuCl + 2HCl + O = 2CuCl_{2} + H_{2}O.

~Cupric compounds.~ Cupric salts are easily made by dissolving cupric
oxide in acids, or, when insoluble, by precipitation. Most of them are
blue or green in color, and the soluble ones crystallize well. Since
they are so much more familiar than the cuprous salts, they are
frequently called merely copper salts.

~Cupric oxide~ (CuO). This is a black insoluble substance obtained by
heating copper in excess of air, or by igniting the hydroxide or
nitrate. It is used as an oxidizing agent.

~Cupric hydroxide~ (Cu(OH)_{2}). The hydroxide prepared by treating a
solution of a copper salt with sodium hydroxide is a light blue
insoluble substance which easily loses water and changes into the oxide.
Heat applied to the liquid containing the hydroxide suspended in it
serves to bring about the reaction represented by the equation

    Cu(OH)_{2} = CuO + H_{2}O.

~Cupric sulphate~ (_blue vitriol_) (CuSO_{4}.5H_{2}O). This substance,
called blue vitriol or bluestone, is obtained as a by-product in a
