and spoke.

"Hi, Dottie, what's on your mind?"

"Nothing much," Dorothy's clear voice answered. "Got it done and can I
see it?"

"Sure--sit tight and I'll send a boat after you."

As he spoke, Rovol's flier darted into the air and away; and in two
minutes it returned, slowing abruptly as it landed. Dorothy stepped out,
radiant, and returned Seaton's enthusiastic caresses with equal fervor
before she spoke.

"Lover, I'm afraid you violated all known speed laws getting me over
here. Aren't you afraid of getting pinched?"

"Nope--not here. Besides, I didn't want to keep Rovol waiting--we're all
ready to go. Hop in here with me, this left-hand control's mine."

Rovol entered the tube, took his place, and waved his hand. Seaton's
hands swept over the keys and the whole gigantic structure wafted into
the air. Still upright, it was borne upon immense rods of force toward
the Area of Experiment, which was soon reached. Covered as the Area was
with fantastic equipment, there was no doubt as to their destination,
for in plain sight, dominating all the lesser instruments, there rose a
stupendous telescopic mounting, with an enormous hollow tube of metallic
lattice-work which could be intended for nothing else than their
projector. Approaching it carefully, Seaton deftly guided the projector
lengthwise into that hollow receptacle and anchored it in the exact
optical axis. Flashing beams of force made short work of welding the two
tubes together immovably with angles and lattices of the same purple
metal, the terminals of the variable-speed motors were attached to the
controllers, and everything was in readiness for the first trial.

"What special instructions do we need to run it, if any?" Seaton asked
of the First of Mechanism, who had lifted himself up into the projector.

"Very little. This motor governs the hour motion, that one the right
ascension. The potentiometers regulate the degree of vernier action--any
ratio is possible, from direct drive up to more than a hundred million
complete revolutions of that graduated dial to give you one second of
arc."

"Plenty fine, I'd say. Thanks a lot, ace. Whither away, Rovol--any
choice?"

"Anywhere you please, son, since this is merely a try-out."

"O. K. We'll hop over and tell Dunark hello."

The tube swung around into line with that distant planet and Seaton
stepped down hard, upon a pedal. Instantly they seemed infinite myriads
of miles out in space, the green system barely visible as a faint green
star behind them.

"Wow, that ray's fast!" exclaimed the pilot, ruefully. "I overshot about
a thousand light years. We'll try again, with considerably less power,"
and he rearranged and reset the dials and meters before him. Adjustment
after adjustment and many reductions in power had to be made before the
projection ceased leaping millions of miles at a touch, but finally the
operators became familiar with the new technique and the ray became
manageable. Soon they were hovering above what had been Mardonal, and
saw that all signs of warfare had disappeared. Slowly turning the
controls, Seaton flashed the projection over the girdling Osnomian sea
and guided it through the impregnable metal walls of the palace into the
throne room of Roban, where they saw the Emperor, Tarnan the Karbix, and
Dunark in close conference.

"Well, here we are," remarked Seaton. "Now we'll put on a little
visibility and give the natives a treat."

"Sh-sh," whispered Dorothy, "they'll hear you, Dick--we're intruding
shamefully."

"No, they won't hear us, because I haven't heterodyned the audio in on
the wave yet. And as for intruding, that's exactly what we came over
here for."

       *       *       *       *       *

He imposed the audio system upon the inconceivably high frequency of
their carrier wave and spoke in the Osnomian tongue.

"Greetings, Roban, Dunark, and Tarnan, from Seaton." All three jumped to
their feet, amazed, staring about the empty room as Seaton went on, "I
am not here in person. I am simply sending you my projection. Just a
moment and I will put on a little visibility."

He brought more forces into play, and solid images of force appeared in
the great hall; images of the three occupants of the controller.
Introductions and greetings over, Seaton spoke briefly and to the point.

"We've got everything we came after--much more than I had any idea we
could get. You need have no more fear of the Fenachrone--we have found a
science superior to theirs. But much remains to be done, and we have
none too much time; therefore I have come to you with certain requests."

"The Overlord has but to command," replied Roban.

"Not command, since we are all working together for a common cause. In
the name of that cause, Dunark, I ask you to come to me at once,
accompanied by Tarnan and any others you may select. You will be piloted
by a ray which we shall set upon your controls. Upon your way here you
will visit the First City of Dasor, another planet, where you will pick
up Sacner Carfon, who will be awaiting you there."

"As you direct, so it shall be," and Seaton flashed the projector to the
neighboring planet of Urvania. There he found that the gigantic
space-cruiser he had ordered had been completed, and requested Urvan and
his commander-in-chief to tow it to Norlamin, piloted by a ray. He then
jumped to Dasor, there interviewing Carfon and being assured of the full
co-operation of the porpoise-men.

"Well, that's that, folks," said Seaton as he shut off the power. "We
can't do much more for a few days, until the gang gets here for the
council of war. How'd it be, Rovol, for me to practice with this outfit
while you are finishing up the odds and ends you want to clean up? You
might suggest to Orlon, too, that it'd be a good deed for him to pilot
those folks over here."

As Rovol wafted himself to the ground from their lofty station, Crane
and Margaret appeared and were lifted up to the place formerly occupied
by the physicist.

"How's tricks, Mart? I hear you're quite an astronomer?" said Seaton.

"Yes, thanks to Orlon and the First of Psychology. He seemed quite
interested in increasing our Earthly knowledge. I certainly know much
more than I had ever hoped to know of anything."

"Yeah, you can pilot us to the Fenachrone system now without any
trouble. You also absorbed some ethnology and kindred sciences. What
d'you think--with Dunark and Urvan, do we know enough to go ahead or
should we take a chance on holding things up while we get acquainted
with some of the other peoples of these planets of the green system?"

"Delay is dangerous, as our time is already short," Crane replied after
a time. "We know enough, I believe; and furthermore, any additional
assistance is problematical; in fact, it is more than doubtful. The
Norlaminians have surveyed the system rather thoroughly, and no other
planet seems to have inhabitants who have even approached the
development attained here."

"Right--that's the way I dope it, exactly. We'll wait until the gang
assembles, then go over the top. In the meantime, I called you over to
take a ride in this projector--it's a darb. I'd like to shoot for the
Fenachrone system first, but I don't quite dare to."

"Don't _dare_ to? You?" scoffed Margaret. "How come?"

"Cancel the 'dare'--change it to 'prefer not to.' Why? Because while
they can't work through a zone of force, some of their real
scientists--and they have lots of them, not like the bull-headed soldier
we captured--may well be able to detect a fifth-order ray--even if they
can't work with them intelligently--and if they detected our ray, it'd
put them on guard."

"You are exactly right, Dick," agreed Crane. "And there speaks the
Norlaminian physicist, and not my old and reckless playmate Richard
Seaton."

"Oh, I don't know--I told you I was getting timid as a mouse. But let's
not sit here twiddling our thumbs--let's go places and do things.
Whither away? I want a destination a good ways off, not something in our
own back yard."

"Go back home, of course, stupe," put in Dorothy, "do you have to be
told every little thing?"

"Sure--never thought of that," and Seaton, after a moment's rapid mental
arithmetic, swung the great tube around, rapidly adjusted a few dials,
and stepped down upon a pedal. There was a fleeting instant of
unthinkable velocity; then they found themselves poised somewhere in
space.

"Well, wonder how far I missed it on my first shot?" Seaton's crisp
voice broke the stunned silence. "Guess that's our sun, over to the
left, ain't it, Mart?"

"Yes. You were about right for distance, and within a few tenths of a
light-year laterally. That is fairly close, I should have said."

"Rotten, for these controls. Except for the effect of relative proper
motions, which I can't calculate yet for lack of data. I should be able
to hit a gnat right in the left eye at this range--and the difference in
proper motions couldn't have thrown me off more than a few hundred feet.
Nope, I was too anxious--hurried too much on the settings of the slow
verniers. I'll snap back and try it again."

He adjusted the verniers very carefully, and again threw on the power.
Again there was the sensation of the barest perceptible moment of
unimaginable speed, and they were in the air some fifty feet above the
ground of Crane Field, almost above the testing shed. Seaton rapidly
adjusted the variable-speed motors until they were perfectly stationary,
relative to the surface of the earth.

"You are improving," commended Crane.

"Yeah--that's more like it. Guess maybe I can learn in time to shoot
this gun. Well, let's go down."

They dropped through the roof into the laboratory where Maxwell, now in
charge of the place, was watching a reaction and occasionally taking
notes.

"Hi, Max! Seaton speaking, on a television. Got your range?"

"Exactly, Chief, apparently. I can hear you perfectly, but can't see
anything," Maxwell stared about the empty laboratory.

"You will in a minute. I knew I had you, but didn't want to scare you
out of a year's growth," and Seaton thickened the image until they were
plainly visible.

"Please call Mr. Vaneman on the phone and tell him you're in touch with
us," directed Seaton as soon as greetings had been exchanged. "Better
yet, after you've broken it to them gently, Dot can talk to them, then
we'll go over and see 'em."

The connection established, Dorothy's image floated up to the telephone
and apparently spoke.

"Mother? This is the weirdest thing you ever imagined. We're not really
here at all you know--we're actually here in Norlamin--no, I mean Dick's
just sending a kind of a talking picture of us to see you on earth
here.... Oh, no, I don't know anything about it--it's like a talkie sent
by radio, only worse, because I am saying this myself right now, without
any rehearsal or anything ... we didn't want to burst in on you without
warning, because you'd be sure to think you were seeing actual ghosts,
and we're not dead the least bit ... we're having the most perfectly
gorgeous time you ever imagined.... Oh, I'm so excited I can't explain
anything, even if I knew anything about it to explain. We'll all four of
us be over there in about a second and tell you all about it. 'Bye!"

Indeed, it was even less than a second--Mrs. Vaneman was still in the
act of hanging up the receiver when the image materialized in the living
room of Dorothy's girlhood home.

"Hello, mother and dad," Seaton's voice was cheerful but matter-of-fact.
"I'll thicken this up so you can see us better in a minute. But don't
think that we are flesh and blood. You'll see simply three-dimensional
talking pictures of ourselves, transmitted by radio."

For a long time Mr. and Mrs. Vaneman chatted with the four visitors from
so far away in space, while Seaton gloried in the working of that
marvelous projector.

"Well, our time's about up," Seaton finally ended the visit. "The
quitting-whistle's going to blow in five minutes, and they don't like
overtime work here where we are. We'll drop in and see you again maybe,
sometime before we come back."

"Do you know yet when you are coming back?" asked Mrs. Vaneman.

"Not an idea in the world, mother, any more than we had when we started.
But we're getting along fine, having the time of our lives, and are
learning a lot besides. So-long!" and Seaton clicked off the power.

       *       *       *       *       *

As they descended from the projector and walked toward the waiting
airboat, Seaton fell in beside Rovol.

"You know they've got our new cruiser built of dagal, and are bringing
it over here. Dagal's good stuff, but it isn't as good as your purple
metal, inoson, which is the theoretical ultimate in strength possible
for any material possessing molecular structure. Why wouldn't it be a
sound idea to flash it into inoson when it gets here?"

"That would be an excellent idea, and we shall do so. It also has
occurred to me that Caslor of Mechanism, Astron of Energy, Satrazon of
Chemistry, myself, and one of two others, should collaborate in
installing a very complete fifth-order projector in the new _Skylark_,
as well as any other equipment which may seem desirable. The security of
the Universe may depend upon the abilities and qualities of you
Terrestrials and your vessel, and therefore _nothing_ should be left
undone which it is possible for us to do."

"You chirped something then, old scout--thanks. You might do that, while
I attend to such preliminaries as wiping out the Fenachrone fleet."

In due time the reinforcements from the other planets arrived, and the
mammoth space-cruiser attracted attention even before it landed, so
enormous was she in comparison with the tiny vessels having her in tow.
Resting upon the ground, it seemed absurd that such a structure could
possibly move under her own power. For two miles that enormous mass of
metal extended over the country-side, and while it was very narrow for
its length, still its fifteen hundred feet of diameter dwarfed
everything near by. But Rovol and his aged co-workers smiled happily as
they saw it, erected their keyboards, and set to work with a will.

Meanwhile a group had gathered about a conference table--a group such as
had never before been seen together upon any world. There was Fodan, the
ancient Chief of the Five of Norlamin, huge-headed, with his leonine
mane and flowing beard of white. There were Dunark and Tarnan of Osnome
and Urvan of Urvania--smooth-faced and keen, utterly implacable and
ruthless in war. There was Sacner Carfon Twenty Three Forty Six, the
immense, porpoise-like, hairless Dasorian. There were Seaton and Crane,
representatives of our own Earthly civilization.

Seaton opened the meeting by handing each man a headset and running a
reel showing the plans of the Fenachrone; not only as he had secured
them from the captain of the marauding vessel, but also everything the
First of Psychology had deduced from his own study of that inhuman
brain. He then removed the reel and gave them the tentative plans of
battle. Headsets removed, he threw the meeting open for discussion--and
discussion there was in plenty. Each man had ideas, which were thrown
upon the table and studied, for the most part calmly and
dispassionately. The conference continued until only one point was left,
upon which argument waxed so hot that everyone seemed shouting at once.

"Order!" commanded Seaton, banging his fist upon the table. "Osnome and
Urvania wish to strike without warning, Norlamin and Dasor insist upon a
formal declaration of war. Earth has the deciding vote. Mart, how do we
vote on this?"

"I vote for formal warning, for two reasons, one of which I believe will
convince even Dunark. First, because it is the fair thing to do--which
reason is, of course, the one actuating the Norlaminians, but which
would not be considered by Osnome, nor even remotely understood by the
Fenachrone. Second, I am certain that the Fenachrone will merely be
enraged by the warning and will defy us. Then what will they do? You
have already said that you have been able to locate only a few of their
exploring warships. As soon as we declare war upon them they will almost
certainly send out torpedoes to every one of their ships of war. We can
then follow the torpedoes with our rays, and thus will be enabled to
find and to destroy their vessels."

"That settles that," declared the chairman as a shout of agreement
