manner as the dry and hot skin indicates the orgasm of the cutaneous
capillaries; and the emaciation of the body that of the cellular ones.

For this purpose of abating the action of the capillaries by frequent
ablution or fomentation, water of any degree of heat beneath that of the
body will be of service, and ought in accurate language to be called a cold
bath; but the degree of coldness, where the patient is sensible, should in
some measure be governed by his sensations; as it is probable, that the
degree of coldness, which is most grateful to him, will also be of the
greatest benefit to him. See Class III. 2. 1. 12. and Article 15 of this
Supplement.

Another great use of frequent ablutions, or fomentations, or baths, in
fevers, where the stomach is in some degree torpid, is to supply the system
with aqueous fluid by means of the cutaneous absorbents; which is
dissipated faster by the increased action of the secerning capillaries,
than the stomach can furnish, and occasions great thirst at the intervals
of the sickness.

IX. _Torpor of the Lungs._

1. The lungs in many cases of contagion may first be affected with torpor,
and the skin become cold by sympathy; in the same manner as a cold skin on
going into the cold bath induces difficulty of breathing. Or the stomach
may become affected with torpor by its sympathy with the lungs, as in the
experiments of Mr. Watt with hydro-carbonate gas; a few respirations of
which induced sickness, and even syncope. When the stomach or skin is thus
affected secondarily by association, an accumulation of sensorial power
occurs much sooner, than when these parts become torpid in consequence of
previous excess of stimulus; and hence they sooner recover their accustomed
action, and the fever ceases. The particles of contagious matter thus
received by respiration somewhat resemble in their effects the acid gases
from burning sulphur, or from charcoal; which, if they do not instantly
destroy, induce a fever, and the patient slowly recovers.

2. I was some years ago stooping down to look, which way the water oozed
from a morass, as a labourer opened it with a spade, to detect the source
of the spring, and inhaled a vapour, which occasioned an instant sense of
suffocation. Immediately recoiling I believe I inhaled it but once; yet a
few hours afterwards in the cool of the evening, when I returned home
rather fatigued and hungry, a shivering and cold fit occurred, which was
followed by a hot one; and the whole disease began and terminated in about
twelve hours without return. In this case the power of fear, or of
imagination, was not concerned; as I neither thought of the bad air of a
morass before I perceived it; nor expected a fever-fit, till it occurred.

In this case the torpor commenced in the lungs, and after a few hours, by
the addition of fatigue, and cold, and hunger, was propagated by direct
sympathy to the rest of the system. An orgasm or increased action of the
whole system was then induced by the accumulation of sensorial power of
irritation in the lungs, and of association in the other organs; and when
these subsided, the disease ceased. It may be asked, could a torpor of the
capillaries of the air-vessels of the lungs be so suddenly produced by
great stimulation?--It appears probable, that it might, because great
exertion of irritative motions may be instantly produced without our
perceiving them; that is, without their being attended by sensation, both
in the lungs and stomach; and the organs may become torpid by the great
expenditure of the sensorial power of irritation in an instant of time; as
paralysis frequently instantly follows too great an exertion of voluntary
power.

3. When the capillaries of the lungs act too violently, as in some
continued fevers; which is known by the heat of the breath, and by the
dryness of the tongue, especially of the middle part of it; not only cooler
air might be admitted more freely into a sick room to counteract this
orgasm of the pulmonary capillaries; but perhaps the patient might breathe
with advantage a mixture of carbonic acid gas, or of hydrogene gas, or of
azote with atmospheric air. And on the contrary, when there exists an
evident torpor of the pulmonary capillaries, which may be known by the
correspondent chilness of the skin; and by a tickling cough, which
sometimes attends cold paroxysms of fever, and is then owing to the
deficient absorption of the pulmonary mucus, the saline parts of which
stimulate the bronchiae, or air-vessels; a mixture of one part of oxygen
gas with 10 or 20 parts of atmospheric air might probably be breathed with
great advantage.

X. _Torpor of the Brain._

As the inactivity or torpor of the absorbent vessels of the brain is the
cause of hydrocephalus internus; and as the deficiency of venous absorption
in the brain, or torpor of the extremities of its veins, is believed
frequently to be the cause of apoplexies; so there is reason to conclude,
that the torpor of the secerning vessels of the brain, which are supposed
to produce the sensorial power, may constitute the immediate cause of some
fevers with arterial debility. And also that the increased action of these
secerning vessels may sometimes constitute the immediate cause of fevers
with arterial strength.

It is nevertheless probable, that the torpor or orgasm of the sanguiferous,
absorbent, or secerning vessels of the brain may frequently exist as a
secondary effect, owing to their association with other organs, as the
stomach or lungs; and may thus be produced like the torpor of the heart and
arteries in inirritative fevers, or like the orgasm of those organs in
irritative fevers, or inflammatory ones.

Where there exists a torpor of the brain, might not very slight electric
shocks passed frequently through it in all directions be used with
advantage? Might not fomentations of 94 or 96 degrees of heat on the head
for an hour at a time, and frequently repeated, stimulate the brain into
action; as in the revival of winter-sleeping animals by warmth? Ether
externally might be frequently applied, and a blister on the shaved head.

Where the secerning vessels of the brain act with too great energy, as in
some inflammatory fevers, might it not be diminished by laying the patient
horizontally on a mill-stone, and whirling him, till sleep should be
produced, as the brain becomes compressed by the centrifugal force? See
Article 15 of this Supplement.

XI. _Torpor of the Heart and Arteries._

1. It was shewn in Class IV. 1. 1. 6. in IV. 2. 1. 2. and in Suppl. I. 6.
3. that a reverse sympathy generally exists between the lacteal and
lymphatic branches of the absorbent system. Hence, when the motions of the
absorbents of the stomach are rendered torpid or retrograde in fevers with
arterial debility, those of the skin, lungs, and cellular membrane, act
with increased energy. But the actions of the muscular fibres of the heart
and arteries are at the same time associated with those of the muscular
fibres of the stomach by direct sympathy. Both these actions occur during
the operation of powerful emetics, as squill, or digitalis; while the
motions of the stomach continue torpid or retrograde, the cellular and
cutaneous absorbents act with greater energy, and the pulsations of the
heart and arteries become weaker, and sometimes slower.

2. The increased action of the stomach after a meal, and of the heart and
arteries at the same time from the stimulus of the new supply of chyle,
seems originally to have produced, and to have established, this direct
sympathy between them. As the increased action of the absorbents of the
stomach after a meal has been usually attended with diminished action of
the other branches of the absorbent system, as mentioned in Class IV. 1. 1.
6. and has thus established a reverse sympathy between them.

2. Besides the reverse sympathy of the absorbent vessels and the muscles of
the stomach, and of the heart and arteries, with those of the skin, lungs,
and cellular membrane; there exists a similar reverse sympathy between the
secerning vessels or glands of the former of these organs with those of the
latter; that is the mucous glands of the heart and arteries act generally
by direct sympathy with those of the stomach; and the mucous glands of the
cellular membrane of the lungs, and of the skin, act by reverse sympathy
with them both.

Hence when the stomach is torpid, as in sickness, this torpor sometimes
only affects the absorbent vessels of it; and then the absorbents of the
cellular membrane and the skin only act with increased energy by reverse
sympathy. If the torpor affects the muscular fibres of the stomach, those
of the heart and arteries act by direct sympathy with it, and a weak pulse
is produced, as in the exhibition of digitalis, but without increase of
heat. But if the torpor also affects the glands of the stomach, the
cutaneous and pulmonary glands act with greater energy by their reverse
sympathy with those of the stomach, and of the heart and arteries; and
great heat is produced along with increased perspiration both from the skin
and lungs.

3. There is some difficulty in explaining, why the actions of the extensive
system of capillary glands, which exist on every other membrane and cell in
the body for the purpose of secreting mucus and perspirable matter, should
so generally act by reverse sympathy with those of the stomach and upper
part of the intestines. It was shewn in Class IV. 1. 1. 6. that when the
stomach was filled with solid and fluid aliment, the absorbents of the
cellular membrane, and of the bladder, and of the skin acted with less
energy; as the fluids they were used to absorb and transmit into the
circulation, were now less wanted; and that hence by habit a reverse
sympathy obtained between these branches of the absorbents of the
alimentary canal, and those of the other parts of the body.

Now, as at this time less fluid was absorbed by the cutaneous and cellular
lymphatics, it would happen, that less would be secreted by their
correspondent secerning vessels, or capillary glands; and that hence by
habit, these secerning vessels would acquire a reverse sympathy of action
with the secerning vessels of the alimentary canal.

Thus when the absorption of the tears by the puncta lacrymalia is much
increased by the stimulus of snuff; or of an affecting idea, on the nasal
dusts, as explained in Sect. XVI. 8. 2. a great increase of the secretion
of tears from the lacrymal glands is produced by the direct sympathy of the
action of these glands with those of their correspondent absorbents; and
that though in this case they are placed at so great a distance from each
other.

4. A difficult question here occurs; why does it happen, that in fevers
with weak pulse the contractions of the heart and arteries become at the
same time more frequent; which also sometimes occurs in chlorosis, and in
some hysteric and hypochondriac diseases, and in some insanities; yet at
other times the weak pulse becomes at the same time slow, as in the
exhibition of digitalis, and in paresis irritativa, described in Class I.
2. 1. 2. which may be termed a fever with slow pulse? this frequency of
pulse can not depend on heat, because it sometimes exists without heat, as
towards the end of some fevers with debility.

Now as apoplexies, which are sometimes ascribed to fulness of blood, are
attended with slow pulse; and as in animals dying in the slaughter house
from deficiency of blood the pulse becomes frequent in extreme; may not the
frequency of pulse in fevers with arterial debility be in general owing to
paucity of blood? as explained in Sect. XXXII. 2. 3. and its slowness in
paresis irritativa be caused by the debility being accompanied with due
quantity of blood? or may not the former circumstance sometimes depend on a
concomitant affection of the brain approaching to sleep? or to the unusual
facility of the passage of the blood through the pulmonary and aortal
capillaries? in which circumstance the heart may completely empty itself at
each pulsation, though its contractions may be weak. While the latter
depends on the difficulty of the passage of the blood through the pulmonary
or aortal capillaries, as in the cold fits of intermittents, and in some
palpitations of the heart, and in some kinds of haemoptoe? in these cases
the increased resistance prevents the heart from emptying itself, and in
consequence a new diastole sooner occurs, and thus the number of pulsations
becomes greater in a given time.

5. In respect to the sympathies of action, which produce or constitute
fever with debility, the system may be divided into certain provinces,
which are assentient or opposite to each other. First, the lacteals or
absorbent vessels of the stomach, and upper part of the intestines;
secondly, the lymphatics or all the other branches of the absorbent
vessels, which arise from the skin, mucous membranes, cellular membranes,
and the various glands. These two divisions act by reverse sympathy with
each other in the hot fits of fever with debility, though by direct
sympathy in the cold ones. The third division consists of the secerning
vessels of the stomach and upper intestines; and the fourth of the
secerning vessels of all the other parts of the body, as the capillary
glands of the skin, lungs, and cellular membrane, and the various other
glands belonging to the sanguiferous system. Many of these frequently, but
the capillaries always, act by reverse sympathy with those of the third
division above mentioned in the hot fits of fever with debility, though by
direct sympathy with them in the cold fits. Fifthly, the muscular fibres of
the stomach, and upper intestines; and sixthly, the muscular fibres of the
heart and arteries. The actions of these two last divisions of moving
fibres act by direct sympathy with each other, both in the cold and hot
fits of fevers with debility.

The efficient cause of those apparent sympathies in fevers with weak pulse
may be thus understood. In the cold paroxysm of fever with weak pulse the
part first affected I believe to be the stomach, and that it has become
torpid by previous violent exertion, as by swallowing contagious matter
mixed with saliva, and not by defect of stimulus, as from cold or hunger.
The actions of this important organ, which sympathizes with almost every
part of the body, being thus much diminished or nearly destroyed, the
sensorial power of association is not excited; which in health contributes
to move the heart and arteries, and all the rest of the system; whence an
universal torpor occurs.

When the hot fit approaches, the stomach in fevers with strong pulse
regains its activity by the accumulation of the sensorial power of either
irritation, if it was the part first affected, or of association if it was
affected in sympathy with some other torpid part, as the spleen or liver;
which accumulation is produced during its torpor. At the same time all the
other parts of the system acquire greater energy of action by the
accumulation of the sensorial power of association, which was produced,
during their inactivity in the cold fit.

But in fevers with weak pulse the stomach, whose sensorial power of
irritation had been previously exhausted by violent action, acquires no
such quick accumulation of sensorial power, but remains in a state of
torpor after the hot fit commences. The heart and arteries remain also in a
state of torpor, because there continues to be no excitement of their power
of association owing to the torpid motions of the stomach; but hence it
happens, that there exists at this time a great accumulation of the power
of association in the less active fibres of the heart and arteries; which,
as it is not excited and expended by them, increases the associability of
the next link of the associated chain of motions, which consists of the
capillaries or other glands; and that in so great a degree as to actuate
them with unnatural energy, and thus to produce a perpetual hot fit of
fever. Because the associability of the capillaries is so much increased by
the accumulation of this power, owing to the lessened activity of the heart
and arteries, as to over-balance the lessened excitement of it by the
weaker movements of the heart and arteries.

6. When the accumulation of the sensorial power of irritation caused by
defect of stimulus is greater in the first link of a train of actions, to
which associated motions are catenated, than the deficiency of the
excitement of the sensorial power of association in the next link, what
happens?--the superabundance of the unemployed sensorial power of the first
link is derived to the second; the associability of which thus becomes so
greatly increased, that it acts more violently than natural, though the
excitement of its power of association by the lessened action of the first
link is less than natural. So that in this situation the withdrawing of an
accustomed stimulus in some parts of the system will decrease the
irritative motions of that part, and at the same time occasion an increase
of the associate motion of another part, which is catenated with it.

This circumstance nevertheless can only occur in those parts of the system,
whose natural actions are perpetual, and the accumulation of sensorial
power on that account very great, when their activity is much lessened by
the deduction of their usual stimulus; and are therefore only to be found
in the sanguiferous system, or in the alimentary canal, or in the glands
and capillaries. Of the first of which the following is an instance.

The respiration of a reduced atmosphere, that is of air mixed with
hydrogene or azote, quickens the pulse, as observed in the case of Mrs.
Eaton by Dr. Reynolds and Dr. Thornton; to which Dr. Beddoes adds in a
note, that "he never saw an instance in which a lowered atmosphere did not
at the moment quicken the pulse, while it weakened the action of the heart
and arteries." Considerations on Factitious Airs, by Thomas Beddoes and
James Watt, Part III. p. 67. Johnson, London. By the assistance of this new
fact the curious circumstance of the quick production of warmth of the skin
on covering the head under the bed-clothes, which every one must at some
time have experienced, receives a more satisfactory explanation, than that
which is given in Class IV. 1. 1. 2. which was printed before this part of
Dr. Beddoes's Considerations was published.

For if the blood be deprived of its accustomed quantity of oxygen, as in
covering the head in bed, and thus breathing an air rendered impure by
repeated respiration, or by breathing a factitious air with less proportion
of oxygen, which in common respiration passes through the moist membranes
of the lungs, and mixes with the blood, the pulsations of the heart and
arteries become weaker, and consequently quicker, by the defect of the
stimulus of oxygen. And as these vessels are subject to perpetual motion,
the accumulation of the sensorial power of irritation becomes so great by
their lessened activity, that it excites the vessels next connected, the
cutaneous capillaries for instance, into more energetic actions, so as to
produce increased heat of the skin, and greater perspiration.

How exactly this resembles a continued fever with weak and quick pulse!--in
the latter the action of the heart and arteries are lessened by defect of
the excitement of the sensorial power of association, owing to the torpor
or lessened actions of the stomach; hence the accumulation of the sensorial
power of association in this case, as the accumulation of that of
irritation in the former, becomes so abundant as to excite into increased
action the parts most nearly connected, as the cutaneous capillaries.

In respect to the circumstance mentioned by Sydenham, that covering the
head in bed in a short time relieved the pertinacious sickness of the
patient, it must be observed, that when the action of the heart and
arteries become weakened by the want of the due stimulus of the proper
quantity of oxygen in the blood, that an accumulation of the sensorial
power of irritation occurs in the fibres of the heart and arteries, which
then is expended on those of the capillary glands, increasing their actions
and consequent secretions and heat. And then the stomach is thrown into
stronger action, both by the greater excitement of its natural quantity of
the sensorial power of association by the increased actions of the
capillaries, and also by some increase of associability, as it had been
previously a long time in a state of torpor, or less activity than natural,
as evinced by its perpetual sickness.

In a manner somewhat similar to this, is the redness of the skin produced
in angry people by the superabundance of the unemployed sensorial power of
volition, as explained in Class IV. 2. 3. 5. Rubor ex ira. From hence we
learn how, when people in fevers with weak pulse, or in dropsies, become
insane, the abundance of the unemployed sensorial power of volition
increases the actions of the whole moving system, and cures those diseases.

7. As the orgasm of the capillaries in fevers with weak pulse is
immediately caused by the torpid actions of the heart and arteries, as
above explained, this supplies us with another indication of cure in such
fevers, and that is to stimulate these organs. This may probably be done by
some kind of medicines, which are known to pass into the blood unchanged in
some of their properties. It is possible that nitre, or its acid, may pass
into the blood and increase the colour of it, and thus increase its
stimulus, and the same may be supposed of other salts, neutral or metallic?
As rubia tinctoria, madder, colours the bones of young animals, it must
pass into the blood with its colouring matter at least unchanged, and
perhaps many other medicines may likewise affect the blood, and thus act by
stimulating the heart and arteries, as well as by stimulating the stomach;
which circumstance deserves further attention.

Another way of immediately stimulating the heart and arteries would be by
transfusing new blood into them. Is it possible that any other fluid
besides blood, as chyle, or milk, or water, could, if managed with great
art, be introduced safely or advantageously into the vein of a living
animal?

A third method of exciting the heart and arteries immediately is by
increasing the natural stimulus of the blood, and is well worthy experiment
in all fevers with weak pulse; and that consists in supplying the blood
with a greater proportion of oxygen; which may be done by respiration, if
the patient was to breathe either oxygen gas pure, or diluted with
atmospheric air, which might be given to many gallons frequently in a day,
and by passing through the moist membranes of the lungs, according to the
experiments of Dr. Priestley, and uniting with the blood, might render it
more stimulant, and thus excite the heart and arteries into greater action!
May not some easier method of exhibiting oxygen gas by respiration be
discovered, as by using very small quantities of hyper-oxygenated marine
acid gas very much diluted with atmospheric air?

XII. _Torpor of the Stomach and upper Intestines._

1. The principal circumstance, which supports the increased action of the
capillaries in continued fever with weak pulse, is their reverse sympathy
with those of the stomach and upper intestines, or with those of the heart
and arteries. The torpor of the stomach and upper intestines is apparent in
continued fevers from the total want of appetite for solid food, besides
the sickness with which fevers generally commence, and the frequent
diarrhoea with indigested stools, at the same time the thirst of the
patient is sometimes urgent at the intervals of the sickness. Why the
stomach can at this time take fluids by intervals, and not solids, is
difficult to explain; except it be supposed, as some have affirmed, that
the lacteal absorbents are a different branch from the lymphatic
absorbents, and that in this case the former only are in a state of
permanent torpor.

2. The torpor of the heart and arteries is known by the weakness of the
pulse. When the actions of the absorbents of the stomach are diminished by
the exhibition of small doses of digitalis, or become retrograde by larger
ones, the heart and arteries act more feebly by direct sympathy; but the
cellular, cutaneous, and pulmonary absorbents are excited into greater
action. Whence in anasarca the fluids in the cellular membrane throughout
the whole body are absorbed during the sickness, and frequently a great
quantity of atmospheric moisture at the same time; as appears by the very
great discharge of urine, which sometimes happens in these cases; and in
ileus the prodigious evacuations by vomiting, which are often a hundred
fold greater than the quantity swallowed, evince the great action of all
the other absorbents during the sickness of the stomach.

3. But when the stomach is rendered permanently sick by an emetic drug, as
by digitalis, it is not probable, that much accumulation of sensorial power
is soon produced in this organ; because its usual quantity of sensorial
power is previously exhausted by the great stimulus of the foxglove; and
hence it seems probable, that the great accumulation of sensorial power,
which now causes the increased action of the absorbents, is produced in
consequence of the inactivity of the heart and arteries; which inactivity
is induced by deficient excitement of the sensorial power of association
between those organs and the stomach, and not by any previous exhaustion of
their natural quantity of sensorial power; whereas in ileus, where the
torpor of the stomach, and consequent sickness, is induced by reverse
sympathy with an inflamed intestine, that is, by dissevered or defective
association; the accumulation of sensorial power, which in that disease so
violently actuates the cellular, pulmonary, and cutaneous absorbents, is
apparently produced by the torpor of the stomach and lacteals, and the
consequent accumulation of the sensorial power of association in them owing
to their lessened action in sickness.

4. This accounts for the dry skin in fevers with weak pulse, where the
stomach and the heart and arteries are in a torpid state, and for the
sudden emaciation of the body; because the actions of the cellular and
cutaneous absorbents are increased by reverse sympathy with those of the
stomach, or with those of the heart and arteries; that is by the
expenditure of that sensorial power of association, which is accumulated in
consequence of the torpor of the stomach and heart and arteries, or of
either of them; this also explains the sudden absorption of the milk in
puerperal fevers; and contributes along with the heat of the respired air
to the dryness of the mucous membrane of the tongue and nostrils.

5. Besides the reverse sympathy, with which the absorbent vessels of the
stomach and upper intestines act in respect to all the other absorbent
vessels, as in the exhibition of digitalis, and in ileus; there is another
reverse sympathy exists between the capillaries, or secretory vessels of
the stomach, and those of the skin. Which may nevertheless be occasioned by
the accumulation of sensorial power by the torpor of the heart and
arteries, which is induced by direct sympathy with the stomach; thus when
the torpor of the stomach remains in a fever-fit which might otherwise have
intermitted, the torpor of the heart and arteries remains also by direct
sympathy, and the increased cutaneous capillary action, and consequent
heat, are produced by reverse sympathy; and the fever is thus rendered
continual, owing primarily to the torpor of the stomach.

6. The reverse sympathy, which exists between the capillaries of the
stomach and the cutaneous capillaries, appears by the chillness of some
people after dinner; and contrary-wise by the digestion being strengthened,
when the skin is exposed to cold air for a short time; as mentioned in
Class IV. 1. 1. 4. and IV. 2. 1. 1. and from the heat and glow on the skin,
which attends the action of vomiting; for though when sickness first
commences, the skin is pale and cold; as it then partakes of the general
torpor, which induces the sickness; yet after the vomiting has continued
some minutes, so that an accumulation of sensorial power exists in the
capillaries of the stomach, and of the skin, owing to their diminished
action; a glow of the skin succeeds, with sweat, as well as with increased
absorption.

7. Nevertheless in some circumstances the stomach and the heart and
arteries seem to act by direct sympathy with the cutaneous capillaries, as
in the flushing of the face and glow of the skin of some people after
dinner; and as in fevers with strong pulse. In these cases there appears to
be an increased production of sensorial power, either of sensation, as in
the blush of shame; or of volition, as in the blush of anger; or of
irritation, as in the flushed face after dinner above mentioned.

This increased action of the capillaries of the skin along with the
increased actions of the stomach and heart is perhaps to be esteemed a
synchronous increase of action, rather than a sympathy between those
organs. Thus the flushing of the face after dinner may be owing to the
secretion of sensorial power in the brain being increased by the
association of that organ with the stomach, in a greater proportion than
the increased expenditure of it, or may be owing also to the stimulus of
new chyle received into the blood.

8. When the stomach and the heart and arteries are rendered torpid in
fevers, not only the cutaneous, cellular, and pulmonary absorbents are
excited to act with greater energy; but also their correspondent
capillaries and secerning vessels or glands, especially perhaps those of
the skin, are induced into more energetic action. Whence greater heat, a
greater secretion of perspirable matter, and of mucus; and a greater
absorption of them both, and of aerial moisture. These reverse sympathies
coincide with other animal facts, as in eruption of small pox on the face
and neck the feet become cold, while the face and neck are much flushed;
and in the hemiplagia, when one arm and leg become disobedient to volition,
the patient is perpetually moving the other. Which are well accounted for
by the accumulation of sensorial power in one part of an associated series
of actions, when less of it is expended by another part of it; and by a
deficiency of sensorial power in the second link of association, when too
much of it is expended by the first.

9. This doctrine of reverse sympathy enables us to account for that
difficult problem, why in continued fevers the increased action of the
cutaneous, cellular, and pulmonary capillaries proceeds without
interruption or return of cold fit; though perhaps with some exacerbations
and remissions; and that during a quarter, or half, or three quarters, or a
whole lunation; while at the same time the pulsations of the heart and
arteries are weaker than natural.

To this should be added the direct sympathy, which exists between the
peristaltic motions of the fibres of the stomach, and the pulsations of the
heart. And that the stomach has become torpid by the too great stimulus of
some poisonous or contagious matter; and this very intricate idea of
continued fever with feeble pulse is reduced to curious simplicity.

The direct sympathy of the stomach and heart and arteries not only appears
from the stronger and slower pulse of persons exhausted by fatigue, after
they have drank a glass of wine, and eaten a few mouthfuls; but appears
also from the exhibition of large doses of digitalis; when the patient
labours under great and incessant efforts to vomit, at the same time that
the actions of the absorbent system are known to be much increased by the
hasty absorption of the serous fluid in anasarca, the pulsations of the
heart become slow and intermittent to an alarming degree. See Class IV. 2.
1. 17. and 18.

10. It would assist us much in the knowledge and cure of fevers, if we
could always determine, which part of the system was primarily affected;
and whether the torpor of it was from previous excess or defect of
stimulus; which the industry of future observers must discover. Thus if the
stomach be affected primarily, and that by previous excess of stimulus, as
when certain quantities of opium, or wine, or blue vitriol, or arsenic, are
swallowed, it is some time in recovering the quantity of sensorial power
previously exhausted by excess of stimulus, before any accumulation of it
can occur. But if it be affected with torpor secondarily, by sympathy with
some distant part; as with the torpid capillaries of the skin, that is by
defective excitement of the sensorial power of association; or if it be
affected by defect of stimulus of food or of heat; it sooner acquires so
much accumulation of sensorial power, as to be enabled to accommodate
itself to its lessened stimulus by increase of its irritability.

Thus in the hemicrania the torpor generally commences in a diseased tooth,
and the membranes about the temple, and also those of the stomach become
torpid by direct synchronous sympathy; and pain of the head, and sickness
supervene; but no fever or quickness of pulse. In this case the torpor of
the stomach is owing to defect of the sensorial power of association, which
is caused by the too feeble actions of the membranes surrounding the
diseased tooth, and thus the train of sympathy ceases here without
affecting the motions of the heart and arteries; but where contagious
matter is swallowed into the stomach, the stomach after a time becomes
torpid from exhaustion of the sensorial power of irritation, and the heart
and arteries act feebly from defect of the excitement of the power of
association. In the former case the torpor of the stomach is conquered by
accumulation of the power of association in one or two whole days; in the
latter it recovers by accumulation of the power of irritation in three or
four weeks.

In intermittent fevers the stomach is generally I believe affected
secondarily by sympathy with the torpid cutaneous capillaries, or with some
internal torpid viscus, and on this account an accumulation of sensorial
power arises in a few hours sufficient to restore the natural irritability
of this organ; and hence the hot fit succeeds, and the fever intermits. Or
if this accumulation of sensorial power becomes excessive and permanent,
the continued fever with strong pulse is produced, or febris irritativa.

In continued fevers the stomach is frequently I suppose affected with
torpor by previous excess of stimulus, and consequent exhaustion of
sensorial power, as when contagious matter is swallowed with the saliva,
and it is then much slower in producing an accumulation of sensorial power
sufficient to restore its healthy irritability; which is a frequent cause
of continued fever with weak pulse or febris inirritativa. Which consists,
after the cold fit is over, in a more frequent and more feeble action of
the heart and arteries, owing to their direct sympathy with the muscular
fibres of the torpid stomach; together with an increased action of the
capillaries, glands, and absorbents of the skin, and cellular membrane,
owing to their reverse sympathy with the torpid capillaries, glands, and
absorbents of the stomach, or with those of the heart and arteries.

Or in more accurate language. 1. The febris inirritativa, or fever with
weak pulse, commences with torpor of the stomach, occasioned by previous
exhaustion of sensorial power of irritation by the stimulus of contagious
matter swallowed with the saliva. 2. The whole system becomes torpid from
defect of the excitement or the sensorial power of association owing to the
too feeble actions of the stomach, this is the cold fit. 3. The whole
system, except the stomach with the upper intestines, and the heart and
arteries, falls into increased action, or orgasm, owing to accumulation of
sensorial power of association during their previous torpor, this is the
hot fit. 4. The stomach and upper intestines have not acquired their
natural quantity of sensorial power of irritation, which was previously
exhausted by violent action in consequence of the stimulus of contagious
matter, and the heart and arteries remain torpid from deficient excitement
of the sensorial power of association owing to the too feeble actions of
the stomach. 5. The accumulation of sensorial power of association in
consequence of the torpor of the heart and arteries occasions a perpetual
orgasm, or increased action of the capillaries.

11. From hence it may be deducted first, that when the torpor of the
stomach first occurs, either as a primary effect, or as a secondary link of
some associate train or circle of motions, a general torpor of the system
sometimes accompanies it, which constitutes the cold fit of fever; at other
times no such general torpor occurs, as during the operation of a weak
emetic, or during sea-sickness.

Secondly. After a time it generally happens, that a torpor of the stomach
ceases, and its actions are renewed with increase of vigour by accumulation
of sensorial power during its quiescence; as after the operation of a weak
emetic, or at the intervals of sea-sickness, or after the paroxysm of an
intermittent fever.

Thirdly. The stomach is sometimes much slower in recovering from a previous
torpor, and is then the remote cause of continued fever with weak pulse;
which is owing to a torpor of the heart and arteries, produced in
consequence of the deficient excitement of the power of association by the
too weak actions of the stomach; and to an orgasm of the capillaries of the
other parts of the system, in consequence of the accumulation of sensorial
power occasioned by the inactivity of the heart and arteries.

Fourthly. The torpor of the stomach is sometimes so complete, that probably
the origin of its nerves is likewise affected, and then no accumulation of
sensorial power occurs. In this case the patient dies for want of
nourishment; either in three or four weeks, of the inirritative fever; or
without quick pulse, by what we have called paresis irritativa. Or he
continues many years in a state of total debility. When this torpor
suddenly commences, the patient generally suffers epileptic fits or
temporary insanity from the disagreeable sensation of so great a torpor of
the stomach; which also happens sometimes at the eruption of the distinct
small pox; whence we have termed this disease anorexia epileptica. See
Class II. 2. 2. 1. and III. 1. 1. 7. and Suppl. I. 14. 3.

Fifthly. When this torpor of the stomach is less in degree or extent, and
yet without recovering its natural irritability by accumulation of
sensorial power, as it does after the cold fit of intermittent fever, or
after the operation of mild emetics, or during syncope; a permanent defect
of its activity, and of that of the upper intestines, remains, which
constitutes apepsia, cardialgia, hypochondriasis, and hysteria. See Class
I. 3. 1. 3. and I. 2. 4. 5.

Sixthly. If the torpor of the stomach be induced by direct sympathy, as in
consequence of a previous torpor of the liver, or spleen, or skin, an
accumulation of sensorial power will sooner be produced in the stomach;
because there has been no previous expenditure of it, the present torpor of
the stomach arising from defect of association. Hence some fevers perfectly
intermit, the stomach recovering its complete action after the torpor and
consequent orgasm, which constitute the paroxysm of fever, are terminated.

Seventhly. If the torpor of the stomach be owing to defect of irritation,
as to the want of food, an accumulation of sensorial power soon occurs with
an increase of digestion, if food be timely applied; or with violent
inflammation, if food be given in too great quantity after very long
abstinence.

Eighthly. If the torpor of the stomach be induced by defect of pleasurable
sensation, as when sickness is caused by the suggestion of nauseous ideas;
an accumulation of sensorial power soon occurs, and the sickness ceases
with the return of hunger; for in this case the inactivity of the stomach
is occasioned by the subduction of agreeable sensation, which acts as a
subduction of stimulus, and not by exhausting the natural quantity of
sensorial power in the fibres or nerves of the stomach.

Ninthly. If the torpor of the stomach be induced by a twofold cause, as in
sea-sickness. See Vertigo rotatoria. Class IV. 2. 1. 10. in which the first
link of association acts too strongly, and in consequence expends more than
usual of the sensorial power of irritation; and secondly in which sensation
is produced between the links of association, and dissevers or enfeebles
them; the accumulation of sensorial power soon occurs in the stomach; as no
previous expenditure of it in that organ has occurred. Whence in
sea-sickness the persons take food with eagerness at times, when the
vertigo eases for a few minutes.

Tenthly. If the gastric torpor be induced by previous violent exertion, as
after intoxication, or after contagious matter has been swallowed, or some
poisons, as digitalis, or arsenic; an accumulation of sensorial power very
slowly succeeds; whence long sickness, or continued fever, because the
quantity of sensorial power already wasted must first be renewed, before an
accumulation of it can be produced.

12. This leads us to a second indication of cure in continued fevers, which
consists in strengthening the actions of the stomach; as the first
indication consisted in decreasing the actions of the cutaneous capillaries
and absorbents. The actions of the stomach may sometimes be increased by
exhibiting a mild emetic; as an accumulation of sensorial power in the
fibres of the stomach is produced during their retrograde actions. Besides
the evacuation of any noxious material from the stomach and duodenum, and
from the absorbents, which open their mouths on their internal surfaces, by
their retrograde motion.

It is probable, that when mild emetics are given, as ipecacuanha, or
antimonium tartarizatum, or infusion of chamomile, they are rejected by an
inverted motion of the stomach and oesophagus in consequence of
disagreeable sensation, as dust is excluded from the eye; and these actions
having by previous habit been found effectual, and that hence there is no
exhaustion of the sensorial power of irritation. But where strong emetics
are administered, as digitalis, or contagious matter, the previous
exhaustion of the sensorial power of irritation seems to be a cause of the
continued retrograde actions and sickness of the stomach. An emetic of the
former kind may therefore strengthen the power of the stomach immediately
after its operation by the accumulation of sensorial power of irritation
during its action. See Class IV. 1. 1.

Another method of decreasing the action of the stomach for a time, and
thence of increasing it afterwards, is by the accumulation of the sensorial
power of irritation during its torpor; is by giving ice, iced water, iced
creams, or iced wine. This accounts for the pleasure, which many people in
fevers with weak pulse express on drinking cold beverage of any kind.

A second method of exciting the stomach into action, and of decreasing that
of the capillaries in consequence, is by the stimulus of wine, opium, bark,
metallic salts of antimony, steel, copper, arsenic, given in small repeated
quantities; which so long as they render the pulse slower are certainly of
service, and may be given warm or cold, as most agreeable to the patient.
For it is possible, that the capillaries of the stomach may act too
violently, and produce heat, at the same time that the large muscles of it
may be in a torpid state; which curious circumstance future observations
must determine.

Thirdly. Hot fomentation on the region of the stomach might be of most
essential service by its stimulus, as heat penetrates the system not by the
absorbent vessels, but by external influence; whence the use of hot
fomentation to the head in torpor of the brain; and the use of hot bath in
cases of general debility, which has been much too frequently neglected
from a popular error occasioned by the unmeaning application of the word
relaxation to animal power. If the fluid of heat could be directed to pass
through particular parts of the body with as little diffusion of its
influence, as that of electricity in the shocks from the coated jar, it
might be employed with still greater advantage.

Fourthly. The use of repeated small electric shocks through the region of
the stomach might be of service in fevers with weak pulse, and well
deserves a trial; twenty or thirty small shocks twice a day for a week or
two would be a promising experiment.

Fifthly. A blister on the back, or sides, or on the pit of the stomach,
repeated in succession, by stimulating the skin frequently strengthens the
action of the stomach by exciting the sensorial power of association; this
especially in those fevers where the skin of the extremities, as of the
hands or nose or ears, sooner becomes cold, when exposed to the air, than
usual.

Sixthly. The action of the stomach may be increased by preventing too great
expenditure of sensorial power in the link of previous motion with which it
is catenated, especially if the action of that link be greater than
natural. Thus as the capillaries of the skin act too violently in fevers
with weak pulse, if these are exposed to cold air or cold water, the
sensorial power, which previously occasioned their orgasm, becomes
accumulated, and tends to increase the action of the stomach; thus in those
fevers with weak pulse and hot skin, if the stomach be stimulated by
repeated small doses of bark and wine or opium, and be further excited at
the same time by accumulation of sensorial power occasioned by rendering
the capillaries torpid by cold air or water, this twofold application is
frequently attended with visible good effect.

By thus stimulating the torpid stomach into greater action, the motions of
the heart and arteries will likewise be increased by the greater excitement
of the power of association. And the capillaries of the skin will cease to
act so violently, from their not possessing so great a superfluity of
sensorial power as during the greater quiescence of the stomach and of the
heart and arteries. Which is in some circumstances similar to the curious
phenomenon mentioned in Class IV. 2. 2. 10; where, by covering the chill
feet with flannel at the eruption of the small-pox, the points of the
flannel stimulate the skin of the feet into greater action, and the
quantity of heat, which they possess, is also confined, or insulated, and
further increases by its stimulus the activity of the cutaneous vessels of
the feet; and by that circumstance abates the too great action of the
capillaries of the face, and the consequent heat of it.

XIII. _Case of continued fever._

The following case of continued fever which I frequently saw during its
progress, as it is less complicate than usual, may illustrate this
doctrine. Master S. D. an active boy about eight years of age, had been
much in the snow for many days, and sat in the classical school with wet
feet; he had also about a fortnight attended a writing school, where many
children of the lower order were instructed. He was seized on February the
8th, 1795, with great languor, and pain in his forehead, with vomiting and
perpetual sickness; his pulse weak, but not very frequent. He took an
emetic, and on the next day, had a blister, which checked the sickness only
for a few hours; his skin became perpetually hot, and dry; and his tongue
white and furred; his pulse when asleep about 104 in a minute, and when
awake about 112.

Fourth day of the disease. He has had another blister, the pain of his head
is gone, but the sickness continues by intervals; he refuses to take any
solid food, and will drink nothing but milk, or milk and water, cold. He
has two or three very liquid stools every day, which are somtimes green,
but generally of a darkish yellow, with great flatulency both upwards and
downwards at those times. An antimonial powder was once given, but
instantly rejected; a spoonful of decoction of bark was also exhibited with
the same event. His legs are bathed, and his hands and face are moistened
twice a day for half an hour in warmish water, which is nevertheless much
colder than his skin.

Eighth day. His skin continues hot and dry without any observable
remissions, with liquid stools and much flatulency and sickness; his water
when observed was of a straw colour. He has asked for cyder, and drinks
nearly a bottle a day mixed with cold water, and takes three drops of
laudanum twice a day.

Twelfth day. He continues much the same, takes no milk, drinks only cyder
and water, skin hot and dry, tongue hot and furred, with liquid stools, and
sickness always at the same time; sleeps much.

Sixteenth day. Was apparently more torpid, and once rather delirious; pulse
112. Takes only capillaire and water; sleeps much.

Twentieth day. Pulse 100, skin dry but less hot, liquid stools not so
frequent, he is emaciated to a great degree, he has eaten half a tea-cup
full of custard to day, drinks only capillaire and water, has thrice taken
two large spoonfuls of decoction of bark with three drops of laudanum,
refuses to have his legs bathed, and will now take nothing but three drops
of laudanum twice a day.

Twenty-fourth day. He has gradually taken more custard every day, and began
to attend to some new play things, and takes wine syllabub.

Twenty-eighth day. He daily grows stronger, eats eggs, and and butter, and
sleeps immediately after his food, can creep on his hands and knees, but
cannot stand erect.

Thirty-second day. He cannot yet stand alone safely, but seems hourly to
improve in strength of body, and activity of mind.

In this case the remote cause of his fever could not be well ascertained,
as it might be from having his feet cold for many successive days, or from
contagion; but the latter seems more probable, because his younger brother
became ill of a similar fever about three weeks afterwards, and probably
received the infection from him. The disease commenced with great torpor of
the stomach, which was shewn by his total aversion to solid food, and
perpetual sickness; the watery stools, which were sometimes green, or of a
darkish yellow, were owing to the acrimony, or acidity, of the contents of
the bowels; which as well as the flatulency were occasioned by indigestion.
This torpor of the stomach continued throughout the whole fever, and when
it ceased, the fever ceased along with it.

The contagious material of this fever I suppose to have been mixed with the
saliva, and swallowed into the stomach; that it excited the vessels, which
constitute the stomach, into the greatest irritative motion like arsenic;
_which might not be perceived, and yet might render that organ paralytic or
inirritable in a moment of time_; as animals sometimes die by one single
exertion, and consequent paralysis, without a second struggle; as by
lightning, or being shot through the back part of the brain; of both which
I have seen instances. I had once an opportunity of inspecting two oxen, a
few minutes after they were killed by lightning under a crab-tree on moist
ground in long grass; and observed, that they could not have struggled, as
the grass was not pressed or bent near them; I have also seen two horses
shot through the cerebellum, who never once drew in their legs after they
first stretched them out, but died instantaneously; in a similar manner the
lungs seem to be rendered instantly inanimate by the fumes of burning
sulphur.

The lungs may be sometimes primarily affected with contagious matter
floating in the atmosphere as well as the stomach, as mentioned in article
9. of this Supplement. But probably this may occur much less frequently,
because the oxygene of the atmosphere does not appear to be taken into the
blood by animal absorption, as the saliva in the stomach, but passes
through the moist membranes into the blood, like the ethereal fluids of
electricity or heat, or by chemical attraction, and in consequence the
contagious matter may be left behind; except it may sometimes be absorbed
along with the mucus; of which however in this case there appeared no
symptoms.

The tonsils are other organs liable to receive contagious matter, as in the
small-pox, scarlet-fever, and in other sensitive inirritated fevers; but no
symptom of this appeared here, as the tonsils were at no time of the fever
