holiday. Constans and his companion paused only long enough to receive
the salutation of those nearest, and then passed into the house to pay
their respects to the host. They had been among the last of the guests
to arrive, and now the signal was given for the festivities of the day
to begin in earnest.

The sports were of the sort characteristic of such a
gathering--wrestling and foot-races, target-shooting and bouts at
cudgel-play and night-stick. Towards the middle of the afternoon, when
the athletic prowess of the young men had been fully exploited, came the
great spectacle, the bull-fight, and of this it will be necessary to
speak somewhat particularly.

The pen, or corral, as it might more properly be called, was a circular
enclosure of fifty yards in diameter, the ring being formed of stout
post-and-rail fence. The victim, a wild bull, was first turned
blindfolded into the enclosure and baited by the dogs until excited to
frenzy. Then half a dozen of the bolder youths would vault into the ring
armed only with their throwing-knives, and the real sport would begin.
The master of the ring, having provided himself with a long pole to
which a sharp knife-blade had been bound, would watch his opportunity to
cut the thong that secured the blind-cloth about the animal's eyes. Woe
now to him who was dull of eye or laggard of foot!

The object of the game was, of course, to strike the fatal blow; but,
skilled as were the young Stockaders in the art of throwing the knife,
it often happened that a bull would be bleeding from a hundred wounds
and still keep his feet. Commonly, too, he would manage to score upon
one or more of his adversaries before succumbing, for while it was
permissible for a contestant to leave the ring, he could only do so
after he had thrown his knife and as a last resort against the bull's
charge. When the animal's attention had been diverted by an attack from
another quarter, the disarmed contestant would vault again into the ring
and recover his weapon. Here, indeed, was a game that might well stir
the coldest blood, since life itself was the stake for which it was
played.

The company had gathered about the bull-pen, pressing closely against
the barrier, that they might lose no part of the show. It should be a
spectacle worth more than ordinary attention, for the bull was an animal
of exceptional size and of a temper to correspond; the knowing ones
opined that the contest would be a protracted one, and expatiated
gravely upon the animal's strong points to their less-informed brethren.
Wagers were being booked; there were endless arguments, asseverations,
questionings; the smoke from innumerable pipes hung like a blue haze
above the heads of the throng, and here and there a fretful child lifted
up complaining voice. Already the sun hung in the zenith, and it was
time to begin if the sport were not to encroach upon the dinner hour.

At the north end of the enclosure a wooden gallery had been reared for
the accommodation of the principal guests, and Constans, to his
surprise, found himself included in this privileged number. Possibly the
pretty Alexa could have explained the mystery of his invitation; certain
it is that she favored him with a radiant smile when he made his
appearance on the platform, a mark of encouragement which might have
justified him in appropriating the vacant seat at the maiden's right
hand. But Constans, being of a retiring disposition, and even a little
indifferent to his opportunities, let the chance slip, and another who
had been waiting anxiously upon the lady's nod was finally made happy.

A murmur of applause had greeted the entrance of the bull, and truly he
was a magnificent creature, deep chested and of the true checkered
marking in black and white. The customary baiting had been omitted, for
the ugliness of his temper needed no external stimulus, and the young
men were already in the ring when he appeared.

The preliminary encounter was a mortifying experience for the sextet of
overconfident youth. One by one they launched their weapons and either
missed outright or else scored but lightly; successively they had been
forced to retreat beyond the barrier by the animal, whose agility in
getting around the ring was marvellous. Unfortunately for the
contestants, all the knives had fallen on virtually the same spot, and
the bull proceeded to mount guard over them as though aware that their
possession was the guarantee of his own immunity. The game was now
indefinitely blocked, since it was certain death for a player to attempt
the recovery of his throwing-knife, and the rules did not permit the
substitution of fresh weapons. The crowd laughed ironically as the
situation dawned upon them, and the discomfited players were compelled
to submit to many a gibe. The bull remained master of the field, and the
spectators, grown tired of waiting, began to express their disapproval
audibly.

Piers Major pushed his way to Constans's side. "A chance for you and
your fire-stick," he whispered. "I have been talking to Red Oxenford and
the others about it, and they are curious to see for themselves. Think
you that you can drop that fellow where he stands?" and he nodded at the
bull, who still kept watch over his spoils.

"Yes," answered Constans, confidently. Here was the supreme moment at
last arrived; the very thought of failure was impossible; he must and
would succeed in the task imposed. Obeying the beckoning finger of his
host, Constans advanced to the edge of the platform overhanging the
enclosure.

An excited murmur rose from the crowd below, and even the dignitaries
upon the gallery jostled one another to obtain a favorable
vantage-point. Alexa stood immediately behind Constans, her eyes bright
with excitement, and her slim hand hidden in her father's huge fist.
Without attempting to take aim, Constans raised the revolver and fired.

The bullet struck the ground in front of the bull and threw up a
spiteful puff of dust, at which the animal pawed disdainfully. But if
the shot had missed its mark, the report of the explosion did full
execution among the spectators. The women shrieked, and the men nearest
the enclosure pushed back hastily among the crowd. For a moment a panic
was imminent, but Constans quieted it with a word.

"It is only the bark of the dog," he said, smilingly, and his hearers
somewhat shamefacedly resumed their places, but this time leaving a dear
space in which he might stand and handle his weapon.

Constans took steady aim, and, to his surprise, missed again, the bullet
flying wide. The failure nettled him. He made his preparations for the
third essay with care, raising and lowering the pistol several times,
until he was sure that he could not miss the mark. A third failure--the
bullet clipping a splinter from a fence-post on the opposite side of the
ring. A mist rose before Constans's eyes; what did it mean? Could he
have deceived himself in thinking that he had mastered this secret of
the ancients? Was it to fail him now, when all depended upon success?
His hand trembled so that he could hardly draw the trigger. The hammer
fell for the fourth time, but no explosion followed, the cartridge
having missed fire. He had now but one shot left, and the whispers of
disapproval and disappointment among the crowd were plainly audible.

Without stopping to reflect, Constans leaped over the rail of the
gallery to the arena below. As he jumped, the girl, Alexa, started, and
a cry escaped her parted lips; it was a sigh rather than an exclamation,
the voice of a crushed flower suspiring its last vital breath. And
Constans did not hear.

For perhaps half a dozen seconds man and beast stood motionless, waiting
upon each other. The bull tossed his head savagely, his tail twitching,
and a cloud of dust and gravel rising under his impatient hoof.
Constans, with finger on trigger, moved a step to the right so as to
face him fairly. Suddenly the great horns came down with a vindictive
sweep, the shoulders heaved in the first impulse of the coming charge.
Like the snap of a whip the report rang out clean and sharp, and the
bullet went home at just the one vulnerable point in the thick
skull--that at which the butcher aims his pole-axe. The bull pulled up
short, the glaring eyes softened as though in wonder at this strange
performance that had been enacted before him; then, as the people still
held their breath, the brute sank quietly to his knees and rolled over
dead.

A woman started in to laugh hysterically, but her voice was drowned in a
mighty shout; like a wave the crowd passed over the barrier, and
Constans grasped helplessly at half a hundred out-stretched hands. A
babel of voices arose; the arena, filled to overflowing with excited men
and women, was comparable only to some gigantic ant-hill.

Fifty yards outside of the main palisade stood an oak-tree. Under the
Stockader law no standing timber should have been permitted at a less
distance than one hundred paces, but the oak was such a fine specimen
that Red Oxenford had allowed it to remain--a fatal error.

A bowstring twanged; the arrow sped to its mark--the fair young breast
of Oxenford's daughter--and in her father's arms the maiden gasped and
died; all this in the space of time in which a cloud of the bigness of a
man's hand might pass across the sun. Down from the lower branches of
that accursed oak dropped the lithe figure of a man garbed all in gray.
"Stop him!" called a weak, uncertain voice, but no one moved. The man in
gray waved his hand derisively and disappeared into the bush. An
inarticulate sound arose from the closely packed throng in the
enclosure, the exhalation of a universal sigh.

Red Oxenford had made neither sound nor sign. He stood motionless, his
daughter's head cradled in the hollow of his arm; he stared stupidly at
the girl's face, so pitifully white and small it seemed, with its
virginal coronal of flaxen hair--then he fell in a heap, like to a
collapsing wall.

Piers Major gently withdrew the bolt from the wound and held it up to
view. Its message was plain to all, for none save the Doomsmen feathered
their arrows with the plume of the gray goose. Only now the quills were
stained to a darker hue.

"It is her blood," he said, and the shaft of polished hickory snapped
like a straw between his fingers. "Her blood! and of Doom shall we
require it." And at that all the people shouted and then stood with
uncovered heads, while the young men bore away the body of Oxenford's
daughter on their locked shields and gave it to her mother.

[Illustration: "OF DOOM SHALL WE REQUIRE IT"]

That night Constans rode out from Deepdene at the head of twenty picked
men, leading them to the secret place where he had stored the guns and
ammunition which he had brought from Doom. Two days of practice with the
unfamiliar weapons, and on the morning of the third the little squad,
reinforced by a company of two hundred men-at-arms, set out upon the
northern road.

Towards noon they passed through Croye. It had been their intention to
stop here for the mid-day meal, but none cared to propose a halt after
entering this strange city of silence. Ordinarily the central square
would have been filled with a voluble, chaffering crowd, it being a
market-day; now there was not a living thing to be seen, not even a hog
wallowing in the kennel nor a buzzard about the butcher-stalls. Yet
there were no traces of fire and sword, the houses had suffered no
violence, and stood there barred and shuttered as though it were still
the middle watch of the night.

"What think you?" said Piers Major to Constans. "Is it the plague?"

"No, or there would be fires burning in the streets and yellow crosses
chalked upon the door-lintels. Those who keep so close behind their
bolts and bars are living people, hale and strong as ourselves. But,
assuredly, some great fear has been put upon them. Perhaps we shall know
more as we go on."

The answer to the riddle was given as they turned the corner by Messer
Hugolin's house. The strong-room on the ground-floor stood empty and
despoiled of its treasures, yet the gold and silver had not been carried
away, but lay scattered about in the filth of the street, as though
utterly contemned by the marauders.

And there, hanging from a cross-bar of the broken window, was the body
of Messer Hugolin, Councillor Primus of Croye, dressed in his scarlet
robes of office, and with a great gold chain about his neck. His head
was bowed upon his breast, so that the face was not visible, and for
this indulgence Constans gave inward thanks.

"Ride on," commanded Piers Major, shortly, and the cavalcade clattered
forward. It is not worth while to linger where once Dom Gillian's
tax-gatherers have passed.




XXII

YET THREE DAYS


Esmay sat in the gardens at Arcadia House. It was the loveliest of
spring days, and there were blossoms everywhere--the vivid pink of the
Judas-tree, the white glory of the dogwood, and each Forsythia bush a
cascade of golden foam. It was all so beautiful, and in that same
measure it hurt so keenly. The girl flung herself face downward in the
grass, seeking to shut out from sight and hearing the world that mocked
her.

That same night Esmay went to Nanna and announced her intention of
paying another visit to the "House of Power."

"Our lord cannot be wholly unmindful of his children," she said, "and
light may come to us from the Shining One. Besides," and here her color
deepened, "it is where he lived, he who was my friend. If I could but
find some little thing that had been his--a glove or one of his books!
Now do be a good Nanna and help me in this."

But the practical Nanna shook her head. "That mad, old graybeard, who
considers it a contamination to even look upon a woman, is it likely
that he will invite you into his sanctuary and set himself to answer
your foolish questions? It is supposed to be sufficient grace for a
woman if the Shining One deigns to accept the gifts that she lays upon
his altar."

"Then we will go dressed as men. There is everything we can want in the
presses up-stairs, and I can steal the key of the wicket gate from out
of Kurt's very pocket. Now, Nanna, dear----"

And of course Nanna yielded, for she saw that her darling's heart was
set upon this thing. Quinton Edge was still absent in the _Black Swan_,
and it would be an easy matter to hoodwink old Kurt; he was always
fuddled with ale nowadays. To-morrow would be Friday, the day of the
weekly sacrifice; they could make the trial then.

It was hard upon noon of the following day when the two women drew near
to the temple of the Shining One. Nanna, clad in doublet and
small-clothes, swung jauntily along, one hand on dagger-hilt and
careless challenge in her snapping, black eyes, the picture of a
swaggering younker. But Esmay, at the last moment, could not bring
herself to don habiliments exclusively masculine. So she compromised by
wearing a round jacket with a rolling collar and tucking away her hair
under a boy's cap. A long rain-coat, for which the showery morning was
an excuse, completed her outward attire and concealed her petticoats
from casual view. Yet in any case her blushes had been spared, for they
met nobody on their way, and the open space in front of the temple was
deserted. Not a single worshiper had come to pay honor and tithe to the
Shining One; the altar was empty of offerings, and the priest himself
was absent from his accustomed post. Yet upon the ear fell the rumble
and clang of moving machinery, and the eye, piercing through the
half-lights of the archway, caught indefinite glimpses of the pulsing
mysteries of wheel and piston-rod that lay within the shadows.

"He must be within," said Nanna, leading the way. "Don't stumble around
like that. Here, take my hand."

Prostrate in front of the switch-board they found the priest, a mere
anatomy of a man, with his checks shrunken to the jaw, and his wasted
limbs no larger than those of a child. Yet he was alive and conscious,
the deep-set eyes glowing with suspicious fire as they turned upon his
unexpected guests.

"Starving," said Nanna, briefly, and proceeded to force a few drops of
wine from a pocket-flask between his lips, while Esmay ran for the
basket of food which had been brought along as an offertory in their
assumed character of worshippers. The stimulant acted powerfully, and
within the hour Prosper was so far restored as to be able to partake of
some solid food. Then he insisted upon getting to his feet, a gaunt and
terrible figure in his rusty cassock.
