wiping out each party of swimmers in turn. Captain Bill might not enjoy
this work, but he did it well.

Raoul heard himself laughing under his breath as he thought of all the
Indians who were dying before his eyes, because of _his_ ship and _his_
cannon and _his_ riflemen.

Then the _Victory_ resumed steaming slowly along the length of the
island, stopping at intervals for the cannoneers to blast the forest.
Kingsbury changed elevation with each shot, so that showers of grapeshot
blanketed the island from side to side.

Finally Raoul decided that they had done all they could from the ship.
All that blood in the water made a fine sight, made him yearn all the
more to wet his hands with blood.

Climbing back up to the pilot house, he said, "Take her to the south end
of the island, Captain Bill. As close as you can. We're going to land."

Helmer stared at him, but said nothing.

He'd better say nothing.

Raoul took his pistol out of its holster and checked to see that it was
primed and loaded. He unsheathed his replica of Bowie's knife. He
hefted it, heavy as a meat cleaver, in his hand and tested the edge with
his thumb. It would cut. By God, it would cut. He slid it back into its
sheath.

He opened his mouth, gulping air in his excitement. His hands tingled
and his whole body felt as if it were growing bigger. He wanted to kill
Indians. He wanted to wade in their blood. Maybe find Black Hawk himself
and take his scalp with the big Bowie knife. He hoped there would be
hundreds of redskins still alive, cowering on that island. He needed to
kill them by the hundreds.

The ship's progress down the length of the island seemed to take
forever.

He tried to calm himself. After that bombardment with grapeshot, after
so many Indians had been shot trying to swim away, there probably
wouldn't be many left alive on the island. It wouldn't really be a
fight; they'd be close to helpless.

"After we're ashore," he said to Helmer, "take the ship over to the
troops on the Mississippi bank and tell General Atkinson we've found the
main body of the Sauk. Tell him to send as many men as the _Victory_
will carry."

       *       *       *       *       *

The steamboat's shallow draft allowed her to move in close, so Raoul and
his dozen Smith County boys could jump down into knee-deep water,
holding rifles, bayonets screwed in place, and pistols and cases of
cartridges and shot over their heads. The water was cold and clammy
through Raoul's flannel trousers, and his feet squelched in his boots.

The _Victory_ drew away with a thumping of her engine and puffs of
thick, black smoke from her two smokestacks. Just the sight of that
steamship should have been enough to scare hell out of the Indians,
Raoul thought.

He and his men clambered up sloping rocks to stand in a clear area of
level ground. Just where the woods started, the upper half of an Indian
lay on his back, trailing long, bloody ribbons of gut. The eyes were
open, staring.

_Now, that's what I wanted to see._

"Remember that we take no prisoners," he said.

Hodge Hode said, "Well, come on, let's knock them 'coons out of the
trees."

An arrow punched through Hodge's neck from front to back.

Raoul's heart stopped, then thumped so hard with fear that he thought it
might split his chest open.

Hodge dropped his rifle and fell to the ground, gagging.

Raoul went down on his knees beside Hodge, seized the arrow just under
its knife-sharp flint head and pulled it through. As the feathered end
went through his neck Hodge made a retching sound. His tongue stuck out
of his mouth.

Raoul cursed under his breath as he bent over Hodge. This couldn't be
happening.

More arrows were flying past them. Raoul's men fired a ragged volley
into the woods, and the arrows stopped.

The arrow had cut through an artery and pierced Hodge's windpipe. His
breath whistled in and out through the hole in his throat, his blood
pumping out of him and soaking into his red beard.

"He is going," said Armand, kneeling beside Raoul.

"Aw no," Hodge managed to murmur.

Raoul felt sick as he watched blood fill Hodge's mouth and pour out of
it. Then the big man went limp and his eyes rolled up in his head.

"Let's get the bastards!" Raoul growled. He was left scared as hell by
Hodge's death, but he was damned if he'd show it.

They climbed over big branches knocked down by the _Victory_'s cannon
and ran in among the trees, Raoul taking the lead. Spruce branches
whipped his face.

_I must be crazy, charging into the woods like this. We could all get
what Hodge got._

High-pitched war whoops shrilled out of the forest shadows ahead, and
more arrows whistled at them.

Knowing it was only luck that none of them hit him, Raoul wanted
desperately to fire his rifle into the forest. But he forced himself not
to shoot until he could see a target.

Brown figures rushed toward him, darting from tree to tree. He fired at
a warrior leaping between the thick trunks of two pines. The Indian
disappeared, but Raoul was sure he'd missed. He jerked the breech of his
rifle open and slapped in another ball-and-powder cartridge with frantic
speed.

The same Indian reappeared from behind another tree only six feet away.
Raoul brought the rifle up and fired. The Indian fell over backward.

Another brave leaped at him from the side, swinging a tomahawk. Raoul
shifted his rifle to his left hand and pulled out his Bowie knife. The
Indian's eyes were huge and white and wild. His upraised arms left his
chest wide open, ribs showing so sharp you could count them. Raoul
lunged, thrusting the knife. The Indian's rush drove him onto the blade.
His tomahawk came down on Raoul's forearm. It hurt, but it didn't even
hit hard enough to cut through Raoul's sleeve. Raoul planted his foot in
the already-dead Indian's belly and jerked the knife out of his body.

As the warrior collapsed, Raoul noticed that his face was bare brown
skin devoid of paint. They'd even run out of war paint, he thought. In
the middle of this battle, that gave him a moment of pleasure.

Rifles were going off on both sides of him. Levi Pope fired into the
upper branches of an elm tree and whooped as a warrior's body came
crashing down. The air was full of blinding, bitter smoke.

Then silence. Motionless Indians lay on the forest floor.

But so did two more of Raoul's own men. One lay face down, perfectly
still. The other was on his back, head propped against a tree trunk. An
arrow, feathers black and white, stuck out of his chest. His eyes were
open but saw nothing. His arms and empty hands jerked, the movements
less like a human being's than like a dying insect's. Raoul felt bile
rising in his throat and bit his lips hard to stop himself from puking.

_That could just as easily have been me._

Another man had an arrow in his arm. Armand pulled it out of him with a
mighty jerk. The man screamed, and Armand clapped a big hand over his
mouth.

Raoul's nine remaining men looked from the two dead men--the second
man's arms had stopped jerking--to Raoul. Were they just waiting for
orders, or were they accusing him?

"Injuns're gettin' ready for another charge," Levi Pope said. "I can see
them skulkin' out there."

"Pull back!" Raoul ordered. "Pick up those dead men's rifles." His voice
rang out strangely in the still forest.

Reloading and walking backward, rifles pointed up, Raoul and his men
retreated to the tip of the island. Armand carried the extra rifles.
They piled up fallen trees to make a hasty barricade.

Raoul lay behind tree trunks long enough for the sweat to cool on his
body. Mosquitoes and little black flies stung him incessantly. He
wondered if the Indians would ever attack. He'd gotten himself into a
very bad spot.

Rifles went off, and bullets plunked into the tree barricade. Brown
bodies came leaping out of the forest. Raoul suddenly remembered how the
Indians had rushed out from behind the Lake Michigan dunes twenty years
ago, and for a moment he was a terrified little boy. His hands shook so
violently he almost dropped his rifle.

With shrill yips and yells Indians came at them. Arrows and bullets
whizzed over the heads of Raoul's men as they ducked down behind their
shelter. Raoul forced himself to concentrate on shooting. He poked his
rifle through an opening between broken tree limbs, aimed at a running
Indian and fired.

His two remaining close companions in this war, Levi and Armand, lay
shooting on either side of him. Hodge was dead, his body sprawled a few
feet behind them, and that by itself brought Raoul close to panic. He
had always felt the big redheaded backwoodsman could never be hurt.

Arrows flew thick and fast. Raoul and his men, reloading from the
cartridge and shot cases they had carried ashore, kept up a steady
answering fire.

He felt shame smouldering in his spine and along his limbs. What a
damned fool he'd been. He had been so sure that storm of grapeshot from
the _Victory_ would finish off the Indians. He had expected this to be
nothing more than a stroll through the forest, counting the dead and
killing off the helpless remnant. Instead it seemed there were plenty of
Sauk warriors left, very much alive, fierce as wolverines. And he and
his men were trapped at the tip of this damned island with no place to
retreat but the river. In the river they'd be helpless under enemy
arrows and bullets, just like the redskins who had tried earlier to swim
away.

The Sauk war cries had fallen silent, and the shots and arrows had
stopped. Raoul peered through a chink in the tree trunks piled before
him. All he could see was dark green boughs with no sign of movement.

"What you figger they're doing now?" Levi said. He had his six pistols
laid out on a log in front of him.

"Probably getting ready to charge us," said Raoul.

How long before the _Victory_ got back? From here at the south end of
the island he could see the white steamship anchored off the riverbank,
her two black stacks giving off little white puffs, her side paddle
wheels motionless. She looked very small and very far away. No chance
Helmer or Kingsbury could see that Raoul and his men were fighting for
their lives here.

What were the men, Levi and Armand and the others, thinking? Again and
again, it seemed, his decisions cost lives. He remembered Old Man's
Creek--de Marion's Run--and he felt his face get fiery hot at the shame
of it.

And then there was Eli Greenglove's bitterness that night they parted,
accusing him of putting Clarissa and the boys in harm's way. And
something about a shock Raoul would get--what had Eli meant by that?

He heard a splash and turned to look behind him. His heart stopped. A
near-naked Indian was rushing at him out of the water, scalping knife
high.

Hands trembling, Raoul had barely time to roll over on his back and fire
his rifle up at the screaming warrior. Sunlight glinted off the long
steel blade. There was a moment of black terror after the rifle went
off. Nothing seemed to happen. His hands had been shaking too hard, he
thought, to aim well.

But then the Sauk dropped to his knees and fell over on his side. The
knife dropped from his hand. Seeing he was safe for this instant, Raoul
took another ball-and-powder cartridge out of his case and shoved it
into the breech.

The Indian rolled over and pushed himself up on his hands and knees, a
long string of blood and spittle dangling from his mouth. Calmer now,
Raoul took careful aim and put a bullet in the shaven brown skull.

Two more dripping Indians were charging out of the water. Rifles went
off beside Raoul. One Sauk fell, then the other, just as he was swinging
his tomahawk at a man on the right end of Raoul's line.

The militiaman screamed. The steel head of the tomahawk was buried in
his buckskin-clad leg.

"See to him, Armand," Raoul said.

Armand, crouching, ran over to the wounded man. But first he attended to
the fallen Indian next to him. He grabbed the brave's head and twisted
it around. Raoul heard the crack of bones.

"To make bien sure," Armand said, teeth flashing in his brown beard.

Three men dead, two wounded. Eight men left. Maybe a hundred Sauk
warriors out there, maybe more.

_What a stupid time to die, right when the war's almost over._

Raoul gnawed on the ends of his mustache and peered into the
impenetrable forest. He and his men were all going to die. He was sure
of it. He felt fear, but more painful than the fear was an ache in his
heart for all that he was going to lose--all that was due him that life
hadn't paid out to him like he deserved. He wanted so much to live.

A line of Indians came out of the trees, some with rifles, some with
bows and arrows. There must be twenty or thirty of them. They weren't
whooping, as they usually did. They were silent, their eyes big, their
mouths set in lipless lines. They were like walking dead men, coming at
him. That was what they were. They knew they were going to die, but they
were going to take this little band of white men with them.

Raoul had all he could do to keep from curling up behind his tree
barricade, head in his arms, whimpering with grief and fear. He made
himself aim and fire. The Indian he'd picked out as a target kept on
coming.

_We're done for_, he thought, over and over again. _We're done for._

Slowly--he did not seem able to move quickly--he inserted another
cartridge into the breech of his rifle. All around him rifles were going
off with deafening booms.

And from behind him there was more booming.

He looked up. Indians were falling. One here, one there, then three,
then two more. Their line was breaking up.

_God, the men are shooting good!_

He heard voices behind him and looked around.

At the same moment Levi Pope said, "Well, here be a sight to welcome."

Ten feet or so behind him a line of men in coonskin caps and gray shirts
were methodically firing over his head. He'd been so lost in panic and
despair he hadn't heard them coming.

He looked back at the Indians. Brown bodies lay tumbled on the ground,
some only a few feet from his barricade. Those on their feet were
backing up. They melted into the tattered forest.

For a moment Raoul could not move. He lay clutching his rifle with a
grip so hard it hurt his hands, panting heavily.

"It's safe now," Levi Pope said quietly, standing up.

Raoul pushed himself to his feet. His legs were shaking so hard he could
barely stand. He looked around and saw militiamen wading across to the
island from the east bank of the Mississippi.

The men who had been skirmishing in the forest north of the Bad Axe must
have seen the fighting on the island.

Too dazed even to feel happy, Raoul stood taking long breaths and
watched the militiamen come.

He had never in his life needed a drink more than he did now, and he had
forgotten to bring any whiskey with him.

       *       *       *       *       *

The southern tip of the island was soon crowded with riflemen. Raoul's
three dead were stretched out under blankets, and a burly horse doctor
from the mining country was bandaging the leg of the man with the
tomahawk wound.

"Colonel Henry Dodge," said a tall, whip-lean officer wearing a bicorn
hat. He shook hands with Raoul. "We're almost neighbors. I'm from
Dodgeville settlement, just a little ways north of Galena."

"I'm damned glad you came over, Colonel," said Raoul, feeling like a
fool to have gotten himself trapped. "The Sauk still seem to have a
power of fighting men left."

"Glad you saved a few for us. There were only about two dozen redskins
on the north side of the Bad Axe. They let us see them to draw us away,
I guess, from the main body hiding out here. But the way you were
blasting this island with grape, I was afraid we'd have nothing to do
but bury Indians. Or pieces of them."

Dodge ordered his men to spread out in two lines, one behind the other,
across the width of the island. Raoul positioned his little party in the
center of the foremost line.

"Advance, my brave Suckers!" Dodge called, and the men laughed at the
nickname for Illinoisians. Holding up a long cavalry saber, Dodge led
the militia line, bayonets leveled, into the broken trees.

Raoul looked downriver for the _Victory_. She had dropped a wooden ramp
to the riverbank, and blue-uniformed regulars were boarding. When they
got here there would be enough soldiers on the island to wipe out the
Indians ten times over.

That would be Zachary Taylor's outfit, from Fort Crawford. Raoul had
heard that the five hundred Federal troops sent from the East had been
decimated by cholera, though their commander, Winfield Scott, was still
on the way here.

Raoul turned and pushed forward, stumbling over tree trunks, shoving
branches out of the way with his rifle, muscles rigid against the arrow
he feared would come whistling out of the gloomy shadows ahead. He saw
no living Indians, but many mangled corpses. He tripped over a bare,
brown severed leg. A moccasin, flaps decorated with undulating red,
white and black beadwork, was still on the foot.

Three Indians, swinging tomahawks and war clubs, sprang out from behind
a pile of grape-blasted birch trees. Raoul and the men flanking him
started shooting. The Indians were riddled before they got within ten
feet.

Raoul was sure he'd killed one of the warriors. He went to the body,
drew his Bowie knife and gripped the long black scalplock. He carved a
circle with the sharp point in the shaved skin around the scalplock.
White bone showed through when he pulled the patch of skin loose, the
round spot quickly filling with blood.

The scalplock was long enough to let him tie it around his belt. The
hair felt coarser than a white man's.

They pressed on into the forest, again and again meeting desperate
little bands of red men, who rushed them only to be felled by a hail of
lead balls. Raoul heard the constant banging of many rifles going off in
other parts of the forest.

And sometimes he heard the high screams of women and children. After the
screams, silence.

Raoul smiled to himself. This was how he wanted it. No prisoners.

Killing no longer seemed dangerous. It no longer felt like sport. It
became simply work through the day's heat. It was tiring work, but good.
With some surprise Raoul realized that the line of troops had swept most
of the island and were now approaching the north end. He could see
Indians up ahead through the trees. This might well be the last of them.
Eagerly, rifle ready, he rushed forward.

He burst into a clearing and found himself facing a half circle of
nearly a dozen bucks, their shaved scalps and bare chests gleaming with
sweat. Behind them cowered a pack of squaws and children.

The warriors shouted at Raoul and his men and beckoned to them. Right in
the center was one man much taller than the rest, with the red and white
feathers of a brave tied into his scalplock. Whatever insults or
challenges he was uttering, he looked Raoul right in the eye and shouted
directly at him.

Raoul felt a chill of fear. The Indian's flesh was wasted, but his
skeleton was huge. He looked like he'd be as hard to stop as a tornado.
And he was holding a rifle in arms and hands so big that they made it
look small.

The other warriors didn't have rifles or even bows. They must have run
out of powder and shot and arrows. They held clubs and knives and
tomahawks.

_They want us to fight hand to hand. That's what Indians do to show
their courage._

_The hell with that._

With a movement that seemed almost contemptuous, the big Indian dropped
the rifle to the ground. He reached down and picked up a war club
painted red and black, with a huge spike at its end.

"Let's pay 'em back, boys!" Raoul shouted. "For all of our people they
killed."

"Oui! For Marchette," said Armand, raising his rifle. His first shot
caught a warrior in the chest and knocked him down.

At that the Indians rushed Raoul and his men.

Raoul felt himself trembling uncontrollably as the bony giant in the
center came straight at him. The big Indian held his war club in front
of him, as if to deflect bullets.

Forcing his arms to hold steady, Raoul aimed his rifle at the Indian's
head and fired.

And missed.

_I should have aimed at his chest._

Raoul cursed his shaking hand as he dropped his rifle and pulled his
pistol.

The brown giant gave a long, full-throated war cry.

Raoul pulled the trigger. He saw a spark, heard the bang of the
percussion cap, but there was nothing more. He cried out in a fury. His
sweat must have dampened the powder.

The club came down on the pistol, and Raoul to his horror felt it
knocked out of his hand. Again the big Indian screamed out his
blood-freezing war whoop and raised the club high.

Raoul's empty hand fumbled for his Bowie knife. He had it out, a death
grip on the hilt. He lunged at his enemy. A jolt ran through Raoul's arm
to his shoulder as the point of the knife sank deep between two thick
ribs.

The Indian gave a deep groan and staggered back. He swung his club, but
too late. Raoul felt a numbing blow just where his neck met his
shoulder, and fell to his knees.

He was looking right into the dark brown eyes of the Indian, who had
also fallen. The eyes were unblinking, dead. The massive body collapsed
against him.

Raoul shouted, a wordless cry of rage, and a red curtain swept over his
eyes. He jerked the knife out, releasing a cataract of blood. With an
effort that wrenched his arms he hurled the brown giant away from him.

Taking a scalp wasn't enough, after a fight like that. Raoul got a firm
grip on the thick, stiff-standing hank of black hair in the center of
his enemy's head and brought the knife down on the brown throat.
Chopping and slicing and sawing, as if butchering a steer, Raoul cut
through the thick neck until at last the head came free.

He lofted the head in his left hand, looking up at the still-open dead
eyes.

"There, you goddamned redskin son of a bitch! Thought you could kill me,
huh?"

A shrill woman's voice broke in on his triumph.

He turned to see a witchlike woman wrapped in a blanket. Her finger was
pointing at him. Her voice went on and on, screeching at him.

She was tall, but starvation had stripped the flesh from her bones. Her
sunken eyes seemed to glow in her skull-like face. He felt as if he was
facing some horrid spectre.

He threw the warrior's head down. Curse him, would she? He snarled like
an angry wolf as he reached for the woman. She didn't even try to get
away. He seized the scrawny neck and pulled her to him, bringing the
Bowie knife's point up against her throat.

She started singing, a weird, high-pitched caterwauling. He'd heard
something like it before. Where?

When he'd been about to shoot Auguste and those two other Indians at Old
Man's Creek. They'd sung like that right at the end.

Her dark eyes held him. They were not clouded over with anger or terror,
but clear with full understanding that he was going to kill her. She was
not afraid. He wished he could frighten her, force her to grovel, but
someone might try to stop him from doing it. Her voice went on and on,
chanting, up and down.

He'd silence her now. Redskin bitch.

He drove the knife into her throat and jerked it sideways. Her song
ended in a sickening rasp.

Still the brown eyes were fixed on him. Her blood spurted out of the
gash he had cut open, splashed over his knife blade, poured hot on his
hand. It spread down over her dress and over the gold lace on his
sleeve. He looked down at his red hand and felt some force within him
stretch his lips and bare his teeth.

He thrust the woman away from him. Her eyes were still open, but she
looked at no one and nothing. She fell to the ground like a bundle of
sticks. She lay on her back, the deep wound in her throat spread wide,
her eyes staring up.

He stood over her and saw that something shiny had fallen out of the
front of her dress and lay beside her head. Tied around her neck with a
purple ribbon was an oval metal case splashed with blood.

He had seen the case, or one like it. He reached down with the knife and
slashed the ribbon. He wiped his knife on his jacket and slammed it into
its sheath, then picked up the slippery case and opened it.

A pair of spectacles. Round, gold frames, thick glass lenses.

They looked exactly like Pierre's old spectacles. Was that possible? How
could this Indian woman have gotten them? Stolen from Victoire, when the
Sauk burned it?

Or had the mongrel somehow gotten his father's spectacles, taken them
with him when he fled from Victor? Pierre's watch had disappeared then;
Raoul was sure Auguste had stolen it. And if this woman had Pierre's
glasses now, could she be the Sauk woman Pierre had lived with, the
mother of his bastard son?

Despite the August heat beating down on the clearing, the air around
Raoul suddenly felt winter cold. All day long while he fought the
Indians he'd struggled with his fear of being killed. Now a worse fear
had him in its grip, a fear of something worse than death, of having
called down upon himself a vengeance that would follow him beyond the
grave.

_My God! I've just killed Pierre's squaw._

The spectacles stared up at him like accusing eyes. The flesh of his
back prickled.

He shut the case and dropped it into his pocket. If it was Pierre's he
couldn't just throw it away.

The few remaining Indians, a flock of women and children, huddled
weeping with their backs to a big tree, arms around one another. Some
were already wounded and screaming in pain.

Tiredly Raoul told himself he must reload rifle and pistol and get on
with the killing. But his anger was spent. He felt empty, worn out.

From somewhere behind him came a shout of, "Cease fire!"

It was welcome. He'd done enough.

"Yonder come the bluebellies," said Levi.

"Ah, merde," muttered Armand, standing with red-dripping bayonet above a
pile of bodies.

Raoul looked around. The order to stop the shooting had come from their
rear, from a short, stout officer who, as Dodge had, was advancing with
drawn saber. Colonel Zachary Taylor.

Taylor looked around the smoking glade at the dead, big bodies and
little ones, brown flesh and tan deerskin splashed with bright red, eyes
staring, limbs helter-skelter.

"Jesus Christ." He turned to Raoul, pain in his bright blue eyes.

Raoul felt his face grow hot. "Colonel," he said, "you understand why we
had to--"

Taylor's expression changed from sadness to weariness. "I've been out on
the frontier for over twenty years. I don't see anything here that I
haven't seen before." He turned away before Raoul could answer and
called, "Lieutenant Davis!"

A tall young officer with a handsome, angular face came up to him and
saluted.

Taylor said, "Jeff, run ahead and make sure any Indians left on this
island get a chance to surrender." He turned to Raoul again, shaking his
head.

"Why let them surrender?" Raoul said.

"There's only a few left alive," said Taylor. "And we're not going to
kill them. And if you need a reason, it's because I wouldn't feel right
about it, and I know a lot of the men wouldn't feel right about it."

Taylor turned to one of his men, a red-faced trooper with a thick blond
mustache. "Sergeant Benson, get me that Sauk man we captured. We'll be
needing to talk to the Indians. We want to find out what's happened to
Black Hawk."

Raoul was painfully aware that Taylor's eyes had shifted to his right
hand, covered with blood. He wanted to hide it behind his back.

He looked Raoul up and down. "Good God, man. Do you know you've got
blood all over you?"

"Enemy blood," said Raoul.

"I see you've got a scalp tied to your belt," Taylor said. "General
Atkinson issued an order against mutilating enemy dead."

Raoul felt himself shaking again, not with fear, but with anger. "I saw
one of my best friends shot dead with an arrow through the throat
today."

"And this?" Taylor asked, pointing to the severed head of the big brave
lying a few feet from Raoul's red-spotted boots. "Was this to avenge
your friend too? You'd better get back to your steamship, Mr. de Marion.
I don't think we have any more need of your services here."

It was not so much Taylor's words, but the mingled contempt and pity in
his voice that enraged Raoul. His fist clenched on the handle of his
knife.

Taylor wore a pistol and carried a saber, but he was a far smaller man
than Raoul, and his stout body, dressed today in a blue jacket and
knee-high fringed buckskin boots, seemed to invite attack.

Taylor's calm blue eyes went to Raoul's hand, then back to his face. He
stood motionless, waiting.

_God! What am I thinking? The regulars would shoot me down the minute I
drew this knife._

Raoul silently beckoned to his men and started back through the broken
trees the way they had come.

After walking a short distance, Raoul saw the sergeant Taylor had sent
behind the lines coming toward him with an Indian walking beside him.

Raoul glanced at the Indian and stopped dead.

He felt as if the arrow he'd been expecting and fearing all day had
finally struck him.

_There are no ghosts._

But Auguste couldn't be alive. He'd been shot to death at Old Man's
Creek.

Was this what killing Pierre's squaw had brought on him?

The man before him had gone hungry for a long time. His almost
skull-like face was a chilling reminder of the woman whose throat Raoul
had slashed. But his gauntness also made him look more like Pierre than
ever before. His buckskin leggings, like those of the Indians Raoul had
just killed, were dirty and full of rips and holes. But the pale scar
line running down his cheek, and those five parallel scars on his bare
chest, left Raoul in no doubt who this was. Auguste's dark eyes burned
at Raoul, alight with a fierce hatred.

The sergeant pulled Auguste by the arm. As the mongrel turned, Raoul
suddenly saw that the middle of his ear was missing, the empty space
bordered by partly healed red flesh.

Stunned speechless, Raoul looked at Levi and Armand, who stared back at
him. They couldn't speak either. They were just as shaken.

Still burning at Taylor's high-and-mighty dismissal of him, Raoul was
staggered by the shock of this meeting. But he saw one thing clear. All
right, Auguste was still alive. That meant Raoul's revenge on the Sauk
was not complete. Auguste was a traitor. Auguste was a murderer. And
Raoul was going to work day and night to get him hanged.




21

The Red Blanket


Longing to hear that White Bear was safe, Redbird could not stop
thinking about him. She sat cross-legged on the ground with Floating
Lily bundled in a blanket on her lap. She gazed out at the small lake
where Black Hawk and his few remaining followers had set up camp. This
was a peaceful place, but with White Bear gone and her dread of what
might have happened to her loved ones at the Bad Axe, she could feel no
peace.

"A lovely place, this lake," said Owl Carver, sitting beside her.

_But it is far from White Bear._

The thought of White Bear's having to make his way through Winnebago
country haunted her. She longed to look into the birch forest behind her
lean-to and see him walking toward her through the white tree trunks.

She missed Yellow Hair and Woodrow too. They were to her another sister,
another son. She hoped that by now they were out of danger.

She had left so many people behind at the Bad Axe, people who had always
been part of her life--Sun Woman, Iron Knife, her two sisters. In the
seven days since Black Hawk had led their little group north on the
ridge trail leading to Chippewa country, there had been no word from the
rest of the band.

Redbird's fear for the people she loved was like a ferret eating away at
her insides.

From his medicine bag Owl Carver took the pale eyes time teller White
Bear had given him and opened its gold outer shell. Redbird saw black
markings on its inner surface and two black arrows.

_Could it tell me when White Bear will come back?_

The old shaman dangled the time teller by its gold chain over Floating
Lily's tiny head. The gold disk gave off a regular, clicking sound, like
the beating of a metal heart. Floating Lily's brown eyes opened wide and
her flower-petal lips curved in a wide, toothless smile.

Eagle Feather, sitting beside Redbird, said, "Grandfather? Is it right
to use a sacred thing just to make the baby smile?"

Owl Carver smiled. His face these days seemed to have caved in. All of
his front teeth were gone, and his mouth was as sunken as Floating
Lily's, while his chin and his nose jutted out.

"A baby's smile is also a sacred thing."

Redbird said, "Have you asked the spirits what has become of the rest of
our people?"

From a cord around his waist Owl Carver untied a medicine bag decorated
with a beadwork owl. He opened it, let little gray scraps sift through
his fingers and sighed.

"Last night I chewed bits of sacred mushroom," Owl Carver said. "I saw
pale eyes' things--lodges that travel over the ground on trails made of
metal, smoking boats with bonfires in their bellies, villages as big as
prairies. Crowds of pale eyes seemed to be cheering for me. It made no
sense. It told me nothing about what happened at the Bad Axe. Maybe I
took too much."

Redbird glanced down at Eagle Feather. His mouth was a circle, and his
blue eyes as he stared up at Owl Carver were so wide that she could see
the whites above and below them. He strained toward Owl Carver, his
longing to follow his father and grandfather in the way of the shaman
showing in every line of his body.

She had always felt that same longing.

"Let me try your sacred mushrooms," said Redbird. "Sun Woman says
sometimes women can see into places where men cannot see."

Owl Carver set the medicine bag down between himself and Eagle Feather.
He sliced his hand through the air, palm down, in refusal.

"The magic might get into your milk and be bad for the baby."

Resentment was a bitter taste in Redbird's mouth. But she had to admit
there was no telling what the mushrooms might do to Floating Lily's
unformed spirit. Still, she knew Owl Carver welcomed that excuse because
he did not want to give the mushrooms to a woman.

Eagle Feather shouted, "Look!" He pointed up at the sky.

Owl Carver and Redbird both looked up. Scanning the cloudless midday sky
for a moment, she saw two tiny black shapes high up, circling slowly.

"Eagles!" said the boy. "My guardian spirits."

Redbird squinted. Yes, those were the wide-spreading wings of eagles.
The birds were searching for prey. Like the long knives and their
Winnebago allies. Their remorseless circling frightened her.

Those bright blue eyes of Eagle Feather's saw farther than hers did,
thought Redbird. She looked down at him proudly, as he wiped his hand
across his mouth and smiled up at her. His pointed chin reminded her of
White Bear.

"If the Winnebago find us here, will they kill us?" she asked her
father.

Owl Carver waved his hands. "They are not our enemies, but they will do
what the long knives demand."

In a strange voice Eagle Feather said, "Mother?"

Frightened by his flat tone, she reached for him. But with the baby in
her lap she could not get to him before Eagle Feather fell over on his
side with his eyes shut.

She screamed.

She laid Floating Lily on the ground and picked up Eagle Feather. He lay
limp in her arms, his head lolling, his mouth hanging open.

After all they had been through, this was more than she could bear. She
burst into tears, her heart thudding like a deerskin drum.

"What is it?" She turned to Owl Carver. "Help him."

The shaman crouched over his grandson, looking down into his face,
bending low to sniff his breath.

"Redbird, be very quiet. We must not wake him."

