sun-spots, and, besides hydrogen, contain the vapours of various metals.
They are of different forms, and present the appearance of filaments,
spikes, and jets of liquid fire; others are pyramidal, convoluted, and
parabolic.

These outbursts, bending over like the jets from a fountain, and
descending in graceful curves of flame, ascend from the surface of the
chromosphere with a velocity often exceeding 100 miles in a second, and
frequently reach an enormous height, but are of transient duration. They
are closely connected with sun-spots, and are evidence of the tremendous
forces that are in action on the surface of the Sun.

The CORONA is an aureole of light which is seen to surround the Sun
during a total eclipse. It is an impressive and beautiful phenomenon,
and is only visible when the Sun is concealed behind the dark body of
the Moon. Professor Young gives the following graphic description of the
corona: 'From behind it [the Moon] stream out on all sides radiant
filaments, beams, and sheets of pearly light, which reach to a distance
sometimes of several degrees from the solar surface, forming an
irregular stellate halo, with the black globe of the Moon in its
apparent centre. The portion nearest the Sun is of dazzling brightness,
but still less brilliant than the prominences, which blaze through it
like carbuncles. Generally this inner corona has a pretty uniform
height, forming a ring three or four minutes of arc in width, separated
by a somewhat definite outline from the outer corona, which reaches to a
much greater distance and is far more irregular in form. Usually there
are several "rifts," as they have been called, like narrow beams of
darkness, extending from the very edge of the Sun to the outer night,
and much resembling the cloud shadows which radiate from the Sun before
a thundershower. But the edges of these rifts are frequently curved,
showing them to be something else than real shadows. Sometimes there are
narrow bright streamers as long as the rifts, or longer. These are often
inclined, or occasionally even nearly tangential to the solar surface,
and frequently are curved. On the whole, the corona is usually less
extensive and brilliant over the solar poles, and there is a
recognisable tendency to accumulation above the middle latitudes, or
spot zones; so that, speaking roughly, the corona shows a disposition to
assume the form of a quadrilateral or four-rayed star, though in almost
every individual case this form is greatly modified by abnormal
streamers at some point or other.' The corona surrounds the Sun and its
other envelopes to a depth of many thousands of miles. It consists of
various elements which exist in a condition of extreme tenuity;
hydrogen, helium, and a substance called coronium appear to predominate,
whilst finely divided shining particles of matter and electrical
discharges resembling those of an aurora assist in its illumination.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.--The Corona during the Eclipse of May 1883.]

We possess no knowledge of the physical structure of the interior of the
Sun, nor have we any terrestrial analogy to guide us as to how matter
would behave when subjected to such conditions of extreme temperature
and pressure as exist in the interior of the orb. Yet we are justified
in concluding that the Sun is mainly a gaseous sphere which is slowly
contracting, and that the energy expended in this process is being
transformed into heat so extreme as to render the orb a great fountain
of light.

Milton in his poem makes more frequent allusion to the Sun than to any
of the other orbs of the firmament, and, in all his references to the
great luminary, describes him in a manner worthy of his unrivalled
splendour, and of his supreme importance in the system which he upholds
and governs. After having alighted on Mount Niphates, Satan is described
as looking

    Sometimes towards Heaven and the full-blazing Sun,
    Which now sat high in his meridian tower.--iv. 29-30.

He then addresses him thus:--

    O thou that with surpassing glory crowned,
    Look'st from thy sole dominion like the god
    Of this new World--at whose sight all the stars
    Hide their diminished heads--to thee I call,
    But with no friendly voice, and add thy name,
    O Sun, to tell thee how I hate thy beams,
    That bring to my remembrance from what state
    I fell, how glorious once above thy sphere.--iv. 32-39.

On another occasion:--

    The golden Sun in splendour likest Heaven
    Allured his eye.--iii. 572-73.

In describing the different periods of the day, Milton seldom fails to
associate the Sun with these times, and rightly so, since they are
brought about by the apparent diurnal journey of the orb across the
heavens. Commencing with morning, he says:--

                                    Meanwhile,
    To re-salute the world with sacred light,
    Leucothea waked, and with fresh dews embalmed
    The Earth.--xi. 133-36.

    Soon as they forth were come to open sight
    Of day-spring, and the Sun--who, scarce up-risen,
    With wheels yet hovering o'er the ocean-brim,
    Shot parallel to the Earth his dewy ray,
    Discovering in wide landskip all the east
    Of Paradise and Eden's happy plains.--v. 138-43

                          or some renowned metropolis
    With glistering spires and pinnacles adorned,
    Which now the rising Sun gilds with his beams.--iii. 549-51.

                      while now the mounted Sun
    Shot down direct his fervid rays, to warm
    Earth's inmost womb.--v. 300-302.

                                  for scarce the Sun
    Hath finished half his journey, and scarce begins
    His other half in the great zone of Heaven.--v. 558-60.

    To sit and taste, till this meridian heat
    Be over, and the Sun more cool decline.--v. 369-70.

    And the great Light of Day yet wants to run
    Much of his race, though steep. Suspense in Heaven,
    Held by thy voice, thy potent voice he hears,
    And longer will delay, to hear thee tell
    His generation, and the rising birth
    Of Nature from the unapparent deep.--vii. 98-103.

The declining day and approach of evening are described as follows:--

    Meanwhile in utmost longitude, where Heaven
    With Earth and Ocean meets, the setting Sun
    Slowly descended, and with right aspect
    Against the eastern gate of Paradise
    Levelled his evening rays.--iv. 539-43.

                            the Sun now fallen
    Beneath the Azores; whether the Prime Orb,
    Incredible how swift, had thither rolled
    Diurnal, or this less volubil Earth,
    By shorter flight to the east, had left him there
    Arraying with reflected purple and gold
    The clouds that on his western throne attend.--iv. 591-97.

                                  the parting Sun
    Beyond the Earth's green Cape and verdant Isles
    Hesperian sets, my signal to depart.--viii. 630-32.

    Now was the Sun in western cadence low
    From noon, and gentle airs due at their hour
    To fan the Earth now waked, and usher in
    The evening cool.--x. 92-95.

                                      for the Sun,
    Declined, was hasting now with prone career
    To the Ocean Isles, and in the ascending scale
    Of Heaven the stars that usher evening rose.--iv. 352-55.

In the combat between Michael and Satan, which ended in the overthrow of
the rebel angels, Milton, in his description of their armour, says:--

                  two broad suns their shields
    Blazed opposite.--vi. 305-306,

and in describing the faded splendour of the ruined Archangel, the poet
compares him to the Sun when seen under conditions which temporarily
deprive him of his dazzling brilliancy and glory:--

                        as when the Sun new-risen
    Looks through the horizontal misty air
    Shorn of his beams, or, from behind the Moon
    In dim eclipse, disastrous twilight sheds
    On half the nations, and with fear of change
    Perplexes monarchs.--i. 594-99.

This passage affords us an example of the sublimity of Milton's
imagination and of his skill in adapting the grandest phenomena in
Nature to the illustration of his subject.


THE MOON

The Moon is the Earth's satellite, and next to the Sun is the most
important of the celestial orbs so far as its relations with our globe
are concerned. Besides affording us light by night, the Moon is the
principal cause of the ebb and flow of the tide--a phenomenon of much
importance to navigators. The Moon is almost a perfect sphere, and is
2,160 miles in diameter. The form of its orbit is that of an ellipse
with the Earth in the lower focus. It revolves round its primary in 27
days 7 hours, at a mean distance of 237,000 miles, and with a velocity
of 2,273 miles an hour. Its equatorial velocity of rotation is 10 miles
an hour. The density of the Moon is 3.57 that of water, or 0.63 that of
the Earth; eighty globes, each of the weight of the Moon, would be
required to counterbalance the weight of the Earth, and fifty globes of
a similar size to equal it in dimensions. The orb rotates on its axis in
the same period of time in which it accomplishes a revolution of its
orbit; consequently the same illumined surface of the Moon is always
directed towards the Earth. To the naked eye the Moon appears as large
as the Sun, and it very rapidly changes its form and position in the
sky. Its motions, which are of a very complex character, have been for
many ages the subject of investigation by mathematicians and
astronomers, but their difficulties may now be regarded as having been
finally overcome.

The phases of the Moon are always interesting and very beautiful. The
orb is first seen in the west, after sunset, as a delicate slender
crescent of pale light; each night it increases in size, whilst it
travels eastward, until it attains the figure of a half moon; still
growing larger as it pursues its course, it finally becomes a full
resplendent globe, rising about the time that the Sun sets and situated
directly opposite to him. Then, in a reverse manner, after full moon, it
goes through the same phases, until, as a slender crescent, it becomes
invisible in the solar rays; afterwards to re-appear in a few days, and,
in its monthly round, to undergo the same cycle of changes. The phases
of the Moon depend upon the changing position of the orb with regard to
the Sun. The Moon shines by reflected light derived from the Sun, and as
one half of its surface is always illumined and the other half totally
dark, the crescent increases or diminishes when, by the Moon's change of
position, we see more or less of the bright side. Visible at first as a
slender crescent near the setting Sun, the angular distance from the orb
and the width of the crescent increase daily, until, at the expiration
of seven days, the Moon is distant one quarter of the circumference of
the heavens from the Sun. The Moon is then a semi-circle, or in
quadrature. At the end of other seven days, the distance of the Moon
from the Sun is at its greatest--half the circumference of its orbit. It
is then visible as a circular disc and we behold the orb as full moon.
The waning Moon, as it gradually decreases, presents the same aspects
reversed, and, finally, its slender crescent disappears in the Sun's
rays. The convex edge of the crescent is always turned towards the Sun.
The rising of the Moon in the east and its setting in the west is an
effect due to the diurnal rotation of the Earth on her axis, but the orb
can be perceived to have two motions besides: one from west to east,
which carries it round the heavens in 29.53 days, and another from north
to south. The west to east motion is steady and continuous, but, owing
to the Sun's attractive force, the Moon is made to swerve from its path,
giving rise to irregularities of its motion called PERTURBATIONS. The
most important of these is the _annual equation_, discovered by Tycho
Brahe--a yearly effect produced by the Sun's disturbing influence as the
Earth approaches or recedes from him in her orbit; another irregularity,
called the _evection_, is a change in the eccentricity of the lunar
orbit, by which the mean longitude of the Moon is increased or
diminished. _Elliptic inequality_, _parallactic inequality_, the
_variation_, and _secular acceleration_, are other perturbations of the
lunar motion, which depend directly or indirectly on the attractive
influence of the Sun and the motion of the Earth in her orbit.

As the plane of the Moon's orbit is inclined at an angle of rather more
than 5 deg. to the ecliptic, it follows that the orb, in its journey round
the Earth, intersects this great circle at two points called the
'Nodes.' When crossing the ecliptic from south to north the Moon is in
its ascending node, and when crossing from north to south in its
descending node. In December the Moon reaches the most northern point of
its course, and in June the southernmost. Consequently we have during
the winter nights the greatest amount of moonlight, and in summer the
least. In the evenings the moonlight is least in March and greatest in
September, when we have what is called the Harvest Moon.

The telescopic appearance of the Moon is very interesting and beautiful,
especially if the orb is observed when waxing and waning. As no aqueous
vapour or cloud obscures the lunar surface, all its details can be
perceived with great clearness and distinctness. Indeed, the topography
of the Moon is better known than that of the Earth, for the whole of its
surface has been mapped and delineated with great accuracy and
precision. The Moon is in no sense a duplicate of its primary, and no
analogy exists between the Earth and her satellite. Evidence is wanting
of the existence of an atmosphere surrounding the Moon; no clouds or
exhalations can be perceived, and no water is believed to exist on the
lunar surface. Consequently there are no oceans, seas, rivers, or lakes;
no fertile plains or forest-clad mountains, such as are found upon the
Earth. Indeed, all the conditions essential for the support and
maintenance of organic life by which we are surrounded appear to be
nonexistent on the Moon. Our satellite has no seasons; its axial
rotation is so slow that one lunar day is equal in length to fourteen of
our days; this period of sunshine is succeeded by a night of similar
duration. The alternation of such lengthened days and nights subjects
the lunar surface to great extremes of heat and cold.

When viewed with a telescope, the surface of the Moon is perceived to
consist of lofty mountain chains with rugged peaks, numerous extinct
volcanoes called crater mountains, hills, clefts, chasms, valleys, and
level plains--a region of desolation, presenting to our gaze the
shattered and upturned fragments of the Moon's crust, convulsed by
forces of a volcanic nature which have long since expended their
energies and died out. The mountain ranges on the Moon resemble those of
the Earth, but they have a more rugged outline, and their peaks are more
precipitous, some of them rising to a height of 20,000 feet. They are
called the Lunar Alps, Apennines, and Cordilleras, and embrace every
variety of hill, cliff, mound, and ridge of comparatively low
elevation. The plains are large level areas, which are situated on
various parts of the lunar surface; they are of a darker hue than the
mountainous regions by which they are surrounded, and were at one time
believed to be seas. They are analogous to the prairies, steppes, and
deserts of the Earth.

_Valleys._--Some of these are of spacious dimensions; others are narrow,
and contract into gorges and chasms. Clefts or rills are long cracks or
fissures of considerable depth, which extend sometimes for hundreds of
miles across the various strata of which the Moon's crust is composed.

The characteristic features of the Moon's surface are the crater
mountains: they are very numerous on certain portions of the lunar disc,
and give the Moon the freckled appearance which it presents in the
telescope, and which Galileo likened to the eyes in the feathers of a
peacock's tail. They are believed to be of volcanic origin, and have
been classified as follows: 'Walled plains, mountain rings, ring plains,
crater plains, craters, craterlets, and crater cones.' Upwards of 13,000
of these mountains have been enumerated, and 1,000 are known to have a
diameter exceeding nine miles. Walled plains consist of circular areas
which have a width varying from 150 miles to a few hundred yards. They
are enclosed by rocky ramparts, whilst the centre is occupied by an
elevated peak. The depth of these formations, which are often far below
