limited to a small portion of the photospheric area. But this state of
things is more or less inconstant. Some at least of the bright rays
indicative of it are subject to temporary extinctions. Already in
1871-72, Dr. Vogel[1388] suspected the prevalence of such vicissitudes;
and their reality was ascertained by M. Eugen von Gothard. After the
completion of his new astrophysical observatory at Hereny in the autumn
of 1881, he repeatedly observed the spectra of both stars without
perceiving a trace of bright lines; and was thus taken quite by surprise
when he caught a twinkling of the crimson C in Gamma Cassiopeiae,
August 13, 1883.[1389] A few days later, the whole range including D_3
was lustrous. Duly apprised of the recurrence of a phenomenon he had
himself vainly looked for during some years, M. von Konkoly took the
opportunity of the great Vienna refractor being placed at his disposal
to examine with it the relighted spectrum on August 27.[1390] In its
wealth of light C was dazzling; D_3 and the green and blue hydrogen rays
shone somewhat less vividly; D and the group _b_ showed faintly dark;
while three broad absorption-bands, sharply terminated towards the red,
diffuse towards the violet, shaded the spectrum near its opposite
extremities.

The previous absence of bright lines from the spectrum of this star was,
however, by no means so protracted or complete as M. von Gothard
supposed. At Dunecht, C was "superbly visible" December 20, 1879[1391];
F was seen bright on October 28 of the same year, and frequently at
Greenwich in 1880-81. The curious fact has, moreover, been adverted to
by Dr. Copeland, that C _is much more variable than F_. To Vogel, June
18, 1872, the first was invisible, while the second was bright; at
Dunecht, January 11, 1887, the conditions were so far inverted that C
was resplendent, F comparatively dim.

No spectral fluctuations were detected in Gamma Cassiopeiae by
Keeler in 1889; but even with the giant telescope of Mount Hamilton, the
helium-ray was completely invisible.[1392] It made, nevertheless,
capricious appearances at South Kensington during that autumn, and again
October 21, 1894,[1393] while in September, 1892, Belopolsky could
obtain no trace of it on orthochromatic plates exposed with the 30-inch
Pulkowa refractor.[1394] Still more noteworthy is the circumstance that
the well-known green triplet of magnesium (_b_), recorded as dark by
Keeler in 1889, came out bright on fifty-two spectrographs of the star
taken by Father Sidgreaves during the years 1891-99.[1395] No
fluctuations in the hydrogen-spectrum were betrayed by them; but
subordinate lines of unknown origin showed alternate fading and
vivification.

The spectrum of Beta Lyrae undergoes transitions to some extent
analogous, yet involving a different set of considerations. First
noticed by Von Gothard in 1882,[1396] they were imperfectly made out,
two years later, to be of a cyclical character.[1397] This, however,
could only be effectively determined by photographic means. Beta Lyrae is
a "short-period variable." Its light changes with great regularity from
3.4 to 4.4 magnitude every twelve days and twenty-two hours, during
which time it attains a twofold maximum, with an intervening secondary
minimum. The question, then, is of singular interest, whether the
changes of spectral quality visible in this object correspond to its
changes in visual brightness. A distinct answer in the affirmative was
supplied through Mrs. Fleming's examination of the Harvard plates of the
star's spectrum, upon which, in 1891, she found recorded diverse complex
changes of bright and dark lines obviously connected with the phases of
luminous variation, and obeying, in the long-run, precisely the same
period.[1398] Something more will be said presently as to the import of
this discovery.

Bright hydrogen lines have so far been detected--for the most part
photographically at Harvard College--in about sixty stars, including
Pleione, the surmised lost Pleiad, P Cygni, noted for instability of
light in the seventeenth century, and the extraordinary southern
variable, Eta Carinae. In most of these objects other vivid rays
are associated with those due to hydrogen. A blaze of hydrogen,
moreover, accompanies the recurring outbursts of about one hundred and
fifty "long-period variables," giving banded spectra of the third type.
Professor Pickering discovered the first example of this class, towards
the close of 1886, in Mira Ceti; further detections were made visually
by Mr. Espin; and the conjunction of bright hydrogen-lines with dusky
bands has been proved by Mrs. Fleming's long experience in studying the
Harvard photographs, to indicate unerringly the subjection of the stars
thus characterised to variations of lustre accomplished in some months.

A third variety of gaseous star is named after MM. Wolf and Rayet, who
discovered, at Paris in 1867,[1399] its three typical representatives,
close together in the constellation Cygnus. Six further specimens were
discovered by Dr. Copeland, five of them in the course of a trip for the
exploration of visual facilities in the Andes in 1883;[1400] and a large
number have been made known through spectral photographs taken in both
hemispheres under Professor Pickering's direction. At the close of the
nineteenth century, over a hundred such objects had been registered,
none brighter than the sixth magnitude, with the single exception of
Gamma Argus, the resplendent continuous spectrum of which, first
examined by Respighi and Lockyer in 1871, is embellished with the yellow
and blue rays distinctive of the type.[1401] Here, then, we have a
stellar globe apparently at the highest point of sunlike incandescence,
sharing the peculiarities of bodies verging towards the nebulous state.
Examined with instruments of adequate power, their spectra are seen to
be highly complex. They include a fairly strong continuous element, a
numerous set of absorption-lines, and a range of emission-lines, more or
less completely represented in different stars. Especially conspicuous
is a broad effluence of azure light, found by Dr. Vogel in 1883,[1402]
and by Sir William and Lady Huggins in 1890,[1403] to be of multiple
structure, and hence to vary in its mode of display. Its suggested
identification with the blue carbon-fluting was disproved at Tulse Hill.
Metallic vapours give no certain sign of their presence in the
atmospheres of these remarkable bodies; but nebulum is stated to shine
in some.[1404] Hydrogen and helium account for a large proportion of
their spectral rays. Thirty-two Wolf-Rayet stars were investigated,
spectroscopically and spectrographically, by Professor Campbell with the
great Lick refractor in 1892-94;[1405] and several disclosed the
singularity, already noticed by him in Gamma Argus, of giving out
mixed series, the members of which change from vivid to obscure with
increase of refrangibility. It is difficult to imagine by what
chromospheric machinery this curious result can be produced. Alcyone in
the Pleiades presents the same characteristic. Alone among the hydrogen
lines, crimson C glows in its spectrum, while all the others are dark.
Luminosity of the Wolf-Rayet kind is particularly constant, both in
quantity and quality. It seems to be incapable of developing save under
galactic conditions. All the stars marked by it lie near the central
line of the Milky Way, or in the Magellanic Clouds. They tend also to
gather into groups. Circles of four degrees radius include respectively
seven in Argo, eight in Cygnus.

The first spectroscopic star catalogue was published by Dr. Vogel at
Potsdam in 1883.[1406] It included 4,051 stars, distributed over a zone
of the heavens extending from 20 deg. north to 20 deg. south of the
celestial equator.[1407] More than half of these were white stars,
while red stars with banded spectra occurred in the proportion of about
one-thirteenth of the whole. To the latter genus, M. Duner, then of Lund,
now Director of the Upsala Observatory, devoted a work of standard
authority, issued at Stockholm in 1884. This was a catalogue with
descriptive particulars of 352 stars showing banded spectra, 297 of which
belong to Secchi's third, 55 to his fourth class (Vogel's iii. _a_ and
iii. _b_). Since then discovery has progressed so rapidly, at first
through the telescopic reviews of Mr. Espin, then in the course of the
photographic survey carried on at Harvard College, that considerably over
one thousand stars are at present recognised as of the family of Betelgeux
and Mira, while about 250 have so far exhibited the spectral pattern of
19 Piscium. One fact well ascertained as regards both species is the
invariability of the type. The prismatic flutings of the one, and the
broader zones of the other, are as if stereotyped--they undergo, in
their fundamental outlines, no modification, though varying in relative
intensity from star to star. They are always accompanied by, or
superposed upon, a spectrum of dark lines, in producing which sodium and
iron have an obvious share; and certain bright rays, noticed by Secchi
with imperfect appliances as enhancing the chiaroscuro effects in
carbon-stars, came out upon plates exposed by Hale and Ellerman in 1898
with the stellar spectrograph of the Yerkes Observatory.[1408] Their
genuineness was shortly afterwards visually attested by Keeler,
Campbell, and Duner;[1409] but no chemical interpretation has been found
for them.

A fairly complete preliminary answer to the question, What are the stars
made of? was given by Sir William Huggins in 1864.[1410] By laborious
processes of comparison between stellar dark lines and the bright rays
emitted by terrestrial substances, he sought to assure his conclusions,
regardless of cost in time and pains. He averred, indeed, that--taking
into account restrictions by weather and position--the thorough
investigation of a _single_ star-spectrum would be the work of some
years. Of two, however--those of Betelgeux and Aldebaran--he was able to
furnish detailed and accurate drawings. The dusky flutings in the
prismatic light of the first of these stars have not been identified
with the absorption of any particular substance; but associated with
them are metallic lines, of which 78 were measured, and a good many
identified by Huggins, while the wave-lengths of 97 were determined by
Vogel in 1871.[1411] A photographic research, made by Keeler at the
Alleghany Observatory in 1897, convinced him that the linear spectrum of
third-type stars of the Betelgeux pattern essentially repeats that of
the sun, but with marked differences in the comparative strength of its
components.[1412] Hydrogen rays are inconspicuously present. That an
exalted temperature reigns, at least in the lower strata of the
atmosphere, is certified by the vaporisation there of matter so
refractory to heat as iron.[1413]

Nine elements--among them iron, sodium, calcium, and magnesium--were
recognised by Huggins as having stamped their signature on the spectrum
of Aldebaran; while the existence in Sirius, and nearly all the other
stars inspected, of hydrogen, together with sundry metals, was rendered
certain or highly probable. This was admitted to be a bare gleaning of
results; nor is there reason to suppose any of his congeners inferior to
our sun in complexity of constitution. Definite knowledge on the
subject, however, made little advance beyond the point to which it was
brought by Huggins's early experiments until spectroscopic photography
became thoroughly effective as a means of research.

In this, as in so many other directions, Sir William Huggins acted as
pioneer. In March, 1863, he obtained microscopic prints of the spectra
of Sirius and Capella.[1414] But they told nothing. No lines were
visible in them. They were mere characterless streaks of light. Nine
years later Dr. Henry Draper of New York got an impression of four lines
in the spectrum of Vega. Then Huggins attacked the subject again in
1876, when the 18-inch speculum of the Royal Society had come into his
possession, using prisms of Iceland spar and lenses of rock crystal; and
this time with better success. A photograph of the spectrum of Vega
showed seven strong lines.[1415] Still he was not satisfied. He waited
and worked for three years longer. At length, on December 18, 1879, he
was able to communicate to the Royal Society[1416] results answering to
his expectations. The delicacy of eye and hand needed to obtain them may
be estimated from the single fact that the image of a star had to be
kept, by continual minute adjustments, exactly projected upon a slit
1/350 of an inch in width during nearly an hour, in order to give it
time to imprint the characters of its analyzed light upon a gelatine
plate raised to the highest pitch of sensitiveness. But by this time he
had secured in his wife a rarely qualified assistant.

The ultra-violet spectrum of the white stars--of which Vega was taken as
the type--was thus shown to be a very remarkable one. A group of broad
dark lines intersected it, arranged at intervals diminishing regularly
upward, and falling into a rhythmical succession with the visible
hydrogen lines. All belonged presumably to the same substance; and the
presumption was rendered a certainty by direct photographs of the
hydrogen spectrum taken by H. W. Vogel at Berlin a few months
earlier.[1417] In them seven of the white-star series of grouped lines
were visible; and the full complement of twelve appeared on Cornu's
plates in 1886.[1418]

In yellow stars, such as Capella and Arcturus, the same rhythmical
series was _partially_ represented, but associated with a great number
of other lines; their state, as regards ultra-violet absorption,
approximating to that of the sun; while the redder stars betrayed so
marked a deficiency in actinic rays that from Betelgeux, with an
exposure _forty times_ that required for Sirius, only a faint spectral
impression could be obtained, and from Aldebaran, in the strictly
invisible region, almost none at all.

Thus, by the means of stellar light-analysis, acquaintance was first
made with the ultra-violet spectrum of hydrogen;[1419] and its harmonic
character, as expressed by "Balmer's Law," supplies a sure test for
discriminating, among newly discovered lines, those that appertain from
those that are unrelated to it. Deslandres' five additional
prominence-rays, for instance, were at once seen to make part of the
series, because conforming to its law;[1420] while a group of six dusky
bands, photographed by Sir William and Lady Huggins, April 4,
1890,[1421] near the extreme upper end of the spectrum of Sirius, were
pronounced without hesitation, for the opposite reason, to have nothing
to do with hydrogen. Their true affinities are still a matter for
inquiry.

As regards the hydrogen spectrum, however, the stars had further
information in reserve. Until recently, it was supposed to consist of a
single harmonic series, although, by analogy, three should co-exist. In
1896, accordingly, a second, bound to the first by unmistakable
numerical relationships, was recognised by Professor Pickering in
spectrographs of the 2.5 magnitude star Zeta Puppis,[1422] and the
identification was shortly afterwards extended to prominent Wolf-Rayet
emission lines. The discovery was capped by Dr. Rydberg's indication of
the Wolf-Rayet blue band at Lambda 4,688 as the fundamental member
of the third, and principal, hydrogen series.[1423] None of the
"Pickering lines" (as they may be called to distinguish them from the
"Huggins series") can be induced to glimmer in vacuum-tubes. They seem
to characterise bodies in a primitive state,[1424] and are in many cases
associated with absorption rays of oxygen, the identification of which
by Mr. McClean in 1897[1425] was fully confirmed by Sir David
Gill.[1426] The typical "oxygen star" is Beta Crucis, one of the
brilliants of the Southern Cross; but the distinctive notes of its
spectrum occur in not a few specimens of the helium class. Thus, Sir
William and Lady Huggins photographed several ultra-violet oxygen lines
in Beta Lyrae,[1427] and found in Rigel signs of the presence of
nitrogen,[1428] which, as well as silicium, proves to be a tolerably
frequent constituent of such orbs.[1429] For some unknown reason,
metalloids tend to become effaced, as metals, in the normal course of
stellar development, exert a more and more conspicuous action.

Dr. Scheiner's spectrographic researches at Potsdam in 1890 and
subsequently, exemplify the immense advantages of self-registration. In
a restricted section of the spectrum of Capella, he was enabled to
determine nearly three hundred lines with more precision than had then
been attained in the measurement of terrestrial spectra. This star
appeared to be virtually identical with the sun in physical
constitution, although it emits, according to the best available data,
about 140 times as much light, and is hence presumably 1,600 times more
voluminous. An equally close examination of the spectrum of Betelgeux
showed the predominance in it of the linear absorption of iron;[1430]
but its characteristic flutings do not extend to the photographic
region. Spectra of the second and third orders are for this reason not
easily distinguished on the sensitive plate.

A spectrographic investigation of all the brighter northern stars was
set on foot in 1886 at the observatory of Harvard College, under the
form of a memorial to Dr. H. Draper, whose promising work in that line
was brought to a close by his premature death in 1882. No individual
exertions could, however, have realized a tithe of what has been and is
being accomplished under Professor Pickering's able direction, with the
aid of the Draper and other instruments, supplemented by Mrs. Draper's
liberal provision of funds. A novel system was adopted, or, rather, an
old one--originally used by Fraunhofer--was revived.[1431] The use of a
slit was discarded as unnecessary for objects like the stars, devoid of
sensible dimensions, and giving hence a _naturally_ pure spectrum; and a
large prism, placed in front of the object-glass, analysed at once, with
slight loss of light, the rays of all the stars in the field. Their
spectra were taken, as it were, wholesale. As many as two hundred stars
down to the eighth magnitude were occasionally printed on a single plate
with a single exposure. No cylindrical lens was employed. The movement
of the stars themselves was turned to account for giving the desirable
width to their spectra. The star was allowed--by disconnecting or
suitably regulating the clock--to travel slowly across the line of its
own dispersed light, so broadening it gradually into a band. Excellent
results were secured in this way. About fifty lines appear in the
photographed spectrum of Aldebaran, and eight in that of Vega. On
January 26, 1886, with an exposure of thirty-four minutes, a
simultaneous impression was obtained of the spectra (among many others)
of close upon forty Pleiades. With few and doubtful exceptions, they all
proved to belong to the same type. An additional argument for the common
origin of the stars forming this beautiful group was thus
provided.[1432]

The "Draper Catalogue" of stellar spectra was published in 1890.[1433]
It gives the results of a rapid analytical survey of the heavens north
of 25 deg. of southern declination, and includes 10,351 stars, down to
about the eighth magnitude. The telescope used was of eight inches
aperture and forty-five focus, its field of view--owing to the
"portrait-lens" or "doublet" form given to it--embracing with fair
definition no less than one hundred square degrees. An objective prism
eight inches square was attached, and exposures of a few minutes were
given to the most sensitive plates that could be procured. In this way
the sky was twice covered in duplicate, each star appearing, as a rule,
on four plates. The registration of their spectra was sought to be made
more distinctive than had previously been attempted, Secchi's first type
being divided into four, his second into five subdivisions; but the
differences regarded in them could be confidently established only for
stars above the sixth magnitude. The work supplies none the less valuable
materials for general inferences as to the distribution and relations of
the spectral types. The labour of its actual preparation was borne by a
staff of ladies under the direction of Mrs. Fleming. Materials for its
completion to the southern pole have been accumulated with the identical
instrument used at Cambridge, transferred for the purpose in 1889 to
Peru, and the forthcoming "Second Draper Catalogue" will comprise 30,000
stars in both hemispheres. As supplements to this great enterprise, two
important detailed discussions of stellar spectra were issued in 1897
and 1901 respectively.[1434] The first, by Miss A. C. Maury, dealt with
681 bright stars visible in the northern hemisphere; the second, by Miss
A. J. Cannon, with 1,122 southern stars. Both authors traced, with care
and ability, the minute gradations by which the long process of stellar
evolution appears to be accomplished.

The progress of the Draper Memorial researches was marked by discoveries
of an unexampled kind.

The principle upon which "motion in the line of sight" can be detected
and measured with the spectroscope has already been explained.[1435] It
depends, as our readers will remember, upon the removal of certain
lines, dark or bright (it matters not which), from their normal places
by almost infinitesimal amounts. The whole spectrum of the moving
object, in fact, is very slightly _shoved_ hither or thither, according
as it is travelling towards or from the eye; but, for convenience of
measurement, one line is usually picked out from the rest, and attention
concentrated upon it. The application of this method to the stars,
however, is encompassed with difficulties. It needs a powerfully
dispersive spectroscope to show line-displacements of the minute order
in question; and powerful dispersion involves a strictly proportionate
enfeeblement of light. This, where the supply is already to a deplorable
extent niggardly, can ill be afforded; for which reason the operation of
determining a star's approach or recession is, even apart from
atmospheric obstacles, an excessively delicate one.

It was first executed by Sir William Huggins early in 1868.[1436]
Selecting the brightest star in the heavens as the most promising
subject of experiment, he considered the F line in the spectrum of
Sirius to be just so much displaced towards the red as to indicate (the
orbital motion of the earth being deducted) recession at the rate of
twenty-nine miles a second; and the reality and direction of the
movement were ratified by Vogel and Lohse's observation, March 22, 1871,
of a similar, but even more considerable displacement.[1437] The inquiry
was resumed by Huggins with improved apparatus in the following year,
when the velocities of thirty stars were approximately determined.[1438]
The retreat of Sirius, which proved slower than had at first been
supposed, was now announced to be shared, at rates varying from twelve
to twenty-nine miles, by Betelgeux, Rigel, Castor, Regulus, and five of
the principal stars in the Plough. Arcturus, on the contrary, gave signs
of rapid approach, as well as Pollux, Vega, Deneb in the Swan, and the
brightness of the Pointers.

Numerically, indeed, these results were encompassed with uncertainty.
Thus, Arcturus is now fully ascertained to be travelling towards the sun
at the comparatively slow pace of less than five miles a second; and
Sirius moves twice as fast in the same direction. The great difficulty
of measuring so distended a line as the Sirian F might, indeed, well
account for some apparent anomalies. The scope of Sir William Huggins's
achievement was not, however, to provide definitive data, but to
establish as practicable the method of procuring them. In this he was
thoroughly successful, and his success was of incalculable value.
Spectroscopic investigations of stellar movements may confidently be
expected to play a leading part in the unravelment of the vast and
complex relations which we can dimly detect as prevailing among the
innumerable orbs of the sidereal world; for it supplements the means
which we possess of measuring by direct observation movements transverse
to the line of sight, and thus completes our knowledge of the courses
and velocities of stars at ascertained distances, while supplying for
all a valuable index to the amount of perspective foreshortening of
apparent movement. Thus some, even if an imperfect, knowledge may at
length be gained of the revolutions of the stars--of the systems they
unite to form, of the paths they respectively pursue, and of the forces
under the compulsion of which they travel.

The applicability of the method to determining the orbital motions of
double stars was pointed out by Fox Talbot in 1871;[1439] but its use
for their discovery revealed itself spontaneously through the Harvard
College photographs. In "spectrograms" of Zeta Ursae Majoris
(Mizar), taken in 1887, and again in 1889, the K line was seen to be
double; while on other plates it appeared single. A careful study of
Miss A. C. Maury of a series of seventy impressions indicated for the
doubling a period of fifty-two days, and showed it to affect all the
lines in the spectrum.[1440] The only available, and no doubt the true,
explanation of the phenomenon was that two similar and nearly equal
stars are here merged into one telescopically indivisible; their
combined light giving a single or double spectrum, according as their
orbital velocities are directed across or along our line of sight. The
movements of a revolving pair of stars must always be opposite in sense,
and proportionately equal in amount. That is, they at all times travel
with speeds in the inverse ratio of their masses. Hence, unless the
plane of their orbits be perpendicular to a plane passing through the
eye, there must be two opposite points where their velocities in the
line of sight reach a maximum, and two diametrically opposite points
where they touch zero. The lines in their common spectrum would thus
appear alternately double and single twice in the course of each
revolution. To that of Mizar, at first supposed to need 104 days for its
completion, a period of only twenty days fourteen hours was finally
assigned by Vogel.[1441] Anomalous spectral effects, probably due to the
very considerable eccentricity of the orbit, long impeded its
satisfactory determination. The mean distance apart of the component
stars, as now ascertained, is just twenty-two million miles, and their
joint mass quadruples that of the sun. But these are minimum estimates.
For if the orbital plane be inclined, much or little, to the line of
sight, the dimensions and mass of the system should be proportionately
increased.

An analogous discovery was made by Miss Maury in 1889. But in the
spectrum of Beta Aurigae, the lines open out and close up on
alternate days, indicating a relative orbit[1442] with a radius of less
than eight million miles, traversed in about four days. This implies a
rate of travel for each star of sixty-five miles a second, and a
combined mass 4.7 times that of the sun. The components are
approximately equal, both in mass and light,[1443] and the system formed
by them is transported towards us with a speed of some sixteen miles a
second. The line-shiftings so singularly communicative proceed, in this
star, with perfect regularity.

This new class of "spectroscopic binaries" could never have been
visually disclosed. The distance of Beta Aurigae from the earth, as
determined, somewhat doubtfully, by Professor Pritchard, is nearly three
and a third million times that of the earth from the sun (parallax =
0.06"); whence it has been calculated that the greatest angular
separation of the revolving stars is only five-thousandths of a second
of arc.[1444] To make this evanescent interval perceptible, a telescope
eighty feet in aperture would be required.

The zodiacal star, Spica (Alpha Virginis), was announced by Dr.
Vogel, April 24, 1890,[1445] to belong to the novel category, with the
difference, however, of possessing a nearly dark, instead of a
brilliantly lustrous companion. In this case, accordingly, the tell-tale
spectroscopic variations consist merely in a slight swinging to and fro
of single lines. No second spectrum leaves a legible trace on the plate.
Spica revolves in four days at the rate of fifty-seven miles a
second,[1446] or quicker, in proportion as its orbit is more inclined to
the line of sight, round a centre at a minimum distance of three
millions of miles. But the position of the second star being unknown,
the mass of the system remains indeterminate. The lesser component of
the splendid, slowly revolving binary, Castor, is also closely double.
Its spectral lines were found by Belopolsky in 1896[1447] to oscillate
once in nearly three days, the secondary globe being apparently quite
obscure. Further study of the movements thus betrayed elicited the fact
that the major axis of the eclipse traversed revolves in a period of
2,100 days, as a consequence, most likely, of the flattened shape of the
stars.[1448] Still more unexpected was the simultaneous assignment, by
Campbell and Newall, of a duplex character to Capella.[1449] Here both
components shine, though with a different quality of light, one giving a
pure solar spectrum, the other claiming prismatic affinity with Procyon.
Their mutual circulation is performed in 104 days, and the radius of
their orbit cannot be less, and may be a great deal more, than
51,000,000 miles. Hence the possibility is not excluded that the
star--which has an authentic parallax of 0.08"--may be visually
resolved. Indeed, signs of "elongation" were thought to be perceptible
with the Greenwich 28-inch refractor,[1450] while only round images
could be seen at Lick.[1451] Another noteworthy case is that of Polaris,
found by Campbell to have certainly one, and probably two obscure
attendants.[1452] Through his systematic investigations of stellar
radial velocities with the Mills spectrograph, knowledge in this
department has, since 1897, progressed so rapidly that the spectroscopic
binaries of our acquaintance already number half a hundred, and ten
times as many more doubtless lie within easy range of detection.

Now it is evident that a spectroscopic binary, if the plane of its
motion made a very small angle with the line of sight, would be a
variable star. For, during a few hours of each revolution, some at least
of its light should be cut off by a transit of its dusky companion. Such
"eclipse-stars" are actually found in the heavens.

The best and longest-known member of the group is Algol in the Head of
Medusa, the "Demon-star" of the Arabs.[1453] This remarkable object,
normally above the third magnitude, loses and regains three-fifths of
its light once in 68.8 hours, the change being completed in about twelve
hours. Its definite and limited nature, and punctual recurrence,
suggested to Goodricke of York, by whom the periodicity of the star was
discovered in 1783,[1454] the interposition of a large dark satellite.
But the conditions involved by the explanation were first seriously
investigated by Pickering in 1880.[1455] He found that the phenomena
could be satisfactorily accounted for by supposing an obscure body 0.764
the bright star's diameter to revolve round it in a period identical
with that of its observed variation. This theoretical forecast was
verified with singular exactitude at Potsdam in 1889.[1456] A series of
spectral photographs taken there showed each of Algol's minima to be
preceded by a rapid recession from the earth, and succeeded by a rapid
movement of approach towards it. They take place, accordingly, when the
star is at the furthest point from ourselves of an orbit described round
an invisible companion, the transits of which across its disc betray
themselves to notice by the luminous vicissitudes they occasion. The
diameter of this orbit, traversed at the rate of twenty-six miles a
second, is just 2,000,000 miles; and it is an easy further inference
from the duration and extent of the phases exhibited that Algol itself
must be (in round numbers) one million, its attendant 830,000 miles in
diameter. Assuming both to be of the same density, Vogel found their
respective masses to be four-ninths and two-ninths that of the sun, and
their distance asunder to be 3,230,000 miles.

This singularly assorted pair of stars possibly form part of a larger
system. Their period of revolution is shorter now by six seconds than it
was in Goodricke's time; and Dr. Chandler has shown, by an exhaustive
discussion, that its inequalities are comprised in a cycle of about 130
years.[1457] They arise, in his view, from a common revolution, in that
period, of the close couple about a third distant body, emitting little
or no light, in an orbit inclined 20 deg. to our line of vision, and of
approximately the size of that described by Uranus round the sun. The
time spent by light in crossing this orbit causes an apparent delay in
the phases of the variable, when Algol and its eclipsing satellite are
on its further side from ourselves, balanced by acceleration while they
traverse its hither side. Dr. Chandler derives confirmation for his
plausible and ingenious theory from a supposed undulation in the line
traced out by Algol's small proper motion; but the reality of this
disturbance has yet to be established.[1458] Meanwhile, M.
Tisserand,[1459] late Director of the Paris Observatory, preferred to
account for Algol's inequalities on the principle later applied by
Belopolsky to those of Castor. That is to say, he assumed a revolving
line of apsides in an elliptical orbit traversed by a pretty strongly
compressed pair of globes. The truth of this hypothesis can be tested by
close observation of the phases of the star during the next few years.

The variable in the Head of Medusa is the exemplar of a class including
26 recognised members, all of which doubtless represent occulting
combinations of stars. But their occultations result merely from the
accident of their orbital planes passing through our line of sight;
hence the heavens must contain numerous systems similarly constituted,
though otherwise situated as regards ourselves, some of which, like
Spica Virginis, will become known through their spectroscopic changes,
while others, because revolving in planes nearly tangent to the sphere,
or at right angles to the visual line, may never disclose to us their
true nature. Among eclipsing stars should probably be reckoned the
peculiar variables, Beta Lyrae and V Puppis, each believed to
consist of a pair of bright stars revolving almost in contact.[1460]
Three stars, on the other hand, distinguished by rapid and regular
fluctuations, have been proved by Belopolsky to be attended by
non-occulting satellites, which circulate, nevertheless, in the
identical periods of light-change.

Gore's "Catalogue of Known Variables"[1461] included, in 1884, 190
entries, and the number was augmented to 243 on its revision in
1888.[1462] Chandler's first list of 225 such objects,[1463] published
about the same time, received successive expansions in 1893 and
1896,[1464] and finally included 400 entries. A new "Catalogue of
Variable Stars," still wider in scope, will shortly be issued by the
German _Astronomische Gesellschaft_. Mr. A. W. Roberts's researches on
southern variables[1465] have greatly helped to give precision, while
adding to the extent of knowledge in this branch. Dr. Gould held the
opinion that most stars fluctuate slightly in brightness through
surface-alterations similar to, but on a larger scale than those of the
sun; and the solar analogy might be pushed somewhat further. It perhaps
affords a clue to much that is perplexing in stellar behaviour. Wolf
pointed out in 1852 the striking resemblance in character between curves
representing sun-spot frequency and curves representing the changing
luminous intensity of many variable stars. There were the same steep
ascent to maximum and more gradual decline to minimum, the same
irregularities in heights and hollows, and, it may be added, the same
tendency to a double maximum, and complexity of superposed
periods.[1466] It is impossible to compare the two sets of phenomena
thus graphically portrayed without reaching the conclusion that they are
of closely related origin. But the correspondence indicated is not, as
has often been hastily assumed, between maxima of sun-spots and minima
of stellar brightness, but just the reverse. The luminous outbursts, not
the obscurations of variable stars, obey a law analogous to that
governing the development of spots on the sun. Objects of the kind do
not, then, gain light through the closing-up of dusky chasms in their
photospheres, but by an actual increase of surface-brilliancy, together
with an immense growth of these brilliant formations--prominences and
faculae--which, in the sun, accompany, or are appended to spots. A
comparison of light-curves with curves of spot-frequency leaves no doubt
on this point, and the strongest corroborative evidence is derived from
the emergence of bright lines in the spectra of long-period variables
rising to their recurring maxima.

Every kind and degree of variability is exemplified in the heavens. At
the bottom of the scales are stars like the sun, of which the lustre
is--tried by our instrumental means--sensibly steady. At the other
extreme are ranged the astounding apparitions of "new," or "temporary"
stars. Within the last thirty-six years eleven of these stellar guests
(as the Chinese call them) have presented themselves, and we meet with a
twelfth no farther back than April 27, 1848. But of the "new star" in
Ophiuchus found by Mr. Hind on that night, little more could be learnt
than of the brilliant objects of the same kind observed by Tycho and
Kepler. The spectroscope had not then been invented. Let us hear what it
had to tell of later arrivals.

About thirty minutes before midnight of May 12, 1866, Mr. John
Birmingham of Millbrook, near Tuam, in Ireland, saw with astonishment a
bright star of the second magnitude unfamiliarly situated in the
constellation of the Northern Crown. Four hours earlier, Schmidt of
Athens had been surveying the same part of the heavens, and was able to
testify that it was not visible there. That is to say, a few hours, or
possibly a few minutes, sufficed to bring about a conflagration, the
news of which may have occupied hundreds of years in travelling to us
across space. The rays which were its messengers, admitted within the
slit of Sir William Huggins's spectroscope, May 16, proved to be of a
composition highly significant as to the nature of the catastrophe. The
star--which had already declined below the third magnitude--showed what
was described as a double spectrum. To the dusky flutings of Secchi's
third type four brilliant rays were added.[1467] The chief of these
agreed in position with lines of hydrogen; so that the immediate cause
of the outburst was inferred to have been the eruption, or ignition, of
vast masses of that subtle kind of matter, the universal importance of
which throughout the cosmos is one of the most curious facts revealed by
the spectroscope.

T Coronae (as the new star was called) quickly lost its adventitious
splendour. Nine days after its discovery it was again invisible to the
naked eye. It is now a pale yellow, slightly variable star near the
tenth magnitude, and finds a place as such in Argelander's charts.[1468]
It was thus obscurely known before it made its sudden leap into
notoriety.

The next "temporary," discovered by Dr. Schmidt at Athens, November 24,
1876, could lay no claim to previous recognition even in that modest
rank. It was strictly a parvenu. There was no record of its existence
until it made its appearance as a star of nearly the third magnitude, in
the constellation of the Swan. Its spectrum was examined, December 2, by
Cornu at Paris,[1469] and a few days later by Vogel and O. Lohse at
Potsdam.[1470] It proved of a closely similar character to that of T
Coronae. A range of bright lines, including those of hydrogen, and
probably of helium, stood out from a continuous background impressed
with strong absorption. It may be presumed that in reality the gaseous
substances, which, by their sudden incandescence, had produced the
apparent conflagration, lay comparatively near the surface of the star,
while the screen of cooler materials intercepting large portions of its
light was situated at a considerable elevation in its atmosphere.

The object, meanwhile, steadily faded. By the end of the year it was of
no more than seventh magnitude. After the second week of March, 1877,
strengthening twilight combined with the decline of its radiance to
arrest further observation. It was resumed, September 2, at Dunecht,
with a strange result. Practically the whole of its scanty light (it had
then sunk below the tenth magnitude) was perceived to be gathered into a
single bright line in the green, and that the most characteristic line
of gaseous nebulae.[1471] The star had, in fact, so far as outward
appearance was concerned, become transformed into a planetary nebula,
many of which are so minute as to be distinguishable from small stars
only by the quality of their radiations. It is now, having sunk to about
the fourteenth magnitude,[1472] entirely beyond the reach of
spectroscopic scrutiny.

Perhaps none of the marvellous changes witnessed in the heavens has
given a more significant hint as to their construction than the stellar
blaze kindled in the heart of the great Andromeda nebula some
undetermined number of years or centuries before its rays reached the
earth in the month of August, 1885. The first published discovery was by
Dr. Hartwig at Dorpat on August 31; but it was found to have been
already seen, on the 19th, by Mr. Isaac W. Ward of Belfast, and on the
17th by M. Ludovic Gully of Rouen. The _negative_ observations, on the
16th, of Tempel[1473] and Max Wolf, limited very narrowly the epoch of
the apparition. Nevertheless, it did not, like most temporaries, attain
its maximum brightness all at once. When first detected, it was of the
ninth, by September 1 it had risen to the seventh magnitude, from which
it so rapidly fell off that in March it touched the limit of visibility
(sixteenth magnitude) with the Washington 26-inch. Its light bleached
very perceptibly as it faded.[1474] During the earlier stages of its
decline, the contrast was striking between the sharply defined, ruddy
disc of the star, and the hazy, greenish-white background upon which it
was projected,[1475] and with which it was inevitably suggested to be in
some sort of physical connection.

Let us consider what evidence was really available on this point. To
begin with, the position of the star was not exactly central. It lay
sixteen seconds of arc to the south-west of the true nebular nucleus.
Its appearance did not then signify a sudden advance of the nebula
towards condensation, nor was it attended by any visible change in it
save the transient effect of partial effacement through superior
brightness.

Equally indecisive information was derived from the spectroscope. To
Vogel, Hasselberg, and Young, the light of the "Nova" seemed perfectly
continuous; but Huggins caught traces of bright lines on September 2,
confirmed on the 9th;[1476] and Copeland succeeded, on September 30, in
measuring three bright bands with an acute-angled prism specially
constructed for the purpose.[1477] A shimmer of F was suspected, and had
also been perceived by Mr. O. T. Sherman of Yale College. Still, the
effect was widely different from that of the characteristic blazing
spectrum of a temporary star, and prompted the surmise that here, too, a
variable might be under scrutiny. The star, however, was certainly so
far "new" that its rays, until their sudden accession of strength, were
too feeble to affect even our reinforced senses. Not one of the 1,283
small stars recorded in charts of the nebula could be identified with
it; and a photograph taken by Dr. Common, August 16, 1884, on which a
multitude of stars down to the fifteenth magnitude had imprinted
themselves, showed the uniform, soft gradation of nebulous light to be
absolutely unbroken by a stellar indication in the spot reserved for the
future occupation of the "Nova."[1478]

So far, then, the view that its relation to the nebula was a merely
optical one might be justified; but it became altogether untenable when
it was found that what was taken to be a chance coincidence had repeated
itself within living memory. On the 21st of May, 1860, M. Auwers
perceived at Koenigsberg a seventh magnitude star shining close to the
centre of a nebula in Scorpio, numbered 80 in Messier's Catalogue.[1479]
Three days earlier it certainly was not there, and three weeks later it
had vanished. The effect to Mr. Pogson (who independently discovered the
change, May 28)[1480] was as if the nebula had been _replaced_ by a
star, so entirely were its dim rays overpowered by the concentrated
blaze in their midst. Now, it is simply incredible that two outbursts of
so uncommon a character should have _accidentally_ occurred just on the
line of sight between us and the central portions of two nebulae; we
must, then, conclude that they showed _on_ these objects because they
took place _in_ them. The most favoured explanation is that they were
what might be called effects of overcrowding--that some of the numerous
small bodies, presumably composing the nebulae, jostled together, in
their intricate circlings, and obtained compensation in heat for their
sacrifice of motion. But this is scarcely more than a plausible
makeshift of perplexed thought. Mr. W. H. S. Monck, on the other hand,
has suggested that new stars appear when dark bodies are rendered
luminous by rushing through the gaseous fields of space,[1481] just as
meteors kindle in our atmosphere. The idea, which has been revived and
elaborated by Dr. Seeliger of Munich,[1482] is ingenious, but was not
designed to apply to our present case. Neither of the objects
distinguished by the striking variations just described is of gaseous
constitution. That in Scorpio appears under high magnifying powers as a
"compressed cluster"; that in Andromeda is perhaps, as Sir J. Herschel
suggested, "optically nebulous through the smallness of its constituent
stars"[1483]--if stars they deserve to be called.

On the 8th of December, 1891, Dr. Max Wolf took a photograph of the
region about Chi Aurigae. No stranger so bright as the eighth
magnitude was among the stars depicted upon it. On the 10th,
nevertheless, a stellar object of the fifth magnitude, situated a couple
of degrees to the north-east of Beta Tauri and previously
unrecorded, where eleventh magnitude stars appeared, imprinted itself
upon a Harvard negative. Subsequent photographs taken at the same place
showed it to have gained about half a magnitude by the 20th; but the
plates were not then examined, and the discovery was left to be modestly
appropriated by an amateur, the Rev. Dr. Anderson of Edinburgh, by whom
it was announced, February 1, 1892, through the medium of an anonymous
postcard, to Dr. Copeland, the Astronomer Royal for Scotland.[1484] By
him and others, the engines of modern research were promptly set to
work. And to good purpose. Nova Aurigae was the first star of its kind
studied by the universal chemical method. It is the first, accordingly,
of which authentic records can be handed down to posterity. They are of
a most remarkable character. The spectrum of the new object was
photographed at Stonyhurst and South Kensington on February 3; a few
days later, at Harvard and Lick in America, at Potsdam and Hereny on the
Continent of Europe. But by far the most complete impression was
secured, February 22, with an exposure of an hour and three-quarters, by
Sir William and Lady Huggins, through whose kindness it is reproduced in
Plate V., Fig. 1. The range of bright lines displayed in it is of
astonishing vividness and extent. It includes all the hydrogen rays dark
in the spectrum of Sirius (separately printed for comparison), besides
many others still more refrangible, as yet unidentified. Very
significant, too, is the marked character of the great prominence lines
H and K. The visual spectrum of the Nova was splendidly effective.
A quartette of brilliant green rays, two of them due to helium,
caught the eye; and they had companions too numerous to be easily
counted. The hydrogen lines were broad and bright; C blazed, as Mr.
Espin said, "like a danger-signal on a dark night"; the sodium pair were
identified at Tulse Hill, and the yellow helium ray was suspected to
lurk close beside them. Fig. 2 in the same plate shows the spectrum as
it was seen and mapped by Lady Huggins, February 2 to 6, together with
the spectra employed to test the nature of the emissions dispersed in
it. One striking feature will be at once remarked. It is that of the
pairing of bright with dark lines. Both in the visible and the
photographic regions this singular peculiarity was unmistakable; and
since the two series plainly owned the same chemical origin, their
separate visibility implied large displacement. Otherwise they would
have been superposed, not juxtaposed. Measurements of the bright rays,
accordingly, showed them to be considerably pushed down towards the red,
while their dark companions were still more pushed up towards the blue
end. Thus the spectrum of Nova Aurigae, like that of Beta Lyrae,
with which it had many points in common, appeared to be really double.
It was supposed to combine the light of two distinct bodies, one, of a
gaseous nature, moving rapidly away from the earth, the other, giving a
more sunlike spectrum, approaching it with even higher speed. The
relative velocity determined at Potsdam for these oppositely flying
masses amounted to 550 miles a second.[1485] And this prodigious rate of
separation was fully maintained during six weeks! It did not then
represent a mere periastral rush-past.[1486] To the bodies exhibiting
its effects, and parting company for ever under its stress, it must have
belonged, with slight diminution, in perpetuity. The luminous outburst
by which they became visible was explained by Sir William Huggins, in a
lecture delivered at the Royal Institution, May 13, 1892, on the tidal
theory of Klinkerfues and Wilsing. Disturbances and deformations due to
the mutual attraction of two bulky globes at a close approach would, he
considered, "give rise to enormous eruptions of the hotter matters from
within, immensely greater, but similar in kind, to solar eruptions; and
accompanied, probably, by large electrical disturbances." The multiple
aspect and somewhat variable character of both bright and dark lines
were plausibly referred to processes of "reversal," such as are nearly
always in progress above sun-spots; but the long duration of the star's
suddenly acquired lustre did not easily fit in with the adopted
rationale. A direct collision, on the other hand, was out of the
question, since there had obviously been little, if any, sacrifice of
motion; and the substitution of a nebula for one of the "stars"[1487]
compelled recourse to scarcely conceivable modes of action for an
explanation of the perplexing peculiarities of the compound spectrum.


PLATE V.

[Illustration: Photographic and Visual Spectrum of Nova Aurigae.

Fig. 1.--From a Photograph taken by Sir William and Lady Huggins, Feb.
22, 1892.

Fig. 2.--From a Drawing made by Lady Huggins, Feb. 2 to 6, 1892.]


An unexpected _denouement_, however, threw all speculations off the
track. The Nova contained most of its brightness, fluctuations
notwithstanding, until March 9; after which date it ran swiftly and
uniformly down towards what was apprehended to be total extinction. No
marked change of spectrum attended its decline. When last examined at
Tulse Hill, March 24, all the more essential features of its prismatic
light were still faintly recognisable.[1488] The object was steadily
sinking on April 26, when a (supposed) final glimpse of it was caught
with the Lick 36-inch.[1489] It was then of about the sixteenth
magnitude. But on August 17 it had sprung up to the tenth, as Professors
Holden, Schaeberle, and Campbell perceived with amazement on turning the
same instrument upon its place. And to Professor Barnard it appeared,
two nights later, not only revived, but transformed into the nucleus of
a planetary nebula, 3" across.[1490] The reality of this seeming
distension, however, at once disputed, was eventually disproved. It
unquestionably arose from the imperfect focussing power of the telescope
for rays of unusual quality.[1491]

The rekindled Nova was detected in this country by Mr. H. Corder, on
whose notification Mr. Espin, on August 21, examined its nearly
monochromatic spectrum.[1492] The metamorphosis of Nova Cygni seemed
repeated.[1493] The light of the new object, like that of its
predecessor, was mainly concentrated in a vivid green band, identified
with the chief nebular line by Copeland,[1494] Von Gothard,[1495] and
Campbell.[1496] The second nebular line was also represented. Indeed,
the last-named observer recognised nearly all the eighteen lines
measured by him in the Nova as characteristic of planetary nebulae.[1497]
Of particular interest is the emergence in the star-spectrum
photographed by Von Gothard of an ultra-violet line originally
discovered at Tulse Hill in the Orion nebula, which is also very strong
in the Lyra annular nebula.

Obviously, then, the physical constitution of Nova Aurigae became
profoundly modified during the four months of its invisibility. The
spectrum of February was or appeared compound; that of August was
simple; it could be reasonably associated only with a single
light-source. Many of the former brilliant lines, too, had vanished, and
been replaced by others, at first inconspicuous or absent. As a result,
the solar-prominence type, to which the earlier spectrum had seemed to
conform, was completely effaced in the later. The cause of these
alterations remains mysterious, yet its effects continue. The chromatic
behaviour of the semi-extinct Nova, when scrutinised with great
refractors, shows its waning light to be distinctly nebular.[1498] Like
nearly all its congeners, the star is situated in the full stream of the
Milky Way, and we learn without surprise that micrometrical measures by
Burnham and Barnard[1499] failed to elicit from it any sign of
parallactic shifting. It is hence certain that the development of light,
of which the news reached the earth in December, 1891, must have been on
a vast scale, and of ancient date. Nova Aurigae at its maximum assuredly
exceeded the sun many times in brightness; and its conflagration can
scarcely have occurred less, and may have occurred much more, than a
hundred years ago.

By means of the photographic surveys of the skies, carried on in both
hemispheres under Professor Pickering's superintendence, such amazing
events have been proved to be of not infrequent occurrence. Within six
years five new stars were detected from Draper Memorial, or chart-plates
by Mrs Fleming, besides the retrospective discovery of a sixth which had
rapidly burnt itself out, eight years previously, in Perseus.[1500] Nova
Normae was the immediate successor of Nova Aurigae; Nova Carinae and Nova
Centauri lit up in 1895, the latter in a pre-existent nebula; Nova
Sagittarii and Nova Aquilae attained brief maxima in 1898 and 1899
respectively. Now, three out of these five stars reproduced with
singular fidelity the spectrum of Nova Aurigae; they displayed the same
brilliant rays shadowed, invariably on their blue sides, by dark ones.
Palpably, then, the arrangement was systematic and significant; it could
not result merely from the casually directed, opposite velocities of
bodies meeting in space. The hypothesis of stellar encounters
accordingly fell to the ground, and has been provided with no entire
satisfactory substitute. Most speculators now fully recognise that
motion-displacements cannot be made to account for the doubled spectra
of Novae, and seek recourse instead to some kind of physical agency for
producing the observed effect.[1501] And since this is also visible in
certain permanent, though peculiar objects--notably in P Cygni,
Beta Lyrae, and Eta Carinae--the acting cause must also evidently be
permanent and inherent.

The "new star of the new century"[1502] was a visual discovery. Dr.
Anderson duplicated, with added _eclat_, his performance of nine years
back. In the early morning of February 22, 1901, he perceived that Algol
had a neighbour of nearly its own brightness, which a photograph taken
by Mr. Stanley Williams, at Brighton, proved to have risen from below
