instantly the job is done.


End This Waste and Danger

You undoubtedly know what a nasty, dangerous job it is to open cans with
the old-fashioned can opener. You have to hack your way along
slowly--ripping a jagged furrow around the edge. Next thing you know,
the can opener slips. Good night! You've torn a hole in your finger. As
often as not it will get infected and stay sore a long time. Perhaps
even your life will be endangered from blood poisoning!

You may be lucky enough to get the can open without cutting yourself.
But there's still the fact to consider that the ragged edge of tin left
around the top makes it almost impossible to pour out all of the food.
Yet now, all this trouble, waste and danger is ended. No wonder salesmen
everywhere are finding this invention a truly revolutionary money maker!


New "Million Dollar" Can Opening Machine

The Speedo holds the can--opens it, flips up the lid so you can grab
it--and gives you back the can without a drop spilled, without any rough
edges to snag your fingers--all in a couple of seconds! It's so easy
even a 10-year-old child can do it in perfect safety! No wonder
women--and men, too--simply go wild over it! No wonder Speedo salesmen
often sell to every house in the block and make up to $10 an hour.


Generous Free Test Offer

Frankly, men, I realize that the profit possibilities of this
proposition as outlined briefly here may seem almost incredible to you.
So I've worked out a plan by-which you can examine the invention and
test its profits without risking one penny.

Get my free test offer while the territory you want is still open--I'll
hold it for you while you make the test. I'll send you all the facts
about others making $25 to $150 in a week. I'll also tell you about
another fast-selling item that brings you two profits on every call. All
you risk is a 2c stamp--so grab your pencil and shoot me the coupon
right now.


AGENTS!

Full Time $265 in a Week

"Here is my record for first 50 days with Speedo:

  June 13,   60 Speedos;
  June 20,   84 Speedos;
  June 30,  192 Speedos;
  July  6,  288 Speedos.

Speedo sells to 9 out of 10 prospects."

M. Ornoff, Va.

  PART TIME
  14 sales in 2 hours

J. J. Corwin, Ariz., says: "Send more order books. I sold first 14
orders in 2 hours."

  SPARE TIME
  Big Money Spare Time

Bart, W. Va. says:

"Was only out a few evenings, and got 20 orders."


  CENTRAL STATES MFG. CO., Dept. B-2403
  4500 Mary Ave. (Est. over 20 years) St. Louis, Mo.

       *       *       *       *       *

  SPEEDO

  Central States Mfg. Co.,
  4500 Mary Ave. Dept. B-2403
  St. Louis, Mo.

Yes, rush me the facts and details of your FREE OFFER.

  Name ........................................

  Address .....................................

  City ...................... State ...........
  [ ] Check here if interested only in one for your home.

       *       *       *       *       *

Please mention NEWSSTAND GROUP--MEN'S LIST, when answering
advertisements

       *       *       *       *       *


Half a Million People

_have learned music this easy way_

[Illustration]

You, too, Can Learn to Play Your Favorite Instrument Without a Teacher

_Easy as_ A-B-C

Yes, half a million delighted men and women all over the world have
learned music this quick, easy way.

Half a million--500,000--what a gigantic orchestra they would make! Some
are playing on the stage, others in orchestras, and many thousands are
daily enjoying the pleasure and popularity of being able to play some
instrument.

Surely this is convincing proof of the success of the _new, modern
method_ perfected by the U.S. School of Music! And what these people
have done, YOU, too, can do!

Many of this half million didn't know one note from another--others had
never touched an instrument--yet in half the usual time they learned to
play their favorite instrument. Best of all, they found learning music
_amazingly_ easy. No monotonous hours of exercises--no tedious
scales--no expensive teachers. This simplified method made learning
music as easy as A-B-C!

It is like a fascinating game. From the very start you are playing
_real_ tunes, perfectly, by _note_. You simply can't go wrong, for every
step, from beginning to end, is right before your eyes in print and
picture. First you are _told_ how to do a thing, then a picture _shows_
you how, then you do it yourself and _hear_ it. And almost before you
know it, you are playing your favorite pieces--jazz, ballads, classics.
No private teacher could make it clearer. Little theory--plenty of
accomplishment. That's why students of the U.S. School of Music get
ahead twice as fast--_three times as fast_ as those who study
old-fashioned, plodding methods.

You don't need any special "talent." Many of the half-million who have
already become accomplished players never dreamed they possessed musical
ability. They only wanted to play some instrument--just like you--and
they found they could quickly learn how this easy way. Just a little of
your spare time each day is needed--and you enjoy every minute of it.
The cost is surprisingly low--averaging only a few cents a day--and the
price is the same for whatever instrument you choose. And remember, you
are studying right in your own home--without paying big fees to private
teachers.

Don't miss any more good times! Learn now to play your favorite
instrument and surprise all your friends. Change from a wallflower to
the center of attraction. Music is the best thing to offer at a
party--musicians are invited everywhere. Enjoy the popularity you have
been missing. Get your share of the musician's pleasure and profit!
Start now!


Free Booklet and Demonstration Lesson

If you are in earnest about wanting to join the crowd of entertainers
and be a "big hit" at any party--if you really _do_ want to play your
favorite instrument, to become a performer whose services will be in
demand--fill out and mail the convenient coupon asking for our Free
Booklet and Free Demonstration Lesson. These explain our wonderful
method fully and show you how easily and quickly you can learn to play
at little expense. This booklet will also tell you all about the amazing
new _Automatic Finger Control_. Instruments are supplied when
needed--cash or credit, U.S. School of Music 3692 Brunswick Bldg., New
York City.

  WHAT INSTRUMENT FOR YOU?
  Piano
  Organ
  Violin
  Clarinet
  Flute
  Harp
  Coronet
  'Cello
  Guitar
  Ukulele
  Saxophone
  Banjo, (Plectrum 5-String or Tenor)
  Piccolo
  Hawaiian Steel Guitar
  Drums and Traps
  Mandolin
  Sight Singing
  Trombone
  Piano
  Accordion
  Voice and Speech Culture
  Harmony and Composition
  Automatic Finger Control
  Italian and German Accordion

       *       *       *       *       *

  U.S. SCHOOL OF MUSIC,
  3692 Brunswick Bldg., New York City.

Please send me your free book, "Music Lessons in Your Own Home," with
introduction by Dr. Frank Crane, Free Demonstration Lesson, and
particulars of your easy payment plan. I am interested in the following
course:

              Have you an instrument: .........

  Name ........................................

  Address .....................................

  City ...................... State ...........

       *       *       *       *       *

Please mention NEWSSTAND GROUP--MEN'S LIST, when answering
advertisements

       *       *       *       *       *


Only 28 years old and earning $15,000 a year

[Illustration: _Works in Shoe Factory_]

W. T. Carson was forced to leave school at an early age. His help was
needed at home. He took a "job" in a shoe factory in Huntington, W. Va.,
at $12 a week.

[Illustration: _Starts Studying at Home_]

Carson determined to make something of himself before it was too late,
so he took up a course with the International Correspondence Schools and
studied in spare time.

[Illustration: _Now Owns Big Business_]

Today W. T. Carson is the owner of one of the largest battery service
stations in West Virginia, with an income of $15,000 a year. And he is
only 28 years old!

[Illustration: _Lectures at College_]

Just a few months ago a large college asked Carson to lecture before a
class in electricity. That shows the practical value of his I. C. S.
course.

[Illustration: _How to Earn More Money_]

If the I. C. S. can smooth the path to success for men like W. T. Carson
it can help you. If it can help other men to earn more money it can help
you too.

[Illustration: _The Boss is Watching You_]

Show him you are ambitious and are really trying to get ahead. Decide
today that you are at least going to find out all about the I. C. S.
and what it can do for you.

=INTERNATIONAL CORRESPONDENCE SCHOOLS. Box 2124-E, Scranton, Penns.=

Without cost or obligation, please send me a copy of your booklet, "=Who
Wins and Why=," and full particulars about the course _before_ which I
have marked X in the list below:


BUSINESS TRAINING COURSES

  [ ] Business Management
  [ ] Industrial Management
  [ ] Personnel Management
  [ ] Traffic Management
  [ ] Accounting and C.P.A. Coaching
  [ ] Cost Accounting
  [ ] Bookkeeping
  [ ] Secretarial Work
  [ ] Spanish
  [ ] French
  [ ] Salesmanship
  [ ] Advertising
  [ ] Business Correspondence
  [ ] Show Card and Sign Lettering
  [ ] Stenography and Typing
  [ ] English
  [ ] Civil Service
  [ ] Railway Mail Clerk
  [ ] Mail Carrier
  [ ] Grade School Subjects
  [ ] High School Subjects
  [ ] Cartooning
  [ ] Illustrating
  [ ] Lumber Dealer


TECHNICAL AND INDUSTRIAL COURSES

  [ ] Architect
  [ ] Architectural Draftsman
  [ ] Building Foreman
  [ ] Concrete Builder
  [ ] Contractor and Builder
  [ ] Structural Draftsman
  [ ] Structural Engineer
  [ ] Electrical Engineer
  [ ] Electrical Contractor
  [ ] Electric Wiring
  [ ] Electric Lighting
  [ ] Electric Car Running
  [ ] Telegraph Engineer
  [ ] Telephone Work
  [ ] Mechanical Engineer
  [ ] Mechanical Draftsman
  [ ] Machine Shop Practice
  [ ] Toolmaker
  [ ] Patternmaker
  [ ] Civil Engineer
  [ ] Surveying and Mapping
  [ ] Bridge Engineer
  [ ] Gas Engine Operating
  [ ] Automobile Work
  [ ] Aviation Engines
  [ ] Plumber and Steam Fitter
  [ ] Plumbing Inspector
  [ ] Foreman Plumber
  [ ] Heating and Ventilation
  [ ] Sheet-Metal Worker
  [ ] Steam Engineer
  [ ] Marine Engineer
  [ ] Refrigeration Engineer
  [ ] R.R. Positions
  [ ] Highway Engineer
  [ ] Chemistry
  [ ] Pharmacy
  [ ] Mining Engineer
  [ ] Navigation
  [ ] Assayer
  [ ] Iron and Steel Worker
  [ ] Textile Overseer or Supt.
  [ ] Cotton Manufacturing
  [ ] Woolen Manufacturing
  [ ] Agriculture
  [ ] Fruit Growing
  [ ] Poultry Farming
  [ ] Mathematics
  [ ] Radio

  Name ................. Address ..............

  City ...................... State ...........

       *       *       *       *       *

Please mention NEWSSTAND GROUP--MEN'S LIST, when answering
advertisements

       *       *       *       *       *


LET RCA INSTITUTES START YOU ON THE ROAD TO ... SUCCESS IN RADIO

[Illustration: Radio-Mechanic and Inspector $1800 to $4000 a Year.]

[Illustration: Broadcast Station Mechanic $1800 to $3600 a Year.]

[Illustration: Land Station Operator $1800 to $4000 a Year.]

[Illustration: Broadcast Operators $1800 to $4800 a Year.]

_Radio needs you_.... That's why the entire Radio industry is calling
for trained men. Radio is thrilling work ... easy hours, vacations with
pay and a chance to see the world. Manufacturers and broadcasting
stations are now eagerly seeking trained RCA Institutes men. Millions of
sets need servicing ... thousands of ships require experienced
operators.... Never before was there an opportunity like this!


_This is the Only Course Sponsored by Radio Corporation of America_

RCA sets the standards for the entire Radio industry.... The RCA
Institutes' Home Laboratory Training Course enables you to quickly learn
all the secrets of Radio.... In your spare time you can obtain a
thorough, practical education in Radio.

You learn Radio by actual experience with the remarkable outlay of
apparatus given to every student. That's why every graduate of RCA
Institutes has the experience, the ability and the confidence to hold a
big-money Radio job.

For the added convenience of students who prefer a Resident
Study Course, RCA Institutes, Inc., has established Resident Schools in
the following cities:

  New York                326 Broadway
  Boston, Mass.        899 Boylston St.
  Philadelphia, Pa.   1211 Chestnut St.
  Baltimore, Md.    1215 N. Charles St.
  Newark, N.J.            560 Broad St.

Home Study graduates may also attend any one of our resident schools for
post-graduate instruction at no extra charge.


_Graduates of RCA Institutes Find It Easier to Get Good Jobs_

Students of RCA Institutes get first-hand knowledge, get it quickly and
get it complete. Success in Radio depends upon training and that's the
training you get with RCA Institutes. That's why every graduate of RCA
Institutes who desired a position has been able to get one.... That's
why graduates are always in big demand!


_Study Radio at the Oldest and Largest Commercial Training Organization
in the World_

Send for this Free Book ... or step in at any of our resident schools
and see for yourself how thousands of men are already on the road to
success in Radio. Remember that you, too, can speed up your earning
capacity ... can earn more money in Radio than you ever earned before.
The man who trains today will hold down the big-money Radio job of the
future. Come in and get this free book or send for it by mail.
Everything you want to know about Radio. 40 fascinating pages, packed
with pictures and descriptions of the brilliant opportunities in this
gigantic, world-wide money-making profession.

=SEND FOR IT TODAY!=


