up till then. But I fear unless the wind hardens down with the dawn
we'll have to bring up to an anchor when the flood makes. Tides run very
hard in these narrow seas. Aye, and there are some shrewdish tide-rips
round my Tin Islands, as you shall see when we reach them."

There were many fearful glances backwards when day came and showed the
waters, and the burning mountains that hemmed them in beyond the shores.
All seemed to expect some navy of Phorenice to come surging up to take
them back to servitude and starvation in the squalid wards of the city;
and I confess ingenuously that I was with them in all truth when they
swore they would fight the ship till she sank beneath them, before they
would obey another of the commands of Phorenice. However, their brave
heroics were displayed to no small purpose. For the full flow of the
tide we hung in our place, barely moving past the land, but yet not
seeing either oar or sail; and then, when the tide turned, away we went
once more with speed, mightily comforted.

Tob's woman must needs bring drink on deck, and bid all pour libations
to her as a future queen. But Tob cuffed her back into the after-castle,
slamming to the hatch behind her heels, and bidding the crew send the
liquor down their dusty throats. "We are done with that foolery," said
he. "My Lord Deucalion will be king of this new kingdom we shall
build in the Tin Islands, and a right proper king he'll make, as you
untravelled ones would know, if you'd sailed the outer seas with him as
I have done." Beneath which I read a regret, but said nothing, having
made my plans from the moment of stepping on board, as will appear on a
later sheet.

So on down the great estuary we made our way, and though it pleasured
the others on board when they saw that the seas were desolate of sails,
it saddened me when I recalled how once the waters had been whitened
with the glut of shipping.

They had started off on their voyage with a bare two days' provision
in their equipment, and so, of necessity even after leaving the great
estuary, we were forced to voyage coastwise, putting into every likely
river and sheltered beach to slay fish and meat for future victualling.
"And when the winter comes," said Tob, "as its gales will be heavier
than this old ship can stomach, I had determined to haul up and make a
permanent camp ashore, and get a crop of grain grown and threshed before
setting sail again. It is the usual custom in these voyages. And I shall
do it still, subject to my lord's better opinion."

So here, having by this time completed a two months' leisurely journey
from the city, I saw my opportunity to speak what I had always carried
in my mind. "Tob," I said, "I am a poor, weak, defenceless man, and I am
quite at your mercy, but what if I do not voyage all the way to the Tin
Islands, and oust you of this kingship?"

He brightened perceptibly. "Aye," he grunted, "you are very weak, my
lord, and mighty defenceless. We know all about that. But what's
else? You must tell all your meaning plain. I'm a common mariner, and
understand little of your fancy talk."

"Why, this. That it is not my wish to leave the continent of Atlantis.
If you will put me down on any part of this side that faces Europe, I
will commend you strongly to the Gods. I would I could give you
money, or (better still) articles that would be useful to you in your
colonising; but as it is, you see me destitute."

"As to that, you owe me nothing, having done vastly more than your share
each time we have put in shore for the hunting. But it will not do, this
plan of yours. I will shamedly confess that the sound of that kingship
in my Tin Islands sounds sweet to me. But no, my lord, it will not do.
You are no mariner yet, and understand little of geography, but I must
tell you that the part of Atlantis there"--he jerked his thumb towards
the line of trees, and the mountains which lay beyond the fringe
of surf--"is called the Dangerous Lands, and a man must needs be a
salamander and be learned in magic (so I am told) before he can live
there."

I laughed. "We of the Priests' Clan have some education, Tob, though
it may not be on the same lines as your own. In fact, I may say I was
taught in the colleges concerning the boundaries and the contents of
our continent with a nicety that would surprise you. And once ashore, my
fate will still be under the control of the most High Gods."

He muttered something in his profane seaman's way about preferring to
keep his own fate under control of his own most strong right arm, but
saying that he would keep the matter in his thoughts, he excused himself
hurriedly to go and see to somewhat concerning the working of the ship,
and there left me.

But I think the sweets of kingly rule were a strong argument in favour
of letting me have my way (which I should have had otherwise if it had
not been given peacefully), and on the third day after our talk he
put the ship inshore again for re-victualling. We lurched into a
river-mouth, half swamped over a roaring bar, and ran up against the
bank and made fast there to trees, but booming ourselves a safe distance
off with oars and poles, so that no beast could leap on board out of the
thicket.

Fish-spearing and meat-hunting were set about with promptitude, and
on the second day we were happy enough to slay a yearling river-horse,
which gave provisions in all sufficiency. A space was cleared on the
bank, fires were lit, and the meat hung over the smoke in strips, and
when as much was cured as the ship would carry, the shipmen made a final
gorge on what remained, filled up a great stack of hollow reeds with
drinking water, and were ready to continue the voyage.

With sturdy generosity did Tob again attempt to make me sail on with
them as their future king, and as steadfastly did I make refusal; and
at last stood alone on the bank amongst the gnawed bones of their feast,
with my weapons to bear me company, and he, and his men, and the women
stood in the little old ship, ready to drop down river with the current.

"At least," said Tob, "we'll carry your memory with us, and make it big
in the Tin Islands for everlasting."

"Forget me," I said, "I am nothing. I am merely an incident that has
come in your way. But if you want to carry some memory with you that
shall endure, preserve the cult of the most High Gods as it was taught
to you when you were children here in Atlantis. And afterwards, when
your colony grows in power, and has come to sufficient magnificence, you
may send to the old country for a priest."

"We want no priest, except one we shall make ourselves, and that will
be me. And as for the old Gods--well, I have laid my ideas before the
fellows here, and they agree to this: We are done with those old Gods
for always. They seem worn out, if one may judge from Their present lack
of usefulness in Atlantis, and, anyway, there will be no room for Them
on the Tin Islands.--Let go those warps there aft, and shove her head
out.--We are under weigh now, my lord, and beyond recall, and so I am
free to tell you what we have decided upon for our religious exercises.
We shall set up the memory of a living Hero on earth, and worship that.
And when in years to come the picture of his face grows dim, we shall
doubtless make an image of him, as accurate as our art permits, and
build him a temple for shelter, and bring there our offerings and
prayers. And as I say, my lord, I shall be priest, and when I am dead,
the sons of my body shall be priests after me, and the eldest a king
also."

"Let me plead with you," I said. "This must not be."

The ship was drifting rapidly away with the current, and they were
hoisting sail. Tob had to shout to make himself heard. "Aye, but it
shall be. For I, too, am a strong man after my kind, and I have ordered
it so. And if you want the name of our Hero that some day shall be God,
you wear it on yourself. Deucalion shall be God for our children."

"This is blasphemy," I cried. "Have a care, fool, or this impiety will
sink you."

"We will risk it," he bawled back, "and consider the odds against us are
small. Regard! Here is thy last horn of wine in the ship, and my woman
has treasured it against this moment. Regard, all men, together
with Those above and Those below! I pour this wine as a libation to
Deucalion, great lord that is to-day, Hero that shall be to-morrow, God
that will be in time to come!" And then all those on the ship joined
in the acclaim till they were beyond the reach of my voice, and were
battling their way out to sea through the roaring breakers of the bar.

Solitary I stood at the brink of the forest, looking after them and
musing sadly. Tob, despite his lowly station, was a man I cared for more
than many. Like all seamen, I knew that he paid his devotions to one
of the obscurer Gods, but till then I had supposed him devout in his
worship. His new avowal came to me as a desolating shock. If a man like
Tob could forsake all the older Gods to set up on high some poor mortal
who had momentarily caught his fancy, what could be expected from
the mere thoughtless mob, when swayed by such a brilliant tongue as
Phorenice's? It seemed I was to begin my exile with a new dreariness
added to all the other adverse prospects of Atlantis.

But then behind me I heard the rustle of some great beast that had
scented me, and was coming to attack through the thicket, and so I had
other matters to think upon. I had to let Tob and his ship go out over
the rim of the horizon unwatched.




15. ZAEMON'S SUMMONS


Since the days when man was first created upon the earth by Gods who
looked down and did their work from another place, there have always
been areas of the land ill-adapted for his maintenance, but none more so
than that part of Atlantis which lies over against the savage continents
of Europe and Africa. The common people avoid it, because of a
superstition which says that the spirits of the evil dead stalk about
there in broad daylight, and slay all those that the more open dangers
of the place might otherwise spare. And so it has happened often that
the criminals who might have fled there from justice, have returned
of their own free will, and voluntarily given themselves up to the
tormentors, rather than face its fabulous terrors.

To the educated, many of these legends are known to be mythical; but
withal there are enough disquietudes remaining to make life very arduous
and stocked with peril. Everywhere the mountains keep their contents
on the boil; earth tremors are every day's experience; gushes of unseen
evil vapours steal upon one with such cunningness and speed, that it is
often hard to flee in time before one is choked and killed; poisons well
up into the rivers, yet leave their colour unchanged; great cracks split
across the ground reaching down to the fires beneath, and the waters
gush into these, and are shot forth again with devastating explosion;
and always may be expected great outpourings of boiling mud or molten
rock.

Yet with all this, there are great sombre forests in these lands, with
trees whose age is unimaginable, and fires amongst the herbage are rare.
All beneath the trees is water, and the air is full of warm steam and
wetness. For a man to live in that constant hot damp is very mortifying
to the strength. But strength is wanted, and cunning also beyond the
ordinary, for these dangerous lands are the abode of the lizards, which
of all beasts grow to the most enormous size and are the most fearsome
to deal with.

There are countless families and species of these lizards, and with some
of them a man can contend with prospect of success. But there are others
whose hugeness no human force can battle against. One I saw, as it came
up out of a lake after gaining its day's food, that made the wet land
shake and pulse as it trod. It could have taken Phorenice's mammoth into
its belly,* and even a mammoth in full charge could not have harmed it.
Great horny plates covered its head and body, and on the ridge of its
back and tail and limbs were spines that tore great slivers from the
black trees as it passed amongst them.


* TRANSLATOR'S NOTE: Professor Reeder of the Wyoming State University
has recently unearthed the skeleton of a Brontosaurus, 130 ft. in
length, which would have weighed 50 tons when alive. It was 35 ft. in
height at the hips, and 25 ft. at the shoulder, and 40 people could be
seated with comfort within its ribs. Its thigh bone was 8 ft. long. The
fossils of a whole series of these colossal lizards have been found.


Now and again these monsters would get caught in some vast fissuring
of the ground, but not often. Their speed of foot was great, and their
sagacity keen. They seemed to know when the worst boilings of the
mountains might be expected, and then they found safety in the deeper
lakes, or buried themselves in wallows of the mud. Moreover, they were
more kindly constituted than man to withstand one great danger of these
regions, in that the heat of the water did them no harm. Indeed, they
will lie peacefully in pools where sudden steam-bursts are making the
water leap into boiling fountains, and I have seen one run quickly
across a flow of molten rock which threatened to cut it off, and not be
so much as singed in the transit.

In the midst of such neighbours, then, was my new life thrown, and
existence became perilous and hard to me from the outset. I came near to
knowing what Fear was, and indeed only a fervent trust in the most High
Gods, and a firm belief that my life was always under Their fostering
care, prevented me from gaining that horrid knowledge. For long enough,
till I learned somewhat of the ways of this steaming, sweltering land,
I was in as miserable a case as even Phorenice could have wished to see
me. My clothes rotted from my back with the constant wetness, till I
went as naked as a savage from Europe; my limbs were racked with agues,
and I could find no herbs to make drugs for their relief; for days
together I could find no better food than tree-grubs and leaves; and
often when I did kill beasts, knowing little of their qualities, I ate
those that gave me pain and sickness.

But as man is born to make himself adaptable to his surroundings, so
as the months dragged on did I learn the limitation of this new life of
mine, and gather some knowledge of its resources. As example: I found
a great black tree, with a hollow core, and a hole into its middle near
the roots. Here I harboured, till one night some monstrous lizard, whose
sheer weight made the tree rock like a sapling, endeavoured to suck me
forth as a bird picks a worm from a hollow log. I escaped by the will
of the Gods--I could as much have done harm to a mountain as injure that
horny tongue with my weapons--but I gave myself warning that this chance
must not happen again.

So I cut myself a ladder of footholes on the inside of the trunk till I
had reached a point ten man-heights from the ground, and there cut other
notches, and with tree branches made a floor on which I might rest.
Later, for luxury, I carved me arrow-slit windows in the walls of my
chamber, and even carried up sand for a hearth, so that I might cook my
victual up there instead of lighting a fire in all the dangers of the
open below.

By degrees, too, I began to find how the large-scaled fish of the rivers
and the lesser turtles might be more readily captured, and so my ribs
threatened less to start through their proper covering of skin as the
days went on. But the lack of salads and gruels I could never overcome.
All the green meat was tainted so powerfully with the taste of tars that
never could I force my palate to accept it. And of course, too, there
remained the peril of the greater lizards and the other dangers native
to the place.

But as the months began to mount into years, and the brute part of my
nature became more satisfied, there came other longings which it was
less easy to provide for. From the ivory of a river horse's tooth I had
endeavoured to carve me a representative of Nais as last I had seen her.
But, though my fingers might be loving, and my will good, my art was
of the dullest, and the result--though I tried time and time again--was
always clumsy and pitiful. Still, in my eyes it carried some suggestion
of the original--a curve here, an outline there, and it made my old love
glow anew within me as I sat and ate it with my eyes. Yet it did little
to satisfy my longings for the woman I had lost; rather it whetted my
cravings to be with her again, or at least to have some knowledge of her
fate.

Other men of the Priests' Clan have come out and made an abode in these
Dangerous Lands, and by mortifying the flesh, have gained an intimacy
with the Higher Mysteries which has carried them far past what mere
human learning and repetition could teach. Indeed, here and there one,
who from some cause and another has returned to the abodes of men, has
carried with him a knowledge that has brought him the reputation amongst
the vulgar for the workings of magic and miracles, which--since all arts
must be allowed which aid so holy a cause--have added very materially to
the ardour with which these common people pursue the cult of the Gods.
But for myself I could not free my mind to the necessary clearness for
following these abstruse studies. During that voyage home from Yucatan I
had communed with them with growing insight; but now my mind was not my
own. Nais had a lien upon it, and refused to be ousted; and, in truth,
her sweet trespass was my chief solace.

But at last my longing could no further be denied. Through one of
the arrow-slit windows of my tree-house I could see far away a great
mountain top whitened with perpetual snow, which our Lord the Sun dyed
with blood every night of His setting. Night after night I used to watch
that ruddy light with wide straining eyes. Night after night I used to
remember that in days agone when I was entering upon the priesthood, it
had been my duty to adore our great Lord as He rose for His day behind
the snows of that very mountain. And always the thought followed on
these musings, that from that distant crest I could see across the
continent to the Sacred Mount, which had the city below it where I had
buried my love alive.

So at last I gave way and set out, and a perilous journey I made of it.
In the heavy mists, which hung always on the lower ground, my way lay
blind before me, and I was constantly losing it. Indeed, to say that
I traversed three times the direct distance is setting a low estimate.
Throughout all those swamps the great lizards hunted, and as the country
was new to me I did not know places of harbour, and a hundred times was
within an ace of being spied and devoured at a mouthful. But the High
Gods still desired me for Their own purposes, and blinded the great
beasts' eyes when I slunk to cover as they passed. Twice rivers of
scalding water roared boiling across my path, and I had to delay till I
could collect enough black timber from the forests to build rafts that
would give me dry ferriage.
