Tode's eyes glittered with maniacal fires. He went on in a voice of
indescribable triumph:

"I'm a god there, Dent. Do you want to know where that land is? It is
Atlantis, sunk beneath the waves nine thousand years before recorded
history opened. It is Atlantis, from which the Cro-Magnons fled in
their ships, to land on the coasts of Spain and France, and become the
ancestors of modern man.

"In old Atlantis, still not wholly submerged, I have made myself a
god. I have mastered the savage Drilgoes whom the Atlanteans
oppressed. All the spoils of their ruined cities are at my disposal.
And I came back to get Lucille, whom I had never ceased to love.
Together Lucille and I will rule like god and goddess.

"Join me, Dent. I'm a god in Atlantis--a god, I tell you. The lesser
races fear me as a supernatural being. Only the city remains
uncaptured, but it is mine whenever I choose to take it. A god--a
god--a god!"

Jim saw now what he had not realized before, that Tode was insane. It
would, indeed, have been a miracle if he had been able to retain his
sanity under such circumstances as he had described. His voice rose
into a wild scream. Yes, Tode was mad--just such a madman as any of
the old Roman emperors, drunk with power, each in his turn the sole
ruler of the world.

"The Earth is mine!" Tode screamed. "Before the modern world was
dreamed of, before the nations were created, Atlantis was the sole
power that held dominion over the scattered tribes of mankind. And she
is in my hand whenever I strike.

"Wealth incalculable, treasures such as man has never since seen,
marvels of scientific discovery, flying machines that would make ours
look foolish, paintings grander than have since been executed--all
these things exist in the proud city that will shortly be at my
command. And I have my Drilgoes, the inferior race, to serve me. They
worship me because they know I am a god. Join me, Dent, and taste the
joys of being one of the supreme rulers of the world."

       *       *       *       *       *

In spite of his undoubted madness, there was such power in Tode's
voice that Jim could not help believe what he had said.

"Well," snarled Tode. "You hesitate to give me your answer, Dent?"

"Lucille and I are engaged to be married," answered Jim, and the words
were drawn from his lips almost against his will. "We love each other.
I am not going to lie to you and then betray you, Tode."

The expression on Tode's face was demoniacal. He snatched up the
deadly tube that contained the violet fire and turned it upon Jim.
Again Jim felt that repulsive force pushing him back. He gasped for
breath, and tensed his whole body in supreme resistance, while he
tried to grapple with Tode in vain.

But suddenly Tode dropped the tube, and a roar of laughter broke from
his lips.

"You fool!" he shouted. "I tell you I am a god, the one god, supreme
above all. Do you think to match your puny will against my own? I tell
you Lucille is mine. And for ever, Dent. Whenever we two have reached
old age, all that will be necessary for us to do will be to turn this
screw a hair's breadth back into the past, and we are both young
again. By holding this vessel steady in four-dimensional space, I can
achieve immortality."

"Yes, Tode," answered Jim, "but, you see, that's the one thing that
you haven't been able to work out yet."

The words seemed to come automatically from Jim's lips. It was only
after he had spoken them that he realized they were true. For a moment
Tode glared at him; then suddenly, with a shriek of insane rage, he
leaped from the instrument board and swung the ray tube with all his
might.

Jim felt the blow descend with stunning force upon his head. He
reeled, flung out his arms, and toppled forward, unconscious....


CHAPTER IV

_Escape_

An intolerably bright light that seemed to sear his eyeballs was the
first thing of which Jim was conscious. Then he became aware of his
aching head, of a sense of utter lassitude, as if he had been bruised
all over in some machine that had caught him up and held him in its
grip for endless aeons.

At last, despite the pain in his eyes, he managed to get his eyelids
open. He tried to struggle to his feet, only to discover that he was
firmly bound with what appeared to be tough creepers, pliant as ropes.

After the lapse of a few minutes, during which he struggled with the
receding waves of unconsciousness, he came to a realization of his
surroundings. That light that had so distressed him--though the
effects were now beginning to pass off--was a pillar of smoke and
flame, shooting out of the crater of a volcano about a mile away,
across a valley.

He was lying in the entrance to a cave, pegged out on his back, and
bound by the tough creepers to the stakes driven into the ground. Up
to the mouth of the cave grew huge tree-ferns, cattails, cycads, and
such growths as existed in earlier ages in the warm, moist regions of
the world.

Beneath the level of the cave a heavy white fog completely shrouded
the valley, extending up to within a short distance of the volcano
opposite. But on the upper slopes of the volcano the sunlight played,
making its crater a sheen of glassy lava, intolerably bright.

Beyond the volcano Jim could see what looked like an expanse of ocean.

       *       *       *       *       *

He groaned, and at the sound a creature came shambling forward,
carrying what looked like a huge melon in either hand. Jim recognized
the Drilgo, Cain.

Chattering and mumbling, Cain placed one of the fruits to Jim's mouth.
It was a sort of bread-fruit, but he was too nauseated to eat, and
rejected it with disgust. Cain offered him the second fruit.

It was a hollow gourd, the interior filled with a clear fluid. Jim
drank greedily as the Drilgo put it to his lips. The contents were
like water, but slightly acid. Jim felt refreshed. He looked about
him.

The Drilgo uttered a chattering call, and immediately a host of the
savages swarmed into the cave. Men--undoubtedly men, in spite of the
brow ridges and the receding foreheads, carrying long spears,
consisting of chipped and pointed heads of stone, with holes bored in
them, through which long bands of creepers passed, fastening them
firmly to the shaft.

Chattering and gesticulating, the Drilgoes surrounded Jim as he lay
helpless on the ground. Their savage faces, their rolling eyes, the
threatening gestures that they made with their spears, convinced Jim
that his end was a foregone conclusion.

But suddenly a distant rumbling sound was heard, increasing rapidly in
volume. The floor of the cave vibrated; masses of rock dropped from
the walls. The light of the volcano across the valley was suddenly
obscured in an immense cloud of black smoke. The twilight within the
cave was succeeded by almost impenetrable darkness.

Shrieking in terror, the Drilgoes bolted, while Jim lay straining at
his ropes, expecting each moment to be crushed by the masses of rock
that were falling all about him.

Suddenly a soft whisper came to Jim through the darkness: "Jim! Are
you safe! Where are you? I can't see you! Speak to me!"

It was Lucille's voice, and Jim called back, husky and tremulous in
the sheer joy that had succeeded his anticipation of instant death.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then he felt the girl kneeling at his side, and heard her hacking at
his bonds. A whole minute passed before the stone knife was able to
sever the last of the stout withes, however.

Then Jim was swaying on his feet, and Lucille's arms were about him,
and for a few moments their fears were forgotten in the renewal of
their love.

"I heard what that devil said to you last night," the girl said. "He
means to kill you with awful tortures. He is away now, on some task or
other, but he'll be back at any moment. We must get away at once--we
three. Dad's in another cave not far away, and his guards bolted after
the earthquake."

The earth was still rumbling, and the cavern still vibrating, but it
was clear that there was no time to lose. As soon as the quake
subsided the Drilgoes would return. Guided by Lucille, Jim groped his
way through the cavern. The girl called softly at intervals, and
presently Jim heard old Parrish's answering call. Then the old man's
form appeared in silhouette against the dark.

"I've got Jim," Lucille whispered. "Are you ready, dad?"

"Yes, yes, I'm ready," chattered the old man. "Now's our chance. I
know a place where we can hide in the thick forests, where the Ray of
the Atlanteans cannot penetrate the mists. Let's go! Let's go!"

Gripping hands, the three started back toward the point where a faint
patch of darkness showed out the entrance to the cavern. They were
nearing it when another and more violent shock flung them upon their
faces.

Huge masses of rock came hurtling down from the roof and sides of the
cavern, and again the three seemed to escape by a miracle.

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly a huge shaft of fire shot from the crater opposite, evolving
into an inverted cone that made the whole land dazzlingly bright. It
pierced the mists in the valley underneath, and by that light Jim
could see a great wave of lava streaming down the mountain sides, like
soup spilled out of a bowl.

A gush of black smoke followed, and the light went out.

"Now!" gasped Parrish, and, clinging to one another, the three darted
out of the cavern's entrance. Another terrific shock sent them
stumbling and reeling and sprawling down the side of the mountain. Jim
heard old Parrish wailing, and, as the shock subsided, groped his way
to his side.

"You hurt?" he shouted.

"Lucille, Lucille," moaned the old man. "She's dead! A big rock
crushed her. I wish I was dead too."

Jim called Lucille's name frantically, and to his immense relief
heard her crying faintly out of the darkness. He rushed to her side
and held her in his arms.

"Where are you hit, darling?"

"I'm--all right," she panted. "I was stunned for a moment. I--can--go
on now."

But she went limp in Jim's arms, and Jim picked her up and stood
irresolute, until he heard Parrish shambling toward him over the
heaving ground.

"She's not hurt, I think, only fainted," said Jim. "Which way,
Parrish? You lead us."

"Down the slope," panted Parrish. "We'll be in the ferns in a minute.
We can hide there for a while, till she's able to walk. God help us
all! And I was once Professor of Physical Chemistry at Columbia!"

The outcry might have seemed comical under other circumstances; as it
was, Jim heartily re-echoed old Parrish's sentiments in his heart.

The last shock was subsiding in faint earth tremors. The two men
plunged down into the heavy fog, which quickly covered them, Jim
carrying Lucille in his arms. He felt the ferny undergrowth all about
him, the thick boles of tree-ferns emerged out of the mist.

"We can stop here for a while," panted Parrish. "Crouch down! They'll
never find us in this fog, and in a few minutes, when Lucille's
better, we can go on."

       *       *       *       *       *

"You must tell me where we are and what our chances are," said Jim,
after again ascertaining that Lucille was unharmed.

"I'll tell you, Dent, as quick as I can. It's the place where I've
spent five years of hell as the slave of that devil, Tode. I never
dreamed, when we were working on the old Atom Smasher, that he had
adapted it to travel in the fourth dimension. He's taken us back
twelve thousand years or so to the island of Atlantis. History hasn't
begun yet. Atlantis is the only civilization in the world. The rest
are Drilgoes, Neanderthal men, wandering in the forests, and still in
their stone age.

"It's true, Dent, what old Plato learned from the Egyptian priests.
Atlantis has been slowly sinking for thousands of years, and all
that's left now is the one great island that we're on. Nearly all the
Atlanteans, the Cro-Magnon men, have perished, except for a few who
have crossed in ships to the coasts of France and Spain. They'll be
the founders of modern Europe--Basques and Iberians, and Bretons and
Welshmen. Our ancestors! It makes my brain reel to think of it!"

"Go on! Go on!" said Jim.

"There's a great city on the island, known as Atlantis too. As big as
London or New York. With flying-machines and temples and art galleries
and big ships that they're building to carry them away when the next
subsidence comes. They know they're doomed, for every few days there's
an eruption now.

"Tode means to make himself master of Atlantis, and transport it into
another epoch by means of the Atom Smasher. But he's never managed to
enter. He's made himself a god in the eyes of the Drilgoes, the
savages who inhabit these forests. He's planning to lead them against
the city, and he's got an army of thousands from all parts of the
interior, who worship him as divine.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The Atlanteans are unwarlike. They've forgotten how to fight in their
thousands of years of peace. But they've got a Ray ten times as strong
as Tode's, that brings instant death to everything it touches. It
shrivels it up. It's a different principle. I don't understand it, but
it's this Ray that keeps the Drilgoes from capturing the city.

"Tode's got a laboratory inside the cave, fitted up with apparatus
that he brought from Chicago, the world capital of the year 3000 A.
D., after disintegrating the atoms and recombining them. But he hasn't
succeeded altogether. He hasn't learned everything. The future isn't
quite clear, like the past. There's a dark cloud moves across the
spectral lines and blurs them. I think it's the element of free
will--or God!"

"I know," Jim answered. "He can't hold that boat steady in
four-dimensional space, as he pretends he can. If he could, it would
mean that man was wholly master of his destiny. He can't and he never
will.

"There's an unknown quantity comes in, Parrish. It is God, and that's
what's going to beat him in the end."

"I've not been as idle as Tode thinks," said Parrish, with a senile
leer. "I know more about the Atom Smasher than he dreams of. He thinks
me just an old fool, the remnants of whose brains are useful to him in
his laboratory. That's why he's kept me alive so far. He'll find out
his mistake," he chuckled. "I have something Tode doesn't dream of."

Suddenly Parrish's air of intense seriousness vanished. He chuckled
and fumbled in his rags. Jim felt a small object like a lever pressed
into his hand and then withdrawn.

"It's death, Dent," chuckled old Parrish. "The concentrated essence of
the destructive principle. It's a lever I fitted into a concealed
groove in the Atom Smasher unknown to Tode. This lever has a universal
joint and connects with a hidden chamber, and when pulled will
catapult the annihilated components of a small quantity of uranium in
any direction we desire. The release of the slumbering energy of this
uranium will produce an explosion of proportions beyond the wildest
dreams of engineers--perhaps, one great enough to throw the Earth out
of its orbit!"

"Uranium!... Breaking up its components!" gasped Jim. "You mean you
can actually do that?"

"Yes!" chuckled Parrish. "I'm keeping it for the day when Tode becomes
a god. When he's steadied the boat in time-space and halted the march
of the past, and when he's got Lucille--then, Dent, I shall so pull
the lever that it will release the energy straight at Tode--and
destroy the Atom-Smasher, ourselves, and even, perhaps, the whole
Earth!"

And he burst into a peal of such wild laughter that Jim realized the
old man's wits were gone.

       *       *       *       *       *

Was it true, that amazing story? It was difficult to know, and yet
anything seemed possible in this amazing world into which Jim had
suddenly been thrown.

The vast pall of smoke cast out by the volcano was beginning to
subside. Slowly a spectral light began to filter through the valley.
Through the fog Jim could see glimpses of the ferny undergrowth, the
giant tree-ferns and cycads that towered aloft. It was like a picture
of the earth when the mastodons, the grass-eaters and the meat-eaters
disputed for its supremacy.

Jim bent over Lucille. He saw her stir, he heard her murmur his name.
Suddenly she sat up, fixed her eyes on his, and shuddered.

"I'm all right, Jim. Let's go," she said. "I can walk now."

She staggered to her feet. Jim put out his hand to support her, but
she shook her head. Jim touched old Parrish on the arm. He started and
uttered a wild screech; then seemed to come to himself and rose.

