shattered to ever rise again.

The flivver skidded momentarily, then crumpled to a full stop against
the rocks at the side of the road. Dixon and Ruth scrambled from the
wreckage and raced for Crawford's home, scarcely fifty yards ahead.

       *       *       *       *       *

They entered the laboratory and Ruth went directly over to where the
radio-projectile rested in a wall-rack. Dixon took the gleaming
cylinder down to examine it. Tapering to a rounded point at the front
end, it was nearly a yard long and about five inches in diameter.

"The mechanism inside the projectile is turned off now, of course,"
Ruth said. "If it were turned on, the projectile would have been on
its way to the space ship long ago, for the radio waves are as strong
here as at the Centaurians' camp."

The girl pointed to a small metal stud in the nose of the projectile.

"When that is snapped over, it makes the contact that sets the
magnetizing mechanism into action," she explained. "Then the
projectile will go hurtling directly for the source of any radio waves
within range. I don't know the nature of its mechanism. Uncle merely
told me that it is the application of an entirely new principle of
electricity."

Dixon laid the long projectile down on the work-bench, and began
packing his lead cylinder of explosive inside it. He had to release
the lead cylinder's safety catch before closing the projectile, which
made his work a thrillingly precarious one, for any sharp blow now
would detonate the unstable mixture of gas and radium compound in one
cataclysmic explosion.

He sighed in relief as he finally straightened up with the completed
projectile held carefully in both hands.

"All we have to do now, Ruth," he said, "is step out from under this
roof and snap that energizing stud. Then this little package of
destruction will be on its way to our Centaurian friends up there by
that pestilential green moon."

       *       *       *       *       *

Ruth stepped ahead to open the door for him. With the end of their
task so near at hand, both forgot to be cautious.

Ruth threw the door open and took one step outside, then suddenly
screamed in terror as her shoulders were encircled by a long
snake-like object that came whipping down from some vast something
that had been lurking just outside. Dixon tried to dodge back, but too
late. Another great hairy tentacle came lashing around his shoulders,
pinning his arms tightly and jerking him out of the doorway.

He had a swift vague glimpse of a hybrid looming there in the green
moonlight--a tarantula hybrid that in size and horror dwarfed any of
the frightful products of Centaurian science that he had yet seen.

Before Dixon had time to note any of the details of his assailant
another tentacle curled around him, tearing the projectile from his
grasp. Then he was irresistibly drawn up toward that grisly head where
Ruth's body was also suspended in one of the powerful tentacles. The
next moment, bearing its burdens with amazing ease, the giant hybrid
started off.

Dixon tried with all his strength to squirm free enough to get a hand
upon the revolver in his pocket, but the constricting tentacle did not
give for even an inch. The only result of his effort was to twist his
hood to one side, leaving him as effectually blindfolded as though his
head were in a sack.

Long minutes of swaying, pitching motion followed as the hybrid sped
over the rocky ridges and gullies. It finally came to a halt, and for
another minute or so Dixon was held there motionless in mid-air, dimly
conscious of a subdued hum of activity all about him. Then he was
gently lowered to the ground again.

While one tentacle still held him securely, another tore away his hood
and tunic. Almost immediately the hood was replaced by one of the
protective white globe devices. Dixon blinked for a moment in
half-blinded bewilderment as he got his first glimpse of the
Earth-camp of the Centaurians.

       *       *       *       *       *

The place, located on the smooth rock floor of a large natural basin,
seemed a veritable cauldron of seething colors which rippled and
blended in a dazzling maze of unearthly splendor. But Dixon forgot
everything else in that weird camp as his startled gaze fell upon the
creature standing directly in front of him.

He knew instinctively that the thing must be one of the Alpha
Centaurians, for in its alien grotesqueness the figure was utterly
dissimilar to anything ever seen upon Earth before.

Life upon the shattered planet of that far distant sun had apparently
sprung from sources both crustacean and reptilian. The Centaurian
stood barely five feet in height. Its bulky, box-like body was
completely covered with a chitinous armor that gleamed pale yellowish
green.

Two short powerful legs, scaled like those of a lizard, ended in feet
that resembled degenerated talons. Two pairs of slender arms emanated
from the creature's shoulders, with their many-jointed flexible length
ending in delicate three-pronged hands.

The scaly hairless head beneath the Centaurian's white globe device
bore a face that was blankly hideous. Two great lidless eyes, devoid
of both pupils and whites, stared unblinkingly at Dixon like twin
blobs of red-black jelly. A toothless loose-lipped mouth slavered
beneath.

Dixon averted his gaze from the horror of that fearful alien face, and
looked anxiously around for Ruth. He saw her almost at once, over at
his right. She was tethered by a light metallic rope that ran from her
waist to one of the metal beams supporting the great shimmering ball
of opalescent fire which formed the central control of the hybrids.

One of the white globe devices had been placed upon Ruth's head and
she was apparently unhurt, for she pluckily flashed a reassuring smile
at Dixon.

       *       *       *       *       *

Directly in front of Dixon and some forty yards away there was a large
pen-like enclosure, with vari-colored shafts of radiance from banks of
projectors constantly sweeping through it. Dixon drew in his breath
sharply as he saw the frightful life lying dormant in that pen. It was
a solid mass of hybrids--great loathesome figures fashioned from a
score of different worms, insects, and spiders. The globes upon the
gruesome mammalian half-heads were still dark and unfired with
opalescence.

The invaders had apparently raided most of the surrounding country in
obtaining those grafted half-heads. Near where Dixon stood there was a
tragic little pile of articles taken from the Centaurians'
victims--prospectors' picks, shovels, axes, and other tools.

Over to the left of the dormant hybrids stood the second Alpha
Centaurian, curiously examining Dixon's projectile. The creature
apparently suspected the deadly nature of the gleaming cylinder for it
soon laid it carefully down and packed cushions of soft fabric around
it to shield it from any possible shock.

Then at an unspoken command from the first Centaurian the great hybrid
whirled Dixon around to face a small enclosure just behind him in
which were located banks of control panels and other apparatus. One of
the pieces of mechanism, with a regularly spaced stream of sparks
snapping between two terminals, was apparently a radio receiver
automatically recording the broadcast from the space ship. Dixon was
unable to even guess the nature of the remaining apparatus.

"Bruce, be careful!" Ruth called in despairing warning. "He is going
to put the thought-reading machine on your brain. Then he'll learn
what the projectile is for, and everything will be lost!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Dixon's mind raced with lightning speed in the face of this new
danger. He stealthily slipped a hand over the revolver in his pocket.
There was one vulnerable spot in the great hybrid holding him, and
that was the opalescent globe on the creature's head. If he could only
smash that globe with one well-directed shot, he might be able to
elude the Centaurians for the precious minute necessary to send the
projectile on its deadly journey.

The hybrid began maneuvering Dixon toward the instrument enclosure.
For a fleeting second the grip of the tentacles upon his shoulders
loosened slightly. Dixon took instant advantage of it. Twisting
himself free from the loosened tentacle in one mighty effort, he
whirled and fired pointblank at the opalescent globe on the head
looming above him.

The bullet smashed accurately home, shattering the globe like a
bursting bubble. The great hybrid collapsed with startling suddenness,
its life force instantly extinguished as the globe burst.

Dixon leaped to one side and swung the gun into line with the
Centaurian's hideous face. He pulled the trigger--but there was no
response. The rusty old firearm had hopelessly jammed.

Dixon savagely flung the revolver at the Centaurian. The creature
tried to dodge, but the heavy gun struck its body a glancing blow.
There was a slight spurt of body fluid as the chitinous armor was
partly broken.

Dixon's heart leaped exultantly. No wonder these creatures had to
create hybrids to fight for them. Their own bodies were as vulnerable
as that of a soft-shelled crab!

The Centaurian quickly drew a slender tube of dark green from a
scabbard in its belt. Dixon dodged back, looking wildly about him for
a weapon. There was an ax in the pile only a few yards away. Dixon
snatched the ax up, and whirled to give battle.

       *       *       *       *       *

The other Centaurian had come hurrying over now to aid its mate. Dixon
was effectually barred from attempting any progress toward the
projectile by the two grotesque creatures as they stood alertly there
beside each other with their green tubes menacing him. Dixon waited
tensely at bay, remembering those searing radium burns upon Emil
Crawford's body.

Then the first Centaurian abruptly leveled a second and smaller tube
upon Dixon. A burst of yellow light flashed toward him, enveloping him
in a cloud of pale radiance before he could dodge.

There was a faint plop as the protecting white globe upon his head was
shattered. The yellow radiance swiftly faded, leaving Dixon unhurt,
but he realized that the first round in the battle had been won
decisively by the Centaurians. His only chance now, was to end the
battle before the paralyzing rays of the green moon sapped his
strength.

He warily advanced upon the Centaurians. Their green tubes swung into
line and twin bolts of violet flame flashed toward him. He dodged, and
the bolts missed by inches. Then Dixon nearly fell as his foot struck
a bundle of cloth on the ground.

The next moment he snatched the bundle up with a cry of triumph. It
was his lead-cloth tunic, torn and useless as a garment, but
invaluable as a shield against the searing effects of those bolts of
radioactive flame. He hurriedly wrapped the fabric in a rough bundle
around his left forearm. The next time the tubes' violet flames
flashed toward him he thrust his rude shield squarely into their path.
There was a light tingling shock, and that was all. The bolts did not
sear through.

With new confidence, Dixon boldly charged the two Centaurians. A weird
battle ensued in the garishly lighted arena.

The effective range of the violet flashes was only about ten feet, and
Dixon's muscular agility was far superior to that of his antagonists.
By constant whirling and dodging he was able to either catch the
violet bolts upon his shielded arm or else dodge them entirely.

Yet, in spite of the Centaurians' clumsy slowness, they maneuvered
with a cool strategy that constantly kept the Earth man's superior
strength at bay. Always as Dixon tried to close with one of them he
was forced to retreat when a flanking attack from the other threatened
his unprotected back. And always the Centaurians maneuvered to bar
Dixon from attempting any dash toward the projectile.

       *       *       *       *       *

The minutes passed, and Dixon felt his strength rapidly ebbing, both
from his herculean exertions and from the paralyzing rays of the green
moon beating down upon his unprotected head. As his speed of foot
lessened the Centaurians began inexorably pressing their advantage.

Dixon was no longer escaping unscathed. In spite of his frantic
efforts to dodge, twice the violet bolts grazed his body in searing
flashes of exquisite agony.

His muscles stiffened still more in the attack of the Green Sickness.
Desperately dodging a Centaurian bolt, he stumbled and nearly fell. As
he staggered to regain his balance, one of his antagonists scrambled
to the coveted position behind him.

It was only Ruth's scream of warning that galvanized Dixon's numbed
brain into action in time to meet the imminent peril.

In one mighty effort he flung his ax at the Centaurian in front of
him. The heavy blade cut deep into the thinly armored body. Mortally
wounded, the creature collapsed.

Dixon whirled and flung up his shielded left arm just in time to
intercept the violet bolt of the other Centaurian. Warily backing
away, Dixon succeeded in retrieving his ax from beside the twitching
body of the fallen invader.

Then, with the heavy weapon again in his hand, he remorselessly
charged his remaining foe. The Centaurian's tube flashed in a
veritable hail of hurtling violet bolts, but Dixon caught the flashes
upon his shield and closed grimly in.

One final leap brought him to close quarters. The heavy ax whistled
through the air in a single mighty stroke that cleft the Centaurian's
frail body nearly in two.

Then Ruth's excited scream came again. "Bruce--the other one! Get it
quick!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Dixon turned. The wounded invader, taking advantage of their
preoccupation in the final struggle with its mate, had dragged its
crippled body over to the instrument enclosure. Dixon staggered toward
it as fast as his half-paralyzed muscles would permit.

He was just too late. The Centaurian jerked a lever home a fraction of
a second before Dixon's smashing ax forever ended his activities. The
lever's action upon the pen of inert hybrids was immediate.

The sweeping lances of light vanished in a brief sheet of vivid flame
which kindled the dark globes on the hybrids' gruesome heads to steady
opalescence--and the dread horde came to life! Sprawling from the pen,
they came scuttling toward Dixon in a surging flood--a scene out of a
nightmare.

Dixon faced the oncoming horde in numb despair, knowing that his
nearly-paralyzed body had no chance in flight. Then, just as the
hybrids were nearly upon him, he heard Ruth's encouraging voice again.

"There's still one chance left, Bruce," she cried, "and I'll take it!"

Dixon turned. Ruth had in her hand the tiny contact grenade he had
given her for a last emergency. She snapped the safety catch on the
little bomb, then hurled it squarely at the giant opalescent globe
looming close beside her.

There was a terrific explosion and the great globe shattered to atoms.
Apparently stunned by the concussion but otherwise unhurt, Ruth was
flung clear of the wreckage.

With the shattering of the central globe the strange life force of the
hybrid horde vanished instantly and completely. Midway in their rush
they sprawled inert and dead, with their outstretched legs so close to
Dixon that he had to step over one or two to get clear.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dixon's brain reeled in the reaction of relief from the horde's
hideous menace. Then he grimly fought to clear his fast-numbing senses
long enough for the one final task that he knew must still be done.

The projectile, cushioned as it was, had escaped detonation in the
blast. He had only to stagger across the twenty yards separating him
from it, then release the stud that would send it flashing out into
space.

But his last shred of reserve strength had nearly been sapped now by
the insidious rays of that malevolent green moon. Even as he started
toward the projectile, he staggered and fell. Unable to drag himself
to his feet again, he began grimly crawling with arms and legs as
stiff and dead as that much stone.

Only ten more yards to go now. And now only five. Grimly, doggedly,
with senses reeling and muscles nearly dead, the last survivor of a
dying planet fought desperately on under the malignant rays of the
vivid green moon!

One last sprawling convulsive effort--and Dixon had the projectile in
his hands. His stiff fingers fumbled agonizingly with the activating
stud. Then abruptly the stud snapped home. With a crescendo whistle of
sundered air the projectile flashed upward into the western sky.

Dixon collapsed upon his back, his dimming eyes fixed upon the grim
green moon. Minutes that seemed eternities dragged slowly by. Then his
heart leaped in sudden hope. Had there really glowed a small blue
spark up there beside the green moon--a spark marking the mighty
explosion of the radium bomb against the Centaurians' space ship?

A fraction of a second later, and doubt became glorious certainty. The
vivid green of the moonlight vanished. The silvery white sheen of a
