
But suddenly a fiercer pain swept into my consciousness--the pain of
gasping breath forcing air through a tortured gullet into suffocating
lungs.

I struggled up into the fierce illumination. From a sitting position I
saw Abud, now clearly visible as in midday, craning his head way back.
I looked, too--and, in spite of my stabbing gasps for air, jumped to
my feet. _The search-rays from the scout planes were focussed directly
on us!_

I knew what that meant. The sight of us was even then being cast upon
the 2-RX visor-screen in the Central Control Station. The devilish
master machine was even then manipulating the proper buttons. We had
not a second to lose!

My strangled throat hurt horribly, but I managed a hoarse yell, "Run!"
and I tottered to where Keston yet lay, bathed in the deadly
illumination, unmoving.

There was a snarl of animal fear from Abud, and he started to run,
wildly, with never a backward glance at us.

Even in my own fear, expecting each instant the crash of terminite
about me, I managed to hurl a last word at the fleeing figure.
"Coward!" That relieved my feelings considerably.

I tottered over and tugged at Keston. He was limp. I looked up.
Hundreds of planes were converging overhead; the night was a
criss-cross of stabbing search-rays. I lifted my friend and slung him
across my shoulder. Every exertion, every move, was accompanied by
excruciating agony, but I persevered. Abud was already halfway to the
tunnel, running like mad.

Then, what I had dreaded, happened. There came a swoosh through the
night, a dull thud, a blinding flash and roar that paled the
search-rays into insignificance. The first terminite bomb had been
dropped!

For a moment the landscape was filled with flying rocks and huge
chunks of ice. When the great clouds of violently upthrown earth had
settled, there was no sign of Abud. He had been directly in the path
of the explosion!

       *       *       *       *       *

Staggering under my load, I headed as close to the ice pack as I
could. There was no safety out in the open. I groaned heavily past the
disintegrator, whose very existence I had forgotten in the crash of
events.

A sizzling hum, a thin eddy of steam, halted me in my tracks. I
stared. The machine was working! Even as I watched, a great wedge was
momentarily being driven further and further into the ice--a great
fan-shaped wedge. Clouds of steam billowed out, growing thicker and
heavier. A rushing stream of unleashed water was lapping at my feet.

I was bewildered, frankly so. What had started the disintegrator in
the dead of night? "Of course!" I shouted exultantly to the limp body
on my shoulder.

For a search-ray was fixed steadily on the funnel. There it was. From
that blinding light the machine was getting the energy it needed. If
only the visor did not disclose that little bit of metal to the
unwinking master machine! I looked again and took heart. It was almost
undistinguishable against the dazzling blur of ice in the fierce white
light. If those rays held, the salvation of the world was assured!

There was only one way to do it. I shrank at my own thoughts, yet
there was no alternative: it must be done. I was hidden from the rays
under a projection of ice, terminite bombs were dropping methodically
over a rapidly devastated sector with methodical regularity. Sooner or
later the master machine would feel that we were exterminated, and the
search-rays switched off. That would mean that the disintegrator would
cease working, and the whole plan fall through. In the morning light,
the sector signalling apparatus, at the first sign of renewed
activity, would give warning, and the unhuman thing of metal at the
controls would discover and wreck our last hope.

No, I must walk boldly into the bombed area and discover myself as
alive in the visors of the planes and make them continue to bomb and
throw their search-rays on the scarred plain. That meant the
disintegrator would receive the vital light.

But how about Keston? I couldn't leave him there on the ground,
motionless, while I deserted him. Nor could I take him with me. I was
prepared to take my chances with almost certain death, but I could not
trifle with his life so. I was in an agony of indecision.

       *       *       *       *       *

Just then the form on my aching shoulder stirred, sighed, struggled a
bit, and suddenly slid down to a standing position. Keston swayed
unsteadily a moment, straightened, looked about him in amazement.

"What's happening here?" he demanded.

"Why, you old war horse," I shouted in my relief, "I thought you were
out of the picture completely!"

"Not me," he answered indignantly. "I'm all right. But you haven't
answered my question."

A terminite bomb exploded not so far away from where we stood. I
ducked involuntarily, Keston doing likewise.

"There's the answer," I grinned, "and a rather neat one, too. But I'll
explain."

In a few words I sketched what had happened, and showed him the
disintegrator spreading its deadly waves of destruction. By now there
was a torrent enveloping us up to our knees. We would have to move
soon, or be drowned in the slowly rising water.

Then, hesitatingly, I told him of my scheme to keep the search-rays in
action. His lean face sobered, but he nodded his head bravely. "Of
course, that is the only way to keep them at it. You and I will start
at once, in separate directions, so that if they get one, the other
will continue to draw the search-rays down on the plain, and into the
disintegrator."

"Not you, Keston," I dissented in alarm. "Your life is too valuable.
Your brain and skill will be needed to remodel the world and make it
habitable for the few prolats that are left, after the machines are
wiped out."

"You're just as valuable a man as I am," he lied affectionately. "No,
my mind is made up. We chance this together." And to all my pleadings
he was obdurate, insisting that we each take an equal risk.

I gave in at last, with a little choke in my throat. We shook hands
with a steady grip, and walked out into the glare of light, on
divergent paths. Would I ever see my friend again?

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a pause of seconds as I walked on and on; came then an
earth-shattering crash that flung me to the ground. The visors had
caught the picture of me! I picked myself up, bruised and sore, but
otherwise unharmed. I started to run.

The sky was a blaze of zooming planes that hurled destruction on the
land below. Far off could be heard the rumbling roar of hurrying
machines--tractors, diggers, disintegrators, levelers, all the mighty
mobile masses of metal that man's brain had conceived--all hurrying
forward in massed attack to seek out and destroy their creators,
obedient to the will of a master machine, immobile, pressing buttons
in the Central Control System.

The night resolved itself into a weird phantasmagoric nightmare for
me, a gigantic game of hide-and-seek, in which I was "it." Gasping,
choking, flung to earth and stunned by ear-shattering explosions,
staggering up somehow, ducking to avoid being crushed beneath the
ponderous treads of metal monsters that plunged uncannily for me,
sobbing aloud in terror, swerving just in time from in front of a
swinging crane, instinctively side-stepping just as a pale violet ray
swept into nothingness all before it--I must have been delirious, for
I retain only the vaguest memory of the horror.

And all the time the guiding search-rays biased down upon the torn and
shattered fields, and the disintegrator, unnoticed in the vast uproar,
steadily kept up its deadly work.

At last, in my delirium and terror, I heard a great rending and
tearing. I looked up, and a tractor just missed me as it rolled by on
swishing treads. But that one glance was enough. The ice cap was
moving, flowing forward, a thousand-foot wall of ice! Great billowing
clouds of steam spurted from innumerable cracks. The deed had been
done! The world was saved for mankind!

Summoning the last ounce of strength, I set off on a steady run for
the shelter of the rock cave, to be out of the way when the final
smash-up came.

       *       *       *       *       *

I was not pursued. The ponderous machines, thousands of them, were
hastily forming into solid ranks directly in front of the tottering
glacier wall. The master machine had seen its impending fate in the
visors, and was organizing a defense.

Even in my elation, I could not but feel unwilling admiration for this
monstrous thing of metal and quartz, imbued with an intelligence that
could think more coolly and quickly than most humans.

Yet I did not stop running until I reached the cave. My heart gave a
great bound. For there, peering anxiously with worn face into the
growing dawn, stood the figure of Keston--my friend whom I had never
expected to see alive again.

"Meron!" he shouted. "Is it you--or your ghost?"

"The very question I was about to ask you," I parried. "But look, old
friend: see what your genius has accomplished--and is now destroying."

The mountain of ice was flowing forward, gathering speed on the way.
At an invisible signal, the massed machines--thousands on thousands of
them--started into action. Like shock troops in a last desperate
assault they ground forward, a serried line that exactly paralleled
the threatened break, and hundreds deep. This old earth of ours had
never witnessed so awe-inspiring a sight.

They smashed into that moving wall of ice with the force of uncounted
millions of tons. We could hear the groaning and straining of
furiously turning machinery as they heaved.

Keston and I looked at each other in amazement. The master machine
was trying to hold back the mighty Glacier by the sheer power of its
cohorts!

       *       *       *       *       *

A wild light sprang into Keston's eye--of admiration, of regret. "What
a thing is this that I created!" he muttered. "If only--" I truly
believe that for a moment he half desired to see his brain-child
triumph.

The air was hideous with a thousand noises. The Glacier wall was
cracking and splitting with the noise of thunderclaps; the machines
were whirring and banging and crashing. It was a gallant effort!

But the towering ice wall was not to be denied. Forward, ever forward,
it moved, pushing inexorably the struggling machines before it, piling
them up high upon one another, grinding into powder the front ranks.

And to cap it all, the huge overhang, a thousand feet high, was
swaying crazily and describing ever greater arcs.

"Look!" I screamed and flung up my arm. Great freight planes were
flying wing-to-wing, head-on for the tottering crag--deliberately
smashing into the topmost point.

"Trying to knock it back into equilibrium!" said Keston, eyes ablaze,
dancing about insanely.

But the last suicidal push did not avail. With screams as of a
thousand devils and deafening rending roars, the whole side of the
Glacier seemed to lean over and fall in a great earth-shattering
crescendo of noise.

While we watched, fascinated, rooted to the ground, that thousand feet
of glittering wall described a tremendous arc, swinging with
increasing momentum down, down, down to the earth it had so long been
separated from.

The clamoring machines were buried under, lost in a swirl of ice and
snow. Only the Central Station remained, a few moments defiant under
the swift onrush of its unfeeling foe.

With a crash that could have been heard around the world, the
uppermost crag struck the Station. The giant Glacier wall was down.
The earth, the sky, the universe was filled with ice, broken,
shattered, torn, splintered, vaporized!

The ground beneath our feet heaved and tumbled in violent quake. We
were thrown heavily--and I knew no more....

       *       *       *       *       *

I weltered out of unconsciousness. Keston was chafing my hands and
rubbing my forehead with ice. He smiled wanly to find me still alive.
Weak and battered, I struggled to my feet.

Before me was a wilderness of ice, a new mountain range of gigantic
tumbled blocks of dazzling purity. Of the embattled machines, of the
Central Control Station, there was not a sign. They were buried
forever under hundreds of feet of frozen water.

I turned to Keston and shook his hand. "You've won; you've saved the
world. Now let's get the prolats and start to rebuild."

There was no trace of exultation in Keston's voice. Instead, he
unaccountably sighed as we trudged up a narrow winding path to the
top. "Yes," he said half to himself, "I've done it. But...."

"But what?" I asked curiously.

"That beautiful, wonderful machine I created!" he burst forth in
sudden passion. "To think that it should lie down there, destroyed, a
twisted mass of scrap metal and broken glass!"




The Exile of Time

_By Ray Cummings_

CONCLUSION

[Illustration: _The Robot braced itself._]

[Sidenote: Only near the End of the World does Fate catch up with
Tugh, the cripple who ran amuck through Time.]


CHAPTER XX

_Following Tugh's Vibration-Trail_

Within the subterranean room of the cavern of machinery, Mary Atwood
and I sat on the couch. Our guard, Migul the Robot, fronted us with
the white-ray cylinder in its metal fingers--the only mechanism to be
armed with this deadly weapon.

"I am your friend," Mary was saying with a smile. "Do you believe
that, Migul?"

"Yes. If you say so. But I have my orders."

"You have treated me kindly, and I want to help you. But you are not
very clever, Migul."

"I am clever. I went beyond control once. No one can can control me."

"Except Tugh," Mary persisted. "You never went beyond his control,
Migul."

"No. His control--he is different: he holds such great power."

"But why is he different?"

The towering mechanism stood planted firmly upon the broad bases of
its metal feet. The weapon in its fingers still covered us. Its
metal-cast face held always the same expression.

"Why is he different?" Mary repeated gently. "Don't you hear me?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The Robot started. "Yes, I hear you." Its toneless, mechanical voice
droned the words. Then the tempo quickened; the grid of wires in the
mouth aperture behind its parted lips vibrated with a faint jangle. "I
hear you. I cannot answer that question. He controls me. There is
chaos--here,"--one of the hands came up and struck its breastplate
with a clang--"chaos, disorder, here within me when I try to disobey
him."

"That is foolish, Migul. He is a tyrant. All the humans of this era
are tyrants. They have made slaves of the Robots. They have created
you so that you are really human in all except your power of
independent action. Don't you desire that, Migul?"

I held my breath. A curious quaking ran over the Robot's frame. The
joints twitched. Emotion was sweeping this thing so nearly human!

"Mary Atwood, you seem to understand me."

"Of course I do. I am from a Time when we had human slaves: black men,
Migul. I knew how they suffered. There is something in slavery that
