after the manner that those were produced by very thin Plates. For, upon
trial, I found that if the Quick-silver were rubb'd off from the
backside of the Speculum, the Glass alone would cause the same Rings of
Colours, but much more faint than before; and therefore the Phaenomenon
depends not upon the Quick-silver, unless so far as the Quick-silver by
increasing the Reflexion of the backside of the Glass increases the
Light of the Rings of Colours. I found also that a Speculum of Metal
without Glass made some Years since for optical uses, and very well
wrought, produced none of those Rings; and thence I understood that
these Rings arise not from one specular Surface alone, but depend upon
the two Surfaces of the Plate of Glass whereof the Speculum was made,
and upon the thickness of the Glass between them. For as in the 7th and
19th Observations of the first part of this Book a thin Plate of Air,
Water, or Glass of an even thickness appeared of one Colour when the
Rays were perpendicular to it, of another when they were a little
oblique, of another when more oblique, of another when still more
oblique, and so on; so here, in the sixth Observation, the Light which
emerged out of the Glass in several Obliquities, made the Glass appear
of several Colours, and being propagated in those Obliquities to the
Chart, there painted Rings of those Colours. And as the reason why a
thin Plate appeared of several Colours in several Obliquities of the
Rays, was, that the Rays of one and the same sort are reflected by the
thin Plate at one obliquity and transmitted at another, and those of
other sorts transmitted where these are reflected, and reflected where
these are transmitted: So the reason why the thick Plate of Glass
whereof the Speculum was made did appear of various Colours in various
Obliquities, and in those Obliquities propagated those Colours to the
Chart, was, that the Rays of one and the same sort did at one Obliquity
emerge out of the Glass, at another did not emerge, but were reflected
back towards the Quick-silver by the hither Surface of the Glass, and
accordingly as the Obliquity became greater and greater, emerged and
were reflected alternately for many Successions; and that in one and the
same Obliquity the Rays of one sort were reflected, and those of another
transmitted. This is manifest by the fifth Observation of this part of
this Book. For in that Observation, when the Speculum was illuminated by
any one of the prismatick Colours, that Light made many Rings of the
same Colour upon the Chart with dark Intervals, and therefore at its
emergence out of the Speculum was alternately transmitted and not
transmitted from the Speculum to the Chart for many Successions,
according to the various Obliquities of its Emergence. And when the
Colour cast on the Speculum by the Prism was varied, the Rings became of
the Colour cast on it, and varied their bigness with their Colour, and
therefore the Light was now alternately transmitted and not transmitted
from the Speculum to the Chart at other Obliquities than before. It
seemed to me therefore that these Rings were of one and the same
original with those of thin Plates, but yet with this difference, that
those of thin Plates are made by the alternate Reflexions and
Transmissions of the Rays at the second Surface of the Plate, after one
passage through it; but here the Rays go twice through the Plate before
they are alternately reflected and transmitted. First, they go through
it from the first Surface to the Quick-silver, and then return through
it from the Quick-silver to the first Surface, and there are either
transmitted to the Chart or reflected back to the Quick-silver,
accordingly as they are in their Fits of easy Reflexion or Transmission
when they arrive at that Surface. For the Intervals of the Fits of the
Rays which fall perpendicularly on the Speculum, and are reflected back
in the same perpendicular Lines, by reason of the equality of these
Angles and Lines, are of the same length and number within the Glass
after Reflexion as before, by the 19th Proposition of the third part of
this Book. And therefore since all the Rays that enter through the
first Surface are in their Fits of easy Transmission at their entrance,
and as many of these as are reflected by the second are in their Fits of
easy Reflexion there, all these must be again in their Fits of easy
Transmission at their return to the first, and by consequence there go
out of the Glass to the Chart, and form upon it the white Spot of Light
in the center of the Rings. For the reason holds good in all sorts of
Rays, and therefore all sorts must go out promiscuously to that Spot,
and by their mixture cause it to be white. But the Intervals of the Fits
of those Rays which are reflected more obliquely than they enter, must
be greater after Reflexion than before, by the 15th and 20th
Propositions. And thence it may happen that the Rays at their return to
the first Surface, may in certain Obliquities be in Fits of easy
Reflexion, and return back to the Quick-silver, and in other
intermediate Obliquities be again in Fits of easy Transmission, and so
go out to the Chart, and paint on it the Rings of Colours about the
white Spot. And because the Intervals of the Fits at equal obliquities
are greater and fewer in the less refrangible Rays, and less and more
numerous in the more refrangible, therefore the less refrangible at
equal obliquities shall make fewer Rings than the more refrangible, and
the Rings made by those shall be larger than the like number of Rings
made by these; that is, the red Rings shall be larger than the yellow,
the yellow than the green, the green than the blue, and the blue than
the violet, as they were really found to be in the fifth Observation.
And therefore the first Ring of all Colours encompassing the white Spot
of Light shall be red without any violet within, and yellow, and green,
and blue in the middle, as it was found in the second Observation; and
these Colours in the second Ring, and those that follow, shall be more
expanded, till they spread into one another, and blend one another by
interfering.

These seem to be the reasons of these Rings in general; and this put me
upon observing the thickness of the Glass, and considering whether the
dimensions and proportions of the Rings may be truly derived from it by
computation.

_Obs._ 8. I measured therefore the thickness of this concavo-convex
Plate of Glass, and found it every where 1/4 of an Inch precisely. Now,
by the sixth Observation of the first Part of this Book, a thin Plate of
Air transmits the brightest Light of the first Ring, that is, the bright
yellow, when its thickness is the 1/89000th part of an Inch; and by the
tenth Observation of the same Part, a thin Plate of Glass transmits the
same Light of the same Ring, when its thickness is less in proportion of
the Sine of Refraction to the Sine of Incidence, that is, when its
thickness is the 11/1513000th or 1/137545th part of an Inch, supposing
the Sines are as 11 to 17. And if this thickness be doubled, it
transmits the same bright Light of the second Ring; if tripled, it
transmits that of the third, and so on; the bright yellow Light in all
these cases being in its Fits of Transmission. And therefore if its
thickness be multiplied 34386 times, so as to become 1/4 of an Inch, it
transmits the same bright Light of the 34386th Ring. Suppose this be the
bright yellow Light transmitted perpendicularly from the reflecting
convex side of the Glass through the concave side to the white Spot in
the center of the Rings of Colours on the Chart: And by a Rule in the
7th and 19th Observations in the first Part of this Book, and by the
15th and 20th Propositions of the third Part of this Book, if the Rays
be made oblique to the Glass, the thickness of the Glass requisite to
transmit the same bright Light of the same Ring in any obliquity, is to
this thickness of 1/4 of an Inch, as the Secant of a certain Angle to
the Radius, the Sine of which Angle is the first of an hundred and six
arithmetical Means between the Sines of Incidence and Refraction,
counted from the Sine of Incidence when the Refraction is made out of
any plated Body into any Medium encompassing it; that is, in this case,
out of Glass into Air. Now if the thickness of the Glass be increased by
degrees, so as to bear to its first thickness, (_viz._ that of a quarter
of an Inch,) the Proportions which 34386 (the number of Fits of the
perpendicular Rays in going through the Glass towards the white Spot in
the center of the Rings,) hath to 34385, 34384, 34383, and 34382, (the
numbers of the Fits of the oblique Rays in going through the Glass
towards the first, second, third, and fourth Rings of Colours,) and if
the first thickness be divided into 100000000 equal parts, the increased
thicknesses will be 100002908, 100005816, 100008725, and 100011633, and
the Angles of which these thicknesses are Secants will be 26' 13'', 37'
5'', 45' 6'', and 52' 26'', the Radius being 100000000; and the Sines of
these Angles are 762, 1079, 1321, and 1525, and the proportional Sines
of Refraction 1172, 1659, 2031, and 2345, the Radius being 100000. For
since the Sines of Incidence out of Glass into Air are to the Sines of
Refraction as 11 to 17, and to the above-mentioned Secants as 11 to the
first of 106 arithmetical Means between 11 and 17, that is, as 11 to
11-6/106, those Secants will be to the Sines of Refraction as 11-6/106,
to 17, and by this Analogy will give these Sines. So then, if the
obliquities of the Rays to the concave Surface of the Glass be such that
the Sines of their Refraction in passing out of the Glass through that
Surface into the Air be 1172, 1659, 2031, 2345, the bright Light of the
34386th Ring shall emerge at the thicknesses of the Glass, which are to
1/4 of an Inch as 34386 to 34385, 34384, 34383, 34382, respectively. And
therefore, if the thickness in all these Cases be 1/4 of an Inch (as it
is in the Glass of which the Speculum was made) the bright Light of the
34385th Ring shall emerge where the Sine of Refraction is 1172, and that
of the 34384th, 34383th, and 34382th Ring where the Sine is 1659, 2031,
and 2345 respectively. And in these Angles of Refraction the Light of
these Rings shall be propagated from the Speculum to the Chart, and
there paint Rings about the white central round Spot of Light which we
said was the Light of the 34386th Ring. And the Semidiameters of these
Rings shall subtend the Angles of Refraction made at the
Concave-Surface of the Speculum, and by consequence their Diameters
shall be to the distance of the Chart from the Speculum as those Sines
of Refraction doubled are to the Radius, that is, as 1172, 1659, 2031,
and 2345, doubled are to 100000. And therefore, if the distance of the
Chart from the Concave-Surface of the Speculum be six Feet (as it was in
the third of these Observations) the Diameters of the Rings of this
bright yellow Light upon the Chart shall be 1'688, 2'389, 2'925, 3'375
Inches: For these Diameters are to six Feet, as the above-mention'd
Sines doubled are to the Radius. Now, these Diameters of the bright
yellow Rings, thus found by Computation are the very same with those
found in the third of these Observations by measuring them, _viz._ with
1-11/16, 2-3/8, 2-11/12, and 3-3/8 Inches, and therefore the Theory of
deriving these Rings from the thickness of the Plate of Glass of which
the Speculum was made, and from the Obliquity of the emerging Rays
agrees with the Observation. In this Computation I have equalled the
Diameters of the bright Rings made by Light of all Colours, to the
Diameters of the Rings made by the bright yellow. For this yellow makes
the brightest Part of the Rings of all Colours. If you desire the
Diameters of the Rings made by the Light of any other unmix'd Colour,
you may find them readily by putting them to the Diameters of the bright
yellow ones in a subduplicate Proportion of the Intervals of the Fits of
the Rays of those Colours when equally inclined to the refracting or
reflecting Surface which caused those Fits, that is, by putting the
Diameters of the Rings made by the Rays in the Extremities and Limits of
the seven Colours, red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet,
proportional to the Cube-roots of the Numbers, 1, 8/9, 5/6, 3/4, 2/3,
3/5, 9/16, 1/2, which express the Lengths of a Monochord sounding the
Notes in an Eighth: For by this means the Diameters of the Rings of
these Colours will be found pretty nearly in the same Proportion to one
another, which they ought to have by the fifth of these Observations.

And thus I satisfy'd my self, that these Rings were of the same kind and
Original with those of thin Plates, and by consequence that the Fits or
alternate Dispositions of the Rays to be reflected and transmitted are
propagated to great distances from every reflecting and refracting
Surface. But yet to put the matter out of doubt, I added the following
Observation.

_Obs._ 9. If these Rings thus depend on the thickness of the Plate of
Glass, their Diameters at equal distances from several Speculums made of
such concavo-convex Plates of Glass as are ground on the same Sphere,
ought to be reciprocally in a subduplicate Proportion of the thicknesses
of the Plates of Glass. And if this Proportion be found true by
experience it will amount to a demonstration that these Rings (like
those formed in thin Plates) do depend on the thickness of the Glass. I
procured therefore another concavo-convex Plate of Glass ground on both
sides to the same Sphere with the former Plate. Its thickness was 5/62
Parts of an Inch; and the Diameters of the three first bright Rings
measured between the brightest Parts of their Orbits at the distance of
six Feet from the Glass were 3.4-1/6.5-1/8. Inches. Now, the thickness
of the other Glass being 1/4 of an Inch was to the thickness of this
Glass as 1/4 to 5/62, that is as 31 to 10, or 310000000 to 100000000,
and the Roots of these Numbers are 17607 and 10000, and in the
Proportion of the first of these Roots to the second are the Diameters
of the bright Rings made in this Observation by the thinner Glass,
3.4-1/6.5-1/8, to the Diameters of the same Rings made in the third of
these Observations by the thicker Glass 1-11/16, 2-3/8. 2-11/12, that
is, the Diameters of the Rings are reciprocally in a subduplicate
Proportion of the thicknesses of the Plates of Glass.

So then in Plates of Glass which are alike concave on one side, and
alike convex on the other side, and alike quick-silver'd on the convex
sides, and differ in nothing but their thickness, the Diameters of the
Rings are reciprocally in a subduplicate Proportion of the thicknesses
of the Plates. And this shews sufficiently that the Rings depend on both
the Surfaces of the Glass. They depend on the convex Surface, because
they are more luminous when that Surface is quick-silver'd over than
when it is without Quick-silver. They depend also upon the concave
Surface, because without that Surface a Speculum makes them not. They
depend on both Surfaces, and on the distances between them, because
their bigness is varied by varying only that distance. And this
dependence is of the same kind with that which the Colours of thin
Plates have on the distance of the Surfaces of those Plates, because the
bigness of the Rings, and their Proportion to one another, and the
variation of their bigness arising from the variation of the thickness
of the Glass, and the Orders of their Colours, is such as ought to
result from the Propositions in the end of the third Part of this Book,
derived from the Phaenomena of the Colours of thin Plates set down in the
first Part.

There are yet other Phaenomena of these Rings of Colours, but such as
follow from the same Propositions, and therefore confirm both the Truth
of those Propositions, and the Analogy between these Rings and the Rings
of Colours made by very thin Plates. I shall subjoin some of them.

_Obs._ 10. When the beam of the Sun's Light was reflected back from the
Speculum not directly to the hole in the Window, but to a place a little
distant from it, the common center of that Spot, and of all the Rings of
Colours fell in the middle way between the beam of the incident Light,
and the beam of the reflected Light, and by consequence in the center of
the spherical concavity of the Speculum, whenever the Chart on which the
Rings of Colours fell was placed at that center. And as the beam of
reflected Light by inclining the Speculum receded more and more from the
beam of incident Light and from the common center of the colour'd Rings
between them, those Rings grew bigger and bigger, and so also did the
white round Spot, and new Rings of Colours emerged successively out of
their common center, and the white Spot became a white Ring
encompassing them; and the incident and reflected beams of Light always
fell upon the opposite parts of this white Ring, illuminating its
Perimeter like two mock Suns in the opposite parts of an Iris. So then
the Diameter of this Ring, measured from the middle of its Light on one
side to the middle of its Light on the other side, was always equal to
the distance between the middle of the incident beam of Light, and the
middle of the reflected beam measured at the Chart on which the Rings
appeared: And the Rays which form'd this Ring were reflected by the
Speculum in Angles equal to their Angles of Incidence, and by
consequence to their Angles of Refraction at their entrance into the
Glass, but yet their Angles of Reflexion were not in the same Planes
with their Angles of Incidence.

_Obs._ 11. The Colours of the new Rings were in a contrary order to
those of the former, and arose after this manner. The white round Spot
of Light in the middle of the Rings continued white to the center till
the distance of the incident and reflected beams at the Chart was about
7/8 parts of an Inch, and then it began to grow dark in the middle. And
when that distance was about 1-3/16 of an Inch, the white Spot was
become a Ring encompassing a dark round Spot which in the middle
inclined to violet and indigo. And the luminous Rings encompassing it
were grown equal to those dark ones which in the four first Observations
encompassed them, that is to say, the white Spot was grown a white Ring
equal to the first of those dark Rings, and the first of those luminous
Rings was now grown equal to the second of those dark ones, and the
second of those luminous ones to the third of those dark ones, and so
on. For the Diameters of the luminous Rings were now 1-3/16, 2-1/16,
2-2/3, 3-3/20, &c. Inches.

When the distance between the incident and reflected beams of Light
became a little bigger, there emerged out of the middle of the dark Spot
after the indigo a blue, and then out of that blue a pale green, and
soon after a yellow and red. And when the Colour at the center was
brightest, being between yellow and red, the bright Rings were grown
equal to those Rings which in the four first Observations next
encompassed them; that is to say, the white Spot in the middle of those
Rings was now become a white Ring equal to the first of those bright
Rings, and the first of those bright ones was now become equal to the
second of those, and so on. For the Diameters of the white Ring, and of
the other luminous Rings encompassing it, were now 1-11/16, 2-3/8,
2-11/12, 3-3/8, &c. or thereabouts.

When the distance of the two beams of Light at the Chart was a little
more increased, there emerged out of the middle in order after the red,
a purple, a blue, a green, a yellow, and a red inclining much to purple,
and when the Colour was brightest being between yellow and red, the
former indigo, blue, green, yellow and red, were become an Iris or Ring
of Colours equal to the first of those luminous Rings which appeared in
the four first Observations, and the white Ring which was now become
the second of the luminous Rings was grown equal to the second of those,
and the first of those which was now become the third Ring was become
equal to the third of those, and so on. For their Diameters were
1-11/16, 2-3/8, 2-11/12, 3-3/8 Inches, the distance of the two beams of
Light, and the Diameter of the white Ring being 2-3/8 Inches.

When these two beams became more distant there emerged out of the middle
of the purplish red, first a darker round Spot, and then out of the
middle of that Spot a brighter. And now the former Colours (purple,
blue, green, yellow, and purplish red) were become a Ring equal to the
first of the bright Rings mentioned in the four first Observations, and
the Rings about this Ring were grown equal to the Rings about that
respectively; the distance between the two beams of Light and the
Diameter of the white Ring (which was now become the third Ring) being
about 3 Inches.

The Colours of the Rings in the middle began now to grow very dilute,
and if the distance between the two Beams was increased half an Inch, or
an Inch more, they vanish'd whilst the white Ring, with one or two of
the Rings next it on either side, continued still visible. But if the
distance of the two beams of Light was still more increased, these also
vanished: For the Light which coming from several parts of the hole in
