those a magnitude brighter.

The magnitudes of the telescopic stars have not yet been measured
completely, and their exact number is unknown; but if we apply our
principle of a threefold increase for each successive magnitude, we
shall find for the fainter stars--those of the tenth and twelfth
magnitudes--prodigious numbers which run up into the millions, and even
these are probably too small, since down to the ninth or tenth magnitude
it is certain that the number of the telescopic stars increases from
magnitude to magnitude in more than a threefold ratio. This is balanced
in some degree by the less rapid increase which is known to exist in
magnitudes still fainter; and applying our formula without regard to
these variations in the rate of increase, we obtain as a rude
approximation to the total number of stars down to the fifteenth
magnitude, 86,000,000. The Herschels, father and son, actually counted
the number of stars visible in nearly 8,000 sample regions of the sky,
and, inferring the character of the whole sky from these samples, we
find it to contain 58,500,000 stars; but the magnitude of the faintest
star visible in their telescope, and included in their count, is rather
uncertain.

How many first-magnitude stars would be needed to give as much light as
do the 2,843 stars of magnitude 5.0 to 6.0? How many tenth-magnitude
stars are required to give the same amount of light?

To the modern man it seems natural to ascribe the different brilliancies
of the stars to their different distances from us; but such was not the
case 2,000 years ago, when each fixed star was commonly thought to be
fastened to a "crystal sphere," which carried them with it, all at the
same distance from us, as it turned about the earth. In breaking away
from this erroneous idea and learning to think of the sky itself as only
an atmospheric illusion through which we look to stars at very different
distances beyond, it was easy to fall into the opposite error and to
think of the stars as being much alike one with another, and, like
pebbles on the beach, scattered throughout space with some rough degree
of uniformity, so that in every direction there should be found in equal
measure stars near at hand and stars far off, each shining with a luster
proportioned to its remoteness.

188. DISTANCES OF THE STARS.--Now, in order to separate the true from
the false in this last mode of thinking about the stars, we need some
knowledge of their real distances from the earth, and in seeking it we
encounter what is perhaps the most delicate and difficult problem in the
whole range of observational astronomy. As shown in Fig. 121, the
principles involved in determining these distances are not fundamentally
different from those employed in determining the moon's distance from
the earth. Thus, the ellipse at the left of the figure represents the
earth's orbit and the position of the earth at different times of the
year. The direction of the star _A_ at these several times is shown by
lines drawn through _A_ and prolonged to the background apparently
furnished by the sky. A similar construction is made for the star _B_,
and it is readily seen that owing to the changing position of the
observer as he moves around the earth's orbit, both _A_ and _B_ will
appear to move upon the background in orbits shaped like that of the
earth as seen from the star, but having their size dependent upon the
star's distance, the apparent orbit of _A_ being larger than that of
_B_, because _A_ is nearer the earth. By measuring the angular distance
between _A_ and _B_ at opposite seasons of the year (e. g., the angles
_A--Jan.--B_, and _A--July--B_) the astronomer determines from the
change in this angle how much larger is the one path than the other, and
thus concludes how much nearer is _A_ than _B_. Strictly, the difference
between the January and July angles is equal to the difference between
the angles subtended at _A_ and _B_ by the diameter of the earth's
orbit, and if _B_ were so far away that the angle _Jan.--B--July_ were
nothing at all we should get immediately from the observations the angle
_Jan.--A--July_, which would suffice to determine the stars' distance.
Supposing the diameter of the earth's orbit and the angle at _A_ to be
known, can you make a graphical construction that will determine the
distance of _A_ from the earth?

[Illustration: FIG. 121.--Determining a star's parallax.]

The angle subtended at _A_ by the radius of the earth's orbit--i. e.,
1/2 (_Jan.--A--July_)--is called the star's parallax, and this is
commonly used by astronomers as a measure of the star's distance instead
of expressing it in linear units such as miles or radii of the earth's
orbit. The distance of a star is equal to the radius of the earth's
orbit divided by the parallax, in seconds of arc, and multiplied by the
number 206265.

A weak point of this method of measuring stellar distances is that it
always gives what is called a relative parallax--i. e., the difference
between the parallaxes of _A_ and _B_; and while it is customary to
select for _B_ a star or stars supposed to be much farther off than _A_,
it may happen, and sometimes does happen, that these comparison stars as
they are called are as near or nearer than _A_, and give a negative
parallax--i. e., the difference between the angles at _A_ and _B_ proves
to be negative, as it must whenever the star _B_ is nearer than _A_.

The first really successful determinations of stellar parallax were made
by Struve and Bessel a little prior to 1840, and since that time the
distances of perhaps 100 stars have been measured with some degree of
reliability, although the parallaxes themselves are so small--never as
great as 1''--that it is extremely difficult to avoid falling into
error, since even for the nearest star the problem of its distance is
equivalent to finding the distance of an object more than 5 miles away
by looking at it first with one eye and then with the other. Too short a
base line.

189. THE SUN AND HIS NEIGHBORS.--The distances of the sun's nearer
neighbors among the stars are shown in Fig. 122, where the two circles
having the sun at their center represent distances from it equal
respectively to 1,000,000 and 2,000,000 times the distance between earth
and sun. In the figure the direction of each star from the sun
corresponds to its right ascension, as shown by the Roman numerals about
the outer circle; the true direction of the star from the sun can not,
of course, be shown upon the flat surface of the paper, but it may be
found by elevating or depressing the star from the surface of the paper
through an angle, as seen from the sun, equal to its declination, as
shown in the fifth column of the following table,

                       _The Sun's Nearest Neighbors_

  ---+------------------+----------+-------+-----+----------+---------
  No.| STAR.            |Magnitude.| R. A. |Dec. | Parallax.|Distance.
  ---+------------------+----------+-------+-----+----------+---------
  1  | [a] Centauri     |   0.7    | 14.5h.| -60°|   0.75"  |  0.27
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  2  | Ll. 21,185       |   6.8    | 11.0  | +37 |   0.45   |  0.46
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  3  | 61 Cygni         |   5.0    | 21.0  | +38 |   0.40   |  0.51
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  4  | [ê] Herculis     |   3.6    | 16.7  | +39 |   0.40   |  0.51
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  5  | Sirius           |  -1.4    |  6.7  | -17 |   0.37   |  0.56
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  6  | [S] 2,398        |   8.2    | 18.7  | +59 |   0.35   |  0.58
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  7  | Procyon          |   0.5    |  7.6  | + 5 |   0.34   |  0.60
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  8  | [g] Draconis     |   4.8    | 17.5  | +55 |   0.30   |  0.68
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  9  | Gr. 34           |   7.9    |  0.2  | +43 |   0.29   |  0.71
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  10 | Lac. 9,352       |   7.5    | 23.0  | -36 |   0.28   |  0.74
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  11 | [s] Draconis     |   4.8    | 19.5  | +69 |   0.25   |  0.82
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  12 | A. O. 17,415-6   |   9.0    | 17.6  | +68 |   0.25   |  0.82
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  13 | [ê] Cassiopeiæ   |   3.4    |  0.7  | +57 |   0.25   |  0.82
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  14 | Altair           |   1.0    | 19.8  | + 9 |   0.21   |  0.97
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  15 | [e] Indi         |   5.2    | 21.9  | -57 |   0.20   |  1.03
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  16 | Gr. 1,618        |   6.7    | 10.1  | +50 |   0.20   |  1.03
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  17 | 10 Ursæ Majoris  |   4.2    |  8.9  | +42 |   0.20   |  1.03
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  18 | Castor           |   1.5    |  7.5  | +32 |   0.20   |  1.03
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  19 | Ll. 21,258       |   8.5    | 11.0  | +44 |   0.20   |  1.03
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  20 | [o]^{2} Eridani  |   4.5    |  4.2  | - 8 |   0.19   |  1.08
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  21 | A. O. 11,677     |   9.0    | 11.2  | +66 |   0.19   |  1.08
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  22 | Ll. 18,115       |   8.0    |  9.1  | +53 |   0.18   |  1.14
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  23 | B. D. 36°, 3,883 |   7.1    | 20.0  | +36 |   0.18   |  1.14
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  24 | Gr. 1,618        |   6.5    | 10.1  | +50 |   0.17   |  1.21
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  25 | [b] Cassiopeiæ   |   2.3    |  0.1  | +59 |   0.16   |  1.28
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  26 | 70 Ophiuchi      |   4.4    | 18.0  | + 2 |   0.16   |  1.28
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  27 | [S] 1,516        |   6.5    | 11.2  | +74 |   0.15   |  1.38
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  28 | Gr. 1,830        |   6.6    | 11.8  | +39 |   0.15   |  1.38
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  29 | [m] Cassiopeiæ   |   5.4    |  1.0  | +54 |   0.14   |  1.47
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  30 | [e] Eridani      |   4.4    |  3.5  | -10 |   0.14   |  1.47
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  31 | [i] Ursæ Majoris |   3.2    |  8.9  | +48 |   0.13   |  1.58
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  32 | [b] Hydri        |   2.9    |  0.3  | -78 |   0.13   |  1.58
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  33 | Fomalhaut        |   1.0    | 22.9  | -30 |   0.13   |  1.58
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  34 | Br. 3,077        |   6.0    | 23.1  | +57 |   0.13   |  1.58
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  35 | [e] Cygni        |   2.5    | 20.8  | +33 |   0.12   |  1.71
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  36 | [b] Comæ         |   4.5    | 13.1  | +28 |   0.11   |  1.87
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  37 | [ps]^{5} Aurigæ  |   8.8    |  6.6  | +44 |   0.11   |  1.87
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  38 | [p] Herculis     |   3.3    | 17.2  | +37 |   0.11   |  1.87
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  39 | Aldebaran        |   1.1    |  4.5  | +16 |   0.10   |  2.06
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  40 | Capella          |   0.1    |  5.1  | +46 |   0.10   |  2.06
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  41 | B. D. 35°, 4,003 |   9.2    | 20.1  | +35 |   0.10   |  2.06
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  42 | Gr. 1,646        |   6.3    | 10.3  | +49 |   0.10   |  2.06
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  43 | [g] Cygni        |   2.3    | 20.3  | +40 |   0.10   |  2.06
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  44 | Regulus          |   1.2    | 10.0  | +12 |   0.10   |  2.06
     |                  |          |       |     |          |
  45 | Vega             |   0.2    | 18.6  | +39 |   0.10   |  2.06
  ---+------------------+----------+-------+-----+----------+---------

in which the numbers in the first column are those placed adjacent to
the stars in the diagram to identify them.

[Illustration: FIG. 122.--Stellar neighbors of the sun.]

190. LIGHT YEARS.--The radius of the inner circle in Fig. 122, 1,000,000
times the earth's distance from the sun, is a convenient unit in which
to express the stellar distances, and in the preceding table the
distances of the stars from the sun are expressed in terms of this
unit. To express them in miles the numbers in the table must be
multiplied by 93,000,000,000,000. The nearest star, [a] Centauri, is
25,000,000,000,000 miles away. But there is another unit in more common
use--i. e., the distance traveled over by light in the period of one
year. We have already found (§ 141) that it requires light 8m. 18s. to
come from the sun to the earth, and it is a simple matter to find from
this datum that in a year light moves over a space equal to 63,368 radii
of the earth's orbit. This distance is called a _light year_, and the
distance of the same star, [a] Centauri, expressed in terms of this
unit, is 4.26 years--i. e., it takes light that long to come from the
star to the earth.

In Fig. 122 the stellar magnitudes of the stars are indicated by the
size of the dots--the bigger the dot the brighter the star--and a mere
inspection of the figure will serve to show that within a radius of 30
light years from the sun bright stars and faint ones are mixed up
together, and that, so far as distance is concerned, the sun is only a
member of this swarm of stars, whose distances apart, each from its
nearest neighbor, are of the same order of magnitude as those which
separate the sun from the three or four stars nearest it.

Fig. 122 is not to be supposed complete. Doubtless other stars will be
found whose distance from the sun is less than 2,000,000 radii of the
earth's orbit, but it is not probable that they will ever suffice to
more than double or perhaps treble the number here shown. The vast
majority of the stars lie far beyond the limits of the figure.

191. PROPER MOTIONS.--It is evident that these stars are too far apart
for their mutual attractions to have much influence one upon another,
and that we have here a case in which, according to § 34, each star is
free to keep unchanged its state of rest or motion with unvarying
velocity along a straight line. Their very name, _fixed stars_, implies
that they are at rest, and so astronomers long believed. Hipparchus (125
B. C.) and Ptolemy (130 A. D.) observed and recorded many allineations
among the stars, in order to give to future generations a means of
settling this very question of a possible motion of the stars and a
resulting change in their relative positions upon the sky. For example,
they found at the beginning of the Christian era that the four stars,
Capella, [e] Persei, [a] and [b] Arietis, stood in a straight
line--i. e., upon a great circle of the sky. Verify this by direct
reference to the sky, and see how nearly these stars have kept the same
position for nearly twenty centuries. Three of them may be identified
from the star maps, and the fourth, [e] Persei, is a third-magnitude
star between Capella and the other two.

Other allineations given by Ptolemy are: Spica, Arcturus and [b] Bootis;
Spica, [d] Corvi and [g] Corvi; [a] Libræ, Arcturus and [z] Ursæ
Majoris. Arcturus does not now fit very well to these alignments, and
nearly two centuries ago it, together with Aldebaran and Sirius, was on
other grounds suspected to have changed its place in the sky since the
days of Ptolemy. This discovery, long since fully confirmed, gave a
great impetus to observing with all possible accuracy the right
ascensions and declinations of the stars, with a view to finding other
cases of what was called _proper motion_--i. e., a motion peculiar to
the individual star as contrasted with the change of right ascension and
declination produced for all stars by the precession.

Since the middle of the eighteenth century there have been made many
thousands of observations of this kind, whose results have gone into
star charts and star catalogues, and which are now being supplemented by
a photographic survey of the sky that is intended to record permanently
upon photographic plates the position and magnitude of every star in the
heavens down to the fourteenth magnitude, with a view to ultimately
determining all their proper motions.

The complete achievement of this result is, of course, a thing of the
remote future, but sufficient progress in determining these motions has
been made during the past century and a half to show that nearly every
lucid star possesses some proper motion, although in most cases it is
very small, there being less than 100 known stars in which it amounts
to so much as 1" per annum--i. e., a rate of motion across the sky which
would require nearly the whole Christian era to alter a star's direction
from us by so much as the moon's angular diameter. The most rapid known
proper motion is that of a telescopic star midway between the equator
and the south pole, which changes its position at the rate of nearly 9"
per annum, and the next greatest is that of another telescopic star, in
the northern sky, No. 28 of Fig. 122. It is not until we reach the tenth
place in a list of large proper motions that we find a bright lucid
star, No. 1 of Fig. 122. It is a significant fact that for the most part
the stars with large proper motions are precisely the ones shown in Fig.
122, which is designed to show stars near the earth. This connection
between nearness and rapidity of proper motions is indeed what we should
expect to find, since a given amount of real motion of the star along
its orbit will produce a larger angular displacement, proper motion, the
nearer the star is to the earth, and this fact has guided astronomers in
selecting the stars to be observed for parallax, the proper motion being
determined first and the parallax afterward.

192. THE PATHS OF THE STARS.--We have already seen reason for thinking
that the orbit along which a star moves is practically a straight line,
and from a study of proper motions, particularly their directions across
the sky, it appears that these orbits point in all possible ways--north,
south, east, and west--so that some of them are doubtless directed
nearly toward or from the sun; others are square to the line joining sun
and star; while the vast majority occupy some position intermediate
between these two. Now, our relation to these real motions of the stars
is well illustrated in Fig. 112, where the observer finds in some of the
shooting stars a tremendous proper motion across the sky, but sees
nothing of their rapid approach to him, while others appear to stand
motionless, although, in fact, they are moving quite as rapidly as are
their fellows. The fixed star resembles the shooting star in this
respect, that its proper motion is only that part of its real motion
which lies at right angles to the line of sight, and this needs to be
supplemented by that other part of the motion which lies parallel to the
line of sight, in order to give us any knowledge of the star's real
orbit.

[Illustration: FIG. 123.--Motion of Polaris in the line of sight as
determined by the spectroscope. FROST.]

193. MOTION IN THE LINE OF SIGHT.--It is only within the last 25 years
that anything whatever has been accomplished in determining these
stellar motions of approach or recession, but within that time much
progress has been made by applying the Doppler principle (§ 89) to the
study of stellar spectra, and at the present time nearly every great
telescope in the world is engaged upon work of this kind. The shifting
of the lines of the spectrum toward the violet or toward the red end of
the spectrum indicates with certainty the approach or recession of the
star, but this shifting, which must be determined by comparing the
star's spectrum with that of some artificial light showing corresponding
lines, is so small in amount that its accurate measurement is a matter
of extreme difficulty, as may be seen from Fig. 123. This cut shows
along its central line a part of the spectrum of Polaris, between wave
lengths 4,450 and 4,600 tenth meters, while above and below are the
corresponding parts of the spectrum of an electric spark whose light
passed through the same spectroscope and was photographed upon the same
plate with that of Polaris. This comparison spectrum is, as it should
be, a discontinuous or bright-line one, while the spectrum of the star
is a continuous one, broken only by dark gaps or lines, many of which
have no corresponding lines in the comparison spectrum. But a certain
number of lines in the two spectra do correspond, save that the dark
line is always pushed a very little toward the direction of shorter wave
lengths, showing that this star is approaching the earth. This spectrum
was photographed for the express purpose of determining the star's
motion in the line of sight, and with it there should be compared Figs.
124 and 125, which show in the upper part of each a photograph obtained
without comparison spectra by allowing the star's light to pass through
some prisms placed just in front of the telescope. The lower section of
each figure shows an enlargement of the original photograph, bringing
out its details in a way not visible to the unaided eye. In the enlarged
spectrum of [b] Aurigæ a rate of motion equal to that of the earth in
its orbit would be represented by a shifting of 0.03 of a millimeter in
the position of the broad, hazy lines.

[Illustration: FIG. 124.--Spectrum of [b] Aurigæ.--PICKERING.]

Despite the difficulty of dealing with such small quantities as the
above, very satisfactory results are now obtained, and from them it is
known that the velocities of stars in the line of sight are of the same
order of magnitude as the velocities of the planets in their orbits,
ranging all the way from 0 to 60 miles per second--more than 200,000
miles per hour--which latter velocity, according to Campbell, is the
rate at which [m] Cassiopeiæ is approaching the sun.

The student should not fail to note one important difference between
proper motions and the motions determined spectroscopically: the latter
are given directly in miles per second, or per hour, while the former
are expressed in angular measure, seconds of arc, and there can be no
direct comparison between the two until by means of the known distances
of the stars their proper motions are converted from angular into linear
measure. We are brought thus to the very heart of the matter; parallax,
proper motion, and motion in the line of sight are intimately related
quantities, all of which are essential to a knowledge of the real
motions of the stars.

[Illustration: FIG. 125.--Spectrum of Pollux.--PICKERING.]

194. STAR DRIFT.--An illustration of how they may be made to work
together is furnished by some of the stars--which make up the Great
Dipper--[b], [g], [e], and [z] Ursæ Majoris, whose proper motions have
long been known to point in nearly the same direction across the sky and
to be nearly equal in amount. More recently it has been found that these
stars are all moving toward the sun with approximately the same
velocity--18 miles per second. One other star of the Dipper, [d] Ursæ
Majoris, shares in the common proper motion, but its velocity in the
line of sight has not yet been determined with the spectroscope. These
similar motions make it probable that the stars are really traveling
together through space along parallel lines; and on the supposition
that such is the case it is quite possible to write out a set of
equations which shall involve their known proper motions and motions in
the line of sight, together with their unknown distances and the unknown
