water, dry ground being the exception, and I look upon the feat of getting
across the country at all as the engineering triumph of my life.

On May 20 a genuine blizzard set in, lasting 24 hours, snowed five inches,
and froze the sloughs over with half an inch of ice, a decidedly
interesting event to the writer, as he was 18 miles from the nearest wood,
therefore lay in his blankets and ate hard tack. I stabled my ponies in
the cook tent, and after they had literally eaten of the sod inside the
tent, I divided my floor with them.

On 28th day of May I saw the first contractor, who broke ground at station
7,150. On the 1st of June I was relieved from this division, and ordered
to take the next, 50 miles west. On the 13th day of June ground was broken
on this division, at station 8,070, or only about 62 miles west of the
east end of the 500-mile contract. It looked at this time as though they
might build 150 miles, but not more. But from this time on very rapid
progress was made. On July 17 the track reached station 7,000, making
however up to this time but about 50 miles of track-laying, including that
laid on the old grade; but large forces were put on to surfacing, and the
track already laid was put in excellent condition for getting material to
the front. The weather from this until the freezing-up was all that could
be desired. Work ceased about the 1st of January, 1883, for the season,
and the final estimate for the work was as follows: 6,103,986 cubic yards
earth excavation, 2,395,750 feet B.M. timber in bridges and the culverts,
85,708 lineal feet piling, 435 miles of track-laying. This work was all
done in 182 working days, including stormy ones, when little, if anything,
could be done, making a daily average of 33,548 yards excavation, 13,150
feet B.M. timber, 471 feet piling, 2-38/100 miles track-laying. We never
had an accurate force report made of the whole line, but roughly there
were employed 5,000 men and 1,700 teams.

The admirable organization of the contractors was something wonderful. The
grading work was practically all done by sub-contractors, Messrs. Langdon,
Sheppard & Co. confining themselves to putting in the supplies and doing
the bridge work, surfacing, and track-laying. The grading forces were
scattered along about 150 miles ahead of the track and supply stores,
established about 50 miles apart, and in no case were sub-contractors
expected to haul supplies over 100 miles. If I remember rightly, there
were four trains of about forty wagons each, hauling supplies from the end
of track to the stores.

As can be readily seen, the vital point of the whole work, and the problem
to solve, was food for men and horses. 1,700 bushels of oats every day and
15,000 pounds of provisions, Sundays and all, for an entire season, which
at the beginning of the work had to come about 170 miles by rail, and then
be taken from 50 to 150 miles by teams across a wilderness, is on the face
of it considerable of an undertaking, to say nothing about hauling the
pile-drivers, piles, and bridge-timber there. To keep from delaying the
track, sidings 1,500 feet long were graded, about 7 miles apart. A
side-track crew, together with an engine, four flats, and caboose, were
always in readiness; and as soon as a siding was reached, in five hours
the switches would be in, and the next day it would be surfaced and all in
working order, when the operating department would fill it with track
material and supplies. From the head of the siding to the end of the track
the ground was in hands of track-laying engine, never going back of the
last siding for supplies or material, and my recollection is that there
were but six hours' delay to the track from lack of material the whole
season, at any rate up to some time in November. The track-laying crew was
equal to 4 miles per day, and in the month of August 92 miles of track
were laid. The ties were cut on the line of the road about 100 miles east
of Winnipeg, so the shortest distance any ties were hauled was 270 miles;
the actual daily burden of the single track from Winnipeg west was 24 cars
steel, 24 cars ties, aside from the transportation of grain and
provisions, bridge material, and lumber for station houses. The station
buildings were kept right up by the company itself, and a depot built with
rooms for the agent every 15 miles, or at every second siding. The
importance of keeping the buildings up with the track was impressed on the
mind of the superintendent of this branch, and, as a satire, he
telegraphed asking permission to haul his stuff ahead of the track by
teams, he being on the track-layers' heels with his stations and tanks the
whole season. The telegraph line was also built, and kept right up to the
end of the track, three or four miles being the furthest they were at any
time behind.

It might be supposed that work done so rapidly would not be well done, but
it is the best built prairie road I know of on this continent. It is built
almost entirely free from cuts, and the work is at least 20 per cent.
heavier than would ordinarily be made across the same country in the
States, on account of snow. 2,640 ties were laid to the mile, and the
track ballasting kept well up with the laying; so well, in fact, and so
well done, that as 100 mile sections were completed schedule trains were
put on 20 miles an hour, and the operating department had nothing to do
but make a time table; the road was _built_ by the construction department
before the operating department was asked to take it. The engineering was
organized in divisions of 30 miles each, and as each was finished the
parties moved ahead again to the front, the engineers usually finding men
sitting on their shovels waiting for the work to be laid out for them. It
was as much as the locating parties could do to keep out of the way of the
construction. The roadbed was built 14 ft. wide in embankment and 20 in
the very few cuts there were, there being no cuts of any moment except
through the Coteaus and the Saskatchewan crossing, and these have since
been widened out on account of snow, so that the road can be operated the
year round and the bucking-snow account cut no figure in the operating
expenses.

The country is a virgin desert. From Winnipeg to the Pacific Ocean there
are a few places that might attain to the dignity of an _oasis_--at
Brandon, Portage la Prairie, etc.--but it is generally what I should call
worthless; 100 miles to wood and 100 feet to water was the general
experience west of the Moose jaw, and the months of June, July, and August
are the only three in the year that it is safe to bet you will not have
sleighing. I burned wood and used stakes that were hauled by carts 85
miles, and none any nearer. It is a matter of some pride that both the
engineering and the construction were done by what our Canadian neighbors
kindly termed "Yankee importations." However, there was one thing that in
the building of this road was in marked contrast to any other Pacific road
ever constructed, that is, there was no lawlessness, no whisky, and not
even a knock-down fight that I ever heard of the whole season, and even in
the midst of 12,000 Indians, all armed with Winchester rifles and plenty
of ammunition, not one of the locating or construction parties ever had a
military escort, nor were any depredations ever committed, except the
running off of a few horses, which were usually recovered; and I think
there were but two fatal accidents during the season, one man killed on
the Grand Coule Bridge, and another from being kicked by a horse.

The track was all laid from one end, and in no case were rails hauled
ahead by teams. Two iron cars were used, the empty returning one being
turned up beside the track to let the loaded one by.

The feat in rapid construction accomplished by this company will never be
duplicated, done as it was by a reckless expenditure of money, the orders
to the engineers being to _get there_ regardless of expense and
horse-flesh; if you killed a horse by hard driving, his harness would fit
another, and there was no scrutiny bestowed on vouchers when the work was
done; and I must pay the tribute to the company to say that everything
that money would buy was sent to make the engineers comfortable. It was
bad enough at best, and the Chief Engineer (J.C. James) rightly considered
that any expense bestowed on the engineering part of the work was a good
investment.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE OSGOOD MAMMOTH EXCAVATOR.


In the accompanying illustration, we present to our readers a mammoth
excavator, built by the Osgood Dredge Company of Albany, N.Y., for the
Pacific Guano Company of California, for uncovering their phosphate
deposits on Chisholm Island, South Colombia.

[Illustration: THE OSGOOD MAMMOTH EXCAVATOR.]

In order to bring out more clearly the principal problem involved in the
construction of this machine, we shall state first the proposed method of
its operation. This is as follows, viz.: The excavator is to dig a trench
thirty feet wide, down to the phosphate rock, and the entire length of the
bed--about one quarter of a mile--dumping the earth of the first cut to
one side. The phosphate is taken out behind the excavator. On reaching the
end of the bed, the excavator is reversed and starts back, making a second
cut thirty feet wide, and dumping now into the cut from which the
phosphate has just been removed. In this way the entire bed is traversed,
the excavator turning over the earth in great furrows thirty feet wide,
and giving an opportunity to simultaneously get out all the phosphate.

As will be seen, the main problem presented was to turn the car around at
each end of the cut in a very limited space. To accomplish this, the car
is mounted on a fixed axle at each end and on a truck under its center of
gravity; this is somewhat forward of the geometrical center of the car.
The frame of the truck is circular, thirteen feet in diameter, made of I
beams curved to shape. The circle carries a track, on which a ring of
coned rollers revolves, which in turn supports the car. By pulling out the
track from under both ends of the car, the whole weight is balanced on
this central turntable truck, thus admitting of the car being turned, end
for end, within its own length. This method of turning the car, and the
size of the machine, are the principal features.

The car is 40' x 13', with arched truss sides. The track is seven feet
gauge, the spread between tracks 20 feet, the height of the A frame 38
feet, length of boom 40 feet, swinging in a circle of 30 feet radius, and
through two-thirds of the entire circle. It has a steel dipper of 46 cubic
feet capacity, 1 inch steel chains, 10" x 12" double cylinder hoisting
engine, and 61/4" x 8" double cylinder reversible crowding engine. The
drums are fitted with friction clutches. Owing to the great distance at
which the dipper is handled, its size is reduced, and because it swings on
the arc of so large a circle the capacity of this machine is only one-half
of that of the No. 1 excavator built by the Osgood Dredge Company.
Nevertheless it will do the work of from 75 to 100 men, since its capacity
is from 800 to 1,000 cubic yards per day, the amount of rock _uncovered_
depending, of course, upon the depth of earth overlying it. The excavator
will dump 30 feet from the center line of the car, and 26 feet above the
track, which is laid on the rock. Total weight about fifty tons. The crew
required for its operation consists of 1 engineer, 1 fireman, 1 craneman,
and 4 to 5 pit men to tend jacks, move track, etc.

In the illustration the boiler connections are omitted, also the housing
for the protection of the crew. The design is characterized by the evident
care which has been bestowed upon securing simplicity and
durability.--_American Engineer._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE OSGOOD EXCAVATOR.


At a recent meeting of the Engineers' Club of Philadelphia, Mr. John C.
Trautwine, Jr., exhibited and described drawings of a large land dredge
built by the Osgood Dredge Co., of Albany, New York, for the Pacific Guano
Co., to be used in removing 8 to 15 feet of material from the phosphate
rock at Bull River, S.C.

The more prominent features of the machine are the car-body, the water
tank, boiler and engine, the A frame (so-called from its slight
resemblance to the letter A), the boom, the dipper-handle; and the dipper,
drawings of which were shown and described in detail.

Before the excavation is begun, the forward end of the car (the end
nearest the dipper) is lifted clear of the track by means of 3
screw-jacks. When the machine has excavated as far in advance of itself as
the length of the boom and that of the dipper-handle will permit, say
about 8 feet, the car is again lowered to the track, the screw-jacks
removed, and the car is moved forward about 8 feet by winding the rope
upon the drum, the other end of the rope being attached to any suitable
fixed object near the line of the track. The forward end of the car is
then again lifted by means of the 3 screw-jacks, and the digging is
resumed. The machine cuts a channel from 25 to 35 feet wide, and deposits
all the dirt upon one side. If necessary, it can dump earth about 25 feet
above the track. The miners follow in the wake of the machine, getting out
the phosphate as fast as it is uncovered. When the machine reaches the end
of the field it is lowered to the track and the screw-jacks are removed.
Shoes or skids are then placed upon the track, and the wheels of the
turntable are run up on them. This lifts the end wheels clear of the
track, so that the car and machine rest entirely upon the turntable. By
now blocking the turntable wheels and winding up only _one_ of the ropes,
the car body and the machine are swung around end for end. The digging is
then resumed in the opposite direction, the temporary track, upon which
the machine travels, being shifted to one side, so that the second channel
is made alongside of the first. The earth removed in cutting this second
channel is dumped into the first channel, the phosphate (as stated above)
having been first removed.

The dipper is of plate steel, and holds 13/4 cubic yards of earth when even
full.

The machine is manned by an engineer, a fireman, and a dipper-tender,
besides which from five to ten laborers are required. These look after the
track, etc.

       *       *       *       *       *




CAPSTAN NAVIGATION ON THE VOLGA.


On several of the large rivers on the Continent, with rapid currents,
cable towage has been introduced in addition to the older methods of
transporting merchandise by sailing and steam boats or by towage with
screw or paddle tugs. A chain or wire rope is laid on the bottom of the
river bed, fixed to anchors at the ends and passed over a chain pulley
driven by the steam engine and guided by pulleys on the steam tug, the tug
lifting it out of the water at the bow and dropping it over the stern and
winding itself with the barges attached to it along the chain, the latter
being utilized as a rule only for the up journey, while down the river the
tugs are propelled by paddles or screws, and can tow a sufficient number
of barges with the assistance of the current. The system has been found
advantageous, as, although the power required for drawing the barges and
tugs against the current is of course the same in all cases, the slip and
waste of power by screws and paddles is avoided. The size of the screws or
paddles is also limited by the nature of the river and its traffic, and
with cable towage a larger number of barges can be hauled, while the
progress made is definite and there is no drifting back, as occurs with
paddle or screw tugs when they have temporarily to slow or stop their
engines on account of passing vessels. Several streams, as the Elbe,
Rhine, and Rhone, have now such cables laid for long distances in those
parts of the rivers where the traffic is sufficient to warrant the
adoption of the system. While this has been introduced only during the
last 16 or 18 years, a similar method of transporting merchandise has been
in use in Russia on the river Volga for upward of 40 years. Navigation on
this river is interrupted for about half the year by the ice, and the
traffic is of larger amount only during part of the summer, while the
length of the river itself is very great, so that laying down permanent
cables would not pay; while, on the other hand, the current is so strong
that towage of some sort must be resorted to for the transport of large
quantities. The problem has been solved by the introduction of the capstan
navigation or towage.

[Illustration: CAPSTAN NAVIGATION ON THE VOLGA.]

There are two kinds of capstans in use, one actuated by horse-power and
the other by steam engines. A horse capstan boat carries according to size
150 to 200 horses, which are stabled in the hold. On deck a number of
horse gears are arranged at which the horses work. The power of the
separate gears is transmitted to a main shaft, which is connected to the
drums that wind on the rope. The horses work under an awning to protect
them from the burning sunshine, and are changed every three hours. Eight
and sometimes ten horses work at each horse gear. The horses are changed
without interruption of the work, the gears being disengaged from the main
shaft in rotation and the horses taken out and put in while the gear is
standing. The horses are bought at the place of departure in the south of
Russia and resold at the destination, usually Nishny-Novgorod, at a fair
profit, the capstan boat carrying fodder and provender for the attendants.
The capstan is accompanied by a steam launch which carries the anchor and
hawser forward in advance of the capstan. The latter has a diameter of as
much as 5 in., and is two to three miles in length. The anchor is dropped
by the tug and the hawser carried back to the capstan, where it is
attached to one of the rope drums, and the boat with the barges attached
to it towed along by the horse gears described above winding on the
hawser. The advance continues without interruption day and night, the
launch taking a second anchor and hawser forward and dropping the anchor
in advance of the first by a hawser's length, so that when the capstan has
wound up the first hawser it finds a second one ready for attachment to
the rope drum. The launch receives the first hawser, picks up the anchor,
and passes the capstan to drop it again in advance of the anchor
previously placed, and carries the hawser back to the capstan, and so on.
A capstan tows twelve or more barges, placed in twos or threes beside and
close behind each other, with a load of a million pounds, or about 16,000
to 17,000 tons. From Astrachan and the mouth of the Kama the capstans make
during the season from the beginning of May to the end of July in the most
favorable case two journeys to the fair of Nishny-Novgorod; after this
time no more journeys are made, as the freights are wanting. At the end of
the up-stream journey the horses are sold, as mentioned before, and the
capstan towed down stream by the steam launch to Astrachan or the Kama
mouth, where meanwhile a fresh lot of barges has been loaded and got
ready, a new supply of horses is bought, and the operation repeated.

Besides these horse capstans there are steam capstans which are less
complicated and have condensing steam engines of about 100 horse power,
the power being transmitted by gearing to the rope drum. The rope drum
shaft projects on both sides beyond the boards of the boat, and for the
return journey paddle wheels, are put on to assist the launch in towing
the clumsy and big capstan boat down the river. The steam capstans tow
considerably larger masses of goods than the horse capstans and also
travel somewhat quicker, so that the launch has scarcely sufficient time
to drop and raise the anchors and also to make double the journey. We do
not doubt that this system of towage might with suitable modifications be
advantageously employed on the large rivers in America and elsewhere for
the slow transport of large quantities of raw materials and other bulky
merchandise, a low speed being, as is well known, much more economical
than a high speed, as many of the resistances increase as the square and
even higher powers of the velocity.

       *       *       *       *       *




STEAMBOAT EQUIPMENT OF WAR VESSELS.


The larger ships in the navy, and some of the more recent small ones, such
as the new cruisers of the Phaeton class, are fitted with powerful steam
winches of a type made by Messrs. Belliss and Co. These are used for
lifting the pinnaces and torpedo boats.

We give an illustration of one of these winches. The cylinders are 6 in.
in diameter and 10 in. stroke. The barrel is grooved for wire rope, and is
safe to raise the second class steel torpedo boats, weighing nearly 12
tons as lifted. The worm gearing is very carefully cut, so that the work
can be done quietly and safely. With machinery of this kind a boat is soon
put into the water, and as an arrangement is fitted for filling the boat's
boilers with hot water from the ship's boilers, the small craft can be
under way in a very short time from the order being given.

Mr. White is fitting compound engines with outside condensers to boats as
small as 21 ft. long, and we give a view of a pair of compound engines of
a new design, which Messrs. Belliss are making for the boats of this
class. The cylinders are 4 in. and 7 in. in diameter by 5 in. stroke. The
general arrangement is well shown in the engraving. On a trial recently
made, a 25 ft. cutter with this type of engines reached a speed of 7.4
knots.

About three years ago the late Controller of the Navy, Admiral Sir W.
Houston Stewart, wished to ascertain the relative consumption of fuel in
various classes of small vessels. An order was accordingly sent to
Portsmouth, and a series of trials were made. From the official reports of
these we extract the information contained in tables F and G, and we think
the details cannot fail to be of interest to our readers. The run around
the island was made in company with other boats, without stopping, and
observations were taken every half hour. The power given out by the
engines was fairly constant throughout. The distance covered was 56 knots,
and the total amount of fuel consumed, including that required for raising
steam, was 1,218 lb. of coal and 84 lb. of wood. The time taken in raising
steam to 60 lb. pressure was forty-three minutes. The rate of consumption
of fuel is of course not the lowest that could be obtained, as a speed of
over 10 knots is higher than that at which the machinery could be worked
most economically.

[Illustration: STEAM WINCH FOR HOISTING AND LOWERING PINNACLES AND
TORPEDO BOATS.]

The trials afterward made to find the best results that could be obtained
in fuel consumption were rather spoiled by the roughness of the weather on
the day they were made. The same boat was run for 10 miles around the
measured mile buoys in Stokes Bay. The following are some of the results
recorded:

_Table F.--Report of Trials of Engines of H.M. 48 ft.
Twin Screw Steam Pinnace, No. 110._

Date                                           August 4, 1881.

Where tried                                    Round the Isle of
                                                   Wight

Draught of water / Forward                       3 ft. 1/2 in.
                 \ Aft                           3 ft. 61/2 in.
Average boiler pressure                          104.81 lb.
Average pressure in receivers   / Starboard       16.27  "
                                \ Port            16.54  "
Mean air pressure in stokehold                   1.4 in. water.
Vacuum in condenser, average                      26.72 in.
Weather barometer                                 30.37  "
Revolutions per minute    / Starboard            240.75
                          \ Port                 251.95
                                                    lb.
Mean pressure in cylinders / Starboard / High     45.33
                           |           \ Low      16.16
                           \ Port      / High     43.16
                                       \ Low      15.3
Indicated horse-power      / Starboard / High     18.20
                           |           \ Low      16.32
                           | Port      / High     18.13
                           |           \ Low      16.17
