He advanced, holding out his hand.

"Captain de Saint-Avit. Delighted, my dear fellow."

At the same time Chatelain appeared on the threshold.

"Sergeant," said the newcomer, "I cannot congratulate you on the
little I have seen. There is not a camel saddle which is not in want
of buckles, and they are rusty enough to suggest that it rains at
Hassi-Inifel three hundred days in the year. Furthermore, where were
you this afternoon? Among the four Frenchmen who compose the post, I
found only on my arrival one convict, opposite a quart of eau-de-vie.
We will change all that, I hope. At ease."

"Captain," I said, and my voice was colorless, while Chatelain
remained frozen at attention, "I must tell you that the Sergeant was
with me, that it is I who am responsible for his absence from the
post, that he is an irreproachable non-commissioned officer from every
point of view, and that if we had been warned of your arrival--"

"Evidently," he said, with a coldly ironical smile. "Also, Lieutenant,
I have no intention of holding him responsible for the negligences
which attach to your office. He is not obliged to know that the
officer who abandons a post like Hassi-Inifel, if it is only for two
hours, risks not finding much left on his return. The Chaamba
brigands, my dear sir, love firearms, and for the sake of the sixty
muskets in your racks, I am sure they would not scruple to make an
officer, whose otherwise excellent record is well known to me, account
for his absence to a court-martial. Come with me, if you please. We
will finish the little inspection I began too rapidly a little while
ago."

He was already on the stairs. I followed in his footsteps. Chatelain
closed the order of march. I heard him murmuring, in a tone which you
can imagine:

"Well, we are in for it now!"




II

CAPTAIN DE SAINT-AVIT


A few days sufficed to convince us that Chatelain's fears as to our
official relations with the new chief were vain. Often I have thought
that by the severity he showed at our first encounter Saint-Avit
wished to create a formal barrier, to show us that he knew how to keep
his head high in spite of the weight of his heavy past. Certain it is
that the day after his arrival, he showed himself in a very different
light, even complimenting the Sergeant on the upkeep of the post and
the instruction of the men. To me he was charming.

"We are of the same class, aren't we?" he said to me. "I don't have
to ask you to dispense with formalities, it is your right."

Vain marks of confidence, alas! False witnesses to a freedom of
spirit, one in face of the other. What more accessible in appearance
than the immense Sahara, open to all those who are willing to be
engulfed by it? Yet what is more secret? After six months of
companionship, of communion of life such as only a Post in the South
offers, I ask myself if the most extraordinary of my adventures is not
to be leaving to-morrow, toward unsounded solitudes, with a man whose
real thoughts are as unknown to me as these same solitudes, for which
he has succeeded in making me long.

The first surprise which was given me by this singular companion was
occasioned by the baggage that followed him.

On his inopportune arrival, alone, from Wargla, he had trusted to the
Mehari he rode only what can be carried without harm by such a
delicate beast,--his arms, sabre and revolver, a heavy carbine, and a
very reduced pack. The rest did not arrive till fifteen days later,
with the convoy which supplied the post.

Three cases of respectable dimensions were carried one after another
to the Captain's room, and the grimaces of the porters said enough as
to their weight.

I discreetly left Saint-Avit to his unpacking and began opening the
mail which the convoy had sent me.

He returned to the office a little later and glanced at the several
reviews which I had just recieved.

"So," he said. "You take these."

He skimmed through, as he spoke, the last number of the _Zeitschrift
der Gesellschaft fur Erdkunde in Berlin_.

"Yes," I answered. "These gentlemen are kind enough to interest
themselves in my works on the geology of the Wadi Mia and the high
Igharghar."

"That may be useful to me," he murmured, continuing to turn over the
leaves.

"It's at your service."

"Thanks. I am afraid I have nothing to offer you in exchange, except
Pliny, perhaps. And still--you know what he said of Igharghar,
according to King Juba. However, come help me put my traps in place
and you will see if anything appeals to you."

I accepted without further urging.

We commenced by unearthing various meteorological and astronomical
instruments--the thermometers of Baudin, Salleron, Fastre, an aneroid,
a Fortin barometer, chronometers, a sextant, an astronomical spyglass,
a compass glass.... In short, what Duveyrier calls the material that
is simplest and easiest to transport on a camel.

As Saint-Avit handed them to me I arranged them on the only table in
the room.

"Now," he announced to me, "there is nothing more but books. I will
pass them to you. Pile them up in a corner until I can have a
book-shelf made."

For two hours altogether I helped him to heap up a real library. And
what a library! Such as never before a post in the South had seen. All
the texts consecrated, under whatever titles, by antiquity to the
regions of the Sahara were reunited between the four rough-cast walls
of that little room of the bordj. Herodotus and Pliny, naturally, and
likewise Strabo and Ptolemy, Pomponius Mela, and Ammien Marcellin. But
besides these names which reassured my ignorance a little, I perceived
those of Corippus, of Paul Orose, of Eratosthenes, of Photius, of
Diodorus of Sicily, of Solon, of Dion Cassius, of Isidor of Seville,
of Martin de Tyre, of Ethicus, of Athenee, the _Scriptores Historiae
Augustae_, the _Itinerarium Antonini Augusti_, the _Geographi Latini
Minores_ of Riese, the _Geographi Graeci Minores_ of Karl Muller....
Since I have had the occasion to familiarize myself with Agatarchides
of Cos and Artemidorus of Ephesus, but I admit that in this instance
the presence of their dissertations in the saddle bags of a captain of
cavalry caused me some amazement.

I mention further the _Descrittione dell' Africa_ by Leon l'African,
the _Arabian Histories_ of Ibn-Khaldoun, of Al-Iaquob, of El-Bekri, of
Ibn-Batoutah, of Mahommed El-Tounsi.... In the midst of this Babel, I
remember the names of only two volumes of contemporary French
scholars. There were also the laborious theses of Berlioux[3] and of
Schirmer.[4]

[Footnote 3: Doctrina Ptolemaei ab injuria recentiorum vindicata, sive
Nilus Superior et Niger verus, hodiernus Eghiren, ab anitiquis
explorati. Paris, 8vo, 1874, with two maps. (Note by M. Leroux.)]

[Footnote 4: De nomine et genere popularum qui berberi vulgo dicuntur.
Paris, 8vo, 1892. (Note by M. Leroux.)]

While I proceeded to make piles of as similar dimensions as possible I
kept saying to myself:

"To think that I have been believing all this time that in his mission
with Morhange, Saint-Avit was particularly concerned in scientific
observations. Either my memory deceives me strangely or he is riding a
horse of another color. What is sure is that there is nothing for me
in the midst of all this chaos."

He must have read on my face the signs of too apparently expressed
surprise, for he said in a tone in which I divined a tinge of
defiance:

"The choice of these books surprises you a bit?"

"I can't say it surprises me," I replied, "since I don't know the
nature of the work for which you have collected them. In any case I
dare say, without fear of being contradicted, that never before has
officer of the Arabian Office possessed a library in which the
humanities were so, well represented."

He smiled evasively, and that day we pursued the subject no further.

Among Saint-Avit's books I had noticed a voluminous notebook secured
by a strong lock. Several times I surprised him in the act of making
notations in it. When for any reason he was called out of the room he
placed his album carefully in a small cabinet of white wood, provided
by the munificence of the Administration. When he was not writing and
the office did not require his presence, he had the mehari which he
had brought with him saddled, and a few minutes later, from the
terrace of the fortifications, I could see the double silhouette
disappearing with great strides behind a hummock of red earth on the
horizon.

Each time these trips lasted longer. From each he returned in a kind
of exaltation which made me watch him with daily increasing
disquietude during meal hours, the only time we passed quite alone
together.

"Well," I said to myself one day when his remarks had been more
lacking in sequence than usual, "it's no fun being aboard a submarine
when the captain takes opium. What drug can this fellow be taking,
anyway?"

Next day I looked hurriedly through my comrade's drawers. This
inspection, which I believed to be my duty, reassured me momentarily.
"All very good," I thought, "provided he does not carry with him his
capsules and his Pravaz syringe."

I was still in that stage where I could suppose that Andre's
imagination needed artificial stimulants.

Meticulous observation undeceived me. There was nothing suspicious in
this respect. Moreover, he rarely drank and almost never smoked.

And nevertheless, there was no means of denying the increase of his
disquieting feverishness. He returned from his expeditions each time
with his eyes more brilliant. He was paler, more animated, more
irritable.

One evening he left the post about six o'clock, at the end of the
greatest heat of the day. We waited for him all night. My anxiety was
all the stronger because quite recently caravans had brought tidings
of bands of robbers in the neighborhood of the post.

At dawn he had not returned. He did not come before midday. His camel
collapsed under him, rather than knelt.

He realized that he must excuse himself, but he waited till we were
alone at lunch.

"I am so sorry to have caused you any anxiety. But the dunes were so
beautiful under the moon! I let myself be carried farther and
farther...."

"I have no reproaches to make, dear fellow, you are free, and the
chief here. Only allow me to recall to you certain warnings concerning
the Chaamba brigands, and the misfortunes that might arise from a
Commandant of a post absenting himself too long."

He smiled.

"I don't dislike such evidence of a good memory," he said simply.

He was in excellent, too excellent spirits.

"Don't blame me. I set out for a short ride as usual. Then, the moon
rose. And then, I recognized the country. It is just where, twenty
years ago next November, Flatters followed the way to his destiny in
an exaltation which the certainty of not returning made keener and
more intense."

"Strange state of mind for a chief of an expedition," I murmured.

"Say nothing against Flatters. No man ever loved the desert as he
did ... even to dying of it."

"Palat and Douls, among many others, have loved it as much," I
answered. "But they were alone when they exposed themselves to it.
Responsible only for their own lives, they were free. Flatters, on the
other hand, was responsible for sixty lives. And you cannot deny that
he allowed his whole party to be massacred."

The words were hardly out of my lips before I regretted them, I
thought of Chatelain's story, of the officers' club at Sfax, where
they avoided like the plague any kind of conversation which might lead
their thoughts toward a certain Morhange-Saint-Avit mission.

Happily I observed that my companion was not listening. His brilliant
eyes were far away.

"What was your first garrison?" he asked suddenly.

"Auxonne."

He gave an unnatural laugh.

"Auxonne. Province of the Cote d'Or. District of Dijon. Six thousand
inhabitants. P.L.M. Railway. Drill school and review. The Colonel's
wife receives Thursdays, and the Major's on Saturdays. Leaves every
Sunday,--the first of the month to Paris, the three others to Dijon.
That explains your Judgment of Flatters.

"For my part, my dear fellow, my first garrison was at Boghar. I
arrived there one morning in October, a second lieutenant, aged
twenty, of the First African Batallion, the white chevron on my black
sleeve.... Sun stripe, as the _bagnards_ say in speaking of their
grades. Boghar! Two days before, from the bridge of the steamer, I had
begun to see the shores of Africa. I pity all those who, when they see
those pale cliffs for the first time, do not feel a great leap at
their hearts, at the thought that this land prolongs itself thousands
and thousands of leagues.... I was little more than a child, I had
plenty of money. I was ahead of schedule. I could have stopped three
or four days at Algiers to amuse myself. Instead I took the train that
same evening for Berroughia.

"There, scarcely a hundred kilometers from Algiers, the railway
stopped. Going in a straight line you won't find another until you get
to the Cape. The diligence travels at night on account of the heat.
When we came to the hills I got out and walked beside the carriage,
straining for the sensation, in this new atmosphere, of the kiss of
the outlying desert.

"About midnight, at the Camp of the Zouaves, a humble post on the road
embankment, overlooking a dry valley whence rose the feverish perfume
of oleander, we changed horses. They had there a troop of convicts and
impressed laborers, under escort of riflemen and convoys to the
quarries in the South. In part, rogues in uniform, from the jails of
Algiers and Douara,--without arms, of course; the others
civilians--such civilians! this year's recruits, the young bullies of
the Chapelle and the Goutte-d'Or.

"They left before we did. Then the diligence caught up with them. From
