
But he was doomed to disappointment. There was not a familiar detail.
Outside of a network of curved lines indicating latitude and longitude,
and the accustomed tilt of the polar axis, the globe was totally
strange! So strange that Chick could not decide which was water and
which land.

After a bit of puzzling Chick ran across a yellow patch marked with
some strange characters which, upon examination, were translated in some
unknown manner within his subconscious mind, to "D'Hartia." Another was
lettered "Kospia."

Assuming that these were land--and there were a few other, smaller ones,
of the same shade--then the land area covered approximately three-fifths
of the globe. Inferentially the green remainder, or two-fifths, was the
water or ocean covered area. Such a proportion was nearly the precise
reverse of that obtaining on the earth. Chick puzzled over other strange
names--H'Alara, Mal Somnal, Bloudou San, and the like. Not one name or
outline that he could place!

How could he make his discovery fit with the words of Dr. Holcomb, and
with what philosophy he knew? Somehow there was too much life, too much
reality, to fit in with any spiritistic hypothesis. He was surrounded by
real matter, atomic, molecular, cellular. He was certain that if he were
put to it he could prove right here every law from those put forth by
Newton to the present.

It was still the material universe; that was certain. Therefor it was
equally certain that the doctor had made a most prodigious discovery.
But--what was it? What was the law that had fallen out of the Blind
Spot?

He gave it up, and stepped to one of the suite's numerous windows.
They were all provided with clear glass. Now was his opportunity for an
uninterrupted, leisurely survey of the world about him.

As before, he noted the maze of splendid, dazzling opalescence, all the
colours of the spectrum blending, weaving, vibrant, like a vast plain
of smooth, Gargantuan jewels. Then he made out innumerable round domes,
spread out in rows and in curves, without seeming order or system;
BUILDINGS, every roof a perfect gleaming dome, its surface fairly alive
with the reflected light of that amazing sun. Of such was the landscape
made.

As before, he could hear the incessant undertone of vague music, of
rhythmical, shimmering and whispering sound. And the whole air was laden
with the hint of sweet scents; tinged with the perfume of attar and
myrrh--of a most delicate ambrosia.

He opened the window.

For a moment he stood still, the air bathing his face, the unknown
fragrance filling his nostrils. The whole world seemed thrumming with
that hitherto faint quiver of sound. Now it was resonant and strong,
though still only an undertone. He looked below him; as he did so,
something dropped from the side of the window opening--a long, delicate
tendril, sinuous and alive. It touched his face, and then--It drooped,
drooped like a wounded thing. He reached out his hand and plucked it,
wondering. And he found, at its tip, a floating crimson blossom as
delicate as the frailest cobweb, so inconceivably delicate that it
wilted and crumbled at the slightest touch.

Chick thrust his head out of the window. The whole building, from ground
to dome, was covered--waving, moving, tenuous, a maze of colour--with
orchids!

He had never dreamed of anything so beautiful, or so splendid.
Everywhere these orchids; to give them the name nearest to the unknown
one. As far as he could see, living beauty!

And then he noticed something stranger still.

From the petals and the foliage about him, little clouds of colour
wafted up, like mists of perfume, forever rising and intermittently
settling. It was mysteriously harmonious, continuous--like life itself.
Chick looked closer, and listened. And then he knew.

These mists were clouds of tiny, multi-coloured insects.

He looked down farther, into the streets. They were teeming with life,
with motion. He was in a city whose size made it a true metropolis.
All the buildings were large, and, although of unfamiliar architecture,
undeniably of a refined, advanced art. Without exception, their roofs
were domed. Hence the effect of a sea of bubbles.

Directly below, straight down from his window, was a very broad street.
From it at varying angles ran a number of intersecting avenues. The
height of his window was great--he looked very closely, and made out
two lines of colour lining and outlining the street surrounding the
apartments.

On the one side the line was blue, on the other crimson; they were
guards. And where the various avenues intersected cables must have
been stretched; for these streets were packed and jammed with a surging
multitude, which the guards seemed engaged in holding back. As far up
the avenues as Chick could see, the seething mass of fellow creatures
extended, a gently pulsing vari-coloured potential commotion.

As he looked one of the packed streets broke into confusion. He could
see the guards wheeling and running into formation; from behind, other
platoons rushed up reinforcements. The great crowd was rolling forward,
breaking on the edge of the spear-armed guards like the surf of a
rolling sea.

Chick had a sudden thought. Were they not looking up at his window? He
could glimpse arms uplifted and hands pointed. Even the guards, those
held in reserve, looked up. Then--such was the distance--the rumble of
the mob reached his ears; at the same time, spreading like a grass fire,
the commotion broke out in another street, to another and another, until
the air was filled with the new undertone of countless human tongues.

Chick was fascinated. The thing was over-strange. While he looked and
listened the whole scene turned to conflict; the voice of the throng
became ominous. The guards still held the cables, still beat back the
populace. Could they hold out, wondered Chick idly; and what was it all
about?

Something touched his shoulder. He wheeled. One of the tall,
red-uniformed guards was standing beside him. Watson instinctively drew
back, and as he did so the other stepped forward, touched the snap, and
closed the window.

"What's the idea? I was just getting interested!"

The soldier nodded pleasantly, respectfully--reverently.

"Orders from below, my lord. Were you to remain at that window it would
take all the guards in the Mahovisal to keep back the Thomahlians."

"Why?" Chick was astonished.

"There are a million pilgrims in the city, my lord, who have waited
months for just one glimpse of you."

Watson considered. This was a new and a dazing aspect of the affair.
Evidently the expression on his face told the soldier that some
explanation would not be amiss.

"The pilgrims are almost innumerable, my lord. They are all of the one
great faith. They are, my lord, the true believers, the believers in the
Day."

The Day! Instantly Watson recalled Senestro's use of the expression. He
sensed a valuable clue. He caught and held the soldier's eye.

"Tell me," commanded Chick. "What is this Day of which you speak!"




XXXVI

AN ALLY, AND SOLID GROUND


The soldier replied unhesitatingly: "It is the Day of Life, my lord.
Others call it the 'first of the Sixteen Days.' Still others, simply the
Day of the Prophet, or Jarados."

"When will it be?"

"Soon. It is but two days hence. And with the going down of the sun on
that day the Fulfilment is to begin, and the Life is to come. Hence the
crowd below, my lord; yet they are nothing compared with the crowds that
today are pressing their way from all D'Hartia and Kospia towards the
Mahovisal."

"All because of the Day?"

"And to see YOU, my lord."

"All believers in the Jarados?"

"All truly; but they do not all believe in your lordship. There are
many sects, including the Bars, that consider you an imposter; but the
rest--perhaps the most--believe you the Herald of the Day. All want to
see you, for whatever motive."

"These Bars; who are they?"

"The military priesthood, my lord. As priests they teach a literal
interpretation of the prophecy; as soldiers they maintain their own
aggrandisement. To be more specific, my lord, it is they who accuse you
of being one of the false ones."

"Why?"

"Because it is written in the prophecy, my lord, that we may expect
impostors, and that we are to slay them."

"Then this coming contest with the Senestro--" beginning to sense the
drift of things.

"Yes, my lord; it will be a physical contest, in which the best man
destroys the other!"

The guard was a tall, finely made and truly handsome chap of perhaps
thirty-five. Watson liked the clear blue of his eyes and the openness
of his manner. At the same time he felt that he was being weighed and
balanced.

"My lord is not afraid?"

"Not at all! I was just thinking--when does this kill take place?"

"Two days hence, my lord; on the first of the Sixteen Sacred Days."

And thus Chick found a staunch friend. The soldier's name, he learned,
was "the Jan Lucar." He was supreme in command of the royal guards; and
Chick soon came to feel that the man would as cheerfully lay down his
life for him, Watson, as for the queen herself. All told, Chick was able
to store away in his memory a few very important facts:

First, that the Aradna did not like the Senestro.

Second, that the Jan Lucar hated the great Bar because of the prince's
ambition to wed the queen and her cousin, the Nervina; also because of
his selfish, autocratic ways.

Next, that were the Nervina on hand she would thwart the Senestro; for
she was a very learned woman, as advanced as the Rhamda Avec himself.
But that she was a queen first and a scholar afterwards; her motive in
going through the Blind Spot was to take care of the political welfare
of her people, her purposes were as high as Rhamda Avec's, but partook
of statesmanship rather than spirituality.

Finally, that the Rhamdas were perfectly willing for the coming contest
to take place, on the evening of the Day of the Prophet, in the Temple
of the Bell and Leaf.

"Jan Lucar," Watson felt prompted to say, "you need have no fear as to
the outcome of the ordeal, whatever it may be. With your faith in me,
I cannot fail. For the present, I need books, papers, scientific data.
Moreover, I want to see the outside of this building."

The guardsman bowed. "The data is possible, my lord, but as to leaving
the building--I must consult the queen and the Rhamda Geos first."

"But I said MUST" Watson dared to say. "I must go out into your world,
see your cities, your lands, rivers, mountains, before I do aught else.
I must be sure!"

The other bowed again. He was visibly impressed.

"What you ask, my lord, is full of danger. You must not be seen in
the streets--yet. Untold bloodshed would ensue inevitably. To half the
Thomahlians you are sacred, and to the other half an impostor. I repeat,
my lord, that I must see the Geos and the queen."

Another bow and the Jan disappeared, to return in a few moments with the
Geos.

"The Jan has told me, my lord, that you would go out."

"If possible. I want to see your world."

"I think it can be arranged. Is your lordship ready to go?"

"Presently." Watson laid a hand on the big globe he had already puzzled
over. "This represents the Thomahlia?"

"Yes, my lord."

"How long is your day, Geos?"

"Twenty-four hours."

"I mean, how many revolutions in one circuit of the sun, in one
year-circle?"

As he uttered the question Chick held his breath. It had suddenly struck
him that he had touched an extremely definite point. The answer might
PLACE him!

"You mean, my lord, how long is a circle in term of days?"

"Yes!"

"Three hundred and sixty-five and a fraction, my lord."

Watson was dumbfounded. Could there be, in all the universe, another
world with precisely the same revolution period? But he could not afford
to show his concern. He said:

"Tell me, have you a moon?"

"Yes; it has a cycle of about twenty-eight days."

Watson drew a deep breath. Inconceivable though it appeared, he was
still on his own earth. For a moment he pondered, wondering if he had
been caught up in tangle of time-displacement. Could it be that, instead
of living in the present, he had somehow become entangled in the past or
in the future?

If so--and by now he was so accustomed to the unusual that he considered
this staggering possibility with equanimity--if the time coefficient was
at fault, then how to account for the picture of the professor, in that
leaf? Had they both been the victims of a ghastly cosmic joke?

There was but one way to find out.

"Come! Lead the way, Geos; let us take a look at your world!"




XXXVII

LOOKING DOWN


Presently the three men were standing at the door of a vast room, one
entire side of which was wide open to the outer air. It was filled by a
number of queer, shining objects. At first glance Chick took them to be
immense beetles.

The Jan Lucar spoke to the Geos:

"We had best take the June Bug of the Rhamda Avec."

Watson thought it best to say nothing, show nothing. The Jan ran up to
one of the glistening affairs, and without the slightest noise he spun
it gracefully around, running it out into the centre of the mosaic
floor.

"I presume," apologised the Geos, "that you have much finer aircraft in
your world."

Aircraft! Watson was all eagerness. He saw that the June Bug was about
ten feet high, with a bunchy, buglike body. On closer scrutiny he could
make out the outlines of wings folded tight against the sides. As for
the material, it must have been metal, to use a term which does not
explain very much, after all. In every respect the machine was a
duplicate of some great insect, except that instead of legs it had
well-braced rollers.

"How does it operate?" Watson wanted to know. "That is, what power do
you use, and how do you apply it?"

The Jan Lucar threw back a plate. Watson looked inside, and saw a mass
of fine spider-web threads, softer than the tips of rabbit's hair, all
radiating from a central grey object about the size of a pea. Chick
reached out to touch this thing with his finger.

But the Geos, like a flash, caught him by the shoulder and pulled him
back.

"Pardon me, my lord!" he exclaimed. "But you must not touch it!
You--even you, would be annihilated!" Then to the Lucar: "Very well."

Whereupon the other did something in front of the craft; touched a
lever, perhaps. Instantly the grey, spidery hairs turned to a dull red.

"Now you may touch it," said the Geos.

But Chick's desire had vanished. Instead he ventured a question:

"All very interesting, but where is your machinery?"

The Rhamda was slightly amused. He smiled a little. "You must give us a
little credit, my lord. We must seem backward to you, but we have passed
beyond reliance upon simple machines. That little grey pellet is, of
course, our motive force; it is a highly refined mineral, which we mine
in vast quantity. It has been in use for centuries. As for the hair-like
web, that is our idea of a transmission."

Watson hoped that he did not look as uncomprehending as he felt. The
other continued:

"In aerial locomotion we are content to imitate life as much as
possible. We long ago discarded engines and propellers, and instead
tried to duplicate the muscular and nervous systems of the birds and
insects. We fly exactly as they do; our motive force is intrinsic. In
some respects, we have improved upon life."

"But it is still only a machine, Geos."

"To be sure, my lord; only a machine. Anything without the life
principle must remain so."

The Jan Lucar pressed another catch, allowing another plate to lower
and thereby disclose a glazed door, which opened into a cosy apartment
fitted with wicker chairs, and large enough for four persons. There
was some sort of control gear, which the Jan Lucar explained was not
connected directly with the flying and steering members, but indirectly
through the membranes of the web-like system. It was uncannily similar
to the nervous connections of the cerebellum with the various parts of
the anatomy of an insect.

"Does it travel very fast?"

"We think so, my lord. This is the private machine of the Rhamda Avec.
It is rather small, but the swiftest machine in the Thomahlia."

They entered the compartment, Watson took his seat beside the Geos,
while the soldier sat forward next to the control elements. He laid
his hands on certain levers; next instant, the machine was gliding
noiselessly over the mosaic, on to a short incline and thence, with ever
increasing speed, toward and through the open side of the room.

The slides had all been thrown back; the compartment was enclosed only
in glass. Watson could get a clear view, and he was amazed at the
speed of the craft. Before he could think they were out in mid-air and
ascending skyward. Travelling on a steep slant, there was no vibration,
no mechanical noise; scarcely the suggestion of movement, except for the
muffled swish of the air.

Were it not for the receding city below him, Chick could have imagined
himself sitting in a house while a windstorm tore by. He felt no change
in temperature or any other ill effects; the cabin was fully enclosed,
and heated by some invisible means. In short, ideal flight: for
instance, the seats were swung on gimbals, so that no matter at
what angle the craft might fly, the passengers would maintain level
positions.

Below stretched the Mahovisal--a mighty city of domes and plazas, and,
widely scattered, a few minarets. At the southern end there was a vast,
square plaza, covering thousands of acres. Toward it, on two sides,
converged scores of streets; they stretched away from it like the ribs
of a giant fan. On the remaining two sides there was a tremendously
large building with a V-shaped front, opening on the square. The play
of opal light on its many-bubbled roof resembled the glimmer from a vast
pearl.

In the air above the city an uncountable number of very small objects
darted hither and thither like sparkling fireflies. It was difficult to
realise that they, too, were aircraft.

To the west lay an immense expanse of silver, melting smoothly into the
horizon. Watson took it to be the Thomahlian ocean. Then he looked up at
the sky directly above him, and breathed a quick exclamation.

It was a single, small object, perfectly white, dropping out of the
amethyst. Tiny at first, amost instantly it assumed a proportion nearly
colossal--a great bird, white as the breast of the snowdrift, swooping
with the grace of the eagle and the speed of the wind. It was so very
large that it seemed, to Chick, that if all the other birds he had
ever known were gathered together into one they would still be as the
swallow. Down, down it came in a tremendous spiral, until it gracefully
alighted in a splash of molten colour on the bosom of the silver sea.
For a moment it was lost in a shower of water jewels--and then lay
still, a swan upon the ocean.

"What is it, Geos?"

"The Kospian Limited, my lord. One of our great airships--a fast one, we
consider it."

"It must accommodate a good many people, Rhamda."

"About nine thousand."

"You say it comes from Kospia. How far away is that?"

"About six thousand miles. It is an eight-hour run, with one stop. Just
now the service is every fifteen minutes. They are coming, of course,
