of phases as in Fig. 9, but requiring only four leads instead of
eight. Figs. 11 and 12 correspond with Figs. 7 and 8 and show the
windings for a multipolar motor in the two systems.

[Illustration: FIG. 13.]

[Illustration: FIG. 14.]

[Illustration: FIG. 15.]

These figures show how a motor may be wound so as to be a multiple
phase motor, although the current entering the motor is a simple,
elementary three or two phase current, which can be transformed by
means of a simple three or two phase current transformer, before
entering the motor, such transformers as are used at present in the
Lauffen-Frankfort transmission. But the same principle as that for the
motor may also be applied to transformers themselves, as shown in
Figs. 13 and 14. Fig. 13 shows a set of transformers which are fed by
a simple three-phase current shown in heavy lines, and which gives in
its secondary circuit a multiple phase rotary current. The connections
for the primary circuit of a transformer with six coils are shown
diagrammatically in Fig. 15, the numbers 1 to 6 representing the
succession of the phases. Fig. 14 shows a transformer for a two-phase
current with four leads, transforming into a multiple phase current of
16 leads. The transformer in this figure is a single "interlocked"
transformer in which the fields are magnetically connected and not
independent of each other as in Fig. 13. This has advantages in the
regulation of currents, which do not exist in Fig. 13, but which need
not be entered into here. The transformers used in the Lauffen-Frankfort
transmission are similar, magnetically, to Fig. 14, only that they are
for a simple three-phase current in both primary and secondary
circuits. Attention is also called to the difference in the
connections of secondary circuits in Figs. 13 and 14; in the former
they are connected in a closed circuit similarly to an ordinary closed
circuit armature, while in Fig. 14 they are independent as far as the
currents themselves are concerned, though magnetically their cores are
connected. It is not the intention to enter into a discussion of the
relative values of these various connections, but merely to draw
attention to the wide range of the number of combinations which this
system admits of.--_Electrical World_.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE LONDON PARIS TELEPHONE.[1]

[Footnote 1: Paper read before the British Association.--_Elec.
Engineer._]

By W.H. Preece, F.R.S.


1. I have already on two occasions, at Newcastle and at Leeds, brought
this subject before Section G, and have given the details of the
length and construction of the proposed circuit.

I have now to report not only that the line has been constructed and
opened to the public, but that its success, telephonic and commercial,
has exceeded the most sanguine anticipations. Speech has been
maintained with perfect clearness and accuracy. The line has proved to
be much better than it ought to have been, and the purpose of this
paper is to show the reason why.

The lengths of the different sections of the circuit are as follows:

    London to St. Margaret's Bay                84.5 miles.
    St. Margaret's Bay to Sangatte (cable).     23.0   "
    Sangatte to Paris.                         199.0   "
    Paris underground.                           4.8   "
                                               -----
    Total.                                     311.3   "

The resistances are as follows:

    Paris underground.                  70 ohms.
    French line.                       294  "
    Cable.                             143  "
    English line.                      183  "
                                       ---
    Total (R)                          693  "

The capacities are as follows:

    Paris underground.           0.43 microfarads.
    French line.                 3.33    "
    Cable.                       5.52    "
    English line.                1.32    "
                                 ----
    Total (K).                  10.62    "

               693 x 10.62 = 7,359 = K R

a product which indicates that speech should be very good.


2. _Trials of Apparatus._--The preliminary trials were made during the
month of March between the chief telegraph offices of the two
capitals, and the following microphone transmitters were compared:

    Ader.                            Pencil form.
    Berliner.                        Granular form.
    D'Arsonval.                      Pencil    "
    DeJongh.                           "       "
    Gower Bell.                        "       "
    Post office switch instrument.   Granules and lamp filaments.
    Roulez.                          Lamp filaments.
    Turnbull.                        Pencil form.
    Western Electric.                Granular.

The receivers consisted of the latest form of double-pole Bell
telephones with some Ader and D'Arsonval receivers for comparison.
After repeated trials it was finally decided that the Ader,
D'Arsonval, Gower-Bell (with double-pole receivers instead of tubes),
Roulez, and Western Electric were the best, and were approximately
equal.

These instruments were, therefore, selected for the further
experiments, which consisted of using local extensions in Paris and
London. The wires were in the first instance extended at the Paris end
to the Observatory through an exchange at the Avenue des Gobelines. The
length of this local line is 7 kms. The wires are guttapercha-covered,
placed underground, and not suitable for giving the best results.

The results were, however, fairly satisfactory. The wires were
extended to the Treasury in London by means of the ordinary
underground system. The distance is about two miles, and although the
volume of sound and clearness of articulation were perceptibly reduced
by these additions to the circuit, conversation was quite practicable.

Further trials were also made from the Avenue des Gobelines on
underground wires of five kilometers long, and also with some renters
in Paris with fairly satisfactory results. The selected telephones
were equally efficient in all cases, which proves that to maintain
easy conversation when the trunk wires are extended to local points it
is only necessary that the local lines shall be of a standard not
lower than that of the trunk line. The experiments also confirm the
conclusion that long-distance speaking is solely a question of the
circuit and its environments, and not one of apparatus. The
instruments finally selected for actual work were Gower-Bell for
London and Roulez for Paris.


3. The results are certainly most satisfactory. There is no circuit in
or out of London on which speech is more perfect than it is between
London and Paris. In fact, it is better than I anticipated, and better
than calculation led me to expect. Speech has been possible not only
to Paris but through Paris to Bruxelles, and even, with difficulty,
through Paris to Marseilles, a distance of over 900 miles. The wires
between Paris and Marseilles are massive copper wires specially
erected for telephone business between those important places.


4. _Business Done._--The charge for a conversation between London and
Paris is 8 s. for three minutes' complete use of the wire. The demand
for the wire is very considerable. The average number of talks per
day, exclusive of Sunday, is 86. The maximum has been 108. We have had
as many as 19 per hour--the average is 15 during the busy hours of the
day. As an instance of what can be done, 150 words per minute have
been dictated in Paris and transcribed in London by shorthand writing.
Thus in three minutes 450 words were recorded, which at 8 s. cost five
words for a penny.


5. _Difficulties._--The difficulties met with in long-distance
speaking are several, and they may be divided into (a) those due to
external disturbances and (b) those due to internal opposition.

(_a._) Every current rising and falling in the neighborhood of a
telephone line within a region, say, of 100 yards, whether the wire
conveying it be underground or overground, induces in the telephone
circuit another current, producing in the telephone a sound which
disturbs speech, and if the neighboring wires are numerous and busy,
as they are on our roads and railways, these sounds became confusing,
noisy, and ultimately entirely preventive of speech. This disturbance
is, however, completely removed by forming the telephone circuit of
two wires placed as near to each other as possible, and twisted around
each other without touching, so as to maintain the mean average
distance of each wire from surrounding conductors the same everywhere.
Thus similar currents are induced in each of the two wires, but being
opposite in direction, as far as the circuit is concerned, they
neutralize each other, and the circuit, therefore, becomes quite
silent.

In England we make the two wires revolve completely round each other
in every four poles, but in France it is done in every six poles. The
reason for the change is the fact that in the English plan the actual
crossing of the wires takes place in the span between the poles, while
in the French plan it takes place at the poles. This is supposed to
reduce the liability of the wires to be thrown into contact with each
other by the wind, but, on the other hand, it diminishes the
geometrical symmetry of the wires--so very essential to insure
silence. As a matter of fact, contacts do not occur on well
constructed lines, and I think our English wires, being more
symmetrical, are freer from external disturbance than those in France.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

(_b._) The internal opposition arises from the resistance, R, the
capacity, K, and the electromagnetic inertia, L, of the circuit. A
current of electricity takes time to rise to its maximum strength and
time to fall back again to zero. Every circuit has what is called its
time constant, _t_, Fig. 1, which regulates the number of current
waves which can be transmitted through it per second. This is the time
the current takes to rise from zero to its working maximum, and the
time it takes to fall from this maximum to zero again, shown by the
shaded portions of the figure; the duration of the working current
being immaterial, and shown by the unshaded portion.

The most rapid form of quick telegraphy requires about 150 currents
per second, currents each of which must rise and fall in 1/150 of a
second, but for ordinary telephone speaking we must have about 1,500
currents per second, or the time which each current rises from zero to
its maximum intensity must not exceed 1/3000 part of a second. The
time constant of a telephone circuit should therefore not be less than
0.0003 second.

Resistance alone does not affect the time constant. It diminishes the
intensity or strength of the currents only; but resistance, combined
with electromagnetic inertia and with capacity, has a serious
retarding effect on the rate of rise and fall of the currents. They
increase the time constant and introduce a slowness which may be
called retardance, for they diminish the rate at which currents can be
transmitted. Now the retardance due to electromagnetic inertia
increases directly with the amount of electromagnetic inertia present,
but it diminishes with the amount of resistance of the conductor. It
is expressed by the ratio L/R while that due to capacity increases
directly, both with the capacity and with the resistance, and it is
expressed by the product, K R. The whole retardance, and, therefore,
the speed of working the circuit or the clearness of speech, is given,
by the equation

                 L
                --- + K R = t
                 R

or               L + K R squared = R t

Now in telegraphy we are not able altogether to eliminate L, but we
can counteract it, and if we can make Rt = 0, then

               L = - K R squared

which is the principle of the shunted condenser that has been
introduced with such signal success in our post office service, and
has virtually doubled the carrying capacity of our wires.

                K R = t

This is done in telephony, and hence we obtain the law of retardance,
or the law by which we can calculate the distance to which speech is
possible. All my calculations for the London and Paris line were based
on this law, which experience has shown it to be true.

How is electromagnetic inertia practically eliminated? First, by the
use of two massive copper wires, and secondly by symmetrically
revolving them around each other. Now L depends on the geometry of the
circuit, that is, on the relative form and position of the different
parts of the circuit, which is invariable for the same circuit, and is
represented by a coefficient, [lambda]. It depends also on the
magnetic qualities of the conductors employed and of the space
embraced by the circuit. This specific magnetic capacity is a variable
quantity, and is indicated by [mu] for the conductor and by [mu]_{0}
for air. It depends also on the rate at which currents rise and fall,
and this is indicated by the differential coefficient dC / dt. It
depends finally on the number of lines of force due to its own current
which cut the conductor in the proper direction; this is indicated by
[beta]. Combining these together we can represent the electromagnetic
inertia of a metallic telephone circuit as

      L = [lambda] ([mu] + [mu]_{0}) dC/dt x [beta]

Now, [lambda] = 2 log (d squared/a squared) Hence the smaller we make the distance,
_d_, between the wires, and the greater we make their diameter, _a_,
the smaller becomes [lambda]. It is customary to call the value of
[mu] for air, and copper, 1, but this is purely artificial and
certainly not true. It must be very much less than one in every
medium, excepting the magnetic metals, so much so that in copper it
may be neglected altogether, while in the air it does not matter what
it is, for by the method of twisting one conductor round the other,
the magnetization of the air space by the one current of the circuit
rotating in one direction is exactly neutralized by that of the other
element of the circuit rotating in the opposite direction.

Now, [beta], in two parallel conductors conveying currents of the same
sense, that is flowing in the same direction, is retarding, Fig. 2,
and is therefore a positive quantity, but when the currents flow in
opposite directions, as in a metallic loop, Fig. 3, they tend to
assist each other and are of a negative character. Hence in a metallic
telephone circuit we may neglect L _in toto_ as I have done.

[Illustration: Fig 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

I have never yet succeeded in tracing any evidence of electromagnetic
inertia in long single copper wires, while in iron wires the value of
L may certainly be taken at 0.005 henry per mile.

In short metallic circuits, say of lengths up to 100 miles, this
negative quantity does not appear, but in the Paris-London circuit
this helpful mutual action of opposite currents comes on in a peculiar
way. The presence of the cable introduces a large capacity practically
in the center of the circuit. The result is that we have in each
branch of the circuit between the transmitter, say, at London and the
cable at Dover, extra currents at the commencement of the operation,
which, flowing in opposite directions, mutually react on each other,
and practically prepare the way for the working currents. The presence
of these currents proved by the fact that when the cable is
disconnected at Calais, as shown in Fig. 5, and telephones are
inserted in series, as shown at D and D', speech is as perfect between
London and St. Margaret's Bay as if the wires were connected across,
or as if the circuit were through to Paris. Their effect is precisely
the same as though the capacity of the aerial section were reduced by
a quantity, M, which is of the same dimension or character as K.
Hence, our retardance equation becomes

                            R (K - M) = t

[Illustration: Fig 4.]

[Illustration: Fig 5.]

Thus it happens that the London-Paris telephone works better than was
expected. The nature of M is probably equivalent to about 0.0075 [phi]
per mile, and therefore K should be also about 0.0075 [phi] instead of
0.0156 [phi] per mile. This helpful action of mutual induction is
present in all long circuits, and it is the reason why we were able to
speak to Brussels and even to Marseilles. It also appears in every
metallic loop, and vitiates the measurements of electromagnetic
inertia and of capacity of loops. Thus, if we measure the capacity of
a loop as compared with a single wire, the amount per mile may be 50
per cent. greater than it ought to be; while if we measure the
capacity of one branch of a circuit under the conditions of the
London-Paris telephone line, it may be 50 per cent. less than it ought
to be. This effect of M is shown by the dotted line in Fig. 1.

Telephonic currents--that is, currents induced in the secondary wire
of an induction coil due to the variation of microphonic currents in
the primary wire--are not alternating currents. They do not follow the
constant periodic law, and they are not true harmonic sine functions
of the time. The microphonic currents are intermittent or pulsatory,
and always flow in the same direction. The secondary currents are also
always of the same sign, as are the currents in a Ruhmkorff coil, and
as are the currents in high vacua with which Crookes has made us so
familiar. Moreover, the frequency of these currents is a very variable
quantity, not only due to the various tones of voices, but to the
various styles of articulation. Hence the laws of periodic alternate
currents following the sine function of the time fail when we come to
consider microphones and telephones. It is important to bear this in
mind, for nearly everything that has hitherto been written on the
subject assumes that telegraphic currents follow the periodic sine
law. The currents derived from Bell's original magneto-transmitters
are alternate, and comply more nearly with the law. The difference
between them and microphones is at once perceptible. Muffling and
disturbance due to the presence of electromagnetic inertia become
evident, which are absent with microphones. I tested this between
London and St. Margaret's, and found the effect most marked.

7. _Lightning._--A metallic telephone circuit may have a static charge
induced upon it by a thunder cloud, as shown in Fig. 6. Such a charge
is an electric strain which is released when the charged cloud flashes
into the earth or into a neighboring cloud. If there be
electromagnetic inertia present, the charge will surge backward and
forward through the circuit until it dies out. If there be no E.M.F.
present it will cease suddenly, and neutrality will be attained at
once. Telephone circuits indicate the operation by peculiar and
characteristic sounds. An iron wire circuit produces a long swish or
sigh, but a copper wire circuit like the Paris-London telephone emits
a short, sharp report, like the crack of a pistol, which is sometimes
startling, and has created fear, but there is no danger or liability
to shock. Indeed, the start has more than once thrown the listener off
his stool, and has led to the belief that he was knocked down by
lightning.

[Illustration: Fig 6.]

8. The future of telephone working, especially in large cities, is one
of underground wires, and the way to get over the difficulties of this
kind of work is perfectly clear. We must have metallic circuits,
twisted wires, low resistance, and low capacity. In Paris a remarkable
cable, made by Fortin-Herman, gives an exceedingly low capacity--viz.,
only 0.069 [phi] per mile. In the United States they are using a wire
insulated with paper which gives 0.08 [phi] per mile. We are using in
London Fowler-Waring cable giving a capacity of 1.8 [phi] per mile,
the capacity of gutta-covered wire being 3 [phi] per mile.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE MANUFACTURE OF PHOSPHORUS BY ELECTRICITY.


One of the most interesting of the modern applications of electricity
to the manufacture of chemicals is to be found in the recently
perfected process known as the Readman-Parker process, after the
inventors Dr. J.B. Readman, F.R.S.E., etc., of Edinburgh, and Mr.
Thomas Parker; the well known practical electrician, of Wolverhampton.

Before giving an account of this process, which has advanced beyond
the experimental to the industrial stage, it may be well to recall the
fact that for several years past Dr. Readman has been devoting an
enormous expenditure of labor, time and money to the perfection of a
process which shall cheapen the production of phosphorus by dispensing
altogether with the use of sulphuric acid for decomposing the
phosphate of lime which forms the raw material of the phosphorus
manufacturer, and also with the employment of fire clay retorts for
distilling the desiccated mixture of phosphoric acid and carbon which
usually forms the second stage of the operation.

The success of the recent applications of electricity in the
production of certain metals and alloys led Dr. Readman to try this
source of energy in the manufacture of phosphorus, and the results of
the first series of experiments were so encouraging that he took out
provisional protection on October 18, 1888, for preparing this
valuable substance by its means.

The experiments were carried on at this time on a very small scale,
the power at disposal being very limited in amount. Yet the elements
of success appeared to be so great, and the decomposition of the raw
material was so complete, that the process was very soon prosecuted on
the large scale.

After a good deal of negotiation with several firms that were in a
position to supply the electric energy required, Dr. Readman finally
made arrangements with the directors of the Cowles Company, limited,
of Milton, near Stoke-on-Trent, the well known manufacturers of alloys
of aluminum, for a lease of a portion of their works and for the use
of the entire electrical energy they produced for certain portions of
the day.

The experiments on the large scale had not advanced very far before
Dr. Readman became aware that another application for letters patent
for producing phosphorus had been made by Mr. Thomas Parker, of
Wolverhampton, and his chemist, Mr. A.E. Robinson. Their joint patent
is dated December 5, 1888, and was thus applied for only seven weeks
after Dr. Readman's application had been lodged.

It appeared that Mr. Parker had conducted a number of experiments
simultaneously but quite independently of those carried on by Dr.
Readman, and that he was quite unaware--as the latter was unaware--of
any other worker in this field. It was no small surprise, therefore,
to find during an interview which took place between these rival
inventors some time after the date referred to, that the two patents
were on practically the same lines, namely, the production of
phosphorus by electricity.

Their interests lay so much together that, after some delay, they
arranged to jointly work out the process, and the result has been the
formation of a preliminary company and the erection on a large scale
of experimental plant in the neighborhood of Wolverhampton to prove
the commercial success of the new system of manufacturing phosphorus.

Before describing these experimental works it may be as well to see
with what plant Dr. Readman has been working at the Cowles Company's
works. And here we may remark that we are indebted to a paper read by
Dr. Readman at the Philosophical Institution, Edinburgh, a short time
ago; this paper being the third of a series which during the last year
or two have been read by the same scientist on this branch of chemical
industry. Here is an abstract giving a description of the plant. The
works are near the Milton Station, on the North Staffordshire Railway.
The boilers for generating the steam required are of the
Babcock-Wilcox type, and are provided with "mechanical stokers;" the
steam engine is of 600 horse power, and is a compound condensing
horizontal tandem, made by Messrs. Pollitt & Wigzel, of Sowerby
Bridge. The fly wheel of this engine is 20 feet in diameter, and
weighs 30 tons, and is geared to the pulley of the dynamo, so that the
latter makes five revolutions for each revolution of the engine by
rope driving gear, consisting of eighteen ropes. The engine is an
extremely fine specimen of a modern steam engine; it works so silently
that a visitor standing with his back to the engine railings, at the
time the engine is being started, cannot tell whether it is in motion
or not.

With regard to the dynamo, the spindle is of steel, 18 feet long, with
three bearings, one being placed on either side of the driving pulley.
The diameter is 7 inches in the bearings and 10 inches in the part
within the core. This part in the original forgings was 14 inches in
diameter, and was planed longitudinally, so as to leave four
projecting ribs or radial bars on which the core disks are driven,
each disk having four key ways corresponding to these ribs. There are
about 900 of these disks, the external diameter being 20 inches and
the total length of the core 36 inches.

The armature winding consists of 128 copper bars, each 7/8 in. deep,
measured radially, by 3/8 in. wide. These bars are coupled up so as to
form thirty-two conductors only; this arrangement has been adopted to
avoid the heating from the Foucault currents, which, with 11/2 in.
conductors, would have been very considerable. The bars are coupled at
the ends of the core across a certain chord and are insulated.

The commutator is 20 inches long, and has sixty-four parts. The
current is collected by eight brushes mounted on a separate ring,
placed concentric to the commutator; and the current is led away from
these brushes by a large number of thin bands of sheet copper strapped
together into convenient groups. The field magnets are of the
horizontal double type.

As this machine is virtually a series wound machine, the magnet coils
each consist of a few turns only of forged copper bars, 11/2 in. wide by
1 in. thick, forged to fit the magnet cores.

There is no insulation other than mica wedges to keep the bars from
touching the core.

The dynamo furnishes a current of about 5,000 amperes, with an E.M.F.
of 50 to 60 volts, and three years ago was claimed to be the largest
machine, at least as regards quantity of current, in the world.

The current from the dynamos is led by copper bars to an enormous "cut
out," calculated to fuse at 8,000 amperes. This is probably one of the
largest ever designed, and consists of a framework carrying twelve
lead plates, each 31/2 in. x 1/16th in. thick. A current indicator is
inserted in the circuit consisting of a solenoid of nine turns. The
range of this indicator is such that the center circle of 360 deg.=8,000
amperes.

The electrodes consisted of a bundle of nine carbons, each 21/2 in. in
