point is apt to be neglected. It is also a well known fact that the
process of reaming by hand is not a difficult or a slow one. The
drilling of the hole requires the greatest amount of work. After this
has been done it is a simple matter to cut the V-shaped grooves. The
reamer should be applied at the center, that is, the grooves should be
cut on the axis or full diameter of the hole. The gauge of the reamer
should be at least 11/2 diameters. Great care should be taken that the
reamer does not twist, as the break may be thereby deflected; and the
reaming must be done also to the full depth of the hole.

The hole is now ready for charging. The powder should be a low
explosive, like black or Judson powder or other explosives which act
slowly. No definite rule can be laid down as to the amount of powder
to be used, but it should be as small as possible. Very little powder
is required in most rocks. Hard and fine grained stone requires less
powder than soft stone. Mr. Knox tells of a case which came under his
observation, where a block of granite "more than 400 tons weight,
split clear in two with 13 oz. of FF powder." He compares this with a
block of sandstone of less than 100 tons weight "barely started with
21/2 lb. of the same grade of powder, and requiring a second shot to
remove it."

It is obvious that enough powder must be inserted in the hole to
produce a force sufficient to move the entire mass of rock on its bed.
In some kinds of stone, notably sandstone, the material is so soft
that it will break when acted upon by the force necessary to shear the
block. In cases of this kind a number of holes should be drilled and
fired simultaneously by the electric battery. In such work it is usual
to put in the holes only 4 or 5 ft. apart. The powder must, of course,
be provided with a fuse or preferably a fulminating cap. It is well to
insert the cap at or near the bottom of the cartridge, as shown in
Figs. 8 and 9.

After the charge the usual thing to do is to insert tamping. In the
improved form of hole the tamping should not he put directly upon the
powder, but an air space should be left, as shown at B, Fig. 8. The
best way to tamp, leaving an air space, is first to insert a wad,
which may be of oakum, hay, grass, paper or other similar material.
The tamping should be placed from 6 to 12 in. below the mouth of the
hole. In some kinds of stone a less distance will suffice, and as much
air space as practicable should intervene between the explosive and
the tamping. If several holes are used on a line they should be
connected in series and blasted by electricity. The effect of the
blast is to make a vertical seam connecting the holes, and the entire
mass of rock is sheared several inches or more.

The philosophy of this new method of blasting is simple, though a
matter of some dispute. The following explanation has been given. See
Fig. 10.

[Illustration: Fig. 10]

"The two surfaces, _a_ and _b_, being of equal area, must receive an
equal amount of the force generated by the conversion of the explosive
into gas. These surfaces being smooth and presenting no angle between
the points, A and B, they furnish no starting point for a fracture,
but at these points the lines meet at a sharp angle including between
them a wedge-shaped space. The gas acting equally in all directions
from the center is forced into the two opposite wedge-shaped spaces,
and the impact being instantaneous the effect is precisely similar to
that of two solid wedges driven from the center by a force equally
prompt and energetic. All rocks possess the property of elasticity in
a greater or less degree, and this principle being excited to the
point of rupture at the points, A and B, the gas enters the crack and
the rock is split in a straight line simply because under the
circumstances it cannot split in any other way."

Another theory which is much the same in substance is then given, and
after some general discussion of the theory of the action of the
forces under the several systems, the paper continues:

The new form of hole is, therefore, almost identical in principle with
the old Portland canister, except that it has the greater advantage of
the V-shaped groove in the rock, which serves as a starting point for
the break. It is also more economical than the Portland canister, in
that it requires less drilling and the waste of stone is less. It is,
therefore, not only more economical than any other system of blasting,
but it is more certain, and in this respect it is vastly superior to
any other blasting system, because stone is valuable, and anything
which adds to the certainty of the break also adds to the profit of
the quarryman.

It is doubtless true that, notwithstanding the greater area of
pressure in the new form of hole, the break would not invariably
follow the prescribed line but for the V-shaped groove which virtually
starts it. A bolt, when strained, will break in the thread whether
this be the smallest section or not, because the thread is the
starting point for the break. A rod of glass is broken with a slight
jar provided a groove has been filed in its surface. Numerous other
instances might be cited to prove the value of the groove. Elasticity
in rock is a pronounced feature, which varies to a greater or less
extent; but it is always more or less present. A sandstone has
recently been found which possesses the property of elasticity to such
an extent that it may be bent like a thin piece of steel. When a blast
is made in the new form of hole the stone is under high tension, and
being elastic it will naturally pull apart on such lines of weakness
as grooves, especially when they are made, as is usually the case in
this system, in a direction at right angles with the lines of least
resistance.

Horizontal holes are frequently put in and artificial beds made by
"lofting." In such cases where the rock has a "rift" parallel with the
bed, one hole about half way through is sufficient for a block about
15 ft. square, but in "liver" rock the holes must be drilled nearly
through the block and the size of the block first reduced.

A more difficult application of the system, and one requiring greater
care in its successful use, is where the block of stone is so situated
that both ends are not free, one of them being solidly fixed in the
quarry wall. A simple illustration of a case of this kind is a stone
step on a stairway which leads up and along a wall, Fig. 11. Each step
has one end fixed to the wall and the other free. Each step is also
free on top, on the bottom and on the face, but fixed at the back. We
now put one of the new form of holes in the corner at the junction of
the step and the wall. The shape of the hole is as shown in Fig. 12.

[Illustration: FIG. 11.]

It is here seen that the grooves are at right angles with each other,
and the block of stone is sheared by a break made opposite and
parallel with the bench, as in the previous case, and an additional
break made at right angles with the bench and at the fixed end of the
block. Sometimes a corner break is made by putting in two of the
regular V-shaped holes in the lines of the proposed break and without
the use of the corner hole. A useful application of this system is in
splitting up large masses of loose stone. For this purpose the
V-shaped grooves are sometimes cut in four positions and breaks are
made in four directions radiating from the center of the hole as shown
in Fig. 12. In this way a block is divided into four rectangular
pieces.

[Illustration: FIG. 12.]

Though the new system is especially adapted to the removal of heavy
masses of rock, yet it has been applied with success in cases where
several light beds overlie each other. In one such instance 10 sheets,
measuring in all only 6 ft., were broken by a blast, but in cases of
this kind the plug and feather process applies very well, and the new
system, when used, must be in the hands of an expert, or the loss will
be serious.

Referring again to our stone step, let us imagine a case where this
stairway runs between two walls. We have here each step fixed at each
end and free only on the top, the bottom, and one face. Let us assume
that there is a back seam, that is, that the step is not fixed at the
back. In a quarry, this seam, unless a natural one, should be made by
a channeling machine. In order to throw this step put of place it must
be cut off at both ends, and for this purpose the V-shaped holes are
put in at right angles to the face. It is well, however, to put the
first two holes next the back seam in a position where the grooves
will converge at the back so as to form a sort of key, which serves a
useful purpose in removing the block after the blast. In quarries
where there are no horizontal beds a channeling machine should be used
to free the block on all sides and to a suitable depth, and then the
ledge may be "lofted" by holes placed horizontally.

Where "pressure" exists in quarries, the new system has certain
limitations. After determining the line of "pressure" it is only
practicable to use the system directly on the line of thrust, or at
right angles to it. It is much better, however, to release the
"pressure" from the ledge by channeling, after which a single end may
be detached by a Knox blast. It is well to bear in mind that the holes
should invariably be of small diameter. In no case should the diameter
of a hole be over 11/2 in. in any kind of rock. This being the case, the
blocks of stone are delivered to the market with but little loss in
measurement. It is a noticeable fact that stone quarried by the new
system shows very little evidence of drill marks, for the faces are
frequently as true as though cut with a machine.

A further gain is the safety of the system. The blasting is light and
is confined entirely within the holes. No spalls or fragments are
thrown from the bast.

The popular idea that the system is antagonistic to the channeling
process is a mistaken one. There are, of course, some quarries which
formerly used channeling machines without this system, but which now
do a large part of the work by blasting. Instances, however, are rare
where the system has replaced the channeler. The two go side by side,
and an intelligent use of the new system in most quarries requires a
channeling machine. There are those who may tell of stone that has
been destroyed by a blast on the new system, but investigation usually
shows that either the work was done by an inexperienced operator, or
an effort was made to do too much.

A most interesting illustration of the value of this system, side by
side with the channeler, is shown in the northern Ohio sandstone
quarries. A great many channeling machines are in use there, working
around the new form of holes, and when used together in an intelligent
and careful manner, the stone is quarried more cheaply than by any
other process that has yet been devised.

To a limited extent the system has been used in slate. The difficulty
is that most of the slate quarries are in solid ledges, where no free
faces or beds exist; but it has been used with success in a slate
quarry at Cherryville, Pa., since 1888. Among notable blasts made by
this system are the following: At the mica schist quarries, at
Conshohocken, Pa., a hole 11/2 in. in diameter was drilled in a block
which was 27 ft. long, 15 ft. wide and 6 ft. thick. The blast broke
the stone across the "rift," only 8 oz. of black powder being used. At
the Portland, Conn., quarries a single blast was fired by electricity,
15 holes being drilled with 2 lb. of coarse No. C powder in each hole,
and a rock was removed 110 ft. long, 20 ft. wide and 11 ft. thick,
containing 24,200 cu. ft., or about 2,400 tons, the fracture being
perfectly straight. This large mass of stone was moved out about 2 in.
without injury to itself or the adjoining rock.

Another blast at Portland removed 3,300 tons a distance of 4 in.
Seventeen holes were drilled, using 2 lb. of powder in each hole, the
size of the block being 150 x 20 x 11 ft. In a Lisbon, O., quarry a
block of sandstone 200 ft. long, 28 ft. wide and 15 ft. thick was
moved about 1/2 in. by a blast. This block was also afterward cut up by
this system in blocks 6 ft. square. A sandstone bowlder 70 ft. long,
average width 50 ft., average thickness 13 ft., was embedded in the
ground to a depth of about 7 ft. A single hole 8 ft. deep was charged
with 20 oz. of powder and the rock was split in a straight line from
end to end and entirely to the bottom. A ledge of sandstone open on
its face and two ends, 110 x 13 x 8 ft., was moved by a blast about 3
in. without wasting a particle of rock, 8 holes being used, drilled by
three men in just one day, and 15 oz. of powder being used in each
hole. A sandstone ledge, open on the face and end only, 200 x 28 x 15
ft., containing 84,000 cu. ft. stone, was moved 1/2 in. by 25 holes,
each containing 1 lb. of powder.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE TROTTER CURVE RANGER.


This little instrument was exhibited in a somewhat crude state at the
meeting of the British Association at Newcastle in 1889. It has since
been modified in several respects, and improvements suggested by
practical use have been introduced, bringing it into a practical form,
and enabling a much greater accuracy to be attained. The principle is
one which is occasionally employed for setting out circles with a
pocket sextant, viz., the property of a circle that the angle in a
segment is constant. The leading feature of the invention is the
arrangement of scales, which enables the operation of setting put
large curves for railway or other work to be carried out without
requiring any calculations, thereby enabling any intelligent man to
execute work which would otherwise call for a knowledge of the use of
a theodolite and the tables of tangential angles.

[Illustration: FIG. 1--PERSPECTIVE VIEW OF INSTRUMENT MOUNTED ON A
STAFF.]

The instrument is intended to be thoroughly portable; so much so,
indeed, that it is not necessary or even desirable to use a tripod. It
may be held in the hand like a sextant, or may be carried on a light
staff. The general appearance is shown in Fig. 1. It will be seen that
a metal plate, on which two scales are engraved, carries a mirror at
one end and an eye piece at the other. The mirror is mounted on a
metal plate, which is shaped to a peculiar curve. A clamp and slow
motion provide for rapid and for fine adjustment. The eye piece is set
at an angle, and contains a half silvered mirror, the upper portion
being transparent. This allows direct vision along the axis of the eye
piece, and at the same time vision in another direction, after two
reflections, one in the eye piece and the other at the adjustable
mirror. Fig. 2 is an outline plan of the instrument when closed. In
the first form of the instrument only one mirror was provided, but by
the double reflection in the improved pattern, any accidental twisting
of the rod or handle produces no displacement of the images, since the
inclination of one mirror neutralizes the equal and opposite
inclination of the other. No cross line is required with the new
arrangement, since it is only necessary that the two images should
coincide.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--OUTLINE OF INSTRUMENT SHOWING THE PATH OF THE
DIRECT AND OF THE REFLECTED RAY.]

The dotted line A B represents the direct ray, and the line A C D the
reflected one. Fig. 3 shows the different geometrical and
trigonometrical elements of the curve, which can be read upon the
various scales, or to which the instrument may be set. An observer
standing at C sights the point B directly and the point A by
reflection. A staff being set up at each point, he will see them
simultaneously, and in coincidence if the instrument be properly set
for the curve. If any intermediate position be taken up on the curve,
both A and B will be seen in coincidence. If the two rods do not
appear superimposed, the operator must move to the right or the left
until this is the case. The instrument will then be over a point in
the curve. Any number of points at any regular or irregular distances
along the curve can thus be set out. One of the simplest elements
which can be taken as a datum is the ratio of the length of the chord
to the radius, AB/AO, Fig. 3. This being given, the value of the ratio
is found on the straight scale on the body of the instrument, and the
curved plate is moved until the beveled edge cuts the scale at the
desired point. The figure of this curve is a polar curve, whose
equation is _r_ = _a_ +- _b_ sin. 2 [theta], where _a_ is the distance
from the zero graduation to the axis of the mirror, and _b_ is the
length of the scale from zero to 2, and [theta] is the inclination of
the mirror. In the perspective view, Fig. 1, the curved edge cuts the
scale at 1. The instrument being thus set, the following elements may
be read either directly on the scales or by simple arithmetical
calculation:

[Illustration: FIG. 3]

    The radius = 1.

    AB, the chord, read direct on the straight scale.

    AFB, the length of the arc, read direct on the back or under
    surface of the plate.

    FH, the versed sine, read direct on the curved scale.

    ACB, the angle in the segment, read direct on the graduated
    edge.

    EAB, the angle between the chord and the tangent, read direct
    on the graduated edge.

    GAB, the tangential angle = 180 deg. - ACB.

    AOB, the angle at the center = 2GAB.

    AGB, the angle between the tangents = 180 deg. - AOB.

    OAB, the angle between the chord and the radius = EAB - 90
    deg.

               AH_{2}
        GF = --------- - FH.
                HO



The foregoing elements are contained in a very simple diagram, Fig. 4,
which is engraved on the instrument, together with the following
references:

        B = 180 deg. - A.
        C = 2B.
        D = 180 deg. - C.
        E = A - 90.

Only one adjustment is necessary, and this is provided by means of the
screws which fix the inclination of the eyepiece. This is set at such
an angle that the instrument, when closed and reading 90 deg. on the
divided limb, acts as an optical square.

It is not necessary, as in the ordinary method with a theodolite, that
one end of the curve should be visible from the other. If an obstacle
intervenes, all that part of the curve which commands a view of both
ends can be set out, and a ranging rod can be set up at any point of
the curve so found, and the instrument may be reset to complete the
curve.

To set out a tangent to the curve at A, Fig. 3, set up a rod at A and
another at any point C, and take up a position on the curve at some
point between them. Adjust the mirror until the rods are seen
superimposed. Then moving back to A, observe C direct, and set up a
rod at E in the line observed by reflection. Then A E is the tangent
required. Similarly, on completing the setting out of a curve, and
arriving at the end of the chord, the remote end being seen by
reflection, the direction observed along the axis of the eyepiece is
the new tangent.

Any of the angles or other ratios already mentioned may be used for
setting the instrument, but if no data whatever are given, as in the
rough surveys for colonial railways where no previous surveys exist,
it is only necessary to select points through which the curve must
pass, to set up ranging rods either at the extremities of the desired
curve, or at any points thereon, to take up a position on the desired
curve between two rods, and to adjust the instrument until they are
seen in coincidence. The curve can then be set out, and fully marked,
and the elements of the curve can be read on the scales and recorded
for reference.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.--DIAGRAM ENGRAVED ON THE INSTRUMENT.]

Various other cases which may occur in practice can be rapidly met by
one or other of the various scales. Suppose the angle A G B between
the tangents be given, together with the middle point F on the curve,
Fig. 3. Subtract this angle from 180 deg., the difference gives the
angle at the center A O B. Take half this, and set the instrument to
the angle thus found. Walk along the tangent until a rod set up at
some point in the tangent, say E, is seen in coincidence with a rod
set up at B. The position of the instrument then marks the point of
departure A. A rod being placed at A, the first half of the curve may
be set out; or, if B is invisible, the instrument may be reset for the
angle E A B, and the whole curve set out up to B. No cutting of hedges
is necessary, as with theodolite work, for a curve can easily be taken
piece by piece. Inclination of the whole instrument introduces no
appreciable error. If the eye piece be pointed up or down hill, the
instrument is thrown a little to one side or other of the tip of the
staff, but in a plane tangent to the circle. Errors made in setting
out a curve with the Trotter curve ranger are not cumulative, as in
the method of tangential angles with a theodolite. No corrections for
inaccurate hitting of the final rod can occur, for the curve must
necessarily end at that point. It should be observed that the
instrument is not intended to supersede a theodolite, but it has the
great advantage over the older instrument that no assistant or chains
or trigonometrical tables or any knowledge of mathematics are
required. The data being given, by a theodolite or otherwise, an
intelligent platelayer can easily set out the curve, while the trained
engineer proceeds in advance with the theodolite. No time is lost; as
in chaining, since the marks may be made wherever and as often as
convenient. In work where high accuracy is required this instrument is
well adapted for filling in, and where a rough idea of the nature of a
given curve is required, the mirror being adjusted for any three
points upon it, the various elements may be read off on the scales. A
telescope is provided, but the errors not being cumulative, it is
rarely required. The curve ranger weighs 1 lb. 10 oz., and is
manufactured by Messrs. Elliott Bros., St. Martin's Lane, London. It
is the invention of Mr. Alex. P. Trotter, Westminster.--_The
Engineer._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE RAIL SPIKE AND THE LOCOMOTIVE.[1]

  [Footnote 1: Abstract from the History of the Camden and Amboy
  Railroad. By J. Elfreth Watkins, of the National Museum,
  Washington, D.C.]


Early in October, 1830, and shortly after the surveys of the Camden
and Amboy Railroad were completed, Robert L. Stevens (born 1787)
sailed for England, with instructions to order a locomotive and rails
for that road.

At that time no rolling mill in America was able to take a contract
for rolling T rails.

Robert Stevens advocated the use of an all-iron rail in preference to
the wooden rail or stone stringer plated with strap iron, then in use
on one or two short American railroads. At his suggestion, at the last
meeting held before he sailed, after due discussion, the Board of
Directors of the Camden and Amboy Railroad passed a special resolution
authorizing him to obtain the rails he advocated.


ROBERT L. STEVENS INVENTS THE AMERICAN RAIL AND SPIKE.

During the voyage to Liverpool he whiled away the hours on shipboard
by whittling thin wood into shapes of imaginary cross sections until
he finally decided which one was best suited to the needs of the new
road.

He was familiar with the Berkenshaw rail, with which the best English
roads were then being laid, but he saw that, as it required an
expensive chair to hold it in place, it was not adapted to our
country, where metal workers were scarce and iron was dear. He added
the base to the T rail, dispensing with the chair. He also designed
the "hook-headed" spike (which is substantially the railroad spike of
to-day) and the "iron tongue" (which has been developed into the fish
bar), and the rivets (which have been replaced by the bolt and nut) to
complete the joint.

A fac-simile of the letter[2] which he addressed to the English iron
masters a short time after his arrival in London is preserved in the
United States National Museum. It contains a cross section, side
elevation and ground plan of the rail for which he requested bids.

The base of the rail which he first proposed was to be wider where it
was to be attached to the supports than in the intervening spaces.
This was afterward modified, so that the base was made the same width
(three inches) throughout.

  [Footnote 2: This letter reads:

    LIVERPOOL, November 26th, 1830.

    GENTLEMEN,--At what rate will you contract to deliver at
    Liverpool, say from 500 to 600 tons of railway, of the best
    quality of iron rolled to the above pattern in 12 or 16 feet
    lengths, to lap as shown in the drawing, with one hole at each
    end, and the projections on the lower flange at every two
    feet, cash on delivery?

    How soon could you make the first delivery, and at what rate
    per month until the whole is complete? Should the terms suit
    and the work give satisfaction a more extended order is likely
    to follow, as this is but about one-sixth part of the quantity
    required. Please to address your answer (as soon as
