without drinking; but there is danger of taking insufficient water to
hold freely in solution the waste products excreted by the body.

Aerated drinks, except a very few of the best, and non-alcoholic beers and
wines, are generally unwholesome, from their containing preservatives,
foaming powders, artificial flavourings, &c.

Stimulants.--Tea and coffee contain an alkaloid theine, besides volatile
oils, tannin, &c. Cocoa contains the milder alkaloid, theobromine. They
stimulate the heart and nervous systems; tea and coffee have also a
diuretic effect. Formerly they were erroneously thought to lessen tissue
waste. These alkaloids, being purins, are open to the general objections
named elsewhere. Stimulants do not impart energy or force of any kind, but
only call forth reserve strength by exciting the heart, nervous system,
&c., to increased activity. This is followed by a depression which is as
great, generally greater, than the previous stimulation. Except, perhaps,
as an occasional medicine, stimulants, should be avoided. Analysis of
cocoa shows a good proportion of proteids and a very large quantity of
fat. The claim that it is a valuable and nutritious food would only be
true if it could be eaten in such quantities as are other foods (bread,
fruits, &c.). Were this attempted, poisoning would result from the large
quantity of alkaloid. The food value of half a spoonful or thereabouts of
cocoa is insignificant. Certain much advertised cocoa mixtures are
ridiculous in their pretentions, unscientific in preparation, and often
injurious.

Cereals.--The most valuable is wheat, from its proteid being chiefly in
the form known as gluten. From its tenacity, gluten enables a much better
loaf to be produced from wheat than from any other cereal. The outer part
of the grain is the richest in mineral matter and proteid. Wheatmeal bread
shows a considerably higher proteid value than white. A large proportion
of the proteid in the outer coats of the wheat berry is, however, not
digested, and in some experiments the waste has been enough to quite
nullify its seeming advantage over white bread. Coarsely ground, sharp
branny particles in bread irritate the intestines, and cause excessive
waste of nutriment; but finely ground wheatmeal is free from this
objection, and is beneficial in preventing constipation. The comparative
value of white and brown bread has been much discussed; it depends both
on the quality of the bread and the condition of the digestive organs.
Experiments on the digestion of bread and other things, have often been
made on persons unaccustomed to such foods, or the foods have been given
in excessive quantity. To those accustomed to it good wheatmeal bread is
much pleasanter, more satisfying, and better flavoured than white; indeed,
the latter is described as insipid. Most bakers' bread is of
unsatisfactory quality. Flour and bread contain very little fat, the
absence of which is considered a defect. This is remedied by the addition
of butter, fat or oil, or by nuts, &c., which are rich in oil. These may
be mixed with the flour prior to cooking, or used afterwards.

Oats contain a substance called avenin, apparently an alkaloid, which has
an irritating action; the quantity is variable. It is to this that the
so-called heating effect of oatmeal on some persons is due.

Prepared Cereals or Breakfast Foods.--Analyses were made of 34 of these
cereal preparations by Weems and Ellis (Iowa State College Agricultural
Bulletin, 1904). They report that the foods possess no nutritive value in
excess of ordinary food materials; that the claim made for many
pre-digested foods are valueless, and no reliance can be placed on the
statement that they are remedies for any disease.

Oatmeal and other cereals are sold in packets as being partially cooked.
We do not doubt that they have been subjected to a dry heat, but this has
scarcely any effect on their starch and other constituents. The difference
is a mechanical one. In rolled oats the grains are so cracked and broken,
that on boiling with water, the water readily penetrates and more quickly
cooks them throughout. There are other prepared cereal foods, but we doubt
whether they are thoroughly cooked after the short boiling directed on the
labels. They are a great convenience where it is difficult to get the time
necessary for cooking the ordinary cereals. Coarsely ground wheat is too
irritating when made into porridge, but there are some granulated wheats
sold in packets, which are quite suitable. The Ralston breakfast food is
excellent. They are rich in the phosphates and salts, found in the outer
part of the grain. One cereal preparation called Grape Nuts, has had its
starch converted into maltose and dextrin (maltose being a sugar), by a
scientific application of the diastase of the grain. It is consequently
easier of digestion and requires no cooking. It is beneficial for some
forms of indigestion. There are several competing foods of less merit, the
starch being less perfectly changed; one at least of which is
objectionably salt. Properly cooked starch is readily digested by healthy
persons, and for them malted food is of no special value.

Pulse, or Legumes, includes haricots and other beans, peas and lentils.
The proteid contained is that variety known as legumin, which is either
the same, or is closely allied, to the casein of milk and cheese. Pulse is
very rich in proteid, the dried kinds in general use, contain 24 or 25 per
cent. The richest is the soy-bean, which is used in China and Japan, it
contains 35 per cent., besides 19 per cent. of fat. Pulse requires
thorough cooking, haricots taking the longest time. Split lentils are
cooked sooner, and are better digested; this is chiefly due to the removal
of the skins. The haricots, bought from small grocers who have a slow
sale, are often old, and will not cook tender. Pulse is best adapted to
the labouring classes; the sedentary should eat it sparingly, it is liable
to cause flatulence or accumulation of gas in the intestines, and
constipation. Haricots are easier to digest when mashed and mixed with
other food. Pulse was formerly stated to leave much undigested residue.
Recent experiments have shown that it is satisfactorily digested under
favourable conditions. Struempell found beans in their skins to leave a
large proportion of proteid matter unabsorbed. Lentil meal mixed with
other food was digested in a perfectly satisfactory manner. Another
experimenter (Rubner) found that when even the very large quantity of
1-1/8 pound of dried split peas per day were eaten, only 17 per cent. of
proteid matter was unabsorbed, which compares very well with the 11 per
cent. of proteid left from a macaroni diet, with which the same man was
fed at another time. Had a reasonable quantity of peas been eaten per day,
the quantity undigested would probably have differed little from that of
other foods.

Nuts are, as a rule, very rich in oil and contain a fair proportion of
proteid; when well masticated they are a very valuable food. Walnuts are
one of the best, and the kernels can be purchased shelled, thus avoiding
much trouble. They can be finely ground in a nut-mill and used for several
purposes, mixed in the proportion of about two ounces to the pound of
wheatmeal they produce a rich flavoured bread. They can also he used in
sweet cakes and in rich puddings to increase their food value, lightness
and taste. Pine kernels being very oily, can be used with flour in the
place of lard or butter.

Fruits are generally looked upon as luxuries, rather than as food
capable of supplying a meal or a substantial part of one. They are usually
eaten only when the appetite has been appeased by what is considered more
substantial fare. Fresh fruits contain a larger proportion of water than
nearly all other raw foods, and consequently the proportion of
nourishment is small; but we must not despise them on this account. Milk
contains as much or more water. Certain foods which in the raw state
contain very little water, such as the pulses and cereals when cooked
absorb a very large quantity; this is particularly the case in making
porridge. Cabbage, cauliflower, Spanish onions and turnips, after cooking
contain even 97 per cent. of water. Roast beef contains on an average 48
per cent., and cooked round steak with fat removed 63 per cent. of water.
It is customary at meal times to drink water, tea, coffee, beer, wine, &c.
When a meal contains any considerable quantity of fresh fruits there need
be no desire to drink. Notwithstanding that fruits contain so much water,
a dietary consisting of fruits with nuts, to which may be added bread and
vegetables, will contain less water than the total quantity usually
consumed by a person taking the more customary highly cooked and seasoned
foods. An advantage is that the water in fruits is in a wholesome
condition, free from the pollution often met with in the water used for
drinking purposes. Raw fruits favour mastication, with its consequent
advantages, whilst cooked and soft food discourages it. Plums and what are
termed stone fruits, if eaten in more than very small quantities, are apt
to disagree. Persons with good digestions can take fruit with bread,
biscuits and with uncooked foods without any inconvenience. Fruit is more
likely to disagree when taken in conjunction with elaborately cooked
foods. Many cannot take fruit, especially if it be acid, at the same time
as cereal or starchy substances, and the difficulty is said to be greater
at the morning's meal. If the indigestion produced is due to the acid of
the fruit preventing the saliva acting on the starch, scientific
principles would direct that the fruit be eaten quite towards the end of
the meal. The same consideration condemns the use of mint sauce, cucumber
and vinegar, or pickles, with potatoes and bread, or even mint sauce with
green peas. Bananas are an exception, as not interfering with the
digestion of starch. Bananas are generally eaten in an unripe condition,
white and somewhat mealy; they should be kept until the starch has been
converted into sugar, when they are both more pleasant and wholesome. Nuts
and fruit go well together. For a portable meal, stoned raisins or other
dried fruit and walnut kernels or other nuts are excellent.

What has been called a defect in most fruits, is the fact that the proteid
is small in proportion to the other constituents. This has been too much
dwelt upon, owing to the prevailing exaggerated idea of the quantity of
proteid required. The tomato contains a large proportion, though the water
is very high. Bananas, grapes and strawberries contain to each part of
proteid from 10 to 12 parts of other solid nutritive constituents (any oil
being calculated into starch equivalents); this is termed the nutritive
ratio. Although this may seem a small proportion of proteid, there are
reasons for believing that it is sufficient. Taking the average of 29
analyses of American apples, a nutritive ratio of 33 was obtained. If it
were suggested that life should be sustained on apples alone, this small
quantity of proteid would be an insurmountable difficulty. As the addition
of nuts or other nutritious food sufficiently increases the proteid, no
objection can with justice be made against the use of fruit. A study of
our teeth, digestive organs and general structure, and of comparative
anatomy, points to fruits, nuts and succulent vegetables as our original
diet.

The potash and other salts of the organic acids in fruits tend to keep the
blood properly alkaline. Where there is a tendency to the deposition of
uric acid in the body, they hinder its formation. Citric, tartaric, malic
and other organic acids exist in fruits in combination with potash and
other bases, as well as in the free state. The free acids in fruits, when
eaten, combine with the alkalies in the intestinal tract, and are absorbed
by the body and pass into the blood, not as acids, but as neutral salts.
Here they are converted into potassium carbonate or some other carbonate.
Fruit acids never make the blood acid but the reverse. Fruit salts and
acids are antiscorbutic. Fruits have often proved of the greatest benefit
in illness. What is known as the grape cure has been productive of much
good. Lemons and oranges have also been of great benefit. Strawberries
have been craved for and have proved of the greatest advantage in some
extreme cases of illness when more concentrated food could not be endured.
Fruit is coming into greater use, especially owing to its better
distribution and lessened cost. Fruit is not as cheap as it should be, as
it can be produced in great abundance at little cost, and with
comparatively little labour. The price paid by the public greatly exceeds
the real cost of production. A very large proportion, often the greater
part of the cost to the consumer, goes in railway and other rates and in
middle-men's profits. It is commonly cheaper to bring fruit from over the
sea, including land carriage on either side, than it is to transport
English produce from one part of our country to another. English homegrown
fruit would be cheaper were it not for the difficulty of buying suitable
land at a reasonable price, and the cost of transit. For the production of
prime fruit there is a lack of sufficient intelligence, of scientific
culture and co-operation.

Vegetables--using the name in its popular sense--contain valuable saline
constituents or salts. By the usual method of cooking a large proportion
of the salts is lost. It is better to steam than to boil them. The fibrous
portion of vegetables is not all digested, but it is useful in stimulating
the peristaltic action of the bowels and lessening any tendency to
constipation. Vegetables are more especially useful to non-vegetarians to
correct the defects of their other food.

The potato belongs to a poisonous order--the _Solanacae_. There is a little
alkaloid in the skin, but this is lost in the cooking. The eyes and
sprouting portions contain the most and should be cut out.

Fungi.--There are about a hundred edible species in this country, but
many of the fungi are poisonous, some intensely so. It can scarcely be
expected that these lowly organised plants, differing so much in their
manner of growth from the green or chlorophyll bearing plants, can be
particularly nourishing. It is only the fructifying part, which appears
above the ground, that is generally eaten. It is of very rapid growth. Of
9 edible fungi of 4 species, obtained in the Belgrade market, the average
amount of water was 89.3 per cent., leaving only 10.7 per cent. of solid
matter; the average of fat was 0.55 per cent. The food value of fungi has
been greatly over-rated. In most of the analyses given in text-books and
elsewhere, the total nitrogen has been multiplied by 6.25 and the result
expressed as proteid. The amount of nitrogen in a form useless for the
purpose of nutrition is about a third of the whole. Of the remainder or
proteid nitrogen, it is said much is not assimilated, sometimes quite
half, owing to the somewhat indigestible character of the fungi. An
analysis of the common mushroom gave proteids 2.2 per cent., amides
(useless nitrogenous compounds) 1.3 per cent., and water 93.7 per cent.
The fungi are of inferior nutritive value to many fresh vegetables and are
much more expensive. Their chief value is as a flavouring.

Milk and Eggs are permissible in a vegetarian dietary, and as a rule,
vegetarians use them. Eggs, with the exception of such as are unfertile,
are of course alive; but they have no conscious existence, and cannot be
said to suffer any pain on being killed and eaten. An objection to their
use as food is, that on an egg and poultry farm, the superfluous male
birds are killed, and as the hens become unprofitable layers they are also
killed. A similar humane objection applies to the use of cow's milk by
man. The calves are deprived of part of their natural food, the deficiency
being perhaps made up by unnatural farinaceous milk substitutes. Many of
the calves, especially the bull calves, are killed, thus leaving all the
milk for human use. When cows cease to yield sufficient milk they too are
slaughtered. Milch cows are commonly kept in unhealthy houses, deprived
of exercise and pure air, crowded together, with filthy evil smelling
floors reeking with their excrements, tended by uncleanly people. With no
exercise and a rich stimulating diet they produce more milk; but it is no
matter for surprise that tuberculosis is common amongst them. When the
lesions of tubercle (consumption) are localised and not excessive, the
rest of the carcase is passed by veterinary surgeons as fit for food; were
it otherwise, enormous quantities of meat would be destroyed. As butcher's
meat is seldom officially inspected, but a very small part is judged by
the butchers as too bad for food. In mitigation it may be said that
poultry lead a happy existence and their death is, or should be, quickly
produced with but little pain, probably less pain than if left to die from
natural causes. The same cannot be said of cattle and sheep when the time
arrives for their transport to the slaughter man's. It is argued by
vegetarians who take milk and animal products that they are not
responsible for the death of the animals, as they do not eat their flesh.
As vegetarians profit by conditions in which the slaughtering of the
animals is a part, they cannot be altogether exonerated. Cow's milk is
prone to absorb bad odours, and it forms a most suitable breeding or
nutrient medium for most species of bacteria which may accidentally get
therein. By means of milk many epidemics have been spread, of scarlet
fever, diphtheria, cholera, and typhoid. Occasionally milk contains
tubercle bacilli from the cows themselves. By boiling, all bacteria,
except a few which may be left out of consideration, are destroyed. Such
a temperature, however, renders the milk less digestible and wholesome for
infants. By heating to 160 deg. F. or 170 deg. F. for a few minutes, such
pathogenic germs as are at all likely to be in milk (tubercle, typhoid,
diphtheria, &c.) are killed, and the value of the milk is but little
affected: this is called Pasteurising. It was until quite recently a
common practice to add boric acid, formaldehyde and other preservatives;
this has injured the vitality and caused the death of many infants. They
have not yet gone quite out of use.

For infants the only satisfactory food is that of a healthy mother. On
account of physical defects in the mother, or often for merely selfish
reasons, the infant is deprived of its natural food. Many attempts have
been made to bring cow's milk to approximately the same composition as
human milk. It can be done by adding water, milk sugar and cream of known
composition, in certain proportions. Great difficulties are met with when
this is put into practice. The simplest method is that of Professor
Soxhlet. The proper quantity of milk sugar is added, but instead of adding
the right quantity of cream or fat--a very difficult thing to do--the
equivalent quantity of extra milk sugar is used. Although not
theoretically satisfactory, in practice it answers very well. We have
found it to agree very well with infants. To cow's milk of pure average
quality, add half its volume of water containing 12.3 per cent. of milk
sugar; or, what amounts to the same thing, to a pint of cow's milk add one
and a quarter ounce of milk sugar and half-a-pint of water. It is
preferable to Pasteurise by placing the bottle of milk in a vessel of
water. This water is to be heated until the milk shows a temperature of
about 75 deg. C. or 165 deg. F., but must not exceed 80 deg. C. or a
change in the albumen of the milk takes place which affects its
digestibility. Keep at this temperature for about ten minutes. If not
required at once, a plug of cotton wool should be placed in the neck
of the bottle, and it should be kept in a cold place until required.
Professor Soxhlet does not advise the addition of lime water. The
proteids are not of the same composition as in human milk (the calf
being a ruminating animal)--and it is a common plan to add water or
barley water to milk until it is so watered down that it cannot curdle
into tough curds. An infant has thus either to distend its stomach with
a large quantity of watery nourishment, or else to get insufficient
food. Sometimes it is necessary to peptonise the milk a little. At
the Leipzig infants hospital, and also the Hygienic Institute, they
give to infants, up to 9 months old, Prof. Soxhlet's mixture, except
that an equal volume of water is added to the milk. Milk, cheese, and
especially hen's eggs contain a very large proportion of proteid. When
added to food poor in proteid they improve its nutritive quality. It has
often been said, and with truth, that some vegetarians by the profuse use
of animal products, consume as much, or even more proteid of animal origin
than the average person who includes flesh food in his dietary. An excess
of proteid from these sources is less injurious as eggs contain no purins,
and milk but a very small quantity. In support of the use of animal
products, it may be said that we have become so fond of animal foods and
stimulating drinks, that the use of milk, butter, cheese and eggs renders
the transition to a dietary derived from the vegetable kingdom much
easier. By means of these, cooked dishes can be produced which approach
and sometimes can scarcely be distinguished from those of cooked flesh.

In the present state of society, when really good vegetarian fare is
difficult to procure away from home, eggs, cheese, and milk are a great
convenience.

Digestion.--The digestive juices contain certain unorganised ferments,
which produce chemical changes in the food. If the food is solid, it has
to be liquefied. Even if already liquid it has generally to undergo a
chemical change before being fitted for absorption into the body. The
alimentary canal is a tubular passage which is first expanded into the
mouth, and later into the stomach. As the food passes down, it is acted
upon by several digestive juices, and in the small intestine the nutritive
matter is absorbed, whilst the residue passes away.

The saliva is the first digestive juice. It is alkaline and contains a
ferment called ptyalin. This acts energetically on the cooked and
gelatinous starch, and slowly on the raw starch. Starch is quite insoluble
in water, but the first product of salivary digestion is a less complex
substance called soluble-starch. When time is allowed for the action to be
completed, the starch is converted into one of the sugars called maltose.
In infants this property of acting on starch does not appear in effective
degree until the sixth or seventh month, and starch should not be given
before that time. Only a small quantity should be provided before the
twelfth month, when it may be gradually increased. Dr. Sims Wallace has
suggested that the eruption of the lower incisors from the seventh to the
eighth month, was for the purpose of enabling the infant--in the
pre-cooking stage of man's existence--to pierce the outer covering of
fruits so as to permit his extracting the soluble contents by suction; and
accordingly when these teeth are cut we may allow the child to bite at
such vegetable substances as apples, oranges, and sugar cane. Dr. Harry
Campbell says that starch should be given to the young, "not as is the
custom, as liquid or pap, but in a form compelling vigorous mastication,
for it is certain that early man, from the time he emerged from the ape
till he discovered how to cook his vegetable food, obtained practically
all his starch in such a form. If it is given as liquid or pap it will
pass down as starch into the stomach, to setup disturbance in that organ;
while if it is administered in a form which obliges the child to chew it
properly, not only will the jaws, the teeth, and the gums obtain the
exercise which they crave, and without which they cannot develop normally,
but the starch will be thoroughly insalivated that much of it will be
converted within the mouth into maltose. Hard well baked crusts constitute
a convenient form in which to administer starch to children. A piece of
crust may be put in the oven and rebaked, and spread with butter. Later,
we may give hard plain biscuits." Dr. Campbell continues, that he does not
say that starch in the pappy form, or as porridge, should find no place
whatever in man's dietary at the present day, but we should arrange that a
