of an object not visible to the naked eye, but whose position with
reference to several visible stars is known; since, while it is easy to
bring the point required to the centre of the _finder's_ field, in which
the guiding stars are visible, it is very difficult to direct the
_telescope's_ tube on a point of this sort. A card tube with wire
fastenings, such as we have described, may appear a very insignificant
contrivance to the regular observer, with his well-mounted equatorial
and carefully-adjusted finder. But to the first attempts of the amateur
observer it affords no insignificant assistance, as I can aver from my
own experience. Without it--a superior finder being wanting--our
"half-hours" would soon be wasted away in that most wearisome and
annoying of all employments, trying to "pick up" celestial objects.

It behoves me at this point to speak of star-maps. Such maps are of many
different kinds. There are the Observatory maps, in which the places of
thousands of stars are recorded with an amazing accuracy. Our beginner
is not likely to make use of, or to want, such maps as these. Then there
are maps merely intended to give a good general idea of the appearance
of the heavens at different hours and seasons. Plate I. presents four
maps of this sort; but a more complete series of eight maps has been
published by Messrs. Walton and Maberly in an octavo work; and my own
'Constellation-Seasons' give, at the same price, twelve quarto maps (of
four of which those in Plate I. are miniatures), showing the appearance
of the sky at any hour from month to month, or on any night, at
successive intervals of two hours. But maps intermediate in character to
these and to Observatory maps are required by the amateur observer.
Such are the Society's six gnomonic maps, the set of six gnomonic maps
in Johnstone's 'Atlas of Astronomy,' and my own set of twelve gnomonic
maps. The Society's maps are a remarkably good set, containing on the
scale of a ten-inch globe all the stars in the Catalogue of the
Astronomical Society (down to the fifth magnitude). The distortion,
however, is necessarily enormous when the celestial sphere is presented
in only six gnomonic maps. In my maps all the stars of the British
Association Catalogue down to the fifth magnitude are included on the
scale of a six-inch globe. The distortion is scarcely a fourth of that
in the Society's maps. The maps are so arranged that the relative
positions of all the stars in each hemisphere can be readily gathered
from a single view; and black duplicate-maps serve to show the
appearance of the constellations.

It is often convenient to make small maps of a part of the heavens we
may wish to study closely. My 'Handbook of the Stars' has been prepared
to aid the student in the construction of such maps.

In selecting maps it is well to be able to recognise the amount of
distortion and scale-variation. This may be done by examining the spaces
included between successive parallels and meridians, near the edges and
angles of the maps, and comparing these either with those in the centre
of the map, or with the known figures and dimensions of the
corresponding spaces on a globe.

We may now proceed to discuss the different tests which the intending
purchaser of a telescope should apply to the instrument.

The excellence of an object-glass can be satisfactorily determined only
by testing the performance of the telescope in the manner presently to
be described. But it is well to examine the quality of the glass as
respects transparency and uniformity of texture. Bubbles, scratches, and
other such defects, are not very important, since they do not affect the
distinctness of the field as they would in a Galilean Telescope,--a
little light is lost, and that is all. The same remark applies to dust
upon the glass. The glass should be kept as free as possible from dirt,
damp, or dust, but it is not advisable to remove every speck which,
despite such precaution, may accidentally fall upon the object-glass.
When it becomes necessary to clean the glass, it is to be noted that the
substance used should be soft, perfectly dry, and free from dust. Silk
is often recommended, but some silk is exceedingly objectionable in
texture,--old silk, perfectly soft to the touch, is perhaps as good as
anything. If the dust which has fallen on the glass is at all gritty,
the glass will suffer by the method of cleaning commonly adopted, in
which the dust is _gathered up_ by pressure. The proper method is to
clean a small space near the edge of the glass, and to _sweep_ from that
space as centre. In this way the dust is _pushed before_ the silk or
wash-leather, and does not cut the glass. It is well always to suspect
the presence of gritty dust, and adopt this cautious method of cleaning.

The two glasses should on no account be separated.

In examining an eye-piece, the quality of the glass should be noted, and
care taken that both glasses (but especially the field-glass) are free
from the least speck, scratch, or blemish of any kind, for these defects
will be exhibited in a magnified state in the field of view. Hence the
eye-pieces require to be as carefully preserved from damp and dust as
the object-glass, and to be more frequently cleaned.

The tube of the telescope should be light, but strong, and free from
vibration. Its quality in the last respect can be tested by lightly
striking it when mounted; the sound given out should be dead or
non-resonant. The inside of the tube must absorb extraneous light, and
should therefore be coloured a dull black; and stops of varying radius
should be placed along its length with the same object. Sliding tubes,
rack-work, etc., should work closely, yet easily.

The telescope should be well balanced for vision with the small
astronomical eye-pieces. But as there is often occasion to use
appliances which disturb the balance, it is well to have the means of at
once restoring equilibrium. A cord ring running round the tube (pretty
tightly, so as to rest still when the tube is inclined), and bearing a
small weight, will be all that is required for this purpose; it must be
slipped along the tube until the tube is found to be perfectly balanced.
Nothing is more annoying than, after getting a star well in the field,
to see the tube shift its position through defective balance, and thus
to have to search again for the star. Even with such an arrangement as
is shown in fig. 8, though the tube cannot readily shift its position,
it is better to have it well balanced.

The quality of the stand has a very important influence on the
performance of a telescope. In fact, a moderately good telescope,
mounted on a steady stand, working easily and conveniently, will not
only enable the observer to pass his time much more pleasantly, but will
absolutely exhibit more difficult objects than a finer instrument on a
rickety, ill-arranged stand. A good observing-chair is also a matter of
some importance, the least constraint or awkwardness of position
detracting considerably from the power of distinct vision. Such, at
least, is my own experience.

But the mere examination of the glasses, tube, mounting, &c., is only
the first step in the series of tests which should be applied to a
telescope, since the excellence of the instrument depends, not on its
size, the beauty of its mounting, or any extraneous circumstances, but
on its performance.

The observer should first determine whether the chromatic aberration is
corrected. To ascertain this the telescope should be directed to the
moon, or (better) to Jupiter, and accurately focussed for distinct
vision. If, then, on moving the eye-piece towards the object-glass, a
ring of purple appears round the margin of the object, and on moving the
eye-glass in the contrary direction a ring of green, the chromatic
aberration is corrected, since these are the colours of the secondary
spectrum.

To determine whether the spherical aberration is corrected, the
telescope should be directed towards a star of the third or fourth
magnitude, and focussed for distinct vision. A cap with an aperture of
about one-half its diameter should then be placed over the object-glass.
If no new adjustment is required for distinct vision, the spherical
aberration is corrected, since the mean focal length and the focal
length of the central rays are equal. If, when the cap is on, the
eye-piece has to be pulled out for distinct vision, the spherical
aberration has not been fully corrected; if the eye-piece has to be
pushed in, the aberration has been over-corrected. As a further test, we
may cut off the central rays, by means of a circular card covering the
middle of the object-glass, and compare the focal length for distinct
vision with the focal length when the cap is applied. The extent of the
spherical aberration may be thus determined; but if the first experiment
gives a satisfactory result, no other is required.

A star of the first magnitude should next be brought into the field of
view. If an irradiation from one side is perceived, part of the
object-glass has not the same refractive power as the rest; and the
part which is defective can be determined by applying in different
positions a cap which hides half the object-glass. If the irradiation is
double, it will probably be found that the object-glass has been too
tightly screwed, and the defect will disappear when the glass is freed
from such undue pressure.

If the object-glass is not quite at right angles to the axis of the
tube, or if the eye-tube is at all inclined, a like irradiation will
appear when a bright star is in the field. The former defect is not
easily detected or remedied; nor is it commonly met with in the work of
a careful optician. The latter defect may be detected by cutting out
three circular cards of suitable size with a small aperture at the
centre of each, and inserting one at each end of the eye-tube, and one
over the object-glass. If the tube is rightly placed the apertures will
of course lie in a right line, so that it will be possible to look
through all three at once. If not, it will be easy to determine towards
what part of the object-glass the eye-tube is directed, and to correct
the position of the tube accordingly.

The best tests for determining the defining power of a telescope are
close double or multiple stars, the components of which are not very
unequal. The illuminating power should be tested by directing the
telescope towards double or multiple stars having one or more minute
components. Many of the nebulae serve as tests both for illumination and
defining power. As we proceed we shall meet with proper objects for
testing different telescopes. For the present, let the following list
suffice. It is selected from Admiral Smyth's tests, obtained by
diminishing the aperture of a 6-in. telescope having a focal length of
8-1/2 feet:

A two-inch aperture, with powers of from 60 to 100, should exhibit

[alpha] Piscium (3".5).   | [delta] Cassiopeiae (9".5),
                          |    mag. (4 and 7-1/2)
[gamma] Leonis  (3".2).   | Polaris (18".6), mag. (2-1/2
                          |    and 9-1/2)

A four-inch, powers 80 to 120, should exhibit

[xi] Ursae Majoris (2".4). | [sigma] Cassiopeiae (3".1),
                          |    mag. (6 and 8).
[gamma] Ceti (2".6).      | [delta] Geminorum (7".1),
                          |    mag. (4 and 9).

The tests in the first column are for definition, those in the second
for illumination. It will be noticed that, though in the case of Polaris
the smaller aperture may be expected to show the small star of less than
the 9th magnitude, a larger aperture is required to show the 8th
magnitude component of [sigma] Cassiopeiae, on account of the greater
closeness of this double.

In favourable weather the following is a good general test of the
performance of a telescope:--A star of the 3rd or 4th magnitude at a
considerable elevation above the horizon should exhibit a small well
defined disc, surrounded by two or three fine rings of light.

A telescope should not be mounted within doors, if it can be
conveniently erected on solid ground, as every movement in the house
will cause the instrument to vibrate unpleasantly. Further, if the
telescope is placed in a warm room, currents of cold air from without
will render observed objects hazy and indistinct. In fact, Sir W.
Herschel considered that a telescope should not even be erected near a
house or elevation of any kind round which currents of air are likely to
be produced. If a telescope is used in a room, the temperature of the
room should be made as nearly equal as possible to that of the outer
air.

When a telescope is used out of doors a 'dew-cap,' that is, a tube of
tin or pasteboard, some ten or twelve inches long, should be placed on
the end of the instrument, so as to project beyond the object-glass. For
glass is a good radiator of heat, so that dew falls heavily upon it,
unless the radiation is in some way checked. The dew-cap does this
effectually. It should be blackened within, especially if made of metal.
"After use," says old Kitchener, "the telescope should be kept in a warm
place long enough for any moisture on the object-glass to evaporate." If
damp gets between the glasses it produces a fog (which opticians call a
sweat) or even a seaweed-like vegetation, by which a valuable glass may
be completely ruined.

The observer should not leave to the precious hours of the night the
study of the bearing and position of the objects he proposes to examine.
This should be done by day--an arrangement which has a twofold
advantage,--the time available for observation is lengthened, and the
eyes are spared sudden changes from darkness to light, and _vice versa_.
Besides, the eye is ill-fitted to examine difficult objects, after
searching by candle-light amongst the minute details recorded in maps or
globes. Of the effect of rest to the eye we have an instance in Sir J.
Herschel's rediscovery of the satellites of Uranus, which he effected
after keeping his eyes in darkness for a quarter of an hour. Kitchener,
indeed, goes so far as to recommend (with a _crede experto_) an
_interval of sleep_ in the darkness of the observing-room before
commencing operations. I have never tried the experiment, but I should
expect it to have a bad rather than a good effect on the eyesight, as
one commonly sees the eyes of a person who has been sleeping in his
day-clothes look heavy and bloodshot.

The object or the part of an object to be observed should be brought as
nearly as possible to the centre of the field of view. When there is no
apparatus for keeping the telescope pointed upon an object, the best
plan is so to direct the telescope by means of the finder, that the
object shall be just out of the field of view, and be brought (by the
earth's motion) across the centre of the field. Thus the vibrations
which always follow the adjustment of the tube will have subsided before
the object appears. The object should then be intently watched during
the whole interval of its passage across the field of view.

It is important that the student should recognise the fact that the
highest powers do not necessarily give the best views of celestial
objects. High powers in all cases increase the difficulty of
observation, since they diminish the field of view and the illumination
of the object, increase the motion with which (owing to the earth's
motion) the image moves across the field, and magnify all defects due to
instability of the stand, imperfection of the object-glass, or
undulation of the atmosphere. A good object-glass of three inches
aperture will in very favourable weather bear a power of about 300, when
applied to the observation of close double or multiple stars, but for
all other observations much lower powers should be used. Nothing but
failure and annoyance can follow the attempt to employ the highest
powers on unsuitable objects or in unfavourable weather.

The greatest care should be taken in focussing the telescope. When high
powers are used this is a matter of some delicacy. It would be well if
the eye-pieces intended for a telescope were so constructed that when
the telescope is focussed for one, this might be replaced by any other
without necessitating any use of the focussing rack-work. This could be
readily effected by suitably placing the shoulder which limits the
insertion of the eye-piece.

It will be found that, even in the worst weather for observation, there
are instants of distinct vision (with moderate powers) during which the
careful observer may catch sight of important details; and, similarly,
in the best observing weather, there are moments of unusually distinct
vision well worth patient waiting for, since in such weather alone the
full powers of the telescope can be employed.

The telescopist should not be deterred from observation by the presence
of fog or haze, since with a hazy sky definition is often singularly
good.

The observer must not expect distinct vision of objects near the
horizon. Objects near the eastern horizon during the time of morning
twilight are especially confused by atmospheric undulations; in fact,
early morning is a very unfavourable time for the observation of all
objects.

The same rules which we have been applying to refractors, serve for
reflectors. The performance of a reflector will be found to differ in
some respects, however, from that of a refractor. Mr. Dawes is, we
believe, now engaged in testing reflectors, and his unequalled
experience of refractors will enable him to pronounce decisively on the
relative merits of the two classes of telescopes.

We have little to say respecting the construction of telescopes. Whether
it is advisable or not for an amateur observer to attempt the
construction of his own telescope is a question depending entirely on
his mechanical ability and ingenuity. My own experience of telescope
construction is confined to the conversion of a 3-feet into a 5-1/2-feet
telescope. This operation involved some difficulties, since the aperture
had to be increased by about an inch. I found a tubing made of alternate
layers of card and calico well pasted together, to be both light and
strong. But for the full length of tube I think a core of metal is
wanted. A learned and ingenious friend, Mr. Sharp, Fellow of St. John's
College, informs me that a tube of tin, covered with layers of brown
paper, well pasted and thicker near the middle of the tube, forms a
light and strong telescope-tube, almost wholly free from vibration.

Suffer no inexperienced person to deal with your object-glass. I knew a
valuable glass ruined by the proceedings of a workman who had been told
to attach three pieces of brass round the cell of the double lens. What
he had done remained unknown, but ever after a wretched glare of light
surrounded all objects of any brilliancy.

One word about the inversion of objects by the astronomical telescope.
It is singular that any difficulty should be felt about so simple a
matter, yet I have seen in the writings of more than one distinguished
astronomer, wholly incorrect views as to the nature of the inversion.
One tells us that to obtain the correct presentation from a picture
taken with a telescope, the view should be inverted, held up to the
light, and looked at from the back of the paper. Another tells us to
invert the picture and hold it opposite a looking-glass. Neither method
is correct. The simple correction wanted is to hold the picture upside
down--the same change which brings the top to the bottom brings the
right to the left, _i.e._, fully corrects the inversion.

In the case, however, of a picture taken by an Herschelian reflector,
the inversion not being complete, a different method must be adopted. In
fact, either of the above-named processes, incorrect for the ordinary
astronomical, would be correct for the Herschelian Telescope. The latter
inverts but does not reverse right and left; therefore after inverting
our picture we must interchange right and left because they have been
reversed by the inversion. This is effected either by looking at the
picture from behind, or by holding it up to a mirror.

[Illustration: PLATE II.]




CHAPTER II.

A HALF-HOUR WITH ORION, LEPUS TAURUS, ETC.


Any of the half-hours here assigned to the constellation-seasons may be
taken first, and the rest in seasonal or cyclic order. The following
introductory remarks are applicable to each:--

If we stand on an open space, on any clear night, we see above us the
celestial dome spangled with stars, apparently fixed in position. But
after a little time it becomes clear that these orbs are slowly shifting
their position. Those near the eastern horizon are rising, those near
the western setting. Careful and continuous observation would show that
the stars are all moving in the same way, precisely, as they would if
they were fixed to the concave surface of a vast hollow sphere, and this
sphere rotated about an axis. This axis, in our latitude, is inclined
about 51-1/2 deg. to the horizon. Of course only one end of this imaginary
axis can be above our horizon. This end lies very near a star which it
will be well for us to become acquainted with at the beginning of our
operations. It lies almost exactly towards the north, and is raised from
50 deg. to 53 deg. (according to the season and hour) above the horizon. There
is an easy method of finding it.

We must first find the Greater Bear. It will be seen from Plate 1, that
on a spring evening the seven conspicuous stars of this constellation
are to be looked for towards the north-east, about half way between the
horizon and the point overhead (or _zenith_), the length of the set of
stars being vertical. On a summer's evening the Great Bear is nearly
overhead. On an autumn evening he is towards the north-west, the length
of the set of seven being somewhat inclined to the horizon. Finally, on
a winter's evening, he is low down towards the north, the length of the
set of seven stars being nearly in a horizontal direction.

Having found the seven stars, we make use of the pointers [alpha] and
