always appear in projective correspondences: namely, the same process that
carries one from _B_ to _D_ will carry one back from _D_ to _B_ again.
This special property will receive further study in the chapter on
Involution.




*38.*  It is seen that as _B_ approaches _A_, _D_ also approaches _A_. As
_B_ moves from _A_ toward _C_, _D_ moves from _A_ in the opposite
direction, passing through the point at infinity on the line _AC_, and
returns on the other side to meet _B_ at _C_ again. In other words, as _B_
traverses _AC_, _D_ traverses the rest of the line from _A_ to _C_ through
infinity. In all positions of _B_, except at _A_ or _C_, _B_ and _D_ are
separated from each other by _A_ and _C_.




*39. Harmonic conjugate of the point at infinity.*  It is natural to
inquire what position of _B_ corresponds to the infinitely distant
position of _D_. We have proved (§ 27) that the particular quadrangle _K_,
_L_, _M_, _N_ employed is of no consequence. We shall therefore avail
ourselves of one that lends itself most readily to the solution of the
problem. We choose the point _L_ so that the triangle _ALC_ is isosceles
(Fig. 7). Since _D_ is supposed to be at infinity, the line _KM_ is
parallel to _AC_. Therefore the triangles _KAC_ and _MAC_ are equal, and
the triangle _ANC_ is also isosceles. The triangles _CNL_ and _ANL_ are
therefore equal, and the line _LB_ bisects the angle _ALC_. _B_ is
therefore the middle point of _AC_, and we have the theorem

_The harmonic conjugate of the middle point of __AC__ is at infinity._

                                [Figure 7]

                                  FIG. 7




*40. Projective theorems and metrical theorems. Linear construction.* This
theorem is the connecting link between the general protective theorems
which we have been considering so far and the metrical theorems of
ordinary geometry. Up to this point we have said nothing about
measurements, either of line segments or of angles. Desargues's theorem
and the theory of harmonic elements which depends on it have nothing to do
with magnitudes at all. Not until the notion of an infinitely distant
point is brought in is any mention made of distances or directions. We
have been able to make all of our constructions up to this point by means
of the straightedge, or ungraduated ruler. A construction made with such
an instrument we shall call a _linear_ construction. It requires merely
that we be able to draw the line joining two points or find the point of
intersection of two lines.




*41. Parallels and mid-points.*  It might be thought that drawing a line
through a given point parallel to a given line was only a special case of
drawing a line joining two points. Indeed, it consists only in drawing a
line through the given point and through the "infinitely distant point" on
the given line. It must be remembered, however, that the expression
"infinitely distant point" must not be taken literally. When we say that
two parallel lines meet "at infinity," we really mean that they do not
meet at all, and the only reason for using the expression is to avoid
tedious statement of exceptions and restrictions to our theorems. We ought
therefore to consider the drawing of a line parallel to a given line as a
different accomplishment from the drawing of the line joining two given
points. It is a remarkable consequence of the last theorem that a parallel
to a given line and the mid-point of a given segment are equivalent data.
For the construction is reversible, and if we are given the middle point
of a given segment, we can construct _linearly_  a line parallel to that
segment. Thus, given that _B_ is the middle point of _AC_, we may draw any
two lines through _A_, and any line through _B_ cutting them in points _N_
and _L_. Join _N_ and _L_ to _C_ and get the points _K_ and _M_ on the two
lines through _A_. Then _KM_ is parallel to _AC_. _The bisection of a
given segment and the drawing of a line parallel to the segment are
equivalent data when linear construction is used._




*42.*  It is not difficult to give a linear construction for the problem
to divide a given segment into _n_ equal parts, given only a parallel to
the segment. This is simple enough when _n_ is a power of _2_. For any
other number, such as _29_, divide any segment on the line parallel to
_AC_ into _32_ equal parts, by a repetition of the process just described.
Take _29_ of these, and join the first to _A_ and the last to _C_. Let
these joining lines meet in _S_. Join _S_ to all the other points. Other
problems, of a similar sort, are given at the end of the chapter.




*43. Numerical relations.*  Since three points, given in order, are
sufficient to determine a fourth, as explained above, it ought to be
possible to reproduce the process numerically in view of the one-to-one
correspondence which exists between points on a line and numbers; a
correspondence which, to be sure, we have not established here, but which
is discussed in any treatise on the theory of point sets. We proceed to
discover what relation between four numbers corresponds to the harmonic
relation between four points.

                                [Figure 8]

                                  FIG. 8




*44.*  Let _A_, _B_, _C_, _D_ be four harmonic points (Fig. 8), and let
_SA_, _SB_, _SC_, _SD_ be four harmonic lines. Assume a line drawn through
_B_ parallel to _SD_, meeting _SA_ in _A'_ and _SC_ in _C'_. Then _A'_,
_B'_, _C'_, and the infinitely distant point on _A'C'_ are four harmonic
points, and therefore _B_ is the middle point of the segment _A'C'_. Then,
since the triangle _DAS_ is similar to the triangle _BAA'_, we may write
the proportion

                          _AB : AD = BA' : SD._

Also, from the similar triangles _DSC_ and _BCC'_, we have

                          _CD : CB = SD : B'C._

From these two proportions we have, remembering that _BA' = BC'_,

                                [formula]

the minus sign being given to the ratio on account of the fact that _A_
and _C_ are always separated from _B_ and _D_, so that one or three of the
segments _AB_, _CD_, _AD_, _CB_ must be negative.




*45.*  Writing the last equation in the form

                          _CB : AB = -CD : AD,_

and using the fundamental relation connecting three points on a line,

                             _PR + RQ = PQ,_

which holds for all positions of the three points if account be taken of
the sign of the segments, the last proportion may be written

                   _(CB - BA) : AB = -(CA - DA) : AD,_

or

                    _(AB - AC) : AB = (AC - AD) : AD;_

so that _AB_, _AC_, and _AD_ are three quantities in hamonic progression,
since the difference between the first and second is to the first as the
difference between the second and third is to the third. Also, from this
last proportion comes the familiar relation

                                [formula]

which is convenient for the computation of the distance _AD_ when _AB_ and
_AC_ are given numerically.




*46. Anharmonic ratio.*  The corresponding relations between the
trigonometric functions of the angles determined by four harmonic lines
are not difficult to obtain, but as we shall not need them in building up
the theory of projective geometry, we will not discuss them here. Students
who have a slight acquaintance with trigonometry may read in a later
chapter (§ 161) a development of the theory of a more general relation,
called the _anharmonic ratio_, or _cross ratio_, which connects any four
points on a line.




PROBLEMS


*1*. Draw through a given point a line which shall pass through the
inaccessible point of intersection of two given lines. The following
construction may be made to depend upon Desargues's theorem: Through the
given point _P_ draw any two rays cutting the two lines in the points
_AB'_ and _A'B_, _A_, _B_, lying on one of the given lines and _A'_, _B'_,
on the other. Join _AA'_ and _BB'_, and find their point of intersection
_S_. Through _S_ draw any other ray, cutting the given lines in _CC'_.
Join _BC'_ and _B'C_, and obtain their point of intersection _Q_. _PQ_ is
the desired line. Justify this construction.

*2.*  To draw through a given point _P_ a line which shall meet two given
lines in points _A_ and _B_, equally distant from _P_. Justify the
following construction: Join _P_ to the point _S_ of intersection of the
two given lines. Construct the fourth harmonic of _PS_ with respect to the
two given lines. Draw through _P_ a line parallel to this line. This is
the required line.

*3.*  Given a parallelogram in the same plane with a given segment _AC_,
to construct linearly the middle point of _AC_.

*4.*  Given four harmonic lines, of which one pair are at right angles to
each other, show that the other pair make equal angles with them. This is
a theorem of which frequent use will be made.

*5.*  Given the middle point of a line segment, to draw a line parallel to
the segment and passing through a given point.

*6.*  A line is drawn cutting the sides of a triangle _ABC_ in the points
_A'_, _B'_, _C'_ the point _A'_ lying on the side _BC_, etc. The harmonic
conjugate of _A'_ with respect to _B_ and _C_ is then constructed and
called _A"_. Similarly, _B"_ and _C"_ are constructed. Show that _A"B"C"_
lie on a straight line. Find other sets of three points on a line in the
figure. Find also sets of three lines through a point.





CHAPTER III - COMBINATION OF TWO PROJECTIVELY RELATED FUNDAMENTAL FORMS




                                [Figure 9]

                                  FIG. 9


*47. Superposed fundamental forms. Self-corresponding elements.* We have
seen (§ 37) that two projective point-rows may be superposed upon the same
straight line. This happens, for example, when two pencils which are
projective to each other are cut across by a straight line. It is also
possible for two projective pencils to have the same center. This happens,
for example, when two projective point-rows are projected to the same
point. Similarly, two projective axial pencils may have the same axis. We
examine now the possibility of two forms related in this way, having an
element or elements that correspond to themselves. We have seen, indeed,
that if _B_ and _D_ are harmonic conjugates with respect to _A_ and _C_,
then the point-row described by _B_ is projective to the point-row
described by _D_, and that _A_ and _C_ are self-corresponding points.
Consider more generally the case of two pencils perspective to each other
with axis of perspectivity _u'_ (Fig. 9). Cut across them by a line _u_.
We get thus two projective point-rows superposed on the same line _u_, and
a moment's reflection serves to show that the point _N_ of intersection
_u_ and _u'_ corresponds to itself in the two point-rows. Also, the point
_M_, where _u_ intersects the line joining the centers of the two pencils,
is seen to correspond to itself. It is thus possible for two projective
point-rows, superposed upon the same line, to have two self-corresponding
points. Clearly _M_ and _N_ may fall together if the line joining the
centers of the pencils happens to pass through the point of intersection
of the lines _u_ and _u'_.

                               [Figure 10]

                                 FIG. 10




*48.*  We may also give an illustration of a case where two superposed
projective point-rows have no self-corresponding points at all. Thus we
may take two lines revolving about a fixed point _S_ and always making the
same angle a with each other (Fig. 10). They will cut out on any line _u_
in the plane two point-rows which are easily seen to be projective. For,
given any four rays _SP_ which are harmonic, the four corresponding rays
_SP'_ must also be harmonic, since they make the same angles with each
other. Four harmonic points _P_ correspond, therefore, to four harmonic
points _P'_. It is clear, however, that no point _P_ can coincide with its
corresponding point _P'_, for in that case the lines _PS_ and _P'S_ would
coincide, which is impossible if the angle between them is to be constant.




*49. Fundamental theorem. Postulate of continuity.* We have thus shown
that two projective point-rows, superposed one on the other, may have two
points, one point, or no point at all corresponding to themselves. We
proceed to show that

_If two projective point-rows, superposed upon the same straight line,
have more than two self-corresponding points, they must have an infinite
number, and every point corresponds to itself; that is, the two point-rows
are not essentially distinct._

If three points, _A_, _B_, and _C_, are self-corresponding, then the
harmonic conjugate _D_ of _B_ with respect to _A_ and _C_ must also
correspond to itself. For four harmonic points must always correspond to
four harmonic points. In the same way the harmonic conjugate of _D_ with
respect to _B_ and _C_ must correspond to itself. Combining new points
with old in this way, we may obtain as many self-corresponding points as
we wish. We show further that every point on the line is the limiting
point of a finite or infinite sequence of self-corresponding points. Thus,
let a point _P_ lie between _A_ and _B_. Construct now _D_, the fourth
harmonic of _C_ with respect to _A_ and _B_. _D_ may coincide with _P_, in
which case the sequence is closed; otherwise _P_ lies in the stretch _AD_
or in the stretch _DB_. If it lies in the stretch _DB_, construct the
fourth harmonic of _C_ with respect to _D_ and _B_. This point _D'_ may
coincide with _P_, in which case, as before, the sequence is closed. If
_P_ lies in the stretch _DD'_, we construct the fourth harmonic of _C_
with respect to _DD'_, etc. In each step the region in which _P_ lies is
diminished, and the process may be continued until two self-corresponding
points are obtained on either side of _P_, and at distances from it
arbitrarily small.

We now assume, explicitly, the fundamental postulate that the
correspondence is _continuous_, that is, that _the distance between two
points in one point-row may be made arbitrarily small by sufficiently
diminishing the distance between the corresponding points in the other._
Suppose now that _P_ is not a self-corresponding point, but corresponds to
a point _P'_ at a fixed distance _d_ from _P_. As noted above, we can find
self-corresponding points arbitrarily close to _P_, and it appears, then,
that we can take a point _D_ as close to _P_ as we wish, and yet the
distance between the corresponding points _D'_ and _P'_ approaches _d_ as
a limit, and not zero, which contradicts the postulate of continuity.




*50.*  It follows also that two projective pencils which have the same
center may have no more than two self-corresponding rays, unless the
pencils are identical. For if we cut across them by a line, we obtain two
projective point-rows superposed on the same straight line, which may have
no more than two self-corresponding points. The same considerations apply
to two projective axial pencils which have the same axis.




*51. Projective point-rows having a self-corresponding point in common.*
Consider now two projective point-rows lying on different lines in the
same plane. Their common point may or may not be a self-corresponding
point. If the two point-rows are perspectively related, then their common
point is evidently a self-corresponding point. The converse is also true,
and we have the very important theorem:




*52.*  _If in two protective point-rows, the point of intersection
corresponds to itself, then the point-rows are in perspective position._

                               [Figure 11]

                                 FIG. 11


Let the two point-rows be _u_ and _u'_ (Fig. 11). Let _A_ and _A'_, _B_
and _B'_, be corresponding points, and let also the point _M_ of
intersection of _u_ and _u'_ correspond to itself. Let _AA'_ and _BB'_
meet in the point _S_. Take _S_ as the center of two pencils, one
perspective to _u_ and the other perspective to _u'_. In these two pencils
_SA_ coincides with its corresponding ray _SA'_, _SB_ with its
corresponding ray _SB'_, and _SM_ with its corresponding ray _SM'_. The
two pencils are thus identical, by the preceding theorem, and any ray _SD_
must coincide with its corresponding ray _SD'_. Corresponding points of
_u_ and _u'_, therefore, all lie on lines through the point _S_.




*53.*  An entirely similar discussion shows that

_If in two projective pencils the line joining their centers is a
self-corresponding ray, then the two pencils are perspectively related._




*54.*  A similar theorem may be stated for two axial pencils of which the
axes intersect. Very frequent use will be made of these fundamental
theorems.




*55. Point-row of the second order.*  The question naturally arises, What
is the locus of points of intersection of corresponding rays of two
projective pencils which are not in perspective position? This locus,
which will be discussed in detail in subsequent chapters, is easily seen
to have at most two points in common with any line in the plane, and on
account of this fundamental property will be called a _point-row of the
second order_. For any line _u_ in the plane of the two pencils will be
cut by them in two projective point-rows which have at most two
self-corresponding points. Such a self-corresponding point is clearly a
point of intersection of corresponding rays of the two pencils.




*56.*  This locus degenerates in the case of two perspective pencils to a
pair of straight lines, one of which is the axis of perspectivity and the
other the common ray, any point of which may be considered as the point of
intersection of corresponding rays of the two pencils.




*57. Pencils of rays of the second order.*  Similar investigations may be
made concerning the system of lines joining corresponding points of two
projective point-rows. If we project the point-rows to any point in the
plane, we obtain two projective pencils having the same center. At most
two pairs of self-corresponding rays may present themselves. Such a ray is
clearly a line joining two corresponding points in the two point-rows. The
result may be stated as follows: _The system of rays joining corresponding
points in two protective point-rows has at most two rays in common with
any pencil in the plane._ For that reason the system of rays is called _a
pencil of rays of the second order._




*58.*  In the case of two perspective point-rows this system of rays
degenerates into two pencils of rays of the first order, one of which has
its center at the center of perspectivity of the two point-rows, and the
other at the intersection of the two point-rows, any ray through which may
be considered as joining two corresponding points of the two point-rows.




*59. Cone of the second order.*  The corresponding theorems in space may
easily be obtained by joining the points and lines considered in the plane
theorems to a point _S_ in space. Two projective pencils give rise to two
projective axial pencils with axes intersecting. Corresponding planes meet
in lines which all pass through _S_ and through the points on a point-row
of the second order generated by the two pencils of rays. They are thus
generating lines of a _cone of the second order_, or _quadric cone_, so
called because every plane in space not passing through _S_ cuts it in a
point-row of the second order, and every line also cuts it in at most two
points. If, again, we project two point-rows to a point _S_ in space, we
obtain two pencils of rays with a common center but lying in different
planes. Corresponding lines of these pencils determine planes which are
the projections to _S_ of the lines which join the corresponding points of
the two point-rows. At most two such planes may pass through any ray
through _S_. It is called _a pencil of planes of the second order_.




PROBLEMS


*1. * A man _A_ moves along a straight road _u_, and another man _B_ moves
along the same road and walks so as always to keep sight of _A_ in a small
mirror _M_ at the side of the road. How many times will they come
together, _A_ moving always in the same direction along the road?

2. How many times would the two men in the first problem see each other in
two mirrors _M_ and _N_ as they walk along the road as before? (The planes
of the two mirrors are not necessarily parallel to _u_.)

3. As A moves along _u_, trace the path of B so that the two men may
always see each other in the two mirrors.

4. Two boys walk along two paths _u_ and _u'_ each holding a string which
they keep stretched tightly between them. They both move at constant but
different rates of speed, letting out the string or drawing it in as they
walk. How many times will the line of the string pass over any given point
in the plane of the paths?

5. Trace the lines of the string when the two boys move at the same rate
of speed in the two paths but do not start at the same time from the point
where the two paths intersect.

6. A ship is sailing on a straight course and keeps a gun trained on a
point on the shore. Show that a line at right angles to the direction of
the gun at its muzzle will pass through any point in the plane twice or
not at all. (Consider the point-row at infinity cut out by a line through
the point on the shore at right angles to the direction of the gun.)

7. Two lines _u_ and _u'_ revolve about two points _U_ and _U'_
respectively in the same plane. They go in the same direction and at the
same rate of speed, but one has an angle a the start of the other. Show
that they generate a point-row of the second order.

8. Discuss the question given in the last problem when the two lines
revolve in opposite directions. Can you recognize the locus?





CHAPTER IV - POINT-ROWS OF THE SECOND ORDER




*60. Point-row of the second order defined.*  We have seen that two
fundamental forms in one-to-one correspondence may sometimes generate a
form of higher order. Thus, two point-rows (§ 55) generate a system of
rays of the second order, and two pencils of rays (§ 57), a system of
points of the second order. As a system of points is more familiar to most
students of geometry than a system of lines, we study first the point-row
of the second order.




*61. Tangent line.*  We have shown in the last chapter (§ 55) that the
locus of intersection of corresponding rays of two projective pencils is a
point-row of the second order; that is, it has at most two points in
common with any line in the plane. It is clear, first of all, that the
centers of the pencils are points of the locus; for to the line _SS'_,
considered as a ray of _S_, must correspond some ray of _S'_ which meets
it in _S'_. _S'_, and by the same argument _S_, is then a point where
corresponding rays meet. Any ray through _S_ will meet it in one point
besides _S_, namely, the point _P_ where it meets its corresponding ray.
Now, by choosing the ray through _S_ sufficiently close to the ray _SS'_,
the point _P_ may be made to approach arbitrarily close to _S'_, and the
ray _S'P_ may be made to differ in position from the tangent line at _S'_
by as little as we please. We have, then, the important theorem

_The ray at __S'__ which corresponds to the common ray __SS'__ is tangent
to the locus at __S'__._

In the same manner the tangent at _S_ may be constructed.


