skeleton of the prow is formed of a large vertical truss which is
bolted to the front of the frame and is held within by a tie bar. On
each side of this truss are placed the _parallels_ (Figs. 1 and 3),
which are formed of pieces of wood that are set into the frame below
and are provided above with grooves for the passage of iron rods that
support the foot rests by means of which the supernumeraries are
lifted. As a whole, those rods constitute a jointed parallelogram, so
that the foot rest always remains horizontal while describing a curve
of five feet radius from the top of the frame to the deck of the
vessel. They are actuated by a cable which winds around a small
windlass fixed in the interior of the frame.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.--THE SHIP AS SEEN FROM THE STAGE.]

The large mast consists of a vertical sheath 10 ft. high, which is set
into the center of the frame, and in the interior of which slides a
wooden spar that exceeds it by 5 ft. at first, and is capable of being
drawn out as many more feet for the final apotheosis. This part of the
mast carries three footboards and a platform for the reception of
"supers." It is actuated by a windlass placed upon the frame.

To form the skeleton of the vessel there are mounted upon the frame a
series of eight large vertical trusses parallel with each other and
cross-braced by small trusses. The upper part of these supports the
flooring of the deck, and their exterior portion affects the curve of
a ship's sides. It is to these trusses that are attached the panels
covered with painted canvas that represent the hull. These panels are
nine in number on each side. Above are placed those that simulate the
nettings and those that cover the prow or form its crest.

The turret that surrounds the large mast is formed of vertical trusses
provided with panels of painted canvas and carrying a floor for the
figurants to stand upon.

The bowsprit is in two parts, one sliding in the other. The front
portion is at first pulled back, in order to hide the vessel entirely
in the side scenes. It begins to make its appearance before the vessel
itself gets under way. Light silken cordages connect the mast, the
bowsprit, and the small mast at the stern.

On each side of the vessel, there are bolted to the frame that
supports it five iron frames covered with canvas (Fig. 3), which reach
the level of the water line, and upon which stand the "supers"
representing the naiads that are supposed to draw the ship upon the
beach. Finally at the bow there is fixed a frame which supports a
danseuse representing the living prow of the vessel.

The vessel is drawn to the middle of the stage by a cable attached to
its right side and passing around a windlass placed in the side scenes
to the left (Fig. 2). It is at the same time pushed by machinists
placed in the interior of the framework. The latter, as above stated,
is entirely covered with painted canvas resembling water.

As the vessel, freighted with harmoniously grouped spirits, and with
naiads, sea fairies, and graceful genii seeming to swim around it,
sails in upon the stage, puts about, and advances as if carried along
by the waves to the front of the stage, the effect is really
beautiful, and does great credit to the machinists of the Opera.

We are indebted to _Le Genie Civil_ and _Le Monde Illustre_ for the
description and engravings.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE GIRARD HYDRAULIC RAILWAY.


[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

We give herewith some illustrations of this railway which has recently
excited so much technical interest in Europe and America, and which
threatens to revolutionize both the method and velocity of traveling,
if only the initial expense of laying the line can be brought within
moderate limits. A short line of railway has been laid in Paris, and
we have there examined it, and traveled over the line more than once;
so that we can testify to the smoothness and ease of the motion. Sir
Edward Watkin examined the railway recently, and we understand that a
line two miles long is to be laid in London, under his auspices. He
seems to think it might be used for the Channel tunnel, being both
smokeless and noiseless. It might also, if it could be laid at a
sufficiently low price, be useful for the underground railways in
London, of one of which he is chairman. We are favorably impressed by
the experiments we have witnessed; our misgivings are as to the cost.
The railway is the invention of the well known hydraulic engineer,
Monsieur Girard, who, as early as 1852, endeavored to replace the
ordinary steam traction on railways by hydraulic propulsion, and in
1854 sought to diminish the resistance to the movement of the wagons
by removing the wheels, and causing them to slide on broad rails. In
order to test the invention, Mons. Girard demanded, and at the end of
1869 obtained, a concession for a short line from Paris to Argenteuil,
starting in front of the Palais de l'Industrie, passing by Le Champ de
Courses de Longchamps, and crossing the Seine at Suresnes.
Unfortunately, the war of 1870-71 intervened, during which the works
were destroyed and Mons. Girard was killed. After his death the
invention was neglected for some years. A short time ago, however, one
of his former colleagues, Mons. Barre, purchased the plans and
drawings of Mons. Girard from his family, and having developed the
invention, and taken out new patents, formed a company to work them.
The invention may be divided into two parts, which are distinct, the
first relating to the mode of supporting the carriages and the second
to their propulsion. Each carriage is carried by four or six shoes,
shown in Figs. 3, 4, and 5; and these shoes slide on a broad, flat
rail, 8 in. or 10 in. wide. The rail and shoe are shown in section in
Fig. 1. The rail is bolted to longitudinal wooden sleepers, and the
shoe is held on the rail by four pieces of metal, A, two on each side,
which project slightly below the top of the rail. The bottom of the
shoe which is in contact with the rail is grooved or channeled, so as
to hold the water and keep a film between each shoe and the rail. The
carriage is supported by vertical rods, which fit one into each shoe,
a hole being formed for that purpose; and the point of support being
very low, and quite close to the rail, great stability is insured. It
is proposed to make the rail of the form shown in Fig. 2 in future, as
this will avoid the plates, A, and the flanges, B, will help to keep
the water on the rail. Figs. 3, 4, and 5 show the shoe in detail. Fig.
3 gives a longitudinal section, Fig. 4 is a plan, and Fig. 5 is a plan
of the shoe inverted, showing the grooves in its face. Fig. 3 shows
the hollow shoe, into which water at a pressure of ten atmospheres is
forced by a pipe from a tank on the tender. The water enters by the
pipe, C, and fills the whole of the chamber, D. The water attempts to
escape, and in doing so lifts the shoe slightly, thus filling the
first groove of the chamber. The pressure again lifts the shoe, and
the second chamber is filled; and so on, until ultimately the water
escapes at the ends, E, and sides, F. Thus a film of water is kept
between the shoe and the rail, and on this film the carriage is said
to float. The water runs away into the channels, H H (Fig. 6), and is
collected to be used over again. Fig. 3 also shows the means of
supporting the carriage on the shoe by means of K, the point of
support being very low. The system of grooves on the lower face of the
shoe is shown in Fig. 5. So much for the means by which wheels are
dispensed with, and the carriage enabled to slide along the line.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

[Illustration: FIG. 6.]

The next point is the method of propulsion. Figs. 7 and 8 give an
elevation and plan of one of the experimental carriages. Along the
under side of each of the carriages a straight turbine, L L, extends
the whole length, and water at high pressure impinges on the blades of
this turbine from a jet, M, and by this means the carriage is moved
along. A parabolic guide, which can be moved in and out of gear by a
lever, is placed under the tender, and this on passing strikes the
tappet, S, and opens the valve which discharges the water from the
jet, M, and this process is repeated every few yards along the whole
line. The jets, M, must be placed at such a distance apart that at
least one will be able to operate on the shortest train that can be
used. In this turbine there are two sets of blades, one above the
other, placed with their concave sides in opposite directions, so that
one set is used for propelling in one direction and the other in the
opposite direction. In Fig. 6 it is seen that the jet, M, for one
direction is just high enough to act against the blades, Q, while the
other jet is higher, and acts on the blades, P, for propulsion in the
opposite direction. The valves, R, which are opened by the tappet, S,
are of peculiar construction, and we hope soon to be able to give
details of them. Reservoirs (Fig. 6) holding water at high pressure
must be placed at intervals, and the pipe, T, carrying high pressure
water must run the whole length of the line. Fig. 6 shows a cross
section of the rail and carriage, and gives a good idea of the general
arrangements. The absence of wheels and of greasing and lubricating
arrangements will alone effect a very great saving, as we are informed
that on the Lyons Railway, which is 800 kilometers long, the cost of
oil and grease exceeds L400,000 per annum. As Sir Edward Watkin
recently explained, all the great railway companies have long tried to
find a substitute for wheels, and this railway appears to offer a
solution of that problem. Mons. Barre thinks that a speed of 200
kilometers (or 120 miles) per hour may be easily and safely attained.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.]

[Illustration: FIG. 8.]

Of course, as there is no heavy locomotive, and as the traction does
not depend upon pressure on the rail, the road may be made
comparatively light. The force required to move a wagon along the road
is very small, Mons. Barre stating, as the result of his experiments,
that an effort amounting to less than half a kilogramme is sufficient
to move one ton when suspended on a film of water with his improved
shoes. It is recommended that the stations be placed at the summit of
a double incline, so that on going up one side of the incline the
motion of the train may be arrested, and on starting it may be
assisted. No brakes are required, as the friction of the shoe against
the rail, when the water under pressure is not being forced through, is
found to be quite sufficient to bring the train to a standstill in a
very short distance. The same water is run into troughs by the side of
the line, and can be used over and over again indefinitely, and in the
case of long journeys, the water required for the tender could be taken
up while the train is running. The principal advantages claimed for
the railway are: The absence of vibration and of side rolling motion;
the pleasure of traveling is comparable to that of sleighing over a
surface of ice, there is no noise, and what is important in town
railways, no smoke; no dust is caused by the motion of the train during
the journey. It is not easy for the carriages to be thrown from the
rails, since any body getting on the rail is easily thrown off by the
shoe, and will not be liable to get underneath, as is the case with
wheels; the train can be stopped almost instantly, very smoothly, and
without shock. Very high speed can be attained; with water at a
pressure of 10 kilogrammes, a speed of 140 kilometers per hour can be
attained; great facility in climbing up inclines and turning round the
curves; as fixed engines are employed to obtain the pressure, there is
great economy in the use of coal and construction of boilers, and
there is a total absence of the expense of lubrication. It is,
however, difficult to see how the railway is to work during a long and
severe frost. We hope to give further illustrations at an early date
of this remarkable invention.--_Industries._

       *       *       *       *       *




QUARTZ FIBERS.[1]

    [Footnote 1: Lecture delivered at the Royal Institution, on
    Friday, June 14, by Mr. C. V. Boys, F.R.S.--_Nature._]


In almost all investigations which the physicist carries out in the
laboratory, he has to deal with and to measure with accuracy those
subtile and to our senses inappreciable forces to which the so-called
laws of nature give rise. Whether he is observing by an electrometer
the behavior of electricity at rest or by a galvanometer the action of
electricity in motion, whether in the tube of Crookes he is
investigating the power of radiant matter, or with the famous
experiment of Cavendish he is finding the mass of the earth--in these
and in a host of other cases he is bound to measure with certainty and
accuracy forces so small that in no ordinary way could their existence
be detected, while disturbing causes which might seem to be of no
particular consequence must be eliminated if his experiments are to
have any value. It is not too much to say that the very existence of
the physicist depends upon the power which he possesses of producing
at will and by artificial means forces against which he balances those
that he wishes to measure.

I had better perhaps at once indicate in a general way the magnitude
of the forces with which we have to deal.

The weight of a single grain is not to our senses appreciable, while
the weight of a ton is sufficient to crush the life out of any one in
a moment. A ton is about 15,000,000 grains. It is quite possible to
measure with unfailing accuracy forces which bear the same relation to
the weight of a grain that a grain bears to a ton.

To show how the torsion of wires or threads is made use of in
measuring forces, I have arranged what I can hardly dignify by the
name of an experiment. It is simply a straw hung horizontally by a
piece of wire. Resting on the straw is a fragment of sheet iron
weighing ten grains. A magnet so weak that it cannot lift the iron yet
is able to pull the straw round through an angle so great that the
existence of the feeble attraction is evident to every one in the
room.

Now it is clear that if, instead of a straw moving over the table
simply, we had here an arm in a glass case and a mirror to read the
motion of the arm, it would be easy to observe a movement a hundred or
a thousand times less than that just produced, and therefore to
measure a force a hundred or a thousand times less than that exerted
by this feeble magnet.

Again, if instead of wire as thick as an ordinary pin I had used the
finest wire that can be obtained, it would have opposed the movement
of the straw with a far less force. It is possible to obtain wire ten
times finer than this stubborn material, but wire ten times finer is
much more than ten times more easily twisted. It is ten thousand times
more easily twisted. This is because the torsion varies as the fourth
power of the diameter. So we say 10 x 10 = 100, 100 x 100 = 10,000.
Therefore, with the finest wire, forces 10,000 times feebler still
could be observed.

It is therefore evident how great is the advantage of reducing the
size of a torsion wire. Even if it is only halved, the torsion is
reduced sixteenfold. To give a better idea of the actual sizes of such
wires and fibers as are in use, I shall show upon the screen a series
of such photographs taken by Mr. Chapman, on each of which a scale of
thousandths of an inch has been printed.

[Illustration: Scale of 1000ths of an inch for Figs. 1 to 7. The scale
of Figs. 8 and 9 is much finer.]

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

The first photograph (Fig. 1) is an ordinary hair--a sufficiently
familiar object, and one that is generally spoken of as if it were
rather fine. Much finer than this is the specimen of copper wire now
on the screen (Fig. 2), which I recently obtained from Messrs. Nalder
Brothers. It is only a little over one-thousandth of an inch in
diameter. Ordinary spun glass, a most beautiful material, is about
one-thousandth of an inch in diameter, and this would appear to be an
ideal torsion thread (Fig. 3). Owing to its fineness, its torsion
would be extremely small, and the more so because glass is more easily
deformed than metals. Owing to its very great strength, it can carry
heavier loads than would be expected of it. I imagine many physicists
must have turned to this material in their endeavor to find a really
delicate torsion thread. I have so turned only to be disappointed. It
has every good quality but one, and that is its imperfect elasticity.
For instance, a mirror hung by a piece of spun glass is casting an
image of a spot of light on the scale. If I turn the mirror, by means
of a fork, twice to the right, and then turn it back again, the light
does not come back to its old point of rest, but oscillates about a
point on one side, which, however, is slowly changing, so that it is
impossible to say what the point of rest really is. Further, if the
glass is twisted one way first and then the other way, the point of
rest moves in a manner which shows that it is not influenced by the
last deflection alone: the glass remembers what was done to it
previously. For this reason spun glass is quite unsuitable as a
torsion thread; it is impossible to say what the twist is at any time,
and therefore what is the force developed.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

So great has the difficulty been in finding a fine torsion thread that
the attempt has been given up, and in all the most exact instruments
silk has been used. The natural cocoon fibers, as shown on the screen
(Fig. 4), consist of two irregular lines gummed together, each about
one two-thousandth of an inch in diameter. These fibers must be
separated from one another and washed. Then each component will,
according to the experiment of Gray, carry nearly 60 grains before
breaking, and can be safely loaded with 15 grains. Silk is therefore
very strong, carrying at the rate of from 10 to 20 tons to the square
inch. It is further valuable in that its torsion is far less than that
of a fiber of the same size of metal or even of glass, if such could
be produced. The torsion of silk, though exceedingly small, is quite
sufficient to upset the working of any delicate instrument, because it
is never constant. At one time the fiber twists one way and another
time in another, and the evil effect can only be mitigated by using
large apparatus in which strong forces are developed. Any attempt that
may be made to increase the delicacy of apparatus by reducing their
dimensions is at once prevented by the relatively great importance of
the vagaries of the silk suspension.

The result, then, is this. The smallness, the length of period, and
therefore delicacy, of the instruments at the physicist's disposal
have until lately been simply limited by the behavior of silk. A more
perfect suspension means still more perfect instruments, and therefore
advance in knowledge.

It was in this way that some improvements that I was making in an
instrument for measuring radiant heat came to a deadlock about two
years ago. I would not use silk, and I could not find anything else
that would do. Spun glass, even, was far too coarse for my purpose, it
was a thousand times too stiff.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

There is a material invented by Wollaston long ago, which, however, I
did not try because it is so easily broken. It is platinum wire which
has been drawn in silver, and finally separated by the action of
nitric acid. A specimen about the size of a single line of silk is now
on the screen, showing the silver coating at one end (Fig. 5).

As nothing that I knew of could be obtained that would be of use to
me, I was driven to the necessity of trying by experiment to find some
new material. The result of these experiments was the development of a
process of almost ridiculous simplicity which it may be of interest
for me to show.

The apparatus consists of a small crossbow, and an arrow made of straw
with a needle point. To the tail of the arrow is attached a fine rod
of quartz which has been melted and drawn out in the oxyhydrogen jet.
I have a piece of the same material in my hand, and now after melting
their ends and joining them together, an operation which produces a
beautiful and dazzling light, all I have to do is to liberate the
string of the bow by pulling the trigger with one foot, and then if
all is well a fiber will have been drawn by the arrow, the existence
of which can be made evident by fastening to it a piece of stamp
paper.

In this way threads can be produced of great length, of almost any
degree of fineness, of extraordinary uniformity, and of enormous
strength. I do not believe, if any experimentalist had been promised
by a good fairy that he might have anything he desired, that he would
have ventured to ask for any one thing with so many valuable
properties as these fibers possess. I hope in the course of this
evening to show that I am not exaggerating their merits.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.]

[Illustration: FIG. 7.]

In the first place, let me say something about the degree of fineness
to which they can be drawn. There is now projected upon the screen a
quartz fiber one five-thousandth of an inch in diameter (Fig. 6). This
is one which I had in constant use in an instrument loaded with about
30 grains. It has a section only one-sixth of that of a single line of
silk, and it is just as strong. Not being organic, it is in no way
affected by changes of moisture and temperature, and so it is free
from the vagaries of silk which give so much trouble. The piece used
in the instrument was about 16 inches long. Had it been necessary to
employ spun glass, which hitherto was the finest torsion material,
then, instead of 16 inches, I should have required a piece 1,000 feet
long, and an instrument as high as the Eiffel tower to put it in.

There is no difficulty in obtaining pieces as fine as this yards long
if required, or in spinning it very much finer. There is upon the
screen a single line made by the small garden spider, and the size of
this is perfectly evident (Fig. 7). You now see a quartz fiber far
finer than this, or, rather, you see a diffraction phenomenon, for no
true image is formed at all; but even this is a conspicuous object in
comparison with the tapering ends, which it is absolutely impossible
to trace in a microscope. The next two photographs, taken by Mr.
Nelson, whose skill and resources are so famous, represent the extreme
end of a tail of quartz, and, though the scale is a great deal larger
than that used in the other photographs, the end will be visible only
to a few. Mr. Nelson has photographed here what it is absolutely
impossible to see. What the size of these ends may be, I have no means
of telling. Dr. Royston Piggott has estimated some of them at less
than one-millionth of an inch, but, whatever they are, they supply for
the first time objects of extreme smallness the form of which is
certainly known, and, therefore, I cannot help looking upon them as
more satisfactory tests for the microscope than diatoms and other
things of the real shape of which we know nothing whatever.

Since figures as large as a million cannot be realized properly, it
may be worth while to give an illustration of what is meant by a fiber
one-millionth of an inch in diameter.

A piece of quartz an inch long and an inch in diameter would, if drawn
out to this degree of fineness, be sufficient to go all the way round
the world 658 times; or a grain of sand just visible--that is,
one-hundredth of an inch long and one hundredth of an inch in
diameter--would make one thousand miles of such thread. Further, the
pressure inside such a thread due to a surface tension equal to that
of water would be 60 atmospheres.

Going back to such threads as can be used in instruments, I have made
use of fibers one ten-thousandth of an inch in diameter, and in these
the torsion is 10,000 times less than that of spun glass.

As these fibers are made finer their strength increases in proportion
to their size, and surpasses that of ordinary bar steel, reaching, to
use the language of engineers, as high a figure as 80 tons to the
inch. Fibers of ordinary size have a strength of 50 tons to the inch.

While it is evident that these fibers give us the means of producing
an exceedingly small torsion, and one that is not affected by weather,
it is not yet evident that they may not show the same fatigue that
makes spun glass useless. I have, therefore, a duplicate apparatus
with a quartz fiber, and you will see that the spot of light comes
back to its true place on the screen after the mirror has been twisted
round twice.

I shall now for a moment draw your attention to that peculiar property
of melted quartz that makes threads such as I have been describing a
possibility. A liquid cylinder, as Plateau has so beautifully shown,
is an unstable form. It can no more exist than can a pencil stand on
its point. It immediately breaks up into a series of spheres. This is
well illustrated in that very ancient experiment of shooting threads
of resin electrically. When the resin is hot, the liquid cylinders,
which are projected in all directions, break up into spheres, as you
see now upon the screen. As the resin cools, they begin to develop
tails; and when it is cool enough, i.e., sufficiently viscous, the
tails thicken and the beads become less, and at last uniform threads
are the result. The series of photographs show this well.

[Illustration: FIG. 8.]

[Illustration: FIG. 9.]

There is a far more perfect illustration which we have only to go into
the garden to find. There we may see in abundance what is now upon the
screen--the webs of those beautiful geometrical spiders. The radial
threads are smooth like the one you saw a few minutes ago, but the
threads that go round and round are beaded. The spider draws these
webs slowly, and at the same time pours upon them a liquid, and still
further to obtain the effect of launching a liquid cylinder in space
he, or rather she, pulls it out like the string of a bow, and lets it
go with a jerk. The liquid cylinder cannot exist, and the result is
what you now see upon the screen (Fig. 8). A more perfect illustration
of the regular breaking up of a liquid cylinder it would be impossible
to find. The beads are, as Plateau showed they ought to be,
alternately large and small, and their regularity is marvelous.
Sometimes two still smaller beads are developed, as may be seen in the
second photograph, thus completely agreeing with the results of
Plateau's investigations.

I have heard it maintained that the spider goes round her web and
places these beads there afterward. But since a web with about 360,000
beads is completed in an hour--that is at the rate of about 100 a
second--this does not seem likely. That what I have said is true, is
made more probable by the photograph of a beaded web that I have made
myself by simply stroking a quartz fiber with a straw wetted with
castor oil (Fig. 9); it is rather larger than a spider line; but I
have made beaded threads, using a fine fiber, quite indistinguishable
from a real spider web, and they have the further similarity that they
