colony of Greeks who had been taken prisoners of war was founded within
a day's journey of Susa.

The great expedition to Persia, and the graphic description of the
retreat of the "ten thousand" Greeks, given by Xenophon in his Anabasis,
must have been well known to Alexander the Great when he set out on his
career of conquest. He overthrew the Persian empire in 331 B.C., having
destroyed Tyre and subdued Egypt in the previous year and carried his
triumphant progress to the banks of the Indus, and there he "held
intercourse with the learned sages of India." On Alexander's death
Seleucus succeeded to the throne of Persia in 307 B.C., and not long
after he forced his way beyond the Indus, and ultimately as far as the
sacred river Ganges. He formed an alliance with the Indian king
Sandrocottus (otherwise known as Chandra-gupta), which was maintained
for many years, and it is said, also, that he gave his daughter in
marriage to the Indian king, and aided him with Grecian auxiliaries in
his wars.

He sent an expedition by sea, under the command of Patrocles his
admiral, who visited the western shores of India, and a little later he
despatched an embassy under Megasthenes and Onesicrates, the former of
whom resided for some years at the "great city" of Palibothra (supposed
to be Patna).

Not long after Megasthenes was at Palibothra, Ptolemy Philadelphus sent
an expedition overland through Persia to India, and later Ptolemy
Euergetes, who lived between 145-116 B.C., sent a fleet under Eudoxius
on a voyage of discovery to the western shores of India, piloted, as is
said, by an Indian sailor who had been shipwrecked, and who had been
found in a boat on the Red Sea. Eudoxius reached India safely, and
returned to Egypt with a cargo of spices and precious stones.

The proof of very ancient communication between Greece and India is
quite clear, both by way of Persia and Egypt, and we find that the
Greeks, who were in the habit of calling all other nations barbarians,
speak constantly with respect of the gymnosophists--called "Sapientes
Indi" by Pliny. We read also of the Greek philosophers constantly
travelling eastward in search of knowledge, and on their return setting
up new schools of thought. Thales, it is affirmed, travelled in Egypt
and Asia during the sixth century B.C., and it is said of him that he
returned to Miletus, and transported that vast stock of learning which
he had acquired into his own country.

He is generally considered as the first of the Greek philosophers.
Strabo says of him that he was the first of the Grecian philosophers who
made inquiry into natural causes and the mathematics.

The doctrine of Thales, that water was the first elementary principle,
is exactly that of the ancient Hindoos, who held that water was the
first element, and the first work of the creative power. This idea was
not completely exploded even up till the 18th century. We find Van
Helmont affirming that all metals, and even rocks, may be resolved into
water; and Lavoisier, so lately as 1770, thought it worth while to
communicate an elaborate paper "On the nature of water and the
experiments by which it has been attempted to prove the possibility of
converting it into earth."

Pythagoras, perhaps the greatest of all Greek philosophers, it is known,
travelled very widely, spending no less than twenty-two years in Egypt.
He also spent some considerable time at Babylon, and was taught the lore
of the Magi.

In the famous satire of Lucian on the philosophic quackery of his day
(about 120 A.D.), "The Sale of the Philosophers," we have a most
interesting account of the system of Pythagoras.

_Scene--A Slave Mart. _Jupiter_, _Mercury_, _philosophers_, in the garb
of slaves, for sale. Audience of buyers._

_Jupiter._--Now, you arrange the benches, and get the place ready for
the company. You bring out the goods and set them in a row; but trim
them up a little first, and make them look their best, to attract as
many customers as possible. You, Mercury, must put up the lots, and bid
all comers welcome to the sale. Gentlemen,--We are here going to offer
you philosophical systems of all kinds, and of the most varied and
ingenious description. If any gentleman happens to be short of ready
money he can give his security for the amount, and pay next year.

_Mercury (to Jupiter)._--There are a great many come; so we had best
begin at once, and not keep them waiting.

_Jupiter._--Begin the sale, then.

_Mercury._--Whom shall we put up first?

_Jupiter._--This fellow with the long hair--the Ionian. He's rather an
imposing personage.

_Mercury._--You, Pythagoras, step out, and show yourself to the company.

_Jupiter._--Put him up.

_Mercury._--Gentlemen, we here offer you a professor of the very best
and most select description. Who buys? Who wants to be a cut above the
rest of the world? Who wants to understand the harmonies of the universe
and to live two lives?

_Customer (turning the philosopher round and examining him)._--He's not
bad to look at. What does he know best?

_Mercury._--Arithmetic, astronomy, prognostics, geometry, music, and
conjuring. You've a first-rate soothsayer before you.

_Customer._--May one ask him a few questions?

_Mercury._--Certainly--(_aside_), and much good may the answers do you.

_Customer._--What country do you come from?

_Pythagoras._--Samos.

_Customer._--Where were you educated?

_Pythagoras._--In Egypt, among the wise men there.

_Customer._--Suppose I buy you, now, what will you teach me?

_Pythagoras._--I will teach you nothing--only recall things to your
memory.

_Customer._--How will you do that?

_Pythagoras._--First, I will clean out your mind, and wash out all the
rubbish.

_Customer._--Well, suppose that done, how do you proceed to refresh the
memory?

_Pythagoras._--First, by long repose and silence, speaking no word for
five whole years.

_Customer._--Why, look ye, my good fellow, you'd best go teach the dumb
son of Croesus! I want to talk and not be a dummy. Well--but after this
silence, and these five years?

_Pythagoras._--You shall learn music and geometry.

_Customer._--A queer idea, that one must be a fiddler before one can be
a wise man!

_Pythagoras._--Then you shall learn the science of numbers.

_Customer._--Thank you, but I know how to count already.

_Pythagoras._--How do you count?

_Customer._--One, two, three, four----

_Pythagoras._--Ha! what you call four is ten, and the perfect triangle,
and the great oath by which we swear.

_Customer._--Now, so help me, the great ten and four, I never heard more
divine or more wonderful words!

_Pythagoras._--And afterwards, stranger, you shall learn about Earth,
and Air, and Water, and Fire--what is their action, and what their form,
and what their motion.

_Customer._--What! have Fire, Air, or Water bodily shape?

_Pythagoras._--Surely they have; else, without form and shape, how could
they move! Besides, you shall learn that the Deity consists in Number,
Mind, and Harmony.

_Customer._--What you say is really wonderful.

_Pythagoras._--Besides what I have just told you, you shall understand
that you yourself, who seem to be one individual, are really somebody
else.

_Customer._--What! do you mean to say I'm somebody else, and not myself,
now talking to you?

_Pythagoras._--Just at this moment you are; but once upon a time you
appeared in another body, and under another name; and hereafter you will
pass again into another shape still.

(After a little more discussion of this philosopher's tenets, he is
purchased on behalf of a company of professors from Magna Graeca for ten
minae. The next lot is Diogenes, the Cynic.)

Apuleius says in the Florida, Section XV., in reference to Pythagoras,
that he went to Egypt to acquire learning, "that he was there taught by
the priests the incredible power of ceremonies, the wonderful
commutations of numbers, and the most ingenious figures of geometry; but
that, not satisfied with these mental accomplishments, he afterwards
visited the Chaldaeans and the Brahmins, and amongst the latter the
Gymnosophists. The Chaldaeans taught him the stars, the definite orbits
of the planets, and the various effects of both kinds of stars upon the
nativity of men, as also, for much money, _the remedies for human use
derived from the earth, the air, and the sea_ (the elements earth, air,
and water, or all nature).

"But the Brahmins taught him the greater part of his philosophy--what
are the rules and principles of the understanding; what the functions of
