corridor by means of cross walls. Inside this surrounding row of rooms
was the real tomb, a building with thick walls and five rooms in a
row. The middle one of these rooms, noticeably larger than the others,
is the real burial chamber. These five rooms were originally connected
by doors which were afterward walled up. As to the roof, we can only
make surmises, as the excavator has furnished us with no material on
this point. The walls as they now stand are at the highest point about
four meters high, and thus may form only the lower part of the
building. Whether the roof was an arch of stone or simply of wood, is
uncertain; but it seems to me probable that it was of wood. For the
tomb contained a layer of ashes in which all the objects put in the
grave with the dead man were found; and, assuming that the roof was of
wood, it is possible that the roof was set on fire at the time when
the tomb was robbed and that the ashes came from this fire. The
explanation which the excavator gives of these ashes, that the body
and the offerings were burned in the closed grave, hardly deserves
consideration. In any case, the grave has been robbed and destroyed.
That is shown by the fact that many pieces of funeral furniture, which
originally could only have been put in the central rooms, were found
partly broken in the outside rooms, or on the side toward the fields,
the side most exposed to the attack of grave robbers.

The assumption that the grave has been robbed and intentionally
destroyed agrees entirely with the fact that all the more valuable
objects found in the grave were in fragments. But, fragmentary as they
are, they are sufficient to give us a good idea of the art of the
first period of the Egyptian kingdom, a period which is now most
generally estimated to be five and a half millenniums before the
present day (3600 B.C.) The skill with which ivory carving was done in
that early time is indeed amazing. Reclining lions, hunting dogs and
fish are so skillfully reproduced that one asks how many centuries of
development must have preceded before the art of carving reached this
perfection. A number of feet taken from the legs of small chairs and
other similar furniture, and made in imitation of bulls' legs, show
such a fixity of style and at the same time such a freedom of
execution, that no archaeologist, without the report of the excavator,
would dare to proclaim them the oldest dated works of Egyptian art.
But it was not only in carving ivory, which is easy to work, that the
Egyptian artists showed their skill. They also make bowls and vases of
diorite and porphyry with the same success; and the forms presented by
the smaller ivory vases are also to be found in vases made of those
refractory stones. Further, the vases made of stone present not merely
such forms as might be made by turning or boring, but there are also
bowls with ribs which are as finely polished as the turned bowls. The
hardest material used in the objects already found is rock crystal, of
which several small flasks and bowls and a little lion are composed.
But the lion, it must be confessed, is rather rudely worked. A few
small vases of obsidian also occur--remarkable in view of the fact
that we do not know of any place in or near Egypt where this stone may
be found. Besides these vessels of hard stone, there are, of course, a
large number made of softer stone. Alabaster vases occur in every
conceivable form. Cylindrical pots, with wavy handles or simple
cordlike ornamentation, appear to have been especially favored. The
great beer jars, closed with enormous stoppers of unbaked clay, were
made of ordinary baked clay. Of course the different stone and clay
vessels, which, undoubtedly, originally contained offerings for the
dead, form the bulk of the contents of the grave. The slate tablets
for rubbing cosmetics for painting the body, and the flint weapons and
knives of all sorts, follow in point of numbers. Remarkably enough,
metal objects occur in this oldest historical period alongside the
stone implements, though, of course, in less numbers. Several objects
made of copper and a slender bead of gold have been found. Such, in
short, is all that remains of the things put in the tomb with the
king. But little as there is, it gives us an idea of the richness and
splendor with which these old royal tombs were furnished.

It might certainly be productive of unusual emotions to know that the
few human bones found in the tomb, and now preserved in the Gizeh
Museum, once belonged to the oldest Egyptian king. But as we know
almost nothing of him, except some unfounded traditions, this sort of
relic worship deserves very little respect. The scientific value of
the proof that Menes was the king buried in the royal tomb of Neggadeh
lies rather in the fact that we have now settled the question of the
age of that culture which was presented to us by the excavations of
Ballas, Neggadeh and Abydos. The products of a whole period of
Egyptian civilization which had been misunderstood, and had been
used to support false historical conclusions, fall into their true
place; and our knowledge of the history of Egyptian culture is
carried back not merely a few centuries, but to a period presenting
characteristics different from the oldest previously known period, but
containing the germs of the later development.

Cairo, Egypt.

       *       *       *       *       *




ROSE PSYCHE.


The hybrid Polyantha Rose Psyche is a seedling from the dwarf
Polyantha Rose Golden Fairy, crossed with the pollen of the Crimson
Rambler. Its growth and habit, though more delicate, much resembles
the Rambler. It is apparently quite hardy, and is very free flowering,
but we fear not perpetual. The flowers are produced in clusters of
from fifteen to twenty-five, and are 2 to 21/2 inches across when
fully expanded. In the bud stage they are very pretty and well formed.
The color is white, suffused with salmon-rose and pink, with a yellow
base to the petals. It is a real companion to Crimson Rambler.--The
Gardeners' Chronicle.

[Illustration: ROSE HYBRID POLYANTHA "PSYCHE"--COLOR, PALE PINK.]

       *       *       *       *       *




SLEEP AND THE THEORIES OF ITS CAUSE.


The theory of the origin of sleep which has gained the widest credence
is the one that attributes it to anaemia of the brain. It has been
shown by Mosso, and many others, that in men with defects of the
cranial wall the volume of the brain decreases during sleep. At the
same time, the volume of any limb increases as the peripheral parts of
the body become turgid with blood. In dogs, the brain has been
exposed, and the cortex of that organ has been observed to become
anaemic during sleep. It is a matter of ordinary observation that in
infants, during sleep, the volume of the brain becomes less, since the
fontanelle is found to sink in. It has been supposed, but without
sufficient evidence to justify the supposition, that this anaemia of
the brain is the cause and not the sequence of sleep. The idea behind
this supposition has been that, as the day draws to an end, the
circulatory mechanism becomes fatigued, the vasomotor center
exhausted, the tone of the blood vessels deficient, and the energy of
the heart diminished, and the circulation to the cerebral arteries
lessened. By means of a simple and accurate instrument (the
Hill-Barnard sphygmometer), with which the pressure in the arteries of
man can be easily reckoned, it has been recently determined that the
arterial pressure falls just as greatly during bodily rest as during
sleep. The ordinary pressure of the blood in the arteries of young and
healthy men averages 110-120 mm. of mercury. In sleep, the pressure
may sink to 95-100 mm.; but if the pressure be taken of the same
subject lying in bed, and quietly engaged on mental work, it will be
found to be no higher. By mental strain or muscular effort, the
pressure is, however, immediately raised, and may then reach 130-140
mm. of mercury. It can be seen from considering these facts that the
fall of pressure is concomitant with rest, rather than with sleep. As,
moreover, it has been determined on strong evidence that the cerebral
vessels are not supplied with vasomotor nerves, and that the cerebral
circulation passively follows every change in the arterial pressure,
it becomes evident that sleep cannot be occasioned by any active
change in the cerebral vessels. This conclusion is borne out by the
fact that to produce in the dog a condition of coma like to sleep, it
is necessary to reduce, by a very great amount, the cerebral
circulation. Thus, both carotids and both vertebral arteries, can be
frequently tied at one and the same time without either producing coma
or any very marked symptoms. The circulation is, in such a case,
maintained through other channels, such as branches from the superior
intercostal arteries which enter the anterior spinal artery. While
total anaemia of the brain instantaneously abolishes consciousness,
partial anaemia is found to raise the excitability of the cortex
cerebri. By estimation of the exchange of gases in the blood which
enters and leaves the brain, it has been shown that the consumption of
oxygen and the production of carbonic acid in that organ is not large.
Further, it may be noted that the condition of anaesthesia is not in
all cases associated with cerebral anaemia. Thus, while during
chloroform anaesthesia the arterial pressure markedly falls, such is
not the case during anaesthesia produced by ether or a mixture of
nitrous oxide and oxygen.

The arterial pressure of man is not lowered by the ordinary fatigue of
daily life. It is only in extreme states of exhaustion that the
pressure may be found decreased when the subject is in the standing
position. The fall of pressure which does occur during rest or sleep
is mainly occasioned by the diminished rate of the heart. The increase
in the volume of the limbs is to be ascribed to the cessation of
muscular movement and to the diminution in the amplitude of
respiration. The duty of the heart is to deliver the blood to the
capillaries. From the veins the blood is, for the most part, returned
to the heart by the compressive action of the muscles, the constant
change of posture and by the respiration acting both as a force and
suction pump. All of these factors are at their maximum during bodily
activity and at their minimum during rest. On exciting a sleeper by
calling his name, or in any way disturbing him, the limbs, it has been
recorded, decrease in volume while the brain expands. This is so
because the respiration changes in depth, the heart quickens, the
muscles alter in tone, as the subject stirs in his sleep in reflex
response to external stimuli. Considering all these facts, we must
regard the fall of arterial pressure, the depression of the
fontanelle, and the turgescence of the vessels of the limbs as
phenomena concomitant with bodily rest and warmth, and we have no more
right to assign the causation of sleep to cerebral anaemia than to any
other alteration in the functions of the body, such as occur during
sleep.

We may well here summarize these other changes in function:

(1) The respiratory movement becomes shallow and thoracic in type.

(2) The volume of the air inspired per minute is lessened by one-half
to two-thirds.

(3) The output of carbonic acid is diminished by the same amount.

(4) The bodily temperature falls.

(5) The acidity of the cortex of the brain disappears.

(6) Reflex action persists; the knee jerk is diminished, pointing to
relaxation in tone of the muscles; consciousness is suspended.

Analyzing more closely the conditions of the central nervous system,
it becomes evident that, in sleep, consciousness alone is in abeyance.
The nerves and the special senses continue to transmit impulses and to
produce reflex movements. If a blanket, sufficiently heavy to impede
respiration, be placed upon the face of a sleeping person, we know
that it will be immediately pushed away. More than this, complicated
movements can be carried out; the postilion can sleep on horseback;
the punkah-wallah may work his punkah and at the same time enjoy a
slumber; a weary mother may sleep, and yet automatically rock her
infant's cradle. Turning to the histories of sleep walkers, we find it
recorded that, during sleep, they perform such feats as climbing
slanting roofs or walking across dangerous narrow ledges and bridges.
The writer knew of the case of a lad who, when locked in his room at
night to prevent his wandering in his sleep, climbed a partition eight
to ten feet in height which separated his sleeping compartment from
the next, and this without waking.

The brain can carry out not only such complicated acts as these, but
it has been found to maintain during sleep its normal inhibitory
control over the lower reflex centers in the spinal cord.

Thus, in sleeping dogs, after the spinal cord has been divided in the
dorsal region, reflexes can be more easily evoked from the lumbar than
from the cervical cord, because the former is freed from the
inhibitory control of the brain.

The strength of stimulus necessary to pass the threshold of
consciousness and to produce an awakening has been measured in various
ways. It has been determined that it takes a louder and louder sound
or a stronger and stronger electric shock to arouse a sleeper during
the first two or three hours of slumber; after that period, the sleep
becomes lighter and the required stimulus need be much less.

The alternative theories which have been suggested to account for the
onset of sleep may be classed as chemical and histological.

In relation to the first, it has been suggested that if consciousness
be regarded as dependent upon a certain rate of atomic vibration, it
is possible that this rate depends on a store of intramolecular
oxygen, which, owing to fatigue, may become exhausted; or it may be
supposed that alkaloidal substances may collect as fatigue products
within the brain, and choke the activity of that organ. Against this
theory may be submitted the facts that monotony of stimulus will
produce sleep in an unfatigued person, that over-fatigue, either
mental or bodily, will hinder the onset of sleep, that the cessation
of external stimuli by itself produces sleep. As an example of this
last, may be quoted the case recorded by Strumpel of a patient who was
completely anaesthetic save for one eye and one ear, and who fell
asleep when these were closed. Moreover, many men possess the power,
by an effort of will, of withdrawing from objective or subjective
stimuli, and of thus inducing sleep.

The histological theories of sleep are founded on recent extraordinary
advances in the knowledge of the minute anatomy of the central nervous
system, a knowledge founded on the Golgi and methylene blue methods of
staining. It is held possible that the dendrites or branching
processes of nerve cells are contractile, and that they, by pulling
themselves apart, break the association pathways which are formed by
the interlacing or synapses of the dendrites in the brain. Ramon y
Cajal, on the other hand, believes that the neuroglia cells are
contractile, and may expand so as to interpose their branches as
insulating material between the synapses formed by the dendrites of
the nerve cells. The difficulty of accepting these theories is that
nobody can locate consciousness to any particular group of nerve
cells. Moreover, the anatomical evidence of such changes taking place
is at present of the flimsiest character.

If these theories be true, what, it may be asked, is the agency that
causes the dendrites to contract or the neuroglia cells to expand? Is
there really a soul sitting aloof in the pineal gland, as Descartes
held? When a man like Lord Brougham can at any moment shut himself
away from the outer world and fall asleep, does his soul break the
dendritic contacts between cell and cell; and when he awakes, does it
make contacts and switch the impulses evoked by sense stimuli on to
one or other tract of the axons, or axis cylinder processes, which
form the association pathways? Such a hypothesis is no explanation; it
simply puts back the whole question a step further, and leaves it
wrapped in mystery. It cannot be fatigue that produces the
hypothetical interruptions of the dendritic synapses and then induces
sleep, for sleep can follow after fatigue of a very limited kind. A
man may sleep equally well after a day spent in scientific research as
after one spent in mountain climbing, or after another passed in
idling by the seashore. He may spend a whole day engaged in
mathematical calculation or in painting a landscape. He fatigues--if
we admit the localization of function to definite parts of the
brain--but one set of association tracts, but one group of cells, and
yet, when he falls asleep, consciousness is not partially, but totally
suspended.

We must admit that the withdrawal of stimuli, or their monotonous
repetition, are factors which do undoubtedly stand out as primary
causes of sleep. We may suppose, if we like, that consciousness
depends upon a certain rate of vibration which takes place in the
brain structure. This vibration is maintained by the stimuli of the
present, which awaken memories of former stimuli, and are themselves
at the same time modified by these. By each impulse streaming into the
brain from the sense organs, we can imagine the structure of the
cerebral cortex to be more or less permanently altered. The impulses
of the present, as they sweep through the association pathways, arouse
memories of the past; but in what way this is brought about is outside
the range of explanation. Perhaps an impulse vibrating at a certain
rate may arouse cells or fibrils tuned by past stimuli to respond to
this particular rate of vibration. Thus may be evoked a chain of
memories, while by an impulse of a different rate quite another set of
memories may be started. Tracts of association are probably formed in
definite lines through the nervous system, as during the life of a
child repeated waves of sense impulses beat against and overcome
resistances, and make smooth pathways here and there through the brain
structure. Thus may be produced growth of axons in certain directions,
and synapses of this cell with that. If the same stimulus be often
repeated, the synapses between groups of cells may become permanent. A
memory, a definite line of action which is manifested by a certain
muscular response, may thus become structurally fixed. If the stimulus
be not repeated, the synapses may be but temporary, and the memory
fade as the group of cells is occupied by a new memory of some more
potent sense stimulus. Many association tracts and synapses are laid
down in the central nervous system when the child is born. These are
the fruits of inheritance, and by their means, we may suppose,
instinctive reflex actions are carried out.

So long as the present stimuli are controlled by past memories and are
active in recalling them, so long does consciousness exist, and the
higher will be the consciousness, the greater the number and the more
intense the character of the memories aroused. We may suppose that
when all external stimuli are withdrawn, or the brain soothed by
monotony of gentle repetition, and when the body is placed at rest,
and the viscera are normal and give rise to no disturbing sensations,
consciousness is then suspended, and natural sleep ensues. Either
local fatigue of the muscles, or of the heart, or ennui, or exhaustion
of some brain center usually leads us to seek those conditions in
which sleep comes. The whole organism may sleep for the sake of the
part. To avoid sleeplessness, we seek monotony of stimulus, either
objective or subjective. In the latter case, we dwell on some
monotonous memory picture, such as sheep passing one by one through a
gap in the hedge. To obtain our object, we dismiss painful or exciting
thoughts, keep the viscera in health, so that they may not force
themselves upon our attention, and render the sense organs quiet by
seeking darkness, silence and warmth.--L.H., in Nature.

       *       *       *       *       *




AMATEUR CHRONOPHOTOGRAPHIC APPARATUS.


At the time that we described the Demeny chronophotographic apparatus
we remarked that it had the advantage of permitting of the projection
of very luminous images of large dimensions; but it is certain that
the cases are somewhat limited in which there is any need of using a
screen 24 or 25 feet square, and, as a general thing, one 6 or 10 feet
square suffices. The manufacturer of the apparatus, M. Gaumont, has,
therefore, been led to construct a small size in which the bands have
the dimensions usually employed in the French and other apparatus,
thus permitting of the use of such as are now found in abundance in
the market.

By reducing the size, it has been possible further to simplify the
construction, and at the same time to reduce the price, thus making of
the new form a genuine amateur apparatus.

It will be remembered that the Demeny principle consists especially in
the avoiding of traction upon the perforated part of the band, which
is the portion that always presents the most fragility. This principle
has naturally been preserved in the small model, and a preservation of
the bands for a long time is thus assured.

[Illustration: FIG. 1--ARRANGEMENT OF THE SENSITIZED BAND IN TWO
MAGAZINES.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2--ARRANGEMENT FOR TAKING VIEWS WITH SPECIAL
GEARING FOR THE WINDING OF THE BAND.]

The apparatus is reversible, and may be used for making negatives as
well as for projecting positives. In its new form it is easily
transportable and is no more bulky than an ordinary 5 by 7 inch
apparatus. Nothing is simpler then than to carry it on a journey, if
one desires to make his own negative bands. Since the sensitized film
has to be protected against the light during its entire travel, two
magazines have been arranged (Fig. 1). One of these, A, which is fixed
upon the top of the camera, contains the clean film, while the other,
B, which is placed beneath the objective, receives the strip after it
has been acted upon by the light. A train of toothed wheels, C (Fig.
2), actuates the roller of this second magazine. This arrangement may,
moreover, be utilized also when projections are made, if one does not
desire the band to float in measure as it unwinds behind the
objective. As the upper magazine is entirely closed when it is placed
upon the apparatus, it is necessary, in order to prepare for taking a
negative, to pull out a few inches of the film, pass the latter over
the guide roller and fix the extremity to the winding roller in the
lower magazine.

It is clear that we can have any number of magazines whatever for
