circle about it as if charmed, like night-wandering insects, by its
splendor. It is manifest to us at the first glance that without the sun
these obedient little planets would not exist; it is his attraction that
binds them together in a system, and his rays that make them visible to
one another in the abyss of space. Although they vary in relative size,
yet we observe a striking similarity among them. They are all globular
bodies, they all turn upon their axes, they all travel about the sun in
the same direction, and their paths all lie very nearly in one plane.
Some of them have one or more moons, or satellites, circling about them
in imitation of their own revolution about the sun. Their family
relationship to one another and to the sun is so evident that it colors
our judgment about them as individuals; and when we happen to find, upon
closer approach, that one of them, the earth, is covered with vegetation
and water and filled with thousands of species of animated creatures, we
are disposed to believe, without further examination, that they are all
alike in this respect, just as they are all alike in receiving light and
heat from the sun.

This preliminary judgment, arising from the evident unity of the
planetary system, can only be varied by an examination of its members in
detail.

One striking fact that commands our attention as soon as we have entered
the narrow precincts of the solar system is the isolation of the sun and
its attendants in space. The solar system occupies a disk-shaped, or
flat circular, expanse, about 5,580,000,000 miles across and relatively
very thin, the sun being in the center. From the sun to the nearest
star, or other sun, the distance is approximately five thousand times
the entire diameter of the solar system. But the vast majority of the
stars are probably a hundred times yet more remote. In other words, if
the Solar system be represented by a circular flower-bed ten feet
across, the nearest star must be placed at a distance of nine and a half
miles, and the great multitude of the stars at a distance of nine
hundred miles!

Or, to put it in another way, let us suppose the sun and his planets to
be represented by a fleet of ships at sea, all included within a space
about half a mile across; then, in order that there might be no shore
relatively nearer than the nearest fixed star is to the sun, we should
have to place our fleet in the middle of the Pacific Ocean, while the
distance of the main shore of the starry universe would be so immense
that the whole surface of the earth would be far too small to hold the
expanse of ocean needed to represent it!

From these general considerations we next proceed to recall some of the
details of the system of worlds amid which we dwell. Besides the earth,
the sun has seven other principal planets in attendance. These eight
planets fall into two classes--the terrestrial planets and the major, or
jovian, planets. The former class comprises Mercury, Venus, the earth,
and Mars, and the latter Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. I have
named them all in the order of their distance from the sun, beginning
with the nearest.

The terrestrial planets, taking their class name from _terra_, the
earth, are relatively close to the sun and comparatively small. The
major planets--or the jovian planets, if we give them a common title
based upon the name of their chief, Jupiter or Jove--are relatively
distant from the sun and are characterized both by great comparative
size and slight mean density. The terrestrial planets are all included
within a circle, having the sun for a center, about 140,000,000 miles
in radius. The space, or gap, between the outermost of them, Mars, and
the innermost of the jovian planets, Jupiter, is nearly two and a half
times as broad as the entire radius of the circle within which they are
included. And not only is the jovian group of planets widely separated
from the terrestrial group, but the distances between the orbits of its
four members are likewise very great and progressively increasing.
Between Jupiter and Saturn is a gap 400,000,000 miles across, and this
becomes 900,000,000 miles between Saturn and Uranus, and more than
1,000,000,000 miles between Uranus and Neptune. All of these distances
are given in round numbers.

Finally, we come to some very extraordinary worlds--if we can call them
worlds at all--the asteroids. They form a third group, characterized by
the extreme smallness of its individual members, their astonishing
number, and the unusual eccentricities and inclinations of their orbits.
They are situated in the gap between the terrestrial and the jovian
planets, and about 500 of them have been discovered, while there is
reason to think that their real number may be many thousands. The
largest of them is less than 500 miles in diameter, and many of those
recently discovered may be not more than ten or twenty miles in
diameter. What marvelous places of abode such little planets would be if
it were possible to believe them inhabited, we shall see more clearly
when we come to consider them in their turn. But without regard to the
question of habitability, the asteroids will be found extremely
interesting.

In the next chapter we proceed to take up the planets for study as
individuals, beginning with Mercury, the one nearest the sun.




CHAPTER II

MERCURY, A WORLD OF TWO FACES AND MANY CONTRASTS


Mercury, the first of the other worlds that we are going to consider,
fascinates by its grotesqueness, like a piece of Chinese ivory carving,
so small is it for its kind and so finished in its eccentric details. In
a little while we shall see how singular Mercury is in many of the
particulars of planetary existence, but first of all let us endeavor to
obtain a clear idea of the actual size and mass of this strange little
planet. Compared with the earth it is so diminutive that it looks as if
it had been cut out on the pattern of a satellite rather than that of an
independent planet. Its diameter, 3,000 miles, only exceeds the moon's
by less than one half, while both Jupiter and Saturn, among their
remarkable collections of moons, have each at least one that is
considerably larger than the planet Mercury. But, insignificant though
it be in size, it holds the place of honor, nearest to the sun.

It was formerly thought that Mercury possessed a mass greatly in excess
of that which its size would seem to imply, and some estimates, based
upon the apparent effect of its attraction on comets, made it equal in
mean density to lead, or even to the metal mercury. This led to curious
speculations concerning its probable metallic composition, and the
possible existence of vast quantities of such heavy elements as gold in
the frame of the planet. But more recent, and probably more correct,
computations place Mercury third in the order of density among the
members of the solar system, the earth ranking as first and Venus as
second. Mercury's density is now believed to be less than the earth's in
the ratio of 85 to 100. Accepting this estimate, we find that the force
of gravity upon the surface of Mercury is only one third as great as
upon the surface of the earth--i.e., a body weighing 300 pounds on the
earth would weigh only 100 pounds on Mercury.

This is an important matter, because not only the weight of bodies, but
the density of the atmosphere and even the nature of its gaseous
constituents, are affected by the force of gravity, and if we could
journey from world to world, in our bodily form, it would make a great
difference to us to find gravity considerably greater or less upon other
planets than it is upon our own. This alone might suffice to render some
of the planets impossible places of abode for us, unless a decided
change were effected in our present physical organization.

One of the first questions that we should ask about a foreign world to
which we proposed to pay a visit, would relate to its atmosphere. We
should wish to know in advance if it had air and water, and in what
proportions and quantities. However its own peculiar inhabitants might
be supposed able to dispense with these things, to _us_ their presence
would be essential, and if we did not find them, even a planet that
blazed with gold and diamonds only waiting to be seized would remain
perfectly safe from our invasion. Now, in the case of Mercury, some
doubt on this point exists.

Messrs. Huggins, Vogel, and others have believed that they found
spectroscopic proof of the existence of both air and the vapor of water
on Mercury. But the necessary observations are of a very delicate
nature, and difficult to make, and some astronomers doubt whether we
possess sufficient proof that Mercury has an atmosphere. At any rate,
its atmosphere is very rare as compared with the earth's, but we need
not, on that account, conclude that Mercury is lifeless. Possibly, in
view of certain other peculiarities soon to be explained, a rare
atmosphere would be decidedly advantageous.

Being much nearer the sun than the earth is, Mercury can be seen by us
only in the same quarter of the sky where the sun itself appears. As it
revolves in its orbit about the sun it is visible, alternately, in the
evening for a short time after sunset and in the morning for a short
time before sunrise, but it can never be seen, as the outer planets are
seen, in the mid-heaven or late at night. When seen low in the twilight,
at evening or morning, it glows with the brilliance of a bright
first-magnitude star, and is a beautiful object, though few casual
watchers of the stars ever catch sight of it. When it is nearest the
earth and is about to pass between the earth and the sun, it temporarily
disappears in the glare of the sunlight; and likewise, when it it is
farthest from the earth and passing around in its orbit on the opposite
side of the sun, it is concealed by the blinding solar rays.
Consequently, except with the instruments of an observatory, which are
able to show it in broad day, Mercury is never visible save during the
comparatively brief periods of time when it is near its greatest
apparent distance east or west from the sun.

The nearer a planet is to the sun the more rapidly it is compelled to
move in its orbit, and Mercury, being the nearest to the sun of all the
planets, is by far the swiftest footed among them. But its velocity is
subject to remarkable variation, owing to the peculiar form of the orbit
in which the planet travels. This is more eccentric than the orbit of
any other planet, except some of the asteroids. The sun being situated
in one focus of the elliptical orbit, when Mercury is at perihelion, or
nearest to the sun, its distance from that body is 28,500,000 miles, but
when it is at aphelion, or farthest from the sun, its distance is
43,500,000 miles. The difference is no less than 14,000,000 miles! When
nearest the sun Mercury darts forward in its orbit at the rate of
twenty-nine miles in a second, while when farthest from the sun the
speed is reduced to twenty-three miles.

Now, let us return for a moment to the consideration of the wonderful
variations in Mercury's distance from the sun, for we shall find that
their effects are absolutely startling, and that they alone suffice to
mark a wide difference between Mercury and the earth, considered as the
abodes of sentient creatures. The total change of distance amounts, as
already remarked, to 14,000,000 miles, which is almost half the entire
distance separating the planet from the sun at perihelion. This immense
variation of distance is emphasized by the rapidity with which it takes
place. Mercury's periodic time, i.e., the period required for it to make
a single revolution about the sun--or, in other words, the length of its
year--is eighty-eight of our days. In just one half of that time, or in
about six weeks, it passes from aphelion to perihelion; that is to say,
in six weeks the whole change in its distance from the sun takes place.
In six weeks Mercury falls 14,000,000 miles--for it _is_ a fall, though
in a curve instead of a straight line--falls 14,000,000 miles toward the
sun! And, as it falls, like any other falling body it gains in speed,
until, having reached the perihelion point, its terrific velocity
counteracts its approach and it begins to recede. At the end of the next
six weeks it once more attains its greatest distance, and turns again to
plunge sunward.

Of course it may be said of every planet having an elliptical orbit
that between aphelion and perihelion it is falling toward the sun, but
no other planet than Mercury travels in an orbit sufficiently eccentric,
and approaches sufficiently near to the sun, to give to the mind so
vivid an impression of an actual, stupendous fall!

Next let us consider the effects of this rapid fall, or approach, toward
the sun, which is so foreign to our terrestrial experience, and so
appalling to the imagination.

First, we must remember that the nearer a planet is to the sun the
greater is the amount of heat and light that it receives, the variation
being proportional to the inverse square of the distance. The earth's
distance from the sun being 93,000,000 miles, while Mercury's is only
36,000,000, it follows, to begin with, that Mercury gets, on the
average, more than six and a half times as much heat from the sun as the
earth does. That alone is enough to make it seem impossible that Mercury
can be the home of living forms resembling those of the earth, for
imagine the heat of the sun in the middle of a summer's day increased
six or seven fold! If there were no mitigating influences, the face of
the earth would shrivel as in the blast of a furnace, the very stones
would become incandescent, and the oceans would turn into steam.

Still, notwithstanding the tremendous heat poured upon Mercury as
compared with that which our planet receives, we can possibly, and for
the sake of a clearer understanding of the effects of the varying
distance, which is the object of our present inquiry, find a loophole to
admit the chance that yet there may be living beings there. We might,
for instance, suppose that, owing to the rarity of its atmosphere, the
excessive heat was quickly radiated away, or that there was something in
the constitution of the atmosphere that greatly modified the effective
temperature of the sun's rays. But, having satisfied our imagination on
this point, and placed our supposititious inhabitants in the hot world
of Mercury, how are we going to meet the conditions imposed by the
rapid changes of distance--the swift fall of the planet toward the sun,
followed by the equally swift rush away from it? For change of distance
implies change of heat and temperature.

It is true that we have a slight effect of this kind on the earth.
Between midsummer (of the northern hemisphere) and midwinter our planet
draws 3,000,000 miles nearer the sun, but the change occupies six
months, and, at the earth's great average distance, the effect of this
change is too slight to be ordinarily observable, and only the
astronomer is aware of the consequent increase in the apparent size of
the sun. It is not to this variation of the sun's distance, but rather
to the changes of the seasons, depending on the inclination of the
earth's axis, that we owe the differences of temperature that we
experience. In other words, the total supply of heat from the sun is not
far from uniform at all times of the year, and the variations of
temperature depend upon the distribution of that supply between the
northern and southern hemispheres, which are alternately inclined
sunward.

But on Mercury the supply of solar heat is itself variable to an
enormous extent. In six weeks, as we have seen, Mercury diminishes its
distance from the sun about one third, which is proportionally ten times
as great a change of distance as the earth experiences in six months.
The inhabitants of Mercury in those six pregnant weeks see the sun
expand in the sky to more than two and a half times its former
magnitude, while the solar heat poured upon them swiftly augments from
something more than four and a half times to above eleven times the
amount received upon the earth! Then, immediately, the retreat of the
planet begins, the sun visibly shrinks, as a receding balloon becomes
smaller in the eyes of its watchers, the heat falls off as rapidly as it
had previously increased, until, the aphelion point being reached, the
process is again reversed. And thus it goes on unceasingly, the sun
growing and diminishing in the sky, and the heat increasing and
decreasing by enormous amounts with astonishing rapidity. It is
difficult to imagine any way in which atmospheric influences could
equalize the effects of such violent changes, or any adjustments in the
physical organization of living beings that could make such changes
endurable.

But we have only just begun the story of Mercury's peculiarities. We
come next to an even more remarkable contrast between that planet and
our own. During the Paris Exposition of 1889 a little company of
astronomers was assembled at the Juvisy observatory of M. Flammarion,
near the French capital, listening to one of the most surprising
disclosures of a secret of nature that any _savant_ ever confided to a
few trustworthy friends while awaiting a suitable time to make it
public. It was a secret as full of significance as that which Galileo
concealed for a time in his celebrated anagram, which, when at length he
furnished the key, still remained a riddle, for then it read: "The
Mother of the Loves imitates the Shapes of Cynthia," meaning that the
planet Venus, when viewed with a telescope, shows phases like those of
the moon. The secret imparted in confidence to the knot of astronomers
at Juvisy came from a countryman of Galileo's, Signor G. V.
Schiaparelli, the Director of the Observatory of Milan, and its purport
was that the planet Mercury always keeps the same face directed toward
the sun. Schiaparelli had satisfied himself, by a careful series of
observations, of the truth of his strange announcement, but before
giving it to the world he determined to make doubly sure. Early in 1890
he withdrew the pledge of secrecy from his friends and published his
discovery.

No one can wonder that the statement was generally received with
incredulity, for it was in direct contradiction to the conclusions of
