
The substances dissolved in the plasma form about 10 per cent of the whole
amount. The remaining 90 per cent is water. Practically all the
constituents of the plasma, except the wastes, enter the blood from the
digestive organs.

*Purposes of Water in the Blood.*--Not only is water the most abundant
constituent of the blood; it is, in some respects, the most important. It
is the liquefying portion of the blood, holding in solution the
constituents of the plasma and floating the corpuscles. Deprived of its
water, the blood becomes a solid substance. Through the movements of the
blood the water also serves the purpose of a transporting agent in the
body. The cells in all parts of the body require water and this is
supplied to them from the blood. Water is present in the corpuscles as
well as in the plasma and forms about 80 per cent of the entire volume of
the blood.

*Coagulation of the Blood.*--If the blood is exposed to some unnatural
condition, such as occurs when it escapes from the blood vessels, it
undergoes a peculiar change known as _coagulation_.(11) In this change the
corpuscles are collected into a solid mass, known as the _clot_, thereby
separating from a liquid called the _serum_. The serum, which is similar
in appearance to the blood plasma, differs from that liquid in one
important respect as explained below.

*Causes of Coagulation.*--Although coagulation affects all parts of the
blood, only one of its constituents is found in reality to coagulate. This
is the fibrinogen. The formation of the clot and the separation of the
serum is due almost entirely to the action of this substance. Fibrinogen
is for this reason called the _coagulable constituent of the blood_. In
the plasma the fibrinogen is in a liquid form; but during coagulation it
changes into a white, stringy solid, called _fibrin_. This appears in the
clot and is the cause of its formation. Forming as a network of
exceedingly fine and very delicate threads (Fig. 11) _throughout the mass
of blood_ that is coagulating, the fibrin first entangles the corpuscles
and then, by contracting, draws them into the solid mass or clot.(12) The
contracting of the fibrin also squeezes out the serum. This liquid
contains all the constituents of the plasma except the fibrinogen.

                                [Fig. 11]


 Fig. 11--*Fibrin threads* (after Ranvier). These by contracting draw the
                  corpuscles together and form the clot.


*Fibrin Ferment and Calcium.*--Most difficult of all to answer have been
the questions: What causes the blood to coagulate outside of the blood
vessels and what prevents its coagulation inside of these vessels? The
best explanation offered as yet upon this point is as follows: Fibrinogen
does not of itself change into fibrin, but is made to undergo this change
by the presence of another substance, called _fibrin ferment_. This
substance is not a regular constituent of the blood, but is formed as
occasion requires. It is supposed to result from the breaking down of the
white corpuscles, and perhaps also from the blood platelets, when the
blood is exposed to unnatural conditions. The formation of the ferment
leads in turn to the changing of the fibrinogen into fibrin.

Another substance which is necessary to the process of coagulation is the
element calcium. If compounds of calcium are absent from the blood,
coagulation does not take place. These are, however, regular constituents
of healthy blood. Whether the presence of the calcium is necessary to the
formation of the ferment or to the action of the ferment upon the
fibrinogen is unknown.

*Purpose of Coagulation.*--The purpose of coagulation is to check the flow
of blood from wounds. The fact that the blood is contained in and kept
flowing continuously through a system of _connected_ vessels causes it to
escape rapidly from the body whenever openings in these vessels are made.
Clots form at such openings and close them up, stopping in this way the
flow that would otherwise go on indefinitely. Coagulation, however, does
not stop the flow of blood from the large vessels. From these the blood
runs with too great force for the clot to form within the wound.

*Time Required for Coagulation.*--The rate at which coagulation takes place
varies greatly under different conditions. It is influenced strongly by
temperature; heat hastens and cold retards the process. It may be
prevented entirely by lowering the temperature of the blood to near the
freezing point. The presence of a foreign substance increases the rapidity
of coagulation, and it has been observed that bleeding from small wounds
is more quickly checked by covering them with linen or cotton fibers. The
fibers in this case hasten the process of coagulation.

*Quantity of Blood.*--The quantity of blood is estimated to be about one
thirteenth of the entire weight of the body. This for the average
individual is an amount weighing nearly twelve pounds and having a volume
of nearly one and one half gallons. About 46 per cent by volume of this
amount is made up of corpuscles and 54 per cent of plasma. Of the plasma
about 10 per cent consists of solids and 90 per cent of water, as already
stated.

*Functions of the Blood.*--The blood is the great carrying, or
distributing, agent in the body. Through its movements (considered in the
next chapter) it carries food and oxygen to the cells and waste materials
from the cells. Much of the blood may, therefore, be regarded as _freight_
in the process of transportation. The blood also carries, or distributes,
heat. Taking up heat in the warm parts of the body, it gives it off at
places having a lower temperature. This enables all parts of the body to
keep at about the same temperature.

In addition to serving as a carrier, the blood has antiseptic properties,
i.e., it destroys disease germs. While  this function is mainly due to the
white corpuscles, it is due in part to the plasma.(13) Through its
coagulation, the blood also closes leaks in the small blood vessels. The
blood is thus seen to be a liquid of several functions.

                                [Fig. 12]


Fig. 12--*A balanced change* in water. The level remains constant although
the water is continually changing; suggestive of the changes in the blood.


*Changes in the Blood.*--In performing its functions in the body the blood
must of necessity undergo rapid and continuous change. The red corpuscles,
whose changes have already been noted, appear to be the most enduring
constituents of the blood. The plasma is the portion that changes most
rapidly. Yet in spite of these changes the quantity and character of the
blood remain practically constant.(14) This is because there is a
_balancing_ of the forces that bring about the changes. The addition of
various materials to the blood just equals the withdrawal of the same
materials from the blood. Somewhat as a vessel of water (Fig. 12) having
an inflow and an outflow which are equal in amount may keep always at the
same level, the balancing of the intake and outgo of the blood keeps its
composition about the same from time to time.

*Hygiene of the Blood.*--The blood, being a changeable liquid, is easily
affected through our habits of living. Since it may be affected for ill as
well as for good, one should cultivate those habits that are beneficial
and avoid those that are harmful in their effects. Most of the hygiene of
the blood, however, is properly included in the hygiene of the organs that
act upon the blood--a fact which makes it unnecessary to treat this subject
fully at this time.

From a health standpoint, the most important constituents of the blood
are, perhaps, the corpuscles. These are usually sufficient in number and
vigor in the blood of those who take plenty of physical exercise, accustom
themselves to outdoor air and sunlight, sleep sufficiently, and avoid the
use of injurious drugs. On the other hand, they are deficient in quantity
and inferior in quality in the bodies of those who pursue an opposite
course. Impurities not infrequently find their way into the blood through
the digestive organs. One should eat wholesome, well-cooked food, drink
freely of _pure_ water, and limit the quantity of food _to what can be
properly digested_. The natural purifiers of the blood are the organs of
excretion. The skin is one of these and its power to throw off impurities
depends upon its being clean and active.

*Effect of Drugs.*--Certain drugs and medicines, including alcohol and
quinine,(15) have recently been shown to destroy the white corpuscles. The
effect of such substances, if introduced in considerable amount in the
body, is to render one less able to withstand attacks of disease. Many
patent medicines are widely advertised for purifying the blood. While
these may possibly do good in particular cases, the habit of doctoring
one's self with them is open to serious objection. Instead of taking drugs
and patent medicines for purifying the blood, one should study to live
more hygienically. We may safely rely upon wholesome food, pure water,
outdoor exercise and sunlight, plenty of sleep, and a clean skin for
keeping the blood in good condition. If these natural remedies fail, a
physician should be consulted.

*Summary.*--The blood is the carrying or transporting agent of the body. It
consists in part of constituents, such as the red corpuscles, that enable
it to carry different substances; and in part of the materials that are
being carried. The latter, which include food and oxygen for the cells and
wastes from the cells, may be classed as freight. Certain constituents in
the blood destroy disease germs, and other constituents, by coagulating,
close small leaks in the blood vessels. Although subject to rapid and
continuous change, the blood is able--by reason of the balancing of
materials added to and withdrawn from it--to remain about the same in
quantity and composition.

Exercises.--1. Compare blood and water with reference to weight, density,
color, odor, and complexity of composition.

2. Show by an outline the different constituents of the blood.

3. Compare the red and white corpuscles with reference to size, shape,
number, origin, and function.

4. Name some use or purpose for each constituent of the blood.

5. What constituents of the blood may be regarded as freight and what as
agents for carrying this freight?

6. After coagulation, what portions of the blood are found in the clot?
What portions are found in the serum?

7. What purposes are served by water in the blood?

8. Show how the blood, though constantly changing, is kept about the same
in quantity, density, and composition.

9. In the lungs the blood changes from a dark to a bright red color and in
the tissues it changes back to dark red. What is the cause of these
changes?

10. If the oxygen and hemoglobin formed a strong instead of a weak
chemical union, could the hemoglobin then act as an oxygen carrier? Why?

11. What habits of living favor the development of corpuscles in the
blood?

12. Why will keeping the skin clean and active improve the quality of
one's blood?



PRACTICAL WORK


*To demonstrate the Physical Properties of Blood* (Optional).--Since blood
is needed in considerable quantity in the following experiments, it is
best obtained from the butcher. To be sure of securing the blood in the
manner desired, take to the butcher three good-sized bottles bearing
labels as follows:

*1* Fill two thirds full. While the blood is cooling, stir rapidly with
the hand or a bunch of switches to remove the clot.

*2* Fill two thirds full and set aside without shaking or stirring.

*3* Fill two thirds full and thoroughly mix with the liquid in the bottle.

Label 3 must be pasted on a bottle, having a tight-fitting stopper, which
is filled one fifth full of a saturated solution of Epsom salts. The
purpose of the salts is to prevent coagulation until the blood is diluted
with water as in the experiments which follow.

*Experiments.*--1. Let some of the defibrinated blood (bottle 1) flow (not
fall) on the surface of water in a glass vessel. Does it remain on the
surface or sink to the bottom? What does the experiment show with
reference to the relative weight of blood and water?

2. Fill a large test tube or a small bottle one fourth full of the
defibrinated blood and thin it by adding an equal amount of water. Then
place the hand over the mouth and shake until the blood is thoroughly
mixed with the air. Compare with a portion of the blood not mixed with the
air, noting any difference in color. What substance in the air has acted
on the blood to change its color?

3. Fill three tumblers each two thirds full of water and set them in a
warm place. Pour into one of the tumblers, and thoroughly mix with the
water, two tablespoonfuls of the blood containing the Epsom salts. After
an interval of half an hour add blood to the second tumbler in the same
manner, and after another half hour add blood to the third. The water
dilutes the salts so that coagulation is no longer prevented. Jar the
vessel occasionally as coagulation proceeds; and if the clot is slow in
forming, add a trace of some salt of calcium (calcium chloride). After the
blood has been added to the last tumbler make a comparative study of all.
Note that coagulation begins in all parts of the liquid at the same time
and that, as the process goes on, the clot shrinks and is drawn toward the
center.

4. Place a clot from one of the tumblers in experiment 3 in a large vessel
of water. Thoroughly wash, adding fresh water, until a white, stringy
solid remains. This substance is fibrin.

5. Examine the coagulated blood obtained from the butcher (bottle 2).
Observe the dark central mass (the clot) surrounded by a clear liquid (the
serum). Sketch the vessel and its contents, showing and naming the parts
into which the blood separates by coagulation.

*To examine the Red Corpuscles.*--Blood for this purpose is easily obtained
from the finger. With a handkerchief, wrap one of the fingers of the left
hand from the knuckle down to the first joint. Bend this joint and give it
a sharp prick with the point of a sterilized 'needle just above the root
of the nail. Pressure applied to the under side of the finger will force
plenty of blood through a very small opening. (To prevent any possibility
of blood poisoning the needle should be sterilized. This may be done by
dipping it in alcohol or by holding it for an instant in a hot flame. It
is well also to wash the finger with soap and water, or with alcohol,
before the operation.) Place a small drop of the blood in the middle of a
glass slide, protect the same with a cover glass, and examine with a
compound microscope. At least two specimens should be examined, one of
which should be diluted with a little saliva or a physiological salt
solution.(16) In the diluted specimen the red corpuscles appear as
amber-colored, circular, disk-shaped bodies. In the undiluted specimen
they show a decided tendency to arrange themselves in rows, resembling
rows of coins. (Singly, the corpuscles do not appear red when highly
magnified.)

A few white corpuscles may generally be found among the red ones in the
undiluted specimen. These become separated by the formation of the red
corpuscles into rows. They are easily recognized by their larger size and
by their silvery appearance, due to the light shining through them.

*To examine White Corpuscles.*--Obtain from the butcher a small piece of
the neck sweetbread of a calf. Press it between the fingers to squeeze out
a whitish, semi-liquid substance. Dilute with physiological salt solution
on a glass slide and examine with a compound microscope. Numerous white
corpuscles of different kinds and sizes will be found. Make sketches.

*To prepare Models of Red Corpuscles.*--Several models of red corpuscles
should be prepared for the use of the class. Clay and putty may be pressed
into the form of red corpuscles and allowed to harden, and small models
may be cut out of blackboard crayon. Excellent models can be molded from
plaster of Paris as follows: Coat the inside of the lid of a baking powder
can with oil or vaseline and fill it even full of a thick mixture of
plaster of Paris and water. After the plaster has set, remove it from the
lid and with a pocket-knife round off the edges and hollow out the sides
until the general form of the corpuscle is obtained. The models may be
colored red if it is desired to match the color as well as the form of the
corpuscle.




CHAPTER V - THE CIRCULATION


A Carrier must move. To enable the blood to carry food and oxygen _to_ the
cells and waste materials _from_ the cells, and also to distribute heat,
it is necessary to keep it moving, or circulating, in all parts of the
body. So closely related to the welfare of the body is the circulation(17)
of the blood, that its stoppage for only a brief interval of time results
in death.

*Discovery of the Circulation.*--The discovery of the circulation of the
blood was made about 1616 by an English physician named Harvey. In 1619 he
announced it in his public lectures and in 1628 he published a treatise in
Latin on the circulation. The chief arguments advanced in support of his
views were the presence of valves in the heart and veins, the continuous
movement of the blood in the same direction through the blood vessels, and
the fact that the blood comes from a cut artery in jets, or spurts, that
correspond to the contractions of the heart.

No other single discovery with reference to the human body has proved of
such great importance. A knowledge of the nature and purpose of the
circulation was the necessary first step in understanding the plan of the
body and the method of maintaining life, and physiology as a science dates
from the time of Harvey's discovery.

*Organs of Circulation.*--The organs of circulation, or blood vessels, are
of four kinds, named the heart, the arteries, the capillaries, and the
veins. They serve as contrivances both for holding the blood and for
keeping it in motion through the body. The heart, which is the chief organ
for propelling the blood, acts as a force pump, while the arteries and
veins serve as tubes for conveying the blood from place to place.
Moreover, the blood vessels are so connected that the blood moves through
them in a regular order, performing two well-defined circuits.

                                [Fig. 13]


Fig. 13--*Heart* in position in thoracic cavity. Dotted lines show positin
                  of diaphragm and of margins of lungs.


*The Heart.*--The human heart, roughly speaking, is about the size of the
clenched fist of the individual owner. It is situated very near the center
of the thoracic cavity and is almost completely surrounded by the lungs.
It is cone-shaped and is so suspended that the small end hangs downward,
forward, and a little to the left. When from excitement, or other cause,
one becomes conscious of the movements of the heart, these appear to be in
the left portion of the chest, a fact which accounts for the erroneous
impression that the heart is on the left side. The position of the heart
in the cavity of the chest is shown in Fig. 13.

*The Pericardium.*--Surrounding the heart is a protective covering, called
the pericardium. This consists of a closed membranous sac so arranged as
to form a double covering around the heart. The heart does not lie inside
of the pericardial sac, as seems at first glance to be the case, but its
relation to this space is like that of the hand to the inside of an empty
sack which is laid around it (Fig. 14). The inner layer of the pericardium
is closely attached to the heart muscle, forming for it an outside
covering. The outer layer hangs loosely around the heart and is continuous
with the inner layer at the top. The outer layer also connects at certain
places with the membranes surrounding the lungs and is attached below to
the diaphragm. Between the two layers of the pericardium is secreted a
liquid which prevents friction from the movements of the heart.

                                [Fig. 14]


 Fig. 14--*Diagram of section of the pericardial sac*, heart removed. _A._
 Place occupied by the heart. _B._ Space inside of pericardial sac. _a._
Inner layer of pericardium and outer lining of heart. _b._ Outer layer of
           pericardium. _C._ Covering of lung. _D._ Diaphragm.


*Cavities of the Heart.*--The heart is a hollow, muscular organ which has
its interior divided by partitions into four distinct cavities. The main
partition extends from top to bottom and divides the heart into two
similar portions, named from their positions the right side and the left
side. On each side are two cavities, the one being directly above the
other. The upper cavities are called _auricles_ and the lower ones
_ventricles_. To distinguish these cavities further, they are named from
their positions the right auricle and the left auricle, and the right
ventricle and the left ventricle (Fig. 15). The auricles on each side
communicate with the ventricles below; but after birth there is no
communication between the cavities on the opposite sides of the heart. All
the cavities of the heart are lined with a smooth, delicate membrane,
called the _endocardium_.

                                [Fig. 15]


   Fig. 15--*Diagram showing plan of the heart.* 1. Semilunar valves. 2.
 Tricuspid valve. 3. Mitral valve. 4. Right auricle. 5. Left auricle. 6.
 Right ventricle. 7. Left ventricle. 8. Chordae tendineae. 9. Inferior vena
    cava. 10. Superior vena cava. 11. Pulmonary artery. 12. Aorta. 13.
                             Pulmonary veins.


*Valves of the Heart.*--Located at suitable places in the heart are four
gate-like contrivances, called valves. The purpose of these is _to give
the blood a definite direction_ in its movements. They consist of tough,
inelastic sheets of connective tissue, and are so placed that pressure on
one side causes them to come together and shut up the passageway, while
pressure on the opposite side causes them to open. A valve is found at the
opening of each auricle into the ventricle, and at the opening of each
ventricle into the artery with which it is connected.

The valve between the right auricle and the right ventricle is called the
_tricuspid_ valve. It is suspended from a thin ring of connective tissue
which surrounds the opening, and its free margins extend into the
ventricle (Fig. 16). It consists of three parts, as its name implies,
which are thrown together in closing the opening. Joined to the free edges
of this valve are many small, tendinous cords which connect at their lower
ends with muscular pillars in the walls of the ventricle. These are known
as the _chordae tendineae_, or heart tendons. Their purpose is to serve as
_valve stops_, to prevent the valve from being thrown, by the force of the
blood stream, back into the auricle.

The _mitral_, or bicuspid, valve is suspended around the opening between
the left auricle and the left ventricle, with the free margins extending
into the ventricle. It is exactly similar in structure and arrangement to
the tricuspid valve, except that it is stronger and is composed of two
parts instead of three.

                                [Fig. 16]


Fig. 16--*Right side of heart* dissected to show cavities and valves. _B._
 Right semilunar valve. The tricuspid valve and the chordae tendineae shown
                            in the ventricle.


The _right semilunar_ valve is situated around the opening of the right
ventricle into the pulmonary artery. It consists of three pocket-shaped
strips of connective tissue which hang loosely from the walls when there
is no pressure from above; but upon receiving pressure, the pockets fill
and project into the opening, closing it completely (Fig. 16). The _left
semilunar_ valve is around the opening of the left ventricle into the
aorta, and is similar in all respects to the right semilunar valve.

*Differences in the Parts of the Heart.*--Marked differences are found in
the walls surrounding the different cavities of the heart. The walls of
the ventricles are much thicker and stronger than those of the auricles,
while the walls of the left ventricle are two or three times thicker than
those of the right. A less marked but similar difference exists between
the auricles and also between the valves on the two sides of the heart.
These differences in structure are all accounted for by the work done by
the different portions of the heart. The greater the work, the heavier the
structures that perform the work.

                                [Fig. 17]


Fig. 17--*Diagram of the circulation*, showing in general the work done by
 each part of the heart. The right ventricle forces the blood through the
 lungs and into the left auricle. The left ventricle forces blood through
 all parts of the body and back to the auricle. The auricles force blood
                           into the ventricles.


*Connection with Arteries and Veins.*--Though the heart is in communication
with all parts of the circulatory system, it makes actual connection with
only a few of the blood tubes. These enter the heart at its upper portion
(Fig. 15), but connect with its different cavities as follows:

1. _With the right auricle_, the superior and the inferior venae cavae and
the coronary veins. The superior vena cava receives blood from the head
and the upper extremities; the inferior vena cava, from the trunk and the
lower extremities; and the coronary veins, from the heart itself.

2. _With the left auricle_, the four pulmonary veins. These receive blood
from the lungs and empty it into the left auricle.

3. _With the right ventricle_, the pulmonary artery. This receives blood
from the heart and by its branches distributes it to all parts of the
lungs.

4. _With the left ventricle_, the aorta. The aorta receives blood from the
heart and through its branches delivers it to all parts of the body.

*How the Heart does its Work.*--The heart is a muscular pump(18) and does
its work through the contracting and relaxing of its walls. During
contraction the cavities are closed and the blood is forced out of them.
During relaxation the cavities open and are refilled. The valves direct
the flow of the blood, being so arranged as to keep it moving always in
the same direction (Fig. 17).

The heart, however, is not a single or a simple pump, but consists in
reality of _four_ pumps which correspond to its different cavities. These
connect with each other and with the blood vessels over the body in such a
manner that each aids in the general movement of the blood.

                                [Fig. 18]


            Fig. 18--Diagram illustrating the "cardiac cycle."


*Work of Auricles and Ventricles Compared.*--In the work of the heart the
two auricles contract at the same time--their contraction being followed
immediately by the contraction of both ventricles. After the contraction
of the ventricles comes a period of rest, or relaxation, about equal in
time to the period of contraction of both the auricles and the
ventricles.(19) On account of the work which they perform, the auricles
have been called the "feed pumps" of the heart; and the ventricles, the
"force pumps."(20) It is the function of the auricles to collect the blood
from the veins, to let this run slowly into the ventricles when both the
auricles and ventricles are relaxed, and finally, by contracting, _to
force an excess of blood into the ventricles_, thereby distending their
walls. The ventricles, having in this way been fully charged by the
auricles, now contract and force their contents into the large arteries.

*Sounds of the Heart.*--Two distinct sounds are given out by the heart as
it pumps the blood. One of them is a dull and rather heavy sound, while
the other is a short, sharp sound. The short sound follows quickly after
the dull sound and the two are fairly imitated by the words "lubb, dup."
While the cause of the first sound is not fully understood, most
authorities believe it to be due to the contraction of the heart muscle
and the sudden tension on the valve flaps. The second sound is due to the
closing of the semilunar valves. These sounds are easily heard by placing
an ear against the chest wall. They are of great value to the physician in
determining the condition of the heart.

*Arteries and Veins.*--These form two systems of tubes which reach from the
heart to all parts of the body. The arteries receive blood from the heart
and distribute it to the capillaries. The veins receive the blood from the
capillaries and return it to the heart. The arteries and veins are similar
in structure, both having the form of tubes and both having three distinct
layers, or coats, in their walls. The corresponding coats in the arteries
and veins are made up of similar materials, as follows:

1. _The inner coat_ consists of a delicate lining of flat cells resting
upon a thin layer of connective tissue. The inner coat is continuous with
the lining of the heart and provides a smooth surface over which the blood
glides with little friction.

2. _The middle coat_ consists mainly of non-striated, or involuntary,
