would shortly be replaced by a supermarket. The environs of the station
itself were a complete puzzle to him, until he oriented himself.

He bought a New York _Times_, glancing first of all at the date line.
Sunday, August 5, 1945; he'd estimated pretty closely. The battle of
Okinawa had been won. The Potsdam Conference had just ended. There were
still pictures of the B-25 crash against the Empire State Building, a
week ago Saturday. And Japan was still being pounded by bombs from the
air and shells from off-shore naval guns. Why, tomorrow, Hiroshima was
due for the Big Job! It amused him to reflect that he was probably the
only person in Williamsport who knew that.

On the way home, a boy, sitting on the top step of a front porch, hailed
him. Allan replied cordially, trying to remember who it was. Of course;
Larry Morton! He and Allan had been buddies. They probably had been
swimming, or playing Commandos and Germans, the afternoon before. Larry
had gone to Cornell the same year that Allan had gone to Penn State;
they had both graduated in 1954. Larry had gotten into some Government
bureau, and then he had married a Pittsburgh girl, and had become
twelfth vice-president of her father's firm. He had been killed, in
1968, in a plane crash.

"You gonna Sunday school?" Larry asked, mercifully unaware of the fate
Allan foresaw for him.

"Why, no. I have some things I want to do at home." He'd have to watch
himself. Larry would spot a difference quicker than any adult. "Heck
with it," he added.

"Golly, I wisht I c'ld stay home from Sunday school whenever I wanted
to," Larry envied. "How about us goin' swimmin', at the Canoe Club,
'safter?"

Allan thought fast. "Gee, I wisht I c'ld," he replied, lowering his
grammatical sights. "I gotta stay home, 'safter. We're expectin'
comp'ny; coupla aunts of mine. Dad wants me to stay home when they
come."

That went over all right. Anybody knew that there was no rational
accounting for the vagaries of the adult mind, and no appeal from adult
demands. The prospect of company at the Hartley home would keep Larry
away, that afternoon. He showed his disappointment.

"Aw, jeepers creepers!" he blasphemed euphemistically.

"Mebbe t'morrow," Allan said. "If I c'n make it. I gotta go, now; ain't
had breakfast yet." He scuffed his feet boyishly, exchanged so-longs
with his friend, and continued homeward.

       *       *       *       *       *

As he had hoped, the Sunday paper kept his father occupied at breakfast,
to the exclusion of any dangerous table talk. Blake Hartley was still
deep in the financial section when Allan left the table and went to the
library. There should be two books there to which he wanted badly to
refer. For a while, he was afraid that his father had not acquired them
prior to 1945, but he finally found them, and carried them onto the
front porch, along with a pencil and a ruled yellow scratch pad. In his
experienced future--or his past-to-come--Allan Hartley had been
accustomed to doing his thinking with a pencil. As reporter, as novelist
plotting his work, as amateur chemist in his home laboratory, as
scientific warfare research officer, his ideas had always been clarified
by making notes. He pushed a chair to the table and built up the seat
with cushions, wondering how soon he would become used to the
proportional disparity between himself and the furniture. As he opened
the books and took his pencil in his hand, there was one thing missing.
If he could only smoke a pipe, now!

His father came out and stretched in a wicker chair with the _Times_
book-review section. The morning hours passed. Allan Hartley leafed
through one book and then the other. His pencil moved rapidly at times;
at others, he doodled absently. There was no question, any more, in his
mind, as to what or who he was. He was Allan Hartley, a man of
forty-three, marooned in his own thirteen-year-old body, thirty years
back in his own past. That was, of course, against all common sense, but
he was easily able to ignore that objection. It had been made before:
against the astronomy of Copernicus, and the geography of Columbus, and
the biology of Darwin, and the industrial technology of Samuel Colt, and
the military doctrines of Charles de Gaulle. Today's common sense had a
habit of turning into tomorrow's utter nonsense. What he needed, right
now, but bad, was a theory that would explain what had happened to him.

Understanding was beginning to dawn when Mrs. Stauber came out to
announce midday dinner.

"I hope you von't mind haffin' it so early," she apologized. "Mein
sister, Jennie, offer in Nippenose, she iss sick; I vant to go see her,
dis afternoon, yet. I'll be back in blenty time to get supper, Mr.
Hartley."

"Hey, Dad!" Allan spoke up. "Why can't we get our own supper, and have a
picnic, like? That'd be fun, and Mrs. Stauber could stay as long as she
wanted to."

His father looked at him. Such consideration for others was a most
gratifying deviation from the juvenile norm; dawn of altruism, or
something. He gave hearty assent:

"Why, of course, Mrs. Stauber. Allan and I can shift for ourselves, this
evening; can't we, Allan? You needn't come back till tomorrow morning."

"_Ach_, t'ank you! T'ank you so mooch, Mr. Hartley."

At dinner, Allan got out from under the burden of conversation by
questioning his father about the War and luring him into a lengthy
dissertation on the difficulties of the forthcoming invasion of Japan.
In view of what he remembered of the next twenty-four hours, Allan was
secretly amused. His father was sure that the War would run on to
mid-1946.

After dinner, they returned to the porch, Hartley _pere_ smoking a cigar
and carrying out several law books. He only glanced at these
occasionally; for the most part, he sat and blew smoke rings, and
watched them float away. Some thrice-guilty felon was about to be
triumphantly acquitted by a weeping jury; Allan could recognize a
courtroom masterpiece in the process of incubation.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was several hours later that the crunch of feet on the walk caused
father and son to look up simultaneously. The approaching visitor was a
