hair and meticulously-clipped mustache, who always gave the impression
of being in evening clothes, even when, as now, he was dressed in faded
khaki.

And Heym ben-Hillel, the Israeli quantum and wave-mechanics man, his
heaping dinner plate an affront to the Laws of Moses, his white hair a
fluffy, tangled chaos, laughing at an impassively-delivered joke the
English knight had made.

And Rudolf von Heldenfeld, with a thin-lipped killer's mouth and a
frozen face that never betrayed its owner's thoughts--he was the
specialist in magnetic currents and electromagnetic fields.

And Farida Khouroglu, the Turkish girl whom MacLeod and Karen had found
begging in the streets of Istanbul, ten years ago, and who had grown up
following the fortunes of the MacLeod Team on every continent and in a
score of nations. It was doubtful if she had ever had a day's formal
schooling in her life, but now she was secretary of the Team, with a
grasp of physics that would have shamed many a professor. She had grown
up a beauty, too, with the large dark eyes and jet-black hair and
paper-white skin of her race. She and Kato Sugihara were very much in
love.

A good team; the best physics-research team in a power-mad,
knowledge-hungry world. MacLeod thought, toying with the stem of his
wineglass, of some of their triumphs: The West Australia Atomic Power
Plant. The Segovia Plutonium Works, which had got them all titled as
Grandees of the restored Spanish Monarchy. The sea-water chemical
extraction plant in Puerto Rico, where they had worked for Associated
Enterprises, whose president, Blake Hartley, had later become President
of the United States. The hard-won victory over a seemingly insoluble
problem in the Belgian Congo uranium mines----He thought, too, of the
dangers they had faced together, in a world where soldiers must use the
weapons of science and scientists must learn the arts of violence. Of
the treachery of the Islamic Kaliphate, for whom they had once worked;
of the intrigues and plots which had surrounded them in Spain; of the
many attempted kidnappings and assassinations; of the time in Basra when
they had fought with pistols and tommy guns and snatched-up clubs and
flasks of acid to defend their laboratories.

A good team--before the rot of treason had touched it. He could almost
smell the putrid stench of it, and yet, as he glanced from face to face,
he could not guess the traitor. And he had so little time--

       *       *       *       *       *

Kato Sugihara's voice rose to dominate the murmur of conversation around
the table.

"I think I am getting somewhere on my photon-neutrino-electron
interchange-cycle," he announced. "And I think it can be correlated to
the collapsed-matter research."

"So?" von Heldenfeld looked up in interest. "And not with the problem of
what goes on in the 'hot layer' surrounding the Earth?"

"No, Suzanne talked me out of that idea," the Japanese replied. "That's
just a secondary effect of the effect of cosmic rays and solar
radiations on the order of particles existing at that level. But I think
that I have the key to the problem of collapsing matter to plate the
hull of the spaceship."

"That's interesting," Sir Neville Lawton commented. "How so?"

"Well, you know what happens when a photon comes in contact with the
atomic structure of matter," Kato said. "There may be an elastic
collision, in which the photon merely bounces off. Macroscopically,
that's the effect we call reflection of light. Or there may be an
inelastic collision, when the photon hits an atom and knocks out an
electron--the old photoelectric effect. Or, the photon may be retained
for a while and emitted again relatively unchanged--the effect observed
in luminous paint. Or, the photon may penetrate, undergo a change to a
neutrino, and either remain in the nucleus of the atom or pass through
it, depending upon a number of factors. All this, of course, is old
stuff; even the photon-neutrino interchange has been known since the
mid-'50s, when the Gamow neutrino-counter was developed. But now we come
to what you have been so good as to christen the Sugihara Effect--the
neutrino picking up a negative charge and, in effect, turning into an
electron, and then losing its charge, turning back into a neutrino, and
then, as in the case of metal heated to incandescence, being emitted
again as a photon.

"At first, we thought this had no connection with the spaceship
insulation problem we are under contract to work out, and we agreed to
keep this effect a Team secret until we could find out if it had
commercial possibilities. But now, I find that it has a direct
connection with the collapsed-matter problem. When the electron loses
its negative charge and reverts to a neutrino, there is a definite
accretion of interatomic binding-force, and the molecule, or the
crystalline lattice or whatever tends to contract, and when the neutrino
becomes a photon, the nucleus of the atom contracts."

       *       *       *       *       *

Heym ben-Hillel was sitting oblivious to everything but his young
colleague's words, a slice of the flesh of the unclean beast impaled on
his fork and halfway to his mouth.

"Yes! Certainly!" he exclaimed. "That would explain so many things I
have wondered about: And of course, there are other forces at work
which, in the course of nature, balance that effect--"

"But can the process be controlled?" Suzanne Maillard wanted to know.
"Can you convert electrons to neutrinos and then to photons in
sufficient numbers, and eliminate other effects that would cause
compensating atomic and molecular expansion?"

Kato grinned, like a tomcat contemplating the bones of a fish he has
just eaten.

"Yes, I can. I have." He turned to MacLeod. "Remember those bullets I
got from you?" he asked.

MacLeod nodded. He handloaded for his .38-special, and like all advanced
cases of handloading-fever, he was religiously fanatical about
uniformity of bullet weights and dimensions. Unlike most handloaders, he
had available the instruments to secure such uniformity.

"Those bullets are as nearly alike as different objects
can be," Kato said. "They weigh 158 grains, and that means
one-five-eight-point-zero-zero-zero-practically-nothing. The diameter is
.35903 inches. All right; I've been subjecting those bullets to
different radiation-bombardments, and the best results have given me a
bullet with a diameter of .35892 inches, and the weight is unchanged. In
other words, there's been no loss of mass, but the mass had contracted.
And that's only been the first test."

"Well, write up everything you have on it, and we'll lay out further
experimental work," MacLeod said. He glanced around the table. "So far,
we can't be entirely sure. The shrinkage may be all in the crystalline
lattice: the atomic structure may be unchanged. What we need is matter
that is really collapsed."

"I'll do that," Kato said. "Barida, I'll have all my data available for
you before noon tomorrow: you can make up copies for all Team members."

"Make mine on microfilm, for projection," von Heldenfeld said.

"Mine, too," Sir Neville Lawton added.

"Better make microfilm copies for everybody," Heym ben-Hillel suggested.
"They're handier than type-script."

MacLeod rose silently and tiptoed around behind his wife and Rudolf von
