miles an hour low lane; eight hundred forty vehicles in the one
hundred to one hundred fifty miles an hour green, and so on. More than
sixteen thousand westbound vehicles on the thruway in the first one
hundred miles; nearly five thousand of them traveling at speeds
between one hundred fifty and three hundred miles an hour.

Over the always-hot intercom throughout the big car Ben called out.
"All set, Kelly?"

"I'm making coffee," Kelly answered from the galley. "Let 'er roll."

Martin started to kick off the brakes, then stopped. "Ooops," he
exclaimed, "almost forgot." His finger touched another button and a
blaring horn reverberated through the vehicle.

In the galley, Kelly hurled herself into a corner. Her body activated
a pressure plant and a pair of mummy-like plastifoam plates slid
curvingly out the wall and locked her in a soft cocoon. A dozen
similar safety clamps were located throughout the car at every working
and relaxation station.

In the same instance, both Ben and Clay touched another plate on their
control seats. From kiosk-type columns behind each seat, pairs of
body-molded crash pads snapped into place to encase both troopers in
their seats, their bodies cushioned and locked into place. Only their
fingers were loose beneath the spongy substance to work arm controls.
The half-molds included headforms with a padded band that locked
across their foreheads to hold their heads rigidly against the backs
of their reinforced seats. The instant all three crew members were
locked into their safety gear, the bull horn ceased.

"All tight," Ben called out as he wiggled and tried to free himself
from the cocoon. Kelly and Clay tested their harnesses.

Satisfied that the safety cocoons were operating properly, Ben
released them and the molds slid back into their recesses. The cocoons
were triggered automatically in any emergency run or chase at speeds
in excess of two hundred miles an hour.

Again he kicked off the brakes, pressed down on the foot feed and Car
56--Beulah--rolled out of the Philadelphia motor pool on the start of
its ten-day patrol.

       *       *       *       *       *

The motor pool exit opened into a quarter-mile wide tunnel sloping
gently down into the bowels of the great city. Car 56 glided down the
slight incline at a steady fifty miles an hour. A mile from the mouth
of the tunnel the roadway leveled off and Ben kicked Beulah up another
twenty-five miles an hour. Ahead, the main tunnel ended in a series of
smaller portal ways, each emblazoned with a huge illuminated number
designating a continental thruway.

Ben throttled back and began edging to the left lanes. Other patrol
cars were heading down the main passageway, bound for their assigned
thruways. As Ben eased down to a slow thirty, another patrol vehicle
slid alongside. The two troopers in the cab waved. Clay flicked on the
"car-to-car" transmit.

The senior trooper in Car 104 looked over at Martin and Ferguson. "If
it isn't the gruesome twosome," he called. "Where have you two been?
We thought the front office had finally caught up with you and found
out that neither one of you could read or write and that they had
canned you."

"We can't read," Ben quipped back. "That's why we're still on the job.
The front office would never hire anyone who would embarrass you two
by being smarter than either of you. Where're you headed, Eddie?"

"Got 154-north," the other officer said.

"Hey," Clay called out, "I've got a real hot doll in Toronto and I'll
gladly sell her phone number for a proper price."

"Wouldn't want to hurt you, Clay," the other officer replied. "If I
called her up and took her out, she'd throw rocks at you the next time
you drew the run. It's all for your own good."

"Oh, go get lost in a cloverleaf," Clay retorted.

The other car broke the connection and with a wave, veered off to the
right. The thruway entrances were just ahead. Martin aimed Beulah at
the lighted orifice topped by the number 26-W. The patrol car slid
into the narrower tunnel, glided along for another mile and then
turned its bow upwards. Three minutes later, they emerged from the
tunnel into the red patrol lane of Continental Thruway 26-West. The
late afternoon sky was a covering of gray wool and a drop or two of
moisture struck the front face of the cab canopy. For a mile on either
side of the police lane, streams of cars sped westward. Ben eyed the
sky, the traffic and then peered at the outer hull thermometer. It
read thirty-two degrees. He made a mental bet with himself that the
weather bureau was off on its snow estimates by six hours. His Vermont
upbringing told him it would be flurrying within the hour.

He increased speed to a steady one hundred and the car sped silently
and easily along the police lane. Across the cab, Clay peered
pensively at the steady stream of cars and cargo carriers racing by in
the green and blue lanes--all of them moving faster than the patrol
car.

The young officer turned in his seat and looked at his partner.

"You know, Ben," he said gravely, "I sometimes wonder if those
old-time cowboys got as tired looking at the south end of northbound
cows as I get looking at the vanishing tail pipes of cars."

The radio came to life.

"Philly Control to Car 56."

Clay touched his transmit plate. "This is Five Six. Go ahead."

"You've got a bad one at Marker 82," Control said. "A sideswipe in the
white."

"Couldn't be too bad in the white," Ben broke in, thinking of the
one-hundred mile-an-hour limit in the slow lane.

"That's not the problem," Control came back. "One of the sideswiped
vehicles was flipped around and bounded into the green, and that's
where the real mess is. Make it code three."

"Five Six acknowledge," Ben said. "On the way."

He slammed forward on the throttles. The bull horn blared and a second
later, with MSO Kelly Lightfoot snugged in her dispensary cocoon and
both troopers in body cushions, Car 56 lifted a foot from the roadway,
and leaped forward on a turbulent pad of air. It accelerated from one
hundred to two hundred fifty miles an hour.

The great red emergency lights on the bow and stern began to blink and
from the special transmitter in the hull a radio siren wail raced
ahead of the car to be picked up by the emergency receptor antennas
required on all vehicles.

The working part of the patrol had begun.

       *       *       *       *       *

Conversation died in the speeding car, partly because of the
concentration required by the troopers, secondly because all
transmissions whether intercom or radio, on a code two or three run,
were taped and monitored by Control. In the center of the instrument
panel, an oversized radiodometer was clicking off the mileage marks as
the car passed each milestone. The milestone posts beamed a coded
signal across all five lanes and as each vehicle passed the marker,
the radiodometer clicked up another number.

Car 56 had been at MM 23 when the call came. Now, at better than four
miles a minute, Beulah whipped past MM 45 with ten minutes yet to go
to reach the scene of the accident. Light flurries of wet snow bounced
off the canopy, leaving thin, fast-drying trails of moisture. Although
it was still a few minutes short of 1700 hours, the last of the winter
afternoon light was being lost behind the heavy snow clouds overhead.
Ben turned on the patrol car's dazzling headlight and to the left and
right, Clay could see streaks of white lights from the traffic on the
green and blue lanes on either side of the quarter-mile wide emergency
lane.

The radio filled them in on the movement of other patrol emergency
vehicles being routed to the accident site. Car 82, also assigned to
NAT 26-West, was more than one hundred fifty miles ahead of Beulah.
Pittsburgh Control ordered Eight Two to hold fast to cover anything
else that might come up while Five Six was handling the current
crisis. Eastbound Car 119 was ordered to cut across to the scene to
assist Beulah's crew, and another eastbound patrol vehicle was held in
place to cover for One One Nine.

At mile marker 80, yellow caution lights were flashing on all
westbound lanes, triggered by Philadelphia Control the instant the
word of the crash had been received. Traffic was slowing down and
piling up despite the half-mile wide lanes.

"Philly Control this is Car 56."

"Go ahead Five Six."

"It's piling up in the green and white," Ben said. "Let's divert to
blue on slowdown and seal the yellow."

"Philly Control acknowledged," came the reply.

       *       *       *       *       *

The flashing amber caution lights on all lanes switched to red. As Ben
began de-acceleration, diagonal red flashing barriers rose out of the
roadway on the green and white lanes at the 85 mile marker and lane
crossing. This channelled all traffic from both lanes to the left and
into the blue lane where the flashing reds now prohibited speeds in
excess of fifty miles an hour around the emergency situation. At the
same time, all crossovers on the ultra high yellow lane were sealed by
barriers to prevent changing of lanes into the over-congested area.

As Car 56's speed dropped back below the two hundred mile an hour mark
the cocoon automatically slid open. Freed from her safety restraints,
Kelly jumped for the rear entrance of the dispensary and cleared the
racking clamps from the six autolitters. That done, she opened another
locker and reached for the mobile first-aid kit. She slid it to the
door entrance on its retractable casters. She slipped on her work
helmet with the built-in transmitter and then sat down on the seat by
the rear door to wait until the car stopped.

Car 56 was now less than two miles from the scene of the crash and
traffic in the green lane to the left was at a standstill. A half mile
farther westward, lights were still moving slowly along the white
lane. Ahead, the troopers could see a faint wisp of smoke rising from
the heaviest congregation of headlights. Both officers had their work
helmets on and Clay had left his seat and descended to the side door,
ready to jump out the minute the car stopped.

Martin saw a clear area in the green lane and swung the car over the
dividing curbing. The big tracks floated the patrol car over the
two-foot high, rounded abutment that divided each speed lane. Snow was
falling faster as the headlight picked out a tangled mass of wreckage
smoldering a hundred feet inside the median separating the green and
white lanes. A crumpled body lay on the pavement twenty feet from the
biggest clump of smashed metal, and other fragments of vehicles were
strung out down the roadway for fifty feet. There was no movement.

NorCon thruway laws were strict and none were more rigidly enforced
than the regulation that no one other than a member of the patrol set
foot outside of their vehicle while on any thruway traffic lane. This
meant not giving any assistance whatsoever to accident victims. The
ruling had been called inhuman, monstrous, unthinkable, and lawmakers
in the three nations of the compact had forced NorCon to revoke the
rule in the early days of the thruways. After speeding cars and cargo
carriers had cut down twice as many do-gooders on foot at accident
scenes than the accidents themselves caused, the law was reinstated.
The lives of the many were more vital than the lives of a few.

Martin halted the patrol vehicle a few feet from the wreckage and
Beulah was still rocking gently on her tracks by the time both Patrol
Trooper Clay Ferguson and MSO Kelly Lightfoot hit the pavement on the
run.

In the cab, Martin called in on the radio. "Car 56 is on scene.
Release blue at Marker 95 and resume speeds all lanes at Marker 95
in--" he paused and looked back at the halted traffic piled up before
the lane had been closed "--seven minutes." He jumped for the steps
and sprinted out of the patrol car in the wake of Ferguson and Kelly.

The team's surgeon was kneeling beside the inert body on the road.
After an ear to the chest, Kelly opened her field kit bag and slapped
an electrode to the victim's temple. The needle on the encephalic
meter in the lid of the kit never flickered. Kelly shut the bag and
hurried with it over to the mass of wreckage. A thin column of black,
oily smoke rose from somewhere near the bottom of the heap. It was
almost impossible to identify at a glance whether the mangled metal
was the remains of one or more cars. Only the absence of track
equipment made it certain that they even had been passenger vehicles.

Clay was carefully climbing up the side of the piled up wrecks to a
window that gaped near the top.

"Work fast, kid," Martin called up. "Something's burning down there
and this whole thing may go up. I'll get this traffic moving."

He turned to face the halted mass of cars and cargo carriers east of
the wreck. He flipped a switch that cut his helmet transmitter into
the remote standard vehicular radio circuit aboard the patrol car.

"Attention, please, all cars in green lane. All cars in the left line
move out now, the next line fall in behind. You are directed to clear
the area immediately. Maintain fifty miles an hour for the next mile.
You may resume desired speeds and change lanes at mile Marker 95. I
repeat, all cars in green lane...." he went over the instructions once
more, relayed through Beulah's transmitter to the standard receivers
on all cars. He was still talking as the traffic began to move.

By the time he turned back to help his teammates, cars were moving in
a steady stream past the huge, red-flashing bulk of the patrol car.

Both Clay and Kelly were lying flat across the smashed, upturned side
of the uppermost car in the pile. Kelly had her field bag open on the
ground and she was reaching down through the smashed window.

"What is it Clay?" Martin called.

The younger officer looked down over his shoulder. "We've got a woman
alive down here but she's wedged in tight. She's hurt pretty badly and
Kelly's trying to slip a hypo into her now. Get the arm out, Ben."

Martin ran back to the patrol car and flipped up a panel on the hull.
He pulled back on one of the several levers recessed into the hull and
the big wrecking crane swung smoothly out of its cradle and over the
wreckage. The end of the crane arm was directly over Ferguson. "Lemme
have the spreaders," Clay called. The arm dipped and from either side
of the tip, a pair of flanges shot out like tusks on an elephant. "Put
'er in neutral," Clay directed. Martin pressed another lever and the
crane now could be moved in any direction by fingertip pulls at its
extremity. Ferguson carefully guided the crane with its projecting
tusks into the smashed orifice of the car window. "O.K., Ben, spread
it."

The crane locked into position and the entire arm split open in a "V"
from its base. Martin pressed steadily on the two levers controlling
