  if the spores are sown in a drop of water in which has been infused
  some vegetable matter, such as a bit of rotten wood, boiling
  thoroughly to kill all germs. A drop of this fluid should be placed
  on a perfectly clean cover glass, which it is well to pass once or
  twice through a flame, and the spores transferred to this drop with
  a needle previously heated. By these precautions foreign germs will
  be avoided, which otherwise may interfere seriously with the growth
  of the young slime moulds. After sowing the spores in the drop of
  culture fluid, the whole should be inverted over a so-called "moist
  chamber." This is simply a square of thick blotting paper, in which
  an opening is cut small enough to be entirely covered by the cover
  glass, but large enough so that the drop in the centre of the cover
  glass will not touch the sides of the chamber, but will hang
  suspended clear in it. The blotting paper should be soaked
  thoroughly in pure water (distilled water is preferable), and then
  placed on a slide, covering carefully with the cover glass with the
  suspended drop of fluid containing the spores. The whole should be
  kept under cover so as to prevent loss of water by evaporation. By
  this method the spores may be examined conveniently without
  disturbing them, and the whole may be kept as long as desired, so
  long as the blotting paper is kept wet, so as to prevent the
  suspended drop from drying up.


CLASS II.--_Schizophytes_.

The Schizophytes are very small plants, though not infrequently
occurring in masses of considerable size. They are among the commonest
of all plants, and are found everywhere. They multiply almost entirely
by simple transverse division, or splitting of the cells, whence their
name. There are two pretty well-marked orders,--the blue-green slimes
(_Cyanophyceae_) and the bacteria (_Schizomycetes_). They are
distinguished, primarily, by the first (with a very few exceptions)
containing chlorophyll (leaf-green), which is entirely absent from
nearly all of the latter.

The blue-green slimes: These are, with few exceptions, green plants of
simple structure, but possessing, in addition to the ordinary green
pigment (chlorophyll, or leaf-green), another coloring matter, soluble
in water, and usually blue in color, though sometimes yellowish or
red.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.--Blue-green slime (_Oscillaria_). _A_, mass of
filaments of the natural size. _B_, single filament, x 300. _C_, a
piece of a filament that has become separated. _s_, sheath, x 300.]

As a representative of the group, we will select one of the commonest
forms (_Oscillaria_), known sometimes as green slime, from forming a
dark blue-green or blackish slimy coat over the mud at the bottom of
stagnant or sluggish water, in watering troughs, on damp rocks, or
even on moist earth. A search in the places mentioned can hardly fail
to secure plenty of specimens for study. If a bit of the slimy mass is
transferred to a china dish, or placed with considerable water on a
piece of stiff paper, after a short time the edge of the mass will
show numerous extremely fine filaments of a dark blue-green color,
radiating in all directions from the mass (Fig. 6, _a_). The filaments
are the individual plants, and possess considerable power of motion,
as is shown by letting the mass remain undisturbed for a day or two,
at the end of which time they will have formed a thin film over the
surface of the vessel in which they are kept; and the radiating
arrangement of the filaments can then be plainly seen.

If the mass is allowed to dry on the paper, it often leaves a bright
blue stain, due to the blue pigment in the cells of the filament. This
blue color can also be extracted by pulverizing a quantity of the
dried plants, and pouring water over them, the water soon becoming
tinged with a decided blue. If now the water containing the blue
pigment is filtered, and the residue treated with alcohol, the latter
will extract the chlorophyll, becoming colored of a yellow-green.

  The microscope shows that the filaments of which the mass is
  composed (Fig. 6, _B_) are single rows of short cylindrical cells of
  uniform diameter, except at the end of the filament, where they
  usually become somewhat smaller, so that the tip is more or less
  distinctly pointed. The protoplasm of the cells has a few small
  granules scattered through it, and is colored uniformly of a pale
  blue-green. No nucleus can be seen.

  If the filament is broken, there may generally be detected a
  delicate, colorless sheath that surrounds it, and extends beyond the
  end cells (Fig. 6, _c_). The filament increases in length by the
  individual cells undergoing division, this always taking place at
  right angles to the axis of the filament. New filaments are produced
  simply by the older ones breaking into a number of pieces, each of
  which rapidly grows to full size.

The name "oscillaria" arises from the peculiar oscillating or swinging
movements that the plant exhibits. The most marked movement is a
swaying from side to side, combined with a rotary motion of the free
ends of the filaments, which are often twisted together like the
strands of a rope. If the filaments are entirely free, they may often
be observed to move forward with a slow, creeping movement. Just how
these movements are caused is still a matter of controversy.

The lowest of the _Cyanophyceae_ are strictly single-celled, separating
as soon as formed, but cohering usually in masses or colonies by means
of a thick mucilaginous substance that surrounds them (Fig. 7, _D_).

The higher ones are filaments, in which there may be considerable
differentiation. These often occur in masses of considerable size,
forming jelly-like lumps, which may be soft or quite firm (Fig. 7,
_A_, _B_). They are sometimes found on damp ground, but more commonly
attached to plants, stones, etc., in water. The masses vary in color
from light brown to deep blackish green, and in size from that of a
pin head to several centimetres in diameter.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.--Forms of _Cyanophyceae_. _A_, _Nostoc_. _B_,
_Gloeotrichia_, x 1. _C_, individual of _Gloeotrichia_. _D_,
Chrooecoccus. _E_, _Nostoc_. _F_, Oscillaria. _G_, _H_, _Tolypothrix_.
All x 300. _y_, heterocyst. _sp._ spore.]

In the higher forms special cells called heterocysts are found. They
are colorless, or light yellowish, regularly disposed; but their
function is not known. Besides these, certain cells become
thick-walled, and form resting cells (spores) for the propagation of
the plant (Fig. 7, C. _sp._). In species where the sheath of the
filament is well marked (Fig. 7, _H_), groups of cells slip out of the
sheath, and develop a new one, thus giving rise to a new plant.

The bacteria (_Schizomycetes_), although among the commonest of
organisms, owing to their excessive minuteness, are difficult to
study, especially for the beginner. They resemble, in their general
structure and methods of reproduction, the blue-green slimes, but are,
with very few exceptions, destitute of chlorophyll, although often
possessing bright pigments,--blue, violet, red, etc. It is one of
these that sometimes forms blood-red spots in flour paste or bits of
bread that have been kept very moist and warm. They are universally
present where decomposition is going on, and are themselves the
principal agents of decay, which is the result of their feeding upon
the substance, as, like all plants without chlorophyll, they require
organic matter for food. Most of the species are very tenacious of
life, and may be completely dried up for a long time without dying,
and on being placed in water will quickly revive. Being so extremely
small, they are readily carried about in the air in their dried-up
condition, and thus fall upon exposed bodies, setting up decomposition
if the conditions are favorable.

A simple experiment to show this may be performed by taking two test
tubes and partly filling them with an infusion of almost any organic
substance (dried leaves or hay, or a bit of meat will answer). The
fluid should now be boiled so as to kill any germs that may be in it;
and while hot, one of the vessels should be securely stopped up with a
plug of cotton wool, and the other left open. The cotton prevents
access of all solid particles, but allows the air to enter. If proper
care has been taken, the infusion in the closed vessel will remain
unchanged indefinitely; but the other will soon become turbid, and a
disagreeable odor will be given off. Microscopic examination shows the
first to be free from germs of any kind, while the second is swarming
with various forms of bacteria.

[Illustration: FIG. 8.--Bacteria.]

These little organisms have of late years attracted the attention of
very many scientists, from the fact that to them is due many, if not
all, contagious diseases. The germs of many such diseases have been
isolated, and experiments prove beyond doubt that these are alone the
causes of the diseases in question.

  If a drop of water containing bacteria is examined, we find them to
  be excessively small, many of them barely visible with the strongest
  lenses. The larger ones (Fig. 8) recall quite strongly the smaller
  species of oscillaria, and exhibit similar movements. Others are so
  small as to appear as mere lines and dots, even with the strongest
  lenses. Among the common forms are small, nearly globular cells;
  oblong, rod-shaped or thread-shaped filaments, either straight or
  curved, or even spirally twisted. Frequently they show a quick
  movement which is probably in all cases due to cilia, which are,
  however, too small to be seen in most cases.

[Illustration: FIG. 9.--_Euglena_. _A_, individual in the active
condition. _E_, the red "eye-spot." _c_, flagellum. _n_, nucleus. _B_,
resting stage. _C_, individual dividing, x 300.]

Reproduction is for the most part by simple transverse division, as in
oscillaria; but occasionally spores are produced also.


CLASS III.--GREEN MONADS (_Volvocineae_).

This group of the protophytes is unquestionably closely related to
certain low animals (_Monads_ or _Flagellata_), with which they are
sometimes united. They are characterized by being actively motile, and
are either strictly unicellular, or the cells are united by a
gelatinous envelope into a colony of definite form.

Of the first group, _Euglena_ (Fig. 9), may be selected as a type.

  This organism is found frequently among other algae, and occasionally
  forms a green film on stagnant water. It is sometimes regarded as a
  plant, sometimes as an animal, and is an elongated, somewhat
  worm-like cell without a definite cell wall, so that it can change
  its form to some extent. The protoplasm contains oval masses, which
  are bright green in color; but the forward pointed end of the cell
  is colorless, and has a little depression. At this end there is a
  long vibratile protoplasmic filament (_c_), by means of which the
  cell moves. There is also to be seen near this end a red speck (_e_)
  which is probably sensitive to light. A nucleus can usually be seen
  if the cell is first killed with an iodine solution, which often
  will render the flagellum (_c_) more evident, this being invisible
  while the cell is in motion. The cells multiply by division.
  Previous to this the flagellum is withdrawn, and a firm cell wall is
  formed about the cell (Fig. 9, _B_). The contents then divide into
  two or more parts, which afterwards escape as new individuals.

Of the forms that are united in colonies[2] one of the best known is
_Volvox_ (Fig. 10). This plant is sometimes found in quiet water,
where it floats on or near the surface as a dark green ball, just
large enough to be seen with the naked eye. They may be kept for some
time in aquaria, and will sometimes multiply rapidly, but are very
susceptible to extremes of temperature, especially of heat.

[2] The term "colony" is, perhaps, inappropriate, as the whole mass of
cells arises from a single one, and may properly be looked upon as an
individual plant.

[Illustration: FIG. 10.--_Volvox._ _A_, mature colony, containing
several smaller ones (_x_), x 50. _B_, Two cells showing the cilia,
x 300.]

  The colony (Fig. 10, _A_) is a hollow sphere, the numerous green
  cells of which it is composed forming a single layer on the outside.
  By killing with iodine, and using a strong lens, each cell is seen
  to be somewhat pear-shaped (Fig. _B_), with the pointed end out.
  Attached to this end are two vibratile filaments (cilia or
  _flagella_), and the united movements of these cause the rolling
  motion of the whole colony. Usually a number of young colonies
  (Fig. _x_) are found within the mother colony. These arise by the
  repeated bipartition of a single cell, and escape finally, forming
  independent colonies.

  Another (sexual) form of reproduction occurs, similar to that found
  in many higher plants; but as it only occurs at certain seasons, it
  is not likely to be met with by the student.

Other forms related to _Volvox_, and sometimes met with, are
_Gonium_, in which there are sixteen cells, forming a flat square;
_Pandorina_ and _Eudorina_, with sixteen cells, forming an oval or
globular colony like _Volvox_, but much smaller. In all of these the
structure of the cells is essentially as in _Volvox_.




CHAPTER IV.

SUB-KINGDOM II.

ALGAE.[3]


[3] Algae (sing. _alga_).

In the second sub-kingdom of plants is embraced an enormous assemblage
of plants, differing widely in size and complexity, and yet showing a
sufficiently complete gradation from the lowest to the highest as to
make it impracticable to make more than one sub-kingdom to include
them. They are nearly all aquatic forms, although many of them will
survive long periods of drying, such forms occurring on moist earth,
rocks, or the trunks of trees, but only growing when there is a
plentiful supply of water.

All of them possess chlorophyll, which, however, in many forms, is
hidden by the presence of a brown or red pigment. They are ordinarily
divided into three classes--I. The Green Algae (_Chlorophyceae_);
II. Brown Algae (_Phaeophyceae_); III. Red Algae (_Rhodophyceae_).


CLASS I.--GREEN ALGAE.

The green algae are to be found almost everywhere where there is
moisture, but are especially abundant in sluggish or stagnant fresh
water, being much less common in salt water. They are for the most
part plants of simple structure, many being unicellular, and very few
of them plants of large size.

We may recognize five well-marked orders of the green algae--I. Green
slimes (_Protococcaceae_); II. _Confervaceae_; III. Pond scums
(_Conjugatae_); IV. _Siphoneae_; V. Stone-worts (_Characeae_).


ORDER I.--_Protococcaceae_.

The members of this order are minute unicellular plants, growing
either in water or on the damp surfaces of stones, tree trunks, etc.
The plants sometimes grow isolated, but usually the cells are united
more or less regularly into colonies.

A common representative of the order is the common green slime,
_Protococcus_ (Fig. 11, _A_, _C_), which forms a dark green slimy
coating over stones, tree trunks, flower pots, etc. Owing to their
minute size the structure can only be made out with the microscope.

[Illustration: FIG. 11.--_Protococcaceae._ _A_, _C_, Protococcus. _A_,
single cells. _B_, cells dividing by fission. _C_, successive steps in
the process of internal cell division. In _C_ iv, the young cells have
mostly become free. _D_, a full-grown colony of _Pediastrum_. _E_, a
young colony still surrounded by the membrane of the mother cell. _F_,
_Scenedesmus_. All, x 300. _G_, small portion of a young colony of the
water net (_Hydrodictyon_), x 150.]

  Scraping off a little of the material mentioned into a drop of water
  upon a slide, and carefully separating it with needles, a cover
  glass may be placed over the preparation, and it is ready for
  examination. When magnified, the green film is found to be composed
  of minute globular cells of varying size, which may in places be
  found to be united into groups. With a higher power, each cell
  (Fig. 11, _A_) is seen to have a distinct cell wall, within which is
  colorless protoplasm. Careful examination shows that the chlorophyll
  is confined to several roundish bodies that are not usually in
  immediate contact with the wall of the cell. These green masses are
  called chlorophyll bodies (chloroplasts). Toward the centre of the
  cell, especially if it has first been treated with iodine, the
  nucleus may be found. The size of the cells, as well as the number
  of chloroplasts, varies a good deal.

  With a little hunting, specimens in various stages of division may
  be found. The division takes place in two ways. In the first
  (Fig. 11, _B_), known as fission, a wall is formed across the cell,
  dividing it into two cells, which may separate immediately or may
  remain united until they have undergone further division. In this
  case the original cell wall remains as part of the wall of the
  daughter cells. Fission is the commonest form of cell multiplication
  throughout the vegetable kingdom.

  The second form of cell division or internal cell division is shown
  at _C_. Here the protoplasm and nucleus repeatedly divide until a
  number of small cells are formed within the old one. These develop
  cell walls, and escape by the breaking of the old cell wall, which
  is left behind, and takes no part in the process. The cells thus
  formed are sometimes provided with two cilia, and are capable of
  active movement.

  Internal cell division, as we shall see, is found in most plants,
  but only at special times.

  Closely resembling _Protococcus_, and answering quite as well for
  study, are numerous aquatic forms, such as _Chlorococcum_ (Fig. 12).
  These are for the most part destitute of a firm cell wall, but are
  imbedded in masses of gelatinous substance like many _Cyanophyceae_.
  The chloroplasts are smaller and less distinct than in
  _Protococcus_. The cells are here oval rather than round, and often
  show a clear space at one end.

[Illustration: FIG. 12.--_Chlorococcum_, a plant related to
_Protococcus_, but the naked cells are surrounded by a colorless
gelatinous envelope. _A_, motionless cells. _B_, a cell that has
escaped from its envelope and is ciliated, x 300.]

  Owing to the absence of a definite membrane, a distinction between
  fission and internal cell division can scarcely be made here. Often
  the cells escape from the gelatinous envelope, and swim actively by
  means of two cilia at the colorless end (Fig. 12, _B_). In this
  stage they closely resemble the individuals of a _Volvox_ colony, or
  other green _Flagellata_, to which there is little doubt that they
  are related.

  There are a number of curious forms common in fresh water that are
  probably related to _Protococcus_, but differ in having the cells
  united in colonies of definite form. Among the most striking are
  the different species of _Pediastrum_ (Fig. 11, _D_, _E_), often met
  with in company with other algae, and growing readily in aquaria when
  once established. They are of very elegant shapes, and the number of
  cells some multiple of four, usually sixteen.

  The cells form a flat disc, the outer ones being generally provided
  with a pair of spines.

  New individuals arise by internal division of the cells, the
  contents of each forming as many parts as there are cells in the
  whole colony. The young cells now escape through a cleft in the wall
  of the mother cell, but are still surrounded by a delicate membrane
  (Fig. 11, _E_). Within this membrane the young cells arrange
  themselves in the form of the original colony, and grow together,
  forming a new colony.
