He went to the door and shouted into the corridor.

"Petway!"

Goat returned to his chair. A few moments later, a twittering noise
sounded in the corridor, then a horrible little apparition appeared in
the door. It was a child-sized creature, naked, grotesquely
barrel-chested and teetering on thin, twisted legs. Its hairless head
was skull-like, with gaping mouth and huge, round eyes.

Maya gasped, profoundly shocked. The little creature looked more like a
miniature Martian native than a human, but the Martians themselves were
not so distorted. She saw her own shock reflected in Nuwell's face.

"Petway, get us three glasses of wine," commanded Goat calmly.

Petway vanished and Goat turned briskly back to his guests.

"Now," he said, "I shall outline the progress of my experiments to you
and answer any questions you may have."




3


Maya's education was extensive, but it did not include the genetic
sciences. She was able to follow Goat's explanations and his references
to the charts he hung, one after another, on the wall of his study, but
she was able to follow them only in a general sense. The technical
details escaped her.

Nuwell seemed to have a better grasp of the subject. He nodded his dark,
curly head frequently, and occasionally asked a question or two.

"Surgery is performed with a concentrated electron stream on the cells
of the early embryo," said Goat. "I call it surgery, but actually it is
an alteration of the structure of certain specific genes which govern
the characteristics I am attempting to change. Such changes would, of
course, then be transmitted on down to any progeny.

"The earlier the embryo is caught, the easier and surer the surgery,
because when it has divided into too many cells the very task of dealing
with each one separately makes the time requirement prohibitive, besides
multiplying the chance for error. The Martians have a method of altering
the physical structure and genetic composition of a full-grown adult,
but this is far beyond the stage I've reached."

"The Martians?" repeated Nuwell in astonishment. "You mean the Martian
natives? They're nothing but degenerated animals!"

"You're wrong," replied Goat. "I know that's the general opinion, but I
had considerable contact with them a good many years ago. Perhaps most
of them are little more than strange animals. No one really knows. They
live simple, animal-like lives, holed up in desert caves, and they're
rarely communicative in any way. But I know from my own experience that
some of them, at least, are still familiar with that ancient science
that they must have possessed when Earth was in an earlier stage of life
than the human."

"This ... child ... that brought us the wine is one of the products of
your experiments?" asked Nuwell.

"Yes. Petway's pretty representative of the children, I'm afraid. I've
been trying to determine what went wrong. It could be an inaccuracy in
dealing with the genetic structure itself, or a failure to follow
exactly the same pattern of change in moving from one cell to another in
the embryo. If I could only catch one at the single cell stage!

"None of the children has turned out as well as my first two
experiments, Brute and Adam. Both of them were born about twenty-five
years ago--terrestrial years, that is--and developed into normal, even
superior physical specimens. Unfortunately, their mental development was
retarded. Adam was the brighter of the two, and Brute killed him
tonight, shortly before your arrival."

Maya shivered.

"Somehow, it seems horrible to me, experimenting with human lives this
way," she said.

"It's being done for a good cause, Maya," said Nuwell. "Dr. Hennessey's
objective is to help man live better on Mars. After all, there is
nothing nobler than the individual's sacrifice of himself for his
fellows, whether it's voluntary or involuntary."

"But what about the mothers of these children?" asked Maya.

"The big problem is to reach them as soon as possible after conception,"
said Goat, misinterpreting her question. "We do this by magnetic
detectors, which report instantly the conjunction of the positive and
negative. The surgery is performed, as quickly as possible, utilizing
the suspended animation technique which is being developed toward
interstellar travel."

"I wasn't asking about the technical aspects," said Maya. "What I want
to know is, what sort of mothers will permit you to experiment this way
on their unborn children, especially seeing the results you've already
obtained?"

Goat started to answer, but Nuwell forestalled him.

"There are some things that are none of your business, darling," he
said. "The terrestrial government sent you here on a specific
assignment, and I don't think you should inquire into matters which are
classified as secret by the local government, which don't have anything
to do with that assignment. Now, Dr. Hennessey, just what sort of
survival qualities have you been able to develop in these experiments?"

"There's no witchcraft involved," retorted Goat, with a sardonic
grimace.

"I haven't accused you," said Nuwell quickly.

"No, but I keep up with events, even out here, well enough to know that
you're the Mars City government's chief nemesis where there's any
suspicion of extrasensory perception. I doubt that you chose to make
this trip yourself without reason, Mr. Eli."

"It's merely a routine inspection," murmured Nuwell.

Goat indicated one of his charts, showing a diagram of genes and
chromosomes in different colors.

"This is my original chart," he said. "I copied it from one belonging to
the Martians many years ago, and my genetic alteration of Brute and Adam
were based on it. But I must have miscopied it, or else the Martians
didn't have the objective I thought they did in it, because I could find
no alteration of genes affecting lung capacity or oxygen utilization. My
own subsequent charts, on which later experiments were based, are
alterations of this."

"But just what is your objective, and how well have you succeeded?"
persisted Nuwell.

"Ability to survive under Martian conditions."

"I know. This is stated in all previous inspection reports. I want
something more specific."

"Why, ability to survive in an almost oxygen-free atmosphere, of course.
As well as can be determined, the Martians do this by deriving oxygen
from surface solids and storing it in their humps under compression,
very much like an oxygen tank.

"I've succeeded to some degree with my children. All of them can go an
hour or two without breathing. What I don't understand is that no
capacities like that were included in the genetic changes on Adam and
Brute, and yet they've gradually developed an ability to do much better.
Both of them were out on the desert the entire day today without
oxygen."

Nuwell was silent for a moment, tapping the tips of his fingers
together, apparently in deep thought. Then he said:

"Maya, I think we've reached the point where you had better retire to
your room and let us to talk privately. You can question Dr. Hennessey
in the morning about any attempts the rebels may have made to contact
him."

Maya obeyed silently, rather glad to get away and think things over
alone. When she had come to Mars as an agent of the Earth government, it
had not occurred to her that there would be areas of information from
which the local government would bar her. She recognized that such a
prohibition was perfectly valid, but she was a little offended,
nevertheless.

Her room was a spacious one on the ground level, and boasted one of
Ultra Vires' few large windows. Maya unpacked her bag, and gratefully
stripped off her boots and socks, her tunic and baggy trousers. In
underpants, she went into the small bathroom, washed cosmetics from her
face and brushed down her thick, short hair.

Donning her light sleeping garment, she sat down on the edge of her bed.
She was very tired from the long drive and, almost without thinking, she
did not get up to turn out the light. She thought at it.

The switch clicked and the light went out.

She felt foolish and a little frightened. She had never told Nuwell of
this sort of thing. Can a woman ask her witch-hunting lover: "Do you
think I'm a witch?"

With almost total recall, as though she heard it spoken, she remembered
the summation speech Nuwell had made the first time she had seen him in
action. He was prosecuting a man charged with conducting experiments
similar to the historic and outlawed Rhine experiments of Earth.

"_Gentlemen, we sit here in a public building and conduct certain
necessary human affairs in a dignified and orderly manner. We follow a
way of life we brought with us from distant Earth. Apparently, we are as
safe here as we would be on Earth._

_"I say 'apparently.' Sometimes we forget the thin barriers here that
protect us against disaster, against extermination. A rent in this
city's dome, a failure in our oxygen machinery, a clogging of our
pumping system by the ever-present sand, and most of us would die before
help could reach us from our nearest neighbors._

_"We live here under certain restrictions that many of us do not like.
Certainly, no one likes to be unable to step out under the open sky
without wearing a bulky marsuit and an oxygen tank. Certainly, no one
likes to be rationed on water and meat throughout the foreseeable
future._

_"But what we have to remember is that absolute discipline has always
been a requirement for those courageous souls in the vanguard of human
progress._

_"Witchcraft--the practice of extrasensory perception, if you prefer the
term--is forbidden on Mars because to practice it one must differ from
his fellow men when the inexorable dangers of our frontier demand that
we work together. To practice it, one must devote time and mental effort
to untried things when our thin margin of safety makes concentrated and
combined effort necessary for survival. That is why witchcraft is
forbidden on Mars._

_"Let those who yet cling to the wistful liberalism of Earth label us
conformists if they will. I say to you that until Mars is won for
humanity, we cannot afford the luxury of nonconformity._

_"Gentlemen, I give you the prosecution's case."_

Maya stared out the window. This whole side of Ultra Vires was dark,
except for a rectangle of light cast from a window a little distance
away--the window of Goat Hennessey's study. In this rectangle, the red
sand of the desert lay clear and stark.

Near the end of the rectangle lay an indistinct, crumpled, oblong
figure. Puzzled, Maya studied it. It looked like a body to her.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the study, Nuwell gazed at the skinny doctor with angry brown eyes.

"The bulletins sent to you, as well as other researchers, gave specific
instructions that research was to be directed toward human utilization
of certain foods now being developed," accused Nuwell.

"I thought this was more important," replied Goat.

"You thought! You're not on Earth, where scientists can get government
grants and go jaunting off on wild research projects of their own."

"I still think this is more important," said Goat stubbornly. "I know
that all of us are expected to co-operate and stick to tried and
accepted lines so we won't be wasting time and material. Perhaps I was
wrong in not doing that initially. But now I've proved that this line
of research can be followed profitably, so its continuance now can't be
looked on as a waste of time."

"Scientists should leave political direction to more experienced men,"
said Nuwell in an exasperated tone. "This is not merely a matter of time
waste, or nonconformity. The Mars Corporation operates our sole supply
line to Earth, Dr. Hennessey, and that supply line brings to man on Mars
all the many things he needs to live here. The Earth-Mars run is an
expensive operation, and it's important that it remain economically
feasible for Marscorp to operate it.

"No matter how altruistic you may be about it, you get man to the point
that he doesn't depend on atmospheric oxygen here, and domes,
pressurized houses and groundcars, oxygen equipment--a great many things
are going to be unnecessary. But there'll still be a lot of other things
we'll have to have from Earth. Don't you realize what a disaster it
would be if Marscorp decided to drop the only spaceship line to Earth
because its cargo fell off to the point that it was economically
unsound?"

Goat looked at him with shrewd blue eyes.

"I think I can jump to a conclusion," he remarked mildly. "Marscorp has
some sort of control over the 'foods' you're trying to make practical
for human consumption in the approved experiments, doesn't it?"

"Well, yes. Marscorp wants to make man gradually self-sufficient on
Mars, and I think it's legitimate that Marscorp derive some economic
benefits from its efforts in that direction."

"I've wondered for some time just how close Marscorp and the government
were tied together," said Goat dryly. "Obviously, if I don't do as you
say, my supplies here will be cut off. So I have no choice but to
discontinue this work and turn my attention to the approved line."

"That isn't quite adequate now," said Nuwell. "You're going to have to
leave here and come to Mars City where you can do your research under
supervision. Your experimental humans here will be destroyed, of
course."

"Destroyed?" There was an agonized note to Goat's voice. "All of them?
How about the two mothers I have who haven't given birth yet?"

"You'd destroy them anyhow, as you have the others, not long after the
births. And that brings up another thing. When you get to Mars City,
watch your tongue. You almost revealed to Miss Cara Nome that the
government has been kidnapping an expectant mother now and then for your
experiments."

"Years of work, gone to waste," mourned Goat somberly. "When must I do
this?"

"As soon as possible. You'll be expected in Mars City within two weeks.
Now, I'd like to see these experimental humans."

A few moments later, they made their way together through a large
dormitory in which all of Goat's charges were sleeping. Nuwell shuddered
at the sight of the small, deformed bodies.

"I don't worry that you could ever take any of these to Mars City
undetected. But," he said, pointing to Brute, "that one looks too near
normal. I want to see him destroyed before I leave."

"Brute? But he's the most successful one I have left!"

"Exactly. That's why I want to see him destroyed, tonight."

Goat awoke Brute, and the monster man sleepily followed them back to the
study.

Goat picked up the huge knife, still stained with Adam's blood, and
looked Brute squarely in the face. Brute returned the gaze, no
comprehension in his dull blue eyes.

"You think I can't kill you, Brute?" said Goat coldly. "I'll show you!"

