Representing the pressure of the aqueous vapor by a, formula (5)
becomes

    (6) V_{s} = v(p - a)/(760(1 + 0.00366t)).

The following problem will serve to illustrate the method of applying
the correction for the pressure of the aqueous vapor.

The volume of a gas measured over water in a laboratory where the
temperature is 20 deg. and the barometric reading is 740 mm. is 500 cc. What
volume would this occupy under standard conditions?

The pressure exerted by the aqueous vapor at 20 deg. (see table in Appendix)
is equal to the pressure exerted by a column of mercury 17.4 mm. in
height. Substituting the values of v, t, p, and a in formula
(6), we have

    (6) V_{s} = 500(740 - 17.4)/(760(1 + 0.00366 x 20)) = 442.9 cc.

~Adjustment of tubes before reading gas volumes.~ In measuring the volumes
of gases collected in graduated tubes or other receivers, over a liquid
as illustrated in Fig. 8, the reading should be taken after raising or
lowering the tube containing the gas until the level of the liquid
inside and outside the tube is the same; for it is only under these
conditions that the upward pressure within the tube is the same as the
atmospheric pressure.


EXERCISES

1. What is the meaning of the following words? phlogiston, ozone,
phosphorus. (Consult dictionary.)

2. Can combustion take place without the emission of light?

3. Is the evolution of light always produced by combustion?

4. (a) What weight of oxygen can be obtained from 100 g. of water?
(b) What volume would this occupy under standard conditions?

5. (a) What weight of oxygen can be obtained from 500g. of mercuric
oxide? (b) What volume would this occupy under standard conditions?

6. What weight of each of the following compounds is necessary to
prepare 50 l. of oxygen? (a) water; (b) mercuric oxide; (c)
potassium chlorate.

7. Reduce the following volumes to 0 deg., the pressure remaining constant:
(a) 150 cc. at 10 deg.; (b) 840 cc. at 273 deg..

8. A certain volume of gas is measured when the temperature is 20 deg.. At
what temperature will its volume be doubled?

9. Reduce the following volumes to standard conditions of pressure, the
temperature remaining constant: (a) 200 cc. at 740 mm.; (b) 500 l.
at 380 mm.

10. What is the weight of 1 l. of oxygen when the pressure is 750 mm.
and the temperature 0 deg.?

11. Reduce the following volumes to standard conditions of temperature
and pressure: (a) 340 cc. at 12 deg. and 753 mm; (b) 500 cc. at 15 deg. and
740 mm.

12. What weight of potassium chlorate is necessary to prepare 250 l. of
oxygen at 20 deg. and 750 mm.?

13. Assuming the cost of potassium chlorate and mercuric oxide to be
respectively $0.50 and $1.50 per kilogram, calculate the cost of
materials necessary for the preparation of 50 l. of oxygen from each of
the above compounds.

14. 100 g. of potassium chlorate and 25 g. of manganese dioxide were
heated in the preparation of oxygen. What products were left in the
flask, and how much of each was present?




CHAPTER III

HYDROGEN


~Historical.~ The element hydrogen was first clearly recognized as a
distinct substance by the English investigator Cavendish, who in 1766
obtained it in a pure state, and showed it to be different from the
other inflammable airs or gases which had long been known. Lavoisier
gave it the name hydrogen, signifying water former, since it had been
found to be a constituent of water.

~Occurrence.~ In the free state hydrogen is found in the atmosphere, but
only in traces. In the combined state it is widely distributed, being a
constituent of water as well as of all living organisms, and the
products derived from them, such as starch and sugar. About 10% of the
human body is hydrogen. Combined with carbon, it forms the substances
which constitute petroleum and natural gas.

     It is an interesting fact that while hydrogen in the free state
     occurs only in traces on the earth, it occurs in enormous
     quantities in the gaseous matter surrounding the sun and
     certain other stars.

~Preparation from water.~ Hydrogen can be prepared from water by several
methods, the most important of which are the following.

1. _By the electric current._ As has been indicated in the preparation
of oxygen, water is easily separated into its constituents, hydrogen and
oxygen, by passing an electric current through it under certain
conditions.

2. _By the action of certain metals._ When brought into contact with
certain metals under appropriate conditions, water gives up a portion
or the whole of its hydrogen, its place being taken by the metal. In the
case of a few of the metals this change occurs at ordinary temperatures.
Thus, if a bit of sodium is thrown on water, an action is seen to take
place at once, sufficient heat being generated to melt the sodium, which
runs about on the surface of the water. The change which takes place
consists in the displacement of one half of the hydrogen of the water by
the sodium, and may be represented as follows:

          _        _            _        _
         | hydrogen |          | sodium   |
sodium + | hydrogen |(water) = | hydrogen |(sodium hydroxide) + hydrogen
         |_oxygen  _|          |_oxygen  _|

The sodium hydroxide formed is a white solid which remains dissolved in
the undecomposed water, and may be obtained by evaporating the solution
to dryness. The hydrogen is evolved as a gas and may be collected by
suitable apparatus.

Other metals, such as magnesium and iron, decompose water rapidly, but
only at higher temperatures. When steam is passed over hot iron, for
example, the iron combines with the oxygen of the steam, thus displacing
the hydrogen. Experiments show that the change may be represented as
follows:

        _        _
       | hydrogen |           _       _                 _        _
iron + | hydrogen |(water) = | iron    |(iron oxide) + | hydrogen |
       |_oxygen  _|          |_oxygen _|               |_hydrogen_|

The iron oxide formed is a reddish-black compound, identical with that
obtained by the combustion of iron in oxygen.

     ~Directions for preparing hydrogen by the action of steam on
     iron.~ The apparatus used in the preparation of hydrogen from
     iron and steam is shown in Fig. 9. A porcelain or iron tube
     B, about 50 cm. in length and 2 cm. or 3 cm. in diameter, is
     partially filled with fine iron wire or tacks and connected as
     shown in the figure. The tube B is heated, slowly at first,
     until the iron is red-hot. Steam is then conducted through the
     tube by boiling the water in the flask A. The hot iron
     combines with the oxygen in the steam, setting free the
     hydrogen, which is collected over water. The gas which first
     passes over is mixed with the air previously contained in the
     flask and tube, and is allowed to escape, _since a mixture of
     hydrogen with oxygen or air explodes violently when brought in
     contact with a flame_. It is evident that the flask A must be
     disconnected from the tube before the heat is withdrawn.

     That the gas obtained is different from air and oxygen may be
     shown by holding a bottle of it mouth downward and bringing a
     lighted splint into it. The hydrogen is ignited and burns with
     an almost colorless flame.

[Illustration Fig. 9]

~Preparation from acids~ (_usual laboratory method_). While hydrogen can
be prepared from water, either by the action of the electric current or
by the action of certain metals, these methods are not economical and
are therefore but little used. In the laboratory hydrogen is generally
prepared from compounds known as acids, all of which contain hydrogen.
When acids are brought in contact with certain metals, the metals
dissolve and set free the hydrogen of the acid. Although this reaction
is a quite general one, it has been found most convenient in preparing
hydrogen by this method to use either zinc or iron as the metal and
either hydrochloric or sulphuric acid as the acid. Hydrochloric acid is
a compound consisting of 2.77% hydrogen and 97.23% chlorine, while
sulphuric acid consists of 2.05% hydrogen, 32.70% sulphur, and 65.25%
oxygen.

The changes which take place in the preparation of hydrogen from zinc
and sulphuric acid (diluted with water) may be represented as follows:

        _        _               _       _
       | hydrogen |(sulphuric   | zinc    |(zinc
zinc + | sulphur  | acid)     = | sulphur | sulphate) + hydrogen
       |_oxygen  _|             |_oxygen _|

In other words, the zinc has taken the place of the hydrogen in
sulphuric acid. The resulting compound contains zinc, sulphur, and
oxygen, and is known as zinc sulphate. This remains dissolved in the
water present in the acid. It may be obtained in the form of a white
solid by evaporating the liquid left after the metal has passed into
solution.

When zinc and hydrochloric acid are used the following changes take
place:

        _        _                  _        _
       | hydrogen |(hydrochloric   | zinc     |(zinc
zinc + |_chlorine_| acid)        = |_chlorine_| chloride) + hydrogen

When iron is used the changes which take place are exactly similar to
those just given for zinc.

[Illustration Fig. 10.]

     ~Directions for preparing hydrogen from acids.~ The preparation
     of hydrogen from acids is carried out in the laboratory as
     follows: The metal is placed in a flask or wide-mouthed bottle
     A (Fig. 10) and the acid is added slowly through the funnel
     tube B. The metal dissolves in the acid, while the hydrogen
     which is liberated escapes through the exit tube C and is
     collected over water. It is evident that the hydrogen which
     passes over first is mixed with the air from the bottle A.
     Hence care must be taken not to bring a flame near the exit
     tube, since, as has been stated previously, such a mixture
     explodes with great violence when brought in contact with a
     flame.

     ~Precautions.~ Both sulphuric acid and zinc, if impure, are
     likely to contain small amounts of arsenic. Such materials
     should not be used in preparing hydrogen, since the arsenic
     present combines with a portion of the hydrogen to form a very
     poisonous gas known as arsine. On the other hand, chemically
     pure sulphuric acid, i.e. sulphuric acid that is entirely free
     from impurities, will not act upon chemically pure zinc. The
     reaction may be started, however, by the addition of a few
     drops of a solution of copper sulphate or platinum
     tetrachloride.

~Physical properties.~ Hydrogen is similar to oxygen in that it is a
colorless, tasteless, odorless gas. It is characterized by its extreme
lightness, being the lightest of all known substances. One liter of the
gas weighs only 0.08984 g. On comparing this weight with that of an
equal volume of oxygen, viz., 1.4285 g., the latter is found to be 15.88
times as heavy as hydrogen. Similarly, air is found to be 14.38 times as
heavy as hydrogen. Soap bubbles blown with hydrogen rapidly rise in the
air. On account of its lightness it is possible to pour it upward from
one bottle into another. Thus, if the bottle A (Fig. 11) is filled
with hydrogen, placed mouth downward by the side of bottle _B_, filled
with air, and is then gradually inverted under B as indicated in the
figure, the hydrogen will flow upward into bottle _B_, displacing the
air. Its presence in bottle B may then be shown by bringing a lighted
splint to the mouth of the bottle, when the hydrogen will be ignited by
the flame. It is evident, from this experiment, that in order to retain
the gas in an open bottle the bottle must be placed mouth downward.

[Illustration Fig. 11]

Hydrogen is far more difficult to liquefy than any other gas, with the
exception of helium, a rare element recently found to exist in the
atmosphere. The English scientist Dewar, however, in 1898 succeeded not
only in obtaining hydrogen in liquid state but also as a solid. Liquid
hydrogen is colorless and has a density of only 0.07. Its boiling point
under atmospheric pressure is -252 deg.. Under diminished pressure the
temperature has been reduced to -262 deg.. The solubility of hydrogen in
water is very slight, being still less than that of oxygen.

Pure hydrogen produces no injurious results when inhaled. Of course one
could not live in an atmosphere of the gas, since oxygen is essential to
respiration.

~Chemical properties.~ At ordinary temperatures hydrogen is not an active
element. A mixture of hydrogen and chlorine, however, will combine with
explosive violence at ordinary temperature if exposed to the sunlight.
The union can be brought about also by heating. The product formed in
either case is hydrochloric acid. Under suitable conditions hydrogen
combines with nitrogen to form ammonia, and with sulphur to form the
foul-smelling gas, hydrogen sulphide. The affinity of hydrogen for
oxygen is so great that a mixture of hydrogen and oxygen or hydrogen
and air explodes with great violence when heated to the kindling
temperature (about 612 deg.). Nevertheless under proper conditions hydrogen
may be made to burn quietly in either oxygen or air. The resulting
hydrogen flame is almost colorless and is very hot. The combustion of
the hydrogen is, of course, due to its union with oxygen. The product of
the combustion is therefore a compound of hydrogen and oxygen. That this
compound is water may be shown easily by experiment.

[Illustration Fig. 12]

     ~Directions for burning hydrogen in air.~ The combustion of
     hydrogen in air may be carried out safely as follows: The
     hydrogen is generated in the bottle A (Fig. 12), is dried by
     conducting it through the tube X, filled with some substance
     (generally calcium chloride) which has a great attraction for
     moisture, and escapes through the tube T, the end of which is
     drawn out to a jet. The hydrogen first liberated mixes with the
     air contained in the generator. If a flame is brought near the
     jet before this mixture has all escaped, a violent and very
     dangerous explosion results, since the entire apparatus is
     filled with the explosive mixture. On the other hand, if the
     flame is not applied until all the air has been expelled, the
     hydrogen is ignited and burns quietly, since only the small
     amount of it which escapes from the jet can come in contact
     with the oxygen of the air at any one time. By holding a cold,
     dry bell jar or bottle over the flame, in the manner shown in
     the figure, the steam formed by the combustion of the hydrogen
     is condensed, the water collecting in drops on the sides of the
     jar.

~Precautions.~ In order to avoid danger it is absolutely necessary to
prove that the hydrogen is free from air before igniting it. This can be
done by testing small amounts of the escaping gas. A convenient and safe
method of doing this is to fill a test tube with the gas by inverting it
over the jet. The hydrogen, on account of its lightness, collects in the
tube, displacing the air. After holding it over the jet for a few
moments in order that it may be filled with the gas, the tube is gently
brought, mouth downward, to the flame of a burner placed not nearer than
an arm's length from the jet. If the hydrogen is mixed with air a slight
explosion occurs, but if pure it burns quietly in the tube. The
operation is repeated until the gas burns quietly, when the tube is
quickly brought back over the jet for an instant, whereby the escaping
hydrogen is ignited by the flame in the tube.

[Illustration. Fig. 13]

~A mixture of hydrogen and oxygen is explosive.~ That a mixture of
hydrogen and air is explosive may be shown safely as follows: A cork
through which passes a short glass tube about 1 cm. in diameter is
fitted air-tight into the tubule of a bell jar of 2 l. or 3 l. capacity.
(A thick glass bottle with bottom removed may be used.) The tube is
closed with a small rubber stopper and the bell jar filled with
hydrogen, the gas being collected over water. When entirely filled with
the gas the jar is removed from the water and supported by blocks of
wood in order to leave the bottom of the jar open, as shown in Fig. 13.
The stopper is now removed from the tube in the cork, and the hydrogen,
which on account of its lightness escapes from the tube, is at once
lighted. As the hydrogen escapes, the air flows in at the bottom of the
jar and mixes with the remaining portion of the hydrogen, so that a
mixture of the two soon forms, and a loud explosion results. The
explosion is not dangerous, since the bottom of the jar is open, thus
leaving room for the expansion of the hot gas.

Since air is only one fifth oxygen, the remainder being inert gases, it
may readily be inferred that a mixture of hydrogen with pure oxygen
would be far more explosive than a mixture of hydrogen with air. Such
mixtures should not be made except in small quantities and by
experienced workers.

~Hydrogen does not support combustion.~ While hydrogen is readily
combustible, it is not a supporter of combustion. In other words,
substances will not burn in it. This may be shown by bringing a lighted
candle supported by a stiff wire into a bottle or cylinder of the pure
gas, as shown in Fig. 14. The hydrogen is ignited by the flame of the
candle and burns at the mouth of the bottle, where it comes in contact
with the oxygen in the air. When the candle is thrust up into the gas,
its flame is extinguished on account of the absence of oxygen. If slowly
withdrawn, the candle is relighted as it passes through the layer of
burning hydrogen.

[Illustration: Fig. 14]

[Illustration: Fig. 15]

~Reduction.~ On account of its great affinity for oxygen, hydrogen has the
power of abstracting it from many of its compounds. Thus, if a stream of
hydrogen, dried by passing through the tube B (Fig. 15), filled with
calcium chloride, is conducted through the tube C containing some
copper oxide, heated to a moderate temperature, the hydrogen abstracts
the oxygen from the copper oxide. The change may be represented as
follows:

     hydrogen + {copper}                 {hydrogen}
                {oxygen}(copper oxide) = {oxygen  }(water) + copper

The water formed collects in the cold portions of the tube C near its
end. In this experiment the copper oxide is said to undergo reduction.
_Reduction may therefore be defined as the process of withdrawing oxygen
from a compound._

~Relation of reduction to oxidation.~ At the same time that the copper
oxide is reduced it is clear that the hydrogen is oxidized, for it
combines with the oxygen given up by the copper oxide. The two processes
are therefore very closely related, and it usually happens that when one
substance is oxidized some other substance is reduced. That substance
which gives up its oxygen is called an _oxidizing agent_, while the
substance which unites with the oxygen is called a _reducing agent_.

~The oxyhydrogen blowpipe.~ This is a form of apparatus used for burning
hydrogen in pure oxygen. As has been previously stated, the flame
produced by the combustion of hydrogen in the air is very hot. It is
evident that if pure oxygen is substituted for air, the temperature
reached will be much higher, since there are no inert gases to absorb
the heat. The oxyhydrogen blowpipe, used to effect this combination,
consists of a small tube placed within a larger one, as shown in Fig.
16.

[Illustration: Fig. 16]

The hydrogen, stored under pressure, generally in steel cylinders, is
first passed through the outer tube and ignited at the open end of the
tube. The oxygen from a similar cylinder is then conducted through the
inner tube, and mixes with the hydrogen at the end of the tube. In order
to produce the maximum heat, the hydrogen and oxygen must be admitted to
the blowpipe in the exact proportion in which they combine, viz., 2
volumes of hydrogen to 1 of oxygen, or by weight, 1 part of hydrogen to
7.94 parts of oxygen. The intensity of the heat may be shown by bringing
into the flame pieces of metal such as iron wire or zinc. These burn
with great brilliancy. Even platinum, having a melting point of 1779 deg.,
may be melted by the heat of the flame.

While the oxyhydrogen flame is intensely hot, it is almost non-luminous.
If directed against some infusible substance like ordinary lime (calcium
oxide), the heat is so intense that the lime becomes incandescent and
glows with a brilliant light. This is sometimes used as a source of
light, under the name of _Drummond_ or _lime light_.

[Illustration: Fig. 17]

~The blast lamp.~ A similar form of apparatus is commonly used in the
laboratory as a source of heat under the name _blast lamp_ (Fig. 17).
This differs from the oxyhydrogen blowpipe only in the size of the
tubes. In place of the hydrogen and oxygen the more accessible coal gas
and air are respectively used. The former is composed largely of a
mixture of free hydrogen and gaseous compounds of carbon and hydrogen.
While the temperature of the flame is not so high as that of the
oxyhydrogen blowpipe, it nevertheless suffices for most chemical
operations carried out in the laboratory.

~Uses of hydrogen.~ On account of its cost, hydrogen is but little used
for commercial purposes. It is sometimes used as a material for the
inflation of balloons, but usually the much cheaper coal gas is
substituted for it. Even hot air is often used when the duration of
ascension is very short. It has been used also as a source of heat and
light in the oxyhydrogen blowpipe. Where the electric current is
available, however, this form of apparatus has been displaced almost
entirely by the electric light and electric furnace, which are much more
economical and more powerful sources of light and heat.


EXERCISES

1. Will a definite weight of iron decompose an unlimited weight of
steam?

2. Why is oxygen passed through the inner tube of the oxyhydrogen
blowpipe rather than the outer?

3. In Fig. 14, will the flame remain at the mouth of the tube?

4. From Fig. 15, suggest a way for determining experimentally the
quantity of water formed in the reaction.

5. Distinguish clearly between the following terms: oxidation,
reduction, combustion, and kindling temperature.

6. Is oxidation always accompanied by reduction?

7. What is the source of heat in the lime light? What is the exact use
of lime in this instrument?

8. In Fig. 12, why is it necessary to dry the hydrogen by means of the
calcium chloride in the tube X?

9. At what pressure would the weight of 1 l. of hydrogen be equal to
that of oxygen under standard conditions?

10. (a) What weight of hydrogen can be obtained from 150 g. of
sulphuric acid? (b) What volume would this occupy under standard
conditions? (c) The density of sulphuric acid is 1.84. What volume
would the 150 g. of the acid occupy?

11. How many liters of hydrogen can be obtained from 50 cc. of sulphuric
acid having a density of 1.84?

12. Suppose you wish to fill five liter bottles with hydrogen, the gas
to be collected over water in your laboratory, how many cubic
centimeters of sulphuric acid would be required?




CHAPTER IV

COMPOUNDS OF HYDROGEN AND OXYGEN; WATER AND HYDROGEN DIOXIDE


WATER

~Historical.~ Water was long regarded as an element. In 1781 Cavendish
showed that it is formed by the union of hydrogen and oxygen. Being a
believer in the phlogiston theory, however, he failed to interpret his
results correctly. A few years later Lavoisier repeated Cavendish's
experiments and showed that water must be regarded as a compound of
hydrogen and oxygen.

~General methods employed for the determination of the composition of a
compound.~ The composition of a compound may be determined by either of
two general processes these are known as _analysis_ and _synthesis_.

1. _Analysis_ is the process of decomposing a compound into its
constituents and determining what these constituents are. The analysis
is _qualitative_ when it results in merely determining what elements
compose the compound; it is _quantitative_ when the exact percentage of
each constituent is determined. Qualitative analysis must therefore
precede quantitative analysis, for it must be known what elements, are
in a compound before a method can be devised for determining exactly how
much of each is present.

2. _Synthesis_ is the process of forming a compound from its constituent
parts. It is therefore the reverse of analysis. Like analysis, it may be
either qualitative or quantitative.

~Application of these methods to the determination of the composition of
water.~ The determination of the composition of water is a matter of
great interest not only because of the importance of the compound but
also because the methods employed illustrate the general methods of
analysis and synthesis.

~Methods based on analysis.~ The methods based on analysis may be either
qualitative or quantitative in character.

[Illustration: Fig. 18]

1. _Qualitative analysis._ As was stated in the study of oxygen, water
may be separated into its component parts by means of the electric
current. The form of apparatus ordinarily used for effecting this
analysis is shown in Fig. 18. A platinum wire, to the end of which is
attached a small piece of platinum foil (about 15 mm. by 25 mm.), is
fused through each of the tubes B and D, as shown in the figure. The
stopcocks at the ends of these tubes are opened and water, to which has
been added about one tenth of its volume of sulphuric acid, is poured
into the tube A until the side tubes B and D are completely
filled. The stopcocks are then closed. The platinum wires extending into
the tubes B and D are now connected with the wires leading from two
or three dichromate cells joined in series. The pieces of platinum foil
within the tubes thus become the electrodes, and the current flows from
one to the other through the acidulated water. As soon as the current
passes, bubbles of gas rise from each of the electrodes and collect in
the upper part of the tubes. The gas rising from the negative electrode
is found to be hydrogen, while that from the positive electrode is
oxygen. It will be seen that the volume of the hydrogen is approximately
double that of the oxygen. Oxygen is more soluble in water than
hydrogen, and a very little of it is also lost by being converted into
ozone and other substances. It has been found that when the necessary
corrections are made for the error due to these facts, the volume of the
hydrogen is exactly double that of the oxygen.

Fig. 19 illustrates a simpler form of apparatus, which may be used in
place of that shown in Fig. 18. A glass or porcelain dish is partially
filled with water to which has been added the proper amount of acid. Two
tubes filled with the same liquid are inverted over the electrodes. The
gases resulting from the decomposition of the water collect in the
tubes.

[Illustration: Fig. 19]

2. _Quantitative analysis._ The analysis just described is purely
qualitative and simply shows that water contains hydrogen and oxygen. It
does not prove the absence of other elements; indeed it does not prove
that the hydrogen and oxygen are present in the proportion in which they
are liberated by the electric current. The method may be made
quantitative, however, by weighing the water decomposed and also the
hydrogen and oxygen obtained in its decomposition. If the combined
weights of the hydrogen and oxygen exactly equal the weight of the water
decomposed, then it would be proved that the water consists of hydrogen
and oxygen in the proportion in which they are liberated by the electric
current. This experiment is difficult to carry out, however, so that the
more accurate methods based on synthesis are used.

~Methods based on synthesis.~ Two steps are necessary to ascertain the
exact composition of water by synthesis: (1) to show by qualitative
synthesis that water is formed by the union of oxygen with hydrogen; (2)
to determine by quantitative synthesis in what proportion the two
elements unite to form water. The fact that water is formed by the
combination of oxygen with hydrogen was proved in the preceding chapter.
The quantitative synthesis may be made as follows:

[Illustration: Fig. 20]

The combination of the two gases is brought about in a tube called a
eudiometer. This is a graduated tube about 60 cm. long and 2 cm. wide,
closed at one end (Fig. 20). Near the closed end two platinum wires are
