
"The officer in the helicopter and those in the fighters, yes. Most of
them are Gunther Firsts."

"Good girl. The set's coming to life--watch it."

The likeness of the alien being became clear upon the alien screen;
visible from the waist up. While humanoid, the creature was very far
indeed from being human. He--at least, it had masculine rudimentary
nipples--had double shoulders and four arms. His skin was a vividly
intense cobalt blue. His ears were black, long, and highly dirigible.
His eyes, a flaming red in color, were large and vertically-slitted,
like a cat's. He had no hair at all. His nose was large and Roman; his
jaw was square, almost jutting; his bright-yellow teeth were clean and
sharp.

After a minute of study the alien said: "Although your vessel is so
entirely alien that nothing even remotely like it is on record, you four
are completely human and, if of compatible type, acceptable. Are there
any other living beings aboard with you?"

"Excepting micro-organisms, none."

"Such life is of no importance. Approach, please, one of you, and grasp
with a hand the projecting metal knob."

With a little trepidation, Garlock did so. He felt no unusual sensation
at the contact.

"All four of you are compatible and we accept you. This finding is
surprising in the extreme, as you are the first human beings of record
who grade higher than what you call Gunther Two ... or Gunther Second?"

"Either one; the terms are interchangeable."

"You have minds of tremendous development and power; definitely superior
even to my own. However, there is no doubt that physically you are
perfectly compatible with our humanity. Your blood will be of great
benefit to it. You may land. Goodbye."

"Wait, please. How about landing conventions? And visiting restrictions
and so on? And may we keep this box? We will be glad to trade you
something for it, if we have anything you would like to have?"

"Ah, I should have realized that your customs would be widely different
from ours. Since you have been examined and accepted, there are no
restrictions. You will not act against humanity's good. Land where you
please, go where you please, do what you please as long as you please.
Take up permanent residence or leave as soon as you please. Marry if you
like, or simply breed--your unions with this planet's humanity will be
fertile. Keep the box without payment. As Guardians of Humanity we
Arpalones do whatever small favors we can. Have I made myself clear?"

"Abundantly so. Thank you, sir."

"Now I really must go. Goodbye."

Garlock glanced into his plate. The jets had disappeared, the helicopter
was falling rapidly away. He wiped his brow.

"Well, I'll be damned," he said.

        *           *           *

When his amazement subsided he turned to the business at hand. "Lola, do
you check me that this planet is named Hodell, that it is populated by
creatures exactly like us? Arpalones?"

"Exactly, except they aren't 'creatures'. They are humanoids, and very
fine people."

"You'd think so, of course ... correction accepted. Well, let's take
advantage of their extraordinarily hospitable invitation and go down.
Cut the rope, Jim."

        *           *           *

The airport was very large, and was divided into several sections, each
of which was equipped with runways and/or other landing facilities to
suit one class of craft--propellor jobs, jets, or helicopters. There
were even a few structures that looked like rocket pits.

"Where are you going to sit down, Jim? With the 'copters or over by the
blast-pits?"

"With the 'copters, I think. Since I can place her to within a couple of
inches. I'll put her squarely into that far corner, where she'll be out
of everybody's way."

"No concrete out there," Garlock said. "But the ground seems good and
solid."

"We'd better not land on concrete," James grinned. "Unless it's terrific
stuff we'd smash it. On bare ground, the worst we can do is sink in a
foot or so, and that won't hurt anything."

"Check. A few tons to the square foot, is all. Shall we strap down and
hang onto our teeth?"

"Who do you think you're kidding, boss? Even though I've got to do this
on manual, I won't tip over a half-piece standing on edge."

James stopped talking, pulled out his scanner, stuck his face into it.
The immense starship settled downward toward the selected corner. There
was no noise, no blast, no flame, no slightest visible or detectable
sign of whatever force it was that was braking the thousands of tons of
the vessel's mass in its miles-long, almost-vertical plunge to ground.

When the _Pleiades_ struck ground the impact was scarcely to be felt.
When she came to rest, after settling into the ground her allotted "foot
or so," there was no jar at all.

"Atmosphere, temperature, and so on, approximately Earth-normal,"
Garlock said. "Just as our friend said it would be."

James scanned the city and the field. "Our visit is kicking up a lot of
excitement. Shall we go out?"

"Not yet!" Belle exclaimed. "I want to see how the women are dressed,
first."

"So do I," Lola added, "and some other things besides."

Both women--Lola through her Operator's scanner; Belle by manipulating
the ship's tremendous Operator Field by the sheer power of her Prime
Operator's mind--stared eagerly at the crowd of people now beginning to
stream across the field.

"As an anthropologist," Lola announced, "I'm not only surprised. I am
shocked, annoyed, and disgruntled. Why, they're _exactly_ like white
Tellurian human beings!"

"But _look_ at their _clothes_!" Belle insisted. "They're wearing
anything and everything, from bikinis to coveralls!"

"Yes, but notice." This was the anthropological scientist speaking now.
"Breasts and loins, covered. Faces, uncovered. Heads and feet and hands,
either bare or covered. Ditto for legs up to there, backs, arms, necks
and shoulders down to here, and torsos clear down to there. We'll not
violate any conventions by going out as we are. Not even you, Belle. You
first, Chief. Yours the high honor of setting first foot--the biggest
foot we've got, too--on alien soil."

"To hell with that. We'll go out together."

"Wait a minute," Lola went on. "There's a funny-looking automobile just
coming through the gate. The Press. Three men and two women. Two
cameras, one walkie-talkie, and two microphones. The photog in the
purple shirt is really a sharpie at lepping. Class Three, at
least--possibly a Two."

"How about screens down enough to lep, boss?" Belle suggested. "Faster.
We may need it."

"Check. I'm too busy to record, anyway--I'll log this stuff up tonight,"
and thoughts flew.

"Check me, Jim," Garlock flashed. "Telepathy, very good. On Gunther, the
guy was right--no signs at all of any First activity, and very few
Seconds."

"Check," James agreed.

"And Lola, those 'Guardians' out there. I thought they were the same as
the Arpalone we talked to. They aren't. Not even telepathic. Same color
scheme, is all."

"Right. Much more brutish. Much flatter cranium. Long, tearing canine
teeth. Carnivorous. I'll call them just 'guardians' until we find out
what they really are."

        *           *           *

The press car arrived and the Tellurians disembarked--and, accidentally
or not, it was Belle's green slipper that first touched ground. There
was a terrific babel of thought, worse, even, than voices in similar
case, in being so much faster. The reporters, all of them, wanted to
know everything at once. How, what, where, when, and why. Also who. And
all about Tellus and the Tellurian solar system. How did the visitors
like Hodell? And all about Belle's green hair. And the photographers
were prodigal of film, shooting everything from all possible angles.

"Hold it!" Garlock loosed a blast of thought that "silenced" almost the
whole field. "We will have order, please. Lola Montandon, our
anthropologist, will take charge. Keep it orderly, Lola, if you have to
throw half of them off the field. I'm going over to Administration and
check in. One of you reporters can come with me, if you like."

The man in the purple shirt got his bid in first. As the two men walked
away together, Garlock noted that the man was in fact a Second--his flow
of lucid, cogent thought did not interfere at all with the steady stream
of speech going into his portable recorder. Garlock also noticed that in
any group of more than a dozen people there was always at least one
guardian. They paid no attention whatever to the people, who in turn
ignored them completely. Garlock wondered briefly. Guardians? The
Arpalones, out in space, yes. But these creatures, naked and unarmed on
the ground? The Arpalones were non-human people. These things
were--what?

At the door of the Field Office the reporter, after turning
Garlock over to a startlingly beautiful, leggy, breasty, blonde
receptionist-usherette, hurried away.

        *           *           *

He flecked a feeler at her mind and stiffened. How could a Two--a high
Two, at that--be working as an usher? And with her guard down clear to
the floor? He probed--and saw.

"Lola!" He flashed a tight-beamed thought. "You aren't putting out
anything about our sexual customs, family life, and so on."

"Of course not. We must know their mores first."

"Good girl. Keep your shield up."

"Oh, we're so glad to see you, Captain Garlock, sir!" The blonde, who
was dressed little more heavily than the cigarette girls in Venusberg's
Cartier Room, seized his left hand in both of hers and held it
considerably longer than was necessary. Her dazzling smile, her laughing
eyes, her flashing white teeth, the many exposed inches of her skin, and
her completely unshielded mind; all waved banners of welcome.

"Captain Garlock, sir, Governor Atterlin has been most anxious to see
you ever since you were first detected. This way, please, sir." She
turned, brushing her bare hip against his leg in the process, and led
him by the hand along a hallway. Her thoughts flowed. "I have been, too,
sir, and I'm simply delighted to see you close up, and I hope to see a
lot more of you. You're a wonderfully pleasant surprise, sir; I've never
seen a man like you before. I don't think Hodell ever saw a man like you
before, sir. With such a really terrific mind and yet so big and strong
and well-built and handsome and clean-looking and blackish. You're
wonderful, Captain Garlock, sir. You'll be here a long time, I hope?
Here we are, sir."

She opened a door, walked across the room, sat down in an overstuffed
chair, and crossed her legs meticulously. Then, still smiling happily,
she followed with eager eyes and mind Garlock's every move.

Garlock had been reading Governor Atterlin; knew why it was the governor
who was in that office instead of the port manager. He knew that
Atterlin had been reading him--as much as he had allowed. They had
already discussed many things, and were still discussing.

The room was much more like a library than an office. The governor, a
middle-aged, red-headed man a trifle inclined to portliness, had been
seated in a huge reclining chair facing a teevee screen, but got up to
shake hands.

"Welcome, friend Captain Garlock. Now, to continue. As to exchange. Many
ships visiting us have nothing we need or can use. For such, all
services are free--or rather, are paid by the city. Our currency is
based upon platinum, but gold, silver, and copper are valuable. Certain
jewels, also...."

"That's far enough. We will pay our way--we have plenty of metal. What
are your ratios of value for the four metals here on Hodell?"

"Today's quotations are...." He glanced at a screen, and his fingers
flashed over the keys of a computer beside his chair. "One weight of
platinum is equal in value to seven point three four six...."

"Decimals are not necessary, sir."

"Seven plus, then, weights of gold. One of gold to eleven of silver. One
of silver to four of copper."

"Thank you. We'll use platinum. I'll bring some bullion tomorrow morning
and exchange it for your currency. Shall I bring it here, or to a bank
in the city?"

"Either. Or we can have an armored truck visit your ship."

"That would be better yet. Have them bring about five thousand tanes.
Thank you very much, Governor Atterlin, and good afternoon to you, sir."

"And good afternoon to you, sir. Until tomorrow, then."

Garlock turned to leave.

"Oh, may I go with you to your ship, sir, to take just a little look at
it?" the girl asked, winningly.

"Of course, Grand Lady Neldine, I'd like to have your company."

She seized his elbow and hugged it quickly against her breast. Then,
taking his hand, she walked--almost skipped--along beside him. "And I
want to see Pilot James close up, too, sir--he's not nearly as wonderful
as you are, sir--and I wonder why Planetographer Bellamy's hair is
green? Very striking, of course, sir, but I don't think I'd care for it
much on me--unless you'd think I should, sir?"

        *           *           *

Belle knew, of course, that they were coming; and Garlock knew that
Belle's hackles were very much on the rise. She could not read him,
except very superficially, but she was reading the strange girl like a
book and was not liking anything she read. Wherefore, when Garlock and
his joyous companion reached the great spaceship--

"How come you picked up _that_ little man-eating shark?" she sent,
venomously, on a tight band.

"It wasn't a case of picking her up." Garlock grinned. "I haven't been
able to find any urbane way of scraping her off. First Contact, you
know."

"She wants altogether too much Contact for a First--I'll scrape her off,
even if she is one of the nobler class on this world...." Belle changed
her tactics even before Garlock began his reprimand. "I shouldn't have
said that, Clee, of course." She laughed lightly. "It was just the
shock; there wasn't anything in any of my First Contact tapes covering
