     There's a small instrument board set on one of the posts. Turn
     the upper of the two dials until the hand of the meter beside
     it moves up to 2700 exactly. Wait a moment, until you're sure
     you have the exact reading. Then turn the second dial until
     the two red lines coincide, and as you do so, mark the time.
     The thing is set to operate the reverse cycle at three-hour
     intervals exactly. When you come down, you'll start a new
     cycle, and it might be important for us to know at just what
     minute we can get back to our own plane.

     If you decide to try it, tell Perrin to do nothing for at
     least a week. If the law started experimenting on this
     equipment, we never could climb back. And leave word with them
     for Hope; tell her I'll scramble out somehow--that _we_ will,
     if you decide to try your luck.

                                                            Vic


Underneath, in Hope's clear, purposeful hand, was this:


     Peter dear:

     Not knowing when you'll arrive, I'm going on ahead. We must
     give Vic a hand--mustn't we?

                                                            H.


       *       *       *       *       *

Naturally, I didn't understand Vic's jargon about frequencies and
light-rays, for I thought more about football than physics in college,
but two things were clear to me. One was that Vic had plunged into some
sort of wild experiment, and the other was that Hope had followed him.
The rest didn't matter very much.

"Perrin! Mr. Butler and Miss Hope are safe. Everything is explained in
this note. You and Mrs. Perrin are to leave me here, and not disturb
anything. Do nothing at all for at least a week. If we aren't all back
here before that time ... take any action you see fit. Understand?"

"No-no, sir. Where--"

"You understand the orders, anyway. That's all that's necessary. Close
the door--and keep it closed at least a week!" I glared at him, and
Perrin closed the door.

The apparatus Vic had mentioned was my first thought. It consisted
primarily of four tall, slim posts, set in the form of a square, about a
yard apart, and supported by heavy copper brackets mounted on a thick
base of insulating material, and each post bore at its top, like a stalk
with a single drooping flower, a deep, highly polished reflector,
pointing inward and downward. The whole effect was not unlike the
skeleton of a miniature skyscraper.

I strode between two of the high, slim black pillars and glanced upward.
All four of the reflectors seemed pointed directly at my face, and I
could see that each held, not the bulb I had expected, but a crudely
shaped blob of fused quartz.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was nothing to be gained by examining the peculiar machine, and
therefore the one quick glance sufficed. If Vic and Hope had gone this
route, I was anxious to follow. I glanced down at the papers in my
hand, and slowly turned the first dial on the little instrument board,
narrowly watching the hand of the meter beside it, as Vic had
instructed.

The hand moved slowly, like the hand of an oil-gauge in which the
pressure is gradually built up. Twenty-one ... twenty-five ...
twenty-six ... _twenty-seven_.

I waited a moment, conscious only of the faint hum of a generator at the
other end of the room, and the quivering hand of the meter. I turned the
dial back an imperceptible degree, and the hand steadied down exactly
upon the numerals "2700." Then I touched the next dial.

This second dial was no more than a thin disk of hard rubber or
bakelite, with a red scratch-mark on one side. On the panel itself, far
to the right of the dial's zero point, was the red scratch-mark that
matched it. When the two coincided--well, something happened.

I was conscious of a faint glow from above as I moved the dial slowly,
so that its red mark approached the stationary one upon the panel. I
glanced up swiftly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Each of the little blobs of quartz was glowing; each with a light of
different color. One was a rich amber, one a pale green, one a vivid,
electric blue, and one was fiery red. The intensity of the light
increased steadily as I moved the dial.

I could not only see the light; I could feel it. It beat upon my body;
throbbed all around me. I had a feeling that the mingling rays of light
conflicted with each other.

It seemed to me for a moment that I was growing as light as air; that my
feet were drifting off the floor, and then, as the red line of the dial
came closer to the indicated point, the feeling left, and I suddenly
seemed very heavy. I could hardly support my own weight; my legs were
trembling with the burden; sweat broke out over my whole body; the rays
of light beat down upon me fiercely, overpoweringly....

Desperately, I quickly turned the dial until the two red marks
coincided. A great weight, soft and enveloping, seemed to drop upon me.
The senses of sight and hearing and feeling all left me. I could only
think--and my thoughts were horrible.

Then, suddenly, there was a terrific crash of sound, and my senses
returned.

I looked around. It seemed that an instant before I had been standing
there in Vic's laboratory, slowly turning the second of the two dials,
while the four lights beat down upon my body. And now ... and now I was
standing in the open, on another world. A nightmare world that words
seem inadequate to describe.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sky was an angry, sulphurous green, pressing low upon a country
utterly flat and nearly barren. The only sign of vegetation I could
perceive were strange growths that remotely resembled trees--inverted
trees, with wide-spreading branches hungrily nursing the black and
barren soil, and gnarled, brief roots reaching out tortured arms toward
the forbidding sky.

