hypercritical, but is in accordance with the knowledge we have to-day.
The old nomenclature we use, but without definite meaning; the latter is
left to be inferred from the connection or context. If a man should
attach to the water main in a city a properly constructed waterwheel,
the latter will rotate; but it would not be proper to say that he
received rotation from the reservoir. What he received was water with a
certain pressure; in other words, a certain form of energy, which he
transforms into rotation by the appropriate means; but by substituting
other means he can make the same water pressure maintain a vibratory
motion, as with the hydraulic ram valve, or let it waste itself by open
flow, in which case it becomes ultimately molecular vibration that is
heat. The analogy holds strictly. The trouble all comes from neglecting
to distinguish between different forms of energy--energy in matter and
energy in the ether.

       *       *       *       *       *




GLASS SPINNING AND WEAVING.


Quite recently a Pittsburg glass firm has succeeded, to a notable
degree, in producing glass threads of sufficient fineness and elasticity
to permit of their being woven into fabrics of novel character and
quality. Their success is such as to warrant the assumption that
garments of pure glass, glistening and imperishable, are among the
possibilities of the near future. The spinning of glass threads of
extreme fineness is not a new process, but, as carried on at present by
the firm in question--Messrs. Atterbury & Co.--possesses considerable
interest. From a quality of glass similar to that from which table ware
is made, rods of glass averaging half an inch in diameter are drawn to
any desired length and of various colors. These rods are then so placed
that the flame of two gas burners is blown against that end of the rod
pointed toward the large "spinning" wheel. The latter is 81/2 feet in
diameter, and turns at the rate of 300 revolutions per minute. The
flames, having played upon the end of the glass cylinder until a melting
heat is attained, a thread of glass is drawn from the rod and affixed to
the periphery of the wheel, whose face is about 12 inches wide. Motion
is then communicated, and the crystal thread is drawn from between the
gas jets and wrapped upon the wheel at the rate of about 7,500 feet per
minute. A higher speed results in a finer filament of glass, and vice
versa. During its passage from the flame to the wheel, a distance of
five or six feet, the thread has become cooled, and yet its elasticity
is preserved to a notable degree. The next step in the process consists
in the removal of the layers of threads from the wheel. This is easily
accomplished, and after being cut to the desired lengths, the filaments
are woven in a loom somewhat similar to that used in weaving silken
goods. Until within the past few weeks only the woof of the fabric was
of glass, but at present both warp and woof are in crystal. Samples of
this cloth have been forwarded to New York and to Chicago, and the
manufacturers claim to be able to duplicate in colors, texture, etc.,
any garments sent them. A tablecloth of glass recently completed shines
with a satiny, opalescent luster by day, and under gaslight shows
remarkable beauty. Imitation plumes, in opal, ruby, pale green, and
other hues, are also constructed of these threads, and are wonderfully
pretty. The chief obstacle yet to surmount seems to lie in the
manipulation of these threads, which are so fine that a bunch containing
250 is not so thick as an average sized knitting needle, and which do
not possess the tractability of threads of silk or cotton.

  [The foregoing information is furnished by a correspondent in
  Pittsburg. A sample of the goods mentioned, a tablecloth of glass,
  is now on exhibition in this city.

  The weaving of such heavy fabrics of glass for ornamental purposes
  and for curiosities is no new thing; nor, in our estimation, does
  comparative success in such experiments warrant the enthusiastic
  claims of the Pittsburg manufacturers touching the adaptability of
  glass for wearing apparel. Unless it is in their power to change
  the nature of glass absolutely and radically, it does not seem
  possible for them so to overcome the ultimate brittleness of the
  separate fibers as to make the fabric fit to be brought in contact
  with the skin. The woven stuff may be relatively tough and
  flexible; but unless the entire fabric can be made of one
  unbreakable fiber the touch of the free ends, be they never so
  fine, must be anything but pleasant or beneficial, if one can
  judge by the finest filaments of glass spun hitherto. Besides, in
  weaving and wearing the goods, a certain amount of fiber dust must
  be produced as in the case of all other textile material. When the
  softest of vegetable fibers are employed the air charged with
  their fragments is hurtful to the lungs; still more injurious must
  be the spiculae of spun glass.

  However, although the manufacturers are likely to be disappointed
  in their expectation of finding in glass a cheap and available
  substitute for linen, cotton, and silk in dress goods, it is quite
  possible that a wide range of useful application may be found for
  their new fabric.]

       *       *       *       *       *




REMARKABLE ERUPTION OF MAUNA LOA.


Late advices from the Sandwich Islands describe the eruption of Mauna
Loa, which began Nov. 5, as one of the grandest ever witnessed. The
opening was about six miles from the summit of the mountain, and already
two great streams of lava had been poured out; one of them, from one to
two yards wide and twenty feet deep, had reached a distance of thirty
miles. Terrible explosions accompany the flow of the lava stream, which
for a time threatened the town of Hilo; at last reports the flow seemed
to be turning in another direction.

Mauna Loa, "long or high mountain" occupies a large portion of the
central and southern part of the island of Hawaii, and reaches an
elevation of 13,760 feet. It has been built up by lavas thrown out in a
highly fluid state, and flowing long distances before cooling; as a
consequence the slopes of the mountain are very gentle, averaging,
according to Prof. Dana, not more than six and a half degrees. Its
craters are numerous, and usually occur near the summit and on the
sides, new ones opening frequently, and furnishing, as in the latest
instance, magnificent lava streams. The terminal crater is circular,
8,000 feet in diameter, and in 1864 was about 1,000 feet deep. In 1859
an enormous lava fountain spouted from this crater for four or five
days, throwing a column of white hot fluid lava about 200 feet in
diameter to the height of two or three hundred feet. The lava stream ran
50 miles to the sea in eight days. Other great eruptions have occurred
in 1832, 1840, 1843, 1852, 1855, 1868 and 1873. The lava streams poured
out in 1840, 1859, and 1868, flowed to the sea, adding considerably to
the area of the island. Those of 1843 and 1855 are estimated to have
poured out respectively 17,000,000,000 and 38,000,000,000 cubic feet of
lava. In 1868 the lava stream forced its way under ground a distance of
twenty miles, and burst forth from a fissure two miles long, throwing up
enormous columns of crimson lava and red hot rock to the height of five
or six hundred feet.

On the eastern part of Mauna Loa, 16 miles from the summit crater, is
Kilauea, the largest continuously active crater in the world. It is
eight miles in circumference, and 1,000 feet deep. Its eruptions are
generally independent of those of Mauna Loa.

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW AIR ENGINE.


A valuable improvement in compressed air engines has recently been
patented in this country and in Europe by Col. F. E. B. Beaumont, of the
Royal Engineers, and we learn from accounts given in the London and
provincial papers that it has proved highly efficient and satisfactory.

The engine possesses some peculiar features which render it very
economical in the use of compressed air. It has two cylinders, one being
much larger than the other. Into the smaller of these cylinders the
compressed air is taken directly from the reservoir, and after doing its
work there it is discharged into the larger cylinder, where it is
further expanded, being finally discharged into the open air.

The admission of air to the smaller cylinder is regulated by an
adjustable cut-off apparatus, which admits of maintaining a uniform
power under a variable pressure. When the reservoir at first starting
contains air at a very high pressure, the cut-off is adjusted so that
the small cylinder receives a very small charge of air at each stroke;
when the pressure in the reservoir diminishes the cut-off is delayed so
that a larger quantity of air is admitted to the small cylinder; and
when the pressure in the reservoir is so far reduced that the pressure
on the smaller piston gives very little power, the supply passages are
kept open so that the air acts directly on the piston of the larger
cylinder. This arrangement is also available when the air pressure is
high and great power is required for a short time, as, for example, in
starting a locomotive.

It is, perhaps, needless to mention the advantages a motor of this kind
possesses over the steam locomotive. The absence of smoke and noise
renders it particularly desirable for tunnels, elevated roads, and, in
fact, for any city railroad.

Further information in regard to this important invention may be
obtained by addressing Mr. R. Ten Broeck, at the Windsor Hotel, New
York.

       *       *       *       *       *




TELEGRAPH WIRES UNDERGROUND.


Philadelphia newspapers report that the American Union Telegraph
Company are about to try in that city the experiment of putting their
wires underground. The plan works well enough in European cities, and
there would seem to be no reason why it should not succeed here, save
the indisposition of the companies to bear the first cost of making the
change. For some months the Western Union Telegraph Company has had the
matter under consideration, but will probably wait until pressed by a
rival company before it undertakes the more serious task of taking down
its forest of poles and sinking the wires which contribute so much to
the prevailing ugliness of our streets. Sooner or later the poles and
wires must come down; and it is altogether probable that the change will
be beneficial to the companies in the long run, owing to the smaller
cost of maintaining a subterranean system. It will certainly be an
advantage to the community.

       *       *       *       *       *




IMPROVED SAFETY NUT.


That a safety nut so simple and so obviously efficient as the one shown
in the annexed engraving should be among the recent inventions in this
line instead of being among the first, is a curious example of the
manner in which inventors often overlook the simplest means of
accomplishing an end. The principle on which this nut operates will be
understood by reference to the engraving. Two nuts are represented on
each bolt, simply for the purpose of showing the difference between the
nut when loose and when screwed down. In practice only one nut is
required to each bolt.

The square nut shown in Fig. 1 is concaved on its under side, so that it
touches its bearings only at the corners and in the outer face of the
nut there are two slots at right angles to each other. When this nut is
screwed home the outer portion is contracted so as to clamp the bolt
tightly.

The hexagonal nut shown in Fig. 2 has but a single transverse slot, and
the nut is made concave on the under surface, so that when the nut is
screwed home it will contract the outer portion and so clamp the bolt.

This nut may be removed and replaced by means of the wrench, but it will
not become accidentally loosened, and the bolt to which it is applied
will always remain tight, as the nut possesses a certain amount of
elasticity. The action of this nut is such as to prevent stripping the
threads of either bolt or nut.

As only one nut is used with each bolt, and as no washer or other extra
appliance is required, it is obvious that a great saving is effected by
this invention.

We are informed that several of the leading railroads have adopted this
nut, and use it on the tracks, engines, cars, and machinery. The Atwood
Safety Nut Company manufacture this article in a variety of forms.

[Illustration: THE ATWOOD SAFETY NUT.]

Further information may be obtained by addressing J. W. Labaree,
Secretary and Treasurer, Room 2, Agawam Bank Building, Springfield,
Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *




PETROLEUM PROSPECTS.


The total oil production of the Pennsylvania oil regions for the month
of October was 2,094,608 barrels. The conditions in the producing field
are gradually giving warrant for permanently higher prices of crude. The
confidence of the trade is daily becoming more fixed in the definiteness
and limit of the Bradford field, as the last of the several "rich
streaks" in the region are being worked.

We entertain an increased belief that the coming year will exhibit a
continued falling off in the volume of production, notwithstanding all
the modern improvements in drilling and the great energy with which they
are employed.

For the past few weeks the markets of both crude and refined seem to
have been rigorously and artificially held by the refining interest. The
refined has been quoted at 12 cts. for four weeks without change--and as
a consequence the exporter has taken oil very sparingly. The exports of
last year to November 1, as compared with the exports of this year to
November 1, show a decrease of 1,269,646 barrels in crude equivalent.
The falling off of production, taken together with the increased demand
which must result from the present reluctance of exporters, unite in
warranting us in the belief above expressed, in enhanced prices for the
coming year.

Our figures show a decrease in production for last month, compared with
the preceding month, of 933 barrels per day, notwithstanding the number
of wells drilled was slightly greater than in the preceding month. It
will be noticed, too, that the average per well of the new wells for
last month is a little less than that of the new wells for the month
before, besides, it is generally recognized that the force of the gas in
the region is gradually becoming less, and pumping is more commonly
resorted to. As nearly as we can ascertain, about one-eighth of all the
wheels of the Bradford region are now pumping. We believe, however, on
the whole, judging the character of the Bradford producing field, that
the falling off of production will be quite gradual. Our reason for this
is that the Bradford field is essentially different from its
predecessor--the Butler field. The wells in the Butler field were often
close together, many of them were very large and fell off rapidly; while
the wells of the Bradford region are smaller, farther apart, much
greater in number, have a greater area from which to draw oil, and
consequently decline very much more slowly.--_Stowell's Reporter_.

       *       *       *       *       *
