Osnome, but will be drawn aside and be lost, if not actually drawn into
the vast central sun. Although it may not have occurred to you, a little
reflection will show that the inhabitants of all the central planets,
such as Osnome, must perforce be absolutely ignorant of astronomy, and
of all the wonders of outer space. Before your coming we knew nothing
beyond our own solar system, and very little of that. We knew of the
existence of only such of the closest planets as were brilliant enough
to be seen in our continuous sunlight, and they were few. Immediately
after your coming I gave your knowledge of astronomy to a group of our
foremost physicists and mathematicians, and they have been working
ceaselessly from space-ships--close enough so that observations could be
recalculated to Osnome, and yet far enough away to afford perfect
'seeing,' as you call it."

"But I don't know any more about astronomy than a pig does about
Sunday," protested Seaton.

"Your knowledge of details is, of course, incomplete," conceded Dunark,
"but the detailed knowledge of the best of your Earthly astronomers
would not help us a great deal, since we are so far removed from you in
space. You, however, have a very clear and solid knowledge of the
fundamentals of the science, and that is what we need, above all
things."

"Well, maybe you're right, at that. I do know the general theory of the
motions, and I studied some Celestial Mechanics. I'm awfully weak on
advanced theory, though, as you'll find out when you get that far."

"Perhaps--but since our enemies have no knowledge of astronomy whatever,
it is not surprising that their rocket-ships can be launched only at one
particularly favorable time; for there are many planets and satellites,
of which they can know nothing, to throw their vessels off the course.

"Some material essential to the operation of their war machinery
apparently must come from their own planet, for they have ceased
attacking, have dug in, and are simply holding their ground. It may be
that they had not anticipated as much resistance as we could offer with
space-ships and intra-atomic energy. At any rate, they have apparently
saved enough of that material to enable them to hold out until the next
conjunction--I cannot think of a better word for it--shall occur. Our
forces are attacking constantly, with all the armament at our command,
but it is certain that if the next conjunction is allowed to occur, it
means the end of the entire Kondalian nation."'

"What d'you mean 'if the next conjunction is _allowed_ to occur?'"
interjected Seaton. "Nobody can stop it."

"I am stopping it," Dunark stated quietly, grim purpose in every
lineament. "That conjunction shall never occur. That is why I must have
the vast quantities of salt and 'X'. We are building abutments of arenak
upon the first satellite of our seventh planet, and upon our sixth
planet itself. We shall cover them with plated active copper, and
install chronometers to throw the switches at precisely the right
moment. We have calculated the exact times, places, and magnitudes of
the forces to be used. We shall throw the sixth planet some distance out
of its orbit, and force the first satellite of the seventh planet clear
out of that planet's influence. The two bodies whose motions we have
thus changed will collide in such a way that the resultant body will
meet the planet of our enemies in head-on collision, long before the
next conjunction. The two bodies will be of almost equal masses, and
will have opposite and approximately equal velocities; hence the
resultant fused or gaseous mass will be practically without velocity and
will fall directly into the fourteenth sun."

"Wouldn't it be easier to destroy it with an explosive copper bomb?"

"Easier, yes, but much more dangerous to the rest of our solar system.
We cannot calculate exactly the effect of the collisions we are
planning--but it is almost certain that an explosion of sufficient
violence to destroy all life upon the planet would disturb its motion
sufficiently to endanger the entire system. The way we have in mind will
simply allow the planet and one satellite to drop out quietly--the other
planets of the same sun will soon adjust themselves to the new
conditions, and the system at large will be practically unaffected--at
least, so we believe."

Seaton's eyes narrowed as his thoughts turned to the quantities of
copper and "X" required and to the engineering features of the project;
Crane's first thought was of the mathematics involved in a computation
of that magnitude and character; Dorothy's quick reaction was one of
pure horror.

"He can't, Dick! He mustn't! It would be too ghastly! It's
outrageous--it's unthinkable--it's--it's--it's simply too horrible!" Her
violet eyes flamed, and Margaret joined in:

"That would be awful, Martin. Think of the destruction of a whole
planet--of an entire world--with all its inhabitants! It makes me
shudder, even to think of it."

       *       *       *       *       *

Dunark leaped to his feet, ablaze. But before he could say a word,
Seaton silenced him.

"Shut up, Dunark! Pipe down! Don't say anything you'll be sorry for--let
_me_ tell 'em! Close your mouth, I tell you!" as Dunark still tried to
get a word in, "I tell you I'll tell 'em, and when I tell 'em they stay
told! Now listen, you two girls--you're going off half-cocked and you're
both full of little red ants. What do you think Dunark is up against?
Sherman chirped it when he described war--and this is a real he-war; a
brand totally unknown on our Earth. It isn't a question of whether or
not to destroy a population--the only question is which population is to
be destroyed. One of them's got to go. Remember those folks go into a
war thoroughly, and there isn't a thought, even remotely resembling our
conception of mercy in any of their minds on either side. If Dunark's
plans go through the enemy nation will be wiped out. That is horrible,
of course. But on the other hand, if we block him off from salt and 'X,'
the entire Kondalian nation will be destroyed just as thoroughly and
efficiently, and even more horribly--not one man, woman, or child would
be spared. Which nation do you want saved? Play that over a couple of
times on your adding machine, Dot, and let me know what you get."

Dorothy, taken aback, opened and closed her mouth twice before she found
her voice.

"But, Dick, they couldn't possibly. Would they kill them all, Dick?
Surely they wouldn't--they _couldn't_."

"Surely they would--and could. They do--it's good technique in those
parts of the Galaxy. Dunark has just told us of how they killed every
member of the entire race of Mardonalians, in forty hours. Kondal would
go the same way. Don't kid yourself, Dimples--don't be a child. War up
there is _no_ species of pink tea, believe me--half of my brain has been
through thirty years of Osnomian warfare, and I know precisely what I'm
talking about. Let's take a vote. Personally, I'm in favor of Osnome.
Mart?"

"Osnome."

"Dottie? Peggy?" Both remained silent for some time, then Dorothy turned
to Margaret.

"You tell him, Peggy--we both feel the same way."

"Dick, you know that we wouldn't want the Kondalians destroyed--but the
other is so--such a--well, such an utter _shrecklichkeit_--isn't there
some other way out?"

"I'm afraid not--but if there is any other possible way out, I'll do my
da--to help find it," he promised. "The ayes have it. Dunark, we'll skip
over to that 'X' planet and load you up."

Dunark grasped Seaton's hand. "Thanks, Dick," he said, simply. "But
before you help me farther, and lest I might be in some degree sailing
under false colors, I must tell you that, wearer of the seven disks
though you are, Overlord of Osnome though you are, my brain brother
though you are; had you decided against me, nothing but my death could
have kept me away from that salt and your 'X' compass."

"Why sure," assented Seaton, in surprise. "Why not? Fair enough! Anybody
would do the same--don't let that bother you."

"How is your supply of platinum?" asked Dunark.

"Mighty low. We had about decided to hop over there after some. I want
some of your textbooks on electricity and so on, too. I see you brought
a load of platinum with you."

"Yes, a few hundred tons. We also brought along an assortment of books I
knew you would be interested in, a box of radium, a few small bags of
gems of various kinds, and some of our fabrics, Sitar thought your
Karfediro would like to have. While we are here, I would like to get
some books on chemistry and some other things."

"We'll get you the Congressional Library, if you want it, and anything
else you think you'd like. Well, gang, let's go places and do things!
What to do, Mart?"

"We had better drop back to Earth, have the laborers unload the
platinum, and load on the salt, books, and other things. Then both ships
will go to the 'X' planet, as we will each want compasses on it, for
future use. While we are loading, I should like to begin remodeling our
instruments; to make them something like these; with Dunark's
permission. These instruments are wonders, Dick--vastly ahead of
anything I have ever seen. Come and look at them, if you want to see
something really beautiful."

"Coming up. But say, Mart, while I think of it, we mustn't forget to
install a zone-of-force apparatus on this boat, too. Even though we
can't use it intelligently, it certainly would be a winner as a defense.
We couldn't hurt anybody through it, of course, but if we should happen
to be getting licked anywhere, all we'd have to do would be to wrap
ourselves up in it. They couldn't touch us. Nothing in the ether
spectrum is corkscrewy enough to get through it."

"That's the second idea you've had since I've known you, Dicky," Dorothy
smiled at Crane. "Do you think he should be allowed to run at large,
Martin?"

"That is a real idea. We may need it--you never can tell. Even if we
never find any other use for the zone of force, that one is amply
sufficient to justify its installation."

"Yes, it would be, for you--and I'm getting to be a regular Safety-First
Simon myself, since they opened up on us. What about those instruments?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The three men gathered around the instrument-board and Dunark explained
the changes he had made--and to such men as Seaton and Crane it was soon
evident that they were examining an installation embodying sheer
perfection of instrumental control--a system which only those wonder
instrument-makers, the Osnomians, could have devised. The new
object-compasses were housed in arenak cases after setting, and the
housings were then exhausted to the highest attainable vacuum.
Oscillation was set up by means of one carefully standardized electrical
impulse, instead of by the clumsy finger-touch Seaton had used. The
bearings, built of arenak and Osnomian jewels, were as strong as the
axles of a truck and yet were almost perfectly frictionless.

"I like them myself," admitted Dunark. "Without a load the needles will
rotate freely more than a thousand hours on the primary impulse, as
against a few minutes in the old type; and under load they are many
thousands of times as sensitive."

"You're a blinding flash and a deafening report, ace!" declared Seaton,
enthusiastically. "That compass is as far ahead of my model as the
_Skylark_ is ahead of Wright's first glider."

The other instruments were no less noteworthy. Dunark had adopted the
Perkins telephone system, but had improved it until it was scarcely
recognized and had made it capable of almost unlimited range. Even the
guns--heavy rapid-firers, mounted in spherical bearings in the
walls--were aimed and fired by remote control, from the board. He had
devised full automatic steering controls; and meters and recorders for
acceleration, velocity, distance, and flight-angle. He had perfected a
system of periscopic vision, which enabled the pilot to see the entire
outside surfaces of the shell, and to look toward any point of the
heavens without interference.

"This kind of takes my eye, too, prince," Seaton said, as he seated
himself, swung a large, concave disk in front of him, and experimented
with levers and dials. "You certainly can't call this thing a
periscope--it's no more a periscope than I am a polyp. When you look
through this plate, it's better than looking out of a window--it
subtends more than the angle of vision, so that you can't see anything
but out-of-doors--I thought for a second I was going to fall out. What
do you call 'em, Dunark?"

"Kraloto. That would be in English ... Seeing-plate? Or rather, call it
'visiplate'."

"That's a good word. Mart, take a look if you want to see a set of
perfect lenses and prisms."

Crane looked into the visiplate and gasped. The vessel had
disappeared--he was looking directly down upon the Earth below him!

"No trace of chromatic, spherical, or astigmatic aberration," he
reported in surprise. "The refracting system is invisible--it seems as
though nothing intervenes between the eye and the object. You perfected
all these things since we left Osnome, Dunark? You are in a class by
yourself. I could not even copy them in less than a month, and I never
could have invented them."

"I did not do it alone, by any means. The Society of Instrument-Makers,
of which I am only one member, installed and tested more than a hundred
systems. This one represents the best features of all the systems tried.
It will not be necessary for you to copy them. I brought along two
complete duplicate sets for the _Skylark_, as well as a dozen or so of
the compasses. I thought that perhaps these particular improvements
might not have occurred to you, since you Terrestrials are not as
familiar as we are with complex instrumental work."

Crane and Seaton spoke together.

"That was thoughtful of you, Dunark, and we appreciated it fully."

"That puts four more palms on your _Croix de Guerre_, ace. Thanks a
lot."

"Say, Dick," called Dorothy, from her seat near the wall. "If we're
going down to the ground, how about Sitar?"

"By lying down and not doing anything, and by staying in the vessel,
where it is warm, she will be all right for the short time we must stay
here," Dunark answered for his wife. "I will help all I can, but I do
not know how much that will be."

"It isn't so bad lying down." Sitar agreed. "I don't like your Earth a
bit, but I can stand it a little while. Anyway, I _must_ stand it, so
why worry about it?"

"'At-a-girl!" cheered Seaton. "And as for you, Dunark, you'll pass the
time just like Sitar does--lying down. If you do much chasing around
down there where we live, you're apt to get your lights and liver
twisted all out of shape--so you'll stay put, horizontal. We've got men
enough around the shop to eat this cargo in three hours, let alone
unload it. While they unload and load you up, we'll install the zone
apparatus, put a compass on you, put one of yours on us, and then you
can hop back up here where you're comfortable. Then as soon as we can
get the 'Lark' ready for the trip, we'll jump up here and be on our way.
Everything clear? Cut the rope, Mart--let the old bucket drop!"




CHAPTER III

Skylark Two Sets Out


"Say, Mart, I just got conscious! It never occurred to me until just
now, as Dunark left, that I'm as good an instrument-maker as Dunark
is--the same one, in fact--and I've got a hunch. You know that needle on
DuQuesne hasn't been working for quite a while? Well, I don't believe
it's out of commission at all. I think he's gone somewhere, so far away
that it can't read on him. I'm going to house it in, re-jewel it, and
find out where he is."

"An excellent idea. He has even you worrying, and as for myself----"

"Worrying! That bird is simply pulling my cork! I'm so scared he'll get
Dottie, that I'm running around in circles and biting myself in the
small of the back. He's got a hen on, you can bet your shirt on
that--what gravels me is he's aiming at the girls, not at us or the
job."

"I should say that someone had aimed at you fairly accurately, judging
by the number of bullets stopped lately by that arenak armor of yours. I
wish that I could take some of the strain, but they are centering all
their attacks upon you."

"Yes--I can't stick my nose outside our yard without somebody throwing
lead at it. It's funny, too. You're more important to the power-plant
than I am."

"You should know why. They are not afraid of me. While my spirit is
willing enough, it was your skill and rapidity with a pistol that
