elaborate security precautions--went over to her mail file and found it
empty. Which meant that whatever had come in was purely routine and
already being handled by her skeleton office staff. Later in the day she
might get a chance to scrawl Ruya Farn's signature on a few dozen
letters and checks. Big job! Trigger sat down at her desk.

She brooded there a minute or two, tapping her teeth with her thumbnail.
The Honorable Precolonial Commissioner Tate, whatever else might be said
of him, undoubtedly was one of the brainiest little characters she'd
ever come across. He probably saw some quite valid reason for keeping
her here, isolated and uninformed. The question was what the reason
could be.

Security.... Trigger wrinkled her nose. Security didn't mean a thing.
Everybody and everything associated with the Old Galactic plasmoids had
been wrapped up in Federation security measures since the day the
plasmoid discovery was announced. And she'd been in the middle of the
operations concerning them right along. Why should Holati Tate have
turned secretive on her now? When even blabby old Plemponi could contact
him.

It was more than a little annoying....

Trigger shrugged, reached into a desk drawer and took out a small
solidopic. She set it on the desk and regarded it moodily.

The face of an almost improbably handsome young man looked back at her.
Startling dark-blue eyes; a strong chin, curly brown hair. There was a
gleam of white teeth behind the quick, warm smile which always awoke a
responsive glow in her.

She and Brule Inger had been the nearest thing to engaged for the last
two and a half years, ever since Precol sent them out together to its
project on Manon Planet. They'd been dating before that, while they were
both still attending the Colonial School. But now she was here, perhaps
stuck here indefinitely--unless she did something about it--and Brule
was on Manon Planet. By the very fastest subspace ships the Manon System
was a good nine days away. For the standard Grand Commerce express
freighter or the ordinary liner it was a solid two-months' run. Manon
was a _long_ way away!

It was almost a month since she'd even heard from Brule. She could make
up another personal tape to him today if she felt like it. He would get
it in fourteen days or so via a Federation packet. But she'd already
sent him three without reply. Brule wasn't at all good at long distance
love-making, and she didn't blame him much. She was a little awkward
herself when it came to feeding her personal feelings into a tape.
And--because of security again--there was very little else she could
feed into it. She couldn't even let Brule know just where she was.

She put the solido back in its drawer, reached for one of the bank of
buttons on the right side of the desk and pushed it down. A desk panel
slid up vertically in front of her, disclosing a news viewer switched to
the index of current headlines.

Trigger glanced over the headlines, while a few items dissolved slowly
here and there and were replaced by more recent developments. Under the
"Science" heading a great deal seemed to be going on, as usual, in
connection with plasmoid experiments around the Hub.

She dialed in the heading, skimmed through the first item that appeared.
Essentially it was a summary of reports on Hubwide rumors that nobody
could claim any worthwhile progress in determining what made the Old
Galactic plasmoids tick. Which, so far as Trigger knew, was quite true.
Other rumors, rather unpleasant ones, were that the five hundred or so
scientific groups to whom individual plasmoids had been issued by the
Federation's University League actually had gained important
information, but were keeping it to themselves.

The summary plowed through a few of the learned opinions and
counteropinions most recently obtained, then boiled them down to the
statement that a plasmoid might be compared to an engine which
appeared to lack nothing but an energy source. Or perhaps more
correctly--assuming it might have an as yet unidentified energy
source--a starter button. One group claimed to have virtually duplicated
the plasmoid loaned to it by the Federation, producing a biochemical
structure distinguishable from the Old Galactic model only by the fact
that it had--quite predictably--fallen apart within hours. But plasmoids
didn't fall apart. The specimens undergoing study had shown no signs of
deterioration. A few still absorbed nourishment from time to time; some
had been observed to move slightly. But none could be induced to
operate. It was all very puzzling!

It _was_ very puzzling, Trigger conceded. Back in the Manon System, when
they had been discovered, the plasmoids were operating with high
efficiency on the protein-collecting station which the mysterious Old
Galactics appeared to have abandoned, or forgotten about, some hundreds
of centuries ago. It was only when humans entered the base and switched
off its mechanical operations that the plasmoids stopped working--and
then, when the switches which appeared to have kept them going were
expectantly closed again, they had stayed stopped.

Personally, Trigger couldn't have cared less if they never did move. It
was nice that old Holati Tate had made an almost indecently vast
fortune out of his first-discovery rights to the things, because she
was really very fond of the Commissioner when he wasn't being
irritating. But in some obscure way she found the plasmoids themselves
and the idea of unlimited plastic life which they embodied rather
appalling. However, she was in a minority there. Practically everybody
else seemed to feel that plasmoids were the biggest improvement since
the creation of Eve.

She switched the viewer presently to its local-news setting and dialed
in the Manon System's reference number. Keeping tab on what was going on
out there had become a private little ritual of late. Occasionally she
even picked up references to Brule Inger, who functioned nowadays as
Precol's official greeter and contact man in the system. He was very
popular with the numerous important Hub citizens who made the long run
out to the Manon--some bent on getting a firsthand view of the marvels
of Old Galactic science, and a great many more bent on getting an early
stake in the development of Manon Planet, which was rapidly approaching
the point where its status would shift from Precol Project to Federation
Territory, opening it to all qualified comers.

Today there was no news about Brule. Grand Commerce had opened its first
business and recreation center on Manon, not ten miles from the Precol
Headquarters dome where Trigger recently had been working. The subspace
net which was being installed about the Old Galactic base was very
nearly completed. The permanent Hub population on Manon Planet had just
passed the forty-three thousand mark. There had been, Trigger recalled,
a trifle nostalgically, barely eight hundred Precol employees, and not
another human being, on that world in the days before Holati Tate
announced his discovery.

She was just letting the viewer panel slide back into the desk when the
office ComWeb gave forth with a musical ping. She switched it on.

"Hi, Rak!" she said cheerily. "Anything new?"

The bony-faced young man looking out at her wore the lusterless black
uniform of a U-League Junior Scientist. His expression was worried.

He said, "I believe there is, Miss Farn." Rak was the group leader of
the thirty-four Junior Scientists the League had installed in the
Project. Like all the Juniors, he took his duties very seriously.
"Unfortunately it's nothing I can discuss over a communicator. Would it
be possible for you to come over and meet with us during the day?"

"That," Trigger stated, "was a ridiculous question, Rak! Want me over
right now?"

He grinned. "Thanks, Miss Farn! In twenty minutes then? I'll get my
advisory committee together and we can meet in the little conference
room off the Exhibition Hall."

Trigger nodded. "I'll be wandering around the Hall. Just send a guard
out to get me when you're ready."





3


She switched off the ComWeb and stood up. Rak and his group were stuck
with the Plasmoid Project a lot more solidly than she was. They'd been
established here, confined to their own wing of the Project area, when
she came in from Manon with the Commissioner. Until the present security
rulings were relaxed--which might not be for another two years--they
would remain on the project.

Trigger felt a little sorry for them, though the Junior Scientists
didn't seem to mind the setup. Dedication stood out all over them. Since
about half were young women, one could assume that at any rate they
weren't condemned to a completely monastic existence.

A couple of workmen were guiding a dozen big cleaning robots around the
Plasmoid Exhibition Hall, which wouldn't be open to students or
visitors for another few hours. Trigger strolled across the floor of the
huge area toward a couple of exhibits that hadn't been there the last
time she'd come through. Life-sized replicas of two O.G.
Plasmoids--Numbers 1432 and 1433--she discovered. She regarded the
waxy-looking, lumpish, partially translucent forms with some distaste.
She'd been all over the Old Galactic Station itself, and might have
stood close enough to the originals of these models to touch them. Not
that she would have.

She glanced at her watch, walked around a scale model of Harvest Moon,
the O.G. station, which occupied the center of the Hall, and went on
among the exhibits. There were views taken on Manon Planet in one
alcove, mainly of Manon's aerial plankton belt and of the giant
plasmoids called Harvesters which had moved about the belt, methodically
engulfing its clouds of living matter. A whale-sized replica of a
Harvester dominated one end of the Hall, a giant dark-green sausage in
external appearance, though with some extremely fancy internal
arrangements.

"Miss Farn...."

She turned. A League cop, standing at the entrance of a hallway thirty
feet away, pitched her the old flourish and followed it up with a bow.
Excellent manners these guard boys had!

Trigger gave him a smile.

"Coming," she said.

Junior Scientist Rak and his advisory committee--two other young men and
a young woman--were waiting in the conference room for her. They all
stood up when she came in. This room marked the border of their
territory; they would have violated several League rules by venturing
out into the hall through which Trigger had entered.

And that would have been unthinkable.

Rak did the talking, as on the previous occasions when Trigger had met
with this group. The advisory committee simply sat there and watched
him. As far as Trigger could figure it, they were present at these
sessions only to check Rak if it looked as if he were about to commit
some ghastly indiscretion.

"We were wondering, Miss Farn," Rak said questioningly, "whether you
have the authority to requisition additional University League guards
for the Plasmoid Project?"

Trigger shook her head. "I've got no authority of any kind that I know
of, as far as the League is concerned. No doubt Professor Mantelish
could arrange it for you."

Rak nodded. "Is it possible for you to contact Professor Mantelish?"

"No," Trigger said. She smiled. "Is it possible for you to contact him?"

Rak glanced around his committee as if looking for approval, then said,
"No, it isn't. As a matter of fact, Miss Farn, we've been isolated here
in the most curious fashion for the past few weeks."

"So have I," said Miss Farn.

Rak looked startled. "Oh!" he said. "We were hoping you would be willing
to give us a little information."

"I would," Trigger assured him, "if I had any to give. I don't,
unfortunately." She considered. "Why do you feel additional League
guards are required?"

"We heard," Rak remarked cautiously, "that there were raiders in the
Colonial School area yesterday."

"Grabbers," Trigger said. "They wouldn't bother you. Your section of the
project is supposed to be raidproof anyway."

Rak glanced at his companions again and apparently received some
undetectable sign of consent. "Miss Farn, as you know, our group has
been entrusted with the care of two League plasmoids here. Are you aware
that six of the plasmoids which were distributed to responsible
laboratories throughout the Hub have been lost to unknown raiders?"

She was startled. "No, I didn't know that. I heard there'd been some
unsuccessful attempts to steal distributed plasmoids."

"These six attempts," Rak said primly, "were completely successful. One
must assume that the victimized laboratories also had been regarded as
raidproof."

Trigger admitted it was a reasonable assumption.

"There is another matter," Rak went on. "When we arrived here, we
understood Doctor Gess Fayle was to bring Plasmoid Unit 112-113 to this
project. It seems possible that Doctor Fayle's failure to appear
indicates that League Headquarters does not consider the project a
sufficiently safe place for 112-113."

"Why don't you ask Headquarters?" Trigger suggested.

They stirred nervously.

"That would be a violation of the Principle of the Chain of Command,
Miss Farn!" Rak explained.

"Oh," she said. The Juniors were overdisciplined, all right. "Is that
112-113 such a particularly important item?"

"If Doctor Fayle is in personal charge of it," Rak said carefully, "I
would say yes."

Recalling her meetings with Doctor Gess Fayle in the Manon System,
Trigger silently agreed. He was one of the U-League's big shots, a
political scientist who had got himself appointed as Mantelish's chief
assistant when that eminent biologist was first sent to Manon to take
over League operations there. Trigger had disliked Fayle on sight, and
hadn't changed her mind on closer acquaintance.

"I remember that 112-113 unit now," she said suddenly. "Big, ugly
thing--well, that describes a lot of them, doesn't it?"

Rak and the others looked quietly affronted. In a moment, Trigger
realized, one of them was going to go into a lecture on functional
esthetics unless she could head them off--and she'd already heard quite
enough about functional esthetics in connection with the plasmoids.

"Now, 113," she hurried on, "is a very small plasmoid"--she held her
hands fifteen inches or so apart--"like that; and it's attached to the
big one. Correct?"

Rak nodded, a little stiffly. "Essentially correct, Miss Farn."

"Well," Trigger said, "I can't blame you for worrying a bit. How about
your Guard Captain? Isn't it all right to ask him about reinforcements?"

Rak pursed his lips. "Yes. And I did. This morning. Before I called
you."

"What did he say?"

Rak grimaced unhappily. "He implied, Miss Farn, that his present guard
complement could handle any emergency. How would he know?"

"That's his job," Trigger pointed out gently. The Juniors did look badly
worried. "He didn't have any helpful ideas?"

"None," said Rak. "He said that if someone wanted to put up the money to
hire a battle squad of Special Federation Police, he could always find
some use for them. But that's hopeless, of course."

Trigger straightened up. She reached out and poked Rak's bony chest with
a finger tip. "You know something?" she said. "It's not!"

The four faces lit up together.

"The fact is," Trigger went on, "that I'm handling the Project budget
until someone shows up to take over. So I think I'll just buy you that
Federation battle squad, Rak! I'll get on it right away." She stood up.
The Juniors bounced automatically out of their chairs. "You go tell your
guard Captain," she instructed them from the hall door, "there'll be a
squad showing up in time for dinner tonight."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Federation Police Office in Ceyce informed Trigger that a Class A
Battle Squad--twenty trained men with full equipment--would report for
two months' duty at the Colonial School during the afternoon. She made
them out a check and gave it the Ruya Farn signature via telewriter. The
figure on that check was going to cause some U-League auditor's eyebrows
to fly off the top of his head one of these days; but if the League
insisted on remaining aloof to the problems of its Plasmoid Project, a
little financial anguish was the least it could expect in return.

Trigger felt quite cheerful for a while.

Then she had a call from Precol's Maccadon office. She was requested to
stand by while a personal interstellar transmission was switched to her
ComWeb.

It looked like her day! She hummed softly, waiting. She knew just one
individual affluent enough to be able to afford personal interstellar
conversations; and that was Commissioner Tate. Fast work, Plemp, she
thought approvingly.

But it was Brule Inger's face that flashed into view on the ComWeb.
Trigger's heart jumped. Her breath caught in her throat.

"Brule!" she yelled then. She shot up out of her chair. "Where are you
calling from?"

Brule's eyes crinkled around the edges. He gave her the smile. The good
old smile. "Unfortunately, darling, I'm still in the Manon System." He
blinked. "What happened to your hair?"

"Manon!" said Trigger. She started to settle back, weak with
disappointment. Then she shot up again. "Brule! Lunatic! You're blowing
a month's salary a minute on this! I love you! Switch off, fast!"

Brule threw back his head and laughed. "You haven't changed much in two
months, anyway! Don't worry. It's for free. I'm calling from the yacht
of a friend."

"Some friend!" Trigger said, startled.

