noise disturbed the still atmosphere--only a soft whirr, that seemed to
pervade everything and to tingle in the nerves of the spectators;
and--what had been was not! The wall was gone! But high above and all
around the place where it had hung over the street with its threat of
death there appeared, swiftly billowing outward in every direction, a
faint bluish cloud. It was the scattered atoms of the destroyed wall.

And now the cry "On to Mars!" was heard on all sides. But for such an
enterprise funds were needed--millions upon millions. Yet some of the
fairest and richest portions of the earth had been impoverished by the
frightful ravages of those enemies who had dropped down upon them from
the skies. Still, the money must be had. The salvation of the planet, as
everyone was now convinced, depended upon the successful negotiation of
a gigantic war fund, in comparison with which all the expenditures in
all of the wars that had been waged by the nations for 2,000 years would
be insignificant. The electrical ships and the vibration engines must be
constructed by scores and thousands. Only Mr. Edison's immense resources
and unrivaled equipment had enabled him to make the models whose powers
had been so satisfactorily shown. But to multiply these upon a war scale
was not only beyond the resources of any individual--hardly a nation on
the globe in the period of its greatest prosperity could have undertaken
such a work. All the nations, then, must now conjoin. They must unite
their resources, and if necessary, exhaust all their hoards, in order to
raise the needed sum.

Negotiations were at once begun. The United States naturally took the
lead, and their leadership was never for a moment questioned abroad.

Washington was selected as the place of meeting for a great congress of
nations. Washington, luckily, had been one of the places which had not
been touched by the Martians. But if Washington had been a city composed
of hotels alone, and every hotel so great as to be a little city in
itself, it would have been utterly insufficient for the accommodation of
the innumerable throngs which now flocked to the banks of the Potomac.
But when was American enterprise unequal to a crisis? The necessary
hotels, lodging-houses and restaurants were constructed with astounding
rapidity. One could see the city growing and expanding day by day and
week after week. It flowed over Georgetown Heights; it leaped the
Potomac; it spread east and west, south and north; square mile after
square mile of territory was buried under the advancing buildings, until
the gigantic city, which had thus grown up like a mushroom in a night,
was fully capable of accommodating all its expected guests.

At first it had been intended that the heads of the various governments
should in person attend this universal congress, but as the enterprise
went on, as the enthusiasm spread, as the necessity for haste became
more apparent through the warning notes which were constantly sounded
from the observatories where the astronomers were nightly beholding new
evidences of threatening preparations in Mars, the kings and queens of
the old world felt that they could not remain at home; that their proper
place was at the new focus and center of the whole world--the city of
Washington. Without concerted action, without interchange of suggestion,
this impulse seemed to seize all the old world monarchs at once.
Suddenly cablegrams flashed to the government at Washington, announcing
that Queen Victoria, the Emperor William, the Czar Nicholas, Alphonso of
Spain, with his mother, Maria Christina; the old emperor Francis Joseph
and the empress Elizabeth, of Austria; King Oscar and Queen Sophia, of
Sweden and Norway; King Humbert and Queen Margherita, of Italy; King
George and Queen Olga, of Greece; Abdul Hamid, of Turkey; Tsait'ien,
Emperor of China; Mutsuhito, the Japanese Mikado, with his beautiful
Princess Haruko; the President of France, the President of Switzerland,
the First Syndic of the little republic of Andorra, perched on the crest
of the Pyrenees, and the heads of all the Central and South American
republics, were coming to Washington to take part in the deliberations,
which, it was felt, were to settle the fate of earth and Mars.

One day, after this announcement had been received, and the additional
news had come that nearly all the visiting monarchs had set out,
attended by brilliant suites and convoyed by fleets of warships, for
their destination, some coming across the Atlantic to the port of New
York, others across the Pacific to San Francisco, Mr. Edison said to me:

"This will be a fine spectacle. Would you like to watch it?"

"Certainly," I replied.

The Ship of Space was immediately at our disposal. I think I have not
yet mentioned the fact that the inventor's control over the electrical
generator carried in the car was so perfect that by varying the
potential or changing the polarity he could cause it slowly or swiftly,
as might be desired, to approach or recede from any object. The only
practical difficulty was presented when the polarity of the electrical
charge upon an object in the neighborhood of the car was unknown to
those in the car, and happened to be opposite to that of the charge to
which the car, at that particular moment was bearing. In such a case, of
course, the car would fly toward the object, whatever it might be, like
a pithball or a feather, attracted to the knob of an electrical machine.
In this way, considerable danger was occasionally encountered, and a few
accidents could not be avoided. Fortunately, however, such cases were
rare. It was only now and then that, owing to some local cause,
electrical polarities unknown to or unexpected by the navigators,
endangered the safety of the car. As I shall have occasion to relate
however, in the course of the narrative, this danger became more acute
and assumed at times a most formidable phase, when we had ventured
outside the sphere of the earth and were moving through the unexplored
regions beyond.

On this occasion, having embarked, we rose rapidly to a height of some
thousands of feet and directed our course over the Atlantic. When
half-way to Ireland, we beheld, in the distance, steaming westward, the
smoke of several fleets. As we drew nearer a marvelous spectacle
unfolded itself to our eyes. From the northeast, their great guns
flashing in the sunlight and their huge funnels belching black volumes
that rested like thunder clouds upon the sea, came the mighty warships
of England, with her meteor flag streaming red in the breeze, while the
royal insignia, indicating the presence of the ruler of the British
Empire, was conspicuously displayed upon the flagship of the squadron.

Following a course more directly westward there appeared, under another
black cloud of smoke, the hulls and guns and burgeons of another great
fleet, carrying the tri-color of France, and bearing in its midst the
head of the magnificent republic of western Europe.

Further south, beating up against the northerly winds came a third fleet
with the gold and red of Spain fluttering from its masthead. This, too,
was carrying its King westward, where now, indeed, the star of empire
had taken its way.

Rising a little higher, so as to extend our horizon, we saw coming down
the English channel, behind the British fleet, the black ships of
Russia. Side by side, or following one another's lead, these war fleets
were on a peaceful voyage that belied their threatening appearance.
There had been no thought of danger to or from the forts and ports of
rival nations which they had passed. There was no enmity, and no fear
between them when the throats of their ponderous guns yawned at one
another across the waves. They were now, in spirit, all one fleet,
having one object, bearing against one enemy, ready to defend but one
country, and that country was the entire earth.

It was some time before we caught sight of the emperor William's fleet.
It seems that the Kaiser, although at first consenting to the
arrangement by which Washington had been selected as the assembling
place for the nations, afterwards objected to it.

"I ought to do this thing myself," he had said. "My glorious ancestors
would never have consented to allow these upstart Republicans to lead in
a warlike enterprise of this kind. What would my grandfather have said
to it? I suspect that it is some scheme aimed at the divine right of
kings."

But the good sense of the German people would not suffer their ruler to
place them in a position so false and so untenable. And swept along by
their enthusiasm the Kaiser had at last consented to embark upon his
flagship at Kiel, and now he was following the other fleets on their
great mission to the Western Continent.

Why did they bring their warships when their intentions were peaceable,
do you ask? Well, it was partly the effect of ancient habit, and partly
due to the fact that such multitudes of officials and members of ruling
families wished to embark for Washington that the ordinary means of
ocean communications would have been utterly inadequate to convey them.

After we had feasted our eyes on this strange sight, Mr. Edison suddenly
exclaimed: "Now let us see the fellows from the rising sun."

The car was immediately directed toward the west. We rapidly approached
the American coast, and as we sailed over the Allegheny Mountains and
the broad plains of the Ohio and the Mississippi, we saw crawling
beneath us from west, south and north, an endless succession of railway
trains bearing their multitudes on toward Washington. With marvelous
speed we rushed westward, rising high to skim over the snow-topped peaks
of the Rocky Mountains and then the glittering rim of the Pacific was
before us. Half-way between the American Coast and Hawaii we met the
fleets coming from China and Japan. Side by side they were plowing the
main, having forgotten, or laid aside, all the animosities of their
former wars.

I well remember how my heart was stirred at this impressive exhibition
of the boundless influence which my country had come to exercise over
all the people of the world, and I turned to look at the man to whose
genius this uprising of the earth was due. But Mr. Edison, after his
wont, appeared totally unconscious of the fact that he was personally
responsible for what was going on. His mind, seemingly, was entirely
absorbed in considering problems, the solution of which might be
essential to our success in the terrific struggle which was soon to
begin.

"Well, have you seen enough?" he asked. "Then let us go back to
Washington."

As we speeded back across the continent we beheld beneath us again the
burdened express trains rushing toward the Atlantic, and hundreds of
thousands of upturned eyes watched our swift progress, and volleys of
cheers reached our ears, for everyone knew that this was Edison's
electrical warship, on which the hope of the nation, and the hopes of
all the nations, depended. These scenes were repeated again and again
until the car hovered over the still expanding capitol on the Potomac,
where the unceasing ring of hammers rose to the clouds.

[Illustration: _A consultation in Wizard Edison's laboratory
between him and Professor Serviss on the best means of repaying the
damage wrought upon this planet by the Martians._]




CHAPTER THREE

_THE CONGRESS OF NATIONS_


The day appointed for the assembling of the nations in Washington opened
bright and beautiful. Arrangements had been made for the reception of
the distinguished guests at the Capitol. No time was to be wasted, and
having assembled in the Senate Chamber, the business that had called
them together was to be immediately begun. The scene in Pennsylvania
Avenue, when the procession of dignitaries and royalties passed up
toward the Capitol was one never to be forgotten. Bands were playing,
magnificent equipages flashed in the morning sunlight, the flags of
every nation on the earth fluttered in the breeze. Queen Victoria, with
the Prince of Wales escorting her, and riding in an open carriage, was
greeted with roars of cheers; the emperor William, following in another
carriage with empress Victoria at his side, condescended to bow and
smile in response to the greetings of a free people. Each of the other
monarchs was received in a similar manner. The Czar of Russia proved to
be an especial favorite with the multitude on account of the ancient
friendship of his house for America. But the greatest applause of all
came when the President of France, followed by the President of
Switzerland and the First Syndic of the little republic of Andorra, made
their appearance. Equally warm were the greetings extended to the
representatives of Mexico and the South American States.

The crowd apparently hardly knew at first how to receive the Sultan of
Turkey, but the universal good feeling was in his favor, and finally
rounds of hand clapping and cheers greeted his progress along the
splendid avenue.

A happy idea had apparently occurred to the Emperor of China and the
Mikado of Japan, for, attended by their intermingled suites, they rode
together in a single carriage. This object lesson in the unity of
international feeling immensely pleased the spectators.

The scene in the Senate Chamber stirred everyone profoundly. That it was
brilliant and magnificent goes without saying, but there was a
seriousness, an intense feeling of expectancy, pervading both those who
looked on and those who were to do the work for which these magnates of
the earth had assembled, which produced an ineradicable impression. The
President of the United States, of course, presided. Representatives of
the greater powers occupied the front seats, and some of them were
honored with special chairs near the President.

No time was wasted in preliminaries. The President made a brief speech.

"We have come together," he said, "to consider a question that equally
interests the whole earth. I need not remind you that unexpectedly and
without provocation on our part the people--the monsters, I should
rather say--of Mars, recently came down upon the earth, attacked us in
our homes and spread desolation around them. Having the advantage of
ages of evolution, which for us are yet in the future, they brought with
them engines of death and destruction against which we found it
impossible to contend. It is within the memory of every one within reach
of my voice that it was through the entirely unexpected succor which
Providence sent us that we were suddenly and effectually freed from the
invaders. By our own efforts we could have done nothing.

"But, as you all know, the first feeling of relief which followed the
death of our foes was quickly succeeded by the fearful news which came
to us from the observatories, that the Martians were undoubtedly
preparing for a second invasion of our planet. Against this we should
have had no recourse and no hope but for the genius of one of my
countrymen, who, as you are all aware, has perfected means which may
enable us not only to withstand the attack of those awful enemies, but
to meet them, and, let us hope, to conquer them on their own ground.

"Mr. Edison is here to explain to you what those means are. But we have
also another object. Whether we send a fleet of interplanetary ships to
invade Mars or whether we simply confine our attention to works of
defense, in either case it will be necessary to raise a very large sum
of money. None of us has yet recovered from the effects of the recent
invasion. The earth is poor today compared to its position a few years
ago; yet we can not allow our poverty to stand in the way. The money,
the means, must be had. It will be part of our business here to raise a
gigantic war fund by the aid of which we can construct the equipment and
machinery that we shall require. This, I think, is all I need to say.
Let us proceed to business."

"Where is Mr. Edison?" cried a voice.

"Will Mr. Edison please step forward?" said the President.

There was a stir in the assembly, and the iron-grey head of the great
inventor was seen moving through the crowd. In his hand he carried one
of his marvelous disintegrators. He was requested to explain and
illustrate its operation. Mr. Edison smiled.

"I can explain its details," he said, "to Lord Kelvin, for instance, but
if Their Majesties will excuse me, I doubt whether I can make it plain
to the Crown Heads."

The Emperor William smiled superciliously. Apparently he thought that
another assault had been committed upon the divine right of kings. But
the Czar Nicholas appeared to be amused, and the Emperor of China, who
had been studying English, laughed in his sleeve, as if he suspected
that a joke had been perpetrated.

"I think," said one of the deputies, "that a simple exhibition of the
powers of the instrument, without a technical explanation of its method
of working, will suffice for our purpose."

This suggestion was immediately approved. In response to it, Mr. Edison,
by a few simple experiments, showed how he could quickly and certainly
shatter into its constituent atoms any object upon which the vibratory
force of the disintegrator should be directed. In this manner he caused
an inkstand to disappear under the very nose of the Emperor William
without a spot of ink being scattered upon his sacred person, but
evidently the odor of the disunited atoms was not agreeable to the
nostrils of the Kaiser.

Mr. Edison also explained in general terms the principle on which the
instrument worked. He was greeted with round after round of applause,
and the spirit of the assembly rose high.

Next the workings of the electrical ship were explained, and it was
announced that after the meeting had adjourned an exhibition of the
flying powers of the ship would be given in the open air.

These experiments, together with the accompanying explanations, added to
what had already been disseminated through the public press, were quite
sufficient to convince all the representatives who had assembled in
Washington that the problem of how to conquer the Martians had been
solved. The means were plainly at hand. It only remained to apply them.
For this purpose, as the President had pointed out, it would be
necessary to raise a very large sum of money.

"How much will be needed?" asked one of the English representatives.

"At least ten thousand millions of dollars," replied the President.

"It would be safer," said a Senator from the Pacific Coast, "to make it
twenty five thousand millions."

"I suggest," said the King of Italy, "that the nations be called in
alphabetical order, and that the representatives of each name a sum
which he is ready and able to contribute."

"We want the cash or its equivalent," shouted the Pacific Coast Senator.

"I shall not follow the alphabet strictly," said the President, "but
shall begin with the larger nations first. Perhaps, under the
circumstances, it is proper that the United States should lead the way.
Mr. Secretary," he continued, turning to the Secretary of the Treasury,
"how much can we stand?"

"At least a thousand millions," replied the Secretary of the Treasury.

A roar of applause that shook the room burst from the assembly. Even
some of the monarchs threw up their hats. The Emperor Tsait'ien smiled
from ear to ear. One of the Roko Tuis, or native chiefs, from Fiji,
sprang up and brandished a war club.

The President then proceeded to call the other nations, beginning with
Austria-Hungary and ending with Zanzibar, whose Sultan, Hamoud bin
Mahomed, had come to the congress in the escort of Queen Victoria. Each
contributed liberally.

Germany, coming in alphabetical order just before Great Britain, had
named, through its chancellor, the sum of $500,000,000, but when the
First Lord of the British Treasury, not wishing to be behind the United
States, named double that sum as the contribution of the British Empire,
the Emperor William looked displeased. He spoke a word in the ear of the
Chancellor who immediately raised his hand.

"We will give a thousand million dollars," said the Chancellor.

Queen Victoria seemed surprised, though not displeased. The First Lord
of the Treasury met her eye, and then, rising in his place, said:

"Make it fifteen hundred million for Great Britain."

Emperor William consulted again with his Chancellor, but evidently
concluded not to increase his bid.

But, at any rate, the fund had benefited to the amount of a thousand
millions by this little outburst of imperial rivalry.

The greatest surprise of all, however, came when the King of Siam was
called upon for his contribution. He had not been given a foremost place
in the Congress, but when the name of his country was pronounced he rose
by his chair, dressed in a gorgeous specimen of the peculiar attire of
his country, then slowly pushed his way to the front, stepped up to the
President's desk and deposited upon it a small box.

"This is our contribution," he said in broken English.

The cover was lifted, and there darted, shimmering in the half-gloom of
the Chamber, a burst of iridescence from the box.

"My friends of the Western world," continued the King of Siam, "will be
interested in seeing this gem. Only once before has the eye of a
European been blessed with the sight of it. Your books will tell you
that in the seventeenth century a traveller, Tavernier, saw in India an
unmatched diamond which afterward disappeared like a meteor, and was
thought to have been lost from the earth. You all know the name of that
diamond and its history. It is the Great Mogul, and it lies before you.
How it came into my possession I shall not explain. At any rate, it is
honestly mine, and I freely contribute it here to aid in protecting my
native planet against those enemies who appear determined to destroy
it."

When the excitement which the appearance of this long lost treasure,
that had been the subject of so many romances and of such long and
fruitless search, had subsided, the President continued calling the
list, until he had completed it.

Upon taking the sum of the contributions (the Great Mogul was reckoned
at three millions) it was found to be still one thousand millions short
of the required amount.

The secretary of the Treasury was instantly on his feet.

"Mr. President," he said, "I think we can stand that addition. Let it be
added to the contribution of the United States of America."

When the cheers that greeted the conclusion of the business were over,
the President announced that the next affair of the Congress was to
select a director who should have entire charge of the preparations for
the war. It was the universal sentiment that no man could be so well
suited for this post as Mr. Edison himself. He was accordingly selected
by the unanimous and enthusiastic choice of the great assembly.

"How long a time do you require to put everything in readiness?" asked
