"We've watched you; you're the same. You're part of the same
blood-sucking class."

"There are better ways to, uh, adjust differences," Magnan said. "This
killing won't help you, I'll personally see to it that your grievances
are heard in the Corps Courts. I can assure you that the plight of the
downtrodden workers will be alleviated. Equal rights for all--"

"These threats won't work," the man said. "You don't scare me."

"Threats? I'm promising _relief_ to the exploited classes of Petreac!"

"You must be nuts," the man said. "You trying to upset the system or
something?"

"Isn't that the purpose of your revolution?"

"Look, Nenni, we're tired of you Nenni getting all the graft. We want
our turn. What good would it do us to run Petreac if there's no loot?"

"You mean you intend to oppress the people? But they're your own
group."

"Group, schmoop. We're taking all the chances; we're doing the work. We
deserve the payoff. You think we're throwing up good jobs for the fun of
it?"

"You're basing a revolt on these cynical premises?"

"Wise up, Nenni. There's never been a revolution for any other reason."

"Who's in charge of this?" Retief said.

"Shoke, the head chef."

"I mean the big boss. Who tells Shoke what all to do?"

"Oh, that's Zorn. Look out, here's where we start down the slope. It's
slippery."

"Look," Magnan said. "You."

"My name's Illy."

"Mr. Illy, this man showed you mercy when he could have had you beaten."

"Keep moving. Yeah, I said I was grateful."

"Yes," Magnan said, swallowing hard. "A noble emotion, gratitude. You
won't regret it."

"I always try to pay back a good turn," Illy said. "Watch your step now
on this sea-wall."

"You'll never regret it," Magnan said.

"This is far enough," Illy motioned to one of the knife men. "Give me
your knife, Vug."

The man passed his knife to Illy. There was an odor of sea-mud and kelp.
Small waves slapped against the stones of the sea-wall. The wind was
stronger here.

"I know a neat stroke," Illy said. "Practically painless. Who's first?"

"What do you mean?" Magnan quavered.

"I _said_ I was grateful. I'll do it myself, give you a nice clean job.
You know these amateurs; botch it up and have a guy floppin' around,
yellin' and spatterin' everybody up."

"I'm first," Retief said. He pushed past Magnan, stopped suddenly, drove
a straight punch at Illy's mouth.

       *       *       *       *       *

The long blade flicked harmlessly over Retief's shoulder as Illy fell.
Retief whirled, leaped past Magnan, took the unarmed servant by the
throat and belt, lifted him and slammed him against the third man. Both
scrambled, yelped and fell from the sea-wall into the water.

Retief turned back to Illy. He pulled off the man's belt and strapped
his hands together.

Magnan found his voice.

"You.... we.... they...."

"I know," Retief said.

"We've got to get back," Magnan said, "Warn them!"

"We'd never get through the rebel cordon around the palace. And if we
did, trying to give an alarm would only set the assassinations off
early."

"We can't just...."

"We've got to go to the source; this fellow Zorn. Get him to call it
off."

"We'd be killed! At least we're safe here."

Illy groaned and opened his eyes. He sat up.

"On your feet, Illy," Retief said.

Illy looked around. "I'm sick," he said.

"The damp air is bad for you. Let's be going." Retief pulled the man to
his feet. "Where does Zorn stay when he's in town?" he demanded.

"What happened? Where's Vug and...."

"They had an accident. Fell in the pond."

Illy gazed down at the restless black water.

"I guess I had you Nenni figured wrong."

"Us Nenni have hidden qualities. Let's get moving before Vug and Slug
make it to shore and start it all over again."

"No hurry," Illy said. "They can't swim." He spat into the water. "So
long, Vug. So long, Toscin. Take a pull, at the Hell Horn for me." He
started off along the sea wall toward the sound of the surf.

"You want to see Zorn, I'll take you to see Zorn," he said. "I can't
swim either."




III


"I take it," Retief said, "that the casino is a front for his political
activities."

"He makes plenty off it. This PAFFL is a new kick. I never heard about
it until maybe a couple months ago."

Retief motioned toward a dark shed with an open door.

"We'll stop here," he said, "long enough to strip the gadgets off these
uniforms."

Illy, hands strapped behind his back, stood by and watched as Retief and
Magnan removed medals, ribbons, orders and insignia from the formal
diplomatic garments.

"This may help some," Retief said, "if the word is out that two
diplomats are loose."

"It's a breeze," Illy said. "We see cats in purple and orange tailcoats
all the time."

"I hope you're right," Retief said. "But if we're called, you'll be the
first to go, Illy."

"You're a funny kind of Nenni," Illy said, eyeing Retief, "Toscin and
Vug must be wonderin' what happened to 'em."

"If you think I'm good at drowning people, you ought to see me with a
knife. Let's get going."

"It's only a little way now," Illy said. "But you better untie me.
Somebody's liable to stick their nose in and get me killed."

"I'll take the chance. How do we get to the casino?"

