combine them chemically we can get isoprene, which is the mother
substance of ordinary India rubber. From acetone also is made the "war
rubber" of the Germans (methyl rubber), which I have mentioned in a
previous chapter. The Germans had been getting about half their supply
of acetone from American acetate of lime and this was of course shut
off. That which was produced in Germany by the distillation of beech
wood was not even enough for the high explosives needed at the front. So
the Germans resorted to rotting potatoes--or rather let us say, since it
sounds better--to the cultivation of _Bacillus macerans_. This
particular bacillus converts the starch of the potato into two-thirds
alcohol and one-third acetone. But soon potatoes got too scarce to be
used up in this fashion, so the Germans turned to calcium carbide as a
source of acetone and before the war ended they had a factory capable of
manufacturing 2000 tons of methyl rubber a year. This shows the
advantage of having several strings to a bow.

The reason why acetylene is such an active and acquisitive thing the
chemist explains, or rather expresses, by picturing its structure in
this shape:

  H-C[triple bond]C-H

Now the carbon atoms are holding each other's hands because they have
nothing else to do. There are no other elements around to hitch on to.
But the two carbons of acetylene readily loosen up and keeping the
connection between them by a single bond reach out in this fashion with
their two disengaged arms and grab whatever alien atoms happen to be in
the vicinity:

    | |
  H-C-C-H
    | |

Carbon atoms belong to the quadrumani like the monkeys, so they are
peculiarly fitted to forming chains and rings. This accounts for the
variety and complexity of the carbon compounds.

So when acetylene gas mixed with other gases is passed over a catalyst,
such as a heated mass of iron ore or clay (hydrates or silicates of iron
or aluminum), it forms all sorts of curious combinations. In the
presence of steam we may get such simple compounds as acetic acid,
acetone and the like. But when three acetylene molecules join to form a
ring of six carbon atoms we get compounds of the benzene series such as
were described in the chapter on the coal-tar colors. If ammonia is
mixed with acetylene we may get rings with the nitrogen atom in place of
one of the carbons, like the pyridins and quinolins, pungent bases such
as are found in opium and tobacco. Or if hydrogen sulfide is mixed with
the acetylene we may get thiophenes, which have sulfur in the ring. So,
starting with the simple combination of two atoms of carbon with two of
hydrogen, we can get directly by this single process some of the most
complicated compounds of the organic world, as well as many others not
found in nature.

In the development of the electric furnace America played a pioneer
part. Provost Smith of the University of Pennsylvania, who is the best
authority on the history of chemistry in America, claims for Robert
Hare, a Philadelphia chemist born in 1781, the honor of constructing the
first electrical furnace. With this crude apparatus and with no greater
electromotive force than could be attained from a voltaic pile, he
converted charcoal into graphite, volatilized phosphorus from its
compounds, isolated metallic calcium and synthesized calcium carbide. It
is to Hare also that we owe the invention in 1801 of the oxy-hydrogen
blowpipe, which nowadays is used with acetylene as well as hydrogen.
With this instrument he was able to fuse strontia and volatilize
platinum.

But the electrical furnace could not be used on a commercial scale until
the dynamo replaced the battery as a source of electricity. The
industrial development of the electrical furnace centered about the
search for a cheap method of preparing aluminum. This is the metallic
base of clay and therefore is common enough. But clay, as we know from
its use in making porcelain, is very infusible and difficult to
decompose. Sixty years ago aluminum was priced at $140 a pound, but one
would have had difficulty in buying such a large quantity as a pound at
any price. At international expositions a small bar of it might be seen
in a case labeled "silver from clay." Mechanics were anxious to get the
new metal, for it was light and untarnishable, but the metallurgists
could not furnish it to them at a low enough price. In order to extract
it from clay a more active metal, sodium, was essential. But sodium also
was rare and expensive. In those days a professor of chemistry used to
keep a little stick of it in a bottle under kerosene and once a year he
whittled off a piece the size of a pea and threw it into water to show
the class how it sizzled and gave off hydrogen. The way to get cheaper
aluminum was, it seemed, to get cheaper sodium and Hamilton Young
Castner set himself at this problem. He was a Brooklyn boy, a student of
Chandler's at Columbia. You can see the bronze tablet in his honor at
the entrance of Havemeyer Hall. In 1886 he produced metallic sodium by
mixing caustic soda with iron and charcoal in an iron pot and heating in
a gas furnace. Before this experiment sodium sold at $2 a pound; after
it sodium sold at twenty cents a pound.

But although Castner had succeeded in his experiment he was defeated in
his object. For while he was perfecting the sodium process for making
aluminum the electrolytic process for getting aluminum directly was
discovered in Oberlin. So the $250,000 plant of the "Aluminium Company
Ltd." that Castner had got erected at Birmingham, England, did not make
aluminum at all, but produced sodium for other purposes instead. Castner
then turned his attention to the electrolytic method of producing sodium
by the use of the power of Niagara Falls, electric power. Here in 1894
he succeeded in separating common salt into its component elements,
chlorine and sodium, by passing the electric current through brine and
collecting the sodium in the mercury floor of the cell. The sodium by
the action of water goes into caustic soda. Nowadays sodium and chlorine
and their components are made in enormous quantities by the
decomposition of salt. The United States Government in 1918 procured
nearly 4,000,000 pounds of chlorine for gas warfare.

The discovery of the electrical process of making aluminum that
displaced the sodium method was due to Charles M. Hall. He was the son
of a Congregational minister and as a boy took a fancy to chemistry
through happening upon an old text-book of that science in his father's
library. He never knew who the author was, for the cover and title page
had been torn off. The obstacle in the way of the electrolytic
production of aluminum was, as I have said, because its compounds were
so hard to melt that the current could not pass through. In 1886, when
Hall was twenty-two, he solved the problem in the laboratory of Oberlin
College with no other apparatus than a small crucible, a gasoline burner
to heat it with and a galvanic battery to supply the electricity. He
found that a Greenland mineral, known as cryolite (a double fluoride of
sodium and aluminum), was readily fused and would dissolve alumina
(aluminum oxide). When an electric current was passed through the melted
mass the metal aluminum would collect at one of the poles.

In working out the process and defending his claims Hall used up all his
own money, his brother's and his uncle's, but he won out in the end and
Judge Taft held that his patent had priority over the French claim of
Herault. On his death, a few years ago, Hall left his large fortune to
his Alma Mater, Oberlin.

Two other young men from Ohio, Alfred and Eugene Cowles, with whom Hall
was for a time associated, wore the first to develop the wide
possibilities of the electric furnace on a commercial scale. In 1885
they started the Cowles Electric Smelting and Aluminum Company at
Lockport, New York, using Niagara power. The various aluminum bronzes
made by absorbing the electrolyzed aluminum in copper attracted
immediate attention by their beauty and usefulness in electrical work
and later the company turned out other products besides aluminum, such
as calcium carbide, phosphorus, and carborundum. They got carborundum as
early as 1885 but miscalled it "crystallized silicon," so its
introduction was left to E.A. Acheson, who was a graduate of Edison's
laboratory. In 1891 he packed clay and charcoal into an iron bowl,
connected it to a dynamo and stuck into the mixture an electric light
carbon connected to the other pole of the dynamo. When he pulled out the
rod he found its end encrusted with glittering crystals of an unknown
substance. They were blue and black and iridescent, exceedingly hard and
very beautiful. He sold them at first by the carat at a rate that would
amount to $560 a pound. They were as well worth buying as diamond dust,
but those who purchased them must have regretted it, for much finer
crystals were soon on sale at ten cents a pound. The mysterious
substance turned out to be a compound of carbon and silicon, the
simplest possible compound, one atom of each, CSi. Acheson set up a
factory at Niagara, where he made it in ten-ton batches. The furnace
consisted simply of a brick box fifteen feet long and seven feet wide
and deep, with big carbon electrodes at the ends. Between them was
packed a mixture of coke to supply the carbon, sand to supply the
silicon, sawdust to make the mass porous and salt to make it fusible.

[Illustration: The first American electric furnace, constructed by
Robert Hare of Philadelphia. From "Chemistry in America," by Edgar Fahs
Smith]

The substance thus produced at Niagara Falls is known as "carborundum"
south of the American-Canadian boundary and as "crystolon" north of this
line, as "carbolon" by another firm, and as "silicon carbide" by
chemists the world over. Since it is next to the diamond in hardness it
takes off metal faster than emery (aluminum oxide), using less power and
wasting less heat in futile fireworks. It is used for grindstones of
all sizes, including those the dentist uses on your teeth. It has
revolutionized shop-practice, for articles can be ground into shape
better and quicker than they can be cut. What is more, the artificial
abrasives do not injure the lungs of the operatives like sandstone. The
output of artificial abrasives in the United States and Canada for 1917
was:

                         Tons        Value
  Silicon carbide       8,323       $1,074,152
  Aluminum oxide       48,463        6,969,387

A new use for carborundum was found during the war when Uncle Sam
assumed the role of Jove as "cloud-compeller." Acting on carborundum
with chlorine--also, you remember, a product of electrical
dissolution--the chlorine displaces the carbon, forming silicon
tetra-chloride (SiCl_{4}), a colorless liquid resembling chloroform.
When this comes in contact with moist air it gives off thick, white
fumes, for water decomposes it, giving a white powder (silicon
hydroxide) and hydrochloric acid. If ammonia is present the acid will
unite with it, giving further white fumes of the salt, ammonium
chloride. So a mixture of two parts of silicon chloride with one part of
dry ammonia was used in the war to produce smoke-screens for the
concealment of the movements of troops, batteries and vessels or put in
shells so the outlook could see where they burst and so get the range.
Titanium tetra-chloride, a similar substance, proved 50 per cent. better
than silicon, but phosphorus--which also we get from the electric
furnace--was the most effective mistifier of all.

Before the introduction of the artificial abrasives fine grinding was
mostly done by emery, which is an impure form of aluminum oxide found in
nature. A purer form is made from the mineral bauxite by driving off its
combined water. Bauxite is the ore from which is made the pure aluminum
oxide used in the electric furnace for the production of metallic
aluminum. Formerly we imported a large part of our bauxite from France,
but when the war shut off this source we developed our domestic fields
in Arkansas, Alabama and Georgia, and these are now producing half a
million tons a year. Bauxite simply fused in the electric furnace makes
a better abrasive than the natural emery or corundum, and it is sold for
this purpose under the name of "aloxite," "alundum," "exolon," "lionite"
or "coralox." When the fused bauxite is worked up with a bonding
material into crucibles or muffles and baked in a kiln it forms the
alundum refractory ware. Since alundum is porous and not attacked by
acids it is used for filtering hot and corrosive liquids that would eat
up filter-paper. Carborundum or crystolon is also made up into
refractory ware for high temperature work. When the fused mass of the
carborundum furnace is broken up there is found surrounding the
carborundum core a similar substance though not quite so hard and
infusible, known as "carborundum sand" or "siloxicon." This is mixed
with fireclay and used for furnace linings.

Many new forms of refractories have come into use to meet the demands of
the new high temperature work. The essentials are that it should not
melt or crumble at high heat and should not expand and contract greatly
under changes of temperature (low coefficient of thermal expansion).
Whether it is desirable that it should heat through readily or slowly
(coefficient of thermal conductivity) depends on whether it is wanted as
a crucible or as a furnace lining. Lime (calcium oxide) fuses only at
the highest heat of the electric furnace, but it breaks down into dust.
Magnesia (magnesium oxide) is better and is most extensively employed.
For every ton of steel produced five pounds of magnesite is needed.
Formerly we imported 90 per cent. of our supply from Austria, but now we
get it from California and Washington. In 1913 the American production
of magnesite was only 9600 tons. In 1918 it was 225,000. Zirconia
(zirconium oxide) is still more refractory and in spite of its greater
cost zirkite is coming into use as a lining for electric furnaces.

Silicon is next to oxygen the commonest element in the world. It forms a
quarter of the earth's crust, yet it is unfamiliar to most of us. That
is because it is always found combined with oxygen in the form of silica
as quartz crystal or sand. This used to be considered too refractory to
be blown but is found to be easily manipulable at the high temperatures
now at the command of the glass-blower. So the chemist rejoices in
flasks that he can heat red hot in the Bunsen burner and then plunge
into ice water without breaking, and the cook can bake and serve in a
dish of "pyrex," which is 80 per cent. silica.

At the beginning of the twentieth century minute specimens of silicon
were sold as laboratory curiosities at the price of $100 an ounce. Two
years later it was turned out by the barrelful at Niagara as an
accidental by-product and could not find a market at ten cents a pound.
Silicon from the electric furnace appears in the form of hard,
glittering metallic crystals.

An alloy of iron and silicon, ferro-silicon, made by heating a mixture
of iron ore, sand and coke in the electrical furnace, is used as a
deoxidizing agent in the manufacture of steel.

Since silicon has been robbed with difficulty of its oxygen it takes it
on again with great avidity. This has been made use of in the making of
hydrogen. A mixture of silicon (or of the ferro-silicon alloy containing
90 per cent. of silicon) with soda and slaked lime is inert, compact and
can be transported to any point where hydrogen is needed, say at a
battle front. Then the "hydrogenite," as the mixture is named, is
ignited by a hot iron ball and goes off like thermit with the production
of great heat and the evolution of a vast volume of hydrogen gas. Or the
ferro-silicon may be simply burned in an atmosphere of steam in a closed
tank after ignition with a pinch of gunpowder. The iron and the silicon
revert to their oxides while the hydrogen of the water is set free. The
French "silikol" method consists in treating silicon with a 40 per cent.
solution of soda.

Another source of hydrogen originating with the electric furnace is
"hydrolith," which consists of calcium hydride. Metallic calcium is
prepared from lime in the electric furnace. Then pieces of the calcium
are spread out in an oven heated by electricity and a current of dry
hydrogen passed through. The gas is absorbed by the metal, forming the
hydride (CaH_{2}). This is packed up in cans and when hydrogen is
desired it is simply dropped into water, when it gives off the gas just
as calcium carbide gives off acetylene.

This last reaction was also used in Germany for filling Zeppelins. For
calcium carbide is convenient and portable and acetylene, when it is
once started, as by an electric shock, decomposes spontaneously by its
own internal heat into hydrogen and carbon. The latter is left as a
fine, pure lampblack, suitable for printer's ink.

Napoleon, who was always on the lookout for new inventions that could be
utilized for military purposes, seized immediately upon the balloon as
an observation station. Within a few years after the first ascent had
been made in Paris Napoleon took balloons and apparatus for generating
hydrogen with him on his "archeological expedition" to Egypt in which he
hoped to conquer Asia. But the British fleet in the Mediterranean put a
stop to this experiment by intercepting the ship, and military aviation
waited until the Great War for its full development. This caused a
sudden demand for immense quantities of hydrogen and all manner of means
was taken to get it. Water is easily decomposed into hydrogen and oxygen
by passing an electric current through it. In various electrolytical
processes hydrogen has been a wasted by-product since the balloon demand
was slight and it was more bother than it was worth to collect and
purify the hydrogen. Another way of getting hydrogen in quantity is by
passing steam over red-hot coke. This produces the blue water-gas, which
contains about 50 per cent. hydrogen, 40 per cent. carbon monoxide and
the rest nitrogen and carbon dioxide. The last is removed by running the
mixed gases through lime. Then the nitrogen and carbon monoxide are
frozen out in an air-liquefying apparatus and the hydrogen escapes to
the storage tank. The liquefied carbon monoxide, allowed to regain its
gaseous form, is used in an internal combustion engine to run the plant.

There are then many ways of producing hydrogen, but it is so light and
bulky that it is difficult to get it where it is wanted. The American
Government in the war made use of steel cylinders each holding 161 cubic
feet of the gas under a pressure of 2000 pounds per square inch. Even
the hydrogen used by the troops in France was shipped from America in
this form. For field use the ferro-silicon and soda process was adopted.
A portable generator of this type was capable of producing 10,000 cubic
