him and they wouldn't have been married and had any children for
positively _years_. So now she'll have the first double-Prime baby and
it ought to be _mine_. I'm older than she is--our group is 'way ahead of
theirs--we have the first and _only_ starship--and then you do _that_.
And you wouldn't give _me_ that treatment. Oh, no--just to _her_, that
bleached-blonde! I'd like to strangle you to death with my own bare
hands!"

"What a hell of a logic!" Garlock had been trying to keep his own temper
in leash, but the leash was slipping. "Assume I tried to work on
you--assume I succeeded--what would you be? What would I have? What age
do you think this is--that of the Vikings? When SOP in getting a wife
was to beat her unconscious with a club and drag her into the longboat
by her hair? Hardly! I do not want and will not have a conquered woman.
Nor a spoiled-rotten, mentally-retarded brat...."

"You unbearable, conceited, overbearing jerk! Why, I'd rather...."

"Get out! And _this_ time, _stay_ out!"

Belle got out--and if door and frame had not been built of super-steel,
both would have been wrecked by the blast of energy she loosed in
closing the door behind her.

In her own room, with Gunther blocks full on, she threw herself face
down on the bed and cried as she had not cried since she was a child.

And finally, without even taking off her clothes, she cried herself to
sleep.




CHAPTER 8


Next morning, early, Belle tapped lightly on Garlock's door.

"Come in."

She did so. "Have you had your coffee?"

"Yes."

"So have I."

Neither Belle nor Garlock had recovered; both faces showed strain and
drain.

"I think we'd better break this up," Belle said, quietly.

"Check. We'll have to, if we expect to get any work done."

Belle could not conceal her surprise.

"Oh, not for the reason you think," Garlock went on, quickly. "Your
record as a man-killer is still one hundred point zero zero zero
percent. I've been in love with you ever since we paired. Before that,
even."

"Flapdoodle!" she snorted, inelegantly. "Why, I...."

"Keep still a minute. And I'm not going to fight with you again. Ever.
I'm not going to touch you again until I can control myself a lot better
than I could last night."

"Oh? That was mostly my fault, of course. But in love? Uh-uh, I've seen
men in love. You aren't. I couldn't make you be, not with the best I
could do. Not even in bed. You aren't, Clee--if you are, I'm an
Australian bushman."

"Perhaps I'm an atypical case. I'm not raving about your perfect
body--you know what that is like already. Nor about your mind, which is
the only one I know of as good as my own. Maybe I'm in love with what I
think you ought to be ... or what I hope you will be. Anyway, I'm in
love with _something_ connected with you--and with no other woman alive.
Shall we go eat?"

"Uh-huh--let's."

They joined Lola and James at the table; and if Lola noticed anything
out of the ordinary, she made no sign.

And after breakfast, in the Main--

"About three weeks, Jim, you think?" Garlock asked.

"Give or take a couple of days, yes."

"And Belle and I would just be in the way--at least until time to show
Deggi about the activation ... and all those Primes to organize ... we'd
better leave you here, don't you think, and get going?"

"I'll buy that. We'll finish as soon as possible."

Lola and James moved a few personal belongings planetside; Garlock and
Belle shot the _Pleiades_ across a vast gulf of space to one of the
planets they had scanned so fleetingly on their preliminary survey. Its
name was, both remembered, Lizoria; its two Primes were named Rezdo
Semolo and Mirea Mitala--male and female, respectively.

After sending down a very brief and perfunctory request for
audience--which was in effect a declaration of intent and nothing
else--Garlock and Belle teleported themselves down into Semolo's office,
where both Lizorian Primes were.

Both got up out of peculiar-looking chairs to face their visitors. Both
were tall; both were peculiarly thin. Not the thinness of emaciation,
but that of bodily structure.

"On them it looks good," Belle tight-beamed a thought to Garlock.

Both moved fast and with exquisite control; both were extraordinarily
graceful. "Snaky" was Belle's thought of the woman; "sinuous" was
Garlock's of the man. Both were completely hairless, of body and of
head--not by nature, but via electric-shaver clipping. Both wore
sandals. The man wore shorts and a shirt-like garment of nylon or its
like; the woman wore just enough ribbons and bands to hold a hundred
thousand credits' worth of jewels in place. She appeared to be about
twenty years--Tellurian equivalent--old; he was probably twenty-three or
twenty-four.

"We did not invite you in and we do not want you here," Semolo said,
coldly. "So get out, both of you. If you don't, when I count three I'll
throw you out, and I won't be too careful about how many of your bones I
break. One.... Two...."

"Pipe down, Rezdo!" the girl exclaimed. "They have something we haven't,
or they wouldn't be here. Whatever it is, we want it."

"Oh, let him try, Miss Mitala," Garlock said, through her hard-held
block, in the depth of her mind. "He won't hurt us a bit and it may do
him some good. While he's wasting effort I'll compare notes with my
partner here, Galactic Vice-Admiral Belle Bellamy. I'm glad to see that
one of you has at least a part of a brain."

"... Three!" Semolo did his best, with everything he had, without even
attracting Garlock's attention. He then tried to leap at the intruder
physically, despite the latter's tremendous advantage in weight and
muscle, but found that he could not move.

Then, through Belle's solidly-set blocks, "How are you doing, ace?
Getting anywhere?"

"My God!" came Belle's mental shriek. "What--how can--but no, you
_didn't_ give _that_ to Fao, surely!"

"I'll say I didn't--nor to Delcamp. But you're going to need it, I'm
thinking."

"But _can_ you? Even if you _would_--and I'm just beginning to realize
how big a man you really are--can that kind of stuff be taught? I
probably haven't got the brain-cells it takes to handle it."

"I'm not sure, but I've reworked our Prime Fields into one and made a
couple of other changes. Theoretically, it ought to work. Shall I come
in and try it?"

"Don't be an idiot, darling. _Of course!_"

        *           *           *

As impersonally as a surgeon exploring an organ, Garlock went into
Belle's mind. "Tune to the field ... that's it--fine! Then--I'll do it
real slow, and watch me close--you do like so ... get it?"

"Uh-huh!" Belle breathed, excitedly. "Got it!"

"Then this ... and this ... and there you are. You can try it on me, if
you like."

"Uh-uh. No sale. I don't need practice and I'd like to preserve the
beautiful illusion that maybe I _could_ crack your shield if I wanted
to. I'll work on Miss Snake-Hips here, the serpentine charmer--but say,
I'll bet there's a bone in it. _You_ can block it, can't you?"

"Yes. It goes like this." He showed her. "It takes full mastery of the
Prime Field, but you've got that."

"Oh, wonderful! Thanks, Clee darling. But do you mean to actually say I
can now completely block you or any other Prime out?"

"You're going too far, ace. Me, yes--but don't forget that there very
well may be people--or things--as far ahead of us as we are ahead of
pointer pups."

"Huh! Balloon-juice and prop-wash! I just _know_, Clee, that you're the
absolute tops of the whole, entire, macrocosmic universe."

"Well, we can dream, of course." Garlock withdrew his mind from Belle's
and turned his attention to the now quiet Semolo. "Well, my
over-confident and contumacious young squirt; are you done horsing
around or do you want to keep it up until you addle completely what few
brains you have?"

The Lizorian made no reply; but merely glared.

"The trouble with you half-baked, juvenile--I almost added 'delinquent'
to that, and perhaps I should have--Primes is that you know too damned
much that isn't true. As an old Tellurian saying hath it, 'you're
altogether too big for your britches.'

"Thus, simply because you have lived a few years on one single planet
and haven't encountered anyone able to stand up to you, you've sold
yourself on the idea that there's nobody, anywhere, who can. You're
wrong--you couldn't be more so if you had an army to help you.

"What, actually, have you done? What, actually, have you got?
Practically nothing. You haven't even started a starship; you've
scarcely started making plans. You realize dimly that the theory is not
in any of the books, that you'll have to slug it out for yourself, but
that is _work_. So you're still just posing and throwing your weight
around.

"As a matter of fact, you're merely a drop in a lake. There are
thousands of millions of planets, and thousands of millions of Prime
Operators. Most of them are probably a lot stronger than you are; many
of them may be stronger than my partner and I are. I am not at all
certain that you will pass even the first screening; but since you are
without question a Prime Operator, I will deliver the message we came to
deliver. Miss Mitala, do you want to listen or shall we drive it into
you, too?"

"I want to listen to anyone or anything who has a working starship and
who can do what you have just done."

"Very well," and Garlock told the general-distribution version of the
story of the Galactic Service.

"Quite interesting," Semolo said loftily, at its end. "Whether or not I
would be interested depends, of course, on whether there's a position
high enough for...."

"I doubt very much if there's one low enough," Garlock cut in sharply.
"However, since it's part of my job, I'll get in touch with you later.
Okay, Belle."

And in the Main--"What a jerk!" Belle exclaimed. "What a half-cooked,
half-digested _pill_! I simply marvel at your forbearance, Clee. You
should have turned him inside out and hung him up to dry--especially
behind the ears!" Then, suddenly, she giggled. "But do you know what I
did?"

"I can guess. A couple of shots in the arm?"

"Uh-huh. Next time he pitches into her she'll slap his ears right off.
Oh, _brother_!"

"Check and double-check. But let's hop to Number Two.... Here it is."

        *           *           *

"Oh, yes," came a smooth, clear, diamond-sharp thought in reply to
Garlock's introductory call. "This world, as you have perceived, is
Falne. I am indeed Baver 14WD27, my companion Prime is indeed Glarre
12WD91. You are, we perceive, Bearers of the Truth; of great skill and
of high advancement. Your visit here will, I am sure, be of immense
benefit to us and possibly, I hope, of some small benefit to you. We
will both be delighted to have you both 'port yourselves to us at once."

The Tellurians did so--and in the very instant of appearance Garlock was
met by a blast of force the like of which he had never even imagined.
The two Falnian Primes, capable operators both, had built up their
highest possible potentials and had launched both terrific bolts without
any hint of warning.

Belle's mind, however, was already fused with Garlock's. Their combined
blocks were instantaneous in action; their counter-thrust was nearly so.
Both Falnians staggered backward until they were stopped by the room's
wall.

"Ah, yes," Garlock said, then. "You are indeed, in a small and feeble
way, Seekers after the Truth; of which we are indeed Bearers. Lesser
Bearers, perhaps, but still Bearers. You will indeed profit greatly from
our visit. You err, however, in thinking that we may in any respect
profit from you. You have nothing whatever that we have not had for
long. Now let us, if you please, take a few seconds of time to get
acquainted, each with the other."

"That, indeed, is the logical and seemly thing to do." Both Falnians
straightened up and stepped forward; neither arrogantly nor
apologetically, but simply as though nothing at all out of the ordinary
had taken place.

Each pair studied the other. Physically, the two pairs were surprisingly
alike. Baver was almost as big as Garlock; almost as heavily muscled.
Glarre could have been cast in Belle's own mold.

        *           *           *

With that, however, all resemblance ceased.

Both Falnians were naked. The man wore only a belt and pouch in lieu of
pockets; the woman only a leather carryall slung from one shoulder--big
enough, Garlock thought, to hold a week's supplies for an Explorer
Scout.

His hair was thick, bushy, unkempt; sun-bleached to a nondescript blend
of pale colors. Hers--long, heavy, meticulously middle-parted and
dressed--was a startling two-tone job. To the right of the part it was a
searingly brilliant red; to the left, an equally brilliant royal blue.

His skin was deeply tanned. The color of hers was completely masked by a
bizarrely spectacular overlay of designs done in semi-indelible,
multi-colored dyes.

"Ah, you are worthy indeed of receiving an increment of Truth. Hear,
then, the message we bring," and again Garlock told the story.

"We thank you, sir and madam, from our hearts. We will accept with joy
your help in finishing our ship; we will do all that in us lies to
further the cause of the Galactic Service. Until a day, then?"
