coefficient of correlation (_r_) is not easy to compute in this case,
because one of the attributes, the colour, is not strictly graduated
(_i.e._ it is not expressed in numbers defining the colour).[5] Using
the coefficient of contingency of PEARSON, it is, however, possible to
find a fairly reliable value of the coefficient of correlation, and
MALMQUIST has in this way found _r_ = +0.85, a rather high value.

In order to facilitate the discussion of the relation between colour and
spectrum it is convenient to deal here with the question of the spectra
of the stars.


10. _Spectra of the stars._ In order to introduce the discussion I first
give a list of the wave-lengths of the FRAUENHOFER lines in the
spectrum, and the corresponding chemical elements.

    _FRAUENHOFER line_    _Element_       [lambda]
       A                                   759.4
       B                                   686.8
       C([alpha])         H (hydrogen)     656.3
       D_1                Na (sodium)      589.6
       D_3                He               587.6
       E                  Fe (iron)        527.0
       F([beta])          H                486.2
        ([gamma])         H                434.1
       G                  Ca (calcium)     430.8
       h([delta])         H                410.2
       H([epsilon])       Ca(H)            396.9
       K                  Ca               393.4

The first column gives the FRAUENHOFER denomination of each line.
Moreover the hydrogen lines [alpha], [beta], [gamma], [delta], [epsilon]
are denoted. The second column gives the name of the corresponding
element, to which each line is to be attributed. The third column gives
the wave-length expressed in millionths of a millimeter as unit
([mu][mu]).

On plate III, where the classification of the stellar spectra according
to the Harvard system is reproduced, will be found also the wave-lengths
of the principal H and He lines.

By the visual spectrum is usually understood the part of the radiation
between the FRAUENHOFER lines A to H ([lambda] = 760 to 400 [mu][mu]),
whereas the photographic spectrum generally lies between F and K
([lambda] = 500 to 400 [mu][mu]).

In the earliest days of spectroscopy the spectra of the stars were
classified according to their visual spectra. This classification was
introduced by SECCHI and was later more precisely defined by VOGEL. The
three classes I, II, III of VOGEL correspond approximately to the colour
classification into white, yellow, and red stars. Photography has now
almost entirely taken the place of visual observations of spectra, so
that SECCHI's and VOGEL's definitions of the stellar spectra are no
longer applicable. The terminology now used was introduced by PICKERING
and Miss CANNON and embraces a great many types, of which we here
describe the principal forms as they are defined in Part. II of Vol.
XXVIII of the Annals of the Harvard Observatory. It may be remarked that
PICKERING first arranged the types in alphabetical order A, B, C, &c.,
supposing that order to correspond to the temperature of the stars.
Later this was found to be partly wrong, and in particular it was found
that the B-stars may be hotter than those of type A. The following is
the temperature-order of the spectra according to the opinion of the
Harvard astronomers.

_Type O_ (WOLF-RAYET stars). The spectra of these stars consist mainly
of bright lines. They are characterized by the bright bands at
wave-lengths 463 [mu][mu] and 469 [mu][mu], and the line at 501 [mu][mu]
characteristic of gaseous nebulae is sometimes present.

This type embraces mainly stars of relatively small apparent brightness.
The brightest is [gamma] Velorum with _m_ = 2.22. We shall find that the
absolute magnitude of these stars nearly coincides with that of the
stars of type B.

The type is grouped into five subdivisions represented by the letters
Oa, Ob, Oc, Od and Oe. These subdivisions are conditioned by the varying
intensities of the bright bands named above. The due sequence of these
sub-types is for the present an open question.

Among interesting stars of this type is [zeta] Puppis (Od), in the
spectrum of which PICKERING discovered a previously unknown series of
helium lines. They were at first attributed (by RYDBERG) to hydrogen and
were called "additional lines of hydrogen".

_Type B_ (Orion type, Helium stars). All lines are here dark. Besides
the hydrogen series we here find the He-lines (396, 403, 412, 414, 447,
471, 493 [mu][mu]).

To this type belong all the bright stars ([beta], [gamma], [delta],
[epsilon], [zeta], [eta] and others) in Orion with the exception of
Betelgeuze. Further, Spica and many other bright stars.

On plate III [epsilon] Orionis is taken as representative of this type.

_Type A_ (Sirius type) is characterized by the great intensity of the
hydrogen lines (compare plate III). The helium lines have vanished.
Other lines visible but faintly.

The greater part of the stars visible to the naked eye are found here.
There are 1251 stars brighter than the 6th magnitude which belong to
this type. Sirius, Vega, Castor, Altair, Deneb and others are all
A-stars.

_Type F_ (Calcium type). The hydrogen lines still rather prominent but
not so broad as in the preceding type. The two calcium lines H and K
(396.9, 393.4 [mu][mu]) strongly pronounced.

Among the stars of this type are found a great many bright stars
(compare the third chapter), such as Polaris, Canopus, Procyon.

_Type G_ (Sun type). Numerous metallic lines together with relatively
faint hydrogen lines.

To this class belong the sun, Capella, [alpha] Centauri and other bright
stars.

_Type K._ The hydrogen lines still fainter. The K-line attains its
maximum intensity (is not especially pronounced in the figure of plate
III).

This is, next to the A-type, the most numerous type (1142 stars) among
the bright stars.

We find here [gamma] Andromedae, [beta] Aquilae, Arcturus, [alpha]
Cassiopeiae, Pollux and Aldebaran, which last forms a transition to the
next type.

_Type M._ The spectrum is banded and belongs to SECCHI's third type. The
flutings are due to titanium oxide.

Only 190 of the stars visible to the naked eye belong to this type.
Generally they are rather faint, but we here find Betelgeuze, [alpha]
Herculis, [beta] Pegasi, [alpha] Scorpii (Antares) and most variables of
long period, which form a special sub-type _Md_, characterized by bright
hydrogen lines together with the flutings.

Type M has two other sub-types Ma and Mb.

_Type N_ (SECCHI's fourth type). Banded spectra. The flutings are due to
compounds of carbon.

Here are found only faint stars. The total number is 241. All are red.
27 stars having this spectrum are variables of long period of the same
type as Md.

The spectral types may be summed up in the following way:--

    White stars:--SECCHI's type I:--Harvard B and A,
    Yellow  "  :--   "      "  II:--   "    F, G and K,
    Red     "  :--   "      " III:--   "    M,
     "      "  :--   "      "  IV:--   "    N.

The Harvard astronomers do not confine themselves to the types mentioned
above, but fill up the intervals between the types with sub-types which
are designated by the name of the type followed by a numeral 0, 1, 2,
..., 9. Thus the sub-types between A and F have the designations A0, A1,
A2, ..., A9, F0, &c. Exceptions are made as already indicated, for the
extreme types O and M.


11. _Spectral index._ It may be gathered from the above description that
the definition of the types implies many vague moments. Especially in
regard to the G-type are very different definitions indeed accepted,
even at Harvard.[6] It is also a defect that the definitions do not
directly give _quantitative_ characteristics of the spectra. None the
less it is possible to substitute for the spectral classes a continuous
scale expressing the spectral character of a star. Such a scale is
indeed implicit in the Harvard classification of the spectra.

Let us use the term _spectral index_ (_s_) to define a number expressing
the spectral character of a star. Then we may conveniently define this
conception in the following way. Let A0 correspond to the spectral index
_s_ = 0.0, F0 to _s_ = +1.0, G0 to _s_ = +2.0, K0 to _s_ = +3.0 M0 to
_s_ = +4.0 and B0 to _s_ = -1.0. Further, let A1, A2, A3, &c., have the
spectral indices +0.1, +0.2, +0.3, &c., and in like manner with the
other intermediate sub-classes. Then it is evident that to all spectral
classes between B0 and M there corresponds a certain spectral index _s_.
The extreme types O and N are not here included. Their spectral indices
may however be determined, as will be seen later.

Though the spectral indices, defined in this manner, are directly known
for every spectral type, it is nevertheless not obvious that the series
of spectral indices corresponds to a continuous series of values of some
attribute of the stars. This may be seen to be possible from a
comparison with another attribute which may be rather markedly
graduated, namely the colour of the stars. We shall discuss this point
in another paragraph. To obtain a well graduated scale of the spectra it
will finally be necessary to change to some extent the definitions of
the spectral types, a change which, however, has not yet been
accomplished.


12. We have found in Sec.9 that the light-radiation of a star is described
by means of the total intensity (_I_), the mean wave-length ([lambda]_0)
and the dispersion of the wave-length ([sigma]_[lambda]). [lambda]_0 and
[sigma]_[lambda] may be deduced from the spectral observations. It must
here be observed that the observations give, not the intensities at
different wave-lengths but, the values of these intensities as they are
apprehended by the instruments employed--the eye or the photographic
plate. For the derivation of the true curve of intensity we must know
the distributive function of the instrument (L. M. 67). As to the eye,
we have reason to believe, from the bolometric observations of LANGLEY
(1888), that the mean wave-length of the visual curve of intensity
nearly coincides with that of the true intensity-curve, a conclusion
easily understood from DARWIN's principles of evolution, which demand
that the human eye in the course of time shall be developed in such a
way that the mean wave-length of the visual intensity curve does
coincide with that of the true curve ([lambda] = 530 [mu][mu]), when the
greatest visual energy is obtained (L. M. 67). As to the dispersion,
this is always greater in the true intensity-curve than in the visual
curve, for which, according to Sec.10, it amounts to approximately 60
[mu][mu]. We found indeed that the visual intensity curve is extended,
approximately, from 400 [mu][mu] to 760 [mu][mu], a sixth part of which
interval, approximately, corresponds to the dispersion [sigma] of the
visual curve.

In the case of the photographic intensity-curve the circumstances are
different. The mean wave-length of the photographic curve is,
approximately, 450 [mu][mu], with a dispersion of 16 [mu][mu], which is
considerably smaller than in the visual curve.


13. Both the visual and the photographic curves of intensity differ
according to the temperature of the radiating body and are therefore
different for stars of different spectral types. Here the mean
wave-length follows the formula of WIEN, which says that this
wave-length varies inversely as the temperature. The total intensity,
according to the law of STEPHAN, varies directly as the fourth power of
the temperature. Even the dispersion is dependent on the variation of
the temperature--directly as the mean wave-length, inversely as the
temperature of the star (L. M. 41)--so that the mean wave-length, as
well as the dispersion of the wave-length, is smaller for the hot stars
O and B than for the cooler ones (K and M types). It is in this manner
possible to determine the temperature of a star from a determination of
its mean wave-length ([lambda]_0) or from the dispersion in [lambda].
Such determinations (from [lambda]_0) have been made by SCHEINER and
WILSING in Potsdam, by ROSENBERG and others, though these researches
still have to be developed to a greater degree of accuracy.


14. _Effective wave-length._ The mean wave-length of a spectrum, or, as
it is often called by the astronomers, the _effective_ wave-length, is
generally determined in the following way. On account of the refraction
in the air the image of a star is, without the use of a spectroscope,
really a spectrum. After some time of exposure we get a somewhat round
image, the position of which is determined precisely by the mean
wave-length. This method is especially used with a so-called
_objective-grating_, which consists of a series of metallic threads,
stretched parallel to each other at equal intervals. On account of the
diffraction of the light we now get in the focal plane of the objective,
with the use of these gratings, not only a fainter image of the star at
the place where it would have arisen without grating, but also at both
sides of this image secondary images, the distances of which from the
central star are certain theoretically known multiples of the effective
wave-lengths. In this simple manner it is possible to determine the
effective wave-length, and this being a tolerably well-known function of
the spectral-index, the latter can also be found. This method was first
proposed by HERTZSPRUNG and has been extensively used by BERGSTRAND,
LUNDMARK and LINDBLAD at the observatory of Upsala and by others.


15. _Colour-index._ We have already pointed out in Sec.9 that the colour
may be identified with the mean wave-length ([lambda]_0). As further
[lambda]_0 is closely connected with the spectral index (_s_), we may
use the spectral index to represent the colour. Instead of _s_ there may
also be used another expression for the colour, called the colour-index.
This expression was first introduced by SCHWARZSCHILD, and is defined in
the following way.

We have seen that the zero-point of the photographic scale is chosen in
such a manner that the visual magnitude _m_ and the photographic
magnitude _m'_ coincide for stars of spectral index 0.0 (A0). The
photographic magnitudes are then unequivocally determined. It is found
that their values systematically differ from the visual magnitudes, so
that for type B (and O) the photographic magnitudes are smaller than the
visual, and the contrary for the other types. The difference is greatest
for the M-type (still greater for the N-stars, though here for the
