flickering over the surface of the sphere as the thing prepared
to strike.

The sphere seemed to pulse briefly as he released his grasp on
the rim of the opening and shoved himself downward into the hole.
He dropped several feet.

Above him a brilliant flash of fire lit the opening.

The sphere itself hovered above the hole.




CHAPTER III

PRIMARY OBJECTIVES


The sphere pulsed again. But this time no flaming whip sprang
from its surface. There was a single flash. For an instant Taylor
caught a glimpse of bestial eyes, looking angrily at him from the
center of the flash. Then there was nothing. He was in the
darkness of a tunnel. Even the charred embers of the wooden trap
door above him seemed dimmed by a cloud of dust.

The sphere had simply exploded.

Taylor had no time to analyze the situation. His hands groped
along the side of the tunnel, the one Norden had used to enter
the plant on his spying expeditions. Taylor crawled slowly,
feeling his way. It seemed eternity until at last he reached the
end of the passage and felt the trap door overhead.

A minute later he rejoined the others, huddled in darkness
outside the gate.

"The searchlight went out," Masters explained. "Something wrong
with the power, I guess."

"I know what it was," Taylor said gruffly. He turned to the
disarmed sentry. "Has anyone come out of here since the factory
stopped working?"

"Nobody but him, sir," the soldier said, jerking his thumb at the
sobbing man huddled against Norden. "He said his name was
Orkins--Jim Orkins. He works in the warehouse. But you can't tell
anything about the rest o' what he says. He just babbles, sir.
Something about livin' lightnin' and balls of fire. He ain't
drunk, sir, so he must be crazy."

"Help him get up," Taylor ordered. "Masters, you take charge of
Norden. We're going back to the car."

"Excuse me, sir," the sentry said, hesitantly. "But that's
against orders. I can't leave. I'm to guard this gate, sir."

"Your orders are canceled," the captain said.

"If I desert my post, it's court martial," the sentry explained.
"How do I know you aren't a spy? Captains don't go around making
privates break the orders of the day. If you've got business in
the plant, why was I told to keep _everyone_ out? Why didn't they
tell me to pass Captain Taylor? I got a duty here and I'll do it
if it kills me. So help me, sir. Sergeant o' the guard!"

The echo of the sentry's bellow rattled against the bleak factory
buildings. A sphere bobbed up through the hole in the roof.
Orkins opened his mouth to scream, but Norden clapped his hand
over the man's lips, choking him off.

"Quiet!" Taylor ordered hoarsely. He addressed the sentry: "See
that thing? It means death to you, to all of us if it finds us.
The sergeant of the guard, probably all of the other sentries are
dead. Every workman in the plant is dead. Somehow we were missed.
The searchlight power went off before they found this post, I
suppose. Now then, all of you follow Masters back to the car.
I'll bring up the rear."

"I won't leave," the sentry said, stubbornly.

Masters stepped forward and put his pistol against the soldier's
back.

"You'll go," he said. "Maybe this ain't regulation, but neither
are the spheres."

The stubby little secret service man pushed the soldier ahead of
him. The sentry marched with his hands in the air.

Drawing his own pistol, Taylor turned to Norden.

"Help Orkins to the car," he said.

Norden drew himself up stiffly.

"Go ahead and shoot," he said. "It'll save the firing squad some
trouble."

Taylor took one step forward. Norden faced him unflinchingly.
Taylor's hand shot out, caught Norden's coat and threw him after
Masters.

"Don't leave me alone!" Orkins cried, crawling after Norden and
clasping him about the legs. Norden kicked him aside.

"Keep moving!" Taylor ordered Norden, who had halted.

Norden did not move.

Taylor swung his fist. The blow connected and the officer caught
the falling man, swung him over his shoulder, then turned to the
cringing Orkins.

"If you don't want to be left here alone, follow us," he said.

Orkins suddenly regained his ability to use his muscles.

Masters, watching over his shoulder, chuckled. There was a faint
wink of one eye visible in the moonlight.

"Kinda screwy, ain't he?" he said, jerking his head in Orkins'
direction.

"I don't know that I blame him, much," Taylor said. "Look at the
plant."

Over the roof and the smokestacks floated the yellowish-red ball
of fire. Another sphere was emerging from the hole in the roof.

"What are they? A new kind of bomb?" Masters asked.

"Norden's bomb never had a chance. Compared with what actually
happened in there, a bomb would have been a picnic. There's not a
living person left in the whole place."

"Not a--hold on there, Cap! Do you know how many were working?"

"They're all dead," Taylor said. Briefly he outlined what he had
seen in the plant.

"Norden, the blankety-blank!" Masters swore. "Shooting's too good
for him."

"This isn't connected with the war--at least not directly. It's
something else, Masters. What, I don't know yet, but I'm
beginning to think that it's something the human race has never
met before. Those spheres have killed a couple of hundred workers
with bolts of energy--"

"I'm no scientist, captain."

"That's the best I can describe this force, Masters. I might call
it heat-bolts, but it's probably partly electric and partly heat,
not entirely either. You see, Masters, heat is energy, just like
electricity and light. The energy these spheres shoot out is a
mixture of energies. We can imagine a spark of electricity
shooting out and striking a man like a bolt of lightning, but
it's hard to visualize heat behaving that way."

"Say, mister," the sentry interrupted, "my arms are getting
tired."

"Okay, buddy," Masters replied. "If I let you put your arms down,
will you behave like a nice little boy?"

"I'll be a perfect angel," the sentry said, lowering his arms.

"You'll be an angel if you aren't, too," Masters added.

"What's your name, soldier?" Taylor asked the sentry.

"Private Pember, sir. Company A, 110th infantry--"

"All right, Private Pember, you can carry this fellow."

Taylor shifted the faintly stirring Norden to the shoulders of
the soldier.

"If it will make you feel any easier, Pember," the captain went
on, "I can assure you that exigencies demanded your removal from
your post. Your life was in danger and you could do no good by
remaining there. In fact, there was nothing left to guard. You
can do more good for your country by coming with us."

"Yes, sir," Pember said. "I guess you are right, captain."

"You're a good soldier, Pember," Taylor went on. "A situation
like this is unique. It demands use of individual initiative,
rather than blind obedience to orders. Do you understand?"
