required shape as quickly as possible, and left to cool clamped in
position.

The sheet ebonite as it comes from the makers is generally far from
flat.  It is often necessary to flatten a sheet of ebonite, and of
course this is the more easily accomplished the smaller the sheet.
Consequently a bit of ebonite of about the required size is first cut
from the stock sheet by a hack-saw such as is generally used for
metals.  This piece is then boiled and pressed between two planed iron
plates previously warmed to near 100 deg. C.

With pieces of ebonite such as are used for the tops of resistance
boxes, measuring, say, 20 X 8 X 11 inches, very little trouble is
experienced.  The sheets when cold are found to retain the flatness
which has been forced upon them perfectly well.  It is otherwise with
large thin sheets such as are used for Holtz machines.  I have
succeeded fairly, but only fairly, by pressing them in a "gluing
press," consisting of heavy planed iron slabs previously heated to
100 deg. C.

I do not know exactly how best to flatten very thin and large sheets.
It is easy to make large tubes out of sheet ebonite by taking
advantage of the softening which ebonite undergoes in boiling water.
A wooden mandrel is prepared of the proper size and shape.  The
ebonite is softened and bent round it; this may require two or three
operations, for the ebonite gets stiff very quickly after it is taken
out of the water.  Finally the tube is bound round the mandrel with
sufficient force to bring it to the proper shape and boiled in water,
mandrel and all.  The bath and its contents are allowed to cool
together, so that the ebonite cools uniformly.

Tubes made in this way are of course subject to the drawback of having
an unwelded seam, but they do well enough to wind wire upon if very
great accuracy of form is not required.  If very accurate spools are
needed the mandrel is better made of iron or slate and the spool is
turned up afterwards.  The seam may be strapped inside or at the ends
by bits of ebonite acting as bridges, and the seam itself may be
caulked with melted paraffin or anthracene.

Working Ebonite.

Ebonite is best worked as if it were brass, with ordinary
brass-turning or planing tools.  These tools should be as hard as
possible, for the edges are apt to suffer severely, and blunt tools
leave a very undesirable woolly surface on the ebonite.  In turning or
shaping ebonite sheets it is as well to begin by taking the skin off
one side first, and then reversing the sheet, finishing the second
side, and then returning to the first.  This is on account of the fact
that ebonite sometimes springs a little out of shape when the skin is
removed.

Turned work in ebonite, if well done, requires no sand-papering, but
may be sufficiently polished by a handful of its own shavings and a
little vaseline.  The advantage of using a polished ebonite surface is
that such a surface deteriorates more slowly under the influence of
light and air than a surface left rough from the tool.  If very highly
polished surfaces are required, the ebonite after tooling is worked
with fine pumice dust and water, applied on felt, or where possible by
means of a felt buff on the lathe, and finally polished with rouge and
water, applied on felt or cloth.

Ebonite works particularly well under a spiral milling cutter, and
sufficiently well under an ordinary rounded planing tool, with cutting
angle the same as for brass, and hardened to the lightest straw
colour.

It is not possible, on the other hand, to use the carpenter's plane
with success, for the angle of the tool is too acute and causes the
ebonite to chip.

In boring ebonite the drill should be withdrawn from the hole pretty
often and well lubricated, for if the borings jam, as they are apt to
do, the heat developed is very great and the temper of the drill gets
spoiled.  Ebonite will spoil a drill by heating as quickly as anything
known;  on the other hand, it may be drilled very fast if proper
precaution is taken.

It is advisable to expose ebonite to the light as little as possible,
especially if the surface is unpolished, for under the combined action
of light and air the sulphur at the surface of the ebonite rapidly
oxidises, and the ebonite becomes covered with a thin but highly
conducting layer of sulphurous or sulphuric acid or their compounds.
When this happens the ebonite may be improved by scrubbing with hot
water, or washing freely with alcohol rubbed on with cotton waste in
the case of apparatus that cannot be dismounted.

A complete cure, however, can only be effected by scraping off the
outer layer of ebonite so as to expose a fresh surface.  For this
purpose a bit of sheet glass broken so as to leave a curved edge is
very useful, and the ebonite is then scraped like a cricket bat.  In
designing apparatus for laboratory use it is as well to bear in mind
that sooner or later the ebonite parts will require to be taken down
and scraped up.  Rods or tubes are, of course, most quickly treated on
the lathe with rough glass cloth, and may be finished with fine
sandpaper, then pumice dust and water, applied on felt.  After
cleaning the pumice off by means of water and a rag, the final touch
may be given by means of vaseline, applied on cloth or on ebonite
shavings.

Sec. 106.  Mica.

A great variety of minerals go under this name.  Speaking generally,
the Russian micas coming into commerce are potash micas, and mica
purchased in England may be taken to be potash mica, especially if it
is in large sheets.

At ordinary temperatures "mica" of the kind found  in commerce is an
excellent insulator.  Schultze (Wied. Ann. vol. xxxvi. p. 655) comes
to the conclusion that both at high and at low temperatures mica (of
all kinds?) is a better insulator than white "mirror glass," the
composition of which is not stated.  The experiments of the author
referred to were apparently left unfinished, and altogether too much
stress must not be laid on the results obtained, one of which was that
mica conducts electrolytically to some extent at high temperatures.

Bouty (Journal de Physique, 1890 [9], 288) and J.  Curie (These de
Doctorat, Paris, 1888) agree in making the final conductivity of the
mica used in Carpentier's condensers exceedingly small--at all events
at ordinary temperatures.  Bearing in mind that for such substances
the term specific resistance has no very definite meaning, M. Bouty
considers it is not less than 3.19 x 1028 E.M. units at ordinary
temperatures.  M. Bouty gives a note or illustration of what such
numbers mean--a precaution not superfluous in cases where magnitudes
are denoted logarithmically.  Referring to the value quoted, viz.
3.19 x 1028, M. Bouty says, "Ce serait la resistance d'une colonne de
mercure de 1mmq de section et de longueur telle que la lumiere se
propageant dans le vide, mettrait plus de 3000 ans A se transmettre
d'une extremite a I'autre de la colonne."

M. Bouty returns to the study of mica (muscovite) in the Journal de
Physique for 1892, p.  5, and there deals with the specific inductive
capacity, which for a very small period of charge he finds has the
value 8--an enormous value for such a good insulator, and one that it
would be desirable to verify by some totally distinct method.  This
remark is enforced by the fact that M. Klemencic finds the number 6
for the same constant.  The temperature coefficient of this constant
was too small for M. Bouty to determine.  The electric intensity was
of the order of 100 volts per centimetre, and the experiments seem to
indicate that the specific inductive capacity would be only slightly
less if referred to a period of charge indefinitely short.

I have found that the residual charge in a mica condenser, made
according to Carpentier's method (to be described below), is about 1
per cent of the original charge under the following circumstances.

Voltage 300 volts on a plate 0.2 mm. thick, duration of charge ten
minutes, temperature about 20 deg. C.  To get this result the mica must be
most carefully dried.  This and other facts indicate that the
so-called residual charge on ordinary condensers is, to a very large
extent, due to the creeping of the charge from the armatures over the
more or less conducting varnished surfaces of the mica, and its slow
return on discharge.

This source of residual charge was carefully guarded against by
Rowland and Nichols (Phil. Mag.  1881) in their work on quartz, and is
referred to by M. Bouty, who adduces some experiments to show that his
own results are not vitiated by it.  On the other hand, M. Bouty shows
that a small rise in temperature enormously affects the state of a
mica surface, and that the surface gets changed in such a way as to
become very fairly conducting at 300 deg. C.  Also anybody can easily try
for himself whether exposing a mica condenser plate which has been
examined in presence of phosphorus pentoxide to ordinary air for five
minutes will not enormously increase the residual charge, as has
always been the case in the writer's experience, and if so, it is open
to him to suggest some cause other than surface creeping as an
explanation.

M. Bouty, using less perfectly dried mica, did not get so good a
result as to smallness of residual charge as the one above quoted.

The chief use of mica for laboratory purposes depends on the ease with
which it can be split, and also upon the fact that it may be
considerably crumpled and bent without breaking.  It therefore makes
an excellent dielectric in so far as convenience of construction is
concerned in the preparation of condensers, and lends itself freely to
the construction of insulating washers or separators of any kind.  Its
success as a fair insulator at moderate temperatures has led to its
use in resistance thermometers, where it appears to have given
satisfaction up to, at all events, 400 deg. C.

It is worth a note that according to Werner Siemens, who had immense
experience (Wied. Ann. vol. clix.), soapstone is the only reliable
insulator at a red heat, but, no doubt, a good deal depends on the
particular specimen investigated.

Sec. 107.  Use of Mica in Condensers.

If good results are desired it is essential to select the mica very
carefully.  Pieces appreciably stained,--particularly if the stain is
not uniformly distributed,--cracked pieces, and pieces tending to
flake off in patches should be rejected.  The best samples of mica
that have come under the writer's observation are those sheets sold
for the purpose of giving to silver photographic prints that hideous
glazed surface which some years ago was so popular.

Sheets of mica about 0.1 to 0.2 mm. thick form good serviceable
condenser plates, and will certainly stand a pressure of 300 volts,
and most likely a good deal more.  The general practice in England
seems to have been to build up condensers of alternate sheets of
varnished or paraffined-mica and tin-foil.

This practice is open to several objections.  In the first place, the
capacity of a condenser made in this way varies with the pressure
binding the plates together.  In the second place, the amount of mica
and tin-foil required is often excessive in consequence of the
imperfect contact of these substances.  Again, the inevitable air film
between the mica and tin-foil renders condensers so made unsuitable
for use with alternating currents, owing to the heating set up through
air discharges, and which is generally, though often (if not always)
wrongly, attributed to dielectric hysteresis.

These imperfections are to a great extent got over by M. Carpentier's
method of construction, which is, however, rather more costly both in
material and labour.  On the other hand, wonderful capacities are
obtained with quite small amounts of mica.  M. Bouty mentions a
condenser of one microfarad capacity weighing 1500 grms.  and
contained in a square box measuring 12 centimetres on the side, and
about 3 centimetres thick.

The relation between the capacity and surface of doubly-coated plates
is in electro-static units:

Capacity = (sp. ind. capacity X area of one surface)/(4pi X thickness)

This may be reduced to electro-magnetic units by dividing by 9x10^20,
and to microfarads by further multiplying by 10^15.

M. Carpentier begins, of course, by having his mica scrupulously clean
and well selected.  It is then silvered by one of the silvering
processes (Sec. 65) on both sides, for which purpose the sheets may be
suspended in a paraffined wood rack, so as to lie horizontally in the
silvering solution, a space of about half an inch being allowed
between the sheets.  The silvering being finished, the sheets are
dipped along two parallel edges in 75 per cent nitric acid.  With
regard to the third and fourth edges of the sheet, the silver is
removed on one side only, using a spun glass brush;  if we agree to
call the two surfaces of the mica A and B respectively, and the two
edges in question C and D, then the silver is removed from the A side
along edge C, and from the B side along edge D.  The silvered part is
shown shaded in Fig.  84.  By this arrangement the silver and mica
plates may be built up together so as to form the same mutual
arrangement of contacts as in an ordinary mica tin-foil condenser.

Fig. 84.

It need hardly be said that the sheets require very complete washing
after treatment with nitric acid, followed by a varnishing of the
edges as already described in the case of glass, and baking at a
temperature of 140 deg. C.  in air free from flame gases, till the shellac
begins to emit its characteristic odour and is absolutely hard when
cold.

The plates are then built up so as to connect the sheets which require
to be connected, and to insulate the other set.  General contact is,
if necessary, secured by means of a little silver leaf looped across
from plate to plate--a part of the construction which requires
particular attention and clean hands, for it is by no means so easy to
make an unimpeachable contact as might at first appear.

The condenser, having been built up, may be clamped solid and placed
in its case;  the capacity will not depend appreciably on the
tightness of the clamp screws--a great feature of the construction.
Such a condenser will not give its best results unless absolutely dry.
I have kept one very conveniently in a vacuum desiccator over
phosphorus pentoxide, but if of any size, the condenser deserves a box
to itself, and this must be air-tight and provided with a drying
reagent, so arranged that it can be removed through a manhole of some
sort.

Contact to the brass-work on the lid may be made by pressing spring
contacts tightly down upon the ends of the silver foils and carrying
the connections through the lid.  This also serves to secure the
condenser in position.

Sec. 108.  Micanite.

This substance, though probably comparing somewhat unfavourably with
the insulators already enumerated, and being subject to the
uncertainties of manufacture, has during the last few years achieved a
considerable success in American electrical engineering construction.
It is composed of scrap mica and shellac varnish worked under pressure
to the desired shape, and may be obtained in sheets, plates, and rods,
or in any of the forms for which a die happens to have been
constructed.

Of course, in special cases it would be worth while to prepare a die,
and then the attainable forms would be limited by moulding
considerations only.  The writer's experience is very limited in this
matter, but Dr. Kennelly, with whom he communicated on the subject,
was good enough to reply in favour of micanite for engineering work.

Sec. 109.  Celluloid.

This material is composed of nitrocellulose and camphor.

It has fair insulating properties, and may be obtained in a variety of
forms, but has now been generally abandoned for electrical work on
account of its inflammability.

Sec. 110.  Paper.

Pure white filter paper, perfectly dry, is probably a very fair
insulator;  the misfortune is that in practice it cannot be kept dry.
Under the most favourable circumstances its specific resistance may
approach 1024 E.M. units.  It must therefore be considered rather as a
partial conductor than as an insulator.  The only case of the use of
dry paper as an insulator in machine construction which has come under
the writer's notice is in building up the commutators of the small
motors which used to drive the Edison phonographs.

Its advantages in this connection are to be traced to the fact that a
commutator so built up is durable and keeps a clean surface.  Of
course, the use of paper as an insulator for telephone wires is well
known, but its success in this direction depends less upon its
insulating properties than upon the fact that it can be arranged in
such a way as to allow of the wires being partially air insulated, an
arrangement tending to reduce the electrostatic capacity of the wire
system.

At one time it was the custom of instrument makers to employ ordinary
printed paper in the shape of leaves torn from books or the folios of
old ledgers to form the dielectric of the condensers used in
connection with the contact breakers of induction coils.  This
practice has nothing but economy to recommend it, for cases often
occur in which the paper, by gradual absorption of moisture from the
air, comes to insulate so badly that it practically short circuits the
spark gap, and so stops the action of the coil.  Three separate cases
have come within the writer's experience.

Some measurements of the resistance of paper have been made by F.
Uppenborn (Centralblatt fuer Electrotechnik, Vol.  xi.  p.  215,
1889).  There is an abstract of the paper also in Wiedemann's
Beiblaetter (1889, vol.  xiii.  P.  711).  Uppenborn examined the
samples of paper under normal conditions as to moisture and obtained
the following results:-

Description of Paper

I

Pressure Intensity

II.

Specific Resistance corresponding to pressures as in Column I. Ohms.

III

Pressure Intensity.

IV.
