for ages, and has thereby become so universally entertained and so
deeply rooted in the minds of females, that even medical men scarcely
venture to question its propriety. My own experience, however, compels
me to declare, that there is not a more erroneous or mischievous
doctrine; and I can most truly affirm, that I never yet witnessed an
instance where protracted lactation had produced any good effect[D],
though I have seen numerous examples (some of which will be introduced
hereafter) where, I believe, it had been the indirect cause of death.

Having thus strongly noticed the impropriety of long continued
suckling, it will, perhaps, be proper to state my opinion as to the
period when this process should terminate. As a general rule, at nine
months after birth the child ought to be entirely weaned; and in no
instance should he be permitted to suck more than ten. In many cases
suckling may be relinquished with advantage (and occasionally it is
absolutely necessary to discontinue it) before the time first above
mentioned; in others, however, it may be protracted beyond it.

I by no means recommend the breast-milk to be at once superseded by
artificial food, but, on the contrary, that the child should be
_gradually_ accustomed to such aliment from a much earlier period; the
proportion of the latter being increased by degrees, while the
breast-milk is diminished in a corresponding ratio. Hence we shall
produce a double advantage; the mother will be benefited as well as the
child--the former, by giving suck less frequently, and in smaller
quantities at a time than usual, will have the secretion of milk
_gradually lessened_, and, therefore all likelihood of inconvenience, as
far as regards herself when the child is entirely weaned, will be
completely prevented; while, on the other hand, the child being
_insensibly estranged_ from the breast, will have become accustomed to
his new food, so that there will be less chance of its disagreeing with
him when it forms his sole support; and thus the danger which is
generally apprehended from weaning will be either materially lessened or
altogether avoided.

The difficulty of bringing up infants by hand, as it is termed, is well
known; but I suspect that the great mortality which has been recorded as
occurring from this source is not inseparable from the practice itself,
but arises mainly from the improper manner in which it is usually
conducted. When it is determined to bring up an infant by hand, the
substitute offered for the mother's milk should as nearly as possible
resemble that fluid; and the child should be constrained to imbibe it in
_the same manner as_ it would _the milk from the maternal breast_; that
is, it should be _sucked_ from a bottle contrived for that purpose,
instead of the child being gorged with it, by means of a large spoon, or
some other equally improper instrument, as is the usual custom. It is a
fact too palpable to be questioned, that the food generally given to
infants brought up by hand is not only administered in an improper
manner, but is also of an improper quality; their tender stomachs are
daily overloaded with _solid_ instead of _liquid_ aliment, and hence
arises the numerous train of evils which, in my opinion, produce the
great mortality just referred to.




CHAPTER II.

_On Lactation, and the Disorders frequently produced in Women by that
process._


There can be no doubt that, speaking generally, a mother is bound to
suckle her children, and that the performance of this duty is no less
conducive to her own health than to the moral and physical welfare of
her offspring; yet there is not a more unfounded doctrine than that
which presumes every woman who is willing to be also capable of
advantageously discharging the important office of a nurse.

If the mother enjoy good health, and the process be not continued too
long, it is likely to produce beneficial effects both in herself and her
infant; but if she be of a very delicate habit--labour under any
dangerous disease--be subject during the period of lactation to great
affliction, or constant mental inquietude--or should the periodical
appearance return, pregnancy occur, or suckling be continued too long,
it may not only prove highly detrimental to herself, but may be the
means of occasioning serious or fatal consequences to her child.

In cases of extreme delicacy of constitution, lactation will often
produce the worst effects. Many young ladies, on becoming mothers, are
incapable of supporting the constant drain to which the wants of their
infants subject them--they lose their good looks, become gradually
weaker, and as their strength declines, their milk is simultaneously
lessened in quantity, and altered in its other properties.

If the suckling be still continued, their debility daily increases,
distressing pains in the back and loins succeed; the patients become
exceedingly nervous, as it is termed, and are unusually susceptible of
ordinary impressions; pain in the head, often of great violence,
follows, which, in some cases, is succeeded by delirium, in others, by
absolute mania. Nor is this the whole catalogue of ills to which
in such cases the unfortunate mother is subjected: the appetite
fails, distressing languor is experienced by day, while copious
perspirations deluge her by night, and dissipate the last remains of
strength--producing a state which may easily be mistaken for, or
terminate in, true pulmonary consumption;--finally, the sight becomes
progressively weaker, until vision is almost destroyed; the eyelids
exude a glutinous secretion, and ophthalmia itself is occasionally
induced.

These are the symptoms too often caused by lactation in delicate or
debilitated habits, even a few months after delivery; the same also are
observed when suckling has been injudiciously protracted beyond the
period to which it should be confined.

A few only of the foregoing symptoms may be noticed, or nearly the whole
may present themselves, in the same patient; and when this happens,
unless the cause which has given rise to them be at once detected, and
appropriate treatment employed, the most serious consequences may be
apprehended.

In these cases, the first step necessary is to discontinue the suckling
altogether: half measures will never answer. Sometimes it is proposed by
the patient, or her friends (more usually the latter), to compromise the
affair by feeding the child partly on spoon meat, and allowing him still
to take the breast, though less frequently than before.

This plan I uniformly object to, for the following reasons:--

1st. Because the mother will not be likely to recover so long as she
continues to suckle at all.

2nd. Because her milk being necessarily of a bad quality, it cannot be
expected that the child will derive benefit from it; but, on the
contrary, there is every probability that his health will suffer by
using diet of such an improper description.

The obvious dependence of the foregoing symptoms upon debility will, of
course, at once suggest to practitioners the nature of the treatment to
be adopted: which should be such as is calculated to invigorate the
system generally--namely, the administration of tonics, &c.

Bark and its various preparations, especially the sulphate of quinine,
with the occasional use of warm aperients (sedulously avoiding the more
violent purgatives), will be found eminently successful; whereas,
cupping at the nape of the neck (which I have seen prescribed for the
headache), and other depletory measures, have proved as manifestly
injurious.

'Every disease productive of great weakness is increased by the state of
the system which follows child-bearing. Of this description are
consumption, dropsy,' &c. In these cases it is evident that the process
of lactation, by adding to the debility already present, must prove
highly injurious, and consequently should be always avoided.

I have already noticed the effects which are produced upon the milk by
the influence of mental emotions on the part of the mother, as well as
by the recurrence of the periodical appearance; and since these are
chiefly injurious to the child, by depraving its sustenance, their
further consideration will be deferred till the next chapter.

With respect to the remaining topic--namely, the occurrence of
miscarriage from suckling--I am convinced that it is by no means an
unfrequent accident, though its real cause is perhaps rarely suspected,
having only met with one patient who considered the mishap in question
to have arisen from keeping her child too long at the breast. Having
already, I trust satisfactorily, explained the manner in which abortion
is produced by the act of suckling, I shall conclude this part of my
subject with the relation of a case that occurred in private practice,
which so strongly corroborates many of the observations in the preceding
and following pages, that I shall offer no apology for its introduction:
more particularly, since the lady herself to whom it refers has
benevolently expressed a wish for its publication, in order that those
who become acquainted with the facts there detailed may be prevented
from undergoing similar unnecessary sufferings:--


CASE.

Mrs. A----, a lady of delicate constitution, about twenty years of age,
three or four months subsequent to the birth of her first child, began
to find her milk gradually lessen in quantity; it had also much changed
from its previous appearance, resembling at the time just stated, a
yellowish, turbid serum. Her child became emaciated; and diarrh[oe]a
supervening, my professional services were required. My advice was, that
the child should be at once weaned, and a suitable wet-nurse, if
possible, procured--neither of which suggestions, as will shortly
appear, were followed. I urged the necessity of this measure more
particularly, because Mrs. A---- was daily getting thinner and weaker;
she also complained of great pain in the head and back, and of an
increasing dimness of sight, which made her fear she should become
blind; but the mother-in-law of my patient being, unfortunately, of
opinion that pregnancy in the latter would not again occur during the
continuance of lactation, recommended that the child, although chiefly
supported upon spoon-meat, should occasionally be allowed to take the
breast; and this plan, notwithstanding the wish of Mrs. A---- to the
