the work of the others of some real use.

His hands molded the materials carefully, lovingly to a pattern that was
set in his mind as a thing to cherish. Day by day his experiments in
their liquid baths took form under his careful modeling. He mixed his
chemicals with the same loving touch, the same careful concentration and
painstaking thoroughness, studying often his notes and analysis charts.

Everything must be just so lest his experiment not turn out perfectly.
He never became exasperated at a failure or a defect that proved to be
the only reward for his faithful endeavors but worked patiently on
toward a goal that he knew would ultimately be his.

Then one day, as the great red sun glowed like an immense red eye
overhead, Kiron stepped back to admire his handiwork. In that instant
the entire wondrous city seemed to breathe a silent prayer as he stood
transfixed by the sight before him. Then it went on as usual, hurrying
noiselessly about its business. The surface cars, empty though they
were, fled swiftly about supported only by the rings of magnetic force
that held them to their designated paths. The gravoships raised from the
tower-dromes to speed silently into the eye of the red sun that was
dying.

"No one now," Kiron thought to himself as he studied his handiwork. Then
he walked unhurriedly to the cabinet in the laboratory corner and took
from it a pair of earphones resembling those of a long forgotten radio
set. Just as unhurriedly, though his mind was filled with turmoil and
his being with excitement, he walked back and connected the earphones to
the box upon his bench. The phones dangled into the liquid bath before
him as he adjusted them to suit his requirements.

Slowly he checked over every step of his experiments before he went
farther. Then, as he proved them for the last time, his hand went slowly
to the small knife switch upon the box at his elbow. Next he threw into
connection the larger switch upon his laboratory wall bringing into his
laboratory the broadcast power of the crysolite city.

The laboratory generators hummed softly, drowning out the quiet hum of
the city outside. As they built up, sending tiny living electrical
impulses over the wires like minute currents that come from the brain,
Kiron sat breathless; his eyes intent.

Closer to his work he bent, watching lovingly, fearful least all might
not be quite right. Then his eyes took on a brighter light as he began
to see the reaction. He knew the messages that he had sent out were
being received and coordinated into a unit that would stir and grow into
intellect.

Suddenly the machine flashed its little warning red light and
automatically snapped off. Kiron twisted quickly in his seat and threw
home the final switch. This, he knew, was the ultimate test. On the
results of the flood of energy impulses that he had set in motion rested
the fulfillment of his success--_or failure_.

He watched with slight misgivings. This had never been accomplished
before. How could it possibly be a success now? Even The Masters had
never quite succeeded at this final test, how could he, only a servant?
