He blinked at me. I couldn't tell whether it meant yes or no.

"When we went to school, you and I--" I hoped my putting us both in the
same age group would tend to mollify him a little, "physics was all
snug, secure, safe, definite. A fact was a fact, and that's all there
was to it. But there's been some changes made. There's the cooerdinate
systems of Einstein, where the relationships of facts can change from
framework to framework. There's the application of multivalued logic to
physics where a fact becomes not a fact any longer. The astronomers talk
about the expanding universe--it's a piker compared to man's expanding
concepts about that universe."

He waited for more. His face seemed to indicate that I was beating
around the bush.

"That all has a bearing on what happened," I assured him. "You have to
understand what was behind the facts before you can understand the facts
themselves. First, we weren't trying to make an antigrav unit at all.
Dr. Auerbach was playing around with a chemical approach to cybernetics.
He made up some goop which he thought would store memory impulses, the
way the brain stores them. He brought a plastic cylinder of it over to
me, so I could discuss it with you. I laid it on my desk while I went on
with my personnel management business at hand."

Old Stone Face opened a humidor and took out a cigar. He lit it slowly
and deliberately and looked at me sharply as he blew out the first puff
of smoke.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The nursery over in the plant had been having trouble with a little
girl, daughter of one of our production women. She'd been throwing
things, setting things on fire. The teachers didn't know how she did it,
she just did it. They sent her to me. I asked her about it. She threw a
tantrum, and when it was all over, Auerbach's plastic cylinder of goop
was trying to fall upward, through the ceiling. That's what happened," I
said.

He looked at his cigar, and looked at me. He waited for me to tie the
facts to the theory. I hesitated, and then tried to reassure myself.
After all, we were in the business of manufacturing computers. The
general manager ought to be able to understand something beyond primary
arithmetic.

"Jennie Malasek was a peculiar child with a peculiar background," I went
on. "Her mother was from the old country, one of the Slav races. There's
the inheritance of a lot of peculiar notions. Maybe she had passed them
on to her daughter. She kept Jennie locked up in their room. The kid
never got out with other children. Children, kept alone, never seeing
anybody, get peculiar notions all by themselves. Who, knows what kind of
a cooerdinate system she built up, or how it worked? Her mother would
come home at night and go about her tasks talking aloud, half to the
daughter, half to herself. 'I really burned that foreman up, today,'
she'd say. Or, 'Oh, boy, was he fired in a hurry!' Or, 'She got herself
thrown out of the place,' things like that."

"So what does that mean, Ralph?" he asked. His switch to my first name
indicated he was trying to work with me instead of pushing me.

"To a child who never knew anything else," I answered, "one who had
never learned to distinguish reality from unreality--as we would define
it from our agreed framework--a special cooerdinate system might be built
up where 'Everybody was up in the air at work, today,' might be taken
literally. Under the old systems of physics that couldn't happen, of
course--it says in the textbooks--but since it has been happening all
through history, in thousands of instances, in the new systems of
multivalued physics we recognize it. Under the old system, we already
had all the major answers, we thought. Now that we've got our smug
certainties knocked out of us, we're just fumbling along, trying to get
some of the answers we thought we had.

"We couldn't make that cylinder activate others. We tried. We're still
trying. In ordinary cybernetics you can have one machine punch a tape
and it can be fed into another machine, but that means you first have to
know how to code and decode a tape mechanically. We don't know how to
code or decode a psi effect. We know the Auerbach cylinder will store a
psi impulse, but we don't know how. So we have to keep working with psi
gifted people, at least until we've established some of the basic laws
governing psi."

I couldn't tell by Henry's face whether I was with him or away from him.
He told me he wanted to think about it, and made a little motion with
his hand that I should leave the room.

I walked through the suite of executive offices and down a sound
rebuffing hallway. The throbbing clatter of manufacture of metallic
parts made a welcome sound as I went through the far doorway into the
factory. I saw a blueprint spread on a foreman's desk as I walked past.
Good old blueprint. So many millimeters from here to there, made of such
and such an alloy, a hole punched here with an allowance of
five-ten-thousandths plus or minus tolerance. Snug, secure, safe. I
wondered if psi could ever be blue-printed. Or suppose you put a hole
here, but when you looked away and then looked back it had moved, or
wasn't there at all?

[Illustration]

Quickly, I got myself into a conversation with a supervisor about the
rising rate of employee turnover in his department. That was something
also snug, secure, safe. All you had to do was figure out human beings.

       *       *       *       *       *

I spent the rest of the morning on such pursuits, working with things I
understood.

On his first rounds of the afternoon, the interoffice messenger brought
me a memorandum from the general manager's office. I opened it with some
misgivings. I was not particularly reassured.

Mr. Grenoble felt he should work with me more closely on the antigrav
project. He understood, from his researches, that the most positive psi
effects were experienced during a seance with a medium. Would I kindly
arrange for the Swami to hold a seance that evening, after office hours,
so that he might analyze the man's methods and procedures to see how
they could fit smoothly into Company Operation. This was not to be
construed as interference in the workings of my department but in the
interests of pursuing the entire matter with diligence and dispatch--

The seance was to be held in my office.

I had had many peculiar conferences in this room--from union leaders
stripping off their coats, throwing them on the floor and stomping on
them; to uplifters who wanted to ban cosmetics on our women employees so
the male employees would not be tempted to think Questionable Thoughts.
I could not recall ever having held a seance before.

My desk had been moved out of the way, over into one corner of the large
room. A round table was brought over from the salesmen's report writing
room (used there more for surreptitious poker playing than for writing
reports) and placed in the middle of my office--on the grounds that it
had no sharp corners to gouge people in their middles if it got to
cavorting about recklessly. In an industrial plant one always has to
consider the matter of safety rules and accident insurance rates.

In the middle of the table there rested, with dark fluid gleaming
through clear plastic cases, six fresh cylinders which Auerbach had
prepared in his laboratory over in the plant.

Auerbach had shown considerable unwillingness to attend the seance; he
pleaded being extra busy with experiments just now, but I gave him that
look which told him I knew he had just been stalling around the last few
months, the same as I had.

If the psi effect had never come out in the first place, there wouldn't
have been any mental conflict. He could have gone on with his processes
of refining, simplifying and increasing the efficiency ratings of his
goop. But this unexpected side effect, the cylinders learning and
demonstrating something he considered basically untrue, had tied his
hands with a hopeless sort of frustration. He would have settled gladly
for a chemical compound which could have added two and two upon request;
but when that compound can learn and demonstrate that there's no such
thing as gravity, teaching it simple arithmetic is like ashes in the
mouth.

I said as much to him. I stood there in his laboratory, leaned up
against a work bench, and risked burning an acid hole in the sleeve of
my jacket just to put over an air of unconcern. He was perched on the
edge of an opposite work bench, swinging his feet, and hiding the
expression in his eyes behind the window's reflection upon his polished
glasses. I said even more.

"You know," I said reflectively, "I'm completely unable to understand
the attitude of supposedly unbiased men of science. Now you take all
that mass of data about psi effects, the odd and unexplainable
happenings, the premonitions, the specific predictions, the accurate
descriptions of far away simultaneously happening events. You take that
whole mountainous mass of data, evidence, phenomena--"

       *       *       *       *       *

A slight turn of his head gave me a glimpse of his eyes behind the
glasses. He looked as if he wished I'd change the subject. In his dry,
undemonstrative way, I think he liked me. Or at least he liked me when I
wasn't trying to make him think about things outside his safe and secure
little framework. But I didn't give in. If men of science are not going
to take up the evidence and work it over, then where are we? And are
they men of science?

"Before Rhine came along, and brought all this down to the level of
laboratory experimentation," I pursued, "how were those things to be
explained? Say a fellow had some unusual powers, things that happened
around him, things he knew without any explanation for knowing them.
I'll tell you. There were two courses open to him. He could express it
in the semantics of spiritism, or he could admit to witchcraft and
sorcery. Take your pick; those were the only two systems of semantics
which had been built up through the ages.

"We've got a third one now--parapsychology. If I had asked you to attend
an experiment in parapsychology, you'd have agreed at once. But when I
ask you to attend a seance, you balk! Man, what difference does it make
what we call it? Isn't it up to us to investigate the evidence wherever
we find it? No matter what kind of semantic debris it's hiding in?"

Auerbach shoved himself down off the bench, and pulled out a beat-up
package of cigarettes.
