their monopoly. But first I want to throw wide the casement in your
minds that opens on the Long View of Things."

Rose Thinker spun twice on her chair and opened her photocells wide. Tin
Philosopher coughed to limber up the diaphragm of his speaker and
continued:

"Ever since the first cave wife boasted to her next-den neighbor about
the superior paleness and fluffiness of her tortillas, mankind has
sought lighter, whiter bread. Indeed, thinkers wiser than myself have
equated the whole upward course of culture with this poignant quest.
Yeast was a wonderful discovery--for its primitive day. Sifting the bran
and wheat germ from the flour was an even more important advance. Early
bleaching and preserving chemicals played their humble parts.

"For a while, barbarous faddists--blind to the deeply spiritual nature
of bread, which is recognized by all great religions--held back our
march toward perfection with their hair-splitting insistence on the
vitamin content of the wheat germ, but their case collapsed when
tasteless colorless substitutes were triumphantly synthesized and
introduced into the loaf, which for flawless purity, unequaled airiness
and sheer intangible goodness was rapidly becoming mankind's supreme
gustatory experience."

[Illustration]

"I wonder what the stuff tastes like," Rose Thinker said out of a clear
sky.

"I wonder what taste tastes like," Tin Philosopher echoed dreamily.
Recovering himself, he continued:

"Then, early in the twenty-first century, came the epochal researches of
Everett Whitehead, Puffyloaf chemist, culminating in his paper 'The
Structural Bubble in Cereal Masses' and making possible the baking of
airtight bread twenty times stronger (for its weight) than steel and of
a lightness that would have been incredible even to the advanced
chemist-bakers of the twentieth century--a lightness so great that,
besides forming the backbone of our own promotion, it has forever since
been capitalized on by our conscienceless competitors of Fairy Bread
with their enduring slogan: 'It Makes Ghost Toast'."

"That's a beaut, all right, that ecto-dough blurb," Rose Thinker
admitted, bugging her photocells sadly. "Wait a sec. How about?--

    "_There'll be bread
    Overhead
    When you're dead--
    It is said._"

       *       *       *       *       *

Phineas T. Gryce wrinkled his nostrils at the pink machine as if he
smelled her insulation smoldering. He said mildly, "A somewhat unhappy
jingle, Rose, referring as it does to the end of the customer as
consumer. Moreover, we shouldn't overplay the figurative 'rises through
the air' angle. What inspired you?"

She shrugged. "I don't know--oh, yes, I do. I was remembering one of the
workers' songs we machines used to chant during the Big Strike--

    "_Work and pray,
    Live on hay.
    You'll get pie
    In the sky
    When you die--
    It's a lie!_

"I don't know why we chanted it," she added. "We didn't want pie--or
hay, for that matter. And machines don't pray, except Tibetan prayer
wheels."

Phineas T. Gryce shook his head. "Labor relations are another topic we
should stay far away from. However, dear Rose, I'm glad you keep trying
to outjingle those dirty crooks at Fairy Bread." He scowled, turning
back his attention to Tin Philosopher. "I get whopping mad, Old Machine,
whenever I hear that other slogan of theirs, the discriminatory
one--'Untouched by Robot Claws.' Just because they employ a few filthy
androids in their factories!"

Tin Philosopher lifted one of his own sets of bright talons. "Thanks,
P.T. But to continue my historical resume, the next great advance in the
baking art was the substitution of purified carbon dioxide, recovered
from coal smoke, for the gas generated by yeast organisms indwelling in
the dough and later killed by the heat of baking, their corpses
remaining _in situ_. But even purified carbon dioxide is itself a rather
repugnant gas, a product of metabolism whether fast or slow, and forever
associated with those life processes which are obnoxious to the
fastidious."

Here the machine shuddered with delicate clinkings. "Therefore, we of
Puffyloaf are taking today what may be the ultimate step toward purity:
we are aerating our loaves with the noble gas helium, an element which
remains virginal in the face of all chemical temptations and whose slim
molecules are eleven times lighter than obese carbon dioxide--yes, noble
uncontaminable helium, which, if it be a kind of ash, is yet the ash
only of radioactive burning, accomplished or initiated entirely on the
Sun, a safe 93 million miles from this planet. Let's have a cheer for
the helium loaf!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Without changing expression, Phineas T. Gryce rapped the table thrice in
solemn applause, while the others bowed their heads.

"Thanks, T.P.," P.T. then said. "And now for the Moment of Truth. Miss
Winterly, how is the helium loaf selling?"
