
The new man arose. "I want you to know that I appreciate the trust you
have put in me."

"Sure, sure," the chief said, but it was not unfriendly. "Do you like
the job?"

"It is a great opportunity," Jordan said, and he meant it.

"What do you think about what we do to them after we capture them?"

The new man shrugged. "I suppose it's the only thing to do. It's not as
though they were human."

"Yeah," the chief said. "I guess so. Anyway, good luck."

Jordan arose and shook the chief's hand. However, just as he was
stepping through the door, his superior asked him another question. "Did
you know that one of them stutters?"

He turned back, puzzled. "Stutters? Why should he stutter? How could
that be?"

The chief shook his head and started cleaning out his pipe.

"I don't know for sure. You'd better get started." He sat back in his
seat and watched the back of the new man as he disappeared through the
doorway.

That young fellow has a lot to learn, he thought to himself. But even
so, maybe he's better off than I am. Maybe I've had too much experience.
Maybe too much experience puts you back where you started from. You've
done the wrong thing so many times and profited so many times from your
mistakes that you see errors and tragedies in everything.

He was depressed, and he did something that usually made him feel better
again. He reached under the edge of his desk and pulled a little switch
that made the galactic map on the wall light up in three-dimensional
depth, then he swung around in his chair so he could see it. Eight
thousand planets that his race had conquered, eight thousand planets
hundreds of light-years apart. Looking at the map gave him a sense of
accomplishment and pride in humanity which even a stupid war and its
aftermath could not completely destroy.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jon Hall, the fugitive, walked along the highway leading south from the
rocket port. There was very little traffic, only an occasional delivery
truck carrying meat or groceries. The real highway was half a mile
overhead where the copters shuttled back and forth up and down the state
in neat orderly layers.

The seventeen were inside his head, looking through his eyes, and
feasting on the blueness of the sky, and the rich green vegetation that
covered the fertile fields. From time to time they talked to him, giving
advice, asking questions, or making comments, but mostly they looked,
each knowing that the hours of their sight might be very few.

After walking a while, Hall became aware of someone's footsteps behind
him. He stopped suddenly in apprehension and swung around. A dozen or so
paces away was a red-headed boy of about ten or eleven, dressed in
plastic overalls, and carrying a basket of ripe raspberries. The stains
about his mouth showed that not all the raspberries were carried in the
basket.

Hall's anxiety faded, and he was glad to see the child. He had hoped to
meet someone who was not so old that they would become suspicious, but
old enough that they might give him directions.

He waited for the lad to catch up.

"Hello," the boy said. "I've been walking behind you most of a mile, but
I guess you didn't hear me."

"It looks as though you've been p-p-picking raspberries," Hall said.

"Yup. My dad owns a patch by the river. Want some?" He proffered the
basket.

"No, thank you," Hall answered. He resumed his walk up the highway with
the boy at his side.

"D-do you live around here," he asked.

"Just up the road a ways." The lad studied his companion for a minute.
"You stutter, don't you?"

"A little."

"There was a boy in my class who used to stutter. The teacher said it
was because he thought so far ahead of what he said he got all tangled
up." The boy reached in his basket for a handful of berries and chewed
them thoughtfully. "She was always after him to talk slower, but I guess
it didn't do any good. He still stutters."

"Is there a p-power plant around here?" Hall asked. "You know, where the
electricity comes from."

"You mean the place where they have the nu-nuclear fission"--the boy
stumbled on the unfamiliar word, but got it out--"and they don't let you
in because you get poisoned or something?"

"Yes, I think that's it."

"There are two places. There's one over at Red Mountain and another over
at Ballarat."

"Where are they?"

"Well--" The boy stopped to think. "Red Mountain's straight ahead, maybe
ten miles, and Ballarat's over there"--he pointed west across the orange
groves--"maybe fifteen miles."

"Good," Hall said. "Good." And he felt glad inside of himself. Maybe it
could be done, he thought.

       *       *       *       *       *

They walked along together. Hall sometimes listening to the chattering
of the boy beside him, sometimes listening to and answering the distant
voices of the seventeen. Abruptly, a few hundred yards before the house
that the boy had pointed out as his father's, a small sports car whipped
down the highway, coming on them almost without warning. The lad jumped
sideways, and Hall, to avoid touching him, stepped off the concrete
road. His leg sank into the earth up to the mid-calf. He pulled it out
as quickly as he could.

The boy was looking at the fast retreating rear of the sports car.

"Gee," he said. "I sure didn't see them coming." Then he caught sight of
the deep hole alongside the road, and he stared at it. "Gosh, you sure
made a footprint there," he said wonderingly.

"The ground was soft," Hall said. "C-come along."

But instead of following, the boy walked over to the edge of the road
and stared into the hole. He tentatively stamped on the earth around it.
"This ground isn't soft," he said. "It's hard as a rock." He turned and
looked at Hall with big eyes.

Hall came close to the boy and took hold of his jacket. "D-don't pay any
attention to it, son. I just stepped into a soft spot."

The boy tried to pull away. "I know who you are," he said. "I heard
about you on the teledepth."

Suddenly, in the way of children, panic engulfed him and he flung his
basket away and threw himself back and forth, trying to tear free. "Let
me go," he screamed. "Let me go. Let me go."

"Just l-listen to me, son," Hall pleaded. "Just listen to me. I won't
hurt you."

But the boy was beyond reasoning. Terror stricken, he screamed at the
top of his voice, using all his little strength to escape.

"If you p-promise to l-listen to me, I'll let you go," Hall said.

"I promise," the boy sobbed, still struggling.

But the moment Hall let go of his coat, he tore away and ran as fast as
he could over the adjacent field.

"W-wait--don't run away," Hall shouted. "I won't hurt you. Stay where
you are. I couldn't follow you anyway. I'd sink to my hips."

The logic of the last sentence appealed to the frightened lad. He
hesitated and then stopped and turned around, a hundred feet or so from
the highway.

"L-listen," said Hall earnestly. "The teledepths are wr-wrong. They
d-didn't tell you the t-truth about us. I d-don't want to hurt anyone.
All I n-need is a few hours. D-don't tell anyone for j-just a few hours
