laughed and turned away, meeting Sandra in the corridor. "Okay, chick,
take 'em away. We'll cover you. Luck, girl."

And in the control room, to Sawtelle, "Needle-beam cover, please; set
for minimum aperture and lethal blast. But no firing, Captain Sawtelle,
until I give the order."

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Perseus_ was surrounded by hundreds of natives. They were all
adult, all naked and about equally divided as to sex. They were
friendly; most enthusiastically so.

"Jarve!" Sandra squealed. "They're _telepathic_. Very strongly so! I
never imagined--I never felt anything like it!"

"Any rough stuff?" Hilton demanded.

"Oh, no. Just the opposite. They love us ... in a way that's simply
indescribable. I don't like this telepathy business ... not clear ...
foggy, diffuse ... this woman is _sure_ I'm her long-lost
great-great-a-hundred-times grandmother or something--_You!_ Slow down.
Take it _easy_! They want us all to come out here and live with ... no,
not _with_ them, but each of us alone in a whole house with them to wait
on us! But first, they all want to come aboard...."

"_What?_" Hilton yelped. "But are you _sure_ they're friendly?"

"Positive, chief."

"How about you, Alex?"

"We're all sure, Jarve. No question about it."

"Bring two of them aboard. A man and a woman."

"You won't bring _any_!" Sawtelle thundered. "Hilton, I had enough of
your stupid, starry-eyed, ivory-domed blundering long ago, but this
utterly idiotic brainstorm of letting enemy aliens aboard us ends all
civilian command. Call your people back aboard or I will bring them in
by force!"

"Very well, sir. Sandy, tell the natives that a slight delay has become
necessary and bring your party aboard."

The Navy officers smiled--or grinned--gloatingly; while the scientists
stared at their director with expressions ranging from surprise to
disappointment and disgust. Hilton's face remained set, expressionless,
until Sandra and her party had arrived.

"Captain Sawtelle," he said then, "I thought that you and I had settled
in private the question or who is in command of Project Theta Orionis at
destination. We will now settle it in public. Your opinion of me is now
on record, witnessed by your officers and by my staff. My opinion of
you, which is now being similarly recorded and witnessed, is that you
are a hidebound, mentally ossified Navy mule; mentally and
psychologically unfit to have any voice in any such mission as this. You
will now agree on this recording and before these witnesses, to obey my
orders unquestioningly or I will now unload all Bureau of Science
personnel and equipment onto this planet and send you and the _Perseus_
back to Terra with the doubly-sealed record of this episode posted to
the Advisory Board. Take your choice."

Eyes locked, and under Hilton's uncompromising stare Sawtelle weakened.
He fidgeted; tried three times--unsuccessfully--to blare defiance. Then,
"Very well sir," he said, and saluted.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Thank you, sir," Hilton said, then turned to his staff. "Okay, Sandy,
go ahead."

Outside the control room door, "Thank God you don't play poker, Jarve!"
Karns gasped. "We'd all owe you all the pay we'll ever get!"

"You think it was the bluff, yes?" de Vaux asked. "Me, I think no. Name
of a name of a name! I was wondering with unease what life would be like
on this so-alien planet!"

"You didn't need to wonder, Tiny," Hilton assured him. "It was in the
bag. He's incapable of abandonment."

Beverly Bell, the van der Moen twins and Temple Bells all stared at
Hilton in awe; and Sandra felt much the same way.

"But suppose he _had_ called you?" Sandra demanded.

"Speculating on the impossible is unprofitable," he said.

"Oh, you're the most _exasperating_ thing!" Sandra stamped a foot.
"Don't you--_ever_--answer a question intelligibly?"

"When the question is meaningless, chick, I can't."

At the lock Temple Bells, who had been hanging back, cocked an eyebrow
at Hilton and he made his way to her side.

"What was it you started to say back there, boss?"

"Oh, yes. That we should see each other oftener."

"That's what I was hoping you were going to say." She put her hand under
his elbow and pressed his arm lightly, fleetingly, against her side.
"That would be indubitably the fondest thing I could be of."

He laughed and gave her arm a friendly squeeze. Then he studied her
again, the most baffling member of his staff. About five feet six.
Lithe, hard, trained down fine--as a tennis champion, she would be.
Stacked--_how_ she was stacked! Not as beautiful as Sandra or Teddy ...
but with an ungodly lot of something that neither of them had ... nor
any other woman he had ever known.

"Yes, I am a little difficult to classify," she said quietly, almost
reading his mind.

"That's the understatement of the year! But I'm making some progress."

"Such as?" This was an open challenge.

"Except possibly Teddy, the best brain aboard."

"That isn't true, but go ahead."

"You're a powerhouse. A tightly organized, thoroughly integrated,
smoothly functioning, beautifully camouflaged Juggernaut. A reasonable
facsimile of an irresistible force."

"My God, Jarvis!" That had gone deep.

"Let me finish my analysis. You aren't head of your department because
you don't want to be. You fooled the top psychs of the Board. You've
been running ninety per cent submerged because you can work better that
way and there's no glory-hound blood in you."

She stared at him, licking her lips. "I knew your mind was a razor, but
I didn't know it was a diamond drill, too. That seals your doom, boss,
unless ... no, you can't _possibly_ know why I'm here."

"Why, of course I do."

"You just think you do. You see, I've been in love with you ever since,
as a gangling, bony, knobby-kneed kid, I listened to your first
doctorate disputation. Ever since then, my purpose in life has been to
land you."




III


"But listen!" he exclaimed. "I _can't_, even if I want...."

"Of course you can't." Pure deviltry danced in her eyes. "You're the
Director. It wouldn't be proper. But it's Standard Operating Procedure
for simple, innocent, unsophisticated little country girls like me to go
completely overboard for the boss."

"But you can't--you _mustn't_!" he protested in panic.

Temple Bells was getting plenty of revenge for the shocks he had given
her. "I can't? Watch me!" She grinned up at him, her eyes still dancing.
"Every chance I get, I'm going to hug your arm like I did a minute ago.
And you'll take hold of my forearm, like you did! That can be taken,
you see, as either: One, a reluctant acceptance of a mildly distasteful
but not quite actionable situation, or: Two, a blocking move to keep me
from climbing up you like a squirrel!"

"Confound it, Temple, you _can't_ be serious!"

"Can't I?" She laughed gleefully. "Especially with half a dozen of those
other cats watching? Just wait and see, boss!"

Sandra and her two guests came aboard. The natives looked around; the
man at the various human men, the woman at each of the human women. The
woman remained beside Sandra; the man took his place at Hilton's left,
looking up--he was a couple of inches shorter than Hilton's six feet
one--with an air of ... of _expectancy_!

"Why this arrangement, Sandy?" Hilton asked.

"Because we're tops. It's your move, Jarve. What's first?"

"Uranexite. Come along, Sport. I'll call you that until ..."

"Laro," the native said, in a deep resonant bass voice. He hit himself a
blow on the head that would have floored any two ordinary men. "Sora,"
he announced, striking the alien woman a similar blow.

"Laro and Sora, I would like to have you look at our uranexite, with
the idea of refueling our ship. Come with me, please?"

Both nodded and followed him. In the engine room he pointed at the
engines, then to the lead-blocked labyrinth leading to the fuel holds.
"Laro, do you understand 'hot'? Radioactive?"

Laro nodded--and started to open the heavy lead door!

"Hey!" Hilton yelped. "That's hot!" He seized Laro's arm to pull him
away--and got the shock of his life. Laro weighed at least five hundred
pounds! And the guy _still_ looked human!

Laro nodded again and gave himself a terrific thump on the chest. Then
he glanced at Sora, who stepped away from Sandra. He then went into the
hold and came out with two fuel pellets in his hand, one of which he
tossed to Sora. That is, the motion looked like a toss, but the pellet
traveled like a bullet. Sora caught it unconcernedly and both natives
flipped the pellets into their mouths. There was a half minute of
rock-crusher crunching; then both natives opened their mouths.

The pellets had been pulverized and swallowed.

Hilton's voice rang out. "Poynter! How _can_ these people be
non-radioactive after eating a whole fuel pellet apiece?"

Poynter tested both natives again. "Cold," he reported. "Stone cold. No
background even. Play _that_ on your harmonica!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Laro nodded, perfectly matter-of-factly, and in Hilton's mind there
formed a picture. It was not clear, but it showed plainly enough a long
line of aliens approaching the _Perseus_. Each carried on his or her
shoulder a lead container holding two hundred pounds of Navy Regulation
fuel pellets. A standard loading-tube was sealed into place and every
fuel-hold was filled.

This picture, Laro indicated plainly, could become reality any time.

Sawtelle was notified and came on the run. "No fuel is coming aboard
without being tested!" he roared.

"Of course not. But it'll pass, for all the tea in China. You haven't
had a ten per cent load of fuel since you were launched. You can fill up
or not--the fuel's here--just as you say."

"If they can make Navy standard, of course we want it."

The fuel arrived. Every load tested well above standard. Every fuel hold
was filled to capacity, with no leakage and no emanation. The natives
who had handled the stuff did not go away, but gathered in the
engine-room; and more and more humans trickled in to see what was going
on.

Sawtelle stiffened. "What's going on over there, Hilton?"

"I don't know; but let's let 'em go for a minute. I want to learn about
these people and they've got me stopped cold."

"You aren't the only one. But if they wreck that Mayfield it'll cost you
over twenty thousand dollars."

"Okay." The captain and director watched, wide eyed.

Two master mechanics had been getting ready to re-fit a tube--a job
requiring both strength and skill. The tube was very heavy and made of
superefract. The machine--the Mayfield--upon which the work was to be
done, was extremely complex.

Two of the aliens had brushed the mechanics--very gently--aside and were
doing their work for them. Ignoring the hoist, one native had picked the
tube up and was holding it exactly in place on the Mayfield. The other,
hands moving faster than the eye could follow, was locking
it--micrometrically precise and immovably secure--into place.

"How about this?" one of the mechanics asked of his immediate superior.
"If we throw 'em out, how do we do it?"

By a jerk of the head, the non-com passed the buck to a commissioned
officer, who relayed it up the line to Sawtelle, who said, "Hilton,
_no_body can run a Mayfield without months of training. They'll wreck it
and it'll cost you ... but I'm getting curious myself. Enough so to take
half the damage. Let 'em go ahead."

"How _about_ this, Mike?" one of the machinists asked of his fellow.
"I'm going to _like_ this, what?"

"Ya-as, my deah Chumley," the other drawled, affectedly. "My man
relieves me of _so_ much uncouth effort."

The natives had kept on working. The Mayfield was running. It had always
howled and screamed at its work, but now it gave out only a smooth and
even hum. The aliens had adjusted it with unhuman precision; they were
one with it as no human being could possibly be. And every mind present
knew that those aliens were, at long, long last, fulfilling their
destiny and were, in that fulfillment, supremely happy. After tens of
thousands of cycles of time they were doing a job for their adored,
their revered and beloved MASTERS.

That was a stunning shock; but it was eclipsed by another.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I am sorry, Master Hilton," Laro's tremendous bass voice boomed out,
"that it has taken us so long to learn your Masters' language as it now
is. Since you left us you have changed it radically; while we, of
course, have not changed it at all."

"I'm sorry, but you're mistaken," Hilton said. "We are merely visitors.
We have never been here before; nor, as far as we know, were any of our
ancestors ever here."

"You need not test us, Master. We have kept your trust. Everything has
been kept, changelessly the same, awaiting your return as you ordered so
long ago."

"Can you read my mind?" Hilton demanded.

"Of course; but Omans can not read in Masters' minds anything except
what Masters want Omans to read."

"Omans?" Harkins asked. "Where did you Omans and your masters come from?
Originally?"

"As you know, Master, the Masters came originally from Arth. They
populated Ardu, where we Omans were developed. When the Stretts drove us
from Ardu, we all came to Ardry, which was your home world until you
left it in our care. We keep also this, your half of the Fuel World, in
trust for you."

"Listen, Jarve!" Harkins said, tensely. "Oman-human. Arth-Earth.
Ardu-Earth Two. Ardry-Earth Three. You can't laugh them off ... but
there never _was_ an Atlantis!"

"This is getting no better fast. We need a full staff meeting. You,
too, Sawtelle, and your best man. We need all the brains the _Perseus_
can muster."

"You're right. But first, get those naked women out of here. It's bad
enough, having women aboard at all, but this ... my men are _spacemen_,
mister."

Laro spoke up. "If it is the Masters' pleasure to keep on testing us, so
be it. We have forgotten nothing. A dwelling awaits each Master, in
which each will be served by Omans who will know the Master's desires
without being told. Every desire. While we Omans have no biological
urges, we are of course highly skilled in relieving tensions and derive
as much pleasure from that service as from any other."

Sawtelle broke the silence that followed. "Well, for the men--" He
hesitated. "Especially on the ground ... well, talking in mixed company,
you know, but I think ..."

"Think nothing of the mixed company, Captain Sawtelle," Sandra said. "We
women are scientists, not shrinking violets. We are accustomed to
discussing the facts of life just as frankly as any other facts."

Sawtelle jerked a thumb at Hilton, who followed him out into the
corridor. "I _have_ been a Navy mule," he said. "I admit now that I'm
out-maneuvered, out-manned, and out-gunned."

"I'm just as baffled--at present--as you are, sir. But my training has
been aimed specifically at the unexpected, while yours has not."

"That's letting me down easy, Jarve." Sawtelle smiled--the first time
the startled Hilton had known that the hard, tough old spacehound
_could_ smile. "What I wanted to say is, lead on. I'll follow you
through force-field and space-warps."

"Thanks, skipper. And by the way, I erased that record yesterday." The
two gripped hands; and there came into being a relationship that was to
become a lifelong friendship.

       *       *       *       *       *
