the level of the Moon's surface, ranges from 10,000 to 20,000 feet.
Mountain rings, ring plains, and crater plains resemble those already
described, but are on a smaller scale; the floors of the larger ones are
frequently occupied by craters and craterlets. The latter exist in large
numbers, and some portions of the Moon's surface appear honeycombed with
them, the smaller craters resting on the sides of larger ones and
occupying the bottoms of the more extensive areas. There is no kind of
formation on the Earth's surface that can be compared with these crater
mountains, which indicate that the Moon was at one time a fiery globe
convulsed by internal forces which found an outlet in the numerous
volcanoes scattered over her surface.

The most remarkable of these volcanic mountains have been named after
distinguished men. (1) Copernicus is one of the most imposing; its
crater is 56 miles in diameter, and situated at its centre is a mountain
with six peaks 2,400 feet in height. The ring by which it is surrounded
rises 11,000 feet above the floor of the crater, and consists of
terraces believed to have been created by the partial congelation and
periodic subsidence of a lake of molten lava which occupied the enclosed
area.

(2) Tycho is one of the most magnificent and perfect of lunar volcanoes,
and is also remarkable as being a centre from which, when the Moon is
full, there radiates a number of bright streaks which extend across the
lunar surface, over mountain and valley, through ring and crater, for
many hundreds of miles. Their nature is unknown, and nothing resembling
them is found on the Earth. Tycho has a diameter of 50 miles and a
depth of 17,000 feet. The peak which rises from the floor of the crater
attains a height of 6,000 feet, and the rampart consists of a series of
terraces which give variety to the appearance of the inner wall. The
surface of the Moon round Tycho is honeycombed with small volcanoes.

(3) Clavius is one of the most extensive of the walled plains; it has a
diameter of 142 miles and an area of 16,500 square miles. The rocky
annulus which surrounds it is very lofty and precipitous, and at one
point reaches a height of 17,300 feet. Upwards of 90 craters have been
counted within this space, one of the peaks attaining to an elevation of
24,000 feet above the level floor of the plain. It is believed that the
lowest depths of this wild and precipitous region are never penetrated
by sunlight, they are so overshadowed by towering crag and fell which
intercept the solar rays; and, as there is no atmosphere to cause
reflection, they are consequently enveloped in perpetual darkness.

(4) Plato has a diameter of about 60 miles and an area of 2,700 square
miles; its central peak rises to a height of 7,300 feet. It has an
irregular rampart which is broken up into terraces averaging about 4,000
feet high; three cones, each with an elevation of from 7,000 to 9,000
feet, rest on its western border.

(5) Theophilus is the deepest of the visible craters on the Moon. It has
a diameter of 64 miles, and the inner edge of the ring rises from the
level floor to a height ranging from 14,000 to 18,000 feet. A group of
mountains occupies the centre of the area, the highest peak of which
reaches an elevation of 5,200 feet. Cyrillus and Catharina, two adjacent
craters, are each about 16,000 feet deep and connected by a wide valley.

(6) Aristarchus is the brightest spot on the Moon, and appears almost
dazzling in the telescope. The crater has a diameter of 42 miles, the
centre of which is occupied by a steep mountain. The rampart on the
western side rises to a height of 7,500 feet, on the east it becomes a
plateau which connects it with a smaller crater called Herodotus. Bright
streaks radiate from Aristarchus when there is full moon, and extend for
a considerable distance over the surface of the orb.

Though the face of the Moon has been carefully scanned for two centuries
and a half, and selenographers have mapped and delineated her features
with the utmost accuracy and precision, yet no perceptible change of a
reliable character has been perceived to occur on any part of the orb.
The surface of the hemisphere directed towards the Earth appears to be
an alternation of desert plains, craggy wildernesses, and extinct
volcanoes--a region of desolation unoccupied by any living thing, and
'upon which the light of life has never dawned.' Owing to the absence of
an atmosphere, there is neither diffuse daylight nor twilight on the
Moon. Every portion of the lunar surface not exposed to the Sun's rays
is shrouded in darkness, and black shadows can be observed fringing
prominences of silvery whiteness. If the Moon were enveloped in an
atmosphere similar to that which surrounds the Earth, the reflection and
diffusion of light among the minute particles of watery vapour which
permeate it would give rise to a gradual transition from light to
darkness; the lunar surface would be visible when not illumined by the
direct rays of the Sun, and before sunrise and after sunset, dawn and
twilight would occur as upon the Earth. But upon the Moon there is no
dawn, and the darkness of night envelops the orb until the appearance of
the edge of the Sun's disc above the horizon, then his dazzling rays
illumine the summits and loftiest peaks of the lunar mountains whilst
yet their sides and bases are wrapped in deep gloom. Since the pace of
the Sun across the lunar heavens is 28 times slower than it is with us,
there is continuous sunshine on the Moon for 304 hours, and this long
day--equal to about a fortnight of our time--is succeeded by a night of
similar duration. As there is no atmosphere overhead to diffuse or
reflect the light, the Sun shines in a pitch-black sky, and at lunar
noonday the planets and constellations can be seen displaying a
brilliancy of greater intensity than can be perceived on Earth during
the darkest night. Every portion of the Moon's surface is bleak, bare,
and untouched by any softening influences. No gentle gale ever sweeps
down her valleys or disturbs the dead calm that hangs over this world;
no cloud ever tempers the fierce glare of the Sun that pours down his
unmitigated rays from a sky of inky blackness; no refreshing shower ever
falls upon her arid mountains and plains; no sound ever breaks the
profound stillness that reigns over this realm of solitude and
desolation.

[Illustration: A PORTION OF THE MOON'S SURFACE]

As might be expected, Milton makes frequent allusion to the Moon in
'Paradise Lost,' and does not fail to set forth the distinctive charms
associated with the unrivalled queen of the firmament. The majority of
poets would most likely regard a description of evening as incomplete
without an allusion to the Moon. Milton has adhered to this sentiment,
as may be perceived in the following lines:--

                                    till the Moon,
    Rising in clouded majesty, at length
    Apparent queen, unveiled her peerless light,
    And o'er the dark her silver mantle threw.--iv. 606-609.

                                        now reigns
    Full-orbed the Moon, and with more pleasing light,
    Shadowy sets off the face of things.--v. 41-43.

The association of the Moon with the nocturnal revels and dances of
elves and fairies is felicitously expressed in the following passage:--

                                or faery elves,
    Whose midnight revels, by a forest side
    Or fountain, some belated peasant sees,
    Or dreams he sees, while overhead the Moon
    Sits arbitress, and nearer to the Earth
    Wheels her pale course.--i. 781-86.

In contrast with this, we have Milton's description of the Moon when
affected by the demoniacal practices of the 'night-hag' who was believed
to destroy infants for the sake of drinking their blood, and applying
their mangled limbs to the purposes of incantation. The legend is of
Scandinavian origin and the locality Lapland:--

    Nor uglier follow the night-hag, when called
    In secret, riding through the air she comes,
    Lured with the smell of infant blood, to dance
    With Lapland witches, while the labouring Moon
    Eclipses at their charms.--ii. 662-66.

In his description of the massive shield carried by Satan, the poet
compares it with the full moon:--

                                his ponderous shield
    Ethereal temper, massy, large, and round,
    Behind him cast. The broad circumference
    Hung on his shoulders like the Moon.--i. 284-87.

The phases displayed by the Moon in her monthly journey round the Earth,
and which lend a variety of charm to the appearances presented by the
orb, are poetically described by Milton in the following lines:--

                      but there the neighbouring Moon
    (So call that opposite fair star) her aid
    Timely interposes, and her monthly round
    Still ending, still renewing, through mid-Heaven
    With borrowed light her countenance triform
    Hence fills and empties, to enlighten the Earth,
    And in her pale dominion checks the night.--iii. 726-32.

It is interesting to observe how aptly Milton describes the subdued
illumination of the Moon's reflected light, as compared with the
brilliant radiance of the blazing Sun, and how the distinguishing glory
peculiar to each orb is appropriately set forth in the various passages
in which they are described; their contrasted splendour enhancing rather
than detracting from the grandeur and beauty belonging to each.


THE PLANET EARTH[14]

No lovelier planet circles round the Sun than the planet Earth, with her
oceans and continents, her mountains, valleys, rivers, lakes, and
plains; surrounded by heaven's azure, radiant with the sunlight of her
day and adorned by night with countless sparkling points of gold. This
beautiful world, the abode of MAN, is of paramount importance to us, and
is the only part of the universe of which we have any direct knowledge.

The Earth may be regarded as one of the Sun's numerous family, and is
situated third in order from the refulgent orb, round which it revolves
in an elliptical orbit at a mean distance of 92,800,000 miles. The Earth
is nearest to the Sun at the end of December, and furthest away at the
beginning of July; the difference between those distances is 3,250,000
miles--the extent of the eccentricity of the planet's orbit. The figure
of the Earth is that of an oblate spheroid; it is slightly flattened at
the poles and bulges at the equator. Its polar or shortest diameter is
7,899 miles, its equatorial diameter is 7,926 miles--greater than the
other by 27 miles. The circumference of the Earth at the equator is
24,899 miles, and the total area of its surface is 197,000,000 square
miles. Its mean density is 5-1/2 times greater than that of water.

The two principal motions performed by the Earth are: (1) Rotation on
its axis; (2) its annual revolution round the Sun. The Earth always
rotates in the same manner, and in the same direction, from west to
east. As the axis of rotation corresponds with the shortest diameter of
the planet, it affords strong evidence that the Earth assumed its
present shape whilst rapidly rotating round its axis when in a fluid or
plastic condition. This would accord with the nebular hypothesis. The
ends of the Earth's axis are called the poles of the Earth; one is the
north, the other the south pole. The north pole is directed towards a
star in the Lesser Bear called the Pole Star. The south pole is directed
to a corresponding opposite part of the heavens. The Earth's axis is
inclined 63 deg. 33' to the plane of the ecliptic, and is always directed to
the same point in the heavens. The Earth accomplishes a revolution on
its axis in 23 hours 56 minutes 4 seconds mean solar time, which is the
length of the sidereal day. This rate of rotation is invariable. At the
equator, where the circumference of the globe exceeds 24,000 miles, the
velocity of a point on its surface is upwards of 1,000 miles an hour,
but, as the poles are approached, the tangential velocity diminishes,
and at those points it is entirely absent. The Earth accomplishes a
revolution of her orbit in 365 days 6 hours 9 minutes; in her journey
round the Sun she travels a circuit of 580,000,000 miles at an average
pace of 66,000 miles an hour. The Earth has other slight motions called
_perturbations_, which are produced by the gravitational attraction of
other members of the solar system. The most important of these is
Precession of the Equinoxes, which is caused by the attraction of the
Sun, Moon, and planets, on the protuberant equatorial region of the
globe. This attraction has a tendency to turn the Earth's axis at right
angles to her orbit, but it only results in the slow rotation of the
pole of the equator round that of the ecliptic, which is occurring at
the rate of 1 deg. in 70 years, and will require a period of 25,868 years to
complete an entire revolution of the heavens.

The spot on Earth round which is centred the chief interest in Milton's
poem is Paradise, which was situated in the east of Eden, a district of
Central Asia. It was here where God ordained that man should first
dwell--a place created for his enjoyment and delight. Satan, after his
soliloquy on Mount Niphates, directs his way to Paradise, and arrives
first in Eden, where he beholds from a distance the Happy Garden--

    So on he fares, and to the border comes
    Of Eden, where delicious Paradise,
    Now nearer, crowns with her enclosure green,
    As with a rural mound, the champain head
    Of a steep wilderness, whose hairy sides
    With thicket overgrown, grotesque and wild,
    Access denied; and overhead upgrew
    Insuperable highth of loftiest shade,
    Cedar, and pine, and fir, and branching palm,
    A sylvan scene, and, as the ranks ascend,
    Shade above shade, a woody theatre
    Of stateliest view. Yet higher than their tops
    The verdurous wall of Paradise up-sprung;
    Which to our general sire gave prospect large
    Into his nether empire neighbouring round.
    And higher than that wall, a circling row
    Of goodliest trees, loaden with fairest fruit,
    Blossoms and fruits at once of golden hue,
    Appeared, with gay enamelled colours mixed;
    On which the Sun more glad impressed his beams
    Than in fair evening cloud, or humid bow,
    When God hath showered the Earth: so lovely seemed
    That landskip. And of pure now purer air
    Meets his approach, and to the heart inspires
    Vernal delight and joy, able to drive
    All sadness but despair. Now gentle gales,
    Fanning their odoriferous wings, dispense
    Native perfumes, and whisper whence they stole
    Those balmy spoils.--iv. 131-59.

Satan, having gained admission to the Garden by overleaping the tangled
thicket of shrubs and bushes which formed an impenetrable barrier and
prevented any access to the enclosure within, he flew up on to the Tree
of Life--

    Beneath him, with new wonder, now he views,
    To all delight of human sense exposed,
    In narrow room Nature's whole wealth; yea, more!--
    A Heaven on Earth: for blissful Paradise
    Of God the garden was, by Him in the east
    Of Eden planted, Eden stretched her line
    From Auran eastward to the royal towers
    Of great Seleucia, built by Grecian kings,
    Or where the sons of Eden long before
    Dwelt in Telassar. In this pleasant soil
    His far more pleasant garden God ordained.
    Out of the fertile ground he caused to grow
    All trees of noblest kind for sight, smell, taste;
    And all amid them stood the Tree of Life,
    High eminent, blooming ambrosial fruit
    Of vegetable gold; and next to life,
    Our death, the Tree of Knowledge, grew fast by--
    Knowledge of good, bought dear by knowing ill.
    Southward through Eden went a river large,
    Nor changed his course, but through the shaggy hill
    Passed underneath ingulfed; for God had thrown
    That mountain, as his garden mould, high raised
    Upon the rapid current, which, through veins
    Of porous earth with kindly thirst up-drawn,
    Rose a fresh fountain, and with many a rill
    Watered the garden; thence united fell
    Down the steep glade, and met the nether flood,
    Which from his darksome passage now appears,
    And now, divided into four main streams,
    Runs diverse, wandering many a famous realm
    And country whereof here needs no account;
    But rather to tell how, if Art could tell
    How, from that sapphire fount the crisped brooks,
    Boiling on orient-pearl and sands of gold,
    With mazy error under pendent shades
    Ran nectar, visiting each plant, and fed
    Flowers worthy of Paradise, which not nice Art
    In beds and curious knots, but Nature boon
    Poured forth profuse on hill, and dale, and plain,
