lord?_"

Nehmon's eyes widened. "Because we have no choice," he said. "We must
run or be killed. You know that. You've seen the records, you've been
taught."

"Oh, yes, I know what I've been taught. I've been taught that eons ago
our remote ancestors fought the Hunters, and lost, and fled, and were
pursued. But why do we keep running? Time after time we've been
cornered, and we've turned and fled. _Why?_ Even animals know that when
they're cornered they must turn and fight."

"We are not animals." Nehmon's voice cut the air like a whiplash.

"But we could fight."

"Animals fight. We do not. We fought once, like animals, and now we must
run from the Hunters who continue to fight like animals. So be it. Let
the Hunters fight."

Ravdin shook his head. "Do you mean that the Hunters are not men like
us?" he said. "That's what you're saying, that they are animals. All
right. We kill animals for our food, isn't that true? We kill the
tiger-beasts in the Jungle to protect ourselves, why not kill the
Hunters to protect ourselves?"

Nehmon sighed, and reached out a hand to the young man. "I'm sorry," he
said gently. "It seems logical, but it's false logic. The Hunters are
men just like you and me. Their lives are different, their culture is
different, but they are men. And human life is sacred, to us, above all
else. This is the fundamental basis of our very existence. Without it we
would be Hunters, too. If we fight, we are dead even if we live. That's
why we must run away now, and always. Because we know that we must not
kill men."

       *       *       *       *       *

On the street below, the night air was suddenly full of voices,
chattering, intermingled with whispers of song and occasional brief
harmonic flutterings. The footfalls were muted on the polished pavement
as the people passed slowly, their voices carrying a hint of puzzled
uneasiness.

"The concert's over!" Ravdin walked to the window, feeling a chill pass
through him. "So soon, I wonder why?" Eagerly he searched the faces
passing in the street for Dana's face, sensing the lurking discord in
the quiet talk of the crowd. Suddenly the sound-boards in the room
tinkled a carillon of ruby tones in his ear, and she was in the room,
rushing into his arms with a happy cry, pressing her soft cheek to his
rough chin. "You're back! Oh, I'm so glad, so very glad!" She turned to
the old man. "Nehmon, what has happened? The concert was ruined tonight.
There was something in the air, everybody felt it. For some reason the
people seemed _afraid_."

Ravdin turned away from his bride. "Tell her," he said to the old man.

Dana looked at them, her gray eyes widening in horror. "The Hunters!
They've found us?"

Ravdin nodded wordlessly.

Her hands trembled as she sat down, and there were tears in her eyes.
"We came so close tonight, so very close. I _felt_ the music before it
was sung, do you realize that? I _felt_ the fear around me, even though
no one said a word. It wasn't vague or fuzzy, it was _clear_! The
transference was perfect." She turned to face the old man. "It's taken
so long to come this far, Nehmon. So much work, so much training to
reach a perfect communal concert. We've had only two hundred years here,
only _two hundred_! I was just a little girl when we came, I can't even
remember before that. Before we came here we were undisturbed for a
thousand years, and before that, four thousand. But _two hundred_--we
_can't_ leave now. Not when we've come so far."

Ravdin nodded. "That's the trouble. They come closer every time. This
time they will catch us. Or the next time, or the next. And that will be
the end of everything for us, unless we fight them." He paused, watching
the last groups dispersing on the street below. "If we only knew, for
certain, what we were running from."

There was a startled silence. The girl's breath came in a gasp and her
eyes widened as his words sank home. "Ravdin," she said softly, "_have
you ever seen a Hunter_?"

Ravdin stared at her, and felt a chill of excitement. Music burst from
the sounding-board, odd, wild music, suddenly hopeful. "No," he said,
"no, of course not. You know that."

The girl rose from her seat. "Nor have I. Never, not once." She turned
to Lord Nehmon. "Have _you_?"

"Never." The old man's voice was harsh.

"Has _anyone_ ever seen a Hunter?"

Ravdin's hand trembled. "I--I don't know. None of us living now, no.
It's been too long since they last actually found us. I've read--oh, I
can't remember. I think my grandfather saw them, or my great-grandfather,
somewhere back there. It's been thousands of years."

"Yet we've been tearing ourselves up by the roots, fleeing from planet
to planet, running and dying and still running. But suppose we don't
need to run anymore?"

He stared at her. "They keep coming. They keep searching for us. What
more proof do you need?"

Dana's face glowed with excitement, alive with new vitality, new hope.
"Ravdin, can't you see? _They might have changed._ They might not be the
