Clip this Coupon _NOW_!

  SPONSORED BY
  RCA INSTITUTES, INC.

  Formerly
  Radio Institute of America

[Illustration: RCA]

       *       *       *       *       *

  RCA INSTITUTES, Inc.
  Dept. NS-2, 326 Broadway,
  New York, N.Y.

Gentlemen: Please send me your FREE 40-page book which illustrates the
brilliant opportunities in Radio and describes your laboratory-method of
instruction at home!

  Name ........................................

  Address .....................................

       *       *       *       *       *

Please mention NEWSSTAND GROUP--MEN'S LIST, when answering
advertisements

       *       *       *       *       *


"INTO THE AFRICAN BLUE"

_High Spots in the Life of a Big Game Photographer_

_By_ MARTIN JOHNSON

[Illustration]

"Into the African Blue" is Africa--the land of romance--of adventure.

African big game is rapidly being shot off; the end is in sight, and it
is for the purpose of recording in pictures and in story the remarkable
wild life which soon must vanish, that Martin and Osa Johnson undertake
their safaris into the remotest corners of the "Blue."

Johnson's photographs are magnificent! They portray the primitive drama
of the wilderness. We see close-ups of elephants and giraffes suckling
their young; lions lolling in the broiling sun or disputing possession
of a zebra kill. We are introduced into the inner family circle of
rhinos, leopards, eland, oryx, gazelle and others--all unconscious of
the nearby presence of man. And there are, of course, thrilling moments
when a cantankerous rhino, elephant or lion resents the intrusion and
charges the camera with deadly intent.

=This thrilling serial, profusely illustrated with photographs by the
author, began in the December issue of FOREST and STREAM. Follow Martin
and Osa Johnson through the Soudan, the Congo, Kenya and Tanganyika;
share their adventures=--

  Forest and Stream
  80 Lafayette Street, New York, N.Y.


SPECIAL OFFER

In addition to this thrilling serial, which in book form would cost not
less than $3.00, the next six issues of FOREST and STREAM will contain
much of interest to the outdoorsman--angler, hunter, camper and nature
lover.

FOREST and STREAM brings to you the best outdoor literature written by
the foremost authorities in their respective fields. By making use of
the coupon to the left you can secure six issues of FOREST and STREAM
containing the complete story "Into the African Blue" for the special
price of $1.00, and you will receive in addition to the magazine and
without extra cost volumes 1 and 2 of the Sportsmen's Encyclopedia, an
invaluable reference book which presents in handy form accurate and
comprehensive information on every branch of outdoor sport.

Send in the coupon--"_DO IT NOW!_"

       *       *       *       *       *

Department C

Here's my $1.00. I want the 6 issues beginning with the December number,
and Vols. 1 and 2 of the Sportsmen's Encyclopedia.

...............................................

...............................................

...............................................

       *       *       *       *       *

Please mention NEWSSTAND GROUP--MEN'S LIST, when answering
advertisements

       *       *       *       *       *


I Will Train You at Home to Fill a Big-Pay Radio Job

_Here's the_ PROOF

=$375 One Month In Spare Time=

"Recently I made $375 in one month in my spare time installing,
servicing, selling Radio Sets."

  Earle Cummings,
  18 Webster St.,
  Haverhill, Mass.

=$450 a Month=

"I work in what I believe to be the largest and best-equipped Radio shop
in the Southwest and also operate KGFI. I am averaging $450 a month."

  Frank M. Jones,
  922 Guadalupe St.,
  San Angelo, Tex.

[Illustration]

You can build 100 circuits with the six big outfits of
Radio parts I give you

_3 of the 100 you can build_

_Find out quick about this practical way to big pay_

If you are earning a penny less than $50 a week, send for my book of
information on the opportunities in Radio. It's FREE. Clip the coupon
NOW. A flood of gold is pouring into Radio, creating hundreds of big-pay
jobs. Why go along at $25, $30 or $45 a week when the good jobs in Radio
pay $50, $75 and up to $250 a week? "Rich Rewards in Radio" gives full
information on these big jobs and explains how you can quickly learn
Radio through my easy, practical home-study training.


Salaries of $50 to $250 a Week Not Unusual

The amazing growth of Radio has astounded the world. In a few short
years three hundred thousand jobs have been created. And the biggest
growth is still to come. That's why salaries of $50 to $250 a week are
not unusual. Radio simply hasn't got nearly the number of thoroughly
trained men it needs.


You Can Learn Quickly and Easily in Spare Time

Hundreds of N. R. I. trained men are today making big money--holding
down big jobs--in the Radio field. You, too, should get into Radio. You
can stay home, hold your job and learn in your spare time. Lack of high
school education or Radio experience are no drawbacks.


Many Earn $15, $20, $30 Weekly On the Side While Learning

I teach you to begin making money shortly after you enroll. My new
practical method makes this possible. I give you SIX BIG OUTFITS of
Radio parts and teach you to build practically every type of receiving
set known. M. E. Sullivan, 412 73rd St., Brooklyn, N.Y., writes: "I made
$720 while studying." G. W. Page, 1807 21st Ave. S., Nashville, Tenn.,
"I picked up $935 in my spare time while studying."


Your Money Back If Not Satisfied

My course fits you for all lines--manufacturing, selling, servicing
sets, in business for yourself, operating on board ship, or in a
broadcasting station--and many others. I back up my training with a
signed agreement to refund every penny of your money if, after
completion, you are not satisfied with the lessons and instructions I
give you.


Act NOW--NEW 64-Page Book is FREE

[Illustration: RADIO NEEDS TRAINED MEN!]

Send for this big book of Radio information. It has put hundreds of
fellows on the road to bigger pay and success. Get it. See what Radio
offers you, and how my Employment Department helps you get into Radio
after you graduate. Clip or tear out the coupon and mail it RIGHT NOW.

  J. E. Smith, President, Dept. OBM
  National Radio Institute
  Washington, D.C.


Employment Service to all Graduates

Originators of Radio Home Study Training

       *       *       *       *       *

Mail This FREE COUPON Today

  J. E. Smith, President,
  Dept. OBM, National Radio Institute,
  Washington, D.C.

Dear Mr. Smith: Send me your Free book "Rich Rewards in Radio," giving
information on the big-money opportunities in Radio and your practical
method of teaching with six Radio Outfits. I understand this places me
under no obligation.

  Name ......................... Age ..........

  Address .....................................

  City ...................... State ...........

       *       *       *       *       *

Please mention NEWSSTAND GROUP--MEN'S LIST, when answering
advertisements

       *       *       *       *       *


_A Year's Protection Against_ SICKNESS

Less than 3c a Day!

_A Year's Protection Against_ ACCIDENT

[Illustration: CASH _or sympathy_?]


_Which do you want?_

Suppose you met with an accident or sickness to-night--salary
stopped--which would you prefer,

$25 Weekly ... or Sympathy?

_Which will your family want?_

In case of your accidental death, which would you rather give your
family


$10,000 Cash ... or Sympathy?

_Which would you Pay?_

Would you rather pay bills and household expenses out of a slim savings
account or a

=$10 bill=


_For a Whole Year's Protection Against_

SICKNESS AND ACCIDENT

_Get Cash instead of Sympathy_

If you met with an accident in your home, on the street, or road, in the
field, or on your job--will your income continue? Remember, few escape
without accident--and none of us can tell what to-morrow holds for us.
While you are reading this warning, somewhere some ghastly tragedy is
taking its toll of human life or limb, some flood or fire, some
automobile or train disaster. Protect yourself now.

_Get Cash instead of Sympathy_

If you suddenly became ill--would your income stop? What if you
contracted lobar pneumonia, appendicitis operation, or any of the many
common ills which are covered in this strong policy, wouldn't you rest
easier and convalesce more quickly if you knew that this old line
company stood ready to help lift from your shoulders distressing
financial burdens in case of a personal tragedy. Protect yourself now.

_Get Cash instead of Sympathy_

=Don't Wait for Misfortune to Overtake You=

_Mail the Coupon today!_

Mail the Coupon before it's too late to protect yourself against the
chances of fate picking you out as its next victim.

  =NO MEDICAL EXAMINATION=

  $10 A Year Entire Costs. No Dues. No Assessments.

  =MEN AND WOMEN=
  16 to 70 Years Accepted.

  =$10,000=
  Principal Sum.

  =$10,000=
  Loss of hands, feet or eyesight.

  =$25 Weekly Benefits=
  for stated accidents or sicknesses.

Doctor's Bills, Hospital Benefit, Emergency Benefit and other liberal
features to help in time of need--all clearly shown in policy.

This is a simple and understandable policy--without complicated or
misleading clauses. You know exactly what every word means--and every
word means exactly what it says.

=Largest and Oldest Exclusive Health and Accident Insurance Company in
America.=

_Under Supervision of All State Insurance Departments_

=ESTABLISHED OVER 40 YEARS=

       *       *       *       *       *

  North American Accident Insurance Co., [of Chicago]
  388 Wallach Building, Newark, New Jersey.

Gentlemen: At no cost to me send details of New $10,000 Premier $10
Policy.

  _Name_ ............................

  _Address_ .........................

  _City_ ............................

       *       *       *       *       *

Please mention NEWSSTAND GROUP--MEN'S LIST, when answering
advertisements

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

Pledge to the Public on Used Car Sales

1 Every used car is conspicuously marked with its lowest price in plain
figures, and that price, just as the price of our new cars, is rigidly
maintained.

2 All Studebaker automobiles which are marked as CERTIFIED CARS have
been properly reconditioned, and carry a 30-day guarantee for
replacement of defective parts and free service on adjustments.

3 Every purchaser of a used car may drive it for five days, and then, if
not satisfied for any reason, bring it back and apply the money paid as
a credit on the purchase of any other car in stock--new or used. (It is
assumed that the car has not been damaged in the meantime.)

(C) 1929 The Studebaker Corporation of America.


You can save money and get a better motor car

_if you buy according to the Studebaker Pledge plan_

OVER 150,000 THRIFTY AMERICAN CITIZENS DID LAST YEAR!

A well constructed car, sold at 40 or 50 per cent of its original price,
offers maximum transportation value. Studebaker dealers offer many fine
used cars--Studebakers, Erskines and other makes--which have been driven
only a few thousand miles.

Reconditioning of mechanical parts, refinishing of bodies give new car
life to these cars at prices no greater than you must pay for a cheap
new car. And as a final measure of protection, these cars are sold
according to the Studebaker Pledge--which offers 5 days' driving trial
on all cars and a 30-day guarantee on all certified cars.

Prices being plainly marked provides the same price for everyone.
Millions of people buy "used" houses. Every car on the road is a used
car the week after it is purchased.

_Invest 2c--you may save $200_

Mail the coupon below for the free booklet.--The 2c stamp is an
investment which may save you as much as $200 in buying a motorcar!

[Illustration: How to judge a used car]


STUDEBAKER

_Builder of Champions_

  The Studebaker Corporation of America
  Dept. 232, South Bend, Indiana

  Please send me copy of "How to Judge a Used Car"

  _Name_ ..........................................

  _Street_ ........................................

  _City_ ...................... _State_ ...........

       *       *       *       *       *

Please mention NEWSSTAND GROUP--MEN'S LIST, when answering
advertisements

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Amazingly Easy Way to Get Into ELECTRICITY]

Don't spend your life waiting for $5 raises in a dull, hopeless job. Now
... and forever ... say good-bye to 25 and 35 dollars a week. Let me
teach you how to prepare for positions that lead to $50, $64, and on up
to $200 a week in Electricity--NOT by correspondence, but by an amazing
way to teach =right here in the great Coyne Shops= that makes you a
practical expert in 90 days! Getting into electricity is far easier than
you imagine!


LEARN WITHOUT BOOKS--In 90 Days _By Actual Work--in the Great Coyne
Shops_

Lack of experience--age, or advanced education bars no one. I don't care
if you don't know an armature from an air brake--I don't expect you to!
It makes no difference! Don't let lack of money stop you. Most of the
men at Coyne have no more money than you have. That's why I have worked
