American's bound hands disappeared beneath the chiton. Squaring his
shoulders, he gripped the pistol, prepared to make a good end.

"They'll get me, but before I die I'll send at least two or three of
these devils to hell," he thought. "Come on--"

But, for an inexplicable reason, the arch-priest beckoned back his
satellites, while roar upon roar of terrific excitement swelled from
the swarming mob below, and a shout which at last became
distinguishable bid fair to split the heavens. "Altara! Altara!
Altara!"

Slowly, the temporarily reprieved victim's muscles stiffened. He
understood. The next victim was to be the fair Altara, sister of
Altorius and Sacred Virgin of Atlans.

"Altara! Altara!" A rising hurricane of impassioned human voices
thundered the name.

Suddenly, the desire to live burned doubly strong in the American's
breast. He must somehow prevent this inhuman catastrophe. But how?
How?

Stealing a quick glance over his shoulder, Nelson stifled a groan. The
southern horizon remained clear, and put an end to hope. No help! He
must fight it out to the end alone.

       *       *       *       *       *

A rank of exultant, black-bearded priests now appeared at the head of
the stairway, then a quartet of olive skinned, semi-naked priestesses
joyfully clashing brass cymbals.

There came an interval--and Nelson's heart stood still as there
appeared the lovely head and shoulders of her whom he had first seen
in the heart of the revolving crystal. Even more fiercely, mad revolt
at fate gripped him.

Through hot, strained eyes the American saw that the stately Altara
was beautiful beyond all possible comparison, and that she seemed
utterly unafraid in the hour of her dreadful death. The Atlantean
maiden's large, clear blue eyes were fixed with calm resignation on
the distant flame sun of Jilboa. On her curling golden hair had been
set a circlet of ceremonial yellow roses, while her white, slender
body was thinly covered with a scanty robe of yellow silk.

Slowly, and moving her small bare feet in a regal stride, Altara
climbed the last few steps and stood straight and unafraid before the
hideous demon god of Jarmuth.

Thousands of frantic inner voices assailed the aviator's
consciousness. "Save her! You must save her! She's too young, too
beautiful to die!"

Like a vast maelstrom of sound, so swelled the lustful cry of the dark
multitude at the base of the Ziggurat, while the arch-priest chanted
his litany in a sort of triumphant exultation. Then, all at once, one
of the executioners roughly tripped the golden haired girl, sprawling
her helpless on the bloody stones; and, before Nelson could quite
realize it, the slender, silver hued form lay limp and helpless
between Beelzebub's bloody claws.

       *       *       *       *       *

Like a dynamo furiously gathering speed, so buzzed Nelson's brain. He
was going to save her--if only for a brief interval! One man against a
nation. Through a raging mist of fury he saw the red-robed priest
raise his lean arms; then the American's bound hands darted beneath
the blue chiton to reappear immediately. No one saw the pistol, for
every eye was rivetted upon the gleaming, sickle-knife of the red
priest. Like a voice from hell, that eery scream burst again from
Beelzebub's throat as his priest stepped near, the knife raised.

Amid a deafening roar the sickle-knife flashed higher; but it never
fell, for the red priest suddenly reeled, clutched his chest and,
staring wildly, staggered sidewise, while the assembled priests stared
thunderstruck. The deafening roar of Beelzebub, the clamor of horns
and cymbals had drowned out the report. In superstitious awe the
Jarmuthians leaped back, panic-stricken, from the convulsively
writhing body of the red priest, which rolled crazily down the steps
before the idol; but a high shout of terror rang out as he toppled off
the summit and, like a discarded puppet, plunged down the precipitous
side of the cone-like tower.

Again Nelson's pistol spat, and two of the executioners collapsed in
kicking agony. Like an avenging fury, the American raged about the
summit, the pistol in his bound bands dealing death right and left
until panic seized the remaining priests, who, with one accord,
abandoned their weapons to rush headlong down the dizzy, winding
roadway. In a trice, none but Altara, Nelson, the two Atlanteans and
the fallen priests remained on the summit.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was the work of a moment for the Atlanteans to cast loose Nelson's
bound wrists, and he theirs; time was precious, for, from below, a
furious cohort of spearmen were charging up the stairs, their dark
features terrible in their wrath.

"Only four more shots!" The sickening realization dashed into Nelson's
brain. "That'll never stop them." Then in the midst of his despair he
saw an answer. Stepping back he fired twice full into the great steam
coil circling the base of the idol.

_Spang! Spang!_ His bullets smacked through the copper coil to
puncture neat, round holes. As he fervently hoped, jets of live steam
rushed through these vents with terrible force and bathed the head of
the stairs with a scalding, blinding vapor. Howling like mad beasts,
the agonized Jarmuthian hoplites fell back, while overhead Beelzebub
bellowed incessantly, shaking the sky with his hideous voice.

"That's better." But Nelson knew his triumph to be brief. "_Where in
hell is Alden?_" he raged as with shaking hands be released the
bewildered girl from the death bar after the two Atlanteans had lifted
it and its fair burden from the claws of Beelzebub.

Picking up the swords and other weapons of the fallen priests the two
Atlanteans uttered their deep-toned war cry of _Halor van!_ and
joyously prepared to die fighting, as furious roar on roar of wrath
arose from the populace, infuriated at being cheated of their prey.
But the black-armored temple guards dared not charge those twin steam
jets barring their approach. Accordingly they tried other means.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nelson's heart stopped as a small, dark object sailed up from below
and clattered on the platform. It was a grenade. With the speed of
thought, the American kicked it to the landing below, where it
exploded, annihilating a detachment of Jarmuthians by drenching them
with the terrible fungus gas. Heart bounding with savage joy, Nelson
watched the deadly green fog leap from the broken grenade and of its
own accord settle on the nearest soldiers. With the usual astonishing
speed there formed on the stricken soldiery that poisonous yellow
mould, whose fungus-like shoots sprouted through nostrils and mouths.
On the dense crowd below the bomb's effect was appalling, and no more
grenades were hurled....

During the respite Nelson's anguished eyes once more swept the skies.
He started. Was it true or was it a mirage? Far to the southward a
small, black speck materialized in the orange-hued heavens. Good old
Alden! Hope wavered in the American's breast. Could he and his two
fellows beat off the infuriated Jarmuthians long enough? He doubted
it.

A shower of spears sailed up, but because of the angle, their
trajectory was too great, and like rays of death the lances flashed
harmlessly overhead to plunge over the summit and wreak death among
those on the other side.

Nearer and nearer came the black speck while from the populace a low
shout of amazement arose. Coincidently Nelson's heart stopped; aghast,
he saw that the steam was no longer hissing from the holes at the
idol's feet! Evidently, the steam current had been shut off from below
to allow the raging priests to lead their followers in a desperate
charge up the stairs.

Marshalling an Atlantean to either side, Nelson sprang to the head of
the stair and fired full in the face of gorgeously robed priests who
staggered back screaming. But the others wavered only an instant.

"_Halor van!_" Both Atlanteans hurled spears retrieved from the
abandoned weapons--and each struck down his man.

       *       *       *       *       *

The American's eye flickered up. Yes, there came a strange, but
welcome sight: a great creature with enormous, leathery pinions was
circling down towards the tower top! A clashing of weapons brought
Nelson's eyes earthwards. He joined in a furious melee at the stair
top, like the Atlanteans, using a captured bronze sword. There came a
deep groan as the right-hand Atlantean collapsed with a bloodied
bronze spear point standing far out from between his naked shoulder
blades.

A swooping shadow fell across the slowly advancing attackers.
Beholding that awesome creature the Jarmuthians cowered, hesitated;
then in headlong panic they darted below, uttering howls of fear and
pursued by the surviving Atlantean, who, gone berserk, must have
shortly paid for his folly.

The pteranodon was now quite recognizable, and seated on a double
saddle was Alden, skillfully guiding the ungainly monster by means of
a curious bridle, by shifting his weight and by pressing certain nerve
centers between the great reptile's leathery shoulders.

Down, down circled Alden until the great wings skimmed just above
Beelzebub's ugly golden head.

Her courage strained beyond endurance, Altara screamed shrilly in fear
as Alden guided the huge reptile to the summit and forced it to light.

"Quick!" shouted Alden. "They're coming back up!"

"All right!" Catching up the fainting girl, Nelson hurdled two or
three fallen bodies, and, while Alden showered fungus bombs upon the
returning Jarmuthians, he laid his precious burden across the saddle
and secured her with straps specially designed for the purpose.

"All right, Dick," he snapped. "Get going!"

"But you?" Alden's brown face was terribly intent.

"I'm not going! This creature could never carry the three of us. It
can't, I tell you! Hurry, those devils are coming!"

Alden folded his arms. "If you don't go, I don't."

"All right then," snarled Nelson, vaulting into the saddle after
casting loose the inert, yellow-robed girl. "Be a damned fool! We'll
all die now."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a near thing, for the pteranodon, scenting the fresh blood, was
very loath to obey its master, and scuffed awkwardly around the tower
top two or three times, while Nelson, clutching Altara to him,
expended his last shot in driving back the enemy.

At last, the pteranodon spread its huge brown pinions and took off.
Then Nelson gasped in alarm, for, unaccustomed to the heavy weight it
now bore, the pteranodon scaled earthwards with the speed of a meteor,
wildly flapping its bat-like-wings. Down! Down! Nelson had an
impression of people scattering like frightened ants.

Alden cursed, tugged furiously on the bridle, and set his weight back
in the saddle, but to no avail. Down! Ever down! The pteranodon now
struggled among the tall buildings.

A sickening sense of defeat gripped Nelson as a long jet of steam shot
out from a huge brass retortii mounted on the roof of an arsenal. The
scalding fingers of steam just missed its target, but fortunately
served to sting the descending pteranodon. With a convulsive shudder
and a whistling scream, the hideous reptile commenced to flap its
gigantic wings faster, and, slowly but surely, began to rise over the
yellow temples and towers of the barbarous city of Jezreel.

       *       *       *       *       *

What followed is now a matter of Atlantean history. On its pages is
set forth in full detail how the giant pteranodon barely crossed the
boiling river to sink exhausted in the outskirts of Tricca.

There, also, is described the series of tremendous battles in which
the Atlanteans, led by Altorius and inspired by the return of their
Sacred Virgin, employed the terrible fungus gas to overwhelm the
Jarmuthian invaders, driving them back with great slaughter to the
steaming plains of their own land.

At even greater length is described the great triumph Altorius
accorded the victorious aviators on the occasion of Victor Nelson's
marriage to Altara.

"Doth it not seem strange," she whispered as they stood looking out
over the great, sleeping city of Heliopolis, "that thou of the New
World and I of the Lost World, should stand man and wife?"

The American's tanned face softened. "My darling," he whispered,
"there are lots of strange things in the new Atlantis--but this isn't
one of them."

_(The End.)_




The Meteor Girl

_By Jack Williamson_

[Illustration: _She seemed to scream, though we could hear nothing._]

[Sidenote: Through the complicated space-time of the fourth dimension
goes Charlie King in an attempt to rescue the Meteor Girl.]


"What's the good in Einstein, anyhow?"

I shot the question at lean young Charlie King. In a moment he looked
up at me; I thought there was pain in the back of his clear brown
eyes. Lips closed in a thin white line across his wind-tanned face;
nervously he tapped his pipe on the metal cowling of the _Golden
Gull's_ cockpit.

"I know that space is curved, that there is really no space or time,
but only space-time, that electricity and gravitation and magnetism
are all the same. But how is that going to pay my grocery bill--or
yours?"

"That's what Virginia wants to know."

"Virginia Randall!" I was astonished. "Why, I thought--"

"I know. We've been engaged a year. But she's called it off."

Charlie looked into my eyes for a long minute, his lips still
compressed. We were leaning on the freshly painted, streamline
fuselage of the _Golden Gull_, as neat a little amphibian monoplane as
ever made three hundred miles an hour. She stood on the glistening
white sand of our private landing field on the eastern Florida coast.
Below us the green Atlantic was running in white foam on the rocks.

In the year that Charlie King and I had been out of the Institute of
Technology, we had built the nucleus of a commercial airplane
business. We had designed and built here in our own shops several very
successful seaplanes and amphibians. Charlie's brilliant mathematical
mind was of the greatest aid, except when he was too far lost in his
abstruse speculations to descend to things commercial. Mathematics is
painful enough to me when it is used in calculating the camber of an
airplane wing. And pure mathematics, such as the theories of
relativity and equivalence, I simply abhor.

I was amazed. Virginia Randall was a girl trim and beautiful as our
shining _Golden Gull_. I had thought them devotedly in love, and had
been looking forward to the wedding.

"But it isn't two weeks, since Virginia was out here! You took her up
in our _Western Gull IV_!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Nervously Charlie lit his pipe, drew quickly on it. His face, lean and
drawn beneath the flying goggles pushed up on his forehead, sought
mine anxiously.

"I know. I drove her back to the station. That was when--when we
quarreled."

"But why? About Einstein? That's silly."

"She wanted me to give it up here, and go in with her father in his
Wall Street brokerage business. The old gent is willing to take me,
and make a business man of me."

"Why, I couldn't run the business without you, Charlie!"

"We talked about that, Hammond. I don't really do much of the work.
Just play around with the mathematics, and leave the models and
blueprints to you."

"Oh, Charlie, that's not quite--"

"It's the truth, right enough," he said, bitterly. "You design
aircraft, and I play with Einstein. And as you say, a fellow can't eat
equations."

"I'd hate to see you go."

"And I'd hate to give up you, and our business, and the math. Really
no need of it. My tastes are simple enough. And old 'Iron-clad'
Randall has made all one family needs. Virginia's not exactly a
pauper, herself. Two or three millions, I think."

"And where did Virginia go?"

"She took the _Valhalla_ yesterday at San Francisco. Going to join her
father at Panama. He cruises about the world in his steam yacht, you
know, and runs Wall Street by radio. I was to telegraph her if I'd
changed my mind. I decided to stick to you, Hammond. I telegraphed a
corsage of orchids, and sent her the message, 'Einstein forever!'"

"If I know Virginia, those were not very politic words."

"Well, a man--"
