whatever else could haul a coffin. The Stock Market went completely
mad. Strikes were declared and settled within hours. Congress was
called into session early. The President got authority to ration
lumber and other materials suddenly in starvation-short supply. State
laws were passed against cremation, under heavy lobby pressure. A new
racket, called boxjacking, blossomed overnight.

The Advertising Manager who had put the thing over had been fighting
with all the formidable weapons of his breed to make his plant
managers build up a stockpile. They had, but it went like a toupee in
a wind tunnel. Competitive coffin manufacturers were caught napping,
but by Wednesday after Thanksgiving they, along with the original one,
were on a twenty-four hour, seven-day basis. Still only a fraction of
the demand could be met. Jet passenger planes were stripped of their
seats, supplied with Yankee gold, and sent to plunder the world of its
coffins.

It might be supposed that Christmas goods other than caskets would
take a bad dumping. That was not so. Such was the upsurge of
prosperity, and such was the shortage of coffins, that nearly
everything--with a few exceptions--enjoyed the biggest season on
record.

On Christmas Eve the frenzy slumped to a crawl, though on Christmas
morning there were still optimists out prowling the empty stores. The
nation sat down to breathe. Mostly it sat on coffins, because there
wasn't space in the living rooms for any other furniture.

There was hardly an individual in the United States who didn't have,
in case of sudden sharp pains in the chest, several boxes to choose
from. As for the rest of the world, it had better not die just now or
it would be literally a case of dust to dust.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

Of course everyone expected a doozy of a slump after Christmas. But
our Advertising Manager, who by now was of course Sales Manager and
First Vice President also, wasn't settling for any boom-and-bust. He'd
been a frustrated victim of his choice of industries for so many years
that now, with his teeth in something, he was going to give it the old
bite. He gave people a short breathing spell to arrange their coffin
payments and move the presents out of the front rooms. Then, late in
January, his new campaign came down like a hundred-megatonner.

Within a week, everyone saw quite clearly that his Christmas models
were now obsolete. The coffin became the new status symbol.

The auto industry was of course demolished. Even people who had enough
money to buy a new car weren't going to trade in the old one and let
the new one stand out in the rain. The garages were full of coffins.
Petroleum went along with Autos. (Though there were those who
whispered knowingly that the same people merely moved over into the
new industry. It was noticeable that the center of it became Detroit.)
A few trucks and buses were still being built, but that was all.

Some of the new caskets were true works of art. Others--well, there
was variety. Compact models appeared, in which the occupant's feet
were to be doubled up alongside his ears. One manufacturer pushed a
circular model, claiming that by all the laws of nature the foetal
position was the only right one. At the other extreme were virtual
houses, ornate and lavishly equipped. Possibly the largest of all was
the "_Togetherness_" model, triangular, with graduated recesses for
Father, Mother, eight children (plus two playmates), and, in the far
corner beyond the baby, the cat.

The slump was over. Still, economists swore that the new boom couldn't
last either. They reckoned without the Advertising Manager, whose eyes
gleamed brighter all the time. People already had coffins, which they
polished and kept on display, sometimes in the new "Coffin-ports"
