If this was a con game, it was going to have to be a good one to get
by Richard Thorn, Ph.D.

He walked across the few feet of hard, salt-white ground that
separated him from Sorensen standing beside the second jeep with the
Black Suitcase in his hand. It was obvious to anyone who watched the
way Sorensen handled the thing that it was heavy--seventy-five pounds
or better.

"Need any help?" Thorn asked, knowing what the answer would be.

"Nope," Sorensen said. "I can handle it."

The suitcase wasn't really black. It was a dark cordovan brown, made
even darker by long usage, which had added oily stains to the
well-used leather. But Thorn thought of it as the Black Suitcase
simply because it was the perfect example of the proverbial Little
Black Box--the box that Did Things. As a test question in an
examination, the Little Black Box performs a useful function. The
examiner draws a symbolic electronic circuit. Somewhere in the
circuit, instead of drawing the component that is supposed to be
there, he draws a Little Black Box. Then he defines the wave-form,
voltage, and amperage entering the circuit and defines whatever is
coming out. Question: What is in the Little Black Box?

Except in the simplest of cases, there is never an absolute answer.
The question is counted as correct if the student puts into the Little
Black Box a component or subcircuit which will produce the effect
desired. The value of the answer depends on the simplicity and
relative controllability of the component drawn in the place of the
Little Black Box.

Sorensen's Black Suitcase was still a problem to Thorn. He couldn't
quite figure out what was in it.

"Hotter'n Billy Blue Blazes!" Sorensen said as he put the Black
Suitcase down on the gleaming white ground. He grinned a little, which
dispelled for a moment his Angry Old Man expression, and said: "You
ready to go, Mr. Thorn?"

"I'm ready any time you are," Thorn said grumpily.

Sorensen looked at the NAC&M scientist sideways. "You don't sound any
happier'n I am, Mr. Thorn."

Thorn looked at him and thought he could see that flash of odd humor
in his light blue eyes. Thorn exhaled a heavy breath. "I'm no happier
than you are to be out in this heat. Let's get on with it."

Sorensen's chuckle sounded so out of place that Thorn was almost
startled. "You know the difference between you and me, Mr. Thorn?"
Sorensen asked. He didn't wait for an answer. "You think this test is
probably a waste of time. Me, on the other hand, I _know_ it is."

"Let's get on with it," Thorn repeated.

       *       *       *       *       *

It took two hours to set up the equipment, in spite of the fact that a
lot of the circuits had been prefabricated before the caravan had come
out from Salt Lake City. But Richard Thorn wanted to make certain that
all his data was both correct and recorded. Sorensen had nothing to do
but watch. He had no hand in setting up the equipment. He had brought
the Black Suitcase, and that was all he was going to be allowed to do.

From the top of the Black Suitcase projected two one-inch copper
electrodes, fourteen inches apart. The North American Carbide & Metals
technicians set up the circuits that were connected to the electrodes
without any help from Sorensen.

But just before they started to work, Sorensen said: "There's just one
thing I think you ought to warn those men about, Mr. Thorn."

"What's that?" Thorn asked.

"If any of 'em tries to open that suitcase, they're likely to get
blown sky high. And I don't want 'em getting funny with me, either."

He had his hand in his trouser pocket, and Thorn was suddenly quite
certain that the man was holding a revolver. He could see the outlines
against the cloth.

Thorn sighed. "Don't worry, Mr. Sorensen. We don't have any ulterior
designs on your invention." He did not add that the investigators of
NAC&M had already assumed that anyone who was asking one million
dollars for an invention which was, in effect, a pig in a poke, would
be expected to take drastic methods to protect his gadget. But there
would be no point in telling Sorensen that his protective efforts had
already been anticipated and that the technicians had already been
warned against touching the Black Suitcase any more than necessary to
connect the leads. Giving Sorensen that information might make him
even more touchy.

Thorn only hoped that the bomb, or whatever it was that Sorensen had
put in the suitcase, was well built, properly fused, and provided with
adequate safeties.

When everything was set up, Sorensen walked over to his device and
turned it on by shoving the blade of a heavy-duty switch into place.
"O.K.," he said.

One of the technicians began flipping other switches, and a bank of
ordinary incandescent light bulbs came on, four at a time. Finally
there were one hundred of them burning, each one a hundred-watt bulb
that glowed brightly but did not appear to be contributing much to the
general brightness of the Utah sun. The technicians checked their
recording voltmeters and ammeters and reported that, sure enough, some
ten kilowatts of power at a little less than one hundred fifteen volts
D.C. was coming from the Black Suitcase.

Sorensen and Thorn sat in the tent which had been erected to ward off
the sun's rays. They watched the lights shine.

       *       *       *       *       *
   *       *       *       *       *

One of the technicians came in, wiping his forehead with a big blue
bandana. "Well, there she goes. Mr. Sorensen, if that thing is
dangerous, hadn't we better back off a little way from it?"

"It isn't dangerous," Sorensen said. "Nothing's going to happen."
