prospector wandering around the desert with a scintillation counter.

Is there any limit to telepathic range?

The spy could even be sitting quietly in an armchair in the Kremlin,
probing through several thousand miles of solid earth to peep into the
brains of the men on Project Isle.

That was, to say the very least, a depressing idea.

Malone found he had to assume that the spy was in the United
States--that, in other words, there was some effective range to
telepathic communication. Otherwise, there was no point in bothering to
continue the search.

Therefore, he found one other thing to do. He alerted every agent to the
job of discovering how the spy was getting his information out of the
country.

He doubted that it would turn up anything, but it was a chance. And
Malone hoped desperately for it, because he was beginning to be sure
that the field agents were never going to turn up any telepathic
imbeciles.

He was right.

They never did.




III


The telephone rang.

Malone rolled over on the couch and muttered under his breath. Was it
absolutely necessary for someone to call him at seven in the morning?

He grabbed at the receiver with one hand, and picked up his cigar from
the ashtray with the other. It was bad enough to be awakened from a
sound sleep--but when a man hadn't been sleeping at all, it was even
worse.

He'd been sitting up since before five that morning, worrying about the
telepathic spy, and at the moment he wanted sleep more than he wanted
phone calls.

"Gur?" he said, sleepily and angrily, thankful that he'd never had a
visiphone installed in his apartment.

A feminine voice said: "Mr. Kenneth J. Malone?"

"Who's this?" Malone said peevishly, beginning to discover himself
capable of semirational English speech.

"Long distance from San Francisco," the voice said.

"It certainly is," Malone said. "Who's calling?"

"San Francisco is calling," the voice said primly.

Malone repressed a desire to tell the voice off, and said instead:
"_Who_ in San Francisco?"

There was a momentary hiatus, and then the voice said: "Mr. Thomas Boyd
is calling, sir. He says this is a scramble call."

Malone took a drag from his cigar and closed his eyes. Obviously the
call was a scramble. If it had been clear, the man would have dialed
direct, instead of going through what Malone now recognized as an
operator.

"Mr. Boyd says he is the Agent-in-Charge of the San Francisco office of
the FBI," the voice offered.

"And quite right, too," Malone told her. "All right. Put him on."

"One moment." There was a pause, a click, another pause and then another
click. At last the operator said: "Your party is ready, sir."

Then there was still another pause. Malone stared at the audio receiver.
He began to whistle "When Irish Eyes Are Smiling."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Hello? Malone?"

"I'm here, Tom," Malone said guiltily. "This is me. What's the trouble?"

"Trouble?" Boyd said. "There isn't any trouble. Well, not really. Or
maybe it is. I don't know."

Malone scowled at the audio receiver, and for the first time wished he
had gone ahead and had a video circuit put in, so that Boyd could see
the horrendous expression on his face.

"Look," he said. "It's seven here and that's too early. Out there, it's
four, and that's practically ridiculous. What's so important?"

He knew perfectly well that Boyd wasn't calling him just for the fun of
it. The man was a good agent. But why a call at this hour?

Malone muttered under his breath. Then, self-consciously, he squashed
out his cigar and lit a cigarette while Boyd was saying: "Ken, I think
we may have found what you've been looking for."

It wasn't safe to say too much, even over a scrambled circuit. But
Malone got the message without difficulty.

"Yeah?" he said, sitting up on the edge of the couch. "You sure?"

"Well," Boyd said, "no. Not absolutely sure. Not absolutely. But it is
worth your taking a personal look, I think."

"Ah," Malone said cautiously. "An imbecile?"

"No," Boyd said flatly. "Not an imbecile. Definitely not an imbecile. As
a matter of fact, a hell of a fat long way from an imbecile."

Malone glanced at his watch and skimmed over the airline timetables in
his mind. "I'll be there nine o'clock, your time," he said. "Have a car
waiting for me at the field."

       *       *       *       *       *

As usual, Malone managed to sleep better on the plane than he'd been
able to do at home. He slept so well, in fact, that he was still groggy
when he stepped into the waiting car.

"Good to see you, Ken," Boyd said briskly, as he shook Malone's hand.

"You, too, Tom," Malone said sleepily. "Now what's all this about?" He
looked around apprehensively. "No bugs in this car, I hope?" he said.

Boyd gunned the motor and headed toward the San Francisco Freeway.
"Better not be," he said, "or I'll fire me a technician or two."

"Well, then," Malone said, relaxing against the upholstery, "where is
this guy, and who is he? And how did you find him?"

Boyd looked uncomfortable. It was, somehow, both an awe-inspiring and a
slightly risible sight. Six feet one and one half inches tall in his
flat feet, Boyd ported around over two hundred and twenty pounds of
bone, flesh and muscle. He swung a potbelly of startling proportions
under the silk shirting he wore, and his face, with its wide nose, small
eyes and high forehead, was half highly mature, half startlingly
childlike. In an apparent effort to erase those childlike qualities,
Boyd sported a fringe of beard and a mustache which reminded Malone of
somebody he couldn't quite place.

But whoever the somebody was, his hair hadn't been black, as Boyd's
was--

He decided it didn't make any difference. Anyhow, Boyd was speaking.

"In the first place," he said, "it isn't a guy. In the second, I'm not
exactly sure who it is. And in the third, Ken, I didn't find it."

There was a little silence.

"Don't tell me," Malone said. "It's a telepathic horse, isn't it? Tom, I
just don't think I could stand a telepathic horse--"

"No," Boyd said hastily. "No. Not at all. No horse. It's a dame. I mean
a lady." He looked away from the road and flashed a glance at Malone.
His eyes seemed to be pleading for something--understanding, possibly,
Malone thought. "Frankly," Boyd said, "I'd rather not tell you anything
about her just yet. I'd rather you met her first. Then you could make up
your own mind. All right?"

"All right," Malone said wearily. "Do it your own way. How far do we
have to go?"

"Just about an hour's drive," Boyd said. "That's all."

Malone slumped back in the seat and pushed his hat over his eyes.
"Fine," he said. "Suppose you wake me up when we get there."

But, groggy as he was, he couldn't sleep. He wished he'd had some coffee
on the plane. Maybe it would have made him feel better.

Then again, coffee was only coffee. True, he had never acquired his
father's taste for gin, but there was always bourbon.

He thought about bourbon for a few minutes. It was a nice thought. It
warmed him and made him feel a lot better. After a while, he even felt
awake enough to do some talking.

He pushed his hat back and struggled to a reasonable sitting position.
"I don't suppose you have a drink hidden away in the car somewhere?" he
said tentatively. "Or would the technicians have found that, too?"

"Better not have," Boyd said in the same tone as before, "or I'll fire a
couple of technicians." He grinned without turning. "It's in the door
compartment, next to the forty-five cartridges and the Tommy gun."

Malone opened the compartment in the thick door of the car and extracted
a bottle. It was brandy instead of the bourbon he had been thinking
about, but he discovered that he didn't mind at all. It went down as
smoothly as milk.

Boyd glanced at it momentarily as Malone screwed the top back on.

"No," Malone said in answer to the unspoken question. "You're driving."
Then he settled back again and tipped his hat forward.

He didn't sleep a wink. He was perfectly sure of that. But it wasn't
over two seconds later that Boyd said: "We're here, Ken. Wake up."

"Whadyamean, wakeup," Malone said. "I wasn't asleep." He thumbed his hat
back and sat up rapidly. "Where's 'here'?"

"Bayview Neuropsychiatric Hospital," Boyd said. "This is where Dr.
Harman works, you know."

"No," Malone said. "As a matter of fact, I don't know. You didn't tell
me--remember? And who is Dr. Harman, anyhow?"

The car was moving up a long, curving driveway toward a large,
lawn-surrounded building. Boyd spoke without looking away from the road.

"Well," he said, "this Dr. Willard Harman is the man who phoned us
yesterday. One of my field agents was out here asking around about
imbeciles and so on. Found nothing, by the way. And then this Dr. Harman
called, later. Said he had someone here I might be interested in. So I
came on out myself for a look, yesterday afternoon ... after all, we had
instructions to follow up every possible lead."

"I know," Malone said. "I wrote them."

"Oh," Boyd said. "Sure. Well, anyhow, I talked to this dame. Lady."

"And?"

"And I talked to her," Boyd said. "I'm not entirely sure of anything
myself. But ... well, hell. You take a look at her."

He pulled the car up to a parking space, slid nonchalantly into a slot
marked _Reserved--Executive Director Sutton_, and slid out from under
the wheel while Malone got out the other side.

       *       *       *       *       *

They marched up the broad steps, through the doorway and into the
glass-fronted office of the receptionist.

Boyd showed her his little golden badge, and got an appropriate gasp.
"FBI," he said. "Dr. Harman's expecting us."

The wait wasn't over fifteen seconds. Boyd and Malone marched down the
hall and around a couple of corners, and came to the doctor's office.
The door was opaqued glass with nothing but a room number stenciled on
it. Without ceremony, Boyd pushed the door open. Malone followed him
inside.

The office was small but sunny. Dr. Willard Harman sat behind a
blond-wood desk, a chunky little man with crew-cut blond hair and
rimless eyeglasses, who looked about thirty-two and couldn't possibly,
Malone thought, have been anywhere near that young. On a second look,
Malone noticed a better age indication in the eyes and forehead, and
revised his first guess upward between ten and fifteen years.

"Come in, gentlemen," Dr. Harman boomed. His voice was that rarity, a
really loud high tenor.

"Dr. Harman," Boyd said, "this is my superior, Mr. Malone. We'd like to
have a talk with Miss Thompson."

"I anticipated that, sir," Dr. Harman said. "Miss Thompson is in the
next room. Have you explained to Mr. Malone that--"

"I haven't explained a thing," Boyd said quickly, and added in what was
obviously intended to be a casual tone: "Mr. Malone wants to get a
picture of Miss Thompson directly--without any preconceptions."

"I see," Dr. Harman said. "Very well, gentlemen. Through this door."

He opened the door in the right-hand wall of the room, and Malone took
one look. It was a long, long look. Standing framed in the doorway,
dressed in the starched white of a nurse's uniform, was the most
beautiful blonde he had ever seen.

She had curves. She definitely had curves. As a matter of fact, Malone
didn't really think he had ever seen curves before. These were something
new and different and truly three-dimensional. But it wasn't the curves,
or the long straight lines of her legs, or the quiet beauty of her face,
that made her so special. After all, Malone had seen legs and bodies and
faces before.

At least, he thought he had. Off-hand, he couldn't remember where.
Looking at the girl, Malone was ready to write brand-new definitions for
every anatomical term. Even a term like "hands." Malone had never seen
anything especially arousing in the human hand before--anyway, not when
the hand was just lying around, so to speak, attached to its wrist but
not doing anything in particular. But these hands, long, slender and
tapering, white and cool-looking....

And yet, it wasn't just the sheer physical beauty of the girl. She had
something else, something more and something different. (_Something
borrowed_, Malone thought in a semi-delirious haze, _and something
blue_.) Personality? Character? Soul?

Whatever it was, Malone decided, this girl had it. She had enough of it
to supply the entire human race, and any others that might exist in the
Universe. Malone smiled at the girl and she smiled back.

After seeing the smile, Malone wasn't sure he could still walk evenly.
Somehow, though, he managed to go over to her and extend his hand. The
notion that a telepath would turn out to be this mind-searing Epitome
had never crossed his mind, but now, somehow, it seemed perfectly
fitting and proper.

"Good morning, Miss Thompson," he said in what he hoped was a winning
voice.

The smile disappeared. It was like the sun going out.

The vision appeared to be troubled. Malone was about to volunteer his
help--if necessary, for the next seventy years--when she spoke.

"I'm not Miss Thompson," she said.

"This is one of our nurses," Dr. Harman put in. "Miss Wilson, Mr.
Malone. And Mr. Boyd. Miss Thompson, gentlemen, is over there."

Malone turned.

       *       *       *       *       *

There, in a corner of the room, an old lady sat. She was a small old
lady, with apple-red cheeks and twinkling eyes. She held some knitting
in her hands, and she smiled up at the FBI men as if they were her
grandsons come for tea and cookies, of a Sunday afternoon.

She had snow-white hair that shone like a crown around her old head in
the lights of the room. Malone blinked at her. She didn't disappear.

"_You're_ Miss Thompson?" he said.

She smiled sweetly. "Oh, my, no," she said.

There was a long silence. Malone looked at her. Then he looked at the
unbelievably beautiful Miss Wilson. Then he looked at Dr. Harman. And,
at last, he looked at Boyd.

"All right," he said. "I get it. _You're_ Miss Thompson."

"Now, wait a minute, Malone," Boyd began.

"Wait a minute?" Malone said. "There are four people here, not counting
me. I know I'm not Miss Thompson. I never was, not even as a child. And
Dr. Harman isn't, and Miss Wilson isn't, and Whistler's
Great-Grandmother isn't, either. So you must be. Unless she isn't here.
Or unless she's invisible. Or unless I'm crazy."

"It isn't _you_, Malone," Boyd said.

"What isn't me?"

"That's crazy," Boyd said.

"O.K.," Malone said. "I'm not crazy. Then will somebody please tell
me--"

The little old lady cleared her throat. A silence fell. When it was
complete she spoke, and her voice was as sweet and kindly as anything
Malone had ever heard.

"You may call me Miss Thompson," she said. "For the present, at any
rate. They all do here. It's a pseudonym I have to use."

"A pseudonym?" Malone said.

"You see, Mr. Malone," Miss Wilson began.

Malone stopped her. "Don't talk," he said. "I have to concentrate and if
you talk I can barely think." He took off his hat suddenly, and began
twisting the brim in his hands. "You understand, don't you?"

The trace of a smile appeared on her face. "I think I do," she said.

"Now," Malone said, "you're Miss Thompson, but not really, because you
have to use a pseudonym." He blinked at the little old lady. "Why?"

"Well," she said, "otherwise people would find out about my little
secret."

"Your little secret," Malone said.

"That's right," the little old lady said. "I'm immortal, you see."

Malone said: "Oh." Then he kept quiet for a long time. It didn't seem to
him that anyone in the room was breathing.

He said: "Oh," again, but it didn't sound any better than it had the
first time. He tried another phrase. "You're immortal," he said.

"That's right," the little old lady agreed sweetly.

There was only one other question to ask, and Malone set his teeth
grimly and asked it. It came out just a trifle indistinct, but the
little old lady nodded.

"My real name?" she said. "Elizabeth. Elizabeth Tudor, of course. I used
to be Queen."

"Of England," Malone said faintly.

"Malone, look--" Boyd began.

"Let me get it all at once," Malone told him. "I'm strong. I can take
it." He twisted his hat again and turned back to the little old lady.

"You're immortal, and you're not really Miss Thompson, but Queen
Elizabeth I?" he said slowly.

"That's right," she said. "How clever of you. Of course, after little
Jimmy--cousin Mary's boy, I mean--said I was dead and claimed the
Throne, I decided to change my name and all. And that's what I did. But
I am Elizabeth Regina." She smiled, and her eyes twinkled merrily.
Malone stared at her for a long minute.

_Burris_, he thought, _is going to love this_.

"Oh, I'm so glad," the little old lady said. "Do you really think he
will? Because I'm sure I'll like your Mr. Burris, too. All of you FBI
men are so charming. Just like poor, poor Essex."

Well, Malone told himself, that was that. He'd found himself a telepath.

And she wasn't an imbecile.

Oh, no. That would have been simple.

Instead, she was battier than a cathedral spire.

       *       *       *       *       *

The long silence was broken by the voice of Miss Wilson.

"Mr. Malone," she said, "you've been thinking." She stopped. "I mean,
you've been so quiet."

"I like being quiet," Malone said patiently. "Besides--" He stopped and
turned to the little old lady. _Can you really read my mind?_ he thought
deliberately. After a second he added: _... your majesty?_

"How sweet of you, Mr. Malone," she said. "Nobody's called me that for
centuries. But of course I can. Although it's not reading, really. After
all, that would be like asking if I can read your voice. Of course I
can, Mr. Malone."

"That does it," Malone said. "I'm not a hard man to convince. And when I
see the truth, I'm the first one to admit it, even if it makes me look
like a nut." He turned back to the little old lady. "Begging your
pardon," he said.

"Oh, my," the little old lady said. "I really don't mind at all. Sticks
and stones, you know, can break my bones. But being called nuts, Mr.
Malone, can never hurt me. After all, it's been so many years--so many
hundreds of years--"

"Sure," Malone said easily.

Boyd broke in. "Listen, Malone," he said, "do you mind telling me what
is going on?"

"It's very simple," Malone said. "Miss Thompson here ... pardon me; I
mean Queen Elizabeth I ... really is a telepath. That's all. I think I
want to lie down somewhere until it goes away."

"Until what goes away?" Miss Wilson said.

Malone stared at her almost without seeing her, if not quite.
"Everything," he said. He closed his eyes.

"My goodness," the little old lady said after a second. "Everything's so
confused. Poor Mr. Malone is terribly shaken up by everything." She
stood up, still holding her knitting, and went across the room. Before
the astonished eyes of the doctor and nurse, and Tom Boyd, she patted
the FBI agent on the shoulder. "There, there, Mr. Malone," she said. "It
will all be perfectly all right. You'll see." Then she returned to her
seat.

Malone opened his eyes. He turned to Dr. Harman. "You called up Boyd
here," he said, "and told him that ... er ... Miss Thompson was a
telepath. Howd' you know?"

"It's all right," the little old lady put in from her chair. "I don't
mind your calling me Miss Thompson, not right now, anyhow."

"Thanks," Malone said faintly.

Dr. Harman was blinking in a kind of befuddled astonishment. "You mean
she really _is_ a--" He stopped and brought his tenor voice to a
squeaking halt, regained his professional poise, and began again. "I'd
rather not discuss the patient in her presence, Mr. Malone," he said.
"If you'll just come into my office--"

"Oh, _bosh_, Dr. Harman," the little old lady said primly. "I do wish
you'd give your own Queen credit for some ability. Goodness knows you
think _you're_ smart enough."

"Now, now, Miss Thompson," he said in what was obviously his best Grade
A Choice Government Inspected couchside manner. "Don't...."

"... Upset yourself," she finished for him. "Now, really, doctor. I know
what you're going to tell them."

"But Miss Thompson, I--"

"You didn't honestly think I _was_ a telepath," the little old lady
said. "Heavens, we know that. And you're going to tell them how I used
to say I could read minds ... oh, years and years ago. And because of
that you thought it might be worth while to tell the FBI about me--which
wasn't very kind of you, doctor, before you knew anything about why they
wanted somebody like me."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Now, now, Miss Thompson," Miss Wilson said, walking across the room to
put an arm around the little old lady's shoulder. Malone wished for one
brief second that he were the old little old lady. Maybe if he were a
patient in the hospital he would get the same treatment.

He wondered if he could possibly work such a deal.

Then he wondered if it would be worth while, being nuts. But of course
it would. He was nuts anyhow, wasn't he?

Sure, he told himself. They were all nuts.

"Nobody's going to hurt you," Miss Wilson said. She was talking to the
old lady. "You'll be perfectly all right and you don't have to worry
about a thing."

"Oh, yes, dear, I know that," the little old lady said. "You only want
to help me, dear. You're so kind. And these FBI men really don't mean
any harm. But Dr. Harman didn't know that. He just thinks I'm crazy and
that's all."

"Please, Miss Thompson--" Dr. Harman began.

"Just crazy, that's all," the little old lady said. She turned away for
a second and nobody said anything. Then she turned back. "Do you all
know what he's thinking now?" she said. Dr. Harman turned a dull purple,
but she ignored him. "He's wondering why I didn't take the trouble to
prove all this to you years ago. And besides that, he's thinking
about--"

[Illustration]

