grandiflorum; for here the long-styled form is utterly barren with its own-form
pollen, although from the position of the anthers this pollen is invariably
applied to the stigma. It is obvious that with heterostyled dimorphic plants the
two female and the two male organs differ in power; for if the same kind of
pollen be placed on the stigmas of the two forms, and again if the two kinds of
pollen be placed on the stigmas of the same form, the results are in each case
widely different. Nor can we see how this differentiation of the two female and
two male organs could have been effected merely through each kind of pollen
being habitually placed on one of the two stigmas.

Another view seems at first sight probable, namely, that an incapacity to be
fertilised in certain ways has been specially acquired by heterostyled plants.
We may suppose that our varying species was somewhat sterile (as is often the
case) with pollen from its own stamens, whether these were long or short; and
that such sterility was transferred to all the individuals with pistils and
stamens of the same length, so that these became incapable of intercrossing
freely; but that such sterility was eliminated in the case of the individuals
which differed in the length of their pistils and stamens. It is, however,
incredible that so peculiar a form of mutual infertility should have been
specially acquired unless it were highly beneficial to the species; and although
it may be beneficial to an individual plant to be sterile with its own pollen,
cross-fertilisation being thus ensured, how can it be any advantage to a plant
to be sterile with half its brethren, that is, with all the individuals
belonging to the same form? Moreover, if the sterility of the unions between
plants of the same form had been a special acquirement, we might have expected
that the long-styled form fertilised by the long-styled would have been sterile
in the same degree as the short-styled fertilised by the short-styled; but this
is hardly ever the case. On the contrary, there is sometimes the widest
difference in this respect, as between the two illegitimate unions of Pulmonaria
angustifolia and of Hottonia palustris.

It is a more probable view that the male and female organs in two sets of
individuals have been by some means specially adapted for reciprocal action; and
that the sterility between the individuals of the same set or form is an
incidental and purposeless result. The meaning of the term "incidental" may be
illustrated by the greater or less difficulty in grafting or budding together
two plants belonging to distinct species; for as this capacity is quite
immaterial to the welfare of either, it cannot have been specially acquired, and
must be the incidental result of differences in their vegetative systems. But
how the sexual elements of heterostyled plants came to differ from what they
were whilst the species was homostyled, and how they became co-adapted in two
sets of individuals, are very obscure points. We know that in the two forms of
our existing heterostyled plants the pistil always differs, and the stamens
generally differ in length; so does the stigma in structure, the anthers in
size, and the pollen-grains in diameter. It appears, therefore, at first sight
probable that organs which differ in such important respects could act on one
another only in some manner for which they had been specially adapted. The
probability of this view is supported by the curious rule that the greater the
difference in length between the pistils and stamens of the trimorphic species
of Lythrum and Oxalis, the products of which are united for reproduction, by so
much the greater is the infertility of the union. The same rule applies to the
two illegitimate unions of some dimorphic species, namely, Primula vulgaris and
Pulmonaria angustifolia; but it entirely fails in other cases, as with Hottonia
palustris and Linum grandiflorum. We shall, however, best perceive the
difficulty of understanding the nature and origin of the co-adaptation between
the reproductive organs of the two forms of heterostyled plants, by considering
the case of Linum grandiflorum: the two forms of this plant differ exclusively,
as far as we can see, in the length of their pistils; in the long-styled form,
the stamens equal the pistil in length, but their pollen has no more effect on
it than so much inorganic dust; whilst this pollen fully fertilises the short
pistil of the other form. Now, it is scarcely credible that a mere difference in
the length of the pistil can make a wide difference in its capacity for being
fertilised. We can believe this the less because with some plants, for instance,
Amsinckia spectabilis, the pistil varies greatly in length without affecting the
fertility of the individuals which are intercrossed. So again I observed that
the same plants of Primula veris and vulgaris differed to an extraordinary
degree in the length of their pistils during successive seasons; nevertheless
they yielded during these seasons exactly the same average number of seeds when
left to fertilise themselves spontaneously under a net.

We must therefore look to the appearance of inner or hidden constitutional
differences between the individuals of a varying species, of such a nature that
the male element of one set is enabled to act efficiently only on the female
element of another set. We need not doubt about the possibility of variations in
the constitution of the reproductive system of a plant, for we know that some
species vary so as to be completely self-sterile or completely self-fertile,
either in an apparently spontaneous manner or from slightly changed conditions
of life. Gartner also has shown that the individual plants of the same species
vary in their sexual powers in such a manner that one will unite with a distinct
species much more readily than another. (6/6. Gartner 'Bastarderzeugung im
Pflanzenreich' 1849 page 165.) But what the nature of the inner constitutional
differences may be between the sets or forms of the same varying species, or
between distinct species, is quite unknown. It seems therefore probable that the
species which have become heterostyled at first varied so that two or three sets
of individuals were formed differing in the length of their pistils and stamens
and in other co-adapted characters, and that almost simultaneously their
reproductive powers became modified in such a manner that the sexual elements in
one set were adapted to act on the sexual elements of another set; and
consequently that these elements in the same set or form incidentally became
ill-adapted for mutual interaction, as in the case of distinct species. I have
elsewhere shown that the sterility of species when first crossed and of their
hybrid offspring must also be looked at as merely an incidental result,
following from the special co-adaptation of the sexual elements of the same
species. (6/7. 'Origin of Species' 6th edition page 247; 'Variation of Animals
and Plants under Domestication' 2nd edition volume 2 page 169; 'The Effects of
Cross and Self-fertilisation' page 463. It may be well here to remark that,
judging from the remarkable power with which abruptly changed conditions of life
act on the reproductive system of most organisms, it is probable that the close
adaptation of the male to the female elements in the two forms of the same
heterostyled species, or in all the individuals of the same ordinary species,
could be acquired only under long-continued nearly uniform conditions of life.)
We can thus understand the striking parallelism, which has been shown to exist
between the effects of illegitimately uniting heterostyled plants and of
crossing distinct species. The great difference in the degree of sterility
between the various heterostyled species when illegitimately fertilised, and
between the two forms of the same species when similarly fertilised, harmonises
well with the view that the result is an incidental one which follows from
changes gradually effected in their reproductive systems, in order that the
sexual elements of the distinct forms should act perfectly on one another.

TRANSMISSION OF THE TWO FORMS BY HETEROSTYLED PLANTS.

The transmission of the two forms by heterostyled plants, with respect to which
many facts were given in the last chapter, may perhaps be found hereafter to
throw some light on their manner of development. Hildebrand observed that
seedlings from the long-styled form of Primula Sinensis when fertilised with
pollen from the same form were mostly long-styled, and many analogous cases have
since been observed by me. All the known cases are given in Tables 6.36 and
6.37.

TABLE 6.36. Nature of the offspring from illegitimately fertilised dimorphic
plants.

Column 1: Species and form.
Column 2: Number of long-styled offspring.
Column 3: Number of short-styled offspring.

Primula veris. Long-styled form, fertilised by own-form pollen during five
successive generations : 156 : 6.

Primula veris. Short-styled form, fertilised by own-form pollen : 5 : 9.

Primula vulgaris. Long-styled form, fertilised by own-form pollen during two
successive generations : 69 : 0.

Primula auricula. Short-styled form, fertilised by own-form pollen, is said to
produce during successive generations offspring in about the following
proportions : 25 : 75.

Primula Sinensis. Long-styled form, fertilised by own-form pollen during two
successive generations : 52 : 0.

Primula Sinensis. Long-styled form, fertilised by own-form pollen (Hildebrand) :
14 : 3.

Primula Sinensis. Short-styled form, fertilised by own-form pollen: 1 : 24.

Pulmonaria officinalis. Long-styled form, fertilised by own-form pollen : 11 :
0.

Polygonum fagopyrum. Long-styled form, fertilised by own-form pollen : 45 : 4.

Polygonum fagopyrum. Short-styled form, fertilised by own-form pollen : 13 : 20.

TABLE 6.37. Nature of the offspring from illegitimately fertilised trimorphic
plants.

Column 1: Species and form.
Column 2: Number of long-styled offspring.
Column 3: Number of mid-styled offspring.
Column 4: Number of short-styled offspring.

Lythrum salicaria. Long-styled form, fertilised by own-form pollen : 56 : 0 : 0.

Lythrum salicaria. Short-styled form, fertilised by own-form pollen : 1 : 0 : 8.

Lythrum salicaria. Short-styled form, fertilised by pollen from mid-length
stamens of long-styled form : 4 : 0 : 8.

Lythrum salicaria. Mid-styled form, fertilised by own-form pollen : 1 : 3 : 0.

Lythrum salicaria. Mid-styled form, fertilised by pollen from shortest stamens
of long-styled form : 17 : 8 : 0.

Lythrum salicaria. Mid-styled form, fertilised by pollen from longest stamens of
short-styled form : 14 : 8 : 18.

Oxalis rosea. Long-styled form, fertilised during several generations by own-
form pollen, produced offspring in the ratio of : 100 : 0 : 0.

Oxalis hedysaroides. Mid-styled form, fertilised by own-form pollen : 0 : 17 :
0.

We see in these two tables that the offspring from a form illegitimately
fertilised with pollen from another plant of the same form belong, with a few
exceptions, to the same form as their parents. For instance, out of 162
seedlings from long-styled plants of Primula veris fertilised during five
generations in this manner, 156 were long-styled and only 6 short-styled. Of 69
seedlings from P. vulgaris similarly raised all were long-styled. So it was with
56 seedlings from the long-styled form of the trimorphic Lythrum salicaria, and
with numerous seedlings from the long-styled form of Oxalis rosea. The offspring
from the short-styled forms of dimorphic plants, and from both the mid-styled
and short-styled forms of trimorphic plants, fertilised with their own-form
pollen, likewise tend to belong to the same form as their parents, but not in so
marked a manner as in the case of the long-styled form. There are three cases in
Table 6.37, in which a form of Lythrum was fertilised illegitimately with pollen
from another form; and in two of these cases all the offspring belonged to the
same two forms as their parents, whilst in the third case they belonged to all
three forms.

The cases hitherto given relate to illegitimate unions, but Hildebrand, Fritz
Muller, and myself found that a very large proportion, or all of the offspring,
from a legitimate union between any two forms of the trimorphic species of
Oxalis belonged to the same two forms. A similar rule therefore holds good with
unions which are fully fertile, as with those of an illegitimate nature which
are more or less sterile. When some of the seedlings from a heterostyled plant
belong to a different form from that of its parents, Hildebrand accounts for the
fact by reversion. For instance, the long-styled parent-plant of Primula veris,
from which the 162 illegitimate seedlings in Table 6.36 were derived in the
course of five generations, was itself no doubt derived from the union of a
long-styled and a short-styled parent; and the 6 short-styled seedlings may be
attributed to reversion to their short-styled progenitor. But it is a surprising
fact in this case, and in other similar ones, that the number of the offspring
which thus reverted was not larger. The fact is rendered still more strange in
the particular instance of P. veris, for there was no reversion until four or
five generations of long-styled plants had been raised. It may be seen in both
tables that the long-styled form transmits its form much more faithfully than
does the short-styled, when both are fertilised with their own-form pollen; and
why this should be so it is difficult to conjecture, unless it be that the
aboriginal parent-form of most heterostyled species possessed a pistil which
exceeded its own stamens considerably in length. (6/8. It may be suspected that
this was the case with Primula, judging from the length of the pistil in several
allied genera (see Mr. J. Scott 'Journal of the Linnean Society Botany' volume 8
1864 page 85). Herr Breitenbach found many specimens of Primula elatior growing
in a state of nature with some flowers on the same plant long-styled, others
short-styled and others equal-styled; and the long-styled form greatly
preponderated in number; there being 61 of this form to 9 of the short-styled
and 15 of the equal-styled.) I will only add that in a state of nature any
single plant of a trimorphic species no doubt produces all three forms; and this
may be accounted for either by its several flowers being separately fertilised
by both the other forms, as Hildebrand supposes; or by pollen from both the
other forms being deposited by insects on the stigma of the same flower.

EQUAL-STYLED VARIETIES.

The tendency of the dimorphic species of Primula to produce equal-styled
varieties deserves notice. Cases of this kind have been observed, as shown in
the last chapter, in no less than six species, namely, P. veris, vulgaris,
Sinensis, auricula, farinosa, and elatior. In the case of P. veris, the stamens
resemble in length, position and size of their pollen-grains the stamens of the
short-styled form; whilst the pistil closely resembles that of the long-styled,
but as it varies much in length, one proper to the short-styled form appears to
have been elongated and to have assumed at the same time the functions of a
long-styled pistil. Consequently the flowers are capable of spontaneous self-
fertilisation of a legitimate nature and yield a full complement of seed, or
even more than the number produced by ordinary flowers legitimately fertilised.
With P. Sinensis, on the other hand, the stamens resemble in all respects the
shorter ones proper to the long-styled form, whilst the pistil makes a near
approach to that of the short-styled, but as it varies in length, it would
appear as if a long-styled pistil had been reduced in length and modified in
function. The flowers in this case as in the last are capable of spontaneous
legitimate fertilisation, and are rather more productive than ordinary flowers
legitimately fertilised. With P. auricula and farinosa the stamens resemble
those of the short-styled form in length, but those of the long-styled in the
size of their pollen-grains; the pistil also resembles that of the long-styled,
so that although the stamens and pistil are of nearly equal length, and
consequently pollen is spontaneously deposited on the stigma, yet the flowers
are not legitimately fertilised and yield only a very moderate supply of seed.
We thus see, firstly, that equal-styled varieties have originated in various
ways, and, secondly, that the combination of the two forms in the same flower
differs in completeness. With P. elatior some of the flowers on the same plant
have become equal-styled, instead of all of them as in the other species.

Mr. Scott has suggested that the equal-styled varieties arise through reversion
to the former homostyled condition of the genus. This view is supported by the
remarkable fidelity with which the equal-styled variation is transmitted after
it has once appeared. I have shown in Chapter 13 of my 'Variation of Animals and
Plants under Domestication,' that any cause which disturbs the constitution
tends to induce reversion, and it is chiefly the cultivated species of Primula
which become equal-styled. Illegitimate fertilisation, which is an abnormal
process, is likewise an exciting cause; and with illegitimately descended long-
styled plants of P. Sinensis, I have observed the first appearance and
subsequent stages of this variation. With some other plants of P. Sinensis of
similar parentage the flowers appeared to have reverted to their original wild
condition. Again, some hybrids between P. veris and vulgaris were strictly
equal-styled, and others made a near approach to this structure. All these facts
support the view that this variation results, at least in part, from reversion
to the original state of the genus, before the species had become heterostyled.
On the other hand, some considerations indicate, as previously remarked, that
the aboriginal parent-form of Primula had a pistil which exceeded the stamens in
length. The fertility of the equal-styled varieties has been somewhat modified,
being sometimes greater and sometimes less than that of a legitimate union.
Another view, however, may be taken with respect to the origin of the equal-
styled varieties, and their appearance may be compared with that of
hermaphrodites amongst animals which properly have their sexes separated; for
the two sexes are combined in a monstrous hermaphrodite in a somewhat similar
manner as the two sexual forms are combined in the same flower of an equal-
styled variety of a heterostyled species.

FINAL REMARKS.

The existence of plants which have been rendered heterostyled is a highly
remarkable phenomenon, as the two or three forms of the same undoubted species
differ not only in important points of structure, but in the nature of their
reproductive powers. As far as structure is concerned, the two sexes of many
animals and of some plants differ to an extreme degree; and in both kingdoms the
same species may consist of males, females, and hermaphrodites. Certain
hermaphrodite cirripedes are aided in their reproduction by a whole cluster of
what I have called complemental males, which differ wonderfully from the
ordinary hermaphrodite form. With ants we have males and females, and two or
three castes of sterile females or workers. With Termites there are, as Fritz
Muller has shown, both winged and wingless males and females, besides the
workers. But in none of these cases is there any reason to believe that the
several males or several females of the same species differ in their sexual
powers, except in the atrophied condition of the reproductive organs in the
workers of social insects. Many hermaphrodite animals must unite for
reproduction, but the necessity of such union apparently depends solely on their
structure. On the other hand, with heterostyled dimorphic species there are two
females and two sets of males, and with trimorphic species three females and
three sets of males, which differ essentially in their sexual powers. We shall,
perhaps, best perceive the complex and extraordinary nature of the marriage
arrangements of a trimorphic plant by the following illustration. Let us suppose
that the individuals of the same species of ant always lived in triple
communities; and that in one of these, a large-sized female (differing also in
other characters) lived with six middle-sized and six small-sized males; in the
second community a middle-sized female lived with six large- and six small-sized
males; and in the third, a small-sized female lived with six large- and six
middle-sized males. Each of these three females, though enabled to unite with
any male, would be nearly sterile with her own two sets of males, and likewise
with two other sets of males of the same size with her own which lived in the
other two communities; but she would be fully fertile when paired with a male of
her own size. Hence the thirty-six males, distributed by half-dozens in the
three communities, would be divided into three sets of a dozen each; and these
sets, as well as the three females, would differ from one another in their
reproductive powers in exactly the same manner as do the distinct species of the
same genus. But it is a still more remarkable fact that young ants raised from
any one of the three female ants, illegitimately fertilised by a male of a
different size would resemble in a whole series of relations the hybrid
offspring from a cross between two distinct species of ants. They would be
dwarfed in stature, and more or less, or even utterly barren. Naturalists are so
much accustomed to behold great diversities of structure associated with the two
sexes, that they feel no surprise at almost any amount of difference; but
differences in sexual nature have been thought to be the very touchstone of
specific distinction. We now see that such sexual differences--the greater or
less power of fertilising and being fertilised--may characterise the co-existing
individuals of the same species, in the same manner as they characterise and
have kept separate those groups of individuals, produced during the lapse of
ages, which we rank and denominate as distinct species.


CHAPTER VII.
POLYGAMOUS, DIOECIOUS, AND GYNO-DIOECIOUS PLANTS.

The conversion in various ways of hermaphrodite into dioecious plants.
Heterostyled plants rendered dioecious.
Rubiaceae.
Verbenaceae.
Polygamous and sub-dioecious plants.
Euonymus.
Fragaria.
The two sub-forms of both sexes of Rhamnus and Epigaea.
Ilex.
Gyno-dioecious plants.
Thymus, difference in fertility of the hermaphrodite and female individuals.
Satureia.
Manner in which the two forms probably originated.
Scabiosa and other gyno-dioecious plants.
Difference in the size of the corolla in the forms of polygamous, dioecious, and
gyno-dioecious plants.

There are several groups of plants in which all the species are dioecious, and
these exhibit no rudiments in the one sex of the organs proper to the other.
About the origin of such plants nothing is known. It is possible that they may
be descended from ancient lowly organised forms, which had from the first their
sexes separated; so that they have never existed as hermaphrodites. There are,
however, many other groups of species and single ones, which from being allied
on all sides to hermaphrodites, and from exhibiting in the female flowers plain
rudiments of male organs, and conversely in the male flowers rudiments of female
organs, we may feel sure are descended from plants which formerly had the two
sexes combined in the same flower. It is a curious and obscure problem how and
why such hermaphrodites have been rendered bisexual.

If in some individuals of a species the stamens alone were to abort, females and
hermaphrodites would be left existing, of which many instances occur; and if the
female organs of the hermaphrodite were afterwards to abort, the result would be
a dioecious plant. Conversely, if we imagine the female organs alone to abort in
some individuals, males and hermaphrodites would be left; and the hermaphrodites
might afterwards be converted into females.

In other cases, as in that of the common Ash-tree mentioned in the Introduction,
the stamens are rudimentary in some individuals, the pistils in others, others
again remaining as hermaphrodites. Here the modification of the two sets of
organs appears to have occurred simultaneously, as far as we can judge from
