she could not let him find her naked.

She tried to run into the circular room. She found that the slightest
exertion of her muscles sent her spinning through the air. She could not
get her feet on the floor. There was no down and no up in that room. She
collided painfully with the metal wall and she snatched at a light
bracket to keep herself from bouncing free in the empty air again.

The god-car had landed against what was either the ceiling or the floor
of the circular room. Mryna had no way of making a differentiation.
Eight brightly lighted corridors opened into the side walls. Mryna heard
footsteps moving toward her down one of the corridors; she pulled
herself blindly into another. As she went farther from the circular
room, a vague sense of gravity returned. At the end of the corridor she
was able to stand on her feet again, although she still had to walk very
carefully. Any sudden movement sent her soaring in a graceful leap that
banged her head against the ceiling.


Cautiously she opened a thick, metal door into another hall--and she
stood transfixed, looking through a mica wall at the emptiness of space
pinpointed with its billions of stars. This was the reality of the
charts she had seen in the astronomy text: that knowledge alone saved
her sanity. She had believed it when the proof lay hidden above the rain
mist; she must believe it now.

From where she stood, she was able to see the place where the god-car
had brought her--like a vast cartwheel spinning in the void. The god-car
was clamped against the hub, from which eight corridors radiated outward
like wheel spokes toward the rim. Far below the gigantic wheel Mryna saw
the sphere of Rythar, invisible behind its shroud of glowing mist.

She moved along the rim corridor, past the mica wall, until she came to
a door that stood open. The room beyond was a sleeping compartment and
it was empty. She searched it for clothing, and found nothing. She went
through four more dormitory rooms before she came upon anything she
could use--brief shorts, clearly made for a man, and a loose, white
tunic. It wasn't suitable; it wasn't the way she wanted to be dressed
when she faced him. But it had to do.

Mryna was pawing through a footlocker looking for boots when she heard a
hesitant step behind her. She whirled and saw a small, stooped,
white-haired man, naked except for trunks like the ones she was wearing.
The wrinkled skin on his wasted chest was burned brown by the hot glare
of the sun. Thick-lensed glasses hung from a chain around his neck.

"My dear young lady," he said in a tired voice, "this is a men's ward!"

"I'm sorry. I didn't know--"

"You must be a new patient." He fumbled for his glasses. Instinctively
she knew she shouldn't let him see her clearly enough to identify her as
a stranger. She shoved past him, knocking the glasses from his hand.

"I'd better find my own--ward." Mryna didn't know the word, but she
supposed it meant some sort of sleeping chamber.

The old man said chattily, "I hadn't heard they were bringing in any new
patients today."

She was in the corridor by that time. He reached for her hand. "I'll see
you in the sunroom?" It was a timid, hopeful question. "And you'll tell
me all the news--everything they're doing back on Earth. I haven't been
home for almost a year."

She fled down the hall. When she heard voices ahead of her, she pulled
back a door and slid into another room--a storeroom piled with cases of
medicines. Behind the cartons she thought she would be safe.

This wasn't what she had expected. Mryna thought there might be one man
living in a kind of prefab somehow suspended above the rain mist. But
there were obviously others up here; she didn't know how many. And the
old man frightened her--more than the dazzling sight of the heavens
visible through the mica wall. Mryna had never seen physical age before.
No one on Rythar was older than she was herself--a sturdy, healthy,
lusty twenty. The old man's infirmity disgusted her; for the first time
in her life she was conscious of the slow decay of death.


The door of the supply room slid open. Mryna crouched low behind the
cartons, but she was able to see the man and the woman who had entered
the room. A woman--here? Mryna hadn't considered that possibility.
Perhaps the Earth-god already had a mate.

The newcomers were dressed in crisp, white uniforms; the woman wore a
starched, white hat. They carried a tray of small, glass cylinders from
which metal needles projected. While the woman held the tray, the man
drove the needles through the caps of small bottles and filled the
cylinders with a bright-colored liquid.

"When are you leaving, Dick?" the woman asked.

"In about forty minutes. They're sending an auto-pickup."

"Oh, no!"

"Now don't start worrying. They have got the bugs out of it by this
time. The auto-pickups are entirely trustworthy."

"Sure, that's what the army says."

"In theory they should be even more reliable than--"

"I wish you'd wait for the hospital shuttle."

"And miss the chance to address Congress this year? We've worked too
long for this; I don't want to muff it now. We've all the statistical
proof we need, even to convince those pinchpenny halfwits. During the
past eight years we've handled more than a thousand cases up here. On
Earth they were pronounced incurable; we've sent better than eighty per
cent back in good health after an average stay of fourteen months."

"No medical man has ever questioned the efficiency of cosmic radiation
