is redundant, and applying it when its presence is required. We should
want in fact for great sources of energy some contrivance which shall
fulfil the same purpose as the accumulators do in an electrical
installation.

Even then, however, the financial consideration remains, as to whether
the cost of building the dam and maintaining the tide-mill in good
order will not on the whole exceed the original price and the charges
for the maintenance of a hundred horse power steam-engine. There
cannot be a doubt that in this epoch of the earth's history, so long
as the price of coal is only a few shillings a ton, the tide-mill,
even though we seem to get its power without current expense, is
vastly more expensive than a steam-engine. Indeed, Sir William Thomson
remarks, that wherever a suitable tidal basin could be found, it would
be nearly as easy to reclaim the land altogether from the sea. And if
this were in any locality where manufactures were possible, the
commercial value of forty acres of reclaimed land would greatly exceed
all the expenses attending the steam-engine. But when the time comes,
as come it apparently will, that the price of coal shall have risen to
several pounds a ton, the economical aspect of steam as compared with
other prime movers will be greatly altered; it will then no doubt be
found advantageous to utilize great sources of energy, such as Niagara
and the tides, which it is now more prudent to let run to waste.

For my argument, however, it matters little that the tides are not
constrained to do much useful work. They are always doing work of some
kind, whether that be merely heating the particles of water by
friction, or vaguely transporting sand from one part of the ocean to
the other. Useful work or useless work are alike for the purpose of my
argument. We know that work can never be done unless by the
consumption or transformation of energy. For each unit of work that is
done--whether by any machine or contrivance, by the muscles of man or
any other animal, by the winds, the waves, or the tides, or in any
other way whatever--a certain equivalent quantity of energy must have
been expended. When, therefore, we see any work being performed, we
may always look for the source of energy to which the machine owes its
efficiency. In fact, it is the old story illustrated, that perpetual
motion is impossible. A mechanical device, however ingenious may be
the construction, or however accurate the workmanship, can never
possess what is called perpetual motion. It is needless to enter into
details of any proposed contrivance of wheels, of pumps, of pulleys;
it is sufficient to say that nothing in the shape of mechanism can
work without friction, that friction produces heat, that heat is a
form of energy, and that to replace the energy consumed in producing
the heat there must be some source from which the machine is
replenished if its motion is to be continued indefinitely.

Hence, as the tides may be regarded as a machine doing work, we have
to ascertain the origin of that energy which they are continually
expending. It is at this point that we first begin to feel the
difficulties inherent in the theory of tidal evolution. I do not mean
difficulties in the sense of doubts, for up to the present I have
mentioned no doubtful point. When I come to such I shall give due
warning. By difficulties I now mean points which it is not easy to
understand without a little dynamical theory; but we must face these
difficulties, and endeavour to elucidate them as well as we can.

Let us first see what the sources of energy can possibly be on which
the tides are permitted to draw. Our course is simplified by the fact
that the energy of which we have to speak is of a mechanical
description, that is to say, not involving heat or other more obscure
forms of energy. A simple type of energy is that possessed by a
clock-weight after the clock has been wound. A store of power is thus
laid up which is gradually doled out during the week in small
quantities, second by second, to sustain the motion of the pendulum.
The energy in this case is due to the fact that the weight is
attracted by the earth, and is yielded according as the weight sinks
downwards. In the separation between two mutually attracting bodies, a
store of energy is thus implied. What we learn from an ordinary clock
may be extended to the great bodies of the universe. The moon is a
gigantic globe separated from our earth by a distance of 240,000
miles. The attraction between these two bodies always tends to bring
them together. No doubt the moon is not falling towards the earth as
the descending clock-weight is doing. We may, in fact, consider the
moon, so far as our present object is concerned, to be revolving
almost in a circle, of which the earth is the centre. If the moon,
however, were to be stopped, it would at once commence to rush down
towards the earth, whither it would arrive with an awful crash in the
course of four or five days. It is fortunately true that the moon does
not behave thus; but it has the ability of doing so, and thus the mere
separation between the earth and the moon involves the existence of a
stupendous quantity of energy, capable under certain conditions of
undergoing transformation.

There is also another source of mechanical energy besides that we have
just referred to. A rapidly moving body possesses, in virtue of its
motion, a store of readily available energy, and it is easy to show
that energy of this type is capable of transformation into other
types. Think of a cannon-ball rushing through the air at a speed of a
thousand feet per second; it is capable of wreaking disaster on
anything which it meets, simply because its rapid motion is the
vehicle by which the energy of the gunpowder is transferred from the
gun to where the blow is to be struck. Had the cannon been directed
vertically upwards, then the projectile, leaving the muzzle with the
same initial velocity as before, would soar up and up, with gradually
abating speed, until at last it reached a turning-point, the elevation
of which would depend upon the initial velocity. Poised for a moment
at the summit, the cannon-ball may then be likened to the
clock-weight, for the entire energy which it possessed by its motion
has been transformed into the statical energy of a raised weight. Thus
we see these two forms of energy are mutually interchangeable. The
raised weight if allowed to fall will acquire velocity, or the rapidly
moving weight if directed upwards will acquire altitude.

The quantity of energy which can be conveyed by a rapidly moving body
increases greatly with its speed. For instance, if the speed of the
body be doubled, the energy will be increased fourfold, or, in
general, the energy which a moving body possesses may be said to be
proportional to the square of its speed. Here then we have another
source of the energy present in our earth-moon system; for the moon is
hurrying along in its path with a speed of two-thirds of a mile per
second, or about twice or three times the speed of a cannon-shot.
Hence the fact that the moon is continuously revolving in a circle
shows us that it possesses a store of energy which is nine times as
great as that which a cannon-ball as massive as the moon, and fired
with the ordinary velocity, would receive from the powder which
discharged it.

Thus we see that the moon is endowed with two sources of energy, one
of which is due to its separation from the earth, and the other to the
speed of its motion. Though these are distinct, they are connected
together by a link which it is important for us to comprehend. The
speed with which the moon revolves around the earth is connected with
the moon's distance from the earth. The moon might, for instance,
revolve in a larger circle than that which it actually pursues; but
if it did so, the speed of its motion would have to be appropriately
lessened. The orbit of the moon might have a much smaller radius than
it has at present, provided that the speed was sufficiently increased
to compensate for the increased attraction which the earth would
exercise at the lessened distance. Indeed, I am here only stating what
every one is familiar with under the form of Kepler's Law, that the
square of the periodic time is in proportion to the cube of the mean
distance. To each distance of the moon therefore belongs an
appropriate speed. The energy due to the moon's position and the
energy due to its motion are therefore connected together. One of
these quantities cannot be altered without the other undergoing
change. If the moon's orbit were increased there would be a gain of
energy due to the enlarged distance, and a loss of energy due to the
diminished speed. These would not, however, exactly compensate. On the
whole, we may represent the total energy of the moon as a single
quantity, which increases when the distance of the moon from the earth
increases, and lessens when the distance from the earth to the moon
lessens. For simplicity we may speak of this as moon-energy.

But the most important constituent of the store of energy in the
earth-moon system is that contributed by the earth itself. I do not
now speak of the energy due to the velocity of the earth in its orbit
round the sun. The moon indeed participates in this equally with the
earth, but it does not affect those mutual actions between the earth
and moon with which we are at present concerned. We are, in fact,
discussing the action of that piece of machinery the earth-moon
system; and its action is not affected by the circumstance that the
entire machine is being bodily transported around the sun in a great
annual voyage. This has little more to do with the action of our
present argument than has the fact that a man is walking about to do
with the motions of the works of the watch in his pocket. We shall,
however, have to allude to this subject further on.

The energy of the earth which is significant in the earth-moon theory
is due to the earth's rotation upon its axis. We may here again use as
an illustration the action of machinery; and the special contrivance
that I now refer to is the punching-engine that is used in our
ship-building works. In preparing a plate of iron to be riveted to the
side of a ship, a number of holes have to be made all round the margin
of the plate. These holes must be half an inch or more in diameter,
and the plate is sometimes as much as, or more than, half an inch in
thickness. The holes are produced in the metal by forcing a steel
punch through it; and this is accomplished without even heating the
plate so as to soften the iron. It is needless to say that an intense
force must be applied to the punch. On the other hand, the distance
through which the punch has to be moved is comparatively small. The
punch is attached to the end of a powerful lever, the other end of the
lever is raised by a cam, so as to depress the punch to do its work.
An essential part of the machine is a small but heavy fly-wheel
connected by gearing with the cam.

This fly-wheel when rapidly revolving contains within it, in virtue of
its motion, a large store of energy which has gradually accumulated
during the time that the punch is not actually in action. The energy
is no doubt originally supplied from a steam-engine. What we are
especially concerned with is the action of the rapidly rotating wheel
as a reservoir in which a large store of energy can be conveniently
maintained until such time as it is wanted. In the action of punching,
when the steel die comes down upon the surface of the plate, a large
quantity of energy is suddenly demanded to force the punch against the
intense resistance it experiences; the energy for this purpose is
drawn from the store in the fly-wheel, which experiences no doubt a
check in its velocity, to be regained again from the energy of the
engine during the interval which elapses before the punch is called on
to make the next hole.

Another illustration of the fly-wheel on a splendid scale is seen in
our mighty steel works, where ponderous rails are being manufactured.
A white-hot ingot of steel is presented to a pair of powerful rollers,
which grip the steel, and send it through at the other side both
compressed and elongated. Tremendous power is required to meet the
sudden demand on the machine at the critical moment. To obtain this
power an engine of stupendous proportions is sometimes attached
directly to the rollers, but more frequently an engine of rather less
horse-power will be used, the might of this engine being applied to
giving rapid rotation to an immense fly-wheel, which may thus be
regarded as a reservoir full of energy. The rolling mills then obtain
from this store in the fly-wheel whatever energy is necessary for
their gigantic task.

These illustrations will suffice to show how a rapidly rotating body
may contain energy in virtue of its rotation, just as a cannon-ball
contains energy in virtue of its speed of translation, or as a
clock-weight has energy in virtue of the fact that it has some
distance to fall before it reaches the earth. The rotating body need
not necessarily have the shape of a wheel--it may be globular in form;
nor need the axes of rotation be fixed in bearings, like those of the
fly-wheel; nor of course is there any limit to the dimensions which
the rotating body may assume. Our earth is, in fact, a vast rotating
body 8000 miles in diameter, and turning round upon its axis once
every twenty-three hours and fifty-six minutes. Viewed in this way,
the earth is to be regarded as a gigantic fly-wheel containing a
quantity of energy great in correspondence with the earth's mass. The
amount of energy which can be stored by rotation also depends upon the
square of the velocity with which the body turns round; thus if our
earth turned round in half the time which it does at present, that is,
if the day was twelve hours instead of twenty-four hours, the energy
contained in virtue of that rotation would be four times its present
amount.

Reverting now to the earth-moon system, the energy which that system
contains consists essentially of two parts--the moon-energy, whose
composite character I have already explained, and the earth-energy,
which has its origin solely in the rotation of the earth on its axis.
It is necessary to observe that these are essentially distinct--there
is no necessary relation between the speed of the earth's rotation and
the distance of the moon, such as there is between the distance of the
moon and the speed with which it revolves in its orbit.

For completeness, it ought to be added that there is also some energy
due to the moon's rotation on its axis, but this is very small for
two reasons: first, because the moon is small compared with the
earth, and second, because the angular velocity of the moon is also
very small compared with that of the earth. We may therefore dismiss
as insignificant the contributions from this source of energy to the
sum total.

I have frequently used illustrations derived from machinery, but I
want now to emphasize the profound distinction that exists between the
rotation of the earth and the rotation of a fly-wheel in a machine
shop. They are both, no doubt, energy-holders, but it must be borne in
mind, that as the fly-wheel doles out its energy to supply the wants
of the machines with which it is connected, a restitution of its store
is continually going on by the action of the engine, so that on the
whole the speed of the fly-wheel does not slacken. The earth, however,
must be likened to a fly-wheel which has been disconnected with the
engine. If, therefore, the earth have to supply certain demands on its
accumulation of energy, it can only do so by a diminution of its
hoard, and this involves a sacrifice of some of its speed.

In the earth-moon system there is no engine at hand to restore the
losses of energy which are inevitable when work has to be done. But we
have seen that work is done; we have shown, in fact, that the tides
are at present doing work, and have been doing work for as long a
period in the past as our imagination can extend to. The energy which
this work has necessitated can only have been drawn from the existing
store in the system; that energy consists of two parts--the
moon-energy and the earth's rotation energy. The problem therefore for
us to consider is, which of these two banks the tides have drawn on to
meet their constant expenditure. This is not a question that can be
decided offhand; in fact, if we attempt to decide it in an offhand
manner we shall certainly go wrong. It seems so very plausible to say
that as the moon causes the tides, therefore the energy which these
tides expend should be contributed by the moon. But this is not the
case. It actually happens that though the moon does cause the tides,
yet when those tides consume energy they draw it not from the distant
moon, but from the vast supply which they find ready to their hand,
stored up in the rotation of the earth.

The demonstration of this is not a very simple matter; in fact, it is
so far from being simple that many philosophers, including some
eminent ones too, while admitting that of course the tides must have
drawn their energy from one or other or both of these two sources, yet
found themselves unable to assign how the demand was distributed
between the two conceivable sources of supply.

We are indebted to Professor Purser of Belfast for having indicated
the true dynamical principle on which the problem depends. It involves
reasoning based simply on the laws of motion and on elementary
mathematics, but not in the least involving questions of astronomical
observation. It would be impossible for me in a lecture like this to
give any explanation of the mathematical principles referred to. I
shall, however, endeavour by some illustrations to set before you what
this profound principle really is. Were I to give it the old name I
should call it the law of the conservation of areas; the more modern
writers, however, speak of it as the conservation of moment of
momentum, an expression which exhibits the nature of the principle in
a more definite manner.

I do not see how to give any very accurate illustration of what this
law means, but I must make the attempt, and if you think the
illustration beneath the dignity of the subject, I can only plead the
difficulty of mathematics as an excuse. Let us suppose that a
ball-room is fairly filled with dancers, or those willing to dance,
and that a merry waltz is being played; the couples have formed, and
the floor is occupied with pairs who are whirling round and round in
that delightful amusement. Some couples drop out for a while and
others strike in; the fewer couples there are the wider is the range
around which they can waltz, the more numerous the couples the less
individual range will they possess. I want you to realize that in the
progress of the dance there is a certain total quantity of spin at any
moment in progress; this spin is partly made up of the rotation by
which each dancer revolves round his partner, and partly of the
circular orbit about the room which each couple endeavours to
describe. If there are too many couples on the floor for the general
enjoyment of the dance, then both the orbit and the angular velocity
of each couple will be restricted by the interference with their
neighbours. We may, however, assert that so long as the dance is in
full swing the total quantity of spin, partly rotational and partly
orbital, will remain constant. When there are but few couples the
unimpeded rotation and the large orbits will produce as much spin as
when there is a much larger number of couples, for in the latter case
the diminished freedom will lessen the quantity of spin produced by
each individual pair. It will sometimes happen too that collision will
take place, but the slight diversions thus arising only increase the
general merriment, so that the total quantity of spin may be
sustained, even though one or two couples are placed temporarily _hors
de combat_. I have invoked a ball-room for the purpose of bringing out
what we may call the law of the conservation of spin. No matter how
much the individual performers may change, or no matter what
vicissitudes arise from their collision and other mutual actions, yet
the total quantity of spin remains unchanged.

Let us look at the earth-moon system. The law of the conservation of
moment of momentum may, with sufficient accuracy for our present
purpose, be interpreted to mean that the total quantity of spin in the
system remains unaltered. In our system the spin is threefold; there
is first the rotation of the earth on its axis, there is the rotation
of the moon on its axis, and then there is the orbital revolution of
the moon around the earth. The law to which we refer asserts that the
total quantity of these three spins, each estimated in the proper way,
will remain constant. It matters not that tides may ebb and flow, or
that the distribution of the spin shall vary, but its total amount
remains inflexibly constant. One constituent of the total amount--that
is, the rotation of the moon on its axis--is so insignificant, that
for our present purposes it may be entirely disregarded. We may
therefore assert that the amount of spin in the earth, due to its
rotation round its axis, added to the amount of spin in the moon due
to its revolution round the earth, remains unalterable. If one of
these quantities change by increase or by decrease, the other must
correspondingly change by decrease or by increase. If, therefore, from
any cause, the earth began to spin a little more quickly round its
axis, the moon must do a little less spin; and consequently, it must
shorten its distance from the earth. Or suppose that the earth's
velocity of rotation is abated, then its contribution to the total
amount of spin is lessened; the deficiency must therefore be made up
by the moon, but this can only be done by an enlargement of the moon's
orbit. I should add, as a caution, that these results are true only on
the supposition that the earth-moon system is isolated from all
external interference. With this proviso, however, it matters not what
may happen to the earth or moon, or what influence one of them may
exert upon the other, no matter what tides may be raised, no matter
even if the earth fly into fragments, the whole quantity of spin of
all those fragments would, if added to the spin of the moon, yield the
same unalterable total. We are here in possession of a most valuable
dynamical principle. We are not concerned with any special theory as
to the action of the tides; it is sufficient for us that in some way
or other the tides have been caused by the moon, and that being so,
the principle of the conservation of spin will apply.

Were the earth and the moon both rigid bodies, then there could be of
course no tides on the earth, it being rigid and devoid of ocean. The
rotation of the earth on its axis would therefore be absolutely
without change, and therefore the necessary condition of the
conservation of spin would be very simply attained by the fact that
neither of the constituent parts changed. The earth, however, not
being entirely rigid, and being subject to tides, this simple state of
things cannot continue; there must be some change in progress.

I have already shown that the fact of the ebbing and the flowing of
the tide necessitates an expenditure of energy, and we saw that this
energy must come either from that stored up in the earth by its
rotation, or from that possessed by the moon in virtue of its distance
and revolution. The law of the conservation of spin will enable us to
decide at once as to whence the tides get their energy. Suppose they
took it from the moon, the moon would then lose in energy, and
consequently come nearer the earth. The quantity of spin contributed
by the moon would therefore be lessened, and accordingly the spin to
be made up by the earth would be increased. That means, of course,
that the velocity of the earth rotating on its axis must be increased,
and this again would necessitate an increase in the earth's rotational
energy. It can be shown, too, that to keep the total spin right, the
energy of the earth would have to gain more than the moon would have
lost by revolving in a smaller orbit. Thus we find that the total
quantity of energy in the system would be increased. This would lead
to the absurd result that the action of the tides manufactured energy
in our system. Of course, such a doctrine cannot be true; it would
amount to a perpetual motion! We might as well try to get a
steam-engine which would produce enough heat by friction not only to
supply its own boilers, but to satisfy all the thermal wants of the
whole parish. We must therefore adopt the other alternative. The tides
do not draw their energy from the moon; they draw it from the store
possessed by the earth in virtue of its rotation.

We can now state the end of this rather long discussion in a very
simple and brief manner. Energy can only be yielded by the earth at
the expense of some of the speed of its rotation. The tides must
therefore cause the earth to revolve more slowly; in other words, _the
tides are increasing the length of the day_.

The earth therefore loses some of its velocity of rotation;
