"I fail to see," said Pete, "just why you had to drag me all the way
from L.A. to have a cigar. I've got work to do."

"Selling movies, right?" said Tommy.

"Check."

"To people who don't want to buy them, right?"

"In a manner of speaking," said Pete testily.

"Exactly," said Tommy. "Considering some of the movies you've been
selling, you should be able to sell anything to anybody, any time, at
any price."

"Please. Movies are getting Better by the Day."

"Yes, I know. And the Grdznth are getting worse by the hour. They're
coming through in battalions--a thousand a day! The more Grdznth come
through, the more they act as though they own the place. Not nasty or
anything--it's that infernal politeness that people hate most, I think.
Can't get them mad, can't get them into a fight, but they do anything
they please, and go anywhere they please, and if the people don't like
it, the Grdznth just go right ahead anyway."

Pete pulled at his lip. "Any violence?"

Tommy gave him a long look. "So far we've kept it out of the papers, but
there have been some incidents. Didn't hurt the Grdznth a bit--they have
personal protective force fields around them, a little point they didn't
bother to tell us about. Anybody who tries anything fancy gets thrown
like a bolt of lightning hit him. Rumors are getting wild--people saying
they can't be killed, that they're just moving in to stay."

Pete nodded slowly. "Are they?"

"I wish I knew. I mean, for sure. The psych-docs say no. The Grdznth
agreed to leave at a specified time, and something in their cultural
background makes them stick strictly to their agreements. But that's
just what the psych-docs think, and they've been known to be wrong."

"And the appointed time?"

Tommy spread his hands helplessly. "If we knew, you'd still be in L.A.
Roughly six months and four days, plus or minus a month for the time
differential. That's strictly tentative, according to the math boys.
It's a parallel universe, one of several thousand already explored,
according to the Grdznth scientists working with Charlie Karns. Most of
the parallels are analogous, and we happen to be analogous to the
Grdznth, a point we've omitted from our PR-blasts. They have an
eight-planet system around a hot sun, and it's going to get lots hotter
any day now."

Pete's eyes widened. "Nova?"

"Apparently. Nobody knows how they predicted it, but they did. Spotted
it coming several years ago, so they've been romping through parallel
after parallel trying to find one they can migrate to. They found one,
sort of a desperation choice. It's cold and arid and full of impassable
mountain chains. With an uphill fight they can make it support a
fraction of their population."

Tommy shook his head helplessly. "They picked a very sensible system for
getting a good strong Grdznth population on the new parallel as fast as
possible. The males were picked for brains, education, ability and
adaptability; the females were chosen largely according to how pregnant
they were."

Pete grinned. "Grdznth in utero. There's something poetic about it."

"Just one hitch," said Tommy. "The girls can't gestate in that climate,
at least not until they've been there long enough to get their glands
adjusted. Seems we have just the right climate here for gestating
Grdznth, even better than at home. So they came begging for permission
to stop here, on the way through, to rest and parturiate."

"So Earth becomes a glorified incubator." Pete got to his feet
thoughtfully. "This is all very touching," he said, "but it just doesn't
wash. If the Grdznth are so unpopular with the masses, why did we let
them in here in the first place?" He looked narrowly at Tommy. "To be
very blunt, what's the parking fee?"

"Plenty," said Tommy heavily. "That's the trouble, you see. The fee is
so high, Earth just can't afford to lose it. Charlie Karns'll tell you
why."

       *       *       *       *       *

Charlie Karns from Math Section was an intense skeleton of a man with a
long jaw and a long white coat drooping over his shoulders like a
shroud. In his arms he clutched a small black box.

"It's the parallel universe business, of course," he said to Pete, with
Tommy beaming over his shoulder. "The Grdznth can cross through. They've
been able to do it for a long time. According to our figuring, this must
involve complete control of mass, space and dimension, all three. And
time comes into one of the three--we aren't sure which."

The mathematician set the black box on the desk top and released the
lid. Like a jack-in-the-box, two small white plastic spheres popped out
and began chasing each other about in the air six inches above the box.
Presently a third sphere rose up from the box and joined the fun.

Pete watched it with his jaw sagging until his head began to spin. "No
wires?"

