
"Well, O.K.," Max said doubtfully, still scowling but evidently a
servant of an officer, if he wanted to be or not.

"Sir," the sergeant added ominously. "If you've had basic, you know
enough how to address an officer."

"Well, yessir," Max said hurriedly.

Joe began to turn away, but then spotted the man immediately behind Max
Mainz. He was one of the three with whom Joe had tangled earlier, the
one who'd obviously had previous combat experience. He pointed the man
out to the sergeant. "You'd better give this lad at least temporary rank
of corporal. He's a veteran and we're short of veterans."

The sergeant said, "Yes, sir. We sure are." Joe's former foe looked
properly thankful.

       *       *       *       *       *

Joe Mauser finished off his own red tape and headed for the street to
locate a military tailor who could do him up a set of the Haer kilts and
fill his other dress requirements. As he went, he wondered vaguely just
how many different uniforms he had worn in his time.

In a career as long as his own from time to time you took semi-permanent
positions in bodyguards, company police, or possibly the permanent
combat troops of this corporation or that. But largely, if you were
ambitious, you signed up for the fracases and that meant into a uniform
and out of it again in as short a period as a couple of weeks.

At the door he tried to move aside but was too slow for the quick moving
young woman who caromed off him. He caught her arm to prevent her from
stumbling. She looked at him with less than thanks.

Joe took the blame for the collision. "Sorry," he said. "I'm afraid I
didn't see you, Miss."

"Obviously," she said coldly. Her eyes went up and down him, and for a
moment he wondered where he had seen her before. Somewhere, he was sure.

She was dressed as they dress who have never considered cost and she had
an elusive beauty which would have been even the more hadn't her face
projected quite such a serious outlook. Her features were more delicate
than those to which he was usually attracted. Her lips were less full,
but still-- He was reminded of the classic ideal of the British Romantic
Period, the women sung of by Byron and Keats, Shelly and Moore.

She said, "Is there any particular reason why you should be staring at
me, Mr.--"

"Captain Mauser," Joe said hurriedly. "I'm afraid I've been rude,
Miss--Well, I thought I recognized you."

She took in his civilian dress, typed it automatically, and came to an
erroneous conclusion. She said, "Captain? You mean that with everyone
else I know drawing down ranks from Lieutenant Colonel to Brigadier
General, you can't make anything better than Captain?"

Joe winced. He said carefully, "I came up from the ranks, Miss. Captain
is quite an achievement, believe me."

"Up from the ranks!" She took in his clothes again. "You mean you're a
Middle? You neither talk nor look like a Middle, captain." She used the
caste rating as though it was not _quite_ a derogatory term.

Not that she meant to be deliberately insulting, Joe knew, wearily. How
well he knew. It was simply born in her. As once a well-educated
aristocracy had, not necessarily unkindly, named their status inferiors
_niggers_; or other aristocrats, in another area of the country, had
named theirs _greasers_. Yes, how well he knew.

He said very evenly, "Mid-Middle now, Miss. However, I was born in the
Lower castes."

An eyebrow went up. "Zen! You must have put in many an hour studying.
You talk like an Upper, captain." She dropped all interest in him and
turned to resume her journey.

"Just a moment," Joe said. "You can't go in there, Miss--"

Her eyebrows went up again. "The name is Haer," she said. "Why can't I
go in here, captain?"

Now it came to him why he had thought he recognized her. She had basic
features similar to those of that overbred poppycock, Balt Haer.

"Sorry," Joe said. "I suppose under the circumstances, you can. I was
about to tell you that they're recruiting with lads running around half
clothed. Medical inspections, that sort of thing."

She made a noise through her nose and said over her shoulder, even as
she sailed on. "Besides being a Haer, I'm an M.D., captain. At the
ludicrous sight of a man shuffling about in his shorts, I seldom blush."

She was gone.

Joe Mauser looked after her. "I'll bet you don't," he muttered.

Had she waited a few minutes he could have explained his Upper accent
and his unlikely education. When you'd copped one you had plenty of
opportunity in hospital beds to read, to study, to contemplate--and to
fester away in your own schemes of rebellion against fate. And Joe had
copped many in his time.




III


By the time Joe Mauser called it a day and retired to his quarters he
was exhausted to the point where his basic dissatisfaction with the
trade he followed was heavily upon him.

He had met his immediate senior officers, largely dilettante Uppers with
precious little field experience, and was unimpressed. And he'd met his
own junior officers and was shocked. By the looks of things at this
stage, Captain Mauser's squadron would be going into this fracas both
undermanned with Rank Privates and with junior officers composed largely
of temporarily promoted noncoms. If this was typical of Baron Haer's
total force, then Balt Haer had been correct; unconditional surrender
was to be considered, no matter how disastrous to Haer family fortunes.

Joe had been able to take immediate delivery of one kilted uniform. Now,
inside his quarters, he began stripping out of his jacket. Somewhat to
his surprise, the small man he had selected earlier in the day to be his
batman entered from an inner room, also resplendent in the Haer uniform
and obviously happily so.

He helped his superior out of the jacket with an ease that held no
subservience but at the same time was correctly respectful. You'd have
thought him a batman specially trained.

Joe grunted, "Max, isn't it? I'd forgotten about you. Glad you found our
billet all right."

Max said, "Yes, sir. Would the captain like a drink? I picked up a
bottle of applejack. Applejack's the drink around here, sir. Makes a
topnotch highball with ginger ale and a twist of lemon."

Joe Mauser looked at him. Evidently his tapping this man for orderly had
been sheer fortune. Well, Joe Mauser could use some good luck on this
job. He hoped it didn't end with selecting a batman.

Joe said, "An applejack highball sounds wonderful, Max. Got ice?"

"Of course, sir." Max left the small room.

Joe Mauser and his officers were billeted in what had once been a motel
on the old road between Kingston and Woodstock. There was a shower and a
tiny kitchenette in each cottage. That was one advantage in a fracas
held in an area where there were plenty of facilities. Such military
reservations as that of the Little Big Horn in Montana and particularly
some of those in the South West and Mexico, were another thing.

Joe lowered himself into the room's easy-chair and bent down to untie
his laces. He kicked his shoes off. He could use that drink. He began
wondering all over again if his scheme for winning this Vacuum Tube
Transport versus Continental Hovercraft fracas would come off. The more
he saw of Baron Haer's inadequate forces, the more he wondered. He
hadn't expected Vacuum Tube to be in _this_ bad a shape. Baron Haer had
been riding high for so long that one would have thought his reputation
for victory would have lured many a veteran to his colors. Evidently
they hadn't bitten. The word was out all right.

Max Mainz returned with the drink.

Joe said, "You had one yourself?"

"No, sir."

Joe said, "Well, Zen, go get yourself one and come on back and sit down.
Let's get acquainted."

"Well, yessir." Max disappeared back into the kitchenette to return
almost immediately. The little man slid into a chair, drink awkwardly in
hand.

His superior sized him up, all over again. Not much more than a kid,
really. Surprisingly aggressive for a Lower who must have been raised
from childhood in a trank-bemused, Telly-entertained household. The fact
that he'd broken away from that environment at all was to his credit, it
was considerably easier to conform. But then it is always easier to
conform, to run with the herd, as Joe well knew. His own break hadn't
been an easy one. "Relax," he said now.

Max said, "Well, this is my first day."

"I know. And you've been seeing Telly shows all your life showing how an
orderly conducts himself in the presence of his superior." Joe took
another pull and yawned. "Well, forget about it. With any man who goes
into a fracas with me, I like to be on close terms. When things pickle,
I want him to be on my side, not nursing some peeve brought on by his
officer trying to give him an inferiority complex."

The little man was eying him in surprise.

Joe finished his highball and came to his feet to get another one. He
said, "On two occasions I've had an orderly save my life. I'm not taking
any chances but that there might be a third opportunity."

"Well, yessir. Does the captain want me to get him--"

"I'll get it," Joe said.

When he'd returned to his chair, he said, "Why did you join up with
Baron Haer, Max?"

The other shrugged it off. "The usual. The excitement. The idea of all
those fans watching me on Telly. The share of common stock I'll get.
And, you never know, maybe a promotion in caste. I wouldn't mind making
Upper-Lower."

Joe said sourly, "One fracas and you'll be over that desire to have the
buffs watching you on Telly while they sit around in their front rooms
sucking on tranks. And you'll probably be over the desire for the
excitement, too. Of course, the share of stock is another thing."

"You aren't just countin' down, captain," Max said, an almost surly
overtone in his voice. "You don't know what it's like being born with no
more common stock shares than a Mid-Lower."

Joe held his peace, sipping at his drink, taking this one more slowly.
He let his eyebrows rise to encourage the other to go on.

Max said doggedly, "Sure, they call it People's Capitalism and everybody
gets issued enough shares to insure him a basic living all the way from
the cradle to the grave, like they say. But let me tell you, you're a
Middle and you don't realize how basic the basic living of a Lower can
be."

Joe yawned. If he hadn't been so tired, there would have been more
amusement in the situation.

Max was still dogged. "Unless you can add to those shares of stock, it's
pretty drab, captain. You wouldn't know."

Joe said, "Why don't you work? A Lower can always add to his stock by
working."

Max stirred in indignity. "Work? Listen, sir, that's just one more field
that's been automated right out of existence. Category Food Preparation,
Sub-division Cooking, Branch Chef. Cooking isn't left in the hands of
slobs who might drop a cake of soap into the soup. It's done automatic.
The only new changes made in cooking are by real top experts, almost
scientists like. And most of them are Uppers, mind you."

Joe Mauser sighed inwardly. So his find in batmen wasn't going to be as
wonderful as all that, after all. The man might have been born into the
food preparation category from a long line of chefs, but evidently he
knew precious little about his field. Joe might have suspected. He
himself had been born into Clothing Category, Sub-division Shoes, Branch
Repair--Cobbler--a meaningless trade since shoes were no longer
repaired but discarded upon showing signs of wear. In an economy of
complete abundance, there is little reason for repair of basic
commodities. It was high time the government investigated category
assignment and reshuffled and reassigned half the nation's population.
But then, of course, was the question of what to do with the
technologically unemployed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Max was saying, "The only way I could figure on a promotion to a higher
caste, or the only way to earn stock shares, was by crossing categories.
And you know what that means. Either Category Military, or Category
Religion and I sure as Zen don't know nothing about religion."

Joe said mildly, "Theoretically, you can cross categories into any field
you want, Max."

Max snorted. "Theoretically is right ... sir. You ever heard about
anybody born a Lower, or even a Middle like yourself, cross categories
to, say, some Upper category like banking?"

Joe chuckled. He liked this peppery little fellow. If Max worked out as
well as Joe thought he might, there was a possibility of taking him
along to the next fracas.

Max was saying, "I'm not saying anything against the old time way of
doing things or talking against the government, but I'll tell you,
captain, every year goes by it gets harder and harder for a man to raise
his caste or to earn some additional stock shares."

The applejack had worked enough on Joe for him to rise against one of
his pet peeves. He said, "That term, the old time way, is strictly Telly
talk, Max. We don't do things _the old time way_. No nation in history
ever has--with the possible exception of Egypt. Socio-economics are in a
continual flux and here in this country we no more do things in the way
they did fifty years ago, than fifty years ago they did them the way the
American Revolutionists outlined back in the Eighteenth Century."

Max was staring at him. "I don't get that, sir."

Joe said impatiently, "Max, the politico-economic system we have today
is an outgrowth of what went earlier. The welfare state, the freezing of
the status quo, the Frigid Fracas between the West-world and the
Sov-world, industrial automation until useful employment is all but
needless--all these things were to be found in embryo more than fifty
years ago."

"Well, maybe the captain's right, but you gotta admit, sir, that mostly
we do things the old way. We still got the Constitution and the
two-party system and--"

Joe was wearying of the conversation now. You seldom ran into anyone,
even in Middle caste, the traditionally professional class, interested
enough in such subjects to be worth arguing with. He said, "The
Constitution, Max, has got to the point of the Bible. Interpret it the
way you wish, and you can find anything. If not, you can always make a
new amendment. So far as the two-party system is concerned, what effect
