
It was far from a warm welcome, but Jonas was satisfied with it. "I
shall work to do you good," he said, "and not evil."

"Stranger," Scharpe said, "work for your own good; do nothing for me.
This is an accursed family; there is no good to be done to me, or my
wife or child."

Jonas tried to look reassuring. He thought of several things to say
about the sunny side of life, and decided on none or them. "My
sympathy--" he began.

"Your sympathy may endanger you," Scharpe said. "My son is gone; I pray
that there is an end to it."

Jonas peered once into the mind of the man, and recoiled violently; but
he had enough, in that one glimpse, to tell him the reason for Scharpe's
misery. And it was quite reason enough, he thought.

"Herr Knupf--"

"We do not mention that name," Scharpe said. "My wife has resigned
herself to what has happened; I am not so wise."

"I promise you," Jonas said earnestly, "that you will be in no danger
from me. No, more: that I will help you out of your difficulties, and
ensure your peace."

"Then you are an angel from Heaven," Scharpe said bitterly. "There is no
other help, while the Inquisitor remains and our sons become suspect to
his rages."

Jonas shook his head. "There is help," he said, "and you will find it.
Your son is gone; accused, questioned, confessed and burnt. But there
will be no more."

Scharpe looked at him for a long time. "Come with me," he said at last,
and led the way into his mud house. Inside, there was only one large
room, but it seemed spacious enough for four. Three pallets lay against
the far right wall, a single one against the left. Scharpe went to the
back of the house, near the single bed. "This will be yours," he said,
"while you are with us. It is poor but it is all we can offer."

"I am honored," Jonas said.

"Here we are alone," Scharpe went on, his voice lowering. "My wife and
daughter have gone to visit a neighbor, for they have not yet closed us
off entirely from all human contact."

[Illustration]

He grimaced. Jonas peered into the mind again, very gently, but the mad
roiling of pain and memory there was too strong for him, and he
returned.

"If you have anything to say to me," Scharpe said, "tell me now. No one
can hear us, not Herr Knupf himself."

"To say to you?"

"Regarding your plan," Scharpe said. "Surely you have a plan. And if I
may play any part in it--"

Jonas blinked. "Plan?" he said.

"Of course," Scharpe said. "You speak of an end to troubles, an end to
the Inquisition and the burnings, an end to the question. And so you
must have a plan for ridding us of Herr Knupf; one which you will tell
me."

Jonas shook his head. "I have no plan," he said.

"It means danger," Scharpe pressed him. "But I do not mind danger, in
such a cause. I am not vengeful, but my son was no wizard. Yet the
Inquisitor took him and had a confession from him; you know well the
worth of such confessions. And soon there will be others, for when the
curse strikes a family it does not stop with one member." He tightened
his lips. "It is not for myself I am afraid," he said.

Jonas nodded. "Were there such a plan," he said, "be assured I would
tell you."

"But--"

"There is none," Jonas said. "Herr Knupf shall remain, for all that I
can do, while the earth remains."

Scharpe opened his mouth, shut it again, and then shrugged. "I see," he
said at last. "You do not trust me. Perhaps you are wise. I might talk
foolishly; I am an old man; older, in this last month, than in all my
other years."

"Believe me," Jonas began. "I--"

"Let it be," Scharpe said quietly. "I believe you. If that is what you
want, I believe you." He shrugged again, moving out toward the door of
the hut. "And, in any case," he said, "the money is needed. For there
are fines to pay, and costs of the Inquisition."

"I understand," Jonas said helplessly.

Scharpe turned and looked him full in the face. In the big man's eyes,
bitterness and hopelessness glittered. "I am sure you do," he said, and
turned again toward the door.

       *       *       *       *       *

The others he met only briefly. Frau Scharpe was a little woman with the
face of a walnut, who looked as if she had never really been cheerful.
Her son's death, he saw when he looked into her mind, had not come as a
surprise to her; it was one more unhappy event, in a lifetime in which
she had expected nothing else. Unhappiness, she told herself, was her
portion in this life; in the Life Above, things would be different.

Jonas had met the type before, and was uninterested in going further.
But Ilse Scharpe was something else entirely. She did not say a word to
him, coming into the house that evening, a pace behind her mother, like
an obedient slave. She was about seventeen, and her mind was as fresh
and clean and pretty as her face and figure. Jonas started musing on
Heroes again, but he never had the chance to make a move toward her. She
had a very nice smile, and from memories in the others' minds he could
hear her voice, low and quiet and entirely satisfactory.

Jonas sighed. The job, he told himself sternly, came first. And
afterward--

Though, come to think of it, there wouldn't be an afterward.

The evening meal was simple. There was a single dish of meat and some
sort of beans; after it had been eaten, and the darkness outside grew to
full night, it was time to retire. Jonas went over to his pallet,
removed his jerkin and shoes, and lay down. He heard the others readying
themselves for sleep, but he did not look into their minds. Soon they
were asleep and breathing heavily.

But Jonas stayed awake for a while.

"It's really too bad we can't work this sort of thing at a distance,"
Claerten's voice said suddenly. "But then, none of us has ever met the
man, and you can't read a mind if you haven't had some physical contact
with the man who owns it."

