Stranger, my house will be honored."

[Illustration]

"Mother bless thee, Bearded One," the Murnan said. He dismounted,
tossing his reins to one of the four retainers who remained on
horseback. He entered the tent after Aaron; and stared about him at the
animals, letting his dark eyes flick across Martha's unveiled face. At
the Amishman's invitation, the visitor sat himself on a tobacco case,
revealing as he crossed his legs elaborately embroidered trousers and
boot tops worked with designs that would dazzle a Texan. Martha bustled
about hiding the remains of their meal.

The Murnan's outer dress was a woolen _riga_, the neckless gown of his
West-African forefathers, with a blanket draped about his shoulders,
exactly as those ancestors had worn one in the season of the cold wind
called harmattan. Aaron introduced himself as Haruna, the Hausa version
of his name; and the guest made himself known as Sarki--Chief--of the
village of Datura. His given name was Kazunzumi. Wutzchen snuffled in
his sleep. The Sarki glanced at the huge pig and smiled. Aaron relaxed a
bit. The Islamic interdict on swine had been shed by the Murnans when
they'd become apostates, just as Colonial Survey had guessed.

Stoltzfoos' Hausa, learned at the Homestead School at Georgetown
University, proved adequate to its first challenge in the field, though
he discovered, with every experimenter in a new language, that his most
useful phrase was _magana sanoo-sanoo_: "please speak slowly." Aaron let
the Chief commence the desultory conversation that would precede talk of
consequence. Martha, ignored by the men, sat on the edge of the bed,
reading the big German-language Bible. Aaron and Kazunzumi sang on in
the heathen tongue about weather, beasts, and field-crops.

The Sarki leaned forward to examine Aaron's beard and shaven upper lip,
once; and smiled. The Murnan does not wear such. He looked at Martha
more casually now, seeing that the husband was not disgraced by his
wife's naked face; and remarked on the whiteness of her skin in the same
tones he'd mentioned Wutzchen's remarkable girth.

Aaron asked when the snows would cease, when the earth would thaw. The
Sarki told him, and said that the land here was as rich as manure.
Gradually the talk worked round to problems involving carpenters, nails,
lumber, hinges--and money. Aaron was pleased to discover that the
natives thought nothing of digging a cellar and raising a barn in
midwinter, and that workers could be easily hired.

Suddenly Sarki Kazunzumi stood and slapped his palms together. The tent
flap was shoved open. Bowed servants, who'd shivered outside for over an
hour, placed their master's presents on the sack table, on the twig
floor, even beside Martha on the bed. There were iron knives, a roast
kid, a basket of peanuts, a sack of roasted coffee beans, a string of
dried fruit, and a tiny earthware flask of perfume. There was even a
woolen riga for Aaron, black, suggesting that the Survey had said a bit
to the natives about Amish custom; and there were bolts of
bright-patterned cloth too worldly for aught but quilts and
infant-dresses, brightening Martha's eyes.

Aaron stood to accept the guest gifts with elaborate thanks. Sarki
Kazunzumi as elaborately bemeaned his offerings. "Musa the carpenter
will appear on tomorrow's tomorrow," he said. "You will, the Mother
willing, visit me in Datura tomorrow. We will together purchase lumber
worthy of my friend-neighbor's barn-making. May the Mother give you
strength to farm, Haruna! May the Mother grant you the light of
understanding!"

"_Sannu, sannu!_" Stoltzfoos responded. He stood at the door of his
tent, holding his lantern high to watch the Sarki and his servants ride
off into the darkness.

       *       *       *       *       *

"_Er iss en groesie Fisch, nee?_" Martha asked.

"The biggest fish in these parts," Aaron agreed. "Did you understand our
talk?"

"The heathen speech is hard for me to learn, Stoltz," Martha admitted,
speaking in the dialect they'd both been reared to. "While you had only
the alien speech to study, I spent my time learning to grow the buglets
and tell the various sorts apart. Besides, _unser guutie Deitschie
Schproech, asz unser Erlayser schwetzt, iss guut genunk fa mier_." (Our
honest German tongue, that our Saviour spoke, is good enough for me).

Aaron laughed. "So _altfashuned_ a _Maedel_ I married," he said. "Woman,
you must learn the Hausa, too. We must be friends to these _Schwotzers_,
as we were friends with the English-speakers back in the United
Schtayts." He pushed aside the bolt of Murnan cloth to sit beside his
wife, and leafed through the pages of their _Familien-Bibel_, pages
lovingly worn by his father's fingers, and his grandfather's. "Listen,"
he commanded:

"_For the Lord thy God bringeth thee into a good land, a land of brooks
of water, of fountains and depths that spring out of valleys and hills;
a land of wheat, and barley, and vines, and fig trees, and pomegranates;
a land of oil olive, and honey; a land wherein thou shalt eat bread
without scarceness, thou shalt not lack any thing in it; a land whose
stones are iron, and out of whose hills thou mayest dig brass. When thou
hast eaten and art full, then thou shalt bless the Lord they God for the
good land which He hath given thee._" Aaron closed the big book
reverently. "Awmen," he said.

"Awmen," the woman echoed. "Aaron, with you beside me, I am not
fretful."

"And with the Lord above us, I fear not in a strange land," Aaron said.
He bent to scrape a handful of earth from beneath Martha's pine-twig
carpet. "_Guuter Gruundt_," he said. "This will grow tall corn. Tobacco,
too; the folk here relish our leaf. There will be deep grasses for the
beasts when the snow melts. We will prosper here, wife."

The next morning was cold, but the snowfall had ceased for a spell. The
Stoltzfooses had risen well before the dawn; Martha to feed herself, her
husband, and the chickens; Aaron to ready the horse and wagon for a trip
into Datura. He counted out the hoard of golden cowries he'd been loaned
as grubstake, did some arithmetic, and allowed his wife to pour him a
second cup of coffee for the road. "You may expect the Sarki's wives to
visit while I'm gone," he remarked.

"I'd be scared half to death!" Martha Stoltzfoos said. Her hands went to
the back of her head, behind the lace prayer covering. "My hair's all
strooby, this place is untidy as an auction yard; besides, how can I
talk with those dark and heathen women? Them all decked out in golden
bangles and silken clothes, most likely, like the bad lady of Babylon?
Aaron Stoltz, I would admire a pretty to ride into town with you."

"Haggling for hired-help is man's _Bissiniss_." he said. "When
Kazunzumi's women come, feed them pie and peaches from the can. You'll
find a way to talk, or women are not sisters. I'll be back home in time
for evening chores."

       *       *       *       *       *

Bumping along the trail into Datura, Aaron Stoltzfoos studied the land.
A world that could allow so much well-drained black soil to go unfarmed
was fortunate indeed, he mused. He thought of his father's farm, which
would be his elder brother's, squeezed between railroad tracks and a
three-lane highway, pressed from the west by an Armstrong Cork plant,
the very cornstalks humming in harmony with the electric lines strung
across the fields. This land was what the old folks had sought in
America so long ago: a wilderness ripe for the plow.

The wagon rumbled along the hoof-pocked frozen clay. Aaron analyzed the
contours of the hills for watershed and signs of erosion. He studied the
patterns of the barren winter fields, fall-plowed and showing here and
there the stubble of a crop he didn't recognize. When the clouds scudded
for a moment off the sun, he grinned up, and looked back blinded to the
road. Good tilth and friendship were promised here, gifts to balance
loneliness. Five years from spring, other Amish folk would come to
homestead--what a barn-raising they'd have! For now, though, he and
Martha, come from a society so close-knit that each had always known the
yield-per-acre of their remotest cousin-german, were in a land as
strange as the New York City Aaron, stopping in for a phone-call to the
vet had once glimpsed on the screen of a gay-German neighbor's
stereo-set.

Datura looked to Aaron like a city from the Bible, giving it a certain
vicarious familiarity. The great wall was a block of sunbaked mud, fifty
feet tall at the battlements, forty feet thick at its base; with bright,
meaningless flags spotted on either side of the entrance tower. The
cowhide-shielded gate was open. Birds popped out of mud nests glued to
the mud wall and chattered at Aaron. Small boys wearing too little to be
warm appeared at the opening like flies at a hog-slaughtering to add to
the din, buzzing and hopping about and waving their arms as they called
companions to view the black-bearded stranger.

Aaron whoaed his horse and took a handful of _anenes_, copper
tenth-penny bits, to rattle between his hands. "_Zonang!_" he shouted:
"Come here! Is there a boy amongst you brave enough to ride with an
off-worlder to the Sarki's house, pointing him the way?"

One of the boys laughed at Aaron's slow, careful Hausa. "Let Black-Hat's
whiskers point him the way!" the boy yelled.

"_Uwaka! Ubaka!_" Damning both parents of the rude one, another
youngster trotted up to Aaron's wagon and raised a skinny brown fist in
greeting. "Sir Off-Worlder, I who am named Waziri, Musa-the-Carpenter's
son, would be honored to direct you to the house of Sarki Kazunzumi."

"The honor, young man, is mine," Stoltzfoos assured the lad, raising his
own fist gravely. "My name is Haruna, son of Levi," he said, reaching
down to hoist the boy up beside him on the wagon's seat. "Your friends
