in the filtre is calcarious, and the liquor which passed thro', if mixed
with a dissolved alkali, yields a white powder, the largest portion of
which is a true _magnesia_.

From this experiment it appears, that an acid quits a calcarious earth
to join itself to _magnesia_; but the exchange being performed slowly,
some of the _magnesia_ is still undissolved, and part of the calcarious
earth remains yet joined to the acid.

When a small quantity of _magnesia_ is thrown into a solution of the
corrosive sublimate of mercury, it soon separates part of the mercury in
the form of a dark red powder, and is itself dissolved.

Imagining that I perceived some resemblance between the properties of
_magnesia_ and those of alkalis, I was led to try what change this
substance would suffer from the addition of quick-lime, which alters in
such a peculiar manner the alkaline salts.

Twenty seven grains of _magnesia_ in fine powder were mixed with
eighteen ounces of lime-water in a flask, which was corked close and
shaken frequently for four days. During this time, I frequently dipp'd
into it little bits of paper, which were coloured with the juice of
violets; and these became green as soon as they touched the water, until
the fourth day, when their colour did not seem to be altered. The water
being now poured off, was intirely insipid, and agreed in every
chemical trial with pure water. The powder, after being perfectly well
dried, weighed thirty seven grains. It did not dissolve intirely in
spirit of vitriol; but, after a brisk effervescence, part of it subsided
in the same manner as the calcarious earths, when mixed with this acid.

When I first tried this experiment, I was at the trouble of digesting
the mixture in the heat of boiling water, and did not then know that it
would succeed in the heat of the air. But Dr. _Alston_, who has obliged
the world with many curious and useful discoveries on the subject of
quick-lime, having had occasion to repeat it, I learned from him that
heat is not necessary; and he has moreover added an useful purpose to
which this property of _magnesia_ may be applied; I mean the sweetening
of water at sea, with which lime may have been mixed to prevent its
putrefaction.

That part of the dried powder which does not dissolve in spirit of
vitriol, consists of the lime separated from the water.

Quick-lime itself is also rendered mild by _magnesia_, if these two are
well rubbed together and infused with a small quantity of water.

By the following experiments, I proposed to know whether this substance
could be reduced to a quick-lime.

An ounce of _magnesia_ was exposed in a crucible for about an hour to
such a heat as is sufficient to melt copper. When taken out, it weighed
three drams and one scruple, or had lost 7/12 of its former weight.

I repeated, with the _magnesia_ prepared in this manner, most of those
experiments I had already made upon it before calcination, and the
result was as follows.

It dissolves in all the acids, and with these composes salts exactly
similar to those described in the first set of experiments: but what is
particularly to be remarked, it is dissolved without any the least
degree of effervescence.

It slowly precipitates the corrosive sublimate of mercury in the form of
a black powder.

It separates the volatile alkali in salt ammoniac from the acid, when it
is mixed with a warm solution of that salt. But it does not separate an
acid from a calcarious earth, nor does it induce the least change upon
lime-water.

Lastly, when a dram of it is digested with an ounce of water in a bottle
for some hours, it does not make any the least change in the water. The
_magnesia_, when dried, is found to have gained ten grains; but it
neither effervesces with acids, nor does it sensibly affect lime-water.

Observing _magnesia_ to lose such a remarkable proportion of its weight
in the fire, my next attempts were directed to the investigation of this
volatile part, and, among other experiments, the following seemed to
throw some light upon it.

Three ounces of _magnesia_ were distilled in a glass retort and
receiver, the fire being gradually increased until the _magnesia_ was
obscurely red hot. When all was cool, I found only five drams of a
whitish water in the receiver, which had a faint smell of the spirit of
hartshorn, gave a green colour to the juice of violets, and rendered the
solutions of corrosive sublimate and of silver very slightly turbid. But
it did not sensibly effervesce with acids.

The _magnesia_, when taken out of the retort, weighed an ounce, three
drams, and thirty grains, or had lost more than the half of its weight.
It still effervesced pretty briskly with acids, tho' not so strongly as
before this operation.

The fire should have been raised here to the degree requisite for the
perfect calcination of _magnesia_. But even from this imperfect
experiment, it is evident, that of the volatile parts contained in that
powder, a small proportion only is water; the rest cannot, it seems, be
retained in vessels, under a visible form. Chemists have often observed,
in their distillations, that part of a body has vanished from their
senses, notwithstanding the utmost care to retain it; and they have
always found, upon further inquiry, that subtile part to be air, which
having been imprisoned in the body, under a solid form, was set free and
rendered fluid and elastic by the fire. We may therefore safely
conclude, that the volatile matter, lost in the calcination of
_magnesia_, is mostly air; and hence the calcined _magnesia_ does not
emit air, or make an effervescence, when mixed with acids.

The water, from its properties, seems to contain a small portion of
volatile alkali, which was probably formed from the earth, air, and
water, or from some of these combined together; and perhaps also from a
small quantity of inflammable matter which adhered accidentally to the
_magnesia_. Whenever Chemists meet with this salt, they are inclined to
ascribe its origin to some animal, or putrid vegetable, substance; and
this they have always done, when they obtained it from the calcarious
earths, all of which afford a small quantity of it. There is, however,
no doubt that it can sometimes be produced independently of any such
mixture, since many fresh vegetables and tartar afford a considerable
quantity of it. And how can it, in the present instance, be supposed,
that any animal or vegetable matter adhered to the _magnesia_, while it
was dissolved by an acid, separated from this by an alkali, and washed
with so much water?

Two drams of _magnesia_ were calcined in a crucible, in the manner
described above, and thus reduced to two scruples and twelve grains.
This calcined _magnesia_ was dissolved in a sufficient quantity of
spirit of vitriol, and then again separated from the acid by the
addition of an alkali, of which a large quantity is necessary for this
purpose. The _magnesia_ being very well washed and dryed, weighed one
dram and fifty grains. It effervesced violently, or emitted a large
quantity of air, when thrown into acids, formed a red powder when mixed
with a solution of sublimate, separated the calcarious earths from an
acid, and sweetened lime-water: and had thus recovered all those
properties which it had but just now lost by calcination: nor had it
only recovered its original properties, but acquired besides an addition
of weight nearly equal to what had been lost in the fire; and, as it is
found to effervesce with acids, part of the addition must certainly be
air.

This air seems to have been furnished by the alkali from which it was
separated by the acid; for Dr. _Hales_ has clearly proved, that alkaline
salts contain a large quantity of fixed air, which they emit in great
abundance when joined to a pure acid. In the present case, the alkali is
really joined to an acid, but without any visible emission of air; and
yet the air is not retained in it: for the neutral salt, into which it
is converted, is the same in quantity, and in every other respect, as if
the acid employed had not been previously saturated with _magnesia_, but
offered to the alkali in its pure state, and had driven the air out of
it in their conflict. It seems therefore evident, that the air was
forced from the alkali by the acid, and lodged itself in the _magnesia_.

These considerations led me to try a few experiments, whereby I might
know what quantity of air is expelled from an alkali, or from
_magnesia_, by acids.

Two drams of a pure fixed alkaline salt, and an ounce of water, were put
into a Florentine flask, which, together with its contents, weighed two
ounces and two drams. Some oil of vitriol diluted with water was dropt
in, until the salt was exactly saturated; which it was found to be, when
two drams, two scruples, and three grains of this acid had been added.
The vial with its contents now weighed two ounces, four drams, and
fifteen grains. One scruple, therefore, and eight grains were lost
during the ebullition, of which a trifling portion may be water, or
something of the same kind. The rest is air.

The celebrated _Homberg_ has attempted to estimate the quantity of solid
salt contained in a determined portion of the several acids. He
saturated equal quantities of an alkali with each of them; and,
observing the weight which the alkali had gained, after being perfectly
dryed, took this for the quantity of solid salt contained in that share
of the acid which performed the saturation. But we learn from the above
experiment, that his estimate was not accurate, because the alkali loses
weight as well as gains it.

Two drams of _magnesia_, treated exactly as the alkali in the last
experiment, were just dissolved by four drams, one scruple, and seven
grains of the same acid liquor, and lost one scruple and sixteen grains
by the ebullition.

Two drams of _magnesia_ were reduced, by the action of a violent fire,
to two scruples and twelve grains, with which the same process was
repeated, as in the two last experiments; four drams, one scruple, and
two grains of the same acid were required to compleat the solution, and
no weight was lost in the experiment.

As in the separation of the volatile from the fixed parts of bodies, by
means of heat, a small quantity of the latter is generally raised with
the former; so the air and water, originally contained in the
