       *       *       *       *       *

As the days passed, to grow into weeks and then, months, Florel wandered
over the land. Sometimes, he took service with a captain, who would
engage in a campaign. Sometimes, he took service with one of the lesser
nobility. A few times, he ran with the bands of the forest and road, to
rob travelers. But he was cautious to avoid the great Earls, realizing
the danger of detection.

Always, he kept his direction to the east, knowing that he would have to
reach the sea and cross to the eastern land before he could feel
completely safe. His store of money and of goods grew, and he hoarded it
against the time when he would use it.

Sometimes, he posed as a merchant, traveling the land with the caravans.
But always, he followed his path eastward.

       *       *       *       *       *

Florel Derikuna looked back at the line of pack animals. It had been a
long trip, and a hard one. He smiled grimly to himself as he remembered
the last robber attack. For a time, he had thought the caravan guard was
going to be overwhelmed. He might have had to join with the robbers, as
he had done before. And that would have delayed his plans. He looked
ahead again, toward the hill, crowned with its great, stone castle.

This, then, was the land of the east--the farthest march of the land of
the east. It had taken him a long, cautious time to get here. And he had
spent his days in fear of a searching party from Budorn, even when he
had reached the seacoast itself. But here, he would be safe. None from
this land had ever been even to the mountainous backbone of his own
land, he was sure. And certainly, there would be no travelers who had
guided their steps from here to faraway Budorn and back.

None here knew Budorn, excepting him. Flor, the serf--now Florel
Derikuna, swordsman at large--was in a new land. And he would take a
new, more useful identity. He looked at the stone buildings of the town
and its castle.

They were not unlike the castles and towns of his native land, he
thought. There were differences, of course, but only in the small
things. And he had gotten used to those by now. He had even managed to
learn the peculiar language of the country. He smiled again. That
coronet he always wore beneath his steel cap had served him well. It had
more powers than he had dreamed of when he had first held it in his
hands in those distant woods.

Here in Dweros, he thought, he could complete his change. Here, he could
take service with the Duke as a young man of noble blood, once afflicted
with a restless urge for travel, but now ready to establish himself. By
now, he had learned to act. It had not been for nothing that he had
carefully studied the ways of the nobility.

The caravan clattered through the gate beneath the castle, twisted
through the streets just beyond the wall, and stopped in the market
place. Derikuna urged his mount ahead and confronted the merchant.

"Here is my destination," he said. "So, we'll settle up, and I'll be on
my way."

The merchant looked at him with a certain amount of relief. The man, he
knew, was a tough fighter. His efforts had been largely the cause of the
failure of bandits to capture the caravan only a few days before. But
there was something about him that repelled. He was a man to be feared,
not liked. Somehow, the merchant felt he was well rid of this guard,
despite his demonstrated ability. He reached into his clothing and
produced two bags.

"We hate to lose you, Derikuna," he dissembled. "Here is your normal
wage." He held out one bag. "And this second purse is a present, in
memory of your gallant defense of the caravan."

Derikuna smiled sardonically. "Thank you," he said, "and good trading."
He reined away.

He had caught the semi-fearful thoughts. Well, that was nothing unusual.
Everybody became fearful of the iron hat sooner or later. Here, they
would learn to respect him, too. Though their respect would be for a
different name. Nor would they be able to deny him aught. They might not
like him. That, he had no interest in. They'd do his will. And they'd
never forget him.

He rode to an inn, where he ordered food and lodging. His meal over, he
saw to his beasts, then had a servant take his baggage to his room.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shortly after daybreak, he awoke. He blinked at the light, stirred
restlessly, and got out of bed. Rubbing his eyes, he walked to the other
side of the room.

For a few minutes, he looked at the trough in the floor and the water
bucket standing near it. At last, he shrugged and started splashing
water over himself. This morning, he spent more time than usual, being
sure that no vestige of beard was left on his face, and that he was
perfectly clean. He completed his bath by dashing perfumed water over
his entire body.

He opened his traveling chest, picking out clothing he had worn but few
times, and those in private. At last, he examined his reflection in a
mirror, and nodded in satisfaction.

"Truly," he told himself, "a fine example of western nobility."

He picked out a few expensive ornaments from his chest, then locked it
again and left the inn.

He guided his mount through the narrow streets to the castle gate, where
he confronted a sleepy, heavily-armed sentry.

"Send word to the castle steward," he ordered, throwing his riding cloak
back, "that Florel, younger son of the Earl of Konewar, would pay his
respects to your master, the Duke of Dwerostel."

The man eyed him for a moment, then straightened and grounded his pike
with a crash.

"It shall be done, sir." He turned and struck a gong.

A guard officer came through the tunnel under the wall. For a moment, he
looked doubtful, then he spoke respectfully and ushered Derikuna through
the inner court to a small apartment, where he turned him over to a
steward.

"You wish audience with His Excellency?"

"I do, My Man. I wish to pay him my respects, and those of my father,
the Earl of Konewar." Derikuna looked haughtily at the man.

Like the guard officer, the steward seemed doubtful. For a few seconds,
he seemed about to demur. Then, he bowed respectfully.

"Very well, sir." With a final, curious glance at the coronet which
shone in Florel's hair, the steward clapped his hands. A page hurried
into the room and bowed.

"Your orders, sir?"

"We have a noble guest. Bring refreshment, at once." The steward waved
to a table. "If Your Honor will wait here?"

Florel inclined his head, strode to a chair, and sat down. He looked
amusedly after the disappearing steward. The coronet of the old Earl, he
thought, was a truly potent talisman. Even the disdainful stewards of
castles bowed to its force. And, thought the impostor, so would his
master--when the time came.

       *       *       *       *       *

The page reappeared with a flagon of wine and some cakes. Florel was
sampling them when the steward returned. The man bowed respectfully,
waited for Florel to finish his wine, and led the way through a corridor
to a heavy pair of doors, which he swung open.

"Florel, Son of Konewar," he announced ceremoniously.

The Duke flipped a bone to one of his dogs, shoved his plate aside, and
looked up. Florel walked forward a few paces, stopped, and bowed low.

"Your Excellency."

As he straightened, he realized that he was the object of an intense
scrutiny. At last, the Duke nodded.

"We had no notice of your coming."

Florel smiled. "I have been traveling alone, Excellency, and incognito.
For some years, I have been wandering, to satisfy my desire to see the
world." He glanced down at his clothing.

"I arrived in your town last evening, and delayed only to make myself
presentable before appearing to pay my respects."

"Very good. Punctuality in meeting social obligations is a mark of good
breeding." The Duke eyed Florel's costume.

"Tell me, young man, do all your nobility affect the insignia you wear?"

Florel's hand rose to his coronet. "Only members of the older families,
Excellency."

"I see." The nobleman nodded thoughtfully. "We have heard rumors of your
fashions in dress, though no member of any of the great families of
your realm has ever come so far before. We are somewhat isolated here."
He looked sharply at the younger man.

"Rumor also has it that this is more than mere insignia you wear. I have
heard it said that your ornaments give more than mortal powers to their
wearer. Is this true?"

Florel hesitated for an instant, then recognized the desired response.
Of course this eastern noble would not welcome the thought that there
were others who had greater powers than he. And he would certainly
resent any suggestions that a young visitor to his court had such
powers.

"Oh, that," he said easily. "Legends, really. The truth is that the
wearing of the coronet and belt is restricted to members of the older,
more honorable families. And even these must prove their ability at arms
and statecraft before being invested with the insignia. Too, knowledge
of long lineage and gentle birth makes a man more bold--possibly even
more skillful than the average." He smiled ingratiatingly.

"You, yourself, recognize your own superiority in all ways over your
retainers, your vassals, and your townspeople. And so are we above the
common man. This insignia is but the outward symbol of that
superiority."

The Duke nodded, satisfied. He waved a hand.

"Sit down, young man. You must remain at our court for a time. We are
hungry for news of the distant lands."

Florel congratulated himself. Well embellished gossip, he had found, was
a popular form of entertainment in camp and court alike, and his store
of gossip was large and carefully gathered. Here at Dweros, far from the
center of the kingdom, his store of tales would last for a long
time--probably as long as he needed.

During the days and nights that followed, he exerted himself to gain the
favor of the Duke and his household. Much of his time, he spent
entertaining others with his tales. But he kept his own ears and eyes
open. He became a constant visitor at the castle, finally being offered
the use of one of the small apartments, which he graciously accepted.
And, of course, he was invited to join the hunts.

Hunting, he discovered, could be a pleasant pastime--so long as it was
another who was doing the hard work of beating. And his own experience
as a beater proved valuable. He was familiar with the ways and the
haunts of animals. What had once been a matter of survival became a road
to acclaim. He was known before long as a skillful, daring hunter.

       *       *       *       *       *

At length, he decided the time was right to talk to the Duke of more
serious things. The duchy was at the very border of the kingdom. To the
north lay territory occupied only by barbaric tribes, who frequently
descended on the northern baronies, to rob travelers of their goods, or
to loot villages. Having secured their loot, the tribesmen retreated to
their mountains before a fighting force could come up with them.

Florel came upon the Duke while he was considering the news of one of
these raids.

"Your Excellency, these border raids could be halted. A strong hand is
all that is needed, at the right place. A determined knight, established
on the Menstal, could command the river crossing and the pass, thus
preventing either entry or exit."

"To be sure." The Duke sighed wearily. "But the mountains of Menstal are
inhospitable. Knights have occupied the heights, protecting the border
for a time, to be sure, but the land has always escheated to the duchy.
A small watchtower is kept manned even now, but it's a hungry land, and
one which would drain even a baron's funds. I have no knight who wants
it."

Florel smiled. He had plans concerning the Menstal, and the great river,
the Nalen, which raced between high cliffs.

"The merchants, who use the Nalen for their shipments, would welcome
protection from the robber bands, I think, as would the travelers of the
roads."

"And?" The Duke looked at him thoughtfully.

"Possibly a small tax?" Florel smiled deprecatingly. "Sufficient to
maintain a garrison?"

"And who would collect the tax?"

"That, Excellency, I could arrange. I have funds, adequate to garrison
the tower of the Menstal, and even to make it livable for a considerable
force of men. And I believe I could maintain and increase a garrison
there that would serve to hold the barbarians at bay."

"Let me think this over." The Duke sat back, toying with his cup. "It is
true," he mused, "that Menstal is the key to the border. And the small
garrison there has proved expensive and ineffective." He tapped the cup
on the table, then set it down and looked about the apartment. Finally,
he looked up at Florel.

