for the Day of the Prophet."

Watson continued to watch the great airship, noting the swarm of smaller
craft that came out from the Mahovisal to greet it, until the Jan Lucar
suddenly altered the course. They stopped climbing, and struck out on a
horizontal level. It left the Mahovisal behind them, a shimmering spot
of fire beside the gleaming sea. They were travelling eastwards. The
landscape below was level and unvaried, of a greenish hue, and much
like that of Chick's own earth in the early spring-time--a vast expanse,
level and sometimes dotted with opalescent towns and cities. Ribbons of
silver cut through the plain at intervals, crookedly lazy and winding,
indicating a drainage from north to south or vice versa. Looking back to
the west, he could see the great, golden sun, poised as he had seen it
that morning, a huge amber plate on the rim of the world. It was sunset.

Then Chick looked straight ahead. Far in the distance a great wall
loomed skyward to a terrific height. So vast was it and so remote, at
first it had escaped the eye altogether. An incredibly high range
of mountains, glowing with a faint rose blush under the touch of the
setting sun. Against the sky were many peaks, each of them tipped with
curious and sparkling diamond-like corruscations. As Chick continued to
gaze the rose began to purple.

The Jan Lucar put the craft to another upward climb. So high were they
now that the Thomahlia below was totally lost from view; it was but
a maze of lurking shadows. The sun was only a gash of amber--it was
twilight down on the ground. And Watson watched the black line of the
Thomahlian shadow climb the purple heights before him until only the
highest crests and the jewelled crags flashed in the sun's last rays.
Then, one by one, they flickered out; and all was darkness.

Still they ascended. Watson became uneasy, sitting there in the night.

"Where are we going?"

"To the Carbon Regions, my lord. It is one of the sights of the
Thomahlia."

"On top of those mountains?"

"Beyond, my lord."

Whereupon, to Chick's growing amazement, the Geos went on to state that
carbon of all sorts was extremely common throughout their world. The
same forces that had formed coal so generously upon the earth had thrown
up, almost as lavishly, huge quantities of pure diamond. The material
was of all colours, as diamonds run, and considered of small value; for
every day purposes they preferred substances of more sombre hues. They
used it, it seemed, to build houses with.

"But how do they cut it?"

"Very easily. The material which drives this craft--Ilodium--will cut it
like butter."

Later, Watson understood. He watched as the craft continued to climb;
the Jan Lucar was steering without the aid of any outside lights
whatever, there being only a small light illuminating his instruments.
Chick presently turned his gaze outside again; whereupon he got another
jolt.

He saw a NEGATIVE sky!

At first he thought his eyes the victims of an illusion; then he looked
closer. And he saw that it was true; instead of the familiar starry
points of light against a velvet background, the arrangement was
just the reverse. Every constellation was in its place, just as Chick
remembered it from the earth; but instead of stars there were jet-black
spots upon a faint, grey background.

The whole sky was one huge Milky Way, except for the black spots. And
from it all there shone just about as much total light as from the
heavens he had known.

Of all he experienced, this was the most disturbing. It seemed totally
against all reason; for he knew the stars to be great incandescent
globes in space. How explain that they were here represented in reverse,
their brilliance scattered and diffused over the surrounding sky,
leaving points of blackness instead? Afterward he learned that the
peculiar chemical constituency of the atmosphere was solely responsible
for the inversion of the usual order of things.

All of a sudden the Jan Lucar switched the craft to a level. He held up
one hand and pointed.

"Look, my lord, and the Rhamda! Look!"

Both men rose from their seats, the better to stare past the soldier.
Straight ahead, where had been one of the corruscating peaks, a streak
of blue fire shot skyward, a column of light miles high, differing
from the beams of a searchlight in that the rays were WAVY, serpentine,
instead of straight. It was weirdly beautiful. Geos caught his breath;
he leaned forward and touched the Jan Lucar.

"Wait," he said in an awed tone. "Wait a moment. It has never come
before, but we can expect it now." And even as he spoke, something
wonderful happened.

From the base of the column two other streaks, one red and the other
bright green, cut out through the blackness on either side. The three
streams started from the same point; they made a sort of trident, red,
green, and blue--twisting, alive--strangely impressive, suggestive of
grandeur and omnipotence--holy.

Again the Rhamda spoke. "Wait!" said he. "Wait!"

They were barely moving now. Watson watched and wondered. The three
streams of light ran up and up, as though they would pierce the heavens;
the eye could not follow their ends. All in utter silence, nothing but
those beams of glorified light, their reality a hint of power, of life
and wisdom--of the certainty of things. Plainly it had a tremendous
significance in the minds of the Geos and the Lucar.

Then came the climax. Slowly, but somehow inexorably, like the laws of
life itself, and somewhere at a prodigious height above the earth, the
three outer ends of the red and the green and the blue spread out
and flared back upon themselves and one another, until their combined
brilliance bridged a great rainbow across the sky. Blending into all
the colours of the prism, the bow became--for a moment--pregnant with
an overpowering beauty, symbolical, portentous of something stupendous
about to come out of the unknown to the Thomahlians. And next--

The bow began to move, to swirl, and to change in shape and colour. The
three great rivers of light billowed and expanded and rounded into a new
form. Then they burst--into a vast, three-leafed clover--blue and red
and green!

And Watson caught the startled words of the Geos:

"The Sign of the Jarados!"




XXXVIII

THE VOICE FROM THE VOID


Even while that inexplicable heavenly pageant still burned against the
heavens, something else took place, a thing of much greater importance
to Chick. And, it happened right before his eyes.

In the front of the car was a dial, slightly raised above the level of
the various controlling instruments. And all of a sudden this dial, a
small affair about six inches across, broke into light and life.

First, there was a white blaze that covered the whole disc; then the
whiteness abruptly gave way to a flood of colour, which resolved itself
into a perfect miniature of the tri-coloured cloverleaf in the sky
ahead. Chick saw, however that the positions of the red and green were
just the obverse of what glowed in the distance; and then he heard the
voice, strong and distinct, speaking with a slight metallic twang as
from a microphone hidden in that little, blazing, coloured leaf:

"Listen, ye who have ears to listen!"

It was said in the Thomahlian tongue. The Geos breathed:

"The voice of the Prophet Jarados!"

But the next moment the unseen speaker began in another language--clear,
silver, musical--in English, and in a voice that Chick recognised!

"Chick! You have done well, my boy. Your courage and your intuition may
lead us out. Follow the prophecy to the letter, Chick; it MUST come
to pass, exactly as it is written! Don't fail to read it, there on the
walls of the Temple of the Bell, when you encounter the Bar Senestro on
the Day of the Prophet!

"I have discovered many things, my boy, but I am not omnipotent. Your
coming has made possible my last hope that I may return to my own kind,
and take with me the secrets of life. You have done right to trust your
instinct; have no fear, yet remember that if you--if we--make one false
step we are lost.

"Finally, if you should succeed in your contest with the Senestro, I
shall send for you; but if you fail, I know how to die.

"Return at once to the Mahovisal. Don't cross into the Region of Carbon.
Take care how you go back; the Bars are waiting. But you can put full
confidence in the Rhamdas."

Then the speaker dropped the language of the earth and used the
Thomahlian tongue again: "It is I who speak--I, the Prophet; the Prophet
Jarados!"

All in the voice of Dr. Holcomb.

The blazing leaf faded into blackness, and the talking ceased. Chick was
glad of the darkness; the whole thing was like magic, and too good
to believe. The first actual words from the missing professor! Each
syllable was frozen into Watson's memory.

The Geos was clutching his arm.

"Did you understand, my lord? We heard the voice of the prophet! What
did he say?"

"Yes, I understand. He used his own language--my language. And he
said"--taking the reins firmly into his hands--"he said that we must
return to the Thomahlia. And we must beware of the Bars."

There was no thought of questioning him. Without waiting the Geos'
command, the Jan Lucar began putting the craft about. Watson glanced at
the sky; the great spectacle was gone; and he demanded of the soldier:

"How can we get back? How do we find our way?"

For there was no visible light save the strange, fitful glow from
that uncanny sky to guide them; no lights from the inky carpet of the
Thomahlia, lights such as one would expect for the benefit of fliers.
But the soldier touched a button, and instantly another and larger dial
was illumined above the instruments.

It revealed a map or chart of a vast portion of the Thomahlia. On the
farther edge there appeared an area coloured to represent water, and
adjoining this area was a square spot labeled "The Mahovisal." And about
midway from this point to the near edge of the dial a red dot hung,
moving slowly over the chart.

"The red dot, my lord, indicates our position," explained the Jan. "In
that manner we know at all times where we are located, and which way we
are flying. We shall arrive in the Mahovisal shortly."

As he spoke the craft was gaining speed, and soon was travelling at
an even greater rate than before. The red dot began to crawl at an
astonishing speed. Of course, they had the benefit of the pull of
gravity, now; apparently they would make the journey in a few minutes.
But incredible though the speed might be, there was nothing but the red
dot to show it.

The Geos felt like talking. "My lord, the sign is conclusive. It is a
marvel, such as only the prophet could possibly have produced; with all
our science we could not duplicate such splendour. Only once before has
the Thomahlia seen it."

Already they were near enough to the surface to make out the clustered,
blinking lights of the towns on the plain below. Ahead of them queer
streamers of pale rays thrust through the darkness. Watson recognised
them as the beams of the far-distant searchlights; and then and there
he gave thanks for one thing, at least, in which the Thomahlians had
seemingly progressed no further than the people of the earth.

Coming a little nearer, Chick made out a number of bright, glittering,
insect-like objects, revealed by these searchlights. The Jan Lucar said:

"The Bars, my lord. They are waiting; and they will head us off if they
can."

"The work of Senestro, I suppose. I thought he claimed to some honour."

"It is not the prince's work, my lord," replied the soldier. "His
D'Hartian and Kospian followers, some of them, have no scruples as to
how they might slay the 'false one', as they think you."

"Suppose," hazarded Watson, "suppose I WERE the false one?"

Both the Geos and the Jan smiled. But the Rhamda's voice was very sure
as he replied:

"If you were false, my lord, I would slay you myself."

They were very near the Mahovisal now. Below was the unmistakable
opalescence, somehow produced by powerful illumination, as intense as
sunlight itself. The red dot was almost above the black square on the
lighted chart. And directly ahead, the air was becoming alive with the
beam-revealed aircraft. How could they get by in safety?

But Chick did not know the Jan Lucar. The soldier said:

"My lord is not uneasy?"

"Of course not," with unconcern. "Why?"

"Because I propose something daring. I am free to admit, my lord, that
were the Geos and I alone, I should not attempt it. But not even the
Bars," with magnificent confidence, "can stand before us now! We have
had the proof of the Jarados, and we know that no matter what the odds,
he will carry us through."

"What are you going to do?"

"I propose to shoot it, my lord." And without explaining the Jan asked
the Geos: "Are you agreeable? The June Bug will hold; the prophet will
protect us."

"Surely," returned the Rhamda. "There is nothing to fear, now, for those
who are in the company of the chosen."

Watson wondering watched the Jan as he tilted the nose of the June Bug
and began to climb at an all but perpendicular angle straight into the
heavens. Mile after mile, in less than as many minutes, they hurtled
towards the zenith, so that the lights of the city dimmed until only
the searching shafts could be seen. Chick began to guess what they
were going to do; that the Jan Lucar was nearly as reckless as he was
handsome.

At last the soldier brought the craft to a level. They soared along
horizontally for a while; the Jan kept his eye fixed on the red dot. And
when it was directly above the black square he stated:

"It is considered a perilous feat, my lord. We are going to drop. If we
make it from this height, not only will we break all records, but will
have proved the June Bug the superior in this respect, as she is in
speed. It is our only chance in any circumstances, but with the Jarados
at our side, we need not fear that the craft will stand the strain. We
shall go through them like stone; before they know it we shall be in the
drome--in less than a minute."

"From this height?" Chick concealed a shudder behind a fair show of
scepticism. "A minute is not much time."

"Does my lord fear the drop?"

"Why should I? I have in mind the June Bug; she might be set afire
through friction, in dropping so quickly through the air." Watson had a
vivid picture of a blazing meteorite, containing the charred bodies of
three men, dropping out of--

"My lord need not be concerned with that," the Jan assured him. "The
shell of the car is provided with a number of tiny pores, through
which a heat-resisting fluid will be pumped during the manoeuvre. The
temperature may be raised a little, but no more.

"You see this plug," touching a hitherto unused knob among the
instruments. "By pulling that out, the mechanism of the craft is
automatically adjusted to care for every phase of the descent. Nothing
else remains to be done, after removing that plug, save to watch the red
dot and prepare to step out upon the floor of our starting-place."

"Has the thing ever been done before?" Watson was sparring for time
while he gathered his nerve.

"I myself have seen it, my lord. The June Bug has been sent up many
times, weighted with ballast; the plug was abstracted by clockwork; and
in fifty-eight seconds she returned through the open end of the drone,
without a hitch. It was beautiful. I have always envied her that plunge.
And now I shall have the chance, with the hand of the Jarados as my
guide and protector!"

Chick had just time to reflect that, if by any chance he got through
with this, he ought to be able to pass any test conceivable. He ought
to be able to get away with anything. He started to murmur a prayer; but
before he could finish, the Jan Lucar leaned over the dial-map for the
last time, saw that the red dot was now exactly central over the square
that represented the city, and unhesitatingly jerked out the plug.

Of what happened next Watson remembered but little. The bottom seemed to
have dropped out of the universe. He was conscious of a crushing blur
of immensity, of a silent thundering within him--then mental chaos and a
stunned oblivion.




XXXIX

WHO IS THE JARADOS?


It was all over. Chick opened his eyes to see the Jan throwing open the
plate on the side of the compartment. Neither the soldier nor the Rhamda
seemed to have noted Chick's daze. As for the Jan, his blue eyes were
dancing with dare-devilry.

"That's what I call living!" he grinned. "They can keep on looking for
the June Bug all night!"

Chick looked out. They were inside the great room from which they had
started; the trip was over; the plunge had been made in safety. Chick
took a long breath, and held out a hand.

"A man after my own heart, Jan Lucar. I foresee that we may have great
sport with the Senestro."

"Aye, my lord," cheerfully. "The presumptuous usurper! I only wish I
could kill him, instead of you."

"You are not the only one," commented the Rhamda. "Half of the Rhamdas
would cheerfully act as the chosen one's proxy."

And so ended the events of Chick Watson's first day beyond the Blind
Spot, his first day on the Thomahlia; that is, disregarding the previous
months of unconsciousness. He had good reason to pass a sleepless night
in legitimate worry for the outcome of it all; but instead he slept the
sound sleep of exhaustion, awakening the next morning much refreshed.

He reminded himself, first of all, that today was the one immediately
preceding that of his test--the Day of the Prophet. He had only a little
more than twenty-four hours to prepare. What was the best and wisest
proceeding?

He called for the Geos. He told him what data he wanted. The Rhamda said
that he could find everything in a library in that building, and inside
a half-hour he returned with a pile of manuscripts.

Left to himself, Chick found that he now had data relating to all the
sciences, to religion, to education and political history and the law.
The chronology of the Thomahlians, Chick found, dates back no less than
fifteen thousand years. An abiding civilisation of that antiquity, it
need not be said, presented somewhat different aspects from what is
known on the earth.

It seemed that the Jarados had come miraculously. That is, he had come
out of the unknown, through a channel which he himself later termed the
Spot of Life.

He had taught a religion of enlightenment, embracing intelligence,
love, virtue, and the higher ethics such as are inherent in all great
philosophies. But he did not call himself a religionist. That was the
queer point. He said that he had come to teach an advanced philosophy of
life; and he expressly stated that his teachings were absolute only to a
limited extent.

"Man must seek and find," was one of his epigrams; "and if he find no
more truths, then he will find lies." Which was merely a negative way of
saying that some of his philosophy was only provisional.

But on some points he was adamant. He had arrived at a time when the
unthinking, self-glorifying Thomahlians had all but exterminated the
lower orders of creation. The Jarados sought to remove the handicap
which the people had set upon themselves, and gave them, in the place
of kindness which they had forgotten, how to use, a burning desire for
a positive knowledge, where before had been only blind faith. Also, he
taught good-fellowship, as a means to this end. He taught beauty, love,
and laughter, the three great cleansers of humanity. And yet, through it
all--

The Jarados was a mystic.

He studied life after a manner of his own. He was a stickler for getting
down to the very heart of things, for prodding around among causes until
he found the cause itself. And thus he learned the secret of the occult.

For so he taught. And presently the Jarados was recognized as an
authority on what the Thomahlia called "the next world." Only he showed
that death, instead of being an ushering into a void, was merely a
translation onto another plane of life, a higher plane and a more
glorious one. In short, a thing to be desired and attained, not to be
avoided.

This put the Spot of Life on an entirely different basis. No longer
was it a fearsome thing. The Jarados elevated death to the plane of
motherhood--something to glory in. And Chick gathered that his famous
prophecy--which he had yet to read, where it hung on the wall of the
temple--gave every detail of the Jarados' profound convictions and
teachings regarding the mystery of the next life.

And now comes a curious thing. As Chick read these details, he became
more and more conscious of--what shall it be called?--the presence of
someone or something beside him, above and all about him, watching his
every movement. He could not get away from the feeling, although it was
broad daylight, and he was seemingly quite alone in the room. Chick was
not frightened; but he could have sworn that a very real personality was
enveloping his own as he read.
