"_Less_ than a hundr ..."

"Of course, we can't be positive, sir."

Heselton whirled back to the intercom. "Radar! That thing is practically
on our necks. What the hell's the matter with that equipment...?"

The radar commander's voice showed distinct signs of strain. "Can't help
it, Admiral. The equipment is working perfectly. We've tried the
complete range of frequencies, twenty-five different sets are in
operation, we're going blind looking. There is absolutely nothing,
nothing at all."

For a moment the bridge was silent, except for the clacking-grunting
from the overhead speaker which, if anything, sounded louder than
before.

"It's tv, sir!" The radio lieutenant came running in again. "We've
unscrambled the image. Here!" The communications screen on Heselton's
desk glowed for a moment, then flashed into life.

       *       *       *       *       *

The figure was clearly alien, though startlingly humanoid--at least from
the waist up, which was all that showed in the screen. A large mouth and
slightly bulging eyes gave it a somewhat jovial, frog-like demeanor.
Seated at a desk similar to Heselton's, wearing a gaudy uniform
profusely strewn with a variety of insignia, it was obviously Heselton's
counterpart, the commander of an alien vessel.

"Hmmm, looks like we've contacted a new race. Let's return the call,
Lieutenant." A tiny red light glowed beneath a miniature camera on
Heselton's desk and almost at once the alien's face registered obvious
satisfaction. It waved a six-fingered hand in an unorthodox, but
friendly, greeting.

Heselton waved back.

The alien then pointed to his mouth, made several clacking-grunting
sounds, and moved a hand on his desk. The scene switched to another
alien standing in front of what looked like a blackboard, with a piece
of chalk in his hand. The meaning was clear.

"Lieutenant, have this transmission switched to the linguistics section.
Maybe those guys can work some sort of language." The screen blanked
out. Heselton leaned back, tense, obviously worried. Hesitantly, he
reached out and touched a button on the intercom.

"Astronomy."

"Professor, there's a ship right next door somewhere that should stand
out like King Kong in a kindergarten."

"I know, Admiral. I've been listening to the intercom. Our optical
equipment isn't designed for close range work, but we've been doing the
best we can, tried everything from infra-red through ultra-violet. If
there is a ship out there I'm afraid it's invisible."

Beads of sweat sprinkled Heselton's forehead. "This is bad, Rogers.
Mighty bad." Nervously, he walked across to the right of the bridge and
stood, hands clasped behind his back, staring blankly out at blackness
and the scattered stars. "I know there is a ship out there, and I know
that a ship simply can't be invisible, not to radar _and_ optics."

"What makes you sure there is only one, sir?"

Heselton cracked his fists together. "My God, Rogers, you're right!
There might be ..."

The intercom clacked. "This is fire control again, sir. I think we've
