
He made computations, checked his controls, figured orbits. Anything to
keep from having to talk to his two ex-Patrolmates or from having to
think about the humiliating job he was on. Anything to--

       *       *       *       *       *

"_Pirates! Moving up at two o'clock!_"

Preston came awake. He picked off the location of the pirate
ships--there were two of them, coming up out of the asteroid belt.
Small, deadly, compact, they orbited toward him.

He pounded the instrument panel in impotent rage, looking for the guns
that weren't there.

"Don't worry, Pres," came Mellors' voice. "We'll take care of them for
you."

"Thanks," Preston said bitterly. He watched as the pirate ships
approached, longing to trade places with the men in the Patrol ships
above and below him.

Suddenly a bright spear of flame lashed out across space and the hull of
Gunderson's ship glowed cherry red. "I'm okay," Gunderson reported
immediately. "Screens took the charge."

Preston gripped his controls and threw the ship into a plunging dive
that dropped it back behind the protection of both Patrol ships. He saw
Gunderson and Mellors converge on one of the pirates. Two blue beams
licked out, and the pirate ship exploded.

But then the second pirate swooped down in an unexpected dive. "Look
out!" Preston yelled helplessly--but it was too late. Beams ripped into
the hull of Mellors' ship, and a dark fissure line opened down the side
of the ship. Preston smashed his hand against the control panel. Better
to die in an honest dogfight than to live this way!

It was one against one, now--Gunderson against the pirate. Preston
dropped back again to take advantage of the Patrol ship's protection.

"I'm going to try a diversionary tactic," Gunderson said on untappable
tight-beam. "Get ready to cut under and streak for Ganymede with all you
got."

"Check."

Preston watched as the tactic got under way. Gunderson's ship traveled
in a long, looping spiral that drew the pirate into the upper quadrant
of space. His path free, Preston guided his ship under the other two and
toward unobstructed freedom. As he looked back, he saw Gunderson
steaming for the pirate on a sure collision orbit.

He turned away. The score was two Patrolmen dead, two ships wrecked--but
the mails would get through.

Shaking his head, Preston leaned forward over his control board and
headed on toward Ganymede.

       *       *       *       *       *

The blue-white, frozen moon hung beneath him. Preston snapped on the
radio.

"Ganymede Colony? Come in, please. This is your Postal Ship." The words
tasted sour in his mouth.

There was silence for a second. "Come in, Ganymede," Preston repeated
impatiently--and then the sound of a distress signal cut across his
audio pickup.

It was coming on wide beam from the satellite below--and they had cut
out all receiving facilities in an attempt to step up their transmitter.
Preston reached for the wide-beam stud, pressed it.

"Okay, I pick up your signal, Ganymede. Come in, now!"

"This is Ganymede," a tense voice said. "We've got trouble down here.
Who are you?"

"Mail ship," Preston said. "From Earth. What's going on?"

There was the sound of voices whispering somewhere near the microphone.
Finally: "Hello, Mail Ship?"

