knew it by heart. Even Charlie had listened to it twice all the way
through when she read it, but he had never wished for the ability to
read himself.

Now Charlie asked: "Do you really believe the book? This is Crimson.
This is real."

"I don't know. Sometimes I think this isn't as real as everything in the
book. And sometimes I just don't know."

They walked in silence to their elevator and took it to the top of the
highest cliff. They had wished for a house there, like one Robin had
seen in the book. They had wished for many things to make their lives
interesting, or pleasant. They had peopled Crimson with the fruit of
their wishes, using the ONE VOLUME ENCYCLOPEDIC HISTORY as a guide.

       *       *       *       *       *

They lived a mile from the Indian Camp. They traded with the Indians
who, strangely, did not know how to wish for things. Neither did the
pirates, or anyone. Just Robin and Charlie. The pirates lived across the
sea on an island. To the south along the shore were Phoenicians, Greeks,
Mayas, Royal Navymen, Submariners, mermaids and Cyclopes. To the north
along the shore were Polynesians, Maoris, Panamanians and Dutchmen.
Inland were Cannibals, Lotus Eaters, a few settlements of cowboys to
make life interesting for the Indians, farmers, Russians, Congressmen
and Ministers. All had been created by Robin and Charlie, who visited
them sometimes. They never believed for a minute that Robin and Charlie
had really created them, although all were amazed by Robin and Charlie's
ability to make things appear out of thin air.

Just as they reached their house, an Indian brave came running down the
trail toward them.

"Skyship come!" he cried, gesturing wildly and excitedly.

"Skyship?" repeated Charlie, looking at Robin. "Have you created any
spaceships?"

"No. You know it's a bargain between us. We don't create anything we
don't think we understand."

The Indian was sweating. His name was Tashtu, which meant Wild Eagle,
and he was their go-between with the tribe. "Skyship sweep across
heavens," he said. "Not land. Go up in Wild Country."

Charlie's interest quickened. Wild Country. They had created it on
impulse, about twenty miles from the Indian Camp, midway between the
settlements of Congressmen inland and Cyclopes on the shore. It was a
place of tortuous gorges and rocks and mountains, utterly lifeless. No
one ever went there. Someday, he had always told Robin, they would
explore Wild Country. If there really was a spaceship, and if it had
gone there ...

"No," Robin said. "I know what you're thinking. But I'm perfectly happy
here."

"You just now said you sometimes thought Crimson wasn't real and there
were other, real worlds which--"

"That's different. I can dream, can't I?"

"But don't you see, if a spaceship's really come, maybe they can tell
us."

       *       *       *       *       *

She gripped his arm. "Charlie. Oh, Charlie, I don't know. I'm afraid.
We've been happy here, haven't we? We really wouldn't want it to
change ..."

"I'm going to Wild Country," Charlie said stubbornly.

Tashtu nodded his head. "It is good that you do. For the braves--"

"Don't tell me they went after the skyship?" Charlie asked.

"Yes, Lord. Skyship come low, ruin crops mile around. War dance follow.
War party leave last sunrise."

"Six hours ago!" Charlie cried. "Can we overtake them?"

Tashtu shrugged. "Hurry, Lord."

"Don't you see," Charlie told Robin. "They're savages. They wouldn't
understand anything like spaceships. They wouldn't want to. If they get
the chance, they'll kill first and ask questions afterwards. We've got
to go to the Wild Country now."

Big and brawny Tashtu was nodding his head earnestly, but Robin seemed
unconvinced. "Why," she said, "there isn't even anything about Wild
Country in the book."

"That's because we made it."

"And besides, the Congressmen are dangerous."

"Congressmen? Don't you mean the Cyclopes?"

"Yes, I'm sorry. The Cyclopes are dangerous."

She couldn't possibly have meant the Congressmen. It was never clear to
either of them precisely what a Congressman did. But there were hundreds
of them on one side of Wild Country and they were forever making
speeches and promises, little round bald men with great, rich voices
and wonderful vocabularies. Charlie loved to hear them speak.

"We go, Lord?" Tashtu asked.

Charlie nodded and went inside swiftly for his rifle. It was modeled
after the most powerful rifle in the encyclopedia and was called a
Mannlicher Elephant Gun. Robin came with her own smaller Springfield
repeater.

"Ready?" Charlie asked.

"Yes. We can think up food along the trail."

"Hurry, Lord," Tashtu urged.

Charlie could hardly contain his excitement. The Wild Country, at last.
And a spaceship.

       *       *       *       *       *

By the time they were ready to make planetfall on the unexplored world,
Purcell knew his dislike of Glaudot bordered on actual hatred. Purcell,
who was forty-five years old and a bachelor, liked his spacemen tough,
yes: you had to be tough to land on, explore, and subdue a couple of
dozen worlds, as Purcell himself had done. But he also liked his
spacemen with humility: facing the unknown and sometimes the unknowable
at every step of the way, you needed humility.

Glaudot, younger than Purcell by fifteen years, confident, arrogant, a
lean hard man and handsome in a gaunt-cheeked, saturnine way, lacked
humility. For one thing, he treated the crew like dirt and had treated
them that way since blastoff from Earth almost five months before. For
another, he seemed impatient with Purcell's orders, although Purcell was
not a cautious man, and certainly not a timid one. What had been growing
between them flared out into the open moments before planetfall.

"I can't get over it," Purcell said. "I've never seen a world anything
like it." They had made telescopic observations from within the
atmosphere. "Giants living in caves," Purcell went on. "Sailing ships
flying the Jolly Roger. A town consisting of miniature replicas of the
White House on Earth. Mermaids."

"Don't tell me you really thought you saw mermaids?" Glaudot asked a
little condescendingly.

"All right, I'll admit I only caught a glimpse of them. I thought they
were mermaids. But what about the Indians?"

"Yes," Glaudot admitted. "I saw the Indians."

Using their atmospheric rockets, they had flown over the Indian village
at an altitude of only a few hundred feet, to see bronze-skinned men
rush out of tents and stare up at them in awe. After that, Purcell had
decided to find some desolate spot in which to land, in order not to
risk a too-sudden encounter with any of the fantastically diversified
natives.

Now Glaudot said: "You're taking what we saw too literally, Captain.
Why, I remember on Harfonte we had all sorts of hallucinations until
Captain Jamison discovered they were exactly that--we'd been hypnotized
into seeing the things we most feared by powerless natives who really
feared us."

"This isn't Harfonte," Purcell said, a little irritably.

"Yeah, but you weren't there."

"I know that, Glaudot. I'm only trying to point out that each world must
be considered as unique. Each world presents its own problems, which--"

"I say this is like Harfonte all over again. I say if you'd had the guts
to land right smack in the middle of that Indian village, you'd have
seen for yourself. I say to play it close to the vest is ridiculous,"
Glaudot said, and then smiled deprecatingly. "Begging your pardon, of
course, Captain. But don't you see, man, you've got to show the
extraterrestrials, whatever form they take, that Earthmen aren't afraid
of them."

"Caution and fear aren't the same thing," Purcell insisted. He didn't
know why he bothered to explain this to Glaudot. Perhaps it was because
Ensign Chandler, youngest man in the exploration party, was in the
lounge listening to them. Chandler was a nice kid, clean-cut and right
out of the finest tradition of Earth, but Chandler was, like all boys
barely out of their teens, impressionable. He was particularly
impressionable in these, his first months in space.

"When you're cautious it's as much to protect the natives as yourself,"
Purcell went on, and then put into simple words what Glaudot and
Chandler should have learned at the Academy for Exploration, anyway.

When he finished, Glaudot shrugged and asked: "What do you think, Ensign
Chandler?"

Chandler blushed slowly. "I--I'd rather not say," he told them. "Captain
Purcell is--the captain."

Glaudot smiled his triumph at Purcell. It was then, for the first time,
that Purcell's dislike for the man became intense. Purcell wondered how
long he'd been poisoning the youth's mind against the doctrines of the
Academy.

Just then a light glowed in the bulkhead and a metallic voice intoned:
"Prepare for landing. Prepare for landing at once."

Purcell, striding to his blast-hammock, told Glaudot, who was the
expedition's exec, "I'll want the landing party ready to move half an
hour after planetfall."

"Yes, sir," said Glaudot eagerly. At least there was something they
agreed on.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Men," Purcell told the small landing party as they assembled near the
main airlock thirty-five minutes later, "we have an obligation to our
civilization which I hope all of you understand. While here on this
unknown world we must do nothing to bring discredit to the name of Earth
and the galactic culture which Earth represents."

They had all seen the bleak moon-like landscape through the viewports.
They were eager to get out there and plant the flag of Earth and
determine what the new world was like. There were only eight of them in
the first landing party: others would follow once the eight established
a preliminary base of operations. The eight were wearing the new-style,
light-weight spacesuits which all exploration parties used even though
the temperature and atmosphere of the new world seemed close enough to
Earth-norm. It had long ago been decided at the Academy that chances
couldn't be taken with some unknown factor, possibly toxic, fatal and
irreversible, in an unknown atmosphere. After a day or two of thorough
laboratory analysis of the air they'd be able to chuck their spacesuits
if all went well.

They filed through the airlock silently, Purcell first with the flag of
Earth, then Glaudot, then the others. White faces watched from the
viewport as they clomped across the convoluted terrain.

"Nobody here but us chickens!" Glaudot said, and he laughed, after they
had walked some way across the desolate landscape. "But then, what did
you expect? Captain took us clear of all the more promising places."

The man's only motive, Purcell decided, was his colossal ego. He made no
reply: that would be descending to Glaudot's level.

After they walked almost entirely across the low-walled crater in which
