me a different life in which I seemed to have participated by chance,
and a life which had, at first sight, no point of contact with the
reality to which I had returned....




A Chance Strain from Grieg


I recalled waking up in another place, on a long slope of green hill
that overlooked a valley. It was dawn again. The sun was just rising
over the crest of the hill behind me, and it threw long shadows across
the grass from the tall, slender trees along the summit. Down in the
valley a broad, clean river of clear water followed the curve of the
hill until it disappeared from sight. There were other hills beyond the
river, all with the same long, simple slope of grass; and, beyond the
hills, there were the tops of blue mountains, swathed in white morning
mist.

It was a strange place. Its strangeness consisted in a subtle appearance
of order and care, as though a gardener or an army of gardeners had
arranged and tended the whole vast sweep of landscape for years. It was
uncultivated and deserted as waste land, but as well trimmed, in spite
of its spaciousness, as a lawn.

The morning was very warm. I was not conscious of any chill in the air.
I was clothed only in short trousers, such as athletes wear, and a short
belted tunic without sleeves and loose--both of them indescribably soft
and comfortable.

I was aware of the strangeness of my awakening, but I seemed to have no
definite recollection of falling asleep. I felt that I had come there
during my sleep under unusual circumstances and from a very different
life, but the thought didn't disturb me or trouble my mind in any way.
My chief emotion was a curious feeling of expectancy. I knew that I was
about to have some new and curious experience, something not trivial,
and I was eager to meet it.

I lay there for awhile, drinking in the beauty of the morning, and
breathing an air of miraculous purity and freshness. Finally I stood up,
light and conscious of a sudden grace, aware for the first time, in its
departure, of the awkwardness and weight which ordinarily attend our
movements on earth. It was as if some of the earth's gravity had been
lost.

For a while I examined the valley, but I saw no sign of life there. Then
I turned and went slowly up the hill, the sunlight falling warmly on my
body, and my feet sinking sensuously in the deep grass.

       *       *       *       *       *

When I came to the crest and looked over, I saw another valley before
me, deeper than the first. The hill rolled away, down and down for
miles, to a long, wide plain. More hills rose from the plain on every
side, as simply as if they had been built there by the hand of some
gigantic child playing in a wilderness of sand. And the river, coming
around the base of the hill on which I was standing, but several miles
away, swept out upon a great aqueduct of stone, hundreds of feet high,
which crossed the plain through its very center, a straight line of
breath-taking beauty, and disappeared far away into the pass between two
mountains. The whole scene was too perfect to be wholly natural.

At the center of the plain stood a tall, white building. Even in the
distance from which I viewed it, it looked massive--larger than any
skyscraper I had ever seen. But it was delicately and intricately
designed, terraced much as most modern office buildings in New York are
terraced, but more elaborately. Its base stood about the aqueduct, which
passed through it, and it swept up magnificently to a slender peak
almost level with the crest of the hill where I was standing. It was the
only building in sight.

I don't know how long I stood there, admiring the clean sweep and
vastness of the scene, before I saw something rise sharply, with a
flashing of bright wings, from some hidden courtyard or terrace of the
building. It was followed closely by another and then another, like a
flight of birds. They shot up swiftly, circled once or twice, and moved
away in different directions, straight and purposeful. One of them came
toward my hill.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was only a few moments before the thing sped up to me and swooped
down as I waved my arms. It was, of course, a machine, slender and long,
with wide arching wings. It seemed almost light enough to float. It had
a deck, shielded from the wind by a shimmering transparent thing like a
thin wire screen, and under the deck a cabin made, it seemed, of glass.
A man and a woman stood on the deck, the woman handling the controls.
They were both dressed much like myself.

The machine came to rest on the hill near me. I stepped forward, and the
man leaped down to meet me. His first greeting was curious.

"So you _are_ here," he said. His voice was small but cool, penetrating
and metallic. I thought of fine steel wires. And, when I replied, my own
voice had something of the same quality.

"Were you expecting me?" I said. He nodded, shaking my hand briefly and
quietly.

"We know all about you," he answered. I was pleased--it made things
simpler--but I wanted to ask him who I was. I didn't remember anything
up to the moment of my awakening on the other side of the hill. Instead,
I asked him:

"Shall I go aboard?" He nodded again, and waved his hand toward the
ladder. I went aboard lithely, and he followed. The girl and I glanced
at each other; I was surprised and rather disturbed by her beauty and
cleanness of body. I turned to the man, a little embarrassed, as she
manipulated some controls and set the ship in motion again.

"You'll have to forgive me," I said. "Something has happened, and I
don't know things. I've completely lost my memory."

They understood at once.

"Your name is Baret." He pronounced it oddly. "I am Edvar, and this girl
is Selda." We all looked at each other intently, and I went on
hesitantly.

"I don't know where I am. Can you tell me something about myself?" Edvar
shook his head.

"Only this," he said, "that we were notified of your presence and your
name. This city is Richmond." I glanced about quickly.

"Richmond!" I exclaimed. "Virginia?" But he shook his head.

"I don't understand you," he replied.

I went on, with a puzzled frown. "It has changed...." Both of them
looked at me curiously.

"How has it changed, Baret?" the girl, Selda, asked me. I glanced at her
absently and closed my eyes.

"Why ... I don't know," I stammered, "I don't remember." For a few
moments there was silence, except for the shouting of the wind past our
ship. Then Selda asked me another question.

"Where are you from?" I shook my head helplessly, and answered again, "I
don't know--I don't remember."

       *       *       *       *       *

A moment later we dipped into the shadow of the building, which they
called Richmond. We slipped by a succession of vast and intricate
facades until we came to a court-like terrace, hundreds of feet above
the ground and sheltered on three sides by walls that leaped up toward
the sky for hundreds of feet more. The effect of height was dizzying and
magnificent.

Selda brought the ship to a quick and graceful landing. I found that we
were in a large paved court like a public square, facing the east and
the sun, which bathed it in cool bright light. It was still early in the
morning. Innumerable windows looked down upon us, and a number of
doorways led into the building on all sides. From one of these a girl
stepped forward. Edvar spoke to her, evidently reporting himself and
Selda. The girl pushed several buttons on a small cabinet which hung
from her shoulder. It rang, low and silvery, twice. Then she pointed to
me.

"Who is that?" she asked.

"His name is Baret," Edvar told her. "I was sent to meet him."

"But where is he from? He is not registered."

"We don't know. It's an unusual circumstance," he explained, while the
girl examined us all carefully. "Very well," she said finally, "you must
attend him until he is registered. I'll notify Odom." Edvar nodded, and
we turned away.

Glancing back as we crossed the court, I saw the ship descending
noiselessly, on the square of pavement where it had landed, into the
