"What for?"

"It's because of the way those hypno sprays work," Dasinger said. "Give
your victim a dose of the stuff, tell him what to do, and it usually
gets done. And if you're being illegal about it, one of the first things
you tell him to do is to forget he's ever been sprayed. This goop is
designed for the specific purpose of knocking out hypnotic commands.
Just roll up your sleeve like a good girl now, and I'll rub a little of
it on your arm."

"You're not rubbing anything on my arm, mister!" Duomart told him
coldly.

Dasinger shrugged resignedly, recapped the tube, and dropped it in his
pocket. "Have it your way then," he remarked. "I was only ..."

He lunged suddenly towards her.

Duomart gave him quite a struggle. A minute or two later, he had her
down on the floor, her body and one arm clamped between his knees, while
he unzipped the cuff on the sleeve of the other arm and pulled the
sleeve up. He brought out the tube of antihypno ointment and rubbed a
few drops of the ointment into the hollow of Duomart's elbow, put the
tube back in his pocket, then went on holding her down for nearly
another minute. She was gasping for breath, blue eyes furious, muscles
tensed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly he felt her relax. An expression of stunned surprise appeared
on her face. "Why," she began incredulously, "he _did_ ..."

"Gave you the spray treatment, eh?" Dasinger said, satisfied. "I was
pretty sure he had."

"Why, that-- At his beck and call, he says! Well, we'll just see about
... let me up, Dasinger! Just wait till I get my hands on that bony
partner of yours!"

"Now take it easy."

"Take it easy! Why should I? I ..."

"It would be better," Dasinger explained, "if Egavine believes you're
still under the influence."

She scowled up at him; then her face turned thoughtful. "Ho! You feel it
isn't that he's a depraved old goat, that he's got something more
sinister in mind?"

"It's a definite possibility. Why not wait and find out? The ointment
will immunize you against further tricks."

Miss Mines regarded him consideringly for a few seconds, then nodded.
"All right! You can let me up now. What do you think he's planning?"

"Not easy to say with Dr. Egavine. He's a devious man." Dasinger got
himself disentangled, came to his feet, and reached down to help her
scramble up.

"They certainly wrap you up with that hypno stuff, don't they!" she
observed wonderingly.

Dasinger nodded. "They certainly do!" Then he added, "I'm keeping the
doctor and his little sidekick locked up, too, until we get to the
planet. That leaves you and me with the run of the ship."

Duomart looked at him. "So it does," she agreed.

"Know how to use a gun?"

"Of course. But I'm not allow-- I don't have one with me on this trip."

       *       *       *       *       *

He reached into his coat, took out a small gun in a fabric holster.
Duomart glanced at it, then her eyes went back to his face.

"Might clip it to your belt," Dasinger said. "It's a good little
shocker, fifty-foot range, safe for shipboard use. It's got a full load,
eighty shots. We may or may not run into emergencies. If we don't,
you'll still be more comfortable carrying it."

Duomart holstered the gun and attached the holster to her belt. She
slid the tip of her tongue reflectively out between her lips, drew it
back, blinked at the flight screens for a few seconds, then looked
across at Dasinger and tapped the holster at her side.

"That sort of changes things, too!" she said.

"Changes what?"

"Tell you in a minute. Sit down, Dasinger. Manual course corrections
coming up...." She slid into the pilot seat, moved her hands out over
the controls, and appeared to forget about him.

Dasinger settled into a chair to her left, lit a cigarette, smoked and
watched her, glancing occasionally at the screens. She was jockeying the
Mooncat deftly in and out of the fringes of a gravitic stress knot,
presently brought it into the clear, slapped over a direction lever and
slid the palm of her right hand along a row of speed control buttons
depressing them in turn.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Nice piece of piloting," Dasinger observed.

Duomart lifted one shoulder in a slight shrug. "That's my job." Her face
remained serious. "Are you wondering why I edged us through that thing
instead of going around it?"

"Uh-huh, a little," Dasinger admitted.

"It knocked half an hour off the time it should take us to get to your
planet," she said. "That is, if you'll still want to go there. We're
being followed, you see."

"By whom?"

"They call her the Spy. After the Mooncat she's the fastest job in the
Fleet. She's got guns, and her normal complement is twenty armed men."

"The idea being to have us lead them to what we're after, and then take
it away from us?" Dasinger asked.

"That's right. I'm not supposed to know about it. You know what a Gray
Fleet is?"

Dasinger nodded. "An Independent that's turned criminal."

"Yes. Willata's Fleet was a legitimate outfit up to four years ago. Then
Liu Taunus and Calat and their gang took over. That happened to be the
two Fleet bosses you slapped handcuffs on, Dasinger. We're a Gray Fleet
now. So I had some plans of my own for this trip. If I can get to some
other I-Fleet or to the Hub, I might be able to do something about
Taunus. After we were down on the planet, I was going to steal the
Mooncat and take off by myself."

"Why are you telling me?"

Miss Mines colored a little. "Well, you gave me the gun," she said. "And
you clobbered Taunus, and got me out of that hypno thing ... I mean, I'd
have to be pretty much of a jerk to ditch you now, wouldn't I? Anyway,
now that I've told you, you won't be going back to Willata's Fleet,
whatever you do. I'll still get to the Hub." She paused. "So what do you
want to do now? Beat it until the coast's clear, or make a quick try for
your loot before the Spy gets there?"

"How far is she behind us?" Dasinger asked.

Duomart said, "I don't know exactly. Here's what happened. When we
started out, Taunus told me not to let the Mooncat travel at more than
three-quarters speed for any reason. I figured then the Spy was involved
in whatever he was planning; she can keep up with us at that rate, and
she has considerably better detector reach than the Cat. She's stayed
far enough back not to register on our plates throughout the trip.

"Late yesterday we hit some extensive turbulence areas, and I started
playing games. There was this little cluster of three sun systems ahead.
One of them was our target, though Dr. Egavine hadn't yet said which. I
ducked around a few twisters, doubled back, and there was the Spy coming
the other way. I beat it then--top velocity. The Spy dropped off our
detectors two hours later, and she can't have kept us on for more than
another hour herself.

"So they'll assume we're headed for one of those three systems, but
they don't know which one. They'll have to look for us. There's only one
terraprox in the system we're going to. There may be none in the others,
or maybe four or five. But the terraprox worlds is where they'll look
because the salvage suits you're carrying are designed for ordinary
underwater work. After the way I ran from them, they'll figure
something's gone wrong with Taunus's plans, of course."

       *       *       *       *       *

Dasinger rubbed his chin. "And if they're lucky and follow us straight
in to the planet?"

"Then," Miss Mines said, "you might still have up to six or seven hours
to locate the stuff you want, load it aboard and be gone again."

"Might have?"

She shrugged. "We've got a lead on them, but just how big a lead we
finally wind up with depends to a considerable extent on the flight
conditions they run into behind us. They might get a break there, too.
Then there's another very unfortunate thing. The system Dr. Egavine's
directed us to now is the one we were closest to when I broke out of
detection range. They'll probably decide to look there first. You see?"

"Yes," Dasinger said. "Not so good, is it?" He knuckled his jaw again
reflectively. "Why was Taunus pounding around on you when I came
forward?"

"Oh, those two runches caught me flying the ship at top speed. Taunus
was furious. He couldn't know whether the Spy still had a fix on us or
not. Of course he didn't tell me that. The lumps he was preparing to
hand out were to be for disregarding his instructions. He does things
like that." She paused. "Well, are you going to make a try for the
planet?"

"Yes," Dasinger said. "If we wait, there's entirely too good a chance
the Spy will run across what we're after while she's snooping around for
us there. We'll try to arrange things for a quick getaway in case our
luck doesn't hold up."

Duomart nodded. "Mind telling me what you're after?"

"Not at all. Under the circumstances you should be told....

       *       *       *       *       *

"Of course," Dasinger concluded a minute or two later, "all we'll have a
legal claim to is the salvage fee."

Miss Mines glanced over at him, looking somewhat shaken. "You _are_
playing this legally?"

"Definitely."

"Even so," she said, "if that really is the wreck of the Dosey Asteroids
raider, and the stones are still on board ... you two will collect
something like ten million credits between you!"

"Roughly that," Dasinger agreed. "Dr. Egavine learned about the matter
from one of your Willata Fleetmen."

Her eyes widened. "He what!"

"The Fleet lost a unit called Handing's Scout about four years ago,
didn't it?"

"Three and a half," she said. She paused. "Handing's Scout is the other
wreck down there?"

"Yes. There was one survivor ... as far as we know. You may recall his
name. Leed Farous."

Duomart nodded. "The little kwil hound. He was assistant navigator. How
did Dr. Egavine...?"

