Behind Brett a voice called in a penetrating whisper: "Quick! You! Get
into the alley...!"

He turned. A gaunt man of about thirty with sparse reddish hair,
perspiration glistening on his upper lip, stood at the mouth of a narrow
way like the one Brett had come through. He wore a grimy pale yellow
shirt with a wide-flaring collar, limp and sweat-stained, dark green
knee-breeches, soft leather boots, scuffed and dirty, with limp tops
that drooped over his ankles. He gestured, drew back into the alley. "In
here."

Brett went toward him. "This man ..."

"Come on, you fool!" The man took Brett's arm, pulled him deeper into
the dark passage. Brett resisted. "Wait a minute. That fellow ..." He
tried to point.

"Don't you know yet?" The red-head spoke with a strange accent. "Golems
... You got to get out of sight before the--"

       *       *       *

The man froze, flattened himself against the wall. Automatically Brett
moved to a place beside him. The man's head was twisted toward the alley
mouth. The tendons in his weathered neck stood out. He had a three-day
stubble of beard. Brett could smell him, standing this close. He edged
away. "What--"

"Don't make a sound! Don't move, you idiot!" His voice was a thin hiss.

Brett followed the other's eyes toward the sunny street. The fallen man
lay on the pavement, moving feebly, eyes open. Something moved up to
him, a translucent brownish shape, like muddy water. It hovered for a
moment, then dropped on the man like a breaking wave, flowed around him.
The body shifted, rotating stiffly, then tilted upright. The sun struck
through the fluid shape that flowed down now, amber highlights
twinkling, to form itself into the crested wave, flow away.

"What the hell...!"

"Come on!" The red-head turned, trotted silently toward the shadowy bend
under the high grey walls. He looked back, beckoned impatiently, passed
out of sight around the turn--

Brett came up behind him, saw a wide avenue, tall trees with chartreuse
springtime leaves, a wrought-iron fence, and beyond it, rolling green
lawns. There were no people in sight.

"Wait a minute! What is this place?!"

His companion turned red-rimmed eyes on Brett. "How long have you been
here?" he asked. "How did you get in?"

"I came through a gate. Just about an hour ago."

"I knew you were a man as soon as I saw you talking to the golem," said
the red-head. "I've been here two months; maybe more. We've got to get
out of sight. You want food? There's a place ..." He jerked his thumb.
"Come on. Time to talk later."

       *       *       *

Brett followed him. They turned down a side street, pushed through the
door of a dingy cafe. It banged behind them. There were tables, stools
at a bar, a dusty juke box. They took seats at a table. The red-head
groped under the table, pulled off a shoe, hammered it against the wall.
He cocked his head, listening. The silence was absolute. He hammered
again. There was a clash of crockery from beyond the kitchen door. "Now
don't say anything," the red-head said. He eyed the door behind the
counter expectantly. It flew open. A girl with red cheeks and untidy
hair, dressed in a green waitress' uniform appeared, swept up to the
table, pad and pencil in hand.

"Coffee and a ham sandwich," said the red-head. Brett said nothing. The
girl glanced at him briefly, jotted hastily, whisked away.

"I saw them here the first day," the red-head said. "It was a piece of
luck. I saw how the Gels started it up. They were big ones--not like the
tidiers-up. As soon as they were finished, I came in and tried the same
thing. It worked. I used the golem's lines--"

"I don't know what you're talking about," Brett said. "I'm going to ask
that girl--"

"Don't say anything to her; it might spoil everything. The whole
sequence might collapse; or it might call the Gels. I'm not sure. You
can have the food when it comes back with it."

"Why do you say 'when "it" comes back'?"

"Ah." He looked at Brett strangely. "I'll show you."

Brett could smell food now. His mouth watered. He hadn't eaten for
twenty-four hours.

"Care, that's the thing," the red-head said. "Move quiet, and stay out
of sight, and you can live like a County Duke. Food's the hardest, but
here--"

The red-cheeked girl reappeared, a tray balanced on one arm, a heavy cup
and saucer in the other hand. She clattered them down on the table.

"Took you long enough," the red-head said. The girl sniffed, opened her
mouth to speak--and the red-head darted out a stiff finger, jabbed her
under the ribs. She stood, mouth open, frozen.

Brett half rose. "He's crazy, miss," he said. "Please accept--"

"Don't waste your breath." Brett's host was looking at him triumphantly.
"Why do I call it 'it'?" He stood up, reached out and undid the top
buttons of the green uniform. The waitress stood, leaning slightly
forward, unmoving. The blouse fell open, exposing round white
breasts--unadorned, blind.

"A doll," said the red-head. "A puppet; a golem."

       *       *       *

Brett stared at her, the damp curls at her temple, the tip of her tongue
behind her teeth, the tiny red veins in her round cheeks, and the white
skin curving ...

"That's a quick way to tell 'em," said the red-head. "The teat is
smooth." He rebuttoned the uniform, then jabbed again at the girl's
ribs. She straightened, patted her hair.

"No doubt a gentleman like you is used to better," she said carelessly.
She went away.

"I'm Awalawon Dhuva," the red-head said.

"My name's Brett Hale." Brett took a bite of the sandwich.

"Those clothes," Dhuva said. "And you have a strange way of talking.
What county are you from?"

"Jefferson."

"Never heard of it. I'm from Wavly. What brought you here?"

"I was on a train. The tracks came to an end out in the middle of
nowhere. I walked ... and here I am. What is this place?"

"Don't know." Dhuva shook his head. "I knew they were lying about the
Fire River, though. Never did believe all that stuff. Religious hokum,
to keep the masses quiet. Don't know what to believe now. Take the roof.
They say a hundred kharfads up; but how do we know? Maybe it's a
thousand--or only ten. By Grat, I'd like to go up in a balloon, see for
myself."

"What are you talking about?" Brett said. "Go where in a balloon? See
what?"

"Oh, I've seen one at the Tourney. Big hot-air bag, with a basket under
it. Tied down with a rope. But if you cut the rope...! But you can bet
the priests will never let that happen, no, sir." Dhuva looked at Brett
speculatively. "What about your county: Fession, or whatever you called
it. How high do they tell you it is there?"

"You mean the sky? Well, the air ends after a few miles and space just
goes on--millions of miles--"

Dhuva slapped the table and laughed. "The people in Fesseron must be
some yokels! Just goes on up; now who'd swallow that tale?" He chuckled.

"Only a child thinks the sky is some kind of tent," said Brett. "Haven't
you ever heard of the Solar System, the other planets?"

"What are those?"

"Other worlds. They all circle around the sun, like the Earth."

"Other worlds, eh? Sailing around up under the roof? Funny; I never saw
them." Dhuva snickered. "Wake up, Brett. Forget all those stories. Just
believe what you see."

"What about that brown thing?"

"The Gels? They run this place. Look out for them, Brett. Stay alert.
Don't let them see you."

       *       *       *

"What do they do?"

"I don't know--and I don't want to find out. This is a great place--I
like it here. I have all I want to eat, plenty of nice rooms for
sleeping. There's the parades and the scenes. It's a good life--as long
as you keep out of sight."

"How do you get out of here?" Brett asked, finishing his coffee.

"Don't know how to get out; over the wall, I suppose. I don't plan to
leave though. I left home in a hurry. The Duke--never mind. I'm not
going back."

"Are all the people here ... golems?" Brett said. "Aren't there any more
real people?"

"You're the first I've seen. I spotted you as soon as I saw you. A live
man moves different than a golem. You see golems doing things like
knitting their brows, starting back in alarm, looking askance, and
standing arms akimbo. And they have things like pursed lips and knowing
glances and mirthless laughter. You know: all the things you read about,
that real people never do. But now that you're here, I've got somebody
to talk to. I did get lonesome, I admit. I'll show you where I stay and
we'll fix you up with a bed."

"I won't be around that long."

"What can you get outside that you can't get here? There's everything
you need here in the city. We can have a great time."

"You sound like my Aunt Haicey," Brett said. "She said I had everything
I needed back in Casperton. How does she know what I need? How do you
know? How do I know myself? I can tell you I need more than food and a
place to sleep--"

"What more?"

"Everything. Things to think about and something worth doing. Why, even
in the movies--"

"What's a movie?"

"You know, a play, on film. A moving picture."

"A picture that moves?"

"That's right."

"This is something the priests told you about?" Dhuva seemed to be
