literally reborn. Some such principle as this seems to operate in
reproduction, except that, instead of the old body being replaced by the
new, and in its form, approximately, the new body is created apart from
it. It is the creation of children that causes us to die, it would seem,
because if this activity is, so to speak, dammed up or turned aside into
new channels, the reproduction operates on the old body, renewing it
continually. It is very obscure and very absurd, is it not? But the most
absurd part of it is that it is true. Whatever the true explanation may
be, the fact remains that the operation can be done, that it actually
prolongs life indefinitely, and that I alone know the secret."

Sir John told me a very great deal more, but, after all, I think it
amounted to little more than this. It would be impossible for me to
express the great hold his discovery took upon my mind the moment he
recounted it. From the very first, under the spell of his personality, I
believed, and I knew he was speaking the truth. And it opened up before
me new vistas. I began to see myself become suddenly eternal, never
again to know the fear of death. I could see myself storing up, century
after century, an amplitude of wisdom and experience that would make me
truly a god.

"Sir John!" I cried, long before he was finished. "You must perform that
operation on me!"

"But, Dennell, you are too hasty. You must not put yourself so rashly
into my hands."

"You have perfected the operation, haven't you?"

"That is true," he said.

"You must try it out on somebody, must you not?"

"Yes, of course. And yet--somehow, Dennell, I am afraid. I cannot help
feeling that man is not yet prepared for such a vast thing. There are
sacrifices. One must give up love and all sensual pleasure. This
operation not only takes away the mere fact of reproduction, but it
deprives one of all the things that go with sex, all love, all sense of
beauty, all feeling for poetry and the arts. It leaves only the few
emotions, selfish emotions, that are necessary to self-preservation. Do
you not see? One becomes an intellect, nothing more--a cold apotheosis
of reason. And I, for one, cannot face such a thing calmly."

"But, Sir John, like many fears, it is largely horrible in the
foresight. After you have changed your nature you cannot regret it. What
you are would be as horrible an idea to you afterwards as the thought of
what you will be seems now."

"True, true. I know it. But it is hard to face, nevertheless."

"I am not afraid to face it."

"You do not understand it, Dennell, I am afraid. And I wonder whether
you or I or any of us on this earth are ready for such a step. After
all, to make a race deathless, one should be sure it is a perfect race."

"Sir John," I said, "it is not you who have to face this, nor any one
else in the world till you are ready. But I am firmly resolved, and I
demand it of you as my friend."

Well, we argued much further, but in the end I won. Sir John promised to
perform the operation three days later.

... But do you perceive now what I had forgotten during all that
discussion, the one thing I had thought I could never forget so long as
I lived, not even for an instant? It was my love for Alice--I had
forgotten that!

       *       *       *       *       *

I cannot write here all the infinity of emotions I experienced later,
when, with Alice in my arms, it suddenly came upon me what I had done.
Ages ago--I have forgotten how to feel. I could name now a thousand
feelings I used to have, but I can no longer even understand them. For
only the heart can understand the heart, and the intellect only the
intellect.

With Alice in my arms, I told the whole story. It was she who, with her
quick instinct, grasped what I had never noticed.

"But Carl!" she cried, "Don't you see?--It will mean that we can never
be married!" And, for the first time, I understood. If only I could
re-capture some conception of that love! I have always known, since the
last shred of comprehension slipped from me, that I lost something very
wonderful when I lost love. But what does it matter? I lost Alice too,
and I could not have known love again without her.

We were very sad and very tragic that night. For hours and hours we
argued the question over. But I felt somewhat that I was inextricably
caught in my fate, that I could not retreat now from my resolve. I was
perhaps, very school-boyish, but I felt that it would be cowardice to
back out now. But it was Alice again who perceived a final aspect of the
matter.

"Carl," she said to me, her lips very close to mine, "it need not come
between our love. After all, ours would be a poor sort of love if it
were not more of the mind than of the flesh. We shall remain lovers, but
we shall forget mere carnal desire. I shall submit to that operation
too!"

And I could not shake her from her resolve. I would speak of danger that
I could not let her face. But, after the fashion of women, she disarmed
me with the accusation that I did not love her, that I did not want her
love, that I was trying to escape from love. What answer had I for that,
but that I loved her and would do anything in the world not to lose her?

I have wondered sometimes since whether we might have known the love of
