silence while Dolores held one of Dick's hands for protection.

"Dick! We only have _one_ cabin! I'm supposed to stay here with you--and
I _hardly know you_! Morquil told me that I must stay here, there are no
extra rooms."

"I'm sorry, Dolores. We will just have to put up with things as they
are. We've got into this and will have to see it through. After all, we
_are_ man and wife, and the people on board would think it strange if we
didn't occupy the same room. There are two bunks, so I won't have to
sleep on the floor. It will be a long trip, and we might as well enjoy
it as much as possible."

Days changed into weeks as the ship plowed steadily south. They stopped
at one port for a few hours to refuel, but there was little to see. The
ship was slow and it felt good to walk on land again. But no one spoke
enough English to answer questions.

It was the only time they sighted land until just before the end of the
trip, when small islands began to slide by. Some within a few hundred
feet, others just visible in the distance. Morquil hadn't appeared on
deck during the entire trip, but now he approached the rail.

His face lighted with an ethereal glow as he gazed across the blue
water. He looked like a man who was sighting his home after many years
of absence. Dick couldn't help but feel glad for him, while cold chills
of misgiving crept up and down his own spine. Their voyage was ending at
a far different place that he had pictured in his mind, and quite the
opposite of the description which Morquil had given of gigantic
mechanical development.

They were passing by small south-sea islands, where mechanical equipment
was out of the question. They hardly appeared _habitable_!

When the captain approached Dick, Morquil joined the conversation.
"_I'll_ give you the directions, Captain. Mr. Barrow is not feeling
well, and I can do it for him.

"In about an hour we will reach the island, and I will point out the
entrance to the harbor. It is well protected and there is no need to
worry about any storm while we unload."

       *       *       *       *       *

Every inch of space in the ship was packed with supplies. There were
crates of books as well as pieces of machinery. Considerable radio
equipment included assembled sets as well as parts. There were rifles
and even one small cannon. Several crates of chickens and turkeys joined
the other things on the beach. Then to the amazement of the party, a
crate of pigs appeared.

It required three days to empty the ship, and with each passing hour the
little party grew more apprehensive. It seemed as if they had been
transferred to an island to start a _new_ civilization, instead of a
place where mechanical development was far advanced. Because Dick was
the leader of the party, the others began to look at him with hatred;
Morquil was almost forgotten.

When the last piece of equipment was covered with heavy tarpaulins, they
constructed a shelter against one side of the pile. It was almost dark
when everything was finished, and the captain decided to wait until the
next day to sail. Everyone was invited on board the _Primrose_, for a
farewell party.

Dick was forced to call a meeting in the main cabin, to forestall danger
of the party deserting with the ship. Morquil had instructed him
carefully.

"Friends, we are facing a great adventure. I'm in no different position
than you, except that as leader I am responsible for whatever happens. I
must take all blame for whatever comes, yet know that it will eventually
work out as we expected.

"You all know that it is forbidden to talk about this trip, or to
surmise our destination. I can assure you that it is done for your
benefit, and later you will appreciate the fact that you did _not_ know
the future. I can't say what the next few days will bring to all of us,
but be assured that everything you have been promised will be fulfilled.

"At the moment it seems impossible that things can turn out as we
expected, but they _will_! You must simply be patient, and do not lose
faith in this great adventure."

As Dick finished his speech, Morquil smiled, well satisfied. Dolores
even smiled faintly, although it required effort to overcome her feeling
of disaster.

The following morning everyone went ashore, and John McCarthy went
around trying to aid Barrow in cheering up the party. He lied like a
trooper, whispering to everyone that he had discovered something that
satisfied _him_ about the marvelous civilization they would reach before
long.

Word of this reached Morquil, and he hurriedly called Dick and John out
of sound of the others. He appeared almost frightened, and the moment
they were alone, he spoke.

"What have you learned? I wanted you to know nothing, and it is better
if you are ignorant. Whatever you learned is too much, and may upset the
future."

John started to laugh, then seeing the expression of agony on the face
of Morquil, he stopped short. "Don't worry. I haven't learned
_anything_! I simply tried to help Dick keep the people satisfied. They
were getting so restless they _needed_ something. In my home town I was
known as a famous liar, and thought my ability might come in handy."

Slowly the agony disappeared from Morquil's face. "Someday you will
understand how much you have done for me, John. You will never regret
it!"

The McCarthys remained jovial, and tried to keep up the spirits of the
others as the days of loneliness passed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Philip Jones and his wife were quiet, and waited patiently. Andrew and
Emma Smith had taken over the cooking, and served the meals. George and
Mary Martin were the youngest couple, and Dick doubted whether either of
them was past twenty-one. The others were all nearer thirty. They spent
their time side by side, gazing over the sea, perfectly happy in each
other's company.

Jerold Brown and Peter Yarbro were constantly fishing, from the
collapsible boat, while their wives played cards.

One night they were awakened by brilliant flashes of light. Running to
the beach, they watched in amazement.

They appeared like big guns firing just above the surface of the water,
a few miles away. While they watched they gradually faded out. It was
like a terrific electric storm, and the little party drew close together
for comfort.

When the lights faded out entirely, Morquil told them to get some sleep.
They would have to move equipment aboard a new ship the following day.

With the first streak of dawn Dick was back at the edge of the beach,
straining his eyes into the gloom, but it was almost an hour before any
object was visible.

After breakfast the ship was much plainer. They could see a rounded
hull, like the top of a huge submarine, above the water. One of the
women remarked that she would _stay_ on the island before she'd enter an
undersea ship. The trip on the _Primrose_ was bad enough, but it wasn't
_below_ the surface.

Morquil called them within the canvas shelter, as if to make a speech.
He held a small ball in one hand, and while they waited for instructions
it landed in their midst.

A cloud of yellow vapor burst from the object, and everyone in the party
slowly sank to the ground. Morquil joined the others in unconscious
stupor, a victim of his own gas.




CHAPTER III

_Strange Destination_


When Dick opened his eyes, there was a feeling of motion to the bed. The
strangeness of the ceiling overhead drew his attention. It was not
canvas, but shiny metal, almost purple in tint.

Suddenly he sat up. Dolores lay beside him. As his eyes cleared of the
lingering mist, objects in the room became plainer. They were in a
luxuriously equipped cabin.

Dolores slowly opened her eyes. A moment later she sat up beside him.
Glancing through the porthole, beyond the bed, she turned away with a
groan.

"We _are_ under water! And deep! I can't see a thing but strange blue
light."

When Dick joined her, his forehead puckered in a frown. "No, Dolores. It
doesn't look like water, it looks more like--No! _It can't be!_"

For several minutes there was silence while he gazed through the
opening. Dolores had lost interest in the outside and was examining the
fittings of the cabin. It had everything that could be desired in a
first class hotel room, and many little toilet articles besides.

Suddenly Dick turned away. "_It's true!_ We're in the air--_or above
it_! Dolores, this ship is an _aircraft_!"

"Never mind, Dick, this room is _beautiful_! Whether we're flying or
swimming, this is the nicest room I ever had. It has _everything_, and
_look_ at the dressing table!"

Dick sat down in amazement, a smile slowly spreading over his face.
Dolores was happy--wherever they were. The room was all that mattered.
But he couldn't understand why Morquil had gassed them, and put them on
board unconscious. _He_ would have enjoyed seeing the new ship.

When a knock sounded at the door, Dolores was unpacking her clothes for
the first time since they left the _Primrose_. Turning the knob, Morquil
stepped in.

"I'm sorry, Dick, that I had to use gas, but I knew the people would be
afraid of boarding this ship. John McCarthy is down in the power room
already, examining the machines, but some of the others are upset about
the transfer from the island. I hope you don't feel resentful?"

"No, Morquil. We're satisfied. If you don't believe it--look at Dolores.
She decided to like this room the minute she saw it, and is unpacking
already."

The worried expression disappeared from the strange man's face. "I had
the cabins equipped for women, as I know they are particular about such
things."

"Would you like to see the ship? It will be your home for a long time,
and you might as well get acquainted. I'm sorry that no one but myself
understands English, but you will have ample time to learn our language
during the voyage. You must speak it fluently by the time we arrive."

As they started out, Dolores dropped the dress she was holding, to join
them. Curiosity overcame the desire to straighten out her clothes.

Entering a wide passage, they turned to the right. It ended abruptly in
a room with several comfortable chairs. Three tables occupied the center
in uneven positions, the underparts filled with metal-covered books.
Two men of Morquil's race looked up at their approach.

Dick returned their friendly smile. When Dolores smiled they appeared
embarrassed; but truly greatly pleased. Barrow noticed that one of them
was examining a book in English; the illustrations seemed to fascinate
him.

A narrow passage, beyond the main cabin, led to the control room where
three men sat in swivel chairs. The instrument board was a marvel to
Dick, and he watched for several minutes. It would require months to
understand even a small portion of the gauges.

The ship was built with two decks, and a large hold beneath the lower
floor which contained the machinery. The strange men were quartered on
the lower level, with the exception of Morquil. His cabin was next to
the one occupied by the Barrows. The McCarthys were on the opposite side
of the passage, in a room slightly smaller than the one allotted to Dick
and his wife.

The quarters of the remainder of the party were smaller, but still quite
comfortable; all located farther back on the same passage.

       *       *       *       *       *

Morquil was proud of the ship, and displayed each section with pride. He
opened every cupboard door, and showed them through all of the cabins.
They were stopped for a while, when they met Mrs. Yarbro, trying to
dispel her fear of the strange craft. The others appeared to be taking
their new quarters for granted, and settling down for the trip.

The main cabin was toward the front of the ship, while the dining room
was at the rear; the staterooms on the passage between. One stairway led
to the lower level, from just back of the control room, another from the
dining saloon. A ramp beneath the rear stairway led to the hold of the
ship. When they started down, Dolores returned to her cabin. Her
interest ended on the upper decks.

Dick spotted John, bending over one of the machines, so engrossed that
