
I had decided to spend a day or two at Atronics City before taking a
scooter out to Ab Karpin's claim. Atronics City had been Karpin's and
McCann's home base. All of McCann's premium payments had been mailed
from here, and the normal mailing address for both of them was GPO
Atronics City.

I wanted to know as much as possible about Ab Karpin before I went out
to see him. And Atronics City seemed like the best place to get my
information.

But not today. Today, my stomach was very unhappy, and my head was on
sympathy strike. Today, I was going to spend my time exclusively in bed,
trying not to float up to the ceiling.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Mapping & Registry Office, it seemed to me the next day, was the
best place to start. This was where prospectors filed their claims, but
it was a lot more than that. The waiting room of M&R was the unofficial
club of the asteroid prospectors. This is where they met with one
another, talked together about the things that prospectors discuss, and
made and dissolved their transient partnerships.

In this way, Karpin and McCann were unusual. They had maintained their
partnership for fifteen years. That was about sixty times longer than
most such arrangements lasted.

Searching the asteroid chunks for rare and valuable metals is basically
pretty lonely work, and it's inevitable that the prospectors will every
once in a while get hungry for human company and decide to try a team
operation. But, at the same time, work like this attracts people who
don't get along very well with human company. So the partnerships come
and go, and the hatreds flare and are forgotten, and the normal
prospecting team lasts an average of three months.

At any rate, it was to the Mapping & Registry Office that I went first.
And, since that office was up on the first level, I went by elevator.

Riding _up_ in that elevator was a heck of a lot more fun than riding
down. The elevator whipped up like mad, the floor pressed against the
soles of my feet, and it felt almost like good old Earth for a second or
two there. But then the elevator stopped, and I held on tight to the
hand-grips to keep from shooting through the top of the blasted thing.

The operator--a phlegmatic sort--gave me directions to the M&R, and off
I went, still trying to figure out how to sail along as gracefully as
the locals.

The Mapping & Registry Office occupied a good-sized shack over near the
dome wall, next to the entry lock. I pushed open the door and went on
in.

The waiting room was cozy and surprisingly large, large enough to
comfortably hold the six maroon leather sofas scattered here and there
on the pale green carpet, flanked by bronze ashtray stands. There were
only six prospectors here at the moment, chatting together in two groups
of three, and they all looked alike. Grizzled, ageless, watery-eyed,
their clothing clean but baggy. I passed them and went on to the desk at
the far end, behind which sat a young man in official gray, slowly
turning the crank of a microfilm reader.

He looked up at my approach. I flashed my company identification and
asked to speak to the manager. He went away, came back, and ushered me
into an office which managed to be Spartan and sumptuous at the same
time. The walls had been plastic-painted in textured brown, the iron
floor had been lushly carpeted in gray, and the desk had been covered
with a simulated wood coating.

The manager--a man named Teaking--went well with the office. His face
and hands were spare and lean, but his uniform was immaculate, covered
with every curlicue the regulations allowed. He welcomed me politely,
but curiously, and I said, "I wonder if you know a prospector named Ab
Karpin?"

"Karpin? Of course. He and old Jafe McCann--pity about McCann. I hear he
got killed."

"Yes, he did."

"And that's what you're here for, eh?" He nodded sagely. "I didn't know
the Belt boys could get insurance," he said.

"It isn't exactly that," I said. "This concerns a retirement plan,
and--well, the details don't matter." Which, I hoped, would end his
curiosity in that line. "I was hoping you could give me some background
on Karpin. And on McCann, too, for that matter."

He grinned a bit. "You saw the men sitting outside?"

I nodded.

"Then you've seen Karpin and McCann. Exactly the same. It doesn't matter
if a man's thirty or sixty or what. It doesn't matter what he was like
before he came out here. If he's been here a few years, he looks exactly
like the bunch you saw outside there."

"That's appearance," I said. "What I was looking for was personality."

"Same thing," he said. "All of them. Close-mouthed, anti-social,
fiercely independent, incurably romantic, always convinced that the big
strike is just a piece of rock away. McCann, now, he was a bit more
realistic than most. He'd be the one I'd expect to take out a retirement
policy. A real pence-pincher, that one, though I shouldn't say it as
he's dead. But that's the way he was. Brighter than most Belt boys when
it came to money matters. I've seen him haggle over a new piece of
equipment for their scooter, or some repair work, or some such thing,
and he was a wonder to watch."

"And Karpin?" I asked him.

"A prospector," he said, as though that answered my question. "Same as
everybody else. Not as sharp as McCann when it came to money. That's why
all the money stuff in the partnership was handled by McCann. But Karpin
was one of the sharpest boys in the business when it came to mineralogy.
He knew rocks you and I never heard of, and most times he knew them by
sight. Almost all of the Belt boys are college grads--you've got to know
what you're looking for out here and what it looks like when you've
found it--but Karpin has practically all of them beat. He's _sharp_."

       *       *       *

"Sounds like a good team," I said.

"I guess that's why they stayed together so long," he said. "They
complemented each other." He leaned forward, the inevitable prelude to a
confidential remark. "I'll tell you something off the record, Mister,"
he said. "Those two were smarter than they knew. Their partnership was
never legalized, it was never anything more than a piece of paper. And
there's a bunch of fellas around here mighty unhappy about that today.
Jafe McCann is the one who handled all the money matters, like I said.
He's got IOU's all over town."

"And they can't collect from Karpin?"

He nodded. "Jafe McCann died just a bit too soon. He was sharp and
cheap, but he was honest. If he'd lived, he would have repaid all his
debts, I'm sure of it. And if this strike they made is as good as I
hear, he would have been able to repay them with no trouble at all."

I nodded, somewhat impatiently. I had the feeling by now that I was
talking to a man who was one of those who had a Jafe McCann IOU in his
pocket. "How long has it been since you've seen Karpin?" I asked him,
wondering what Karpin's attitude and expression was now that his partner
was dead.

"Oh, Lord, not for a couple of months," he said. "Not since they went
out together the last time and made that strike."

"Didn't Karpin come in to make his claim?"

"Not here. Over to Chemisant City. That was the nearest M&R to the
strike."

"Oh." That was a pity. I would have liked to have known if there had
been a change of any kind in Karpin since his partner's death. "I'll
tell you what the situation is," I said, with a false air of
truthfulness. "We have some misgivings about McCann's death. Not
suspicions, exactly, just misgivings. The timing is what bothers us."

"You mean, because it happened just after the strike?"

"That's it," I answered frankly.

He shook his head. "I wouldn't get too excited about that, if I were
you," he said. "It wouldn't be the first time it's happened. A man makes
the big strike after all, and he gets so excited he forgets himself for
a minute and gets careless. And you only have to be careless once out
here."
