captain of his ship and wanted nothing more. Sure, it was only a
three-man crew--himself, a flight engineer, an astronavigator. But it
was an E ship, which meant that he outranked even the captains of the
great luxury liners.

There was a time when the realization caused him to strut a little, but
he'd got over it. He was single, had no ties, wanted none. He had a good
job which he took seriously, was doing significant work which he also
took seriously, was paid premium wages even for a space captain, which
didn't matter except in terms of recognition. He didn't mind going
anywhere in the known universe, or how long he would be away. He hoped
he would get back someday, but he wasn't fanatic about it.

In a routine so well-practiced that it had become ritual, he checked
over the cruiser point by point. Of course the maintenance men had
checked each item when they had, after his last trip, dismantled,
cleaned, oiled, polished, tested, and reassembled one part after
another. Then maintenance supervisors had checked over the ship with a
gimlet-eyed attitude of hoping to find some flaw, just one tiny flub, so
they could turn some luckless mechanic inside out. The Inspection
Department, traditionally an enemy of Maintenance, took over from there
and inspected every part as if it had been slapped together by a bunch
of army goof-offs who knew that pilots were expendable in peace or war
and, unconsciously at least, aided in expending them.

Both departments had certified, with formal preflight papers, that the
ship was in readiness for deep space. But Lynwood considered such papers
as so much garbage, and went over the entire ship himself. This might
have had something to do with his so-called luck.

He wondered if Frank and Louie had checked into the ship this morning.
Probably had; last night's outing wasn't much to hang over about. A
steak at the Eagle Cafe down in Yellow Sands, a couple of drinks at
Smitty's, a game of pool at Smiley's, a few dances at the Stars and
Moons. Big night out for his crew before they left for deep space.
Yellow Sands was strictly for young families, where bright-boy hubby
worked up on the hill at E.H.Q., and wifey raised super-bright kids who
already considered Dad to be behind the times. Their idea of sin in that
town was to snub the wrong matron at a cocktail party; or not snub, as
the case might be. Not that it mattered much, neither Frank nor Louie
was dedicated to hell-raising.

When he at last opened the door to the generator room, he saw his flight
engineer, Frank Norton, had a couple of student E's on his hands.

It was one of the nuisances of being stationed here at E.H.Q. that you'd
have swarms of these super-bright youngsters hanging around, asking
questions, disputing your answers, arguing with each other, and, if you
didn't watch them carefully, taking things apart and putting them back
together in different hookups to see what would happen.

The first thing these kids were taught was to disregard everything
everybody had ever said; to start out from scratch as if nobody had ever
had the sense to think about the problem before; to doubt most of all
the opinions of experts, for, obviously, if the experts were right then
there would be no problem. Most of them didn't have to be taught it,
they seemed to have been born with it. Time was you batted a young smart
aleck down, told him to go get dry behind the ears before he shot off
his mouth. But not these days. These days you looked at him hopefully,
and crossed your fingers. He might grow up to be an E.

Tom wondered what it would be like to doubt the realities, the very
machinery under his hands, to assume that although it had always worked
it might not work this time. He could not conceive that state of mind,
or how a man could live in it without going insane. Every time he saw
these tortured kids saying, "Well, maybe, but what if ..." he was glad
to be nothing more than a ship captain who knew his machinery was
exactly what it was supposed to be and nothing else.

But, in a way, it was nice for the lads too. After thousands of years of
man's almost rabid determination to destroy the brightest and best of
his young, the world had finally found a place for the bright boy.

This morning, probably because of the early dawn hour, there were only
two of them in the generator room. As expected, they were arguing over
the space-jump band. Frank was standing over to one side, observing but
not participating. His cap was pushed back on his blond head, his big
face expressionless. It was common gossip throughout flight crews
everywhere that Frank, blindfolded, could take a cruiser apart and put
it back together without missing a motion.

"The jump band is founded on the basic of the Moebius strip," one
student E was saying heatedly. "This little gadget sends out a field in
the shape of such a strip, a band with a half twist before rejoined. Its
width is as variable as we need it, up to a light-year."

"Only it hasn't any width at all," the other student argued. "That's the
whole point. The Moebius strip has only one edge, so it can't have
width. We enter that edge, go through a line that doesn't exist, and
come out a light-year away, without taking any longer than the time to
pass a point."

"But that's _what_ happens, not _how_," the other shouted angrily.
"Everybody knows _what_ happens. Tell me _how_ and maybe I'll listen."

Tom caught his flight engineer's eye and signaled with his head that it
might be a good idea to get rid of the students. Any other time it would
be all right, a part of their stand-by job, but they'd got word last
night to have the ship in readiness from six o'clock on. They might have
to wait all day, but then again, some E might get an idea and want to go
shooting out to Eden right off.

Frank caught the signal, grinned, and began to herd the two students
toward the door. They were in such heated argument now, accusing one
another of parrot repetition instead of thinking for himself, that they
didn't realize that they were being nudged out of the ship, down its
ramp, and out on the field.

"Don't think it hasn't been educational, and all," Frank murmured to
them as he got them off the ramp. "You get the how of it figured out,
you let me know."

The two looked at him as if he might be an interesting phenomenon,
decided he wasn't, and wandered away, back toward the school
dormitories, still arguing.

"Sometimes I think a quiet milk run out to Saturn would have its
brighter side," Frank muttered to Tom when he came back inside the ship.
Tom grinned at him in wordless understanding.

There was no tension between them. They had worked together so long that
they had got over all the attraction-repulsion conflicts which operate
far beneath the surface mind to cause likes and dislikes. Now they
accepted one another in the way a man accepts his own hands--proud of
them when they do something with extra skill, making allowances when
they fumble; but never considering doing without them.

"Wonder who the E will be this time?" Frank asked, without too much
concern. It didn't really matter. An E was an E, for better or for
worse.

"Haven't heard," Tom answered. "Probably not decided yet. If the Senior
E's think it isn't much of a problem, they might send a Junior. Or if
they don't want to be bothered, they might send a Junior who's up for
his solo problem."

"Whoever, or whatever, I'm sure it will be interesting," Frank commented
with a grin. Tom returned the grin. There wasn't any malice in it, nor
any of the basic enmity and destructiveness of the stupid toward the
bright, just a recognition that an E was an E. They had a vast respect
for an E, but you couldn't get around it that some of them were--well,
maybe eccentric was the word.

"I hear there's trouble on that planet we're going to--Eden, isn't it?"
Frank commented.

"You think we'd be hauling an E out there if there weren't?" Tom
countered wryly.

They continued to check over each item in the generator room, their
flying fingers making sharp contrast to their slow, idle conversation.
They gave the room extra care this time because there had been some
quick-fingered students around who just might have got it into their
heads to improve the machinery. Satisfied at last that there had been no
subtle meddling, they snapped the cowl of the generator back into
position. They took one more sharp look around, then walked, single
file, up the narrow passage to the control room. Louie LeBeau was
sitting in the astronavigator's seat, checking over his star charts and
instruments. He glanced up at them as they came level with his cubicle.
He was the third man of the team, as used to them as they were to him.

"Fourteen hop adjustments to get us past Pluto and out of the heavy
traffic," he grumbled sourly. His round face and liquid brown eyes were
perpetually disgusted. "They keep saying over at Traffic that they're
going to provide a freeway out of the solar system so we can take it in
one hop, but they don't do it. Wonder when we'll ever go modern, start
doing things scientific?"

They paid no attention to his grumbling. That was just Louie.

"Then how many hops to Eden, after Pluto?" Tom asked.

"I figure twenty," Louie answered. "Can't take full light-year leaps
every time. There's stuff in the way. There's always stuff in the way to
louse up a good flight plan. Universe is too crowded. There'll be no
trouble getting _to_ Eden, no trouble _getting_ there. Make it in about
fourteen hours. Fourteen hours to go eleven lousy little light-years.
Fourteen hours I got to work in one stretch. Wait'll the union agent
hears you're working me fourteen hours without a relief. And are you
letting me get my rest now, so I can work fourteen hours? Or are you
stopping me from resting with a lot of questions?"

"But you think there may be trouble _after_ we get to Eden?" Tom asked.

Louie looked at him. There was no fear in the soft, brown eyes; just an
enormous indignation that life should always treat him so dirty.

"Don't you?" he asked.




4


Calvin Gray, Junior Extrapolator, stood nude before his bathroom mirror
and played a no-beard light over his chin and thin cheeks. That should
take care of the beard problem for the next six months or so. He leaned
forward and examined the fine lines beginning to appear at the corners
of his eyes. Well, that was one of the signs he'd reached the thirty
mark. One couldn't stay forever at the peak of youth--not yet, anyway.
Perhaps he should think about that sometime.

Trouble was, there was always something more urgent....

He became conscious that Linda was standing in the bathroom door
watching him. He hadn't heard her get out of bed.

"You used the no-beard just last month, Cal," she said. There was a
questioning note in her voice.

"Want to keep handsome," he said lightly. "Never know when I might have
to run out to some other world. Wouldn't want one of my other wives to
catch me with stubble on my face."

It was a stale joke, a childish one, but it served to introduce the
topic foremost in his mind.

"This Eden problem. I can't plan on it, but I hope it's my solo to
qualify me for my big E. I'm due, you know."

Linda chose to avoid coming directly to grips with it.

"Yehudi is already at the door," she said, and made a face of
exasperation. "Someday I'm going to turn off the gadget that signals the
orderly room the minute you get out of bed, so I can have you all to
myself."

"It's better if you get used to him," Cal cautioned. "Turn off the
signal and that turns on an alarm. Instead of one Yehudi, you'd have
twenty rushing in to see what was wrong."

"Well, it seems to me a grown man ought to be able to take his morning
shower without an observer standing by to see that he doesn't drown
himself or swallow the soap," she commented with a touch of acid.

"Get used to it, woman," he commanded. "There's only one observer now.
When--if I get my Senior rating, there'll be three."

She didn't say anything. Instead she stepped over to him, pressed her
nude body against his, and tenderly nuzzled his arm.

"Maybe if we go back to bed, he'll go away," she said, and glittered her
eyes at him wickedly.

"He won't, but it's a good idea," Cal grinned at her.

"You could tell him to go away," she whispered with a little pout.

She was fighting. She was fighting with the only weapon she had to hold
him, to keep him from going away, to face an unknown. He knew it, and
the bitterness in her eyes, back of her teasing, showed she knew he knew
it.

He took her tenderly in his arms, held her close to him, stroked her
hair, kissed her mouth. She pulled her face away, buried it in his
chest. He felt her sobbing.

He picked her up, lightly, carried her back into the bedroom, laid her
gently on the bed, and, oblivious to the attendant who stood
expressionless inside the door, knelt down beside the bed and held her
head in his arms.

"Don't fight it," he said softly. "It isn't the first time a man has had
to go."

"It's the first time it ever happened to me," she sobbed.

"You knew when you married me.... You agreed...."

"It was easy to agree, then. There was the glamor of being known as the
wife of an E. Now that doesn't matter. There's just you, and the thought
of losing you, never seeing you again."

"I haven't gone yet," he reminded her. "I don't know that I'll get the
job. There are three Seniors at base right now. One of them might want
it. Even if I do get the problem, who says I won't be back? You take old
McGinnis. He's eighty if he's a day. He's been an E for nigh on to fifty
years. He's still around, you'll notice."

She was quieter now. She lay, looking at him, drinking in his dark hair,
blue eyes, handsome face, the shape of his intelligent head, the slope
of his neck and shoulders, the tapering waist, all the masculine grace
and beauty. She pressed her closed fist into her mouth. All the beauty
she might never see again, feel enfolded around her, enfold with
herself.

"I'm a little fool," she said through clenched teeth. "Of course you'll
be back. And you'd better make it quick, or I'll come after you."

He kissed her, rumpled her short hair, straightened her crumpled body on
the bed, pulled the sheet over her.

"Why don't you go back to sleep," he suggested. "Rest. I'll have
breakfast in the E club room. That's where we'll be watching the Eden
briefing. Sleep. Sleep all morning."

Gently he closed her eyes with the tip of his forefinger. Gently he
kissed her once more. This time she didn't cling to him, try to hold
him.

He tucked the sheet in around her throat. Dutifully, she kept her eyes
closed. He stood up then, and signaled the orderly.

"I'll take my shower now," he said.

The orderly didn't speak, just followed him into the bathroom to stand
in the doorway and watch him through the shower glass. He was rigidly
obeying the cardinal rule of E.H.Q.

Unless his life is in danger, never interrupt the thinking of an E. The
whole course of man's destiny in the universe may depend on it.

How much of the future of the universe depended upon his not
interrupting the scene he had just witnessed wasn't for him to say. He
sighed. He thought of his own wife--shrewish, fat, coarse, always
complaining. He wondered what she would do if he picked her up, carried
her to bed, closed her eyes with his fingers. For once, he'd bet, she'd
be speechless.

He must try it sometime. But first, she'd have to lose about fifty
pounds.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Cal got to the E club room two Seniors were already there--McGinnis
and Wong. He thought their greeting was a shade more cordial, a shade
more interested than usual. They seemed, this time, to be looking at him
as if he were a person, not merely a Junior E. When he turned away from
them to greet the three Juniors, who, along with himself, ranked the
club-room privileges, he became certain of his impressions. Their faces
were frankly envious.

Eden was to be his problem!

He'd hoped for it. Even half expected it. Yet all the way through his
shower, dressing, coming down the elevator from his apartment, he'd been
nagged with the fear he might not be considered; that the grief of Linda
and her rise above it would lead only to anticlimax. By the time he'd
got to the club-room door, followed by his orderly, he had already
conditioned himself to disappointment.

Now he subdued his elation while he told his orderly what he wanted for
breakfast.

"You fellows join me in something?" he asked both Juniors and Seniors.

"A second cup of coffee," Wong agreed.
