indulgence.

That such a course, if properly conducted, must be interesting,
needs scarcely to be observed; for the more we examine the
structure and functions of the human body, the more we admire the
excellence of the workmanship, and beauty of contrivance, which
presents itself in every part, and which continually shows the
hand of omniscience. The most ingenious of human inventions, when
compared with the animal frame, indicate a poverty of contrivance
which cannot fail to humble the pretensions of the sons of men.
Surely then there are few who will not feel a desire to become
acquainted with subjects so interesting.

But there is another point of view which will place the utility of
such inquiries in a still stronger light. We shall afterwards see,
that our life is continually supported by the action of a number
of substances, by which the body is surrounded, and which are
taken into the stomach for its nourishment. On the due action of
these depends the pleasant performance of the different functions,
or the state of health; without which, riches, honours, and every
other gratification, become joyless and insipid.

By understanding the manner in which these powers act, or, in
other words, by becoming acquainted with the principles of
physiology, we shall be enabled to regulate them, so as, in a
great measure, to guard against the numerous ills that flesh is
heir to: for it is universally agreed, that by far the greatest
part of the diseases to which mankind are subject, have been
brought on by intemperance, imprudence, and the neglect of
precautions, which often arises from carelessness, but much
oftener from ignorance of those precautions.

Physiological ignorance is, undoubtedly, the most abundant source
of our sufferings; every person accustomed to the sick must have
heard them deplore their ignorance of the necessary consequences
of those practises, by which their health has been destroyed: and
when men shall be deeply convinced, that the eternal laws of
nature have connected pain and decrepitude with one mode of life,
and health and vigour with another, they will avoid the former and
adhere to the latter.

It is strange, however, to observe that the generality of mankind
do not seem to bestow a single thought on the preservation of
their health, till it is too late to reap any benefit from their
conviction: so that we may say of health, as we do of time, we
take no notice of it but by its loss; and feel the value of it
when we can no longer think of it but with retrospect and regret.

When we take a view of the human frame, and see how admirably each
part is contrived for the performance of its different functions,
and even for repairing its own injuries, we might at first sight
imagine, that such a structure, unless destroyed by external
force, should continue for ever in vigour, and in health: and it
is by mournful experience alone that we are convinced of the
contrary. The strongest constitution, which never experienced the
qualms of sickness, or the torture of disease, and which seems to
bid defiance to the enemies of health that surround it, is not
proof against the attacks of age. Even in the midst of life we are
in death; how many of us have contemplated with admiration the
graceful motion of the female form; the eye sparkling with
intelligence; the countenance enlivened by wit, or animated by
feeling: a single instant is sufficient to dispel the charm: often
without apparent cause, sensation and motion cease at once; the
body loses its warmth, the eyes their lustre, and the lips and
cheeks become livid. These, as Cuvier observes, are but preludes
to changes still more hideous. The colour passes successively to a
blue, a green, and a black; the flesh absorbs moisture, and while
one part of it escapes in pestilential exhalations, the remaining
part falls down into a putrid liquid mass. In a short time no part
of the body remains, but a few earthy and saline principles; its
other elements being dispersed through air, or carried off by
water, to form new combinations, and afford food for other
animals.

The human body has been defined to be a machine composed of bones
and muscles, with their proper appendages, for the purpose of
motion, at the instance of its intelligent principle. From this
principle, nerves, or instruments of sensation, are likewise
detached to the various parts of the body, for such information as
may be necessary to determine it to those motions of the body,
which may conduce to the happiness of the former, and the
preservation of both.

It may perhaps be objected to this definition, that the body
consists of other parts besides bones, muscles, and nerves; this
is undoubtedly true; but, if we examine more minutely, we shall
find that all the other parts, as well as functions of the body,
seem only to be subservient to the purposes I have mentioned. For,
in the first place, the muscles which are necessary to the motions
of the body, are, from the nature of their constitution, subject
to continual waste; to repair which waste, some of the other
functions have been contrived.

Secondly, most of the other parts and functions of the body, are
either necessary to the action of the muscles, or to the operation
of the intelligent principle, or both.

Lastly, from the sensibility, and delicate structure, of the
muscles and nerves, they require to be defended from external
injuries: this is done by membranes, and other contrivances,
fitted for the purpose.

To see this more clearly, we shall examine a little more
particularly how each of the functions is subservient to the
muscular and nervous systems. For this purpose it may be observed,
1st. that the stomach and digestive faculties serve to assimilate
the food, or convert it into matter proper to repair the continual
waste of solids and fluids. The circulation of the blood besides
being absolutely necessary, as we shall afterwards see, to the
action of the muscles, distributes the nourishment, thus
assimilated and prepared by the stomach, to all parts of the body.
The different glands separate liquors from the blood, for useful,
but still for subservient purposes. Thus the salivary glands,
stomach, pancreas, and liver, separate juices necessary to the
proper digestion and assimilation of the food. The kidneys serve
to strain off from the blood the useless and superfluous water,
salts, &c. which if allowed to remain in the body would be very
injurious to it.

We shall afterwards see, that the nerves are not only instruments
of sensation, but the origin of motion; it being immediately by
their means that the muscles are moved. A certain degree of heat
is necessary to keep the blood fluid, and also to the action of
the nerves; without either of which, no motion could be performed.
Respiration or breathing is so necessary to life, that it cannot
exist, even a few minutes, without the exercise of that function;
and yet we shall afterwards see, that the ultimate end of
respiration is to keep the body in a proper state, for the
purposes of muscular motion and sensation.

The skin serves like a sheath to defend the body from injuries;
the skull serves the same purpose to the brain, which is the
origin of the nerves. The different membranes separate the fibres,
muscles, nerves, and various organs of the body, from each other.
Hence we see that there is no impropriety, in calling the human
body a machine composed of bones and muscles, with their proper
appendages, for the purpose of motion, at the instance of its
intelligent principle.

In order to show more clearly how each part is subservient to
these ends, I shall give a short account of the structure of the
human body, but I must premise, that the nature of this course
will prevent my entering minutely into anatomical detail. All that
can be done is, to give such a general outline of anatomy and
physiology, as will furnish individuals with so much knowledge of
themselves, as may enable them to guard against habitual sickness.

Among the solid parts of the human frame the bones stand
conspicuous. Their use is, to give firmness and shape to the body.
Some of them likewise serve as armour, or defense, to guard
important parts; thus the skull is admirably contrived to defend
the brain; and the spine or backbone is designed, not only to
strengthen the body, but to shield that continuation of the brain,
called the spinal marrow, from whence originate great numbers of
nerves, which pass through convenient openings of this bone, and
are distributed to various parts of the body. In the structure of
this, as well as every other part, the wisdom of the Creator is
manifest. Had it been a single bone, the loins must have been
inflexible; to avoid which, it consists of a number of small
bones, articulated or joined together with great exactness, which
are strengthened by compact ligaments. Hence it becomes capable of
various inflections, without injuring the nerves, or diminishing
that strength which is so much required.

The whole system of bones, or skeleton, is constructed of several
parts, of different shapes and sizes, joining with one another in
various manners, and so knit together, as best to answer to the
motions which the occasions of the animal may require.

These bones serve as levers for the muscles to act on; which last
serve as mechanical powers, to give the machine various motions,
at the command of the will.

The muscles are fleshy fibres, attached by their extremities to
the bones. When the fibres shorten themselves, the two parts into
which the muscle is inserted are brought nearer; and, by this
simple contrivance, all the motions of animals are performed, and
their bodies carried from one place to another.

Joints are provided with muscles for performing the motions for
which they are adapted; every muscle pulling the bone, to which it
is attached, in its own particular direction. Hence the muscles
may be considered as so many moving forces, as was before hinted;
and their strength, the distance of their insertion from the
centre of motion, the length of the lever to which they are
attached, and the weight connected with it, determine the duration
and velocity of the motions which they produce. Upon these
different circumstances depend the different kinds of motion
performed by various animals, such as the force of their leap, the
extent of their flight, the rapidity of their course, and their
address in catching their prey.

Most of the muscles act upon the bones, so as to produce the
effects of a lever of the third kind, as it is termed by
mechanics, where the power acts between the centre of motion and
the weight; hence it has a mechanical disadvantage; as an instance
of this, the muscle which bends the forearm, is inserted about one
eighth or one tenth of the distance from the centre of motion that
the hand is, where the weight or resistance is applied; hence the
muscle must exert a force eight or ten times greater than the
weight to be raised. But this disadvantage is amply compensated by
making the limbs move with greater velocity; besides, if room had
been given for the muscles to act with greater advantage, the
limbs must have been exceedingly deformed and unwieldy. [1]

The muscles, in general, at least those which serve for voluntary
motion, are balanced by antagonists, by means of which they are
kept beyond their natural stretch. When one of two antagonists is
contracted by the will, the other relaxes in order to give it
play; or at least becomes overpowered by the contraction of the
first. Also when one of such muscles happens to be paralytic, the
other being no longer balanced, or kept on the stretch,
immediately contracts to its natural length, and remains in that
situation. The part to which it is fixed will, of course, be
affected accordingly. If one of the muscles which move the mouth
sideways be destroyed, the other immediately contracting, draws
the mouth awry; and in that situation it remains. The same may be
observed of the leg, the arm, and other parts. Some muscles assist
one another in their action, while others have different actions;
according to their shapes, the course of their fibres, and the
structure of the parts they move.

According to the shape and nature of the bones to be moved, and of
the motions to be performed, the muscles are either long, or
short; slender, or bulky; straight, or round. Where a great motion
is required, as in the leg, or arm, the muscles are long; where a
small motion is necessary, they are short; for a strong motion
they are thick, and for a weak one slender.

Some of the muscles are fastened to, and move bones; others
cartilages, and others again other muscles, as may best suit the
intention to be answered.

With respect to the bones, some are solid and flattened; others
hollow and cylindrical. Every cylindrical bone is hollow, or has a
cavity containing a great number of cells, filled with an oily
marrow. Each of these cells is lined with a fine membrane, which
forms the marrow. On this membrane, the blood vessels are spread,
which enter the bones obliquely, and generally near their middle;
from some branches of these vessels the marrow is secreted; while
others enter the internal substance of the bones for their
nourishment; and the reason why they enter the bones obliquely is,
that they may not weaken them by dividing too many fibres in the
same place.

The bones being made hollow, their strength is greatly increased
without any addition to their weight; for if they had been formed
of the same quantity of matter without any cavities, they would
have been much weaker; their strength to resist breaking
transversely being proportionate to their diameters, as is evident
from mechanics.

All the bones, excepting so much of the teeth as are out of the
sockets, and those parts of other bones which are covered with
cartilages, are surrounded by a fine membrane, which on the skull
is called pericranium, but in other parts periosteum. This
membrane serves for the muscles to slide easily upon, and to
hinder them from being lacerated by the hardness and roughness of
the bones.

But though the apparatus which I have been describing is admirably
contrived for the performance of motion; it would continue for
ever inactive, if not animated by the nervous system.

The brain is the seat of the intelligent principle: from this
organ, white, soft, and medullary threads, called nerves, are sent
off to different parts of the body: some of them proceed
immediately from the brain to their destined places, while the
greater number, united together, perforate the skull, and enter
the cavity of the backbone, forming what we call the spinal
marrow, which may be regarded as a continuation of the brain.
Portions of the spinal marrow pass through different apertures to
all parts of the body.

We are not conscious of the impression of external objects on our
body, unless there be a free communication of nerves, between the
place where the impression is made and the brain. If a nerve be
divided, or have a ligature put round it, sensation is intercepted.

There is perhaps only one sense which is common to all classes of
animals, and which exists over every part of the surface of the
body; I mean the sense of touch. The seat of this sense is in the
extremities of the nerves distributed over the skin; and by means
of it we ascertain the resistance of bodies, their figure, and
their temperature.

The other senses have been thought to be only more refined
modifications of the sense of touch; and the organs of each are
placed near the brain on the external surface of the head. The
sense of sight, for instance, is seated in the eye; the hearing in
the ear; the smell in the internal membrane of the nose; and the
taste in the tongue.

The light; the pulses, or vibrations of the air; the effluvia
floating in the atmosphere; saline particles, or particles which
are soluble in water or saliva, are the substances which act upon
these four senses; and the organs which transmit their action to
the nerves, are admirably adapted to the respective nature of
each. The eye presents to the light a succession of transparent
lenses to refract its rays; the ear opposes to the air membranes,
fluids, and bones, well fitted to transmit its vibrations; the
nostrils, while they afford a passage to the air in its way to the
lungs, intercept any odorous particles which it contains, and the
tongue is provided with spongy papillae to imbibe the sapid
liquors which are the objects of taste.

It is by these organs that we become acquainted with what passes
around us; by these we know that a material world exists. We may
however observe, that the nervous system, besides making us
acquainted with external things, gives us notice of many changes
that take place within our own body. Internal pain warns us of the
presence of disease; and the disagreeable sensations of hunger,
thirst, and fatigue, are signs of the body standing in need of
refreshment or repose.

Concerning the manner in which we become acquainted with external
things, by means of the senses, we know nothing. Many hypotheses
have been offered to explain this: none of them however are the
result of experiment and observation. Many philosophers have
supposed the universe to be filled with an extremely subtile
fluid, which they have termed ethereal; and this hypothesis has
been sanctioned by the illustrious authority of Newton. He however
merely offered it in the modest form of a query, for the attention
of other philosophers; little thinking that it would be made use
of to explain phenomena which they did not understand. His query
about a subtile elastic fluid pervading the universe, and giving
motion and activity to inert masses of matter, and thereby causing
the phenomena of attraction, gravitation, and many other
appearances in nature, was immediately laid hold of by his
followers, as a fact sufficiently supported, because it seemed to
have the sanction of so great an authority.

This hypothesis was made use of to explain a great number of
phenomena, and the physiologists, whose theories were generally
influenced by the prevailing philosophy, eagerly laid hold of it
to explain the phenomena of sensation, and muscular motion. When
an impression was made upon any part of the external surface of
the body, whether it was occasioned by heat, or mechanical
impulse, they supposed, that the ether in the extremities of the
nerves was set in motion. This motion, from the energy of the
ether, is communicated along the nerves to the brain, and there
produces such a change as occasions a consciousness of the
original impression, and a reference in the mind to the place
where it was made. Next they supposed, that the action of the will
caused a motion of the ether to be instantly propagated along the
nerves that terminate in the fibres of the muscles, which
stimulated them to contraction.

Other philosophers imagined, that a tremulous motion was excited
in the nerves themselves, by the action of external impulses, like
the motions excited in the string of a harp. These motions they
supposed to be propagated along the nerves of sense, to the brain,
and from thence along the motory nerves, to the muscles.

Before they attempted this explanation of the phenomena, they
should have proved the existence of such a fluid, or at least
brought forward such circumstances, as rendered its existence
credible. But supposing we grant them the hypothesis, it will, in
my opinion, not avail much; for it is not easy to conceive how the
motion of a subtile fluid, or the vibration of a nerve, can cause
sensation.

Nor are the internal senses, as they are generally called, namely,
memory, and imagination, any better explained on this supposition;
for we cannot conceive how this nervous fluid is stored up and
propelled by the will.

After all, I think we must confess, that this subject is still
enveloped in obscurity. One observation is worth making, namely,
that our sensations have not the smallest resemblance to the
substance or impression, which causes them; thus the sensation
occasioned by the smell of camphor, possesses not the smallest
