arrival, curled up in his favorite chair by the fireside, a wide-mouthed
goblet of cognac by his side. As I entered the room, he lifted a paw
formally, but then his reserve was dissolved by the emotion of our
reunion, and he licked my face in unashamed joy.

Francois refreshed his glass, and poured another for me, and we toasted
each other's well-being.

"To you, _mon purr_," I said, using the affectionate name of my
childhood memory.

"To Joanna," my father said. He smacked his lips over the cognac, and
wiped his whiskers gravely. "And where is this paragon?"

"With Madame Jolinet. She will be down shortly."

"And you have told her everything?"

I blushed. "No, _mon purr_, I have not. I thought it best to wait until
we were home. She is a wonderful woman," I added impulsively. "She will
not be--"

"Horrified?" my father said. "What makes you so certain, my son?"

"Because she is a woman of great heart," I said stoutly. "She was
educated at a fine college for women in Eastern America. Her ancestors
were rugged people, given to legend and folklore. She is a warm, human
person--"

"Human," my father sighed, and his tail swished. "You are expecting too
much of your beloved, Etienne. Even a woman of the finest character may
be dismayed in this situation."

"But my mother--"

"Your mother was an exception, a changeling of the Fairies. You must not
look for your mother's soul in Joanna's eyes." He jumped from his chair,
and came towards me, resting his paw upon my knee. "I am glad you have
not spoken of me, Etienne. Now you must keep your silence forever."

I was shocked. I reached down and touched my father's silky fur,
saddened by the look of his age in his gray, gold-flecked eyes, and by
the tinge of yellow in his white coat.

"No, _mon purr_," I said. "Joanna must know the truth. Joanna must know
how proud I am to be the son of Edwarde Dauphin."

"Then you will lose her."

"Never! That cannot happen!"

My father walked stiffly to the fireplace, staring into the gray ashes.
"Ring for Francois," he said. "Let him build the fire. I am cold,
Etienne."

I walked to the cord and pulled it. My father turned to me and said:
"You must wait, my son. At dinner this evening, perhaps. Do not speak of
me until then."

"Very well, father."

When I left the library, I encountered Joanna at the head of the
stairway, and she spoke to me excitedly.

"Oh, Etienne! What a _beautiful_ old house. I know I will love it! May
we see the rest?"

"Of course," I said.

"You look troubled. Is something wrong?"

"No, no. I was thinking how lovely you are."

We embraced, and her warm full body against mine confirmed my conviction
that we should never be parted. She put her arm in mine, and we strolled
through the great rooms of the house. She was ecstatic at their size and
