thick skulls of his slaves. And he could--and did--thus get obedience
and performance from those slaves by using normal, sensible means as
befitted one of the race of true men.

And what would one want of the pseudomen other than obedience? Would one
perhaps wish to discuss matters of abstract interest with these beast
men? He regarded the scene with growing irritation.

Now, he remembered. It was one of those days of rest which some idiot in
the Council had once sponsored. And a group of soft-headed fools had
concurred, so that one now had to tolerate periodic days of idleness.

Times had changed, he thought. There had been a time when slaves were
slaves and a man could expect to get work from them in return for his
protection and support.

But even with these new, soft laws, herds must be guarded--especially
with that null expanding as it was. Even some lackland idiot should be
able to understand that much.

He turned his attention to the headman's hut.

The man was there. Surrounded by a few villagers, he squatted before his
flimsy, frond-roofed hut, his mouth in grotesque motion. Now, he stopped
his noisemaking and poised his head. Then he nodded, looking about the
village.

Obviously, he was taking his ease and allowing his people to do as they
would, without supervision.

Barra started to concentrate on the surrogate, to make his wishes and
his displeasure known. Then he turned impatiently from the crystal,
seizing his staff. Efficient as the surrogates were, there were some
things better attended to in person.

       *       *       *       *       *

He got to his feet and strode angrily out of the study, sending a
peremptory summons before him. As he entered the wide hallway, an
elderly slave came toward him. Barra looked at the man imperiously.

"My cloak," he demanded, "and the cap of power."

He projected the image of his fiber cloak and of the heavy gold
headpiece with its precisely positioned crystals, being careful to note
the red, green and blue glow of the various jewels. Meticulously, he
filled in details of the gracefully formed filigree which formed mounts
to support the glowing spheres. And he indicated the padded headpiece
with its incrustation of crystal carbon, so his servitor could make no
mistake. The man was more sensitive than one of the village slaves, but
even so, he was merely a pseudoman and had to have things carefully
delineated for him.

As the man walked toward a closet, Barra looked after him unhappily. The
heavy power and control circlet was unnecessary in the Residence, for
amplifiers installed in the building took care of all requirements. But
outside, in the village and fields, a portable source of power and
control was indispensable and this heavy gold cap was the best device he
had been able to find.

Even so, he hated to wear the circlet. The massive crystals mounted on
their supporting points weighed a couple of pounds by themselves and
though the gold insulating supports were designed as finely as possible,
the metal was still massive and heavy. It was a definite strain on his
neck muscles to wear the thing and he always got a headache from it.

For an instant, envy of the powerful psionics crossed his mind. There
were, he knew, those who required no control or power devices, being
able to govern and direct psionic forces without aid. But his powers,
though effective as any, required amplification and when he went out of
the Residence it was essential that he have the cap with him.

Proper and forceful handling of the things of the Estates, both animate
and inanimate, demanded considerable psionic power and this made the
large red power crystal at the center of his cap most necessary.

Besides, simultaneous control problems could be difficult--sometimes
even almost impossible--without the co-ordinating crystals which were
inset at the periphery of the headband.

And there was the possibility that he might meet some trespassing
lacklander who might have to be impressed with the resources of the
master of Kira Barra. He knew of more than one instance wherein a Master
Protector had been overcome by some predatory lackland wanderer, who had
then managed by one means or another to secure his own accession to the
estates of his victim. He smiled grimly.

Carelessness could be costly. He had proved that to his brother.

Kio Barra still remembered the first time he had quarreled violently
with Boemar. He still remembered the gentle, sympathetic smile and the
sudden, twisting agony that had shot through him as his power crystal
overloaded. The flare of energy had left him incapable of so much as
receiving a strongly driven thought for many days.

He laughed. But, poor, soft fool that he had been, Boemar had carefully
nursed his brother's mind back to strength again.

Yes, Boemar had been a powerful man, but a very unwise one. And he had
forgotten the one great strength of his weaker brother--a strength that
had grown as Leuwan aged. And so, it was Leuwan who was Kio Barra.

[Illustration]

But such a thing would never again happen at Kira Barra. With his
controls and amplifiers, he was more than a match for the most powerful
of the great psionics--so long as they didn't meet him with affectionate
sympathy.

He stood silently as the servitor put the cap on his head and placed the
cloak about his shoulders. Then, tucking his heavy duty distorter under
his arm, he turned toward the outer door. The control jewels on his cap
burned with inner fire as he raised himself a few inches from the floor
and floated out toward the dock.

       *       *       *       *       *

Not far from the forest shaded village of Tibara, logs had been lashed
together to form a pier which jutted from the shore and provided a
mooring for the hollowed logs used by men of the village in harvesting
the fish of the lake. Several boats nested here, their bows pointing
toward the fender logs of the pier. More were drawn up on the gravel of
the shore, where they lay, bottoms upward, that they might dry and be
cleaned.

A few villagers squatted by their boats and near the pier. Others were
by the nets which had been spread over the gravel to dry.

One large section of the pier was vacant. Always, this area was reserved
for the use of the Lord of the Mountain Lake.

As Barra's boat sped through the water, he concentrated his attention on
the logs of the pier, urging his boat to increasing speed. The sharp
prow rose high in the water, a long vee of foam extending from it, to
spread out far behind the racing boat.

As the bow loomed almost over the floating logs, Barra abruptly
transferred his focus of attention to his right rear, pulling with all
the power of the boat's drive crystals. The craft swung violently,
throwing a solid sheet of water over pier and shore, drenching the logs
and the men about them.

Then the bow settled and the boat lay dead in the water, less than an
inch from the pier's fender logs.

Barra studied the space between boat and logs for an instant, then
nodded in satisfaction. It was an adequate landing by anyone's
standards.

His tension somewhat relieved, he raised himself from the boat and
hovered over the dock.

Sternly, he looked at the villagers who were now on their feet, brushing
water from their heads and faces. They ceased their movements, eying
him apprehensively and he motioned imperiously toward the boat.

"Secure it!"

The jewels of his control cap glowed briefly, amplifying and radiating
the thought.

The villagers winced, then two of them moved to obey the command. Barra
turned his attention away and arrowed toward the screen of trees which
partially concealed the village proper.

As he dropped to the ground in the clearing before the headman's hut,
men and women looked at him, then edged toward their homes. He ignored
them, centering his attention on the headman himself.

The man had gotten to his feet and was anxiously studying his master's
face.

For a few seconds, Barra examined the man. He was old. He had been
headman of the village under the old Master Protector, his father--and
his brother had seen no reason for change, allowing the aging headman to
remain in charge of the welfare of his people.

But this was in the long ago. Both of the older Kio Barra had been soft,
slack men, seeking no more than average results. He, Leuwan, was
different--more exacting--more demanding of positive returns from the
Estates.

Oh, to be sure, Kira Barra had somehow prospered under the soft hands of
his predecessors, despite their coddling of the subhuman pseudomen, but
there had been many laxities which had infuriated Leuwan, even when he
was a mere youth. He frowned thoughtfully.

Of course, if those two hadn't been so soft and tolerant, he would have
been something other than Lord of the Mountain Lake. He would have had
to find other activities elsewhere. He dropped the line of thought.

This was not taking care of the situation.

He put his full attention on the man before him, driving a demand with
full power of cap amplifier.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Why are all your people idling away their time? Where are your herdsmen
and guards?"

The headman's face tensed with effort. He waved a hand southward and
made meaningless noises. Faintly, the thought came through to Barra.

"In south forest, with herd. Not idle, is rest day. Few work."

Barra looked angrily at the man. Did this fool actually think he could
evade and lie his way out of the trouble his obvious failure to
supervise had brought? He jabbed a thumb northward.

"What about that herd drifting toward the north river?" The two green
communicator crystals gleamed with cold fire.

The headman looked confused. "Not north," came the blurred thought. "No
herd north. All south forest, near swamp. One-hand boys watch. Some
guard. Is rest day."

Unbelievingly Barra stared at the pseudoman. He was actually persisting
in his effort to lie away his failure. Or was he attempting some sort
of defiance? Had his father and brother tolerated such things as this,
or was this something new, stemming from the man's age? Or, perhaps, he
was trying the temper of the Master Protector, to see how far he could
go in encroaching on authority.

He would deal with this--and now!

Abruptly, he turned away, to direct his attention to the central
surrogate. It was equipped with a projector crystal.

The air in the clearing glowed and a scene formed in the open space.
Unmistakably, it was the northern part of Kira Barra. The lake was
shown, and sufficient landmarks to make the location obvious, even to a
pseudoman. Carefully, Barra prevented any trace of the blank, swirling
null from intruding on the scene. Perhaps the subhuman creature before
him knew something of its properties, but there was no point in making
these things too obvious.

He focused the scene on the stream and brought the approaching herd into
the picture, then he flashed in his own face, watching. And he brought
the view down closely enough to indicate that no human creature was near
the herd. Finally, he turned his attention to the headman again.

"There was the herd. Where were your people?"

The old man shook his head incredulously, then turned toward one of the
few men who still remained in the clearing.

He made a series of noises and the other nodded. There were more of the
growls and hisses, then the headman waved a hand southward and the other
nodded again and turned away, to run into the trees and disappear.

The headman faced Barra again.

"Send man," he thought laboriously. "Be sure herd is still south." He
pointed toward the area where the projection had been.

"That not herd," he thought. "That other herd. Never see before."

       *       *       *       *       *

