wall. Reaching for his jacket, he said, "I--I guess I'd better be moving
along, Mr. Tranton. I'm really sorry if I've caused you any trouble." He
started past me for the door.

"Hold on, son." I grabbed his arm. "Why the rush?"

"I don't want to cause you any trouble. Now that you know what I am--"
he gritted the words out bitterly, "the word will get around. I wouldn't
want the others in town to be angry with you because of me. You and Mrs.
Tranton have been swell to me. Thanks for everything." He tried to pull
his arm loose, but I held fast.

"Let's go inside and have a cup of coffee," I suggested. "I don't know
about the other towns you've been through, but here we don't hate a
person because he might happen to have powers we don't."

"Yesterday I was down at the store, and I heard one of the men sounding
off about us," he said. "He didn't sound like he cared much for us."

"Must have been John Atherson. He never could understand ESP, and he
blames the war on it. We just let him talk; can't change a person like
that." We went up the back steps and through the door into the kitchen.
"Go on, show Marty," I said, taking off my jacket.

He looked at me to make sure I meant it. Then he raised the coffee pot
from the stove, and watched it move across the room under its own power
to the table where I was sitting. Leaving the pot in mid-air, he made
the cupboard open, and still standing in the middle of the room, floated
three cups and saucers to the table. Then he got the cream, sugar and
three spoons, put them on the table, and poured the coffee. Marty
watched the coffee pot move back to the stove, her mouth open in
amazement, "I heard of it, but I don't think I'd have believed it if I
hadn't seen it." I nodded, and she smiled at him. "Now that I know," she
said, "I'm even gladder you chose to stay here for a while."

He grinned. "Thanks." He sat down with us at the table, and stirred some
sugar into his coffee.

"It must be hard on you," Marty said quietly, in a knowing way. "Are you
really looking for your family, or for others with ESP?"

"My father was killed during the bombings. After that, Mom and I were
alone. She only had a little talent; Dad and I were the ones who were
really adept. Anyway, we stayed on the small farm we owned until last
spring. Then Mom married again, and I was free to leave. I think her new
husband was sorry to see me go, because it meant a lot of manual work
for him that I had been doing an easier way. I decided to see if I
couldn't find any others like myself, so I left and started across the
country."

"Do you have any other powers, or can you just control things?" Marty
asked.

He grinned. "If you mean, am I an all-around superman, no. Dad wasn't
either. I do have a scattering of other psi talents, though, but nothing
as well-developed as my telekinesis. I'm still working on them."

Tommy came in from school just then. "Could you teach him how to use his
mind that way, or do you have to be born with it?" I said.

He smiled again. "No, you don't have to be born with it. Everyone could
do it if they started training themselves young enough to use their
minds to the fullest extent. All through history certain people have had
strange powers. The trouble was, they were thought to be freaks instead
of the better developed humans they actually were. Even now, we're only
on the threshold of learning the full power of the mind." He turned to
Tommy. "Would you like to learn how to do things, Tommy?"

"Sure. Like what?"

He glanced at Marty and me. "Like making the world a better place to
live."

Two weeks later, at a meeting of the town council, I wasn't too worried
about getting the proposal accepted. We might have some trouble with
Atherson, but I figured between the two of us we could handle him. When
the new business came up, I stood up and led Tommy to the front of the
hall. There were a few whispers as we went, as children under fifteen
