
During his residence at Benach Tycho received a visit from Kepler, who
stayed with him for several months in order that he might carry out some
astronomical observations. In the following year Kepler returned, and
took up his permanent residence with Tycho, having been appointed
assistant in his observatory, a post which, at Tycho's request, was
conferred upon him by the Emperor.

Tycho Brahe soon discovered that his ignorance of the language and
unfamiliarity with the customs of the people caused him much
inconvenience. He therefore asked permission from the Emperor to be
allowed to remove to Prague. This request was readily granted, and a
suitable residence was provided for him in the city.

In the meantime his family, his large instruments, and other property,
having arrived at Prague, Tycho was soon comfortably settled in his new
home.

Though Tycho Brahe continued his astronomical observations, yet he could
not help feeling that he lived among a strange people; nor did the
remembrance of his sufferings and the cruel treatment he received at the
hands of his fellow-countrymen subdue the affection which he cherished
towards his native land. Pondering over the past, he became despondent
and low-spirited; a morbid imagination caused him to brood over small
troubles, and gloomy, melancholy thoughts possessed his mind--symptoms
which seemed to presage the approach of some serious malady. One
evening, when visiting at the house of a friend, he was seized with a
painful illness, to which he succumbed in less than a fortnight. He died
at Prague on October 24, 1601, when in his fifty-fifth year.

The Emperor Rudolph, when informed of Tycho Brahe's death, expressed his
deep regret, and commanded that he should be interred in the principal
church in the city, and that his obsequies should be celebrated with
every mark of honour and respect.

Tycho Brahe stands out as the most romantic and prominent figure in the
history of astronomy. His independence of character, his ardent
attachments, his strong hatreds, and his love of splendour, are
characteristics which distinguish him from all other men of his age.
This remarkable man was an astronomer, astrologer, and alchemist; but in
his latter years he renounced astrology, and believed that the stars
exercised no influence over the destinies of mankind.

As a practical astronomer, Tycho Brahe has not been excelled by any
other observer of the heavens. The magnificence of his observatory at
Huen, upon the equipment and embellishment of which it is stated he
expended a ton of gold; the splendour and variety of his instruments,
and his ingenuity in inventing new ones, would alone have made him
famous. But it was by the skill and assiduity with which he carried out
his numerous and important observations that he has earned for himself a
position of the most honourable distinction among astronomers. In his
investigation of the Lunar theory Tycho Brahe discovered the Moon's
_annual equation_, a yearly effect produced by the Sun's disturbing
force as the Earth approaches or recedes from him in her orbit. He also
discovered another inequality in the Moon's motion, called the
_variation_. He determined with greater exactness astronomical
refractions from an altitude of 45 deg. downwards to the horizon, and
constructed a catalogue of 777 stars. He also made a vast number of
observations on planets, which formed the basis of the 'Rudolphine
Tables,' and were of invaluable assistance to Kepler in his
investigation of the laws relating to planetary motion.

Tycho Brahe declined to accept the Copernican theory, and devised a
system of his own, which he called the 'Tychonic.' By this arrangement
the Earth remained stationary, whilst all the planets revolved round
the Sun, who in his turn completed a daily revolution round the Earth.
All the phenomena associated with the motions of those bodies could be
explained by means of this system; but it did not receive much support,
and after the Copernican theory became better understood it was given
up, and heard of no more.

We now arrive at the name of KEPLER, one of the very greatest of
astronomers, and a man of remarkable genius, who was the first to
discover the real nature of the paths pursued by the Earth and planets
in their revolution round the Sun. After seventeen years of close
observation, he announced that those bodies travelled round the Sun in
elliptical or oval orbits, and not in circular paths, as was believed by
Copernicus. In his investigation of the laws which govern the motions of
the planets he formulated those famous theorems known as 'Kepler's
Laws,' which will endure for all time as a proof of his sagacity and
surpassing genius. Prior to the discovery of those laws the Sun, though
acknowledged to be the centre of the system, did not appear to occupy a
central position as regards the motions of the planets; but Kepler, by
demonstrating that the planes of the orbits of all the planets, and the
lines connecting their apsides, passed through the Sun, was enabled to
assign the orb his true position with regard to those bodies.

JOHN KEPLER was born at Weil, in the Duchy of Wurtemberg, December 21,
1571. His parents, though of noble family, lived in reduced
circumstances, owing to causes for which they were themselves chiefly
responsible. In his youth Kepler suffered so much from ill-health that
his education had to be neglected. In 1586 he was sent to a monastic
school at Maulbronn, which had been established at the Reformation, and
was under the patronage of the Duke of Wurtemberg. Afterwards he studied
at the University of Tubingen, where he distinguished himself and took a
degree. Kepler devoted his attention chiefly to science and mathematics,
but paid no particular attention to the study of astronomy. Maestlin,
the professor of mathematics, whose lectures he attended, upheld the
Copernican theory, and Kepler, who adopted the views of his teacher,
wrote an essay in favour of the diurnal rotation of the Earth, in which
he supported the more recent astronomical doctrines. In 1594, a vacancy
having occurred in the professorship of astronomy at Gratz consequent
upon the death of George Stadt, Kepler was appointed his successor. He
did not seek this office, as he felt no particular desire to take up the
study of astronomy, but was recommended by his tutors as a man well
fitted for the post. He was thus in a manner compelled to devote his
time and talents to the science of astronomy. Kepler directed his
attention to three subjects--viz. 'the number, the size, and the motion
of the orbits of the planets.' He endeavoured to ascertain if any
regular proportion existed between the sizes of the planetary orbits, or
in the difference of their sizes, but in this he was unsuccessful. He
then thought that, by imagining the existence of a planet between Mars
and Jupiter, and another between Venus and Mercury, he might be able to
attain his object; but he found that this assumption afforded him no
assistance. Kepler then imagined that as there were five regular
geometrical solids, and five planets, the distances of the latter were
regulated by the size of the solids described round one another. The
discovery afterwards of two additional planets testified to the
absurdity of this speculation. A description of these extraordinary
researches was published, in 1596, in a work entitled 'Prodromus of
Cosmographical Dissertations; containing the cosmographical mystery
respecting the admirable proportion of the celestial orbits, and the
genuine and real causes of the number, magnitude, and periods of the
planets, demonstrated by the five regular geometrical solids.' This
volume, notwithstanding the fanciful speculations which it contained,
was received with much favour by astronomers, and both Tycho Brahe and
Galileo encouraged Kepler to continue his researches. Galileo admired
his ingenuity, and Tycho advised him 'to lay a solid foundation for his
views by actual observation, and then, by ascending from these, to
strive to reach the causes of things.' Kepler spent many years in these
fruitless endeavours before he made those grand discoveries in search of
which he laboured so long.

The religious dissensions which at this time agitated Germany were
accompanied in many places by much tumult and excitement. At Gratz the
Catholics threatened to expel the Protestants from the city. Kepler, who
was of the Reformed faith, having recognised the danger with which he
was threatened, retired to Hungary with his wife, whom he had recently
married, and remained there for near twelve months, during which time he
occupied himself with writing several short treatises on subjects
connected with astronomy. In 1599 he returned to Gratz and resumed his
professorship.

In the year 1600 Kepler set out to pay Tycho Brahe a visit at Prague, in
order that he might be able to avail himself of information contained in
observations made by Tycho with regard to the eccentricities of the
orbits of the planets. He was received by Tycho with much cordiality,
and stayed with him for four months at his residence at Benach, Tycho in
the meantime having promised that he would use his influence with the
Emperor Rudolph to have him appointed as assistant in his observatory.
On the termination of his visit Kepler returned to Gratz, and as there
was a renewal of the religious trouble in the city, he resigned his
professorship, from which he only derived a small income, and, relying
on Tycho's promise, he again journeyed to Prague, and arrived there in
1601. Kepler was presented to the Emperor by Tycho, and the post of
Imperial Mathematician was conferred upon him, with a salary of 100
florins a year, upon condition that he should assist Tycho in his
observatory. This appointment was of much value to Kepler, because it
afforded him an opportunity of obtaining access to the numerous
astronomical observations made by Tycho, which were of great assistance
to him in the investigation of the subject which he had chosen--viz. the
laws which govern the motions of the planets, and the form and size of
the planetary orbits.

As an acknowledgment of the Emperor's great kindness, the two
astronomers resolved to compute a new set of astronomical tables, and in
honour of his Majesty they were to be called the 'Rudolphine Tables.'
This project pleased the Emperor, who promised to defray the expense of
their publication. Logomontanus, Tycho's chief assistant, had entrusted
to him that portion of the work relating to observations on the stars,
and Kepler had charge of the part which embraced the calculations
belonging to the planets and their orbits. This important work had
scarcely been begun when the departure of Logomontanus, who obtained an
appointment in Denmark, and the death of Tycho Brahe in October 1601,
necessitated its suspension for a time. Kepler was appointed Chief
Mathematician to the Emperor in succession to Tycho--a position of
honour and distinction, and to which was attached a handsome salary,
that was paid out of the Imperial treasury. But owing to the continuance
of expensive wars, which entailed a severe drain upon the resources of
the country, the public funds became very low, and Kepler's salary was
always in arrear. This condition of things involved him in serious
pecuniary difficulties, and the responsibility of having to maintain an
increasing family added to his anxieties. It was with the greatest
difficulty that he succeeded in obtaining payment of even a portion of
his salary, and he was reduced to such straits as to be under the
necessity of casting nativities in order to obtain money to meet his
most pressing requirements.

In 1609 Kepler published his great work, entitled 'The New Astronomy;
or, Commentaries on the Motions of Mars.' It was by his observation of
Mars, which has an orbit of greater eccentricity than that of any of the
other planets, with the exception of Mercury, that he was enabled, after
years of patient study, to announce in this volume the discovery of two
of the three famous theorems known as Kepler's Laws. The first is, that
all the planets move round the Sun in elliptic orbits, and that the orb
occupies one of the foci. The second is, that the radius-vector, or
imaginary line joining the centre of the planet and the centre of the
Sun, describes equal areas in equal times. The third law, which relates
to the connection between the periodic times and the distances of the
planets, was not discovered until ten years later, when Kepler, in 1619,
issued another work, called the 'Harmonies of the World,' dedicated to
James I. of England, in which was contained this remarkable law. These
laws have elevated astronomy to the position of a true physical science,
and also formed the starting-point of Newton's investigations which led
to the discovery of the law of gravitation. Kepler's delight on the
discovery of his third law was unbounded. He writes: 'Nothing holds me.
I will indulge in my sacred fury. I will triumph over mankind by the
honest confession that I have stolen the golden vases of the Egyptians
to build up a tabernacle for my God far away from the confines of Egypt.
If you forgive me, I rejoice; if you are angry, I can bear it. The die
is cast; the book is written, to be read either now or by posterity I
care not which. It may well wait a century for a reader, as God has
waited six thousand years for an observer.'

When Kepler presented his celebrated book to the Emperor, he remarked
that it was his intention to make a similar attack upon the other
planets, and promised that he would be successful if his Majesty would
undertake to find the means necessary for carrying on operations. But
the Emperor had more formidable enemies to contend with nearer home than
Jupiter and Saturn, and no funds were forthcoming to assist Kepler in
his undertaking.

The chair of mathematics in the University of Linz having become vacant,
Kepler offered himself as a candidate for the appointment, which he was
anxious to obtain; but the Emperor Rudolph was averse to his leaving
Prague, and encouraged him to hope that the arrears of his salary would
be paid. But past experience led Kepler to have no very sanguine
expectations on this point; nor was it until after the death of Rudolph,
in 1612, that he was relieved from his pecuniary embarrassments.

On the accession of Rudolph's brother, Matthias, to the Austrian throne,
Kepler was reappointed Imperial Mathematician; he was also permitted to
hold the professorship at Linz, to which he had been elected. Kepler was
not loth to remove from Prague, where he had spent eleven years harassed
by poverty and other domestic afflictions. Having settled with his
family at Linz, Kepler issued another work, in 1618, entitled 'Epitome
of the Copernican Astronomy,' in which he gave a general account of his
astronomical observations and discoveries, and a summary of his opinions
with regard to the theories which in those days were the subject of
controversial discussion. Almost immediately after its publication it
was included by the Congregation of the Index, at Rome, in the list of
prohibited books. This occasioned Kepler considerable alarm, as he
imagined it might interfere with the sale of his works, or give rise to
difficulties in the issue of others. He, however, was assured by his
friend Remus that the action of the Papal authorities need cause him no
anxiety.

The Emperor Matthias died in 1619, and was succeeded by Ferdinand III.,
who not only retained Kepler in his office, but gave orders that all the
arrears of his salary should be paid, including those which accumulated
during the reign of Rudolph; he also expressed a desire that the
'Rudolphine Tables' should be published without delay and at his cost.
But other obstacles intervened, for at this time Germany was involved in
a civil and religious war, which interfered with all peaceful
vocations. Kepler's library at Linz was sealed up by order of the
Jesuits, and the city was for a time besieged by troops. This state of
public affairs necessitated a considerable delay in the publication of
the 'Tables.'

The 'Rudolphine Tables' were published at Ulm in 1627. They were
commenced by Tycho Brahe, and completed by Kepler, who made his
calculations from Tycho's observations, and based them upon his own
great discovery of the ellipticity of the orbits of the planets. They
are divided into four parts. The first and third parts contain
logarithmic and other tables for the purpose of facilitating
astronomical calculations; in the second are tables of the Sun, Moon,
and planets; and in the fourth are indicated the positions of one
thousand stars as determined by Tycho. Kepler made a special journey to
Prague in order to present the 'Tables' to the Emperor, and afterwards
the Grand Duke of Tuscany sent him a gold chain as an acknowledgment of
his appreciation of the completion of this great work.

Albert Wallenstein, Duke of Friedland, an accomplished scholar and a man
fond of scientific pursuits, made Kepler a most liberal offer if he
would take up his residence in his dominions. After duly considering
this proposal, Kepler decided to accept the Duke's offer, provided it
received the sanction of the Emperor. This was readily given, and
Kepler, in 1629, removed with his family from Linz to Sagan, in Silesia.
The Duke of Friedland treated him with great kindness and liberality,
and through his influence he was appointed to a professorship in the
University of Rostock. Though Kepler was permitted to retain the pension
bestowed upon him by the late Emperor Rudolph, he was unable after his
removal to Silesia to obtain payment of it, and there was a large
accumulation of arrears. In a final endeavour to recover the amount
owing to him he travelled to Ratisbon, and appealed to the Imperial
Assembly, but without success. The fatigue which Kepler endured on his
journey, combined with vexation and disappointment, brought on a fever,
which terminated fatally. He died on November 15, 1630, when in the
sixtieth year of his age, and was interred in St. Peter's churchyard,
Ratisbon.

Kepler was a man of indomitable energy and perseverance, and spared
neither time nor trouble in the accomplishment of any object which he
took in hand. In thinking over the form of the orbits of the planets, he
writes: 'I brooded with the whole energy of my mind on this
subject--asking why they are not other than they are--the number, the
size, and the motions of the orbits.' But many fanciful ideas passed
through Kepler's imaginative brain before he hit upon the true form of
the planetary orbits. In his 'Mysterium Cosmographicum' he asserts that
the five kinds of regular polyhedral solids, when described round one
another, regulated the distances of the planets and size of the
planetary orbits. In support of this theory he writes as follows: 'The
orbit of the Earth is the measure of the rest. About it circumscribe a
dodecahedron. The sphere including this will be that of Mars. About
Mars' orbit describe a tetrahedron; the sphere containing this will be
