here?" she said to the man.

The man looked up, half-rising. "It's a pleasure," he murmured. He
studied Thacher intently. "However, a friend of mine will be joining me
in a moment."

"I'm sure there's room enough for us all," Mara said. She seated herself
and Thacher helped her with her chair. He sat down, too, glancing up
suddenly at Mara and the business man. They were looking at each other
almost as if something had passed between them. The man was middle-aged,
with a florid face and tired, grey eyes. His hands were mottled with the
veins showing thickly. At the moment he was tapping nervously.

"My name's Thacher," Thacher said to him, holding out his hand. "Bob
Thacher. Since we're going to be together for a while we might as well
get to know each other."

The man studied him. Slowly his hand came out. "Why not? My name's
Erickson. Ralf Erickson."

"Erickson?" Thacher smiled. "You look like a commercial man, to me." He
nodded toward the sample case on the floor. "Am I right?"

The man named Erickson started to answer, but at that moment there was a
stir. A thin man of about thirty had come up to the table, his eyes
bright, staring down at them warmly. "Well, we're on our way," he said
to Erickson.

"Hello, Mara." He pulled out a chair and sat down quickly, folding his
hands on the table before him. He noticed Thacher and drew back a
little. "Pardon me," he murmured.

"Bob Thacher is my name," Thacher said. "I hope I'm not intruding
here." He glanced around at the three of them, Mara, alert, watching him
intently, heavy-set Erickson, his face blank, and this person. "Say, do
you three know each other?" he asked suddenly.

There was silence.

The robot attendant slid over soundlessly, poised to take their orders.
Erickson roused himself. "Let's see," he murmured. "What will we have?
Mara?"

"Whiskey and water."

"You, Jan?"

The bright slim man smiled. "The same."

"Thacher?"

"Gin and tonic."

"Whiskey and water for me, also," Erickson said. The robot attendant
went off. It returned at once with the drinks, setting them on the table.
Each took his own. "Well," Erickson said, holding his glass up. "To our
mutual success."

       *       *       *       *       *

All drank, Thacher and the three of them, heavy-set Erickson, Mara, her
eyes nervous and alert, Jan, who had just come. Again a look passed
between Mara and Erickson, a look so swift that he would not have caught
it had he not been looking directly at her.

"What line do you represent, Mr. Erickson?" Thacher asked.

Erickson glanced at him, then down at the sample case on the floor. He
grunted. "Well, as you can see, I'm a salesman."

Thacher smiled. "I knew it! You get so you can always spot a salesman
right off by his sample case. A salesman always has to carry something
to show. What are you in, sir?"

Erickson paused. He licked his thick lips, his eyes blank and lidded,
like a toad's. At last he rubbed his mouth with his hand and reached
down, lifting up the sample case. He set it on the table in front of
him.

"Well?" he said. "Perhaps we might even show Mr. Thacher."

They all stared down at the sample case. It seemed to be an ordinary
leather case, with a metal handle and a snap lock. "I'm getting
curious," Thacher said. "What's in there? You're all so tense. Diamonds?
Stolen jewels?"

Jan laughed harshly, mirthlessly. "Erick, put it down. We're not far
enough away, yet."

"Nonsense," Erick rumbled. "We're away, Jan."

"Please," Mara whispered. "Wait, Erick."

"Wait? Why? What for? You're so accustomed to--"

"Erick," Mara said. She nodded toward Thacher. "We don't know him,
Erick. Please!"

"He's a Terran, isn't he?" Erickson said. "All Terrans are together in
these times." He fumbled suddenly at the catch lock on the case. "Yes,
Mr. Thacher. I'm a salesman. We're all salesmen, the three of us."

"Then you do know each other."

"Yes." Erickson nodded. His two companions sat rigidly, staring down.
"Yes, we do. Here, I'll show you our line."

He opened the case. From it he took a letter-knife, a pencil sharpener,
a glass globe paperweight, a box of thumb tacks, a stapler, some clips,
a plastic ashtray, and some things Thacher could not identify. He placed
the objects in a row in front of him on the table top. Then he closed
the sample case.

"I gather you're in office supplies," Thacher said. He touched the
letter-knife with his finger. "Nice quality steel. Looks like Swedish
steel, to me."

Erickson nodded, looking into Thacher's face. "Not really an impressive
business, is it? Office supplies. Ashtrays, paper clips." He smiled.

"Oh--" Thacher shrugged. "Why not? They're a necessity in modern
business. The only thing I wonder--"

"What's that?"

"Well, I wonder how you'd ever find enough customers on Mars to make it
worth your while." He paused, examining the glass paperweight. He lifted
it up, holding it to the light, staring at the scene within until
Erickson took it out of his hand and put it back in the sample case.
"And another thing. If you three know each other, why did you sit apart
when you got on?"

They looked at him quickly.

"And why didn't you speak to each other until we left Deimos?" He leaned
toward Erickson, smiling at him. "Two men and a woman. Three of you.
Sitting apart in the ship. Not speaking, not until the check-station
was past. I find myself thinking over what the Martian said. Three
saboteurs. A woman and two men."

Erickson put the things back in the sample case. He was smiling, but his
face had gone chalk white. Mara stared down, playing with a drop of
