weather no insects are flying, the flower is nevertheless able to
fertilize itself, because the hairy fringe must often come in contact
with the stigmas of neighboring florets. It is only when we study
flowers with reference to their motives and methods that we understand
why one is abundant and another rare. Composites long ago utilized many
principles of success in life that the triumphant Anglo-Saxon carries
into larger affairs to-day.

Joe-Pye, an Indian medicine-man of New England, earned fame and
fortune by curing typhus fever and other horrors with decoctions made
from this plant.


Boneset; Common Thorough wort; Agueweed; Indian Sage

_Eupatorium perfoliatum_

_Flower-heads_--Composite, the numerous, small, dull, white heads of
tubular florets only, crowded in a scaly involucre and borne in
spreading, flat-topped terminal cymes. _Stem:_ Stout, tall, branching
above, hairy, leafy. _Leaves:_ Opposite, often united at their bases, or
clasping, lance-shaped, saw-edged, wrinkled.

_Preferred Habitat_--Wet ground, low meadows, roadsides.

_Flowering Season_--July-September.

_Distribution_--From the Gulf states north to Nebraska, Manitoba, and
New Brunswick.

Frequently, in just such situations as its sister the Joe-Pye Weed
selects, and with similar intent, the boneset spreads its soft,
leaden-white bloom; but it will be noticed that the butterflies, which
love color, especially deep pinks and magenta, let this plant alone,
whereas beetles, that do not find the butterfly's favorite, fragrant
Joe-Pye Weed at all to their liking, prefer these dull, odorous flowers.
Many flies, wasps, and bees also, get generous entertainment in these
tiny florets, where they feast with the minimum loss of time, each head
in a cluster containing, as it does, from ten to sixteen restaurants. An
ant crawling up the stem is usually discouraged by its hairs long before
reaching the sweets. Sometimes the stem appears to run through the
centre of one large leaf that is kinky in the middle and taper-pointed
at both ends, rather than between a pair of leaves.

An old-fashioned illness known as break-bone fever--doubtless paralleled
to-day by the grippe--once had its terrors for a patient increased a
hundredfold by the certainty he felt of taking nauseous doses of boneset
tea, administered by zealous old women outside the "regular practice."
Children who had to have their noses held before they would--or, indeed,
could--swallow the decoction, cheerfully munched boneset taffy instead.


Golden-rods

_Solidago_

When these flowers transform whole acres into "fields of the
cloth-of-gold," the slender wands swaying by every roadside, and
Purple Asters add the final touch of imperial splendor to the autumn
landscape, already glorious with gold and crimson, is any parterre of
Nature's garden the world around more gorgeous than that portion of it
we are pleased to call ours? Within its limits eighty-five species of
golden-rod flourish, while a few have strayed into Mexico and South
America, and only two or three belong to Europe, where many of ours
are tenderly cultivated in gardens, as they would be here, had not
Nature been so lavish. To name all these species, or the asters, the
sparrows, and the warblers at sight is a feat probably no one living
can perform; nevertheless, certain of the commoner golden-rods have
well-defined peculiarities that a little field practice soon fixes in
the novice's mind.

Along shady roadsides, and in moist woods and thickets, from August to
October, the Blue-stemmed, Wreath, or Woodland Golden-rod (_S. caesia_)
sways an unbranched stem with a bluish bloom on it. It is studded with
pale golden clusters of tiny florets in the axils of lance-shaped,
feather-veined leaves for nearly its entire length. Range from Maine,
Ontario, and Minnesota to the Gulf states. None is prettier, more
dainty, than this common species.

In rich woodlands and thicket borders we find the Zig-zag or
Broad-leaved Golden-rod (_S. latifolia_)--its prolonged, angled stem
that grows as if waveringly uncertain of the proper direction to take,
strung with small clusters of yellow florets, somewhat after the manner
of the preceding species. But its saw-edged leaves are ovate, sharply
tapering to a point, and narrowed at the base into petioles. It blooms
from July to September. Range from New Brunswick to Georgia, and
westward beyond the Mississippi.

During the same blooming period, and through a similar range, our only
albino, with an Irish-bull name, the White Golden-rod, or more properly
Silver-rod (_S. bicolor_), cannot be mistaken. Its cream-white florets
also grow in little clusters from the upper axils of a usually simple
and hairy gray stem six inches to four feet high. Most of the heads are
crowded in a narrow, terminal pyramidal cluster. This plant approaches
more nearly the idea of a rod than its relatives. The leaves, which are
broadly oblong toward the base of the stem, and narrowed into long
margined petioles, are frequently quite hairy, for the silver-rod elects
to live in dry soil and its juices must be protected from heat and too
rapid transpiration.

When crushed in the hand, the _dotted_, bright green, lance-shaped,
entire leaves of the Sweet Golden-rod or Blue Mountain Tea (_S. odora_)
cannot be mistaken, for they give forth a pleasant anise scent. The
slender, simple smooth stem is crowned with a graceful panicle, whose
branches have the florets seated all on one side. Dry soil. New England
to the Gulf states. July to September.

The Wrinkle-leaved, or Tall, Hairy Golden-rod or Bitterweed (_S.
rugosa_), a perversely variable species, its hairy stem perhaps only a
foot high, or, maybe, more than seven feet, its rough leaves broadly
oval to lance-shaped, sharply saw-edged, few if any furnished with
footstems, lifts a large, compound, and gracefully curved panicle, whose
florets are seated on one side of its spreading branches. Sometimes the
stem branches at the summit. One usually finds it blooming in dry soil
from July to November throughout a range extending from Newfoundland and
Ontario to the Gulf states.

The unusually beautiful, spreading, recurved, branching panicle of bloom
borne by the early, Plume, or Sharp-toothed Golden-rod or Yellow-top
(_S. juncea_), so often dried for winter decoration, may wave four feet
high but, usually not more than two, at the summit of a smooth, rigid
stem. Toward the top, narrow, elliptical, uncut leaves are seated on the
stalk; below, much larger leaves, their sharp teeth slanting forward,
taper into a broad petiole, whose edges may be cut like fringe. In dry,
rocky soil this is, perhaps, the first and last golden-rod to bloom,
having been found as early as June, and sometimes lasting into November.
Range from North Carolina and Missouri very far north.

Perhaps the commonest of all the lovely clan east of the Mississippi, or
throughout a range extending from Arizona and Florida northward to
British Columbia and New Brunswick, is the Canada Golden-rod or
Yellow-weed (_S. canadensis_). Surely every one must be familiar with
the large, spreading, dense-flowered panicle, with recurved sprays, that
crowns a rough, hairy stem sometimes eight feet tall, or again only two
feet. Its lance-shaped, acutely pointed, triple-nerved leaves are rough,
and the lower ones saw-edged. From August to November one cannot fail to
find it blooming in dry soil.

Most brilliantly colored of its tribe is the low-growing Gray or Field
Golden-rod or Dyer's Weed (_S. nemoralis_). The rich, deep yellow of its
little spreading recurved, and usually one-sided panicles is admirably
set off by the ashy gray, or often cottony, stem, and the hoary,
grayish-green leaves in the open, sterile places where they arise from
July to November. Quebec and the Northwest Territory to the Gulf states.

  "Along the roadside, like the flowers of gold
    That tawny Incas for their gardens wrought,
  Heavy with sunshine droops the golden-rod."

Bewildered by the multitude of species, and wondering at the enormous
number of representatives of many of them, we cannot but inquire into
the cause of such triumphal conquest of a continent by a single genus.
Much is explained simply in the statement that golden-rods belong to the
vast order of _Compositae_, flowers in reality made up sometimes of
hundreds of minute florets united into a far-advanced socialistic
community having for its motto, "In union there is strength." In the
first place, such an association of florets makes a far more conspicuous
advertisement than a single flower, one that can be seen by insects at a
great distance; for most of the composite plants live in large colonies,
each plant, as well as each floret, helping the others in attracting
their benefactors' attention. The facility with which insects are
enabled to collect both pollen and nectar makes the golden-rods
exceedingly popular restaurants. Finally, the visits of insects are more
likely to prove effectual, because any one that alights must touch
several or many florets, and cross-pollinate them simply by crawling
over a head. The disk florets mostly contain both stamens and pistil,
while the ray florets in one series are all male. Immense numbers of
wasps, hornets, bees, flies, beetles, and "bugs" feast without effort
here: indeed, the budding entomologist might form a large collection of
_Hymenoptera, Diptera, Coleoptera_, and _Hemiptera_ from among the
visitors to a single field of golden-rod alone. Usually to be discovered
among the throng are the velvety black _Lytta_ or _Cantharis_, that
impostor wasp-beetle, the black and yellow wavy-banded, red-legged
locust-tree borer, and the painted _Clytus_, banded with yellow and
sable, squeaking contentedly as he gnaws the florets that feed him.

Where the slender, brown, plume-tipped wands etch their charming
outline above the snow-covered fields, how the sparrows, finches,
buntings, and juncos love to congregate, of course helping to scatter
the seeds to the wind while satisfying their hunger on the swaying,
down-curved stalks. Now that the leaves are gone, some of the golden-rod
stems are seen to bulge as if a tiny ball were concealed under the bark.
In spring a little winged tenant, a fly, will emerge from the gall that
has been his cradle all winter.


Blue and Purple Asters or Starworts

_Aster_

Evolution teaches us that thistles, daisies, sunflowers, asters, and all
the triumphant horde of composites were once very different flowers from
what we see to-day. Through ages of natural selection of the fittest
among their ancestral types, having finally arrived at the most
successful adaptation of their various parts to their surroundings in
the whole floral kingdom, they are now overrunning the earth. Doubtless
the aster's remote ancestors were simple green leaves around the vital
organs, and depended upon the wind, as the grasses do--a most
extravagant method--to transfer their pollen. Then some rudimentary
flower changed its outer row of stamens into petals, which gradually
took on color to attract insects and insure a more economical method of
transfer. Gardeners to-day take advantage of a blossom's natural
tendency to change stamens into petals when they wish to produce double
flowers. As flowers and insects developed side by side, and there came
to be a better and better understanding between them of each other's
requirements, mutual adaptation followed. The flower that offered the
best advertisement, as the composites do, by its showy rays; that
secreted nectar in tubular flowers where no useless insect could pilfer
it; that fastened its stamens to the inside wall of the tube where they
must dust with pollen the underside of every insect, unwittingly
cross-fertilizing the blossom as he crawled over it; that massed a great
number of these tubular florets together where insects might readily
discover them and feast with the least possible loss of time--this
flower became the winner in life's race. Small wonder that our June
fields are white with daisies and the autumn landscape is glorified with
golden-rod and asters!

Since North America boasts the greater part of the two hundred and fifty
asters named by scientists, and as variations in many of our common
species frequently occur, the tyro need expect no easy task in
identifying every one he meets afield. However, the following are
possible acquaintances to every one:

In dry, shady places the Large, or Broad-leaved Aster (_A.
macrophyllus_), so called from its three or four conspicuous,
heart-shaped leaves on long petioles, in a clump next the ground, may be
more easily identified by these than by the pale lavender or violet
flower-heads of about sixteen rays each which crown its reddish angular
stem in August and September. The disk turns reddish brown.

Much more branched and bushy is the Common Blue, Branching, Wood, or
Heart-leaved Aster (_A. cordifolius_), whose generous masses of small,
pale lavender flower-heads look like a mist hanging from one to five
feet above the earth in and about the woods and shady roadsides from
September even to December in favored places.

By no means tardy, the Late Purple Aster, so-called, or Purple Daisy
(_A. patens_), begins to display its purplish-blue, daisy-like
flower-heads early in August, and farther north may be found in dry,
exposed places only until October. Rarely the solitary flowers, that
are an inch across or more, are a deep, rich violet. The twenty to
thirty rays which surround the disk, curling inward to dry, expose the
vase-shaped, green, shingled cups that terminate each little branch.
The thick, somewhat rigid, oblong leaves, tapering at the tip, broaden
at the base to clasp the rough, slender stalk. Range similar to the
next species.

Certainly from Massachusetts, northern New York, and Minnesota southward
to the Gulf of Mexico one may expect to find the New England Aster or
Starwort (_A. novae-angliae_), one of the most striking and widely
distributed of the tribe, in spite of its local name. It is not unknown
in Canada. The branching clusters of violet or magenta-purple
flower-heads, from one to two inches across--composites containing as
many as forty to fifty purple ray florets around a multitude of perfect
five-lobed, tubular, yellow disk florets in a sticky cup--shine out with
royal splendor above the swamps, moist fields, and roadsides from August
to October. The stout, bristle-hairy stem bears a quantity of alternate
lance-shaped leaves lobed at the base where they clasp it.

In even wetter ground we find the Red-stalked, Purple-stemmed, or Early
Purple Aster, Cocash, Swanweed, or Meadow Scabish (_A. puniceus_)
blooming as early as July or as late as November. Its stout, rigid
stem, bristling with rigid hairs, may reach a height of eight feet to
display the branching clusters of pale violet or lavender flowers. The
long, blade-like leaves, usually very rough above and hairy along the
midrib beneath, are seated on the stem.

The lovely Smooth or Blue Aster (_A. laevis_), whose sky-blue or violet
flower-heads, about one inch broad, are common through September and
October in dry soil and open woods, has strongly clasping, oblong,
tapering leaves, rough margined, but rarely with a saw-tooth, toward the
top of the stem, while those low down on it gradually narrow into
clasping wings.

In dry, sandy soil, mostly near the coast, from Massachusetts to
Delaware, grows one of the loveliest of all this beautiful clan, the
Low, Showy, or Seaside Purple Aster (_A. spectabilis_). The stiff,
usually unbranched stem does its best in attaining a height of two feet.
Above, the leaves are blade-like or narrowly oblong, seated on the stem,
whereas the tapering, oval basal leaves are furnished with long
footstems, as is customary with most asters. The handsome, bright,
violet-purple flower-heads, measuring about an inch and a half across,
have from fifteen to thirty rays, or only about half as many as the
familiar New England aster. Season: August to November.


White Asters or Starworts

In dry, open woodlands, thickets, and roadsides, from August to October,
we find the dainty White Wood Aster (_A. divaricatus_)--_A. corymbosus_
of Gray--its brittle zig-zag stem two feet high or less, branching at
the top, and repeatedly forked where loose clusters of flower-heads
spread in a broad, rather flat corymb. Only a few white rays--usually
from six to nine--surround the yellow disk, whose florets soon turn
brown. Range from Canada southward to Tennessee.

The bushy little White Heath Aster (_A. ericoides_) every one must know,
possibly, as Michaelmas Daisy, Farewell Summer, White Rosemary, or
Frost-weed; for none is commoner in dry soil, throughout the eastern
United States at least. Its smooth, much-branched stem rarely reaches
three feet in height, usually it is not more than a foot tall, and its
very numerous flower-heads, white or pink tinged, barely half an inch
across, appear in such profusion from September even to December as to
transform it into a feathery mass of bloom.

Growing like branching wands of golden-rod, the Dense-flowered,
White-wreathed, or Starry Aster (_A. multiflorus_) bears its minute
flower-heads crowded close along the branches, where many small, stiff
leaves, like miniature pine needles, follow them. Each flower measures
only about a quarter of an inch across. From Maine to Georgia and Texas
westward to Arizona and British Columbia the common bushy plant lifts
its rather erect, curving, feathery branches perhaps only a foot,
sometimes above a man's head, from August till November, in such dry,
open, sterile ground as the white Heath Aster also chooses.


Golden Aster

_Chrysopsis mariana_

_Flower-heads_--Composite, yellow, 1 in. wide or less, a few corymbed
flowers on glandular stalks; each composed of perfect tubular disk
florets surrounded by pistillate ray florets; the involucre
campanulate, its narrow bracts overlapping in several series. _Stem:_
Stout, silky, hairy when young, nearly smooth later, 1 to 2-1/2 ft.
tall. _Leaves:_ Alternate, oblong to spatulate, entire.

_Preferred Habitat_--Dry soil, or sandy, not far inland.

_Flowering Season_--August-September.

_Distribution_--Long Island and Pennsylvania to the Gulf states.

Whoever comes upon clumps of these handsome flowers by the dusty
roadside cannot but be impressed with the appropriateness of their
generic name (_Chrysos_ = gold; _opsis_ = aspect). Farther westward,
