
It wasn't so lonely after that. Now I had something to talk to. She was
small when I got her--it would be too dangerous to go near a full grown
one--but she grew rapidly. That was because I caught small animals and
brought them to her. Not having to depend on what she could catch, she
grew almost twice as fast as usual, and was so sleek and pretty. Really,
she was a pet to be proud of.

I don't know how I could have stood the four months there alone, if I
hadn't her to talk to. I don't think she really understood me, but I
pretended she did, and that helped.

Every three or four weeks, three of the council members came to take a
part of the Treasure, or to add to it. Always three of them.

That's why I was so surprised one day, to see one man coming by
himself. It was Gremm, the little old member, who had recommended that I
be given this job. I was happy to see him, and we talked for a while,
mostly about my work, and how I liked it. I almost told him about my
pet, but I didn't, because he might be angry at me for breaking the Law.

Finally, he asked me to give him the Key.

"I've been sent to get something from the Treasure," he explained.

I was unhappy to displease him, but I said, "I can't let you have it.
There must be three members. You know that."

"Of course, I know it. But something came up suddenly, so they sent me
alone. Now, let me have it."

I shook my head. That was the one order they had given me--never to give
the Key to any one person who came alone.

Gremm became quite angry.

"You idiot," he shouted. "Why do you think I had you put out here? It
was so I could get in there and help myself to the Treasure."

"But that would be dishonest. And there are no dishonest people in the
State."

"For three thousand years. I know." His usually kind face had an ugly
look I had never seen before. "But I'm going to get part of that
Treasure. And it won't do you any good to report it, because no one is
going to take the word of a fool like you, against a respected council
member. They'll think you are the dishonest one. Now, give me that Key!"

It's a terrible thing to disobey a council member. But if I obeyed him,
I would be disobeying all the others. And that would be worse.

"No!" I shouted.

He threw himself upon me. For his size and age, he was very
strong--stronger, even, than I. I fought as hard as I could, but I knew
I wouldn't be able to keep him away from the Key for very long. And if
he took the Treasure, I would be blamed. The council would have to think
