stood there, was insolently challenging. Darl's rage flared higher at
the sight.

       *       *       *       *       *

Scorning the ladder that curved along the Dome to the ground, he threw
himself at the polished round side of the great hemisphere. With
increasing speed he slid downward, the gleaming surface breaking only
slightly the velocity of his fall. On Earth this would have been
suicidal. Even here, where the pull of gravity was so much less, the
feat was insanely reckless. But the heat-softened ground, the strength
of his metal suit, brought Darl safely through.

He whirled to meet the expected onslaught of the interloper. The green
tube was aimed straight at him! The Earthman started to bring his own
weapon up when something exploded in his brain. There was a moment of
blackness; then he was again clear-minded. But he could not move--not
so much as the tiny twist of his wrist that would have brought his own
weapon into play.

Frozen by this strange paralysis, Darl Thomas saw the giant figure
approach. The apparition bent and slung him to its shoulder. Glowing
walls rose about him, dimmed. The Terrestrian knew that he was being
carried down into one of the myriad openings that honeycombed the
terrain. The luminescence died; there was no longer light enough to
penetrate to his helmet's darkened goggles.

Frantic questions surged through the captured Earthman's mind. Who was
his captor? From where, and how, had he come to Mercury? Jim, Angus
McDermott, and himself were the only Terrestrians on the planet; of
that he was certain. Only one or two of the reptile-skinned Venusian
laborers had sufficient intelligence to manipulate a space suit, and
they were unquestionably loyal.

This individual was a giant who towered far above Darl's own six feet.
The Mercurian natives--he had seen them when ITA's expedition had
cleaned out the burrows beneath the Dome and sealed them up--were
midgets, the tallest not more than two feet in height. Whatever he
was, why was the stranger trying to destroy the Dome? Apparently
Thomas himself was not to be killed offhand: the jolting journey was
continuing interminably. With enforced patience the Earthman resigned
himself to wait for the next scene in this strange drama.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the headquarters tent Jim's usual grin was absent as he moved
restlessly among the switches and levers that concentrated control of
all the Dome's complex machinery. "Darl's been gone a devilish long
time," he muttered to himself. "Here it's almost time for shifts to
change and he's not back yet."

A bell clanged, somewhere up in the mass of cables that rose from the
control board. For the next ten minutes Holcomb had no time for worry
as he rapidly manipulated the innumerable wheels and handles in accord
with the vari-colored lights that flickered on a huge ground-glass map
of the sub-Mercurian passages. On the plain outside there was a vast
rustling, a many-voiced twittering and squeaking that was not quite
bird-like in tone. Through the opened tent-flap one could see the
stream of Venusian workers, their work-period ended, pouring out of
the shaft-head and filing between the ordered ranks of others whose
labors were about to begin.

They were queer-looking specimens, these gentle, willing allies of the
Earthmen. Their home planet is a place of ever-clouded skies and
constant torrential rains. And so the Venusians were amphibians,
web-footed, fish-faced, their skin a green covering of horny scales
that shed water and turned the sharp thorns of their native jungles.
When intrepid explorers discovered in the mazes of Mercury's spongy
interior the _surta_ that was so badly needed as a base material for
synthetic food to supply Earth's famine-threatened population, it was
to these loyal and amiable beings that ITA's engineers turned for
workers who could endure the stifling heat of the underground
workings.

The tent-flap was thrust aside, and a hawk-nosed Scot came sleepily
in, to be enthusiastically greeted by Jim.

"Hello, you old Caledonian. 'Bout time you showed up."

       *       *       *       *       *

The newcomer fixed the speaker with a dour gaze. "An' why should I
commence my tour o' dooty befair the time?"

"Because your chief, Mr. Darl Thomas, decided that he's a filliloo
bird or somethin', flew to his little nest up top, an' forgot to come
down again."

"Is this ain o' your jests, James Holcomb? I eenquire mairly that I
may ken when to laugh."

"It's no joke, Mac. Last I see o' him he's skippin' around the roof
like he has a buzzin' propeller stuck to his shoulder blades. He
lights on th' air-lock platform, pops inside, an' goes dead for all I
know."

From his bony legs to his scrawny neck the Scotchman's angular body,
as nearly nude as that of the others, radiated the doubt that was
expressed in every seam and wrinkle of his hatchet face.

"That's straight, Angus, may I kiss a pink-eared _vanta_ if it ain't.
Here's what happened." The bantering grin disappeared from Jim's
countenance as he detailed the events that had preceded Darl's
vanishing. "That was two hours ago," he concluded, "and I've been
getting pretty uneasy about him."

"Why did na ye call me, so that ain o' us micht eenvestigate?"

"Hell. Darl wasn't born yesterday, he can take care of himself.
Besides, your last shift was pretty strenuous, an' I thought I'd let
you sleep. No tellin' what might happen next; this forsaken place has
been givin' me the jim-jams lately."

"Your conseederation is touching, but--" A scratching at the door,
accompanied by a high squeak, interrupted him.

       *       *       *       *       *

To Jim's shouted "Come in," there entered a Venusian, whose red
rosette fastened to the green scales of his skin marked him an
overseer. In the thread-like fingers of his hand he held a time-sheet,
but the nervous pulsing of his gill-membranes caused Holcomb to
exclaim anxiously: "What's wrong, Ran-los? No accident, I hope?"

The shrill combination of squeaks and twitterings that came from the
man-reptile's toothless mouth meant nothing to the Scot, but Jim's
last service had been on Venus and he had gained a working knowledge
of the language. Finally the interchange was ended, and Ran-los bowed
himself out. Jim turned to his companion.

"There's some more queer stuff for you, Angie. Just before
shift-change, Ran-los heard odd sounds from the other side of the
barrier at the end of gallery M-39. Says they seemed like signals o'
some kind. He's a wise old bird and if he's worried about something
it's damn well worth lookin' into. I don't know whether to find out
first what's happened to Darl, or--"

Again there was an interruption; this time from the usually silent
radio-communication set in the far corner. Jim leaped to the
instrument and snapped on the head-set. Angus leaned over him,
watching his intent face.

Faintly, as from an immense distance, came the thin whistle of
