his arm back as a thin streamer of smoke and the smell of burning
insulation entered the room.

"You've broken it," said Sutter accusingly.

But his voice died abruptly as the screen flared into light and a low
hum sounded behind the panel. An instant later the light became subdued
and a streak of tawny yellow took form. The yellow slowly coalesced into
a sandy stretch of beach with long rolling swells washing up on it, to
recede in a smother of foam. Through the amplifier came the muted roar
of the breakers and the low soughing of the wind.

"Well, we got something at any rate," Travail said. "I wonder what it
is."

Sutter stared, fascinated. The view of the beach seemed to come into
sharper focus as he watched, and he saw now that it was an incredibly
lonely scene, with the sea stretching away to a vanishing point and a
stand of stunted spruce flanking the width of sand. But what caught his
eye and held him almost in a trance was the array of objects littering
the sand at the water's edge.

They were shells. Not the prosaic commonplace shells usually found on a
New England shore nor even the brighter colored, more intricately formed
shells of tropic seas. These were shells he had never seen before, even
in library collections. Alien and soft-hued and lovely shells that
caused his collector's heart to jump wildly. He saw a delicate
star-shaped thing that might have been fashioned of porcelain and
enameled with the brush of the Mings. He saw spiral coverings from
uncatalogued cephalopods, many chambered and many hued. He saw shells of
a thousand shapes and designs, all incredibly beautiful....

Sutter forgot everything else as he sat there staring at that
collector's paradise.

"I'll see if I can get something else," said Travail.

"No!" said Sutter quickly. "Don't touch it!"

He continued to stare hungrily at the alien shells until suddenly the
scene before him grew dim, then faded completely away.

Travail laughed shortly. "Somebody sold you a fluke. This set must be an
off brand. Incidentally, isn't Tanganyika a colony governed by the
Federal Union Congress?"

"Yes, it is," replied Sutter. "I don't understand this at all. There's
no _Empire_ of Tanganyika."

       *       *       *       *       *

Next morning after breakfast Sutter announced that he was driving into
the country to visit a friend. There was no reason why he should not
have told his roommate the truth--that he was going to look up the man
who had sold him the TV set. No reason except for the odd fact that
Travail had made no mention of the alien shells, and Sutter kept
thinking that a shell collector would have been immediately aware of the
rareness of them.

Once again Sutter drove out across state and down the highway where he
had seen the roadside stand. But when he reached the spot there was no
sign of the stand. The big oak tree which had shaded it and the rail
fence on the adjoining property were there. But no stand. As Sutter
stared with perplexed eyes at the spot he saw something he had not
noticed before.

At the edge of the highway was a large granite boulder with a bronze
plate fastened to its slanting surface. Sutter got out of the car,
approached it and read:

    _This property has been preserved as a State Park to commemorate the
    first successful trial explosion of the Hydrogen Bomb which took
    place on this site and marked the beginning of an era._

It seemed to Sutter as he stood there that the surrounding silence grew
more intense. Then he passed through a wide gateway and began to stride
across an evenly clipped lawn toward a grove of trees beyond. Halfway he
paused and glanced absently at his watch. It was exactly twelve o'clock
noon.

And abruptly the scene before him slipped out of plumb. The sky and the
lawn seemed to alter positions, to rotate madly as in a vortex. The
whirling ceased and the next instant Sutter stood on the shore of a
lonely sea with a tawny width of sand stretching out before him and the
waves washing up almost at his feet. Then he saw the shells....

It was the beach of the alien shells! There they lay, scattered about
the sand, hundreds, thousands of them, alien and delicate and lovely,
exoskeletons the like of which he had never seen before. Their pastel
colors blended with one another to form a horizontal rainbow extending
into the measureless distance.

And somehow, as Sutter walked among them, picking his way with care, the
years of his life seemed to slip away and he was a small boy at the
seashore again, entranced with his first shell discovery. He could even
