considering the work that's cut out for us, it would seem like a poor
move to antagonize her unduly. What do you gentlemen think?"

"I think you're right, sir," said Hendricks quickly. "I believe she
should be given every consideration."

       *       *       *       *       *

Kincaide, my level-headed second officer, glanced curiously at
Hendricks. "I see she's made one friend, anyway," he said. "Don't let
yourself slip, my boy; I've run across her kind before. They're
dangerous."

"Thanks, but the warning's not necessary, Mr. Kincaide," replied
Hendricks stiffly, an angry flush mounting to his checks. "I merely
expressed a requested opinion."

"We'll let that phase of it drop, gentlemen," I cut in sharply, as I
saw Kincaide's eyes flash. Trust a woman to stir up strife and
ill-feeling! "What shall we do with her?"

"I believe, sir," said Correy, "that we'd be nice to her. Treat her as
an honored guest; make the best of a bad situation. If she's what the
Chief thought she is, the boss of this outfit we've got to lick, then
there's no need of stroking her the wrong way, as I see it."

"And you, Mr. Kincaid?"

"I see no other way out of it. Under the circumstances, we can't treat
her like a common culprit; both her position and her sex would
prevent."

"Very well, then; we seem to be agreed. We'll find suitable quarters
for her--"

"I'll give her mine," put in Hendricks. "Correy will let me double up
with him, I imagine."

"Sure," nodded Correy.

Kincaide glanced sharply at Hendricks, but said nothing. I knew,
however, that he was thinking just what I was: that my young third
officer was in for a bad, bad time of it.

Just how bad, I think neither of us guessed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Liane became a member of the officers' mess on the _Ertak_. She
occupied Hendricks' stateroom, and, I must confess, with uncommon good
judgment for a woman, remained there most of the time.

She knew the reason for our mission, but this was one subject we never
discussed. Nor did we mention the sect of which, according to the
Chief of Command, she was the head. We did talk freely, when brought
together at the table, on every other general topic.

Liane was an exceedingly intelligent conversationalist. Her voice was
fascinating, and her remarks were always to the point. And she was a
very good listener; she paid flattering attention to the most casual
remark.

It seemed to me she was particularly gracious to Hendricks. Her
strangely arresting blue eyes seldom left his face when he was
speaking, and the greater portion of her remarks seemed addressed to
him. Naturally, Hendricks responded as a flower responds to the
warming rays of the sun.

"We'll do well, sir, to keep a weather eye on the youngster," opined
Correy one morning. (I think I have previously explained that even in
the unchanging darkness of space, we divided time arbitrarily into
days and nights). "Unless I'm badly mistaken, Hendricks is falling
victim to a pair of blue eyes."

"He's young," I shrugged. "We'll be there in two more days, and then
we'll be rid of her."

"Yes," nodded Correy, "we'll be there in a couple of days. And we'll
be rid of her, I hope. But--suppose it should be serious, sir?"

"What do you mean?" I asked sharply. I had been thinking, rather
vaguely, along much the same lines, but to hear it put into words came
as rather a shock.

"I hope I'm wrong," said Correy very gravely. "But this Liane is an
unusual woman. When I was his age, I could have slipped rather badly
myself. Her eyes--that slow smile--they do things to a man.

"At the same time, Liane is supposed to be the head of the thing we're
to stamp out; you might say the enemy's leader. And it wouldn't be a
good thing, sir, to have a--a friend of the enemy on board the
_Ertak_, would it?"

A rebuke rose to my lips, but I checked it. After all, Correy had no
more than put into words some fears which had been harassing me.

       *       *       *       *       *

A traitor--in the Service? Perhaps you won't be able to understand
just what that thought meant to those of us who wore the Blue and
Silver in those days. But a traitor was something we had never had. It
was almost unbelievable that such a thing would ever happen; that it
could ever happen. And yet older men than Hendricks had thrown honor
aside at the insistence of women less fascinating than Liane.

I had felt the lure of her personality; there was not one of us on
board the _Ertak_ who had not. And she had not exercised her wiles on
any of us save Hendricks; with the shrewdness which had made her the
leader she was, she had elected to fascinate the youngest, the
weakest, the most impressionable.

"I'll have a talk with him, Mr. Correy," I said quietly. "Probably it
isn't necessary; I trust him implicitly, as I am sure you do, and the
rest of us."

"Certainly, sir," Correy replied hastily, evidently relieved by the
manner in which I had taken his remarks. "Only, he's very young, sir,
and Liane is a very fascinating creature."

I kept my promise to Correy the next time Hendricks was on watch.

"We'll be setting down in a couple of days," I commented casually.
"It'll be good to stretch our legs again, won't it?"

"It certainly will, sir."

"And I imagine that's the last we'll see of our fair stowaway," I
said, watching him closely.

Hendricks' face flushed and then drained white. With the tip of his
forefinger he traced meaningless geometrical patterns on the surface
of the instrument table.

"I imagine so, sir," he replied in a choked voice. And then, suddenly,
in a voice which shook with released emotion. "Oh, I know what you're
thinking!" he added. "What you've all been thinking; you, sir, and
Correy and Kincaide. Probably the men, too, for that matter.

"But it's not so! I want you to believe that, sir. I may be
impressionable, and certainly she is beautiful and--and terribly
fascinating; but I'm not quite a fool. I realize she's on the other
side; that I can't, that I must not, permit myself to care. You--you
do believe that, sir?"

"Of course, lad!" I put my hand reassuringly on his shoulder; his
whole body was shaking. "Forget it; forget her as soon as you can.
None of us have doubted you for an instant; we just--wondered."

"I could see that; I could feel it. And it hurt," said my junior
officer with shame-faced hesitancy. "But I'll forget her--after she's
gone."

I let it go at that. After all, it was a rather painful subject for us
both. The next day it did seem that he treated her with less
attention; and she noticed it, for I saw the faint shadow of a frown
form between her perfect brows, and her glance traveled meditatively
from Hendricks' flushed face to my own.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next morning, after the first meal of the day, she walked down the
passage with me, one slim white hand placed gently within the curve of
my arm.

"Mr. Hendricks," she commented softly, "seems rather distraught the
last day or so."

"Yes?" I said, smiling to myself, and wondering what was coming next.

"Yes, Commander Hanson." There was just the faintest suggestion of
steeliness in her voice now. "I fancy you've been giving him good
advice, and painting me in lurid colors. Do you really think so badly
of me?" Her hand pressed my arm with warm friendliness; her great blue
eyes were watching me with beseeching interest.

"I think, Liane," I replied, "that Mr. Hendricks is a very young man."

"And that I am a dangerous woman?" She laughed softly.

"That, at least," I told her, "your interests and ours are not
identical."

"True," she said coolly, pausing before the door of her stateroom. Her
hand dropped from my arm, and she drew herself up regally. In the
bright flow of the ethon tubes overhead she was almost irresistibly
beautiful. "Our interests are not identical, Commander Hanson. They
are widely divergent, directly opposed to each other, as a matter of
fact. And--may I be so bold as to offer you a bit of advice?"

I bowed, saying nothing.

"Then, don't attempt to meddle with things which are more powerful,
than you and the forces you control. And--don't waste breath on Mr.
Hendricks. Fair warning!"
