In the early morning, Phobar slept. When he awoke, he felt refreshed and
decided to take a short walk in the familiar and peaceful light of day.
He never took that walk. He opened the door on a kind of dim and reddish
twilight. Not a cloud hung in the sky, but the sun shone feebly with a
dull red glow, and the skies were dull and somber, as if the sun were
dying as scientists had predicted it eventually would.

Phobar stared at the dull heavens in a daze, at the foreboding
atmosphere and the livid sun that burned faintly as through a smoke
curtain. Then the truth flashed on him--it was the terrible path of fire
from the dark star! By what means he could not guess, by what appalling
control of immense and inconceivable forces he could not even imagine,
the dark star was sucking light and perhaps more than light from the
sun!

       *       *       *       *       *

Phobar turned and shut the door. The world had seen its last dawn. If
the purpose of the dark star was destruction, none of the planets could
offer much opposition, for no weapon of theirs was effective beyond a
few thousand miles range at most--and the dark star could span millions.
If the invader passed on, its havoc would be only a trifle smaller, for
it had already destroyed two members of the solar system and was now
striking at its most vital part. Without the sun, life would die, but
even with the sun the planets must rearrange themselves because of the
destruction of balance.

Even he could hardly grasp the vast and abysmal catastrophe that without
warning had swept from space. How could the dark star have traversed
three thousand light-years of space in a week's time? It was
unthinkable! So stupendous a control of power, so gigantic a
manipulation of cosmic forces, so annihilating a possession of the
greatest secrets of the universe, was an unheard-of concentration of
energy and knowledge of stellar mechanics. But the evidence of his own
eyes and the path of the dark star with flaming suns to mark its
progress, told him in language which could not be refuted that the dark
star possessed all that immeasurable, titanic knowledge. It was the lord
of the universe. There was nothing which the dark star could not crush
or conquer or change. The thought of that immense, supreme power numbed
his mind. It opened vistas of a civilization, and a progress, and an
unparalleled mastery of all knowledge which was almost beyond
conception.

       *       *       *       *       *

Already the news had raced across the world. On Phobar's television
screen flashed scenes of nightmare; the radio spewed a gibberish of
terror. In one day panic had swept the Earth; on the remaining members
of the Five World Federation the same story was repeated. Rioting mobs
drowned out the chant of religious fanatics who hailed Judgment Day.
Great fires turned the air murky and flame-shot. Machine guns spat
regularly in city streets; looting, murder, and fear-crazed crimes were
universal. Civilization had completely vanished overnight.

The tides roared higher than they ever had before; for every thousand
people drowned on the American seaboards, a hundred thousand perished in
China and India. Dead volcanoes boomed into the worst eruptions known.
Half of Japan sank during the most violent earthquake in history. Land
rocked, the seas boiled, cyclones howled out of the skies. A billion
eyes focused on Mecca, the mad beating of tom-toms rolled across all
Africa, women and children were trampled to death by the crowds that
jammed into churches.

"Has man lived in vain?" asked the philosopher.

"The world is doomed. There is no escape," said the scientist.

"The day of reckoning has come! The wrath of God is upon us!" shouted
the street preachers.

In a daze, Phobar switched off the bedlam and, walking like a man
asleep, strode out, he did not care where, if only to get away.

The ground and the sky were like a dying fire. The sun seemed a
half-dead cinder. Only the great swathe of radiance between the sun and
the dark star had any brilliance. Sinister, menacing, now larger even
than the sun, the invader from beyond hung in the heavens.

As Phobar watched it, the air around him prickled strangely. A sixth
sense gave warning. He turned to race back into his house. His legs
failed. A fantastic orange light bathed him, countless needles of pain
shot through his whole body, the world darkened.

       *       *       *       *       *

Earth had somehow been blotted out. There was a brief blackness, the
nausea of space and of a great fall that compressed eternity into a
moment. Then a swimming confusion, and outlines which gradually came to
rest.

Phobar was too utterly amazed to cry out or run. He stood inside the
most titanic edifice he could have imagined, a single gigantic structure
vaster than all New York City. Far overhead swept a black roof fading
into the horizon, beneath his feet was the same metal substance. In the
midst of this giant work soared the base of a tower that pierced the
roof thousands of feet above.

Everywhere loomed machines, enormous dynamos, cathode tubes a hundred
feet long, masses and mountains of such fantastic apparatus as he had
never encountered. The air was bluish, electric. From the black
substance came a phosphorescent radiance. The triumphant drone of motors
and a terrific crackle of electricity were everywhere. Off to his right
purple-blue flames the size of Sequoia trees flickered around a group of
what looked like condensers as huge as Gibraltar. At the base of the
central tower half a mile distant Phobar could see something that
resembled a great switchboard studded with silver controls. Near it was
a series of mechanisms at whose purpose he could not even guess.

       *       *       *       *       *

All this his astounded eyes took in at one confused glance. The thing
that gave him unreasoning terror was the hundred-foot-high metal monster
before him. It defied description. It was unlike any color known on
Earth, a blinding color sinister with power and evil. Its shape was
equally ambiguous--it rippled like quicksilver, now compact, now spread
out in a thousand limbs. But what appalled Phobar was its definite
possession of rational life. More, its very thoughts were transmitted to
him as clearly as though written in his own English:

"Follow me!"

Phobar's mind did not function--but his legs moved regularly. In the
grasp of this mental, metal monster he was a mere automaton. Phobar
noticed idly that he had to step down from a flat disk a dozen yards
across. By some power, some tremendous discovery that he could not
understand, he had been transported across millions of miles of
space--undoubtedly to the dark star itself!

The colossal thing, indescribable, a blinding, nameless color, rippled
down the hall and stooped before a disk of silvery black. In the center
of the disk was a metal seat with a control board near-by.

"Be seated!"
