any part of the heavens shows stars beaming continuously, and every
increase in telescopic power shows stars still further removed than any
seen before. The whole of this intervening space must therefore be
filled with the ether. Some of the waves that reach us are not more than
the hundred-thousandth of an inch long, so there can be no crack or
break or absence of ether from so small a section as the
hundred-thousandth of an inch in all this great expanse. More than this.
No one can think that the remotest visible stars are upon the boundary
of space, that if one could get to the most distant star he would have
on one side the whole of space while the opposite side would be devoid
of it. Space we know is of three dimensions, and a straight line may be
prolonged in any direction to an infinite distance, and a ray of light
may travel on for an infinite time and come to no end provided space be
filled with ether.

How long the sun and stars have been shining no one knows, but it is
highly probable that the sun has existed for not less than 1000 million
years, and has during that time been pouring its rays as radiant energy
into space. If then in half that time, or 500 millions of years, the
light had somewhere reached a boundary to the ether, it could not have
gone beyond but would have been reflected back into the ether-filled
space, and such part of the sky would be lit up by this reflected light.
There is no indication that anything like reflection comes to us from
the sky. This is equivalent to saying that the ether fills space in
every direction away from us to an unlimited distance, and so far is
itself unlimited.


3. MATTER IS HETEROGENEOUS.

The various kinds of matter we are acquainted with are commonly called
the elements. These when combined in various ways exhibit characteristic
phenomena which depend upon the kinds of matter, the structure and
motions which are involved. There are some seventy different kinds of
this elemental matter which may be identified as constituents of the
earth. Many of the same elements have been identified in the sun and
stars, such for instance as hydrogen, carbon, and iron. Such phenomena
lead us to conclude that the kinds of matter elsewhere in the universe
are identical with such as we are familiar with, and that elsewhere the
variety is as great. The qualities of the elements, within a certain
range of temperature, are permanent; they are not subject to
fluctuations, though the qualities of combinations of them may vary
indefinitely. The elements therefore may be regarded as retaining their
identity in all ordinary experience.


THE ETHER IS HOMOGENEOUS.

One part of the ether is precisely like any other part everywhere and
always, and there are no such distinctions in it as correspond with the
elemental forms of matter.


4. MATTER IS ATOMIC.

There is an ultimate particle of each one of the elements which is
practically absolute and known as an atom. The atom retains its identity
through all combinations and processes. It may be here or there, move
fast or slow, but its atomic form persists.


THE ETHER IS NON-ATOMIC.

One might infer, from what has already been said about continuity, that
the ether could not be constituted of separable particles like masses of
matter; for no matter how minute they might be, there would be
interspaces and unoccupied spaces which would present us with phenomena
which have never been seen. It is the general consensus of opinion
among those who have studied the subject that the ether is not atomic in
structure.


5. MATTER HAS DEFINITE STRUCTURE.

Every atom of every element is so like every other atom of the same
element as to exhibit the same characteristics, size, weight, chemical
activity, vibratory rate, etc., and it is thus shown conclusively that
the structural form of the elemental particles is the same for each
element, for such characteristic reactions as they exhibit could hardly
be if they were mechanically unlike.

Of what form the atoms of an element may be is not very definitely
known. The earlier philosophers assumed them to be hard round particles,
but later thinkers have concluded that atoms of such a character are
highly improbable, for they could not exhibit in this case the
properties which the elements do exhibit. They have therefore dismissed
such a conception from consideration. In place of this hypothesis has
been substituted a very different idea, namely, that an atom is a
vortex-ring[1] of ether floating in the ether, as a smoke-ring puffed
out by a locomotive in still air may float in the air and show various
phenomena.

[Footnote 1: Vortex-rings for illustration may be made by having a
wooden box about a foot on a side, with a round orifice in the middle of
one side, and the side opposite covered with stout cloth stretched tight
over a framework. A saucer containing strong ammonia water, and another
containing strong hydrochloric acid, will cause dense fumes in the box,
and a tap with the hand upon the cloth back will force out a ring from
the orifice. These may be made to follow and strike each other,
rebounding and vibrating, apparently attracting each other and being
attracted by neighbouring bodies.

By filling the mouth with smoke, and pursing the lips as if to make the
sound _o_, one may make fifteen or twenty small rings by snapping the
cheek with the finger.]

A vortex-ring produced in the air behaves in the most surprising manner.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.--Method of making vortex-rings and their
behaviour.]

1. It retains its ring form and the same material rotating as it
starts with.

2. It can travel through the air easily twenty or thirty feet in a
second without disruption.

3. Its line of motion when free is always at right angles to the
plane of the ring.

4. It will not stand still unless compelled by some object. If
stopped in the air it will start up itself to travel on without
external help.

5. It possesses momentum and energy like a solid body.

6. It is capable of vibrating like an elastic body, making a
definite number of such vibrations per second, the degree of
elasticity depending upon the rate of vibration. The swifter the
rotation, the more rigid and elastic it is.

7. It is capable of spinning on its own axis, and thus having rotary
energy as well as translatory and vibratory.

8. It repels light bodies in front of it, and attracts into itself
light bodies in its rear.

9. If projected along parallel with the top of a long table, it will
fall upon it every time, just as a stone thrown horizontally will
fall to the ground.

10. If two rings of the same size be travelling in the same line,
and the rear one overtakes the other, the front one will enlarge its
diameter, while the rear one will contract its own till it can go
through the forward one, when each will recover its original
diameter, and continue on in the same direction, but vibrating,
expanding and contracting their diameters with regularity.

11. If two rings be moving in the same line, but in opposite
directions, they will repel each other when near, and thus retard
their speed. If one goes through the other, as in the former case,
it may quite lose its velocity, and come to a standstill in the air
till the other has moved on to a distance, when it will start up in
its former direction.

12. If two rings be formed side by side, they will instantly collide
at their edges, showing strong attraction.

13. If the collision does not destroy them, they may either break
apart at the point of the collision, and then weld together into a
single ring with twice the diameter, and then move on as if a single
ring had been formed, or they may simply bounce away from each
other, in which case they always rebound _in a plane_ at right
angles to the plane of collision. That is, if they collided on their
sides, they would rebound so that one went up and the other down.

14. Three may in like manner collide and fuse into a single ring.

Such rings formed in air by a locomotive may rise wriggling in the air
to the height of several hundred feet, but they are soon dissolved and
disappear. This is because the friction and viscosity of the air robs
the rings of their substance and energy. If the air were without
friction this could not happen, and the rings would then be persistent,
and would retain all their qualities.

Suppose then that such rings were produced in a medium without friction
as the ether is believed to be, they would be permanent structures with
a variety of properties. They would occupy space, have definite form and
dimensions, momentum, energy, attraction and repulsion, elasticity; obey
the laws of motion, and so far behave quite like such matter as we know.
For such reasons it is thought by some persons to be not improbable
that the atoms of matter are minute vortex-rings of ether in the ether.
That which distinguishes the atom from the ether is the form of motion
which is embodied in it, and if the motion were simply arrested, there
would be nothing to distinguish the atom from the ether into which it
dissolved. In other words, such a conception makes the atoms of matter a
form of motion of the ether, and not a created something put into the
ether.


THE ETHER IS STRUCTURELESS.

If the ether be the boundless substance described, it is clear it can
have no form as a whole, and if it be continuous it can have no minute
structure. If not constituted of atoms or molecules there is nothing
descriptive that can be said about it. A molecule or a particular mass
of matter could be identified by its form, and is thus in marked
contrast with any portion of ether, for the latter could not be
identified in a similar way. One may therefore say that the ether is
formless.


6. MATTER IS GRAVITATIVE.

The law of gravitation is held as being universal. According to it every
particle of matter in the universe attracts every other particle. The
evidence for this law in the solar system is complete. Sun, planets,
satellites, comets and meteors are all controlled by gravitation, and
the movements of double stars testify to its activity among the more
distant bodies of the universe. The attraction does not depend upon the
kind of matter nor the arrangement of molecules or atoms, but upon the
amount or mass of matter present, and if it be of a definite kind of
matter, as of hydrogen or iron, the gravitative action is proportional
to the number of atoms.


THE ETHER IS GRAVITATIONLESS.

One might infer already that if the ether were structureless, physical
laws operative upon such material substances as atoms could not be
applicable to it, and so indeed all the evidence we have shows that
gravitation is not one of its properties. If it were, and it behaved in
any degree like atomic structures, it would be found to be denser in the
neighbourhood of large bodies like the earth, planets, and the sun.
Light would be turned from its straight path while travelling in such
denser medium, or made to move with less velocity. There is not the
slightest indication of any such effect anywhere within the range of
astronomical vision.

Gravitation then is a property belonging to matter and not to ether.
The impropriety of thinking or speaking of the ether as matter of any
kind will be apparent if one reflects upon the significance of the law
of gravitation as stated. Every particle of matter in the universe
attracts every other particle. If there be anything else in the universe
which has no such quality, then it should not be called matter, else the
law should read: Some particles of matter attract some other particles,
which would be no law at all, for a real physical law has no exceptions
any more than the multiplication table has. Physical laws are physical
relations, and all such relations are quantitative.


7. MATTER IS FRICTIONABLE.

A bullet shot into the air has its velocity continuously reduced by the
air, to which its energy is imparted by making it move out of its way. A
railway train is brought to rest by the friction brake upon the wheels.
The translatory energy of the train is transformed into the molecular
energy called heat. The steamship requires to propel it fast, a large
amount of coal for its engines, because the water in which it moves
offers great friction--resistance which must be overcome. Whenever one
surface of matter is moved in contact with another surface there is a
resistance called friction, the moving body loses its rate of motion,
and will presently be brought to rest unless energy be continuously
supplied. This is true for masses of matter of all sizes and with all
kinds of motion. Friction is the condition for the transformation of all
kinds of mechanical motions into heat. The test of the amount of
friction is the rate of loss of motion. A top will spin some time in the
air because its point is small. It will spin longer on a plate than on
the carpet, and longer in a vacuum than in the air, for it does not have
the air friction to resist it, and there is no kind or form of matter
not subject to frictional resistance.


THE ETHER IS FRICTIONLESS.

The earth is a mass of matter moving in the ether. In the equatorial
region the velocity of a point is more than a thousand miles in an hour,
for the circumference of the earth is 25,000 miles, and it turns once on
its axis in 24 hours, which is the length of the day. If the earth were
thus spinning in the atmosphere, the latter not being in motion, the
wind would blow with ten times hurricane velocity. The friction would be
so great that nothing but the foundation rocks of the earth's crust
could withstand it, and the velocity of rotation would be reduced
appreciably in a relatively short time. The air moves along with the
earth as a part of it, and consequently no such frictional destruction
takes place, but the earth rotates in the ether with that same rate, and
if the ether offered resistance it would react so as to retard the
rotation and increase the length of the day. Astronomical observations
show that the length of the day has certainly not changed so much as the
tenth of a second during the past 2000 years. The earth also revolves
about the sun, having a speed of about 19 miles in a second, or 68,000
miles an hour. This motion of the earth and the other planets about the
sun is one of the most stable phenomena we know. The mean distance and
period of revolution of every planet is unalterable in the long run. If
the earth had been retarded by its friction in the ether the length of
the year would have been changed, and astronomers would have discovered
it. They assert that a change in the length of a year by so much as the
hundredth part of a second has not happened during the past thousand
years. This then is testimony, that a velocity of nineteen miles a
second for a thousand years has produced no effect upon the earth's
motion that is noticeable. Nineteen miles a second is not a very swift
astronomical motion, for comets have been known to have a velocity of
400 miles a second when in the neighbourhood of the sun, and yet they
have not seemed to suffer any retardation, for their orbits have not
been shortened. Some years ago a comet was noticed to have its periodic
time shortened an hour or two, and the explanation offered at first was
that the shortening was due to friction in the ether although no other
comet was thus affected. The idea was soon abandoned, and to-day there
is no astronomical evidence that bodies having translatory motion in the
ether meet with any frictional resistance whatever. If a stone could be
thrown in interstellar space with a velocity of fifty feet a second it
would continue to move in a straight line with the same speed for any
assignable time.

As has been said, light moves with the velocity of 186,000 miles per
second, and it may pursue its course for tens of thousands of years.
There is no evidence that it ever loses either its wave-length or
energy. It is not transformed as friction would transform it, else there
would be some distance at which light of given wave-length and amplitude
would be quite extinguished. The light from distant stars would be
different in character from that coming from nearer stars. Furthermore,
as the whole solar system is drifting in space some 500,000,000 of miles
in a year, new stars would be coming into view in that direction, and
faint stars would be dropping out of sight in the opposite direction--a
phenomenon which has not been observed. Altogether the testimony seems
conclusive that the ether is a frictionless medium, and does not
transform mechanical motion into heat.


8. MATTER IS AEOLOTROPIC.

That is, its properties are not alike in all directions. Chemical
phenomena, crystallization, magnetic and electrical phenomena show each
in their way that the properties of atoms are not alike on opposite
faces. Atoms combine to form molecules, and molecules arrange themselves
