great love of solitude, a guy who hadn't a malicious hair in his head. A
happy little guy who liked to sing and dance in the light of a
high-leaping fire. He had a banjo and was good at music making. Who
could have hated Ned with a rage so primitive and savage? I looked at
Harry and saw that he was wondering the same thing.

Harry looked pretty bad, about ready to cave in. He was leaning against
the well, a tormented fury in his eyes.

"The murderous bastard," he muttered. "I'd like to get him by the throat
and choke the breath out of him. Who'd want to do a thing like that to
Ned."

"I can't figure it either," I said.

Then I remembered. I don't think Molly Egan really could have loved Ned.
The curious thing about it was that Ned didn't even need the kind of
love she could have given him. He was a self-sufficient little guy
despite his frailness and didn't really need a woman to look after him.
But Molly must have seen something pathetic in him.

Molly was a beautiful woman in her own right, and there wasn't a man in
the camp who hadn't envied Ned. It was puzzling, but it could have
explained why Ned was lying slumped on the sand with a bashed-in skull.
It could have explained why someone had hated him enough to kill him.

Without lifting a finger Ned had won Molly's love. That could make some
other guy as mad as a caged hyena--the wrong sort of other guy. Even a
small man could have shattered Ned's skull, but the prints on the sand
were big.

How many men in the camp wore size-twelve shoes? That was the sixty-four
dollar question, and it hung in the shimmering air between Harry and
myself like an unspoken challenge. We could almost see the curve of the
big question mark suspended in the dazzle.

I thought awhile, looking at Harry. Then I took a long, deep breath and
said, "We'd better talk it over with Bill Seaton first. If it gets
around too fast those footprints will be trampled flat. And if tempers
start rising anything could happen."

Harry nodded. Bill was the kind of guy you could depend on in an
emergency. Cool, poised, efficient, with an air of authority that
commanded respect. He could be pigheaded at times, but his sense of
justice was as keen as a whip.

Harry and I walked very quietly across a stretch of tumbled sand and
halted at the door to Bill's shack. Bill was a bachelor and we knew
there'd be no woman inside to put her foot down and tell him he'd be a
fool to act as a lawman. Or would there be? We had to chance it.

Law-enforcement is a thankless job whether on Earth or on Mars. That's
why it attracts the worst--and the best. If you're a power-drunk sadist
you'll take the job just for the pleasure it gives you. But if you're
really interested in keeping violence within bounds so that fairly
decent lads get a fighting chance to build for the future, you'll take
the job with no thought of reward beyond the simple satisfaction of
lending a helping hand.

Bill Seaton was such a man, even if he did enjoy the limelight and liked
to be in a position of command.

"Come on, Harry," I said. "We may as well wake him up and get it over
with."

We went into the shack. Bill was sleeping on the floor with his long
legs drawn up. His mouth was open and he was snoring lustily. I couldn't
help thinking how much he looked like an overgrown grasshopper. But that
was just a first impression springing from overwrought nerves.

I bent down and shook Bill awake. I grabbed his arm and shook him until
his jaw snapped shut and he shot up straight, suddenly galvanized.
Instantly the grotesque aspect fell from him. Dignity came upon him and
enveloped him like a cloak.

"Ned, you say? The poor little cuss! So help me--if I get my hands on
the rat who did it I'll roast him over a slow fire!"

He got up, staggered to an equipment locker, and took out a sun helmet
and a pair of shorts. He dressed quickly, swearing constantly and
staring out the door at the bright dawn glow as if he wanted to send
both of his fists crashing into the first suspicious guy to cross his
path.

"We can't have those footprints trampled," he muttered. "There are a lot
of dumb bastards here who don't know the first thing about keeping
pointers intact. Those prints may be the only thing we'll have to go
on."

"Just the three of us can handle it, Bill," I said. "When you decide
what should be done we can wake the others."

Bill nodded. "Keeping it quiet is the important thing. We'll carry him
back here. When we break the news I want that body out of sight."

Harry and Bill and I--we took another walk in the sun. I looked at
Harry, and the greenish tinge which had crept into his face gave me a
jolt. He's taking this pretty hard, I thought. If I hadn't known him so
well I might have jumped to an ugly conclusion. But I just couldn't
imagine Harry quarreling with Ned over Molly.

How was I taking it myself? I raised my hand and looked at it. There was
no tremor. Nerves steady, brain clear. No pleasure in enforcing the
law--pass that buck to Bill. But there was a gruesome job ahead, and I
was standing up to it as well as could be expected.

Ever try lifting a corpse? The corpse of a stranger is easier to lift
than the corpse of a man you've known and liked. Harry and I lifted him
together. Between us the dead weight didn't seem too intolerable--not at
first. But it quickly became a terrible, heavy limpness that dragged at
our arms like some soggy log dredged up from the dark waters of the
canal.

We carried him into the shack and eased him down on the floor. His head
fell back and his eyes lolled.

Death is always shameful. It strips away all human reticences and makes
a mockery of human dignity and man's rebellion against the cruelty of
fate.

For a moment we stood staring down at all that was left of Ned. I looked
at Bill. "How many men in the camp wear number-twelve shoes?"

"We'll find out soon enough."

All this time we hadn't mentioned Larsen. Not one word about Larsen, not
one spoken word. Cheating, yes. Lying, and treacherous disloyalty, and
viciousness, and spite. Fights around the campfires at midnight,
battered faces and broken wrists and a cursing that never ceased. All
that we could blame on Larsen. But a harmless little guy lying dead by a
well in a spreading pool of blood--that was an outrage that stopped us
dead in our legend-making tracks.
