
Cappen drew back against the rail, trying to make himself small.

"All gods turn their faces from ye!" It was more than weariness and
despair which glared in Svearek's eyes, there was something of death in
them. "I'll go myself, then!"

"No, my king. That we will not find ourselves in."

"I am the king!"

"And we are yer housecarls, sworn to defend ye--even from yerself. Ye
shall not go."

The ship rolled again, so violently that they were all thrown to
starboard. Cappen landed on Torbek, who reached up to shove him aside
and then closed one huge fist on his tunic.

"Here's our man!"

"Hi!" yelled Cappen.

Torbek hauled him roughly back to his feet. "Ye cannot row or bail yer
fair share," he growled, "nor do ye know the rigging or any skill of a
sailor--'tis time ye made yerself useful!"

"Aye, aye--let little Cappen go--mayhap he can sing the trolls to
sleep--" The laughter was hard and barking, edged with fear, and they
all hemmed him in.

"My lord!" bleated the minstrel. "I am your guest--"

Svearek laughed unpleasantly, half crazily. "Sing them a song," he
howled. "Make a fine roun--whatever ye call it--to the troll-wife's
beauty. And bring us some fire, little man, bring us a flame less hot
than the love in yer breast for yer lady!"

Teeth grinned through matted beards. Someone hauled on the rope from
which the ship's small boat trailed, dragging it close. "Go, ye scut!" A
horny hand sent Cappen stumbling to the rail.

He cried out once again. An ax lifted above his head. Someone handed him
his own slim sword, and for a wild moment he thought of fighting.
Useless--too many of them. He buckled on the sword and spat at the men.
The wind tossed it back in his face, and they raved with laughter.

Over the side! The boat rose to meet him, he landed in a heap on
drenched planks and looked up into the shadowy faces of the northmen.
There was a sob in his throat as he found the seat and took out the
oars.

An awkward pull sent him spinning from the ship, and then the night had
swallowed it and he was alone. Numbly, he bent to the task. Unless he
wanted to drown, there was no place to go but the island.

He was too weary and ill to be much afraid, and such fear as he had was
all of the sea. It could rise over him, gulp him down, the gray horses
would gallop over him and the long weeds would wrap him when he rolled
dead against some skerry. The soft vales of Caronne and the roses in
Croy's gardens seemed like a dream. There was only the roar and boom of
the northern sea, hiss of sleet and spindrift, crazed scream of wind, he
was alone as man had ever been and he would go down to the sharks alone.

The boat wallowed, but rode the waves better than the longship. He grew
dully aware that the storm was pushing him toward the island. It was
becoming visible, a deeper blackness harsh against the night.

He could not row much in the restless water, he shipped the oars and
waited for the gale to capsize him and fill his mouth with the sea. And
when it gurgled in his throat, what would his last thought be? Should he
dwell on the lovely image of Ydris in Seilles, she of the long bright
hair and the singing voice? But then there had been the tomboy laughter
of dark Falkny, he could not neglect her. And there were memories of
Elvanna in her castle by the lake, and Sirann of the Hundred Rings, and
beauteous Vardry, and hawk-proud Lona, and-- No, he could not do justice
to any of them in the little time that remained. What a pity it was!

No, wait, that unforgettable night in Nienne, the beauty which had
whispered in his ear and drawn him close, the hair which had fallen like
a silken tent about his cheeks ... ah, that had been the summit of his
life, he would go down into darkness with her name on his lips ... But
hell! What _had_ her name been, now?

Cappen Varra, minstrel of Croy, clung to the bench and sighed.

The great hollow voice of surf lifted about him, waves sheeted across
the gunwale and the boat danced in madness. Cappen groaned, huddling
into the circle of his own arms and shaking with cold. Swiftly, now, the
end of all sunlight and laughter, the dark and lonely road which all men
must tread. _O Ilwarra of Syr, Aedra in Tholis, could I but kiss you
once more--_

Stones grated under the keel. It was a shock like a sword going through
him. Cappen looked unbelievingly up. The boat had drifted to land--he
was alive!

It was like the sun in his breast. Weariness fell from him, and he
leaped overside, not feeling the chill of the shallows. With a grunt, he
heaved the boat up on the narrow strand and knotted the painter to a
fang-like jut of reef.

Then he looked about him. The island was small, utterly bare, a savage
loom of rock rising out of the sea that growled at its feet and streamed
off its shoulders. He had come into a little cliff-walled bay, somewhat
sheltered from the wind. He was here!

For a moment he stood, running through all he had learned about the
