until he was sure that she was not shocked or angry about what he had
just said.

She sat silently for a moment and then she said, "Do you think that is
right for me to do, George?"

"Sure it is! Why not? They know about you and me. They know we're in
love."

"Love--" She spoke the word as though it were an indefinite, elusive
thing that you could not offer as reason for doing anything.

Gistla was very wise, George realized, but this was a time for
enthusiasm, a time to strengthen their own relationship in this world.

"Say you will!" George said.

"Do you want me to?"

"Well, sure I do. What did you think?"

She held her hands in her lap quietly. They were not unlike his own,
George observed, except for the extreme smallness and the color.

"I do not think it will be nice for you or them," she said.

"Ah, listen, Gistla. Don't talk that way. It'll be fine!" But he knew
that he was not deceiving her with the lightness he tried to put into
his voice.

Then, although she had never done it before, she reached out and touched
his cheek. George had grown used to the emotions that reflected on her
face, and he knew she was suddenly very sad. "Yes, George," she said. "I
will go with you to meet your family." And she said it as though she
were telling him good-by.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was no better than he had expected. It was worse. Much worse. And he
was growing angrier by the moment. They were all seated in the
rock-walled patio behind the large white house. Gistla sat beside him,
looking very small and frightened and very different. And it was that
obvious difference that George had hoped everyone might ignore. But
instead, each of them, his father, his mother, his sister, appeared to
be trying to make it even more obvious.

The first strain, when everyone had sat there staring at Gistla as
though she were something behind a cage, had passed. But now his parents
and sister were moving in a new direction. They had relaxed, having
found control of the situation, and they were cutting her to pieces.

"Tell me," his sister was saying, her eyes dancing slyly, "don't you
people have some very strange tricks you can do?"

George tightened his fingers against his palms. He heard Gistla answer,
"Tricks?"

"Yes." His sister's white smile shined. "You know, like making things
disappear, things like that."

"My father," Gistla said seriously, "can do very wonderful things. He is
a musician."

George's father leaned forward, blinking amusedly. "Really? What does he
play?"

"Play?" asked Gistla.

"Yes. He's a musician. He must play something, some kind of instrument."

Gistla looked at George, but George did not know what to say. He wished
he had never tried to do this. He wished he had just ignored his family
and gone on loving Gistla in the privacy of his own emotions.

"Well, now," Mr. Kenington was saying rather impatiently. "Does he play
something like our violin or clarinet or oboe, or what?" His father,
George had noticed, was becoming impatient more frequently since he had
become Secretary. The Secretarial post was very important.

"He does not play anything," Gistla said carefully. "He just ... makes
the music and I hear it."

"But how?" Mr. Kenington insisted. "What does he play the music _on_? He
certainly can't make the music without using something to make it on."

Gistla glanced again at George and he said quickly, "It's pretty hard to
understand, Father. I don't think--"

"No, now don't interrupt just now, son. This is very interesting. We'd
like to know what she's talking about."

Mrs. Kenington spoke for the first time. "Are you just making this up?"

It was like a whip coming through the air. His mother sat there,
blinking, the suspicion and distrust she felt for this creature showing
in her eyes and upon her mouth and even in the way she was sitting.

"Now, Lois," Mr. Kenington said, as though he really sympathized with
what she had said, believing that not only Gistla was making it up, but
that all of her race made everything up. But he was stubborn. "Come now,
tell us. Tell us what you mean."

Gistla's smooth head turned this way and that. "Sometimes," she said
slowly, "my father journeys to other places, and if he cannot return
soon, he sends me music. When the light has gone from the day and I am
alone, I hear it."

"You mean he sends it by wires or by radio?" Mr. Kenington asked with
