"I do. The hell with them."

He laughed like a real youngster and I figured he couldn't even be
twenty-five. He didn't have any trouble with the broken curbstones in
spite of his scotch and waters. I asked him about it.

"Sense of balance," he said. "You have to be tops for balance to be a
spacer--you spend so much time outside in a suit. People don't know how
much. Punctures. And you aren't worth a damn if you lose your point."

"What's that mean?"

"Oh. Well, it's hard to describe. When you're outside and you lose your
point, it means you're all mixed up, you don't know which way the
can--that's the ship--which way the can is. It's having all that room
around you. But if you have a good balance, you feel a little tugging to
the ship, or maybe you just _know_ which way the ship is without feeling
it. Then you have your point and you can get the work done."

"There must be a lot that's hard to describe."

He thought that might be a crack and he clammed up on me.

"You call this Gandytown," I said after a while. "It's where the
stove-up old railroad men hang out. This is the place."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was the second week of the month, before everybody's pension check
was all gone. Oswiak's was jumping. The Grandsons of the Pioneers were
on the juke singing the _Man from Mars Yodel_ and old Paddy Shea was
jigging in the middle of the floor. He had a full seidel of beer in his
right hand and his empty left sleeve was flapping.

The kid balked at the screen door. "Too damn bright," he said.

I shrugged and went on in and he followed. We sat down at a table. At
Oswiak's you can drink at the bar if you want to, but none of the
regulars do.

Paddy jigged over and said: "Welcome home, Doc." He's a Liverpool
Irishman; they talk like Scots, some say, but they sound almost like
Brooklyn to me.

"Hello, Paddy. I brought somebody uglier than you. Now what do you say?"

Paddy jigged around the kid in a half-circle with his sleeve flapping
and then flopped into a chair when the record stopped. He took a big
drink from the seidel and said: "Can he do this?" Paddy stretched his
face into an awful grin that showed his teeth. He has three of them. The
kid laughed and asked me: "What the hell did you drag me into here for?"

"Paddy says he'll buy drinks for the house the day anybody uglier than
he is comes in."

Oswiak's wife waddled over for the order and the kid asked us what we'd
have. I figured I could start drinking, so it was three double scotches.

After the second round, Paddy started blowing about how they took his
arm off without any anesthetics except a bottle of gin because the
red-ball freight he was tangled up in couldn't wait.

That brought some of the other old gimps over to the table with their
stories.

Blackie Bauer had been sitting in a boxcar with his legs sticking
through the door when the train started with a jerk. Wham, the door
closed. Everybody laughed at Blackie for being that dumb in the first
place, and he got mad.

Sam Fireman has palsy. This week he was claiming he used to be a
watchmaker before he began to shake. The week before, he'd said he was a
brain surgeon. A woman I didn't know, a real old Boxcar Bertha, dragged
herself over and began some kind of story about how her sister married a
