
       *       *       *       *       *

"Let me get this straight, Jim." Holland's pudgy face was sober, his
eyes serious. "You started out by thinking Jean was showing paranoid
tendencies, and offhand I'm inclined to agree with you. Overnight you
changed your mind and began thinking that maybe, just maybe, she might
be right. Honestly, don't you suspect your own reasons for such a quick
switch?"

"Sure I do, Bob," Blair said worriedly. "Do you think I haven't beaten
out my brains over it? I know the idea's monstrous. But just suppose
there _was_ a branch of humanity--if you could call it human--living off
us unsuspected. A branch that knows how to eliminate--competition--almost
by instinct."

"Now hold on a minute, Jim. You've taken Jean's reaction to this last
death, plus a random association with a cuckoo clock, and here you are
with a perfectly wild hypothesis. You've always been rational and
analytical, old man. Surely you can realize that a perfectly normal urge
to rationalize Jean's conclusions is making you concur with them against
your better judgment."

"Bob--"

"I'm not through, Jim. Just consider how fantastic the whole idea is.
Because of a series of accidents you can't accuse a child of planned
murder. Nor can you further hypothesize that all orphans are
changelings, imbued with an instinct to polish off their
foster-siblings."

"Not _all_ orphans, Bob. Not planned murder, either. Take it easy. Just
some of them. A few of them--different. Growing up. Placing their young
with well-to-do families somehow, and then dropping unobtrusively out of
the picture. And the young growing up, and always the natural children
dying off in one way or another. The changeling inherits, and the
process is repeated, step by step. Can you say it's impossible? Do you
_know_ it's impossible?"

"I wouldn't say impossible, Jim. But I _would_ say that your thesis has
a remarkably low index of probability. Why don't others suspect, besides
you?"

Jim spread his hands hopelessly. "I don't know. Maybe they do. Maybe
these creatures--if they do exist--have some means of protection we
don't know about."

"You need more than maybes, Jim. What about Joanna Simmons' mother?
According to your theories she should have been well off. Was she?"

"No, she wasn't," Jim admitted reluctantly. "She came here and took a
job with my outfit. Said she was divorced, and had lived in New York.
Then she quit to take a position in California, and we agreed to board
Joanna until she got settled. Warrenburg was the town. She was killed
there quite horribly, in a terrible auto accident."

"Have you any reason for suspecting skulduggery? Honestly, Jim? Or for
labelling her one of your human--er--cuckoos?"

"Only my hunch. We had a newspaper clipping, and a letter from the
coroner. We even sent the money for her funeral. But those things could
be faked, Bob."

"Give me some evidence that they _were_ faked, and I'll be happy to
reinspect your views." Holland levered his avoirdupois out of his chair.
"In the meantime, relax. Take a trip if you can. Try not to worry."

Jim grinned humorlessly. "Mustn't let myself get excited, eh? Okay, Bob.
But if I get hold of any evidence that I think you might accept, I'll be
back. The last laugh and all that. Pending developments you take it
easy, too. Don't let yourself get overworked. Stay out of the sun. So
long now."

"So long, Jim."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was cool in the Warrenburg city hall, though outside the streets were
sizzling.

"Sorry, Mr. Blair," said the stout, motherly woman with the horn-rimmed
glasses. "We've no record of a Helen Simmons. Nothing whatever." She
closed the file with resolute finality.
