
The reporters stopped their scuffling and followed Stern's gaze.

       *       *       *       *       *

Something old and leathery and horrible was emerging from the circular
doorway. Several tentacles, like so many snakes, slid around the hand
rail which ran down the steps. Then, at the top, it paused.

Stern felt an immediate and unreasoning hate for the thing, whatever it
was, a hate so strong that he forgot to feel fear. It seemed to him to
combine the repulsive qualities of a spider and a toad. The body, fat
and repugnant, was covered by a loose skin, dull and leathery, and the
fatness seemed to be pulled downward below the lower tentacles like an
insect's body, until it was wider at the bottom than at the top.

Like a salt shaker, Stern thought.

It turned its head--it had no neck; the loose skin of the body just
turned with it--and looked back inside the sphere. The head resembled a
toad's, but a long trident tongue slid in and out quickly, changing the
resemblance to that of a malformed snake.

From the interior, Dr. Curtis appeared beside the creature and stood
there vaguely for a moment. Stern noticed that his clothes seemed just
as new as when he had left, but he had grown a long, untrimmed beard,
and his face had a vacant expression, as if he were hypnotized.

The creature looked upward at Curtis, who was head and shoulders taller,
and its resemblance changed again in Stern's mind, so that now it looked
like a dog, at least in attitude. From its mouth came a low hissing
noise.

[Illustration: Illustrated by WILLER]

Curtis looked down at the dog-spider-toad, his eyes slowly beginning
to focus. The creature wiggled like a seal with a fish in sight, then
slid and bumped down the steps, with Curtis following him.

"Clyde!" cried Beryl and rushed toward Curtis.

The outstretched tentacles of the beast stopped her, but at a touch from
Curtis they fell away and Beryl was in his arms.

Stern watched the scene sourly and with rage in his heart. Why hadn't
Clyde waited another year? Then nothing could have changed things. Now
he would lose not only Beryl, but the management of the money that was
left, and the marketing of new patents on the machine. Curtis did not
approve of speculation, especially when it lost money.

"You've changed, Clyde," Beryl was saying as she hugged him. "What is
the matter--do you need a doctor?"

"No, I don't want a doctor, but I have to get home," said Curtis.

Stern felt anger again beating in his brain like heavy surf on a beach.
Curtis was sick. The least he could have done was die. Well, maybe he
still would. And if he didn't he could be helped to--Stern saw the beast
looking at him intently, malevolently. Its face might have looked almost
human, now that it was so close, if it had possessed eyebrows and hair.
As it was, its nose rose abruptly and flared into two really enormous
nostrils, but its mouth looked small and wrinkled, like that of an old
grandmother without any teeth.

They turned to the doorway without noticing the absence of the
reporters, who had long since run off to telephone and get
photographers.

Curtis walked slowly. He would stop for a moment, look about as if
expecting something entirely different, and then he would move forward
again.

They all got into the car, Curtis and Beryl on the front seat, with
Beryl driving, and Stern and the creature in the rear. As Beryl drove,
Stern looked savagely at the back of Curtis's head, but he felt the
beast staring at him balefully. Could it be a mind reader? That was
ridiculous. How could anything that couldn't speak read a person's mind?

He turned to study it. The Martian, if that was what it was, had only
six tentacles, three on each side. The lower ones were heavy and almost
as thick as legs. The upper ones were small and were obviously used as
hands, while it was possible that the middle ones could be used either
way. A series of suction cups or sucking pads were at the end of each
tentacle. With equipment like this, it could walk right up the side of a
building, except, perhaps, for the higher gravity of Earth.

Stern could smell it now, a dry, desert smell, and that made it more
revolting than ever. They were born to hate each other.

       *       *       *       *       *

When they got home, Beryl was all solicitousness. The way a woman is
when she has a man to impress, Stern thought.

"Just sit right here in your old chair," she told Curtis, "and I'll call
a doctor. Then I'll put some water on to heat." But first she knelt by
his side and laid her head on his breast. "Oh, darling," she said with a
sob, "Why did you wait so long? I've missed you so."

A very good act, Stern told himself bitterly, without believing it at
all.

She got up and turned toward Stern. "Will you help me get some water on,
Al?" she asked. "I'm going to phone."

He went into the kitchen. He knew where the kettle was, the
refrigerator, the mixings. He could hear her dialing, and then, before
