
"Haven't you ever heard of a savage who gets in bad with his
witch-doctor and is killed by magic? The savage is convinced, having
seen or heard of other cases, that he _can_ be killed. The witch-doctor
sees to it he's told he _will_ be killed. And sometimes the savage
actually dies--"

"From poison, I've always thought."

"The poison of fear. The physical changes that accompany fear, magnified
beyond belief by belief itself."

"But how in the world could all this have affected Cappy? He wasn't a
savage. And he was elderly, Ted. A bad heart, maybe. A stroke.
Anything."

"He passed his pre-flight physical only a year ago. And--well, he lived
all alone. He was careful not to let you see it, but I know he worried
about these three trees on his place. And I know he got back from the
Meeting in a worried state of mind. Then, obviously, the trees
moved--grouped themselves around his cabin within easy range. But don't
be afraid of them, Naomi. So long as you're not, they can't hurt you.
They're not bothering us now."

"No. But where's Richard?"

Naomi's eyes swept past Ted, encompassing the cabin. No Richard! He'd
been left outside ...

Glass tinkled and crashed as she flung back the cabin door. "Richard!
Richard!"

Her child was not in sight. Nor within earshot, it seemed.

"Richard Heckscher! Where are you?" Sanity returned with the
conventional primness. And it brought her answer.

"Here I am, Mommie! Look-at!"

He was in a tree! He was fifteen feet off the ground, high in the
branches of a tree-thing, swaying--

For an instant, dread flowed through Naomi as if in her bloodstream and
something was cutting off her breath. Then, as the hands over mouth and
throat withdrew, she saw they were Ted's. She let him drag her into the
cabin and close the broken door.

"Better not scare Richard," he said quietly, shoving her gently into a
chair. "He might fall."

Dumbly she caught her breath, waiting for the bawling out she'd earned.

But Ted said, "Richard keeps us safe. So long as we fear for him, and
not ourselves--"

That was easy to do. Outside, she heard a piping call: "Look at me now,
Mommie!"

"Showing off!" she gasped. In a flashing vision, Richard was half boy,
half vulture, flapping to the ground with a broken wing.

"Here," said Ted, picking up a notebook that had been on the table.
"Here's Cappy's present. A homemade picture book. Bait."

"Let _me_ use it!" she said. "Richard may have seen I was scared just
now."

Outside again, under the tree, she called, "Here's Cappy's present,
Richard. He's gone away and left it for you."

Would he notice how her voice had gone up half an octave, become flat
and shrill?

"I'm coming down," Richard said. "Let me down, tree."

He seemed to be struggling. The branches were cagelike. He was caught!

Naomi's struggle was with her voice. "How did you _ever_ get up there?"
she called.

"The tree let me up, Mommie," Richard explained solemnly, "but he won't
let me down!" He whimpered a little.

He must _not_ become frightened! "You tell that tree you've got to come
right down this instant!" she ordered.

