creature, a feeling of confidence might appear.

Since Mazechazz came from a planet of super-heated desert and scrub
resembling the Karoo of South Africa, the resemblance could have been
bettered, but it was well within the allowable limits set forth in the
Inner Mandate. And in Galactic Psychology, every trick counted. For
persuasion was the chief weapon of the Sirian Combine. Outright force
was absolutely forbidden, save by the aforesaid vote of the council.
Every weapon in the book of persuasion was used to bring intelligent
races into the Combine, and persuasion is a thing of infinite variety.


As these thoughts flashed through Powers' mind, he seated himself in a
plain chair and adjusted the Universal Speaker to his mouth. Beside
him, on a more elaborate chair, tailored to fit his tail, Mazechazz did
the same, while the four Falsethsa seated themselves on low stools and
took similar instruments from the oblong table which separated them
from the two Surveymen. Deep in the bowels of the ship, a giant
translator switched on, to simultaneously translate and record the
mutually alien tongues as they were spoken. Adjustable extensions on
the speakers brought the sound to the bone of the skull. For different
life forms, different instruments would have been necessary and were
provided for.

Mazechazz, as "captain," opened the proceedings.

"Since this is our last session with you, we hope some fresh proposals
have occurred to your honorable council during your absence," hummed
the speaker through Powers' skull.

He who was designated First among the council of the Mureess answered.

"We have no new proposals, nor indeed had we ever any. Trade would be
welcome, but we vitally need nothing you or your Combine have
described, captain. We have all the minerals we need and the Great
Mother--he meant the sea--provides food. We will soon go into space
ourselves and meet as equals with you. We cannot tolerate what you call
an 'observer,' who seems to us a spy, and not subject to our laws by
your own definition. That is all we have to say."

That does it, thought Powers glumly. The cold--and entirely
accurate--description of a Planetary representative of the Sirian
Combine was the final clincher. The intensely proud and chauvinistic
Falsethsa would tolerate no interference.

Mazechazz gave no indication that he had heard. He tried again.

"In addition to trade and education, general advancement of the
populace," murmured the mike, "have you considered defense?" He paused.
"Not all races who travel in space are friendly. A few are starkly
inimical, hating all other forms of life. Could you defend yourselves,
Honorable Sirs, against such?"

It was obvious from the speed of the answer that the Council of Mureess
had considered, if not anticipated this question. The second member
spoke, an obvious pre-assignment.

"In all our long history, you are our first contact with star
travelers. Yet we are not defenseless. The Great Mother contains not
only food, fish and plants which we harvest, but many strong and
terrible beasts. Very few are left to disturb us. In addition, the
implications of your ship have not escaped us, and our scientists are
even now adapting some of our atomic devices used in mining to other
ends." The voice contained a faint hint of pride as it ended. We got
guns, too, buddy, it said, and we ain't pushovers.

The First of the Council spoke again. "Let me be plain, Respected
Star-farers. It seems obvious to us that you have learned most of what
we represent as a council, if not all. We are the heads of the Great
Clans and we will not change. It hardly seems likely that you represent
a society based on heredity if you include the diverse and nameless
breeds of creature you have shown us on your screens. We do not want
such an amalgam on our world causing unrest and disturbances of public
order. Still less do we desire authoritarian interference with the
ordered life we have developed. Your requests are one and severally
refused. There will be no 'observer.' Trade, regulated by us, will be
welcome. Otherwise, should you choose not to be bound by our laws, we
must respectfully and finally bid you farewell. When at some future
date, we develop ships such as yours, we may reconsider." The speaker
paused, looked at his three confreres, who nodded silently. The First
stared arrogantly at Mazechazz, and continued.

"Finally, we have decided to place a ban on further landings by aliens
