presented overtones of a small sortie.

Hennings first nodded to the first, a youngish man whose air suggested
technical competence more than the assurance of great authority. The
officer placed his brief case upon the glistening surface of a large
table and touched a switch on the flap.

"It's as well to be sure, sir," the commodore approved. "Our men have
been unable to detect any devices, but the walls may have ears."

"They won't scan through this scrambler, sir," asserted the young
officer.

Hennings accepted a seat at the table and looked up to one of the
others.

"Mirelli's Star," an older officer reported briskly. "The same
situation prevails, with both sides having landed surface troops in
force on Mirelli II, Mirelli III, and Mirelli V, the fourth planet
being inhabited by a partly civilized, nonhuman race protected under
the Terran Convention."

"Recent engagements?"

"No, sir. Maneuvering continues, but actual encounters have declined
in frequency. Casualties are modest and evenly matched. General
Nilssen on Mirelli III continues to receive Polluxian agents seeking
his defection."

"I never thought to ask," murmured Hennings. "Is he really a distant
connection of the Polluxian Nilssen family?"

"It is improbable, sir, but they are polite enough to accept the
pretense. Of course, he rejects every offer in a very high-minded
manner, and seems to be making an adequate impression of chivalry."

He stepped back at Henning's nod, to be replaced by another officer.

"One minor space skirmish in the Agohki system to report, sir. The
admiral in command appears to have recouped after the error of two
days ago, when that Polluxian detachment was so badly mauled. He
arranged the capture of three of our cruisers."

"Was that not a trifle rash?" demanded Hennings.

"Intelligence is inclined to think not, sir. The ships were armed only
with weapons listed as general knowledge items. The crews were not
only trained in prisoner-of-war tactics, but also well supplied with
small luxuries. The Polluxian fleet in that system is known to have
been in space for several months, so a friendly effect is
anticipated."

Hennings considered the condensed report proffered for his perusal. He
noted that the Polluxians had been quite gentlemanly about notifying
Ursan headquarters of the capture and of the complete lack of
casualties. He also saw that while the message was ostensibly directed
to the Federation flagship, it had been beamed in such fashion as to
be conveniently intercepted at the secret Ursan Federation
headquarters on Agohki VII.

"That was a bit rude of them," he commented. "We have never dragged
their secrets into the open."

"On the other hand, sir," the commodore suggested, "it may be an
