the planning his own. It was like complimenting himself.

He cleared his throat and stood, smiling his most benevolent smile to
reassure Mrs. Atkinson.

"Ah, my dear. Is George about?"

Again, the woman's hand skittered to her throat.

"He's not ill, surely?" Loveral asked, although this, too, was silly,
because foods, selected and prepared for utmost nutrition, packed
and frozen to be doled out in weekly quantities, purified air,
disease-killing serums, simply written folders on exercise, and of
course Loveral's own philosophies of quiet, peaceful living--all of this
guarded well the health of Dream Planet's flock.

The woman shook her head. "No, George is fine. He's just--sleeping, I
think."

"Rest is nature's finest tonic," said Loveral, and hearing his voice
thought suddenly there was hardly anything he could say any more that
might not sound a bit out of place in this peaceful world. Rest to the
man who had nothing to do ceased to be a tonic.

"Yes, yes," said Loveral. "May we just sit down, my dear?"

Mrs. Atkinson jerked a hand toward one of the chairs and then wound her
fingers.

Loveral sat down and leaned back, smiling his most charming smile.
"Perhaps George might awaken after a bit?"

"Oh, yes," the woman said, her eyes flickering, and she sat upon the
edge of one chair, like a bird perched upon a thin wire.

Loveral waited, legs crossed, leaning his head back against the silken
softness of the chair. It was so good to relax these days. The business
of watching and of caring for his flock was trying. When you have
brought an entire community of people at great expense through space,
guaranteeing to give them a life of constant comfort and ease, so that
they might dream and think as they wander through the flowers and the
leaves, their thoughts cleansed of worry about work and responsibility,
then you have a job. Loveral was most busy, busier than his heritage of
wealth ever before had allowed, seeing to all of this.

But he also was most content--with everything except Atkinson.

Mrs. Atkinson teetered on the edge of her chair, as though she might at
any moment go flying across the room in a crazy gyration. There was
something about her eyes, Loveral noticed, while he peacefully nodded in
the chair. Fear, perhaps.

If so, he probably had been right. He tightened himself, listening.
There it was again. The sound. Just as he had heard it a day before when
he had passed near the house. He leaned forward quickly.

Mrs. Atkinson jumped.

Loveral smiled. "Didn't I hear a noise of some sort, my dear?"

"Noise?" the woman said, as though her own voice were the sound of an
echo.

"An odd noise," Loveral said, his eyes searching.

The woman's hands fluttered about her dress.

Loveral stood up. "Would you mind if I just glanced about, my dear?"

The woman didn't answer, but Loveral was already moving across the room
toward a door. He opened it and walked down a hall. The noise grew
stronger. He threw open another door.

       *       *       *       *       *

He stood watching while George Atkinson spun around, dark eyes flashing,
hair tousled. There was a two days' growth of beard darkening Atkinson's
