cigarette. At that moment the door banged open. Nerves raw, Bettijean
cried out. Andy's cigarette tumbled from his trembling fingers.

"Sergeant," the chicken colonel barked, parading into the office.

Andy swore under his breath and eyed the two young officers who
trailed after the colonel. Emotionally exhausted, he had to clamp his
jaw against a huge laugh that struggled up in his throat. For just an
instant there, the colonel had reminded him of a movie version of
General Rommel strutting up and down before his tanks. But it wasn't a
swagger stick the colonel had tucked under his arm. It was a folded
newspaper. Opening it, the colonel flung it down on Andy's desk.

"RED PLAGUE SWEEPS NATION," the scare headline screamed. Andy's first
glance caught such phrases as "alleged Russian plot" and "germ
warfare" and "authorities hopelessly baffled."

Snatching the paper, Andy balled it and hurled it from him. "That'll
help a lot," he growled hoarsely.

"Well, then, Sergeant." The colonel tried to relax his square face,
but tension rode every weathered wrinkle and fear glinted behind the
pale gray eyes. "So you finally recognize the gravity of the
situation."

Andy's head snapped up, heated words searing towards his lips.
Bettijean stepped quickly around the desk and laid a steady hand on
his shoulder.

"Colonel," she said levelly, "you should know better than that."

A shocked young captain exploded, "Corporal. Maybe you'd better report
to--"

"All right," Andy said sharply.

For a long moment he stared at his clenched fists. Then he exhaled
slowly and, to the colonel, flatly and without apology, he said,
"You'll have to excuse the people in this office if they overlook some
of the G.I. niceties. We've been without sleep for two days, we're
surviving on sandwiches and coffee, and we're fighting a war here that
makes every other one look like a Sunday School picnic." He felt
Bettijean's hand tighten reassuringly on his shoulder and he gave her
a tired smile. Then he hunched forward and picked up a report. "So say
what you came here to say and let us get back to work."

"Sergeant," the captain said, as if reading from a manual,
"insubordination cannot be tolerated, even under emergency conditions.
Your conduct here will be noted and--"

"Oh, good heavens!" Bettijean cried, her fingers biting into Andy's
shoulder. "Do you have to come in here trying to throw your weight
around when this man--"

"That's enough," the colonel snapped. "I had hoped that you two would
co-operate, but...." He let the sentence trail off as he swelled up a
bit with his own importance. "I have turned Washington upside down to
get these two officers from the surgeon general's office. Sergeant.
Corporal. You are relieved of your duties as of this moment. You will
report to my office at once for suitable disciplinary action."

Bettijean sucked in a strained breath and her hand flew to her mouth.
"But you can't--"

"Let's go," Andy said, pushing up from his chair. Ignoring the brass,
he turned to her and brushed his lips across hers. "Let them sweat a
while. Let 'em have the whole stinking business. Whatever they do to
us, at least we can get some sleep."

"But you can't quit now," Bettijean protested. "These brass hats don't
know from--"

"Corporal!" the colonel roared.

       *       *       *       *       *

And from the door, an icy voice said, "Yes, colonel?"

The colonel and his captains wheeled, stared and saluted. "Oh,
general," the colonel said. "I was just--"

"I know," the brigadier said, stepping into the room. "I've been
listening to you. And I thought I suggested that everybody leave the
sergeant and his staff alone."

"But, general, I--"

The general showed the colonel his back and motioned Andy into his
chair. He glanced to Bettijean and a smile warmed his wedge face.
"Corporal, were you speaking just then as a woman or as a soldier?"

Crimson erupted into Bettijean's face and her tight laugh said many
things. She shrugged. "Both I guess."

The general waved her to a chair and, oblivious of the colonel, pulled
up a chair for himself. The last trace of humor drained from his face
as he leaned elbows on the desk. "Andy, this is even worse than we had
feared."

Andy fumbled for a cigarette and Bettijean passed him a match. A
captain opened his mouth to speak, but the colonel shushed him.

"I've just come from Intelligence," the general said. "We haven't had
a report--nothing from our agents, from the Diplomatic Corps, from the
