
"A carry-over from Earth, no doubt," he commented. "An unusual one, too,
for a culture without technology."

When the meal was over, the two men from the ship were conducted on a
tour of the area. It was a neat agricultural community, with broad
fields, well-constructed buildings and, a short distance from Saranta's
castle-like home, a village in which artisans and craftsmen plied their
peaceful trades.

Peo tried to notice what he thought Tardo would look for on such a short
inspection. The Council agent, he knew, had had intensive training and
many years of experience. It was hard for Peo to judge what factors
Tardo would consider significant--probably very minor ones that the
average man would not notice, he thought.

Tardo had seemed most intent on the question of slavery, and Peo looked
for signs of it. He could see none. The people of the planet had had
time to conceal some things, of course. But the people they saw in the
village wore a proud air of independence no slave could assume.

Saranta apologized for their having to walk, explaining that there was
no other means of transportation on the planet.

"And, without transportation, you can understand why we have not been
able to develop a technology," he added. "We hope transport will be
included in the first assistance you will give us."

Tardo asked about the fields.

"I see there is no one working them," he said. "Is that done by the
villagers?"

"Our labor supply is transient," answered Saranta after a moment's
hesitation. "The laborers who will work our fields--for a wage, of
course--are probably in the next town or the one beyond it now."

Alpha Persei was sinking in the western sky when Tardo and Peo took
their leave of Saranta and made their way down the road toward their
planetary landing craft.

"It looks like a good world to me," said Peo. "If tomorrow's inspection
is as satisfactory, I suppose you will recommend the beginning of
technical aid?"

"There will be no inspection tour tomorrow, and I shall recommend
against aid at this time," replied Tardo. "I've seen enough."

"Why?" asked Peo, surprised.

"There are two classes of people on this planet, and we've seen only
one," said Tardo. "Those we have seen are freemen. The others are no
better than animals. We give no aid that helps men tighten their hold
over their fellows."

