"Oh, I don't know," Broyk said, a little wistfully. "I sometimes think
it was a mistake for Center to do away with sex. It must have been
interesting."

"Atavist!" Kial snapped in horror.

Had his people's emotional make-up provided for blushing, Kial would
undoubtedly have turned beet-red. Broyk's words had caused him acute
embarrassment.

       *       *       *       *       *

As he sat reflecting upon his strange companion, he suddenly began to
feel a sensation he had often heard about but never before had
experienced. Terror and dismay filled him as he sought to throw off the
probing finger that was penetrating his mind.

He looked at Broyk. There was the faintest notion of a smile on the
other's face as he said: "Yes, Kial--I am a Telepath."

Kial's mind reeled. He felt himself on the brink of some gigantic abyss
and then, as suddenly as it had come, the searching sensation faded
away.

"Since you are unable to enter my mind," Broyk said calmly, "it's only
fair that I tell you about myself. You were right--I'm an atavist. Even
in period 8000, such things can happen. Always such creatures are
destroyed after their first psychotests, but my case was different.
The Controller who bred me was only a dabbler in such things. I
was a failure, but he took a fancy to me. I was allowed to mature
secretly--few people knew of my existence. When I reached my majority my
presence became dangerous and I was sent back into time to try and find
the proper place for myself. And I think I've found it--here!"

Kial was a very amazed young man. "But such a barbarous age," he
complained. "Sex and atom bombs and everything ..."

"Remember," Broyk smiled, "these people are the forebears of the
geniuses who created Center and the Galactic Empire. They'll survive,
despite their barbarism. The existence of Center is proof."

"It's rather horrible to contemplate," Kial said thoughtfully, calmer
now, "and yet, this might really be a great age. In a way I almost envy
you."

"Of course you do," Broyk said. "You have certain tendencies--they
bother you, although you manage to hide them well. I discovered them
when I took the liberty of telepathing you. Artificial Genetics isn't
perfect, even in our time--perhaps because we originally sprang from
man. Perhaps we'll never be quite perfect, because of that, even after
thousands of periods of breeding."

Kial took another look at the loving young couple. "It--it might be fun,
after all."

Broyk laughed. "You needn't envy me at all, you know."
