agents."

"Not exactly. The agent usually persuades the writer to make any such
changes, as the agent is considered an authority on what will or will
not sell."

"The writers always agree?"

"Not always. If stubbornness is encountered, the agent merely shelves
the manuscript and tells the writer it has been repeatedly rejected."

The Coroner glanced at the two policemen. Both were obviously puzzled.
They returned the Coroner's look, apparently ready to move on his order.

The thin, mirthless smile was still on Cole's lips. Maniacal violence
could lie just behind it. Possibly Cole was armed. Better to play for
time--try to quiet the madness within. The Coroner continued speaking.
"You Martians have infiltrated other fields also?"

"Oh, yes. We are in government, industry, education. We are everywhere.
We have, of course, concentrated mainly upon the ranks of labor and in
the masses of ordinary, everyday people. It is from these sources that
we will draw our shock troops when the time comes."

"That time will be--?"

"Soon, very soon."

The Coroner could not forebear a smile. "You find the science-fiction
writers more dangerous than the true scientists?"

"Oh, yes. The scientific mind tends to reject anything science
disproves." There was now a mocking edge to Cole's voice. "Science can
easily prove we do not exist."

"But the science-fiction writer?"

"The danger from the imaginative mind cannot be overestimated."

The Coroner knew he must soon order the officers to lay hands upon this
madman. He regretted his own lack of experience with such situations. He
tried to put a soothing, confidential note into his voice. "You said a
moment ago that if you'd had the right kind of weapon to use on Smith--"

Cole reached into his pocket and brought out what appeared to be a
fountain pen. "This. It kills instantly and leaves no mark whatever.
Heart failure is invariably stated as the cause of death."

The Coroner felt better. Obviously, Cole was not armed. As the Coroner
raised a hand to signal the officers, Cole said, "You understand, of
course, that I can't let you live."

"Take this man into custody."

The police officers did not move. The Coroner turned on them sharply.
They were smiling. Cole pointed the fountain pen. The Coroner felt a
