information on the Redford Project into the hands of the
opposition--it was no longer fashionable to call Communists "the
enemy"--there was no reason why he shouldn't be allowed to contribute
to the American efforts to bridge space.

Three times in the five months since Bern had joined the project,
agents of the Soviet government had made attempts to contact the
physicist. Three times the FBI, warned by S.M.M.R. agents, had quietly
blocked the contact. Konrad Bern had been effectively isolated.

But, at the project site itself, equipment failure had become
increasingly more frequent, all out of proportion to the normal
accident rate in any well-regulated laboratory. The work of the
project had practically come to a standstill; the ultra-secret project
reports to the President were beginning to show less and less progress
in the basic research, and more and more progress in repairing damaged
equipment. Apparently, though, increasing efficiency in repair work
was self-neutralizing; repairing an instrument in half the time merely
meant that it could break down twice as often.

It had to be sabotage. And yet, not even the S.M.M.R. agents could
find any trace of intentional damage nor any thought patterns that
would indicate deliberate damage.

And Senator John Peter Gonzales quite evidently did _not_ want to face
the implications of _that_ particular fact.

"We're going to have to send an agent in," Taggert repeated.

(_That's my cue_, thought the young man on the fifth floor as he
crushed out his cigarette and got up from the chair.)

"I don't know how we're going to manage it," said the senator. "What
excuse do we have for putting a new man on the Redford team?"

Brian Taggert grinned. "What they need is an expert repair
technician--a man who knows how to build and repair complex research
instruments. He doesn't have to know anything about the purpose of the
team itself, all he has to do is keep the equipment in good shape."

Senator Gonzalez let a slow smile spread over his face. "You've been
gulling me, you snake. All right; I deserved it. Tell him to come in."

As the door opened, Taggert said: "Senator Gonzales, may I present Mr.
David MacHeath? He's our man, I think."

       *       *       *       *       *

David MacHeath watched a blue line wriggle its way erratically across
the face of an oscilloscope. "The wave form is way off," he said
flatly, "and the frequency is slithering all over the place."

He squinted at the line for a moment then spoke to the man standing
nearby. "Signal Harry to back her off two degrees, then run her up
slowly, ten minutes at a time."

The other man flickered the key on the side of the small
carbide-Welsbach lamp. The shutters blinked, sending pulses of light
down the length of the ten-foot diameter glass-walled tube in which
the men were working. Far down the tube, MacHeath could see the
answering flicker from Harry, a mile and a half away in the darkness.

MacHeath watched the screen again. After a few seconds, he said:
"O.K.! Hold it!"

Again the lamp flashed.

"Well, it isn't perfect," MacHeath said, "but it's all we can do from
here. We'll have to evacuate the tube to get her in perfect balance.
Tell Harry to knock off for the day."

While the welcome message was being flashed, MacHeath shut off the
testing instruments and disconnected them. It was possible to
compensate a little for the testing equipment, but a telephone, or
even an electric flashlight, would simply add to the burden.

Bill Griffin shoved down the key on the lamp he was holding and locked
it into place. The shutters remained open, and the lamp shed a beam of
white light along the shining walls of the cylindrical tube. "How much
longer do you figure it'll take, Dave?" he asked.

"Another shift, at least," said MacHeath, picking up the compact,
shielded instrument case. "You want to carry that mat?"

[Illustration]

Griffin picked up the thick sponge-rubber mat that the instrument case
had been sitting on, and the two men started off down the tube,
walking silently on the sponge-rubber-soled shoes which would not
scratch the glass underfoot.

"Any indication yet as to who our saboteur is?" Griffin asked.

"I'm not sure," MacHeath admitted. "I've picked up a couple of leads,
but I don't know if they mean anything or not."

"I wonder if there _is_ a saboteur," Griffin said musingly. "Maybe
it's just a run of bad luck. It could happen, you know. A statistical
run of--"

"You don't believe that, any more than I do," MacHeath said.

"No. But I find it even harder to believe that a materialistic
philosophy like Communism could evolve any workable psionic
discipline."

"So do I," agreed MacHeath.

"But it can't be physical sabotage," Griffin argued. "There's not a
trace of it--anywhere. It _has_ to be psionic."

"Right," said MacHeath, grinning as he saw what was coming next.

"But we've already eliminated that. So?" Griffin nodded firmly as if
in full agreement with himself. "So we follow the dictum of the
Master: 'Eliminate the impossible; whatever is left, no matter how
improbable, is the truth.' And, since there is absolutely nothing
left, there is no truth. At the bottom, the whole thing is merely a
matter of mental delusion."

"Sherlock Holmes would be proud of you, Bill," MacHeath said. "And so
am I."

Griffin looked at MacHeath oddly. "I wish I was a halfway decent
telepath, I'd like to know what's going on in your preconscious."

"You'd have to dig deeper than that, I'm afraid," MacHeath said
ruefully. "As soon as my subconscious has solved the problem, I'll let
you know."

"I've changed my mind," said Griffin cheerfully. "I don't envy your
telepathy. I don't envy a guy who has to TP his own subconscious to
find out what he's thinking."

MacHeath chuckled softly as he turned the bolt that opened the door in
the "gun" end of the stripped-nuclei accelerator. The seals broke with
a soft hiss. Evidently, the barometric pressure outside the
two-mile-long underground tube had changed slightly during the time
they had been down there.

"It'll be a week before we can test it," MacHeath said in a tired
voice. "Even after we get it partly in balance. It'll take that long
to evacuate the tube and sweep it clean."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was the first sentence he had spoken in the past hour or so, and it
was purely for the edification of the man who was standing on the
other side of the air lock, although neither Griffin nor MacHeath had
actually seen him as yet.

Griffin was not a telepath in the sense that the S.M.M.R. used the
word, but to a non-psionicist, he would have appeared to be one.
Membership in the "core" group of the _Society for Mystical and
Metaphysical Research_ required, above all, _understanding_. And, with
that understanding, a conversation between two members need consist
only of an occasional gesture and a key word now and then.

The word "understanding" needs emphasis. Without understanding of
another human mind, no human mind can be completely effective. Without
