He sat behind his desk for a few minutes longer, a bearlike man with a
round, pale face and eyes circled with dark rings and heavy pouches,
all of which had the effect of making him look like a rather sleepy
specimen of the giant panda. He finished the few papers he had been
working on, stacked them together, rose, and went into the outer
office, where he told his staff that he was going out for a short
walk.

By the time he arrived at the brownstone building in Arlington and was
pushing open the door of Brian Taggert's office, Taggert had received
reports from New York and had started other chains of action. As soon
as Senator Kerotski came in, Taggert pushed the letter across the desk
toward him. "Check that."

Kerotski read the letter, and a look of relief came over his round
face. "Not the same typewriter or paper, but this is him, all right.
What more do we know?"

"Plenty. Hold on, and I'll give you a complete rundown." He picked up
the telephone and began speaking in a low voice. It was an
ordinary-sounding conversation; even if the wire had been tapped, no
one who was not a "core" member of the S.M.M.R. would have known that
the conversation was about anything but an esoteric article to be
printed in _The Metaphysicist_--something about dowsing rods.

The core membership had one thing in common: _understanding_.

Consider plutonium. Imagine someone dropping milligram-sized pellets
of the metal into an ordinary Florence flask. (In an inert atmosphere,
of course; there is no point in ruining a good analogy with side
reactions.) More than two and a half million of those little pellets
could be dropped into the flask without the operator having anything
more to worry about than if he were dropping grains of lead or gold
into the container. But after the five millionth, dropping them in by
hand would only be done by the ignorant, the stupid, or the
indestructible. A qualitative change takes place.

So with understanding. As a human mind increases its ability to
understand another human mind, it eventually reaches a critical point,
and the mind itself changes. And, at that point, the Greek letter
_psi_ ceases to be a symbol for the unknown.

When understanding has passed the critical point, conversation as it
is carried on by most human beings becomes unnecessarily redundant.
Even in ordinary conversation, a single gesture--a shrug of the
shoulders, a snap of the fingers, or a nose pinched between thumb and
forefinger--can express an idea that would take many words and much
more time. A single word--"slob," "nazi," "saint"--can be more
descriptive than the dozens of words required to define it. All that
is required is that the meanings of the symbols be understood.

The ability to manipulate symbols is the most powerful tool of the
human mind; a mind which can manipulate them _effectively_ is, in
every sense of the word, truly human.

Even without telepathy, it was possible for two S.M.M.R. agents to
carry on a conversation above and around ordinary chit-chat. It took
longer, naturally; when speaking without the chit-chat, it was
possible to convey in seconds information that would have taken
several minutes to get over in ordinary conversation.

       *       *       *       *       *

Senator Kerotski only listened to a small part of the phone
discussion. He knew most of the story.

In the past eight months, six anonymous letters had been received by
various companies. As Taggert had once put it, in quotes, "We seem to
have an Abudah chest containing a patent Hag who comes out and
prophesies disasters, with spring complete."

The Big Bend Power Reactor, near Marfa, Texas, had been warned that
their stellarator would blow. The letter was dismissed as "crackpot,"
and no precautions were taken. The explosion killed nine men and cut
off the power in the area for three hours, causing other accidents due
to lack of power.

The merchant submarine _Bandar-log_, plying her way between Ceylon and
Japan, had ignored the warning sent to her owners and had never been
heard from again.

In the Republic of Yemen, an oil refinery caught fire and destroyed
millions of dollars worth of property in spite of the anonymous letter
that had foretold the disaster.

The Prince Charles Dam in Central Africa had broken and thousands had
drowned because those in charge had relegated a warning letter to the
cylindrical file.

A mine cave-in in Canada had extinguished three lives because a
similar letter had been ignored.

By the time the fifth letter had been received, the S.M.M.R. had
received the information and had begun its investigation. As an _ex
officio_ organ of the United States Government, it had ways and means
of getting hold of the originals of the letters which had been
received by the responsible persons in each of the disasters. All had
been sent by the same man; all had been typed on the same machine; all
had been mailed in New York.

When the sixth warning had come to the offices of Caribbean Trans-Air,
the S.M.M.R., working through the FBI, had persuaded the company's
officials to take the regularly scheduled aircraft off the run and
substitute another while the regular ship was carefully inspected. But
it was the replacement ship that came to pieces in midair.

The anonymous predictor, whoever he was, was a man of no mean ability.

Then letter number seven had been received by the United States
Department of Space. It predicted that a meteor would smash into
America's Moonbase One, completely destroying it.

Finally, a non-anonymous letter had come to the S.M.M.R. requesting
admission to the society, enclosing the proper fee. The letter also
said that the writer was interested in literature on the subjects of
prescience, precognition, and/or prophecy, and would be interested in
contacting anyone who had had experience with such phenomena.

Putting two and two together only yields four, no matter how often
it's done, but two to the eighth power gives a nice, round two hundred
fifty-six, which is something one can sink one's teeth into.

Brian Taggert cut off the phone connection. "That's it, Mike," he said
to the senator. "We've got him."

Two of the Society's agents, both top-flight telepaths, had gone out
to "Dr. Joachim's" place on Coney Island's Boardwalk, posing as
customers--"clients" was the word Dr. Joachim preferred--and had done
a thorough probing job.

"He's what might be called a perfectly sincere fraud," Taggert
continued. "You know the type I'm sure."

The senator nodded silently. The woods were full of that kind of
thing. Complete, reliable control of any kind of psionic power
requires understanding and sanity, but the ability lies dormant in
many minds that cannot control it, and it can and does burst forth
erratically at times. Finding a physical analogy for the phenomenon is
difficult, since mental activities are, of necessity, of a higher
order than physical activities.

Some of the operations of tensor calculus have analogs in algebra;
many do not.
