tremendous size of his leap had taken him past them. In the succeeding
instant he was made aware of what he had escaped, for the
hastily-loosed rays struck squarely a group of three or four Martian
guards rushing to the dais from the opposite side, and they vanished
from view with a sharp detonation as though clicked out of existence!

Randall was not to know then, that the red rays were ones that
annihilated matter by neutralizing or damping the matter-vibrations in
the ether. But he did know that no more rays were loosed, for by then
he and Milton and Lanier were on the dais and were wrapped in a
hurricane combat with the guards that had rushed between them and the
Martian Master.

Gleaming fangs--great scaled forms--reaching talons--it was all a wild
phantasmagoria of grotesque forms spinning around him as he struck
with all the power of his earthly muscles and felt crocodilian forms
staggering and going down beneath his frenzied blows. He heard the
roar of an automatic close beside him in the melee as Milton
remembered at last through the red haze of his fury the weapon he
carried, but before either Randall or Lanier could reach their own
weapons a new wave of crocodilian forms had poured onto them that by
sheer pressing weight held them helpless, to be disarmed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hissing orders sounded, the arms and legs of the three were tightly
grasped by great taloned paws, and the masses of Martians about them
melted back from the dais. Held each by two great creatures, Milton
and Randall and Lanier faced again the triple-bodied Martian Master,
who in all that wild moment of struggle appeared not to have changed
his position. The big monster's black eyes stared unmovedly down at
them.

"You Earth-beings seem of lower intelligence even than we thought,"
his hissing voice informed them. "And those weapons--crude, very
crude."

Milton, his face set, spoke back: "It may be that you will find human
weapons of some power if your hordes reach earth," he said.

"But what compared with the power of ours?" the other asked coldly.
"And since our scientists even now devise new weapons to annihilate
the earth's races, I think they would be glad of three of those races
to experiment with now. The one use we can make of you, certainly."

The creature turned its bulging head a little towards the guards who
held the three men, and uttered a brief hissing order. Instantly the
six Martians, grasping the three tightly, marched them across the
great hall and through a different door than that by which they had
entered.

They were taken down a narrow corridor that turned sharply twice as
they went on. Randall saw that it was lit by squares inset in the
walls that glowed with crimson light. It came to him as they marched
on that night must be upon the Martian city without, since the sun had
been sinking when they had crossed it in the centipede-machine.

       *       *       *       *       *

Through what seemed an ante-room they were taken, and then into a long
hall instantly recognizable as a laboratory. There were many glowing
squares illuminating it, and narrow windows high in the wall gave them
a glimpse of the city outside, a pattern of crimson lights. Long metal
tables and racks filled the big room's farther end, while along the
walls were ranged shining mechanisms of unfamiliar and grotesque
appearance. Fully a score of the crocodilian Martians were busy in the
room, some intent on their work at the racks and tables, others
operating some of the strange machines.

The guards conducted the three to an open space by the wall, below one
of the high window-openings and between two great cylindrical
mechanisms. Then, while five of their number held the three men
prisoned in that space by the threat of their levelled ray-tubes, the
other moved toward one of the busy Martian scientists and held with
him a brief interchange of hissing speech.

Milton leaned to whisper to the other two: "We've got to get out of
this while we're still living," he whispered. "You heard the Martian
Master--in constructing that matter-receiver on earth, we've opened a
door through which all the Martian millions will pour onto our world!"

"It's useless, Milton," said Randall dully. "Even if we got clear of
this the Martians will be at their matter-transmitter in hordes when
the moment comes to flash back to earth."

"I know that, but we've got to try," the other insisted. "If we or
some of us could get clear of this, we might in some way hide near the
matter-transmitter until the moment came and then fight to it."

"But how to get out of the hands of these, even?" asked Lanier,
nodding toward the alert guards before them.

       *       *       *       *       *

"There's but one way," Milton whispered swiftly. "Our earthly muscles
would enable us, I think, to get through this window-opening above us
in a leap, if we had a moment's chance. Well, whichever of us they
take to experiment with or examine first, must make a struggle or
disturbance that will turn the guards' attention for a moment and give
the other two a chance to make the attempt!"

"One to stay and the other two to get away...." Randall said slowly;
but Milton's tense whisper interrupted:

"It's the only way, and even then a thousand to one chance! But it's
we who have opened this gate for the Martian invasion of our world and
it's we who must--"

Before he could finish, the approach of hissing voices told them that
the leader of the six guards and the Martian who seemed the chief of
the experimenters in the hall were nearing them. The three men stood
silent and tense as the two crocodilian monsters stopped before them.
The scientist, who carried in his metal-belt, instead of a ray-tube a
compact case of instruments, surveyed them as though in curiosity.

He came closer, his quick reptilian eyes taking in with evident
interest every feature of their bodily appearance. Intuitively the
three knew that one of them was to be chosen for a first investigation
by the Martian scientists, and that that one would have not even the
slender hope of escape open to the other two. A strange lottery of
life and death!

       *       *       *       *       *

Randall saw the creature's gaze turn from one to another of them, and
then heard the hiss of his voice as he pointed a taloned paw toward
Milton. Instantly two of the guards had seized Milton and had jerked
him out from the wall, the other guards holding back Randall and
Lanier with threatening tubes. It was upon Milton that the fatal
choice had fallen!

Randall and Lanier made together a half-movement forward, but Milton,
a tense message in his eyes, forced them back. The guards who held the
physicist led him, at the direction of the Martian scientist, toward a
great upright frame at the room's far end, upon which were clustered a
score of dial-indicators. From these flexible cords led; and now the
scientists began attaching these by clips to various spots on Milton's
body. Some mechanical examination of his bodily characteristics were
apparently to be made. Milton shot suddenly a glance at the two by the
wall, and his head nodded in an almost imperceptible signal. The
muscles of Lanier and Randall tensed.

Then abruptly Milton seemed to go mad. He shouted aloud in a terrible
voice, and at the same moment tore from him the cords just attached,
his fists striking out then at the amazed Martians around him. As they
leaped back from that sudden explosion of activity and sound on
Milton's part the guards before Randall and Lanier whirled
instinctively for an instant toward it. And in that instant the two
had leaped.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was upward they leaped, with all the force of their earthly
muscles, toward the big window-opening a half-dozen feet in the wall
above them. Like released steel springs they sat up, and Randall heard
the thump of their feet as they struck the opening's sill, heard wild
cries suddenly coming from beneath them, as the guards turned back
toward them. Crimson rays clove up like light toward them, but the
instant's surprise had been enough, and in it they had leaped on and
through the opening, into the outside night!

As they shot downward and struck the metal paving outside, Randall
heard a wild babble of cries from inside. A moment he and Lanier gazed
frenziedly around them, then were running with great leaps along the
base of the building from which they had just escaped.

In the darkness of night the Martian city stretched away to their
right, its massive dark cone-structures outlined by points of glowing
ruddy light here and there upon them. Beside the city's metal streets
were illuminated by the brilliant field of stars overhead and by the
soft light of the two moons, one much larger than the other, that
moved among those stars.

Along the street crocodilian Martians were coming and going still,
though in small numbers, there being but few in sight in the dim-lit
street's length. Lanier pointed ahead as they leaped onward.

"Straight onward, Randall!" he jerked. "There seem fewer of the
Martians this way!"

"But the great cone of the matter-station is the other way!" Randall
exclaimed.

"We can't risk making for it now!" cried the other. "We've got to keep
clear of them until the alarm is over. Hear them now?"

For even as they leaped forward a rising clamor of hissing cries and
rush of feet was coming from behind as scores of Martians poured out
into the darkness from the great cone-building. The two fugitives had
passed by then from the shadow of the mighty structure, and as they
ran along the broad metal street toward the shadow of the next cone,
through the light of the moons above, they heard higher cries and then
glimpsed narrow shafts of crimson force cleaving the night around
them.

       *       *       *       *       *

Randall, as the deadly rays drove past him, heard the low detonating
sound made by their destruction of the air in their path, and the
inrush of new air. But in the misty and uncertain moonlight the rays
could not be loosed accurately, and before they could be swept
sidewise to annihilate the two fleeing men they had gained, with a
last great leap, the shadow of the next building.

On they ran, the clatter of the Martian pursuit growing more noisy
behind them. Randall heard Lanier gasping with each great leap, and
felt himself at every breath a knife of pain stabbing through his
lungs, the rarified atmosphere of the red planet taking its toll.
Again from the darkness behind them the crimson rays clove, but this
time were wide of their mark.

With every moment the clamor of pursuit seemed growing louder, the
alarm spreading out over the Martian city and arousing it. As they
raced past cone after cone, Randall knew even the increased power of
their muscles could not long aid them against the exhaustion which the
thin air was imposing on them. His thoughts spun for a moment to
Milton, in the laboratory behind, and then back to their own desperate
plight.

Abruptly shapes loomed in the misty light before them! A group of
three great Martians, reptilian shapes that had been coming toward
them and had stopped for an instant in amazement at sight of the
running pair. There was no time to halt themselves, to evade the
three, and with a mutual instinct Lanier and Randall seized together
the last expedient open to them. They ran straight forward toward the
astounded three, and when a half-score feet from them, leaped with all
their force upward and toward them, their tensed bodies flying through
the air with feet outstretched before them.

Then they had struck the group of three with feet-foremost, and with
the impetus of that great leap had knocked them sprawling to this side
and that, while with a supreme effort the two kept their balance and
leaped on. The cries of the three added to the din behind them as they
threw themselves forward.

       *       *       *       *       *

They flung themselves past a last cone building to halt for an instant
in utter amazement despite the nearing pursuit. Before them were no
more streets and structures, but a huge smooth-flowing waterway! It
gleamed in the moonlight and lay at right angles across their path,
seeming to flow along the Martian city's edge.

"A canal!" cried Lanier. "It's one of the canals that meet at this
city and flow around it! We're trapped--we've reached the city's
edge!"

"Not yet!" Randall gasped. "Look!"

As he pointed to the left Lanier shot a glance there; and then both of
them were running in that direction, along the smooth metal paving
that bordered the mighty canal. They came to what Randall had seen, a
mighty metal arch that soared out over the waterway to its opposite
side. A bridge!

They were on it, were racing up the smooth incline of it. Randall
glanced back as they reached the arch's summit. From that height the
city stretched far away behind them, a lace of crimson lights in the
night. He glimpsed the gleam of the giant waterway that encircled the
city completely, one that was fed by other canals from far away that
emptied into it, the great city's vital water-supply brought thus from
this world's melting polar snows.

There were moving lights behind now, too, pouring out onto the metal
paving by the waterway, moving to and fro as though in confusion, with
a babel of hissing cries. It was not until Randall and Lanier were
running down the descending incline of the great arched bridge,
though, that the lights and shouts of their pursuers began to move up
on that bridge after them.

       *       *       *       *       *

Running off the bridge's smooth way, the two found themselves
stumbling on through the darkness over more metal paving, and then
over soft ground. There were no lights or buildings or sounds of any
sort on this farther side of the great waterway. A tall dark wall
seemed suddenly to loom up out of the darkness some distance ahead of
the two.

"The crimson jungle!" Randall cried. "The jungles we glimpsed from the
city! It's a chance to hide!"

They raced toward the protecting blackness of that wall of vegetation.
They reached it, flung themselves inside, just as the pursuing
Martians, a mass of running crocodilian shapes and of great racing
centipede-machines, swept up over the bridge's arch behind. A moment
the two halted in the thick vegetation's shelter, gasping for breath,
then were moving forward through the jungle's denser darkness.

Thick about them and far above them towered the masses of strange
trees and plant life through which they made their way. Randall could
see but dimly the nature of these plant-forms, but could make out that
they were grotesque and unearthly in appearance, all leafless, and
with masses of thin tendrils branching from them instead of leaves. He
realized that it was only beside the arid planet's great canals that
this profusion of plant life had sufficient moisture for existence,
and that it was the broad bands of jungle bordering the canals that
had made the latter visible to earth's astronomers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lanier and he halted for a moment to listen. The thick jungle about
them seemed quite silent. But from behind there came through it a
vague tumult of hissing calls; and then, as they glimpsed red flashes
far behind, they heard the crashing of great masses of the leafless
trees.

"The rays!" whispered Lanier. "They're beating through the jungle with
them and the centipede-machines after us!"

They paused no more, but pushed on through the thick growths with
renewed urgency. Now and then, as they passed through small clearings,
Randall glimpsed overhead the fast-moving nearer moon and slower
sailing farther moon of Mars, moving across the steady stars. In some
of these clearings they saw, too, strange great openings burrowed in
the ground as though by some strange animal.

The crashing clamor of the Martians beating the jungle behind was
coming close, ever closer, and as they came to still another misty-lit
clearing, Lanier paused, with face white and tense.

"They're closing in on us!" he said. "They're hunting us down by
beating the jungle with those centipede-machines, and even if we
escape them we're getting farther from the city and the matter-station
each moment!"

Randall's eyes roved desperately around the clearing; and then, as
they fell on a group of the great burrowed openings that seemed
present everywhere about them, he uttered an exclamation.

"These holes! We can hide in one until they've passed over us, and
then steal back to the city!"

Lanier's eyes lit. "It's a chance!"

       *       *       *       *       *

They sprang toward the openings. They were each of some four feet
diameter, extending indefinitely downward as though the mouths of
tunnels. In a moment Randall was lowering himself into one, Lanier
after him. The tunnel in which they were, they found, curved to one
side a few feet below the surface. They crawled down this curve until
they were out of sight of the opening above. They crouched silent,
then, listening.

There came down to them the dull, distant clamor of the
centipede-machines crashing through the jungle, cutting a way with
rays, their clamor growing ever louder. Then Randall, who was lowest
in the tunnel, turned suddenly as there came to him a strange rustling
sound from _beneath_ him. It was as though some crawling or creeping
thing was moving in the tunnel below them!

He grasped the arm of Lanier, beside and a little above him, to warn
him, but the words he was about to whisper never were uttered. For at
this moment a big shapeless living thing seemed to flash up toward
them through the darkness from beneath, cold ropelike tentacles
gripped both tightly; and then in an instant they were being dragged
irresistibly down into the lightless tunnel's depths!

       *       *       *       *       *

