be voices, around her; on the invisible tape she seemed to be reading
what they said.

A number of speakers, apparently involved in a fast, hot argument
about what to do with her. Impressions flashed past....

       *       *       *       *       *

Why waste time with her? It was clear that kitten-talk was all she was
capable of!... Not necessarily; that was a normal first step. Give her
a little time!... But what--exasperatedly--could such a small-bite
_possibly_ know that would be of significant value?

There was a slow, blurred, awkward-seeming interruption. Its content
was not comprehensible to Telzey at all, but in some unmistakable
manner it was defined as Tick-Tock's thought.

A pause as the circle of speakers stopped to consider whatever TT had
thrown into the debate.

Then another impression ... one that sent a shock of fear through
Telzey as it rose heavily into her awareness. Its sheer intensity
momentarily displaced the tape-reading symbolism. A savage voice
seemed to rumble:

"Toss the tender small-bite to me"--malevolent crimson eyes fixed on
Telzey from somewhere not far away--"and let's be done here!"

Startled, stammering protest from Tick-Tock, accompanied by gusts of
laughter from the circle. Great sense of humor these characters had,
Telzey thought bitterly. That crimson-eyed thing wasn't joking at all!

More laughter as the circle caught her thought. Then a kind of
majority opinion found sudden expression:

"Small-bite _is_ learning! No harm to wait--We'll find out
quickly--Let's...."

The tape ended; the voices faded; the colors went blank. In whatever
jumbled-up form she'd been getting the impressions at that
point--Telzey couldn't have begun to describe it--the whole thing
suddenly stopped.

       *       *       *       *       *

She found herself sitting in the grass, shaky, scared, eyes open.
Tick-Tock stood beside the terrace, looking at her. An air of hazy
unreality still hung about the garden.

She might have flipped! She didn't think so; but it certainly seemed
possible! Otherwise ... Telzey made an attempt to sort over what had
happened.

Something _had_ been in the garden! Something had been inside her
mind. Something that was at home on Jontarou.

There'd been a feeling of perhaps fifty or sixty of these ... well,
beings. Alarming beings! Reckless, wild, hard ... and that red-eyed
nightmare! Telzey shuddered.

They'd contacted Tick-Tock first, during the night. TT understood them
better than she could. Why? Telzey found no immediate answer.

Then Tick-Tock had tricked her into letting her mind be invaded by
these beings. There must have been a very definite reason for that.

She looked over at Tick-Tock. TT looked back. Nothing stirred in
Telzey's thoughts. Between _them_ there was still no direct
communication.

Then how had the beings been able to get through to her?

Telzey wrinkled her nose. Assuming this was real, it seemed clear that
the game of symbols she'd made up between herself and TT had provided
the opening. Her whole experience just now had been in the form of
symbols, translating whatever occurred into something she could
consciously grasp.

"Kitten-talk" was how the beings referred to the use of symbols; they
seemed contemptuous of it. Never mind, Telzey told herself; they'd
agreed she was learning.

The air over the grass appeared to flicker. Again she had the
impression of reading words off a quickly moving, not quite visible
tape.

"You're being taught and you're learning," was what she seemed to
read. "The question was whether you were capable of partial
understanding as your friend insisted. Since you were, everything else
that can be done will be accomplished very quickly."

A pause, then with a touch of approval, "You're a well-formed mind,
small-bite! Odd and with incomprehensibilities, but well-formed--"

One of the beings, and a fairly friendly one--at least not unfriendly.
Telzey framed a tentative mental question. "Who are you?"

"You'll know very soon." The flickering ended; she realized she and
the question had been dismissed for the moment. She looked over at
Tick-Tock again.

"Can't _you_ talk to me now, TT?" she asked silently.

A feeling of hesitation.

"Kitten-talk!" was the impression that formed itself with difficulty
then. It was awkward, searching; but it came unquestionably from TT.
"Still learning too, Telzey!" TT seemed half anxious, half angry.
"We--"

       *       *       *       *       *

A sharp buzz-note reached Telzey's ears, wiping out the groping
thought-impression. She jumped a little, glanced down. Her
wrist-talker was signaling. For a moment, she seemed poised
uncertainly between a world where unseen, dangerous-sounding beings
referred to one as small-bite and where TT was learning to talk, and
the familiar other world where wrist-communicators buzzed periodically
in a matter-of-fact manner. Settling back into the more familiar
world, she switched on the talker.

"Yes?" she said. Her voice sounded husky.

"Telzey, dear," Halet murmured honey-sweet from the talker, "would you
come back into the house, please? The living room--We have a visitor
who very much wants to meet you."

Telzey hesitated, eyes narrowing. Halet's visitor wanted to meet
_her_?

"Why?" she asked.

"He has something _very_ interesting to tell you, dear." The edge of
triumphant malice showed for an instant, vanished in murmuring
sweetness again. "So please hurry!"

"All right." Telzey stood up. "I'm coming."

"Fine, dear!" The talker went dead.

Telzey switched off the instrument, noticed that Tick-Tock had chosen
to disappear meanwhile.

Flipped? She wondered, starting up towards the house. It was clear
Aunt Halet had prepared some unpleasant surprise to spring on her,
which was hardly more than normal behavior for Halet. The other
business? She couldn't be certain of anything there. Leaving out TT's
strange actions--which might have a number of causes, after all--that
entire string of events could have been created inside her head. There
was no contradictory evidence so far.

But it could do no harm to take what _seemed_ to have happened at face
value. Some pretty grim event might be shaping up, in a very real way,
around here....

"You reason logically!" The impression now was of a voice speaking to
her, a voice that made no audible sound. It was the same being who'd
addressed her a minute or two ago.

The two worlds between which Telzey had felt suspended seemed to glide
slowly together and become one.

"I go to Law school," she explained to the being, almost absently.

Amused agreement. "So we heard."

"What do you want of me?" Telzey inquired.

"You'll know soon enough."

"Why not tell me now?" Telzey urged. It seemed about to dismiss her
again.

Quick impatience flared at her. "Kitten-pictures! Kitten-thoughts!
Kitten-talk! Too slow, too slow! YOUR pictures--too much YOU! Wait
till the...."

Circuits close ... channels open.... Obstructions clear? What _had_ it
said? There'd been only the blurred image of a finicky, delicate, but
perfectly normal technical operation of some kind.

"... Minutes now!" the voice concluded. A pause, then another thought
tossed carelessly at her. "This is more important to you, small-bite,
than to _us_!" The voice impression ended as sharply as if a
communicator had snapped off.

Not _too_ friendly! Telzey walked on towards the house, a new fear
growing inside her ... a fear like the awareness of a storm gathered
nearby, still quiet--deadly quiet, but ready to break.

"Kitten-pictures!" a voice seemed to jeer distantly, a whispering in
the park trees beyond the garden wall.

       *       *       *       *       *

Halet's cheeks were lightly pinked; her blue eyes sparkled. She looked
downright stunning, which meant to anyone who knew her that the worst
side of Halet's nature was champing at the bit again. On uninformed
males it had a dazzling effect, however; and Telzey wasn't surprised
to find their visitor wearing a tranced expression when she came into
the living room. He was a tall, outdoorsy man with a tanned, bony
face, a neatly trained black mustache, and a scar down one cheek which
would have seemed dashing if it hadn't been for the stupefied look.
Beside his chair stood a large, clumsy instrument which might have
