
"So you've been thinking?" he asked, reaching for his curve-stemmed
pipe.

"How do you know?"

"My spies tell me you haven't been out in the lab since the other day.
Certainly you were doing something besides sulk in your office."

"Yes."

"Well, what did you come up with? Why did that switching operation
fail out in space."

"I don't know."

His shaggy eyebrows shot up. "You don't know? Is that all COMCORP got
for three days' pay?"

"A confession of ignorance is a hell of a lot more revealing than a
solid error," I snapped. "The honest answer that I get out of the
telemetry data is that something in that gate broke the circuit and
the switching operation failed. I think there are about seven thousand
components in the gate. I don't know which one failed. A few I can
rule out, because they would only cause part of the gate to fail. But
a hundred different breaks could account for the data. So I don't
know."

He lit his pipe and blew smoke around the curved stem before he made
reply. "So we got a philosopher for our money," he said. "A confession
of ignorance, eh? What are you going to do about it?"

"You tell me, Mr. Cleary. You're the old head around here."

"So I am," he said evenly. "So I am. Well, my advice to young pups is
that they should not be ashamed when they don't know. They should say
so. But they should have something else to say along with it."

"For example," I suggested grumpily.

"They should say, 'I don't know, but I know where to find out,'" he
said. "Tell me, Dr. Seaman, do you know where to find out?"

He puffed at me for the two or three minutes I thought about it.
Really, that's a very long time to think. Most ideas come to you the
moment you identify the problem, which is the really hard part of
thinking. But this problem took some thought, and I wanted him to
think I was thinking.

"Yes," I said at last. "I know where to find out."

"Where?"

"Out in space."

       *       *       *       *       *

This called for a lot more smoke. "You mean, go out there and look at
the satellite, in space?"

"Yes, I can't imagine any other way really to figure it out."

He nodded. "You may be right, Mike. But do you know how much it costs
to send a manned satellite aloft?"

"Oh," I agreed. "There are cheaper ways. We can beef up every part in
that gate, test it much tougher than we already have, and when we get
the gate to where all seven thousand components can stand any
imaginable strain, we can rebuild the twelve Telstars we haven't
launched yet and be pretty sure they won't have switching failures.
But that isn't what you asked me."

"We'd have to fix eighteen of them," he said. "The first six are about
sixty per cent useless. They'd have to be replaced."

"I still think you should consider sending a man to examine the
Telstars in orbit," I suggested.

"Science demands it, eh" he growled.

"No, I was thinking that perhaps a simple repair could be made in
space, and that you wouldn't have to launch six extra birds."

He got out of the chair and went to the clothes tree to put on his
coat. The elbows were shiny from leaning on his desk. "It might be
cheaper at that," he said. "The first six are launched in only two
orbits. Three telstars in each orbit, separated by one hundred and
twenty degrees. Two launches of a repair man might do it, with careful
handling. Is that what you had in mind?"

"Something like that."

"We'd have to send a pretty rare kind of a repair man, Mike," he said,
coming back to sit on the corner of his desk and glower down at me.
That was about his kindest expression.

"Yes," I agreed. "You need somebody who can test and diagnose, and
then make a repair."

"And who is an astronaut, too," he said. "I wonder if there is such a
thing?"

"Make one," I suggested.

He scowled a little more fiercely. "Explain that," he ordered.

"I figure you could take one of our men from my laboratory, who knows
how to test the gate, and a man who is handy enough with miniature
components to cut out the one that failed and replace it, and teach
him how to get around in a spacesuit. That would surer than hell be
quicker than taking one of these hot-shot astronauts and teaching him
solid-state physics."

"Yes," he agreed, looking down his fingers. "That was a pretty sneaky
way to get out from between Fred Stone and me, young man."

I couldn't resist it: "That's what took most of the three days," I
said, just a little too smugly.

"I liked you better in the middle," Cleary grumped. "Well, you have a
thought, and it calls for a conference." He took his coat off again,
hung it on the clothes tree, came back to his desk and got on the
phone.

"Sylvia? Have Fred Stone come up, and you come in with him, eh? That's
a dear."

He racked up the instrument and smiled at me as he stoked his pipe
into more activity. "Relax," he advised me. "It always takes a while
to round up Fred Stone."

He wanted no small talk, so I fidgeted in my chair while Cleary rocked
gently in his. In about ten minutes, curly-headed Sylvia brought Dr.
Stone in with her.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was, "Hello, Fred," and "Hello there, Paul," when they came in.
Sylvia didn't have anything to say, although she gave me a hot-eyed
glance before pulling out the dictation board on Paul Cleary's desk
and making herself comfortable with her notebook.

Cleary offered Doc Stone some of his tobacco, which was politely
refused. The old man began it:

"Your Dr. Seaman has quite an idea, Fred," he said, in a mild, kindly
voice, with a dumb, guileless look on his face.

"Good, Paul," Doc Stone smiled thinly. "I've told you he's a good
boy."

"Hm-m-m," said Cleary. "He says his tests can't prove what went wrong
with the switching gate on the satellites, and in effect that the
telemetry doesn't make it plain whether we have design or assembly
trouble."

"Well, _well_!" said Fred Stone. I decided to start shopping for a
marker for my grave.

"Yes," Cleary said. "He made quite a suggestion, that we send a man
out in space to look over the Telstars and find out what went wrong.
Even better, he says it might be possible to make a repair at the same
time and get the bird working. You can see the advantages of doing
that, the way they are orbiting."

"Yes, indeed," Doc Stone said, looking at me with slitted eyes. "Quite
a unique adventure for some technician."

"Just what I was thinking," Cleary said. "The problem resolves into:
Who do we send? Now Mike, here, says we should take a man from his lab
who knows the bird and its assembly and teach him how to get around in
a spacesuit--that, he claims, would be quicker than taking one of
these space jockeys and making a technician out of him."

"I think he's right."

"So--there we are. Who do we send?"

"There can hardly be any choice," Dr. Stone said, looking at me with
eyes like granite.

"Hardly," Cleary agreed. "The head of the lab is the best man, beyond
a doubt."

They were talking about me! Try to get out of taking sides, would I?
Cleary wanted me back in the middle. Stone wanted me dead. They were
both likely to get their way, unless I told them off.

I opened my mouth. Cleary cleared his throat loudly.

"Oh, Dr. Seaman!" Sylvia cut in, breaking her careful silence. "What a
thrilling opportunity for you!"

I gaped at her. Well, Cleary had said it. She only went out with
astronauts. She was space-happy.

"There are men in the shop who deserve the chance...." I started.

"Nonsense!" she said quickly. "It's your idea, doctor, and you deserve
the fame!"

"And the promotion this will undoubtedly earn--if you can bring it
off," Cleary added.

"Yes!" Dr. Stone said with relish. He didn't think I could, either.
Well, that made three of us, unless Sylvia made four.

"Thank you very much," I started, as a prelude to backing out.

"Good, that's settled," Cleary said. "That's all, Sylvia."

She got up and left. She had done her dirty work. If I hadn't been so
sick at my stomach, I would have had to admire really great teamwork.

