There was silence for a moment. Then renewed chuckles, but slightly
nervous ones, and not too many.

Dr. Ormond said sternly, "I am serious about that! The possibility,
though it may be small tonight, is there. You have learned that, by
the laws of Insight, any image of subjective reality, if it can be
endowed with _all_ the attributes of objective reality by its human
creator, _must_ spontaneously become an image in objective reality!

"In this case, our collective ham sandwich, if it were perfectly
visualized, could not only be seen by you but felt, its weight and the
texture of each of its ingredients perceived, their appetizing
fragrance savored"--Cavender groaned mentally--"and more: if one of
you were to eat this sandwich, he would find it exactly as nourishing
as any produced by the more ordinary methods of objective reality.

"There are people in the world today," Dr. Ormond concluded, speaking
very earnestly now, "who can do this! There always have been people
who could do this. And you are following in their footsteps, being
trained in even more advanced skills. I am aware to a greater extent
than any of you of the latent power that is developing--has
developed--in this group. Tonight, for the first time, that power will
be focused, drawn down to a pinpoint, to accomplish one task.

"Again, I do not say that at the end of our exercise a ham sandwich
will lie on this plate. Frankly, I don't expect it. But I suggest very
strongly that you don't let it surprise or startle you too much if we
find it here!"

There was dead stillness when he finished speaking. Cavender had a
sense that the lecture room had come alive with eerie little chills.
Dr. Ormond lifted the plate solemnly up before him, holding it between
the fingertips of both hands.

"Now, if you will direct your attention here ... no, Eleanor, with
your eyes open!

"Let us begin...."

       *       *       *       *       *

Cavender sighed, straightened up in his chair, eyes fixed obediently
on the wooden plate, and banned ham sandwiches and every other kind of
food firmly from his thoughts. There was no point in working his
appetite up any further when he couldn't satisfy it, and he would have
to be on guard a little against simply falling asleep during the next
three minutes. The cloudiness of complete fatigue wasn't too far away.
At the edge of his vision, he was aware of his fellow students across
the room, arranged in suddenly motionless rows like staring zombies.
His eyelids began to feel leaden.

The three minutes dragged on, came to an end. Ormond slowly lowered
his hands. Cavender drew a long breath of relief. The wooden plate, he
noted, with no surprise, was still empty.

"You may stop visualizing," Ormond announced.

There was a concerted sighing, a creaking of chairs. The students came
out of their semitrances, blinked, smiled, settled into more
comfortable positions, waiting for Dr. Al's comments.

"No miracles this time!" Ormond began briskly. He smiled.

Mrs. Folsom said, "Dr. Al--"

He looked over at her. "Yes, Eleanor?"

Eleanor Folsom hesitated, shook her head. "No," she said. "Go on. I'm
sorry I interrupted."

"That's all right." Dr. Al gave her a warm smile. It had been, he
continued, a successful exercise, a very promising first attempt, in
spite of the lack of an immediate materialization, which, of course,
had been only a remote possibility to start with. He had no fault to
find with the quality of the group's effort. He had sensed it ... as
they, too, presently would be able to sense it ... as a smooth flow of
directed energy. With a little more practice ... one of these days ...

Cavender stifled one yawn, concealed another which didn't allow itself
to be stifled behind a casually raised hand. He watched Ormond move
over to the prop table, put the wooden plate down beside the red
suitcase without interrupting his encouraging summary of the exercise,
hesitate, then pick up something else, something which looked like a
flexible copper trident, and start back to the center of the room with
it.

Mrs. Folsom's voice said shrilly, "_Dr. Al--!_"

"Yes, Eleanor? What is it?"

"Just now," Mrs. Folsom said, her voice still holding the shrill note,
"just a moment ago, on the plate over there, I'm certain ... I'm
almost certain I saw the ham sandwich!"

She added breathlessly, "And that's what I was going to say before,
Dr. Al! Right after you told us to stop visualizing I thought I saw
the sandwich on the plate! But it was only for a moment and I wasn't
sure. But now I'm sure, almost sure, that I saw it again on the plate
on the table!"

The old woman was pointing a trembling finger towards the table. Her
cheeks showed spots of hectic red. In the rows behind her, the
students looked at one another, shook their heads in resignation, some
obviously suppressing amusement. Others looked annoyed. They were all
familiar with Eleanor Folsom's tendency to produce such little
sensations during the meetings. If the evening didn't promise to bring
enough excitement, Eleanor always could be counted on to take a hand
in events.

Cavender felt less certain about it. This time, Mrs. Folsom sounded
genuinely excited. And if she actually believed she'd seen something
materialize, she might be fairly close to getting one of those little
heart attacks she kept everyone informed about.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. Al could have had the same thought. He glanced back at the prop
table, asked gravely, "You don't see it there now, do you, Eleanor?"

Mrs. Folsom shook her head. "No. No, of course not! It disappeared
again. It was only there for a second. But I'm sure I saw it!"

"Now this is very interesting," Ormond said seriously. "Has anyone
else observed anything at all unusual during the last few minutes?"

There was a murmured chorus of dissent, but Cavender noticed that the
expressions of amusement and annoyance had vanished. Dr. Al had
changed the tune, and the students were listening intently. He turned
back to Mrs. Folsom.

"Let us consider the possibilities here, Eleanor," he said. "For one
thing, you should be congratulated in any case, because your
experience shows that your visualization was clear and true throughout
our exercise. If it hadn't been, nothing like this could have
occurred.

"But precisely what was the experience? There we are, as of this
moment, on uncertain ground. You saw something. That no one else saw
the same thing might mean simply that no one else happened to be
looking at the plate at those particular instances in time. I, for
example, certainly gave it no further attention after the exercise was
over. You _may_ then have observed a genuine materialization!"

Mrs. Folsom nodded vigorously. "Yes, I--"

"But," Ormond went on, "under the circumstances, the scientific
attitude we maintain at this Institute demands that we leave the
question open. For now. Because you might also, you understand, have
