the jut of a cheek, or the crook of a nose. But it was not enough for
recognition. All the nobles were dressed in battle accoutrements that
had become stained or torn. Their harness had shifted, their tunics were
askew, and they were bunched so closely that the outline of one man
blended into the mis-shaped shadow of the next. The voices were hoarse
from an afternoon's bellowing. Some were still drunk with the acid fire
of exhausted nerves, and were loud. Others, drained, mumbled in the
background like a chorus of the stupid. Gesticulating, mumbling,
shouting, shadowed, lumped into one knot of blackness lighted by a ruddy
cheekbone here, a gleaming brow there above an eye socket as inky and
blank as a bottomless pit, they were like something out of the wan and
misty ages before the Earth had had time to form completely.

Two arguing voices rose out of the mass:

"Those three barbarian tankettes are _mine_, I say!"

"Yours when I lie dead!"

"They surrendered to me!"

"Because I pounded them into submission."

"Into submission, indeed! You skulked around their flanks like a lame
dog, and now that I've taken them, you want your bone!"

"You were glad enough to see me there when the battle was hot. Call me a
dog again and I'll spit you like a rat on a pitchfork."

No one else in the group of nobles paid the two of them any attention.
No one had time to spare for any quarrel but his own, and the whole
squabbling pile of them looked ready to fly apart at any moment--to draw
sidearms and knives and flare into spiteful combat.

The Barbarian spat quietly. "There's your Seaboard League, lad. There's
your convocation of free men. Step out there and ask for your lands
back. Care to try?"

"We've already decided that wouldn't be wise," Geoffrey said irritably.
He had never cared much for these inevitable aftermaths to battle, but
it made him angry to have an inland barbarian make pointed comments. "I
suppose it's different when _you_ win, eh?"

"Not very. But then, we're not civilized. Let's get moving, lad."

Silently, they skirted the fire and made their way toward the parked
vehicles of The Barbarian's captured supply train. The ground was rough
and covered by underbrush. More than once, The Barbarian stumbled into
Geoffrey, making him clench his jaw against the pain in his chest. But
he saw no point in saying anything about it.

"There she is," The Barbarian said in a husky growl. Geoffrey peered
through the brush at an armored trailer whose flat sides were completely
undecorated except for a scarlet bearpaw painted on the door. A lantern
gleamed behind the slit windows, and The Barbarian grunted with
satisfaction. "She's still in there. Fine. We'll have this done in a
couple of seconds."

In spite of the incongruity, Geoffrey asked curiously: "What's a
second?"

"A division of time, lad--one sixtieth of a minute."

"Oh. What on Earth would you want to measure that accurately for?"

"For getting women out of trailers in a hurry, lad. Now--let's look for
sentries."

       *       *       *

There were two guarding the trailer--men-at-arms from Dugald's holding,
Geoffrey noticed--carrying shotguns and lounging in the shadows. One of
them had a wineskin--Geoffrey heard the gurgle plainly--and the other
was constantly turning away from the trailer to listen to the shrieks
and shouting coming from among the other vehicles of the train, where
other guards were not being quite as careful of their masters' new
property.

"I see they've found the quartermaster's waggons," The Barbarian said
drily. "Now, then, lad--you work away toward the right, there, and I'll
take the left. Here--take my knife. I won't need it." The Barbarian
passed over a length of steel as big as a short-sword, but oddly curved
and sharpened down one side of the blade. "Stab if you can, but if you
have to cut, that blade'll go through a man's forearm. Remember you're
not holding one of those overgrown daggers of yours."

"And just why should I kill a man for you?"

"Do you think that man won't try to kill you?"

Geoffrey had no satisfactory answer to that. He moved abruptly off into
the brush, holding The Barbarian's knife, and wondering just how far he
was obligated for a bandaged chest and half a pint of water. But a man's
duty to his rescuer was plain enough, and, besides, just what else was
there to do?

The blame for it all went squarely back to Dugald, and Geoffrey did not
love him for it. He slipped through the bushes until he was only a few
yards from the man who had the wineskin, and waited for The Barbarian to
appear at the opposite end of the trailer.

When it happened, it happened quite suddenly, as these things will. One
moment the other sentry was craning his neck for another look at what
was going on elsewhere. The next he was down on his knees, croaking
through a compressed throat, with The Barbarian's arm under his chin and
a driving knee ready to smash at the back of his neck again.

Geoffrey jumped forward, toward his own man. The man-at-arms had dropped
his wineskin in surprise and was staring at what was happening to his
comrade. When he heard Geoffrey come out of the underbrush, the face he
turned was white and oddly distended with shock, as though all the bones
had drained out of it. He might have appeared fierce enough, ordinarily.
But things were happening too fast for him.

Geoffrey had never killed anyone but a noble in his life. Not
intentionally and at close range, in any case. The completely baffled
and helpless look of this one somehow found time to remind him that this
was not, after all, one of his peers--that the man was hopelessly
outclassed in fair combat--or in anything else, for that matter.
Geoffrey did _not_ stop to weigh the probity of this idea. It was the
central tenet of his education and environment. Furthermore, there was
some truth in it.

He couldn't kill the man. He swept up his arm and struck the flat of The
Barbarian's broad knife against the side of the guard's head, and bowled
the man over with his rush. But the guard had a hard skull. He stared up
with glazed but conscious eyes, and squalled: "Lord Geoffrey!" Geoffrey
hit him again, and this time the guard stayed down, but the damage was
done. Scrambling to his feet, Geoffrey ran over to The Barbarian, who
was letting the other guard ooze to the ground.

"We'll have to hurry!" Geoffrey panted. "Before that man comes back to
his senses."

The Barbarian gave him a disgusted look, but nodded. "Hurry we shall."
He lurched to the trailer door and slapped it with the flat of his hand.
"Let's go, Myka."

There was a scrambling sound inside the trailer, and the light went out.
The door slid open, and Geoffrey found himself staring at the most
beautiful woman he had ever seen.

She was lithe almost to the point of boyishness, even though she was
clearly some years older than Geoffrey. She had short hair the color of
hammered copper, high cheekbones, and tawny eyes. She was wearing a
tunic and short trousers, and there was an empty pistol holster strapped
around her waist. Obviously, she was not a lady. But it was much too
late for Geoffrey to care about that. She stopped in the doorway,
shaking her head slowly at The Barbarian. "I swear, Hodd," she said in a
low, laughing voice, "one of these days you _won't_ come back from the
