
"Color pattern," Betty ordered the vuescreen as he came in, "robot audio
out." With people talking in the house it was still necessary to put the
machines under master automatic and manual control. Some of the less
sophisticated robots might pick up some chance phrase of conversation
and interpret it as an order if left on audio.

"Ben," said Betty, getting up to meet him, "you're late."

Ben was too good a salesman to argue that. Instead, he took her in his
arms and kissed her. It was a very good sixty seconds later that she
pushed him away with a severeness destroyed by a blush and a giggle to
say, "Late but making up for lost time, huh? And sober, too. You must be
feeling good for a change."

"Sure--and you feel even better, sugar." He reached for her again. She
slipped away from him, laughing, but his wrist tel-timer caught on the
locket she always wore, her only memento from her parents, dead in the
old moon-orb crash disaster. She stood still, slightly annoyed, as he
unhooked and his mood was, not broken, but set back a little. "What's
got into you tonight anyway, Ben?"

"Oh, I don't know. Did I tell you, the O.M. may give us a vacation?
Remember some of those nights up at that new 'Do It Yourself' Camp last
summer?"

"Ben!" She blushed, smiled. "We won't get any vacation if we blow our
house-warming pitch tonight, you know. And we have three couples due
here in less than a half hour. Besides, I have to talk to you about
Nana."

       *       *       *       *       *

"That damned new CD-IX model. Now what?"

"She's very upset about Bennie. I'm not sure I blame her. This afternoon
he simply refused his indoctrination. All the time he should have been
playing store with Playmate he insisted on _drawing_ things--himself,
mind you, not Playmate. On the walls, with an old pencil of yours he
found someplace in your things. Nana couldn't do a thing with him. She
says you've got to give him a spanking."

"Why me? Why not you?"

"Now Ben, we've been over that and over it. Discipline is the father's
job."

"Well, I won't do it. Bennie's just a baby. Let him do a few things
himself. Won't hurt him."

"Ben!"

"That Nana is an officious busybody, trying to run our lives."

"Oh, Ben! You know Nana loves little Bennie. She only wants to help
him."

"But to what?"

"She'd never dream of lifting a finger against Bennie no matter what he
did. And she lives in terror that he'll cut her switch in some temper
tantrum."

"Hmph! Well, I'm going up right now and tell her if I hear another word
from her about spanking Bennie, I'll cut her switch myself. Then she can
go back to Central for reprogramming and see how she likes it."

"Ben! You wouldn't."

"Why not? Maybe she needs a new personality?"

"You won't say a thing to her. You're too soft-hearted."

"This time I won't be."

This time he wasn't. He met Nana CD-IX in the hallway outside Bennie's
room. Like all nurse, teaching, and children's personal service robots,
she was human in form, except for her control dial safely out of baby's
reach, top, center.

The human form was reassuring to children, kept them from feeling
strange with parents back. Nana was big, gray-haired, stout, buxom,
motherly, to reassure parents.

"Now, Mr. Tilman," she said with weary impatience, "you are too late.
Surely you don't intend to burst in and disturb your son now."

"Surely I do."

"But he is having his supper. You will upset him. Can't you understand
that you should arrange to be here between 5:30 and 6 if you wish to
interview the child?"

"Did he miss me? Sorry, I couldn't make it earlier. But now I am going
to see him a minute."

"Mr. Tilman!"

"Nana! And what's this about your wanting Bennie spanked because he drew
a few pictures?"

"Surely you realize these are the child's formative years, Mr. Tilman.
He should be learning to think in terms of selling now--not _doing_
things. That's robot work, Mr. Tilman. Robots can't sell, you know, and
what will people, let alone robots think if you let your boy grow up--"

       *       *       *       *       *

"He's growing up fine; and I am going in to see him."

"Mr. Tilman!"
