
"Did he say nothing else?"

"No, mistress," said the man.

A pallor overspread the Atlantide's little forehead.

"Go get him," she said brusquely.

Bowing, the Targa left the room.

I listened to this dialogue with great anxiety. Was this Morhange? Had
he been faithful to me, after all? Had I suspected him unjustly? He
had wanted to see me and been unable to!

My eyes never left Antinea's.

She was no longer the haughty, mocking princess of our first
interview. She no longer wore the golden circlet on her forehead. Not
a bracelet, not a ring. She was dressed only in a full flowing tunic.
Her black hair, unbound, lay in masses of ebony over her slight
shoulders and her bare arms.

Her beautiful eyes were deep circled. Her divine mouth drooped. I did
not know whether I was glad or sorry to see this new quivering
Cleopatra.

Flattened at her feet, King Hiram gazed submissively at her.

An immense orichalch mirror with golden reflections was set into the
wall at the right. Suddenly she raised herself erect before it. I saw
her nude.

A splendid and bitter sight!--A woman who thinks herself alone,
standing before her mirror in expectation of the man she wishes to
subdue!

The six incense-burners scattered about the room sent up invisible
columns of perfume. The balsam spices of Arabia wore floating webs in
which my shameless senses were entangled.... And, back toward me,
standing straight as a lily, Antinea smiled into her mirror.

Low steps sounded in the corridor. Antinea immediately fell back into
the nonchalant pose in which I had first seen her. One had to see such
a transformation to believe it possible.

Morhange entered the room, preceded by a white Targa.

He, too, seemed rather pale. But I was most struck by the expression
of serene peace on that face which I thought I knew so well. I felt
that I never had understood what manner of man Morhange was, never.

He stood erect before Antinea without seeming to notice her gesture
inviting him to be seated.

She smiled at him.

"You are surprised, perhaps," she said finally, "that I should send
for you at so late an hour."

Morhange did not move an eyelash.

"Have you considered it well?" she demanded.

Morhange smiled gravely, but did not reply.

I could read in Antinea's face the effort it cost her to continue
smiling; I admired the self-control of these two beings.

"I sent for you," she continued. "You do not guess why?... Well, it is
to tell you something that you do not expect. It will be no surprise
to you if I say that I never met a man like you. During your
captivity, you have expressed only one wish. Do you recall it?"

"I asked your permission to see my friend before I died," said
Morhange simply.

I do not know what stirred me more on hearing these words: delight at
Morhange's formal tone in speaking to Antinea, or emotion at hearing
the one wish he had expressed.

But Antinea continued calmly:

"That is why I sent for you--to tell you that you are going to see him
again. And I am going to do something else. You will perhaps scorn me
even more when you realize that you had only to oppose me to bend me
to your will--I, who have bent all other wills to mine. But, however
that may be, it is decided: I give you both your liberty. Tomorrow
Cegheir-ben-Cheikh will lead you past the fifth enclosure. Are you
satisfied?"

"I am," said Morhange with a mocking smile.

"That will give me a chance," he continued, "to make better plans for
the next trip I intend to make this way. For you need not doubt that I
shall feel bound to return to express my gratitude. Only, next time,
to render so great a queen the honors due her, I shall ask my
government to furnish me with two or three hundred European soldiers
and several cannon."

Antinea was standing up, very pale.

"What are you saying?"

"I am saying," said Morhange coldly, "that I foresaw this. First
threats, then promises."

Antinea stepped toward him. He had folded his arms. He looked at her
with a sort of grave pity.

"I will make you die in the most atrocious agonies," she said finally.

"I am your prisoner," Morhange replied.

"You shall suffer things that you cannot even imagine."

"I am your prisoner," repeated Morhange in the same sad calm.

Antinea paced the room like a beast in a cage. She advanced toward my
companion and, no longer mistress of herself, struck him in the face.

He smiled and caught hold of her, drawing her little wrists together
with a strange mixture of force and gentleness.

King Hiram growled. I thought he was about to leap. But the cold eyes
of Morhange held him fascinated.

"I will have your comrade killed before your eyes," gasped Antinea.

It seemed to me that Morhange paled, but only for a second. I was
overcome by the nobility and insight of his reply.

"My companion is brave. He does not fear death. And, in any case, he
would prefer death to life purchased at the price you name."

So saying, he let go Antinea's wrists. Her pallor was terrible. From
the expression of her mouth I felt that this would be her last word to
him.

"Listen," she said.

How beautiful she was, in her scorned majesty, her beauty powerless
for the first time!

"Listen," she continued. "Listen. For the last time. Remember that I
hold the gates of this palace, that I have supreme power over your
life. Remember that you breathe only at my pleasure. Remember...."

"I have remembered all that," said Morhange.

"A last time," she repeated.

The serenity of Morhange's face was so powerful that I scarcely
noticed his opponent. In that transfigured countenance, no trace of
worldliness remained.

"A last time," came Antinea's voice, almost breaking.

Morhange was not even looking at her.

"As you will," she said.

Her gong resounded. She had struck the silver disc. The white Targa
appeared.

"Leave the room!"

Morhange, his head held high, went out.

Now Antinea is in my arms. This is no haughty, voluptuous woman whom
I am pressing to my heart. It is only an unhappy, scorned little girl.

So great was her trouble that she showed no surprise when I stepped
out beside her. Her head is on my shoulder. Like the crescent moon in
the black clouds, I see her clear little bird-like profile amid her
mass of hair. Her warm arms hold me convulsively.... _O tremblant
coeur humain_....

Who could resist such an embrace, amid the soft perfumes, in the
langorous night? I feel myself a being without will. Is this my voice,
the voice which is murmuring:

"Ask me what you will, and I will do it, I will do it."

My senses are sharpened, tenfold keen. My head rests against a soft,
nervous little knee. Clouds of odors whirl about me. Suddenly it seems
as if the golden lanterns are waving from the ceiling like giant
censers. Is this my voice, the voice repeating in a dream:

"Ask me what you will, and I will do it. I will do it."

Antinea's face is almost touching mine. A strange light flickers in
her great eyes.

Beyond, I see the gleaming eyes of King Hiram. Beside him, there is a
little table of Kairouan, blue and gold. On that table I see the gong
with which Antinea summons the slaves. I see the hammer with which she
struck it just now, a hammer with a long ebony handle, a heavy silver
head ... the hammer with which little Lieutenant Kaine dealt death....

I see nothing more....




XVII

THE MAIDENS OF THE ROCKS


I awakened in my room. The sun, already at its zenith, filled the
place with unbearable light and heat.

The first thing I saw, on opening my eyes, was the shade, ripped down,
lying in the middle of the floor. Then, confusedly, the night's events
began to come back to me.

My head felt stupid and heavy. My mind wandered. My memory seemed
blocked. "I went out with the leopard, that is certain. That red mark
on my forefinger shows how he strained at the leash. My knees are
still dusty. I remember creeping along the wall in the room where the
white Tuareg were playing at dice. That was the minute after King
Hiram had leapt past them. After that ... oh, Morhange and Antinea....
And then?"

I recalled nothing more. I recalled nothing more. But something must
have happened, something which I could not remember.

I was uneasy. I wanted to go back, yet it seemed as if I were afraid
to go. I have never felt anything more painful than those conflicting
emotions.

"It is a long way from here to Antinea's apartments. I must have been
very sound asleep not to have noticed when they brought me back--for
they have brought me back."

I stopped trying to think it out. My head ached too much.

"I must have air," I murmured. "I am roasting here; it will drive me
mad."

I had to see someone, no matter whom. Mechanically, I walked toward
the library.

I found M. Le Mesge in a transport of delirious joy. The Professor was
engaged in opening an enormous bale, carefully sewed in a brown
blanket.

"You come at a good time, sir," he cried, on seeing me enter. "The
magazines have just arrived."

He dashed about in feverish haste. Presently a stream of pamphlets and
magazines, blue, green, yellow and salmon, was bursting from an
opening in the bale.

"Splendid, splendid!" he cried, dancing with joy. "Not too late,
either; here are the numbers for October fifteenth. We must give a
vote of thanks to good Ameur."

His good spirits were contagious.

"There is a good Turkish merchant who subscribes to all the
interesting magazines of the two continents. He sends them on by
Rhadames to a destination which he little suspects. Ah, here are the
French ones."

M. Le Mesge ran feverishly over, the tables of contents.

"Internal politics: articles by Francis Charmes, Anatole
Leroy-Beaulieu, d'Haussonville on the Czar's trip to Paris. Look, a
study by Avenel of wages in the Middle Ages. And verse, verses of the
young poets, Fernand Gregh, Edmond Haraucourt. Ah, the resume of a
book by Henry de Castries on Islam. That may be interesting.... Take
what you please."

Joy makes people amiable and M. Le Mesge was really delirious with it.

A puff of breeze came from the window. I went to the balustrade and,
resting my elbows on it, began to run through a number of the _Revue
des Deux Mondes_.

I did not read, but flipped over the pages, my eyes now on the lines
of swarming little black characters, now on the rocky basin which lay
shivering, pale pink, under the declining sun.

Suddenly my attention became fixed. There was a strange coincidence
between the text and the landscape.

"In the sky overhead were only light shreds of cloud, like bits of
white ash floating up from burnt-out logs. The sun fell over a circle
of rocky peaks, silhouetting their severe lines against the azure sky.
From on high, a great sadness and gentleness poured down into the
lonely enclosure, like a magic drink into a deep cup...."[17]

[Footnote 17: Gabrielle d'Annunzio: _Les Vierges aux Rochers_. Cf. The
_Revue des Deux Mondes_ of October 15, 1896; page 867.]

I turned the pages feverishly. My mind seemed to be clearing.

Behind me, M. Le Mesge, deep in an article, voiced his opinions in
indignant growls.

I continued reading:

"On all sides a magnificent view spread out before us in the raw
