
He told me more about our neighbors while we killed the beer. The
Ponds were permanent residents. The kid--his name was Joey and he was
ten--was a polio case who hadn't walked for over a year, and his
mother was a waitress at a roadside joint named the Sea Shell Diner.
There wasn't any Mr. Pond. I guessed there never had been, which would
explain why Ethel acted so tough and sullen.

We were halfway through supper when I remembered something the kid had
said.

"Who's Charlie?" I asked.

Doc frowned at his plate. "The kid had a dog named Charlie, a big
shaggy mutt with only one eye and no love for anybody but the boy. The
dog isn't coming home. He was run down by a car on the highway while
Joey was hospitalized with polio."

"Tough," I said, thinking of the kid sitting out there all day in his
wheelchair, straining his eyes across the palmetto flats. "You mean
he's been waiting a _year_?"

Doc nodded, seemed to lose interest in the Ponds, so I let the subject
drop. We sat around after supper and polished off the rest of the
beer. When we turned in around midnight I figured we wouldn't be
staying long at the Twin Palms trailer court. It wasn't a very
comfortable place.

I was wrong there. It wasn't comfortable, but we stayed.

I couldn't have said at first why we stuck, and if Doc could he didn't
volunteer. Neither of us talked about it. We just went on living the
way we were used to living, a few weeks here and a few there, all
over the States.

We'd hit the Florida west coast too late for the citrus season, so I
went in for the fishing instead. I worked the fishing boats all the
way from Tampa down to Fort Myers, not signing on with any of the
commercial companies because I like to move quick when I get restless.
I picked the independent deep-water snapper runs mostly, because the
percentage is good there if you've got a strong back and tough hands.

Snapper fishing isn't the sport it seems to the one-day tourists who
flock along because the fee is cheap. You fish from a wide-beamed old
scow, usually, with hand-lines instead of regular tackle, and you use
multiple hooks that go down to the bottom where the big red ones are.
There's no real thrill to it, as the one-day anglers find out quickly.
A snapper puts up no more fight than a catfish and the biggest job is
to haul out his dead weight once you've got him surfaced.

Usually a pro like me sells his catch to the boat's owner or to some
clumsy sport who wants his picture shot with a big one, and there's
nearly always a jackpot--from a pool made up at the beginning of every
run--for the man landing the biggest fish of the day. There's a knack
to hooking the big ones, and when the jackpots were running good I
only worked a day or so a week and spent the rest of the time lying
around the trailer playing cribbage and drinking beer with Doc Shull.

Usually it was the life of Riley, but somehow it wasn't enough in this
place. We'd get about half-oiled and work up a promising argument
about what was wrong with the world. Then, just when we'd got life
looking its screwball funniest with our arguments one or the other of
us would look out the window and see Joey Pond in his wheelchair,
waiting for a one-eyed dog named Charlie to come trotting home across
the palmetto flats. He was always there, day or night, until his
mother came home from work and rolled him inside.

It wasn't right or natural for a kid to wait like that for anything
and it worried me. I even offered once to buy the kid another mutt but
Ethel Pond told me quick to mind my own business. Doc explained that
the kid didn't want another mutt because he had what Doc called a
psychological block.

"Charlie was more than just a dog to him," Doc said. "He was a sort of
symbol because he offered the kid two things that no one else in the
world could--security and independence. With Charlie keeping him
company he felt secure, and he was independent of the kids who could
run and play because he had Charlie to play with. If he took another
dog now he'd be giving up more than Charlie. He'd be giving up
everything that Charlie had meant to him, then there wouldn't be any
point in living."

I could see it when Doc put it that way. The dog had spent more time
with Joey than Ethel had, and the kid felt as safe with him as he'd
have been with a platoon of Marines. And Charlie, being a one-man dog,
had depended on Joey for the affection he wouldn't take from anybody
else. The dog needed Joey and Joey needed him. Together, they'd been a
natural.

At first I thought it was funny that Joey never complained or cried
when Charlie didn't come home, but Doc explained that it was all a
part of this psychological block business. If Joey cried he'd be
admitting that Charlie was lost. So he waited and watched, secure in
his belief that Charlie would return.

The Ponds got used to Doc and me being around, but they never got what
you'd call intimate. Joey would laugh at some of the droll things Doc
said, but his eyes always went back to the palmetto flats and the
highway, looking for Charlie. And he never let anything interfere with
his routine.

That routine started every morning when old man Cloehessey, the
postman, pedaled his bicycle out from Twin Palms to leave a handful of
mail for the trailer-court tenants. Cloehessey would always make it a
point to ride back by way of the Pond trailer and Joey would stop him
and ask if he's seen anything of a one-eyed dog on his route that day.

Old Cloehessey would lean on his bike and take off his sun helmet and
